<BEGIN_adams-1787-2_179324>

<P_652>

<heading>

Chap. IX . ADAMS-1787-2,652.4

On the Organization or Construction of Timber , as viewed by the
Microscope . ADAMS-1787-2,652.5

<$$heading>

The subject of the following chapter opens an extensive field of
observation to the naturalist , in which the labour of a life may be
well employed : ADAMS-1787-2,652.7

it is a branch where the observer will find the microscope of continual
use , and without which he will scarce be able to form any just idea of
the organization of trees and plants , of the variations in the
disposition , the number , nature , and offices of the several parts
thereof . ADAMS-1787-2,652.8

Malphigi , Grew , Duhamel , Hill , Bonnet , and De Saussure , are almost
the only writers who have treated on this subject ; ADAMS-1787-2,652.9

and if we consider the imperfection of the instruments used by some in
those anatomical researches , and the little attention paid by the rest
to the advantages their favorite pursuits might have derived from the
use of the microscope and the dissecting knife , we have rather more to
wonder at what has been done , than at what remains to be performed .
ADAMS-1787-2,652.10

One reason that our knowledge of the subject of this chapter is so
circumscribed , is the general inattention <P_653> to the structure of
plants ; ADAMS-1787-2,653.11

to this , among other causes , we may also ascribe the instability and
fluctuation of the different theories on the principles of vegetation .
ADAMS-1787-2,653.12

We are , however , so little acquainted with the steps which Providence
takes to lead intellectual , but free agents , to the knowledge of truth
, and the various difficulties , errors , and prejudices that must be
removed before it can shine in it's native colours , that it is our duty
to encourage every humble effort towards the advancement of science ,
that thus we may co-operate with our Creator and Redeemer in promoting
that vast plan to which all things are now converging , the bringing all
his creatures to a state of truth , goodness , and consequent happiness
, an end worthy of the best and wisest of beings . ADAMS-1787-2,653.13

As Dr. Hill is the first writer who has treated this part of natural
history in an orderly and scientific manner , I shall use the names he
has adopted for characterizing the different parts of trees , &c. which
are , 1. the rind ; 2. the bark ; 3. the blea ; 4. the wood ; 5.
the corona or circle of propagation ; 6. the pith .
ADAMS-1787-2,653.14

These are placed immediately within or under one another ;
ADAMS-1787-2,653.15

they are the essential parts upon which the strength of the tree depends
: ADAMS-1787-2,653.16

in , among , and between these , the various vessels are placed , which
nourish the whole , and maintain and carry on the vegetation of the tree
, and from which it obtains it's peculiar qualities and virtues .
ADAMS-1787-2,653.17

These vessels are of five kinds . ADAMS-1787-2,653.18

<P_654>

<heading>

Juice Vessels . ADAMS-1787-2,654.21

<$$heading>

1. The exterior vessels , placed between the rind and the bark .
ADAMS-1787-2,654.23

2. The interior , in the substance of the bark . ADAMS-1787-2,654.24

3. The intimate , in the substance of the blea . ADAMS-1787-2,654.25

4. The sap vessels , in the substance of the wood .
ADAMS-1787-2,654.26

5. The coronal , in the corona . ADAMS-1787-2,654.27

More accurate instruments , or a more minute investigation of the parts
, may probably discover new vessels , in a system which appears to be
entirely vascular , and bring us more thoroughly acquainted with the
nature of vegetation . ADAMS-1787-2,654.28

<heading>

Of the Rind . ADAMS-1787-2,654.30

<$$heading>

The exterior covering of all trees is a thin , dry , parched substance ,
which has been compared by many writers to the skin of animals , and
called by names analogous thereto ; ADAMS-1787-2,654.32

thus it is called the epidermis by Duhamel , the skin by Grew , the rind
by Hill . ADAMS-1787-2,654.33

When a tree is full of sap , this membrane may be easily detached from
the part it covers ; ADAMS-1787-2,654.34

it may be separated from green branches which are not in sap , by
boiling them in water ; ADAMS-1787-2,654.35

large pieces of it may also be obtained from rotten branches ;
ADAMS-1787-2,654.36

the rind of the leaves of many trees is detached with singular dexterity
from the other parts , by some of the mining caterpillars ;
ADAMS-1787-2,654.37

artificial methods for effecting this purpose have been described in
page 159 of this work . ADAMS-1787-2,654.38

Though the rind may at first sight be thought to be of little use , it
will be found to be a principal organ in the <P_655> process of
vegetation ; ADAMS-1787-2,655.39

the part which covers the root has the most important offices assigned
to it . ADAMS-1787-2,655.40

Many are of opinion that the rind is formed of dried vesicula ;
ADAMS-1787-2,655.41

and Malphigi says , that we may see in the vascular texture of the bark
of the cherry and plumb trees an arrangement of the parts proper to form
the rind , and this arrangement is occasioned by the endeavour of the
vascular part to extend itself to the circumference , and the resistance
it meets with from the rind ; and that hence the vessels are flattened ,
and assume a membranaceous form . ADAMS-1787-2,655.42

The rind is a general covering to the young trunks of trees , to the
branches , the roots , the leaves , the fruit , the flowers , &c.
ADAMS-1787-2,655.43

Upon the trunks of large trees some pieces only of the rind are to be
found , having probably been broke by the increased size of the tree .
ADAMS-1787-2,655.44

The rind of some species of trees will bear being stretched much further
than those of others , and remain for a considerable time uniformly
spread over the bark . ADAMS-1787-2,655.45

Duhamel asserts , that the rind of vigorous healthy trees remains longer
whole than on those that are more languid , notwithstanding that the
growth of the last is slower , and therefore makes less efforts against
the rind . ADAMS-1787-2,655.46

This circumstance is much in favour of the distinct organization of the
rind , and against the opinion of those who only suppose it to consist
of dried bladders . ADAMS-1787-2,655.47

Thin as the rind is , it is formed of many coats , adhering closely to
each other , which in some species may be separated with ease , in
others with difficulty . ADAMS-1787-2,655.48

Duhamel says , that he has divided the <P_656> rind of the birch into
six distinct coats , and that he had no doubt but what the division
might have been carried much further . ADAMS-1787-2,656.49

Dr. Hill says , that unless some of these coats are obtained in a state
of separation from the rest , the true construction of the rind can@
@not be discovered , ADAMS-1787-2,656.50

for the connection and form of the parts is lost by the confusion in
which they appear while they lie one upon another . ADAMS-1787-2,656.51

The following experiments may throw a little light upon this obscure
subject . ADAMS-1787-2,656.52

All the rind was taken from the trunk of a cherry tree , and the tree
thus skinned , exposed to the air , ADAMS-1787-2,656.53

a part of the bark which was next to the rind dried up
ADAMS-1787-2,656.54

and exfoliated ; ADAMS-1787-2,656.55

the part next to this did the same ; ADAMS-1787-2,656.56

after two or three exfoliations , a farinaceous substance covered the
superficies of the trunk , soon after which a new rind appeared .
ADAMS-1787-2,656.57

Some pieces of rind were taken from a few young branches ,
ADAMS-1787-2,656.58

and the wounds were covered with a cloth that had been soaked in wax and
turpentine ; ADAMS-1787-2,656.59

on these the rind appeared in a very little time , without any apparent
exfoliation . ADAMS-1787-2,656.60

From some other branches , not only the rind , but a part of the bark ,
was also taken away , and the wounds covered as before ;
ADAMS-1787-2,656.61

a slight exfoliation was observed here , which was soon followed with a
new rind . ADAMS-1787-2,656.62

The bark was taken entirely off from a vigorous cherry-tree , while it
was in full sap , so that the wood appeared the whole extent of the
trunk . ADAMS-1787-2,656.63

This was protected from the rays of the sun , and from the air .
ADAMS-1787-2,656.64

A new bark and rind formed themselves upon the trunk ,
ADAMS-1787-2,656.65

but they did not originate from the bark that was left on the branches
and the root , ADAMS-1787-2,656.66

but extended from different spots , which were first formed at
considerable <P_657> distances from each other . ADAMS-1787-2,657.67

After a lapse of fifteen years , this new rind did not appear like the
natural rind of the cherry-tree . ADAMS-1787-2,657.68

From these experiments we learn , that the rind regenerates more readily
in some cases than in others , and that it preserves and prevents in a
degree the bark from becoming dry too soon , and in consequence thereof
exfoliating . ADAMS-1787-2,657.69

Aided by the microscope , a number of luminous points may be discovered
in the rind ; ADAMS-1787-2,657.70

these are so many minute holes for other purposes of transpiration .
ADAMS-1787-2,657.71

In the cane these holes are visible to the naked eye .
ADAMS-1787-2,657.72

A few oval holes may also be perceived in it ; ADAMS-1787-2,657.73

these are , however , no more than a separation of the parts ,
occasioned by the extension of the vasa interiora . ADAMS-1787-2,657.74

Dr. Grew supposed the rind to be formed of small vesicles , or bladders
, clustered together , and intermixed with lignous fibres or vessels ,
which run through the length of the rind ; ADAMS-1787-2,657.75

these are conjoined by other transverse ones , but that as the rind
dries , the bladders or blebs shrink up and disappear .
ADAMS-1787-2,657.76

This account does not differ much from that of Dr. Hill , who says ,
that the rind is formed of a series of longitudinal vessels , and a
filmy substance between them , which , when viewed in a transverse
section , form small circles , the sides of which are supported and made
up of these longitudinal fibres ; that the transverse vessels are only a
deception , occasioned by the spaces between part and part of the film .
ADAMS-1787-2,657.77

The mode of obtaining an accurate view of the organization of this part
, by conveying coloured liquors into the several vessels thereof , has
been already described in page 162 of these <P_658> essays ;
ADAMS-1787-2,658.78

by this means , together with the microscope , we find that the vessels
are every-where pierced with small dots , or openings ;
ADAMS-1787-2,658.79

of the use of these the following conjectures have been formed .
ADAMS-1787-2,658.80

The root , which is equal in surface to a third part of the tree above
ground , is covered with a pierced rind . ADAMS-1787-2,658.81

The cold of winter contracts the whole of this , ADAMS-1787-2,658.82

the parts are drawn closer together , ADAMS-1787-2,658.83

and the mouths of these innumerable vessels are shut , or nearly so , by
this contraction ; ADAMS-1787-2,658.84

a very little of the half congealed moisture of the ground gets into
them , ADAMS-1787-2,658.85

but this suffices for the service of the tree , when there is little
heat to cause any perspiration , and at a time when in the deciduous
trees , the very organs of the greatest perspiration , the leaves , do
not exist . ADAMS-1787-2,658.86

The warmth of spring arrives , ADAMS-1787-2,658.87

the fluids of the earth grow thinner , ADAMS-1787-2,658.88

every part of the root expands ; ADAMS-1787-2,658.89

this opens the mouths of the vessels , ADAMS-1787-2,658.90

and the torrent of nutrition rushes in . ADAMS-1787-2,658.91

By this means , every coat of the rind , and the interstitial spaces
thereof , are rendered supple , ADAMS-1787-2,658.92

and may be easily separated from the under coverings .
ADAMS-1787-2,658.93

In roots the colour of the rind varies very much , being white in some ,
brown in others , &c. ADAMS-1787-2,658.94

Every root , according to Grew , after it has arrived at a certain age ,
has a double skin , the one coeval with the other parts ,
ADAMS-1787-2,658.95

and exists in the seed : ADAMS-1787-2,658.96

a ring is afterwards sent off from the bark , which forms the second
skin ; ADAMS-1787-2,658.97

thus in the root of dandelion , towards the end of May , the original or
outer skin appears shrivelled , ADAMS-1787-2,658.98

and is easily separated from the new <P_659> one , which is fresher ,
and adheres more firmly to the bark . ADAMS-1787-2,659.99

Perennial plants are supplied in this manner with a new skin every year
; ADAMS-1787-2,659.100

the outer one always falls off in the autumn and winter ,
ADAMS-1787-2,659.101

and a new one is formed from the bark in the succeeding spring .
ADAMS-1787-2,659.102

<heading>

Of the Vessels which are contained between the Rind and the Bark .
ADAMS-1787-2,659.104

<$$heading>

These are called by Duhamel the cellular coat , <paren> enveloppe
cellulaire <$$paren> by Hill the exterior vessels , and the vasa propria
exteriora . ADAMS-1787-2,659.106

It has been already observed , that in trees the juice vessels , or vasa
propria , do not form those constituent parts of the wood of which the
timber consists , but that it is from the nature of these recipient
vessels that it derives it's virtues , qualities , and specific
properties . ADAMS-1787-2,659.107

A tree may grow , live , and give shade without them ;
ADAMS-1787-2,659.108

but on those it's peculiar character and decided virtues depend ;
ADAMS-1787-2,659.109

these are greatest where the vasa propria are largest or most numerous ,
ADAMS-1787-2,659.110

and where we do not find these , we scarce find any thing that will
affect the taste or the smell . ADAMS-1787-2,659.111

There are different ranges of these vessels between the several parts ,
each of which has it's allotted place , it's peculiar form , it's
different structure , and it's separate use . ADAMS-1787-2,659.112

Many trees have them in all their parts , others only in some of them ,
while others do not exhibit any . ADAMS-1787-2,659.113

On taking off the rind , we find a substance of a deep_green colour ,
succulent and herbaceous , formed of a prodigious number <P_660> of
filaments , interwoven together in various directions ;
ADAMS-1787-2,660.114

it is more abundant in some trees than in others , particularly in the
elder , and more succulent in summer than in winter ;
ADAMS-1787-2,660.115

it is then also less adherent to the rind . ADAMS-1787-2,660.116

Dr. Hill thinks the best time of separating the rind , in order to view
this part , is in a living branch , at the time of it's swelling for the
spring , or for the mid-summer shoot , but much easier by the means of
maceration . ADAMS-1787-2,660.117

When the rind is perfectly separated , it leaves the vasa propria of
this class behind it ; ADAMS-1787-2,660.118

they scarce adhere to the inner bark , and but little to the rind ;
ADAMS-1787-2,660.119

they are disposed in packets , ADAMS-1787-2,660.120

and do not run strait down the branch , ADAMS-1787-2,660.121

but interweaving with each other form a kind of net .
ADAMS-1787-2,660.122

These packets may be separated easily from the bark ;
ADAMS-1787-2,660.123

when a thin transverse section of one of them is examined , it is found
to be composed of twelve or fifteen distinct vessels , with hard rinds .
ADAMS-1787-2,660.124

Dr. Hill says , that with a great deal of patience , a vast number of
objects , and a good microscope , we may see by what means these vessels
adhere to the bark ; ADAMS-1787-2,660.125

for we shall find upon the sides small oval depressions which fit
thereto , and that are probably a kind of glands , that separate from
the general store of sap with which the bark is filled , the juices
peculiar to these vessels . ADAMS-1787-2,660.126

<heading>

Of the Bark . ADAMS-1787-2,660.128

<$$heading>

The bark lies next within the rind , ADAMS-1787-2,660.130

and differs but little from it in construction , though it holds a more
important office in the scale of vegetation , the growth and qualities
of the tree being in <P_661> a great measure connected with it .
ADAMS-1787-2,661.131

It is , therefore , found to differ considerably in substance , quantity
, and quality , in various kinds . ADAMS-1787-2,661.132

It is originally the outer membrane , covering the lobes of the seed .
ADAMS-1787-2,661.133

Even there , as in the branch of a tree , it appears in form of a kind
of spunge , or like a crust of bread , composed of flatted bladders .
ADAMS-1787-2,661.134

It's {COM:sic} spunge-like nature may be further inferred from the
contraction of it's pores when dry , and the ease with which they dilate
when in water . ADAMS-1787-2,661.135

Grew has called it a most curious and exquisitely fine-@ @wrought spunge
. ADAMS-1787-2,661.136

In the course of it's growth , the outer ranges of these bladders drying
, it becomes what we call the rind , ADAMS-1787-2,661.137

for the rind was once bark , ADAMS-1787-2,661.138

and has only suffered a slight change in separating from it .
ADAMS-1787-2,661.139

By the bark the tree is fed with a continual supply of moisture ,
protected from external injuries , and defended from the excesses of
heat and cold , ADAMS-1787-2,661.140

for these purposes it is variously disposed in different trees .
ADAMS-1787-2,661.141

In the hardy and slow growing , as the oak , it is thin ;
ADAMS-1787-2,661.142

in the quick growing , as willow , poplar , and the like , it is thick ;
ADAMS-1787-2,661.143

And what is more particularly to be attended to is , that in some it's
inner verge is radiated . ADAMS-1787-2,661.144

There are some trees , and a great many herbaceous plants , in which
this part is continued inward , in form of rays , through the blea into
the wood , forming as it were so many wedges , that split as it were the
substance of both those parts , a circumstance which accounts for the
vegetation of some particular trees , which are known to live when
<P_662> deprived of the bark ; because they have rays of the same
substance within , which answer the purpose , and this in a degree
answering to the nature of their life . ADAMS-1787-2,662.145

The bark appears to be formed , first , of longitudinal fibres , which
Duhamel considers as so many lymphatic vessels ; secondly , by a kind of
a filmy cellular tissue , which have been considered as a kind of
bladders by some , or as parenchymous by others ; thirdly , of the vasa
propria interiora , or interior juice vessels . ADAMS-1787-2,662.146

The longitudinal fibres are disposed in strata , which lie one over the
other . ADAMS-1787-2,662.147

In that stratum which is next the rind , or rather the cellular coat ,
we perceive a net of longitudinal fibres , the meshes of which are large
and easily distinguished , particularly when the cellular tissue that
fills up the interstices is removed . ADAMS-1787-2,662.148

To do this , the branches should be macerated for a considerable time ;
ADAMS-1787-2,662.149

some require to be kept in this state for years . ADAMS-1787-2,662.150

It will then be easy to separate first the rind , then the cellular
coating , and afterwards this pulpy matter . ADAMS-1787-2,662.151

It may sometimes be easily removed after the branches have been boiled .
ADAMS-1787-2,662.152

The most exterior stratum , when examined by the naked eye , seems to be
formed of simple fibres , which graft , solder , or anastomose one with
the other ; ADAMS-1787-2,662.153

but when examined by a microscope , each of these fibres will be found
to be a bundle of filaments , which may be easily separated from each
other . ADAMS-1787-2,662.154

Grew says , that each filament , like the nerves in animals , consists
of twenty or thirty small contiguous tubes , which run uniformly from
the extremity of the root , without sending off any <P_663> branches ,
or suffering any change in their size and shape . ADAMS-1787-2,663.155

Hence the bark may be tore or divided lengthways , with greater ease
than in an horizontal direction ; ADAMS-1787-2,663.156

when macerated , they are capable of a very great degree of subdivision
. ADAMS-1787-2,663.157

The filaments of a cortical vessel are to be looked on <paren> agreeable
to what we have already observed <$$paren> as so many little bundles
placed near together , and at first growing parallel to each other ; but
soon quitting this direction , the filaments of one fascicle parting
from that to which they originally belonged , and inclining more or less
obliquely towards another , sometimes uniting with it , at others
bending backwards , and uniting again with that from which it proceeded
, or with some one that it meets with . ADAMS-1787-2,663.158

In this manner new fascicles are often formed , while other parcels are
increased or diminished by the additions of new filaments ;
ADAMS-1787-2,663.159

by this means , a kind of irregular net is formed , ADAMS-1787-2,663.160

and the fibres proceed in a serpentine line from the top to the bottom
of the tree . ADAMS-1787-2,663.161

The thickness of the bark is entirely formed of strata of these
longitudinal fibres , which lie one over the other ;
ADAMS-1787-2,663.162

each of these strata is similar to the exterior one , only the meshes
are smaller , and the fibres finer , in proportion as they are more
interior , insomuch that at last the meshes are almost annihilated , and
the fibres seem to lie quite parallel to each other .
ADAMS-1787-2,663.163

There are some trees , however , where the meshes are not visible , and
in which the fibres lie quite in a strait direction .
ADAMS-1787-2,663.164

There are many other circumstances in which they vary in different trees
; ADAMS-1787-2,663.165

in some the meshes of each stratum correspond with each other , <P_664>
diminishing gradually in size as they are more interior , and forming as
it were so many conical cells . ADAMS-1787-2,664.166

We may , I think , conclude from what has been said , that the bark is
composed of several thin membranes , which extend over the whole
exterior surface of the tree . ADAMS-1787-2,664.167

The most exterior membrane is the rind ; ADAMS-1787-2,664.168

under this is what Duhamel calls the cellular coat ; next to this the
cortical stratum or true bark of the tree , which is formed of lymphatic
vessels ranged more or less in a reticular form , and of the vasa
propria interiora . ADAMS-1787-2,664.169

The meshes are so constituted as to form large cavities next the rind ,
and small ones near the wood . ADAMS-1787-2,664.170

These cavities are filled with a parenchymous substance or the cellular
tissue , which being continued from the wood to the rind , joins and
unites the cortical stratum , and afterwards spreading on the outside
thereof , forms what has been termed the cellular coat .
ADAMS-1787-2,664.171

<heading>

Of the Cellular Tissue . ADAMS-1787-2,664.173

<$$heading>

We now proceed to give some account of the substance which fills up the
vacant spaces that are left between the longitudinal fibres .
ADAMS-1787-2,664.175

It is called by Grew the parenchyma or pulp , by Malphigi , the
vesicular tissue or web ; ADAMS-1787-2,664.176

both of them consider it as formed of small bladders or reticules , that
are in contact with each other , lying in an horizontal position , or at
right angles to the longitudinal fibres : ADAMS-1787-2,664.177

they do not suppose them to be all of the same size , or even of the
same figure : ADAMS-1787-2,664.178

Grew compares it to the froth of beer or eggs . ADAMS-1787-2,664.179

The flesh of fruits consists for the most part of this substance , very
much filled with juice , though with considerable difference in it's
organization . ADAMS-1787-2,664.180

Be this as it may , <P_665> the nature of this substance , it's form and
structure , are at present but very little known . ADAMS-1787-2,665.181

It is floccose , ADAMS-1787-2,665.182

and varies in colour in different species . ADAMS-1787-2,665.183

<heading>

Of the Vasa Propria Interiora . ADAMS-1787-2,665.185

<$$heading>

Besides the lymphatic vessels and the cellular substance , we find the
juice vessels , or vasa propria , in the bark . ADAMS-1787-2,665.187

In those trees which are famous for medicinal virtues , they are usually
very large ; ADAMS-1787-2,665.188

they carry the milky juices of the sumach , ADAMS-1787-2,665.189

and in them is lodged the finest and highest-flavoured turpentine in all
the kinds of pine . ADAMS-1787-2,665.190

Dr. Hill thinks that a tree of that genus exhibits them best , and the
more , as the turpentine which fills them may be perfectly dissolved in
spirit of wine . ADAMS-1787-2,665.191

The pinus orientalis is the species in which these vessels are most
distinctly seen . ADAMS-1787-2,665.192

<heading>

Of the Blea . ADAMS-1787-2,665.194

<$$heading>

This is that part of the tree which is forming into wood , and therefore
lies between it and the bark , and may be separated from them by
maceration . ADAMS-1787-2,665.196

A longitudinal piece of the blea , when examined by the microscope ,
exhibits a number of vessels running parallel to each other , the
interstitial spaces being filled with a floccose , white , formless
substance , of which Dr. Hill suspects even the vessels themselves to
be formed . ADAMS-1787-2,665.197

Innumerable small openings , or mouths , may be discovered in these
vessels , suited to imbibe the moisture which is so essential to the
life and health of plants . ADAMS-1787-2,665.198

These mouths can@ @not be well discerned , except when they are <P_666>
opened by the season of the year , either before the first leaves of
spring , or in the midsummer shooting time ; ADAMS-1787-2,666.199

though a small quantity of moisture will keep them open at that time ,
yet no quantity would be sufficient at an improper season .
ADAMS-1787-2,666.200

The blea is a zone more or less perfect , which lies under the bark ,
and covers or surrounds the wood , and is principally distinguished from
it by being less dense . ADAMS-1787-2,666.201

In some species the difference between the blea and the wood is very
remarkable , ADAMS-1787-2,666.202

in others it is less so . ADAMS-1787-2,666.203

The ancient botanists , struck with the difference they observed between
the wood and the blea , compared this substance to the fat in animals .
ADAMS-1787-2,666.204

Malphigi , Grew , and Duhamel consider it as the wood not yet arrived to
a state of perfection . ADAMS-1787-2,666.205

It is organized in a manner similar to the wood , and possessing the
same vessels , disposed nearly in the same manner .
ADAMS-1787-2,666.206

The juice vessels of this part may be separated from it by maceration ;
ADAMS-1787-2,666.207

Dr. Hill says , that in this state they appear perfect cylinders , with
thick white coats , the surface perfectly uniform .
ADAMS-1787-2,666.208

<heading>

Of the Wood . ADAMS-1787-2,666.210

<$$heading>

When the bark and the blea is taken away , we come to the wood , which
is a solid substance , on which the strength of the tree depends , and
which has been considered by naturalists as being to the tree what bones
are to the animal . ADAMS-1787-2,666.212

The wood , in a general view , may be considered as formed of strata ,
which are inclosed one within the other ; ADAMS-1787-2,666.213

these strata consist of lignous <P_667> fibres or lymphatic vessels ,
the cellular web or tissue , vasa propria , and what have been called
the air vessels . ADAMS-1787-2,667.214

It is more difficult to investigate the construction of the wood than
that of the other parts , because the texture is in general much harder
, and therefore not so easily separated , requiring very long
macerations , and many subjects , before one may be found fit for
examination . ADAMS-1787-2,667.215

If we examine a transverse section of almost any kind of wood , we shall
perceive these strata very clearly and sensibly distinguished from one
another . ADAMS-1787-2,667.216

It has been generally supposed , that each of these is the product of
one year's growth ; though if we cut the same wood obliquely , we shall
perceive that each of these strata is compounded of smaller ones , which
are , therefore , not so easy to discover as the larger .
ADAMS-1787-2,667.217

By macerating rotten pieces of trees , the wood may be divided into an
immense number of leaves , or strata , thinner than the finest paper .
ADAMS-1787-2,667.218

If the foregoing strata are examined in their detached state by the
microscope , we shall find them to be composed of longitudinal fibres ;
ADAMS-1787-2,667.219

some pieces of rotten wood , after maceration , will divide of
themselves into very fine longitudinal fibres ; ADAMS-1787-2,667.220

the existence of these is further proved by the facility with which wood
may be split in the direction of these fibres . ADAMS-1787-2,667.221

From hence we may collect , that the lignous strata are formed of small
fibres or vessels , collected together in fascicles , like the bark :
ADAMS-1787-2,667.222

in some trees they are parallel to each other , ADAMS-1787-2,667.223

in others they are disposed more obliquely , crossing and forming an
irregular kind of network . ADAMS-1787-2,667.224

There is great probability that this reticular disposition exists in all
trees , though it may be difficult to discover it in many <P_668> on
account of the fineness of the meshes , the hardness of the wood and the
sameness of colour in the constituent fibres . ADAMS-1787-2,668.225

We are here only speaking of the lymphatic vessels or lignous fibres of
the wood , which exist in it as well as in the bark , though in
different states ; ADAMS-1787-2,668.226

for the lignous fibres are always harder and less flexible than the
cortical ones . ADAMS-1787-2,668.227

Malphigi thinks they differ in another particular , namely , that a
juice or fluid issues from the cortical , while none is found in those
of the wood . ADAMS-1787-2,668.228

In this it would appear from the observations of Duhamel , that he was
mistaken . ADAMS-1787-2,668.229

A transverse section of wood generally appears formed of a number of
rays proceeding from the corona to the bark , which are intersected at
different distances by concentric circles , interspersed with vessels of
varying magnitude : ADAMS-1787-2,668.230

the variations in this structure afford much pleasure to the curious
observer , ADAMS-1787-2,668.231

and throw considerable light upon the nature and properties of timber ;
ADAMS-1787-2,668.232

for it is by means of a variety of strainers that different juices are
prepared from the same mass . ADAMS-1787-2,668.233

Matter , considered as matter , has no share in the qualities of bodies
. ADAMS-1787-2,668.234

It is from the arrangement of it , or the recipient forms given to it ,
that we have so many different substances . ADAMS-1787-2,668.235

According to the modifications that these receive , we shall find the
same light , air , water , and earth , manifesting themselves in one by
a deadly poison , and in another by the most salubrious food .
ADAMS-1787-2,668.236

A lemon ingrafted upon an orange stock , is capable of changing the sap
of the orange into it's own nature , by a different arrangement of the
nutritive juices . ADAMS-1787-2,668.237

One mass of earth will give life and vigour to the bitter aloe , to the
sweet cane , the <P_669> cool house-leek , and the fiery mustard , the
nourishing grain , and the deadly night-shade . ADAMS-1787-2,669.238

The wood may be considered as composed of two parts , lignous and
parenchymous . ADAMS-1787-2,669.239

We have already treated of the former ; ADAMS-1787-2,669.240

the latter is that which is disposed into rays running as it were
between the lignous fibres , and interweaving with them ;
ADAMS-1787-2,669.241

it originates either with the pith or corona . ADAMS-1787-2,669.242

There is a very great diversity in these radial insertions ,
ADAMS-1787-2,669.243

in some trees there are very few , while they abound in others ;
ADAMS-1787-2,669.244

in some they are very fine , in others very thick .
ADAMS-1787-2,669.245

In texture they seem similar to the blebs of the bark , only that here
they are so crouded and stretched out as to appear like parallel threads
, something similar to a net when drawn tight . ADAMS-1787-2,669.246

<heading>

Of the Corona . ADAMS-1787-2,669.248

<$$heading>

Dr. Hill gives this name to that circle which surrounds the pith , and
separates it from the wood ; although in his opinion it differs greatly
from both , and in it's composition has no resemblance to either .
ADAMS-1787-2,669.250

It is , according to him , the most important part in the whole
vegetable fabric , by which the propagation and increase of the branches
, buds , and shoots , is carried on . ADAMS-1787-2,669.251

It has been usual to suppose the pith of vegetables to be the part in
which these wonderful sources of increase reside {TEXT:resides} ,
ADAMS-1787-2,669.252

but this is not the case ; ADAMS-1787-2,669.253

and he asserts , that so far from being prior to the other parts , it is
in reality posterior to some of them . ADAMS-1787-2,669.254

<P_670>

The corona is not so uniform as the other parts , ADAMS-1787-2,670.256

nor is it constituted exactly similar in all trees .
ADAMS-1787-2,670.257

It is placed between the pith and wood in all vegetables , forming a
ring , whose outline is more or less regulated . ADAMS-1787-2,670.258

The general circle is cellular , composed of blebs and vessels , like
the bark and the rind , ADAMS-1787-2,670.259

and is perfectly similar to them , only that at different distances
oblong clusters of different vessels are placed amongst it .
ADAMS-1787-2,670.260

These clusters are usually eight or ten in number , ADAMS-1787-2,670.261

and give origin to the angles of the corona . ADAMS-1787-2,670.262

They are not uniform , or of one kind of vessels , as in the bark ,
ADAMS-1787-2,670.263

but each has two distinct sorts , the exterior one answering to the blea
, and the interior to the wood of trees ; ADAMS-1787-2,670.264

and within each of these are disposed vessels not unlike those in the
blea and wood , though often larger than they are found in those parts .
ADAMS-1787-2,670.265

Thus each clutter is composed of all the essential parts of the
succeeding branch , ADAMS-1787-2,670.266

and the intermediate parts of the circle are absolutely bark and rind ;
ADAMS-1787-2,670.267

they are ready to follow and clothe the cluster when it goes off in the
form of a shoot , because it will then need their covering and defence ,
though , in it's present inclosed state , it does not .
ADAMS-1787-2,670.268

It is from this construction that a tree is ready at all times , and in
all parts , to shoot out branches , and every branch in the same manner
to send out others ; ADAMS-1787-2,670.269

for the whole trunk , and the branch in all it's length , have this
course of essential vessels ready to be protruded out , and the proper
and natural integuments as ready to cover them . ADAMS-1787-2,670.270

In some trees these parts are more evident , in others more obscurely
arranged . ADAMS-1787-2,670.271

Dr. Hill says , the bocconia , or parrot-wood of the West-Indies , and
the greater celandine , are proper subjects for opening this great
<P_671> mystery of nature . ADAMS-1787-2,671.272

On the corona and it's clusters depend that property of vegetables ,
that they can be produced entire from every piece .
ADAMS-1787-2,671.273

These clusters follow the course of the other portions of the tree ;
ADAMS-1787-2,671.274

they are , therefore , every-where ; ADAMS-1787-2,671.275

they are always capable of growing , ADAMS-1787-2,671.276

and their growth , even in a cutting of the smallest twig , can@ @not
produce a leaf or any other part of a vegetable alone ,
ADAMS-1787-2,671.277

but must afford the whole , ADAMS-1787-2,671.278

for they are complete bodies , ADAMS-1787-2,671.279

and the whole is there waiting only for the opportunities of extension .
ADAMS-1787-2,671.280

For the knowledge we have of this part we are altogether indebted to Dr.
Hill . ADAMS-1787-2,671.281

It remains for future observers to confirm or disprove his observations
. ADAMS-1787-2,671.282

<heading>

Of the Pith . ADAMS-1787-2,671.284

<$$heading>

The pith is found in the center of every young shoot of a tree ;
ADAMS-1787-2,671.286

it is large in some , less in others , but present in all .
ADAMS-1787-2,671.287

It is placed close within the corona . ADAMS-1787-2,671.288

It seems to be nothing more than a congeries of the cellular tissue ;
ADAMS-1787-2,671.289

it is generally found near the center of the tree , inclosed as it were
within a tube ; ADAMS-1787-2,671.290

in general , the cells of the pith are larger than those of the cellular
tissue , with which , according to Duhamel , it communicates .
ADAMS-1787-2,671.291

For the rays which extend from the pith to the bark are , in his opinion
, produced from it . ADAMS-1787-2,671.292

Thus , though it may differ in name from the parenchymous parts of the
bark , and the radial insertions in the wood , yet it is of the same
nature and texture , ADAMS-1787-2,671.293

and is continuous with them ; so that , according to this idea , the
skin , the parenchyma , the insertions , and the <P_672> pith , are all
one piece of work , filled up in divers manners with the vessels .
ADAMS-1787-2,672.294

The bark and the wood grow thicker every year , while the pith , on the
contrary , grows more slender , so that in a branch of one year it is of
a larger size than it is in the same branch when two years old , and so
on . ADAMS-1787-2,672.295

In very young branches , while in an herbaceous state , the pith forms
the greatest part of it's substance ; ADAMS-1787-2,672.296

but when the fibres are stronger , the pith becomes less succulent , and
surrounded with a tube of wood ; ADAMS-1787-2,672.297

when the branch is arrived to a certain age , it is so compressed as to
be almost annihilated . ADAMS-1787-2,672.298

In examining different branches that proceed from others in their first
state , a small communication between the pith of the one and the other
will be found ; ADAMS-1787-2,672.299

but this communication is generally entirely closed up in the second or
third year . ADAMS-1787-2,672.300

The cells of which the pith is formed are at first entirely one
connected body ; ADAMS-1787-2,672.301

but as the plant grows up , it is often so broke and ruptured , as to
remain no longer a continuous substance . ADAMS-1787-2,672.302

This , as well as many other particulars in the history of the pith ,
corroborates the opinion of Dr. Hill , who thinks it is formed for the
purpose of moistening the clusters of the corona , and regulating it's
extension ; ADAMS-1787-2,672.303

it has been supposed coeval with , or primordial to all the other parts
, ADAMS-1787-2,672.304

but he thinks it is postnate , and comes after them in the order of time
, as well as in it's uses . That exhaled air gives origin to it's blebs
, and the thickness of the <P_673> juices cloathing the bubble , gives
it form and substance . ADAMS-1787-2,673.305

The first season is the time of it's greatest use , ADAMS-1787-2,673.306

and it immediately after begins to decay . ADAMS-1787-2,673.307

The pith has in general been represented as much more complex than it
really is . ADAMS-1787-2,673.308

It consists of a range of bladders , lying one over the other .
ADAMS-1787-2,673.309

The membrane is simple , the outline single ; ADAMS-1787-2,673.310

but as it is very difficult to procure it in this simple state , it is
often seen and represented under a variety of irregular , though
pleasing forms , which are occasioned by the intersections of the
outlines of the blebs , as seen one over another . ADAMS-1787-2,673.311

A cluster in any part of the corona , protruding itself onward and
outward in the growing season , carries a part of the circle out with it
. ADAMS-1787-2,673.312

The cluster itself is a perfect piece of the wood and blea ,
ADAMS-1787-2,673.313

and the bark which follows it out in it's progress perfectly cloaths it
: ADAMS-1787-2,673.314

thus is the first protrusion of the shoot made , but all this while
there is no pith . ADAMS-1787-2,673.315

The continuation of growth is made by the extension of all the parts
obliquely upwards ; ADAMS-1787-2,673.316

in the course of this extension they hollow themselves into a kind of
cylinder , of the form of the future branch , ADAMS-1787-2,673.317

and by this disposition a small vacancy is made in their center .
ADAMS-1787-2,673.318

This enlarges as they increase , ADAMS-1787-2,673.319

and as it enlarges it becomes filled with the exudation of those little
bladders which remain and constitute the pith , fed from the inner coat
of the pith , which already begins to form itself into a new corona .
ADAMS-1787-2,673.320

Grew seemed to think , that in some instances the pith was of posterior
growth to the other parts , and derived it's origin from the bark ; and
that the insertions of the bark running <P_674> in between the rays of
the wood , meet in the center , and constitute the pith .
ADAMS-1787-2,674.321

<heading>

Of the Sap Vessels . ADAMS-1787-2,674.323

<$$heading>

The most numerous and the largest apertures are generally to be found in
the wood , which are perceived very distinctly in a transverse section ,
in which the ends of the vessels are seen as cut through by the knife .
ADAMS-1787-2,674.325

The scarlet oak of America is recommended as a proper object for
exhibiting them . ADAMS-1787-2,674.326

If a short cylinder of a three years branch of this oak , a little
macerated , be hollowed away with a chisel {TEXT:chissel} , we shall see
what a large portion of the wood is occupied by these vessels ;
ADAMS-1787-2,674.327

they are thick and strong , ADAMS-1787-2,674.328

and it is easy , with some care and attention , to loosen several of
them . ADAMS-1787-2,674.329

If a number of these , thus separated , be put into a vial of rain water
, and frequently shook for several days , some will at length be found
perfectly clean , ADAMS-1787-2,674.330

these are then to be put into spirit of wine , ADAMS-1787-2,674.331

and when that has been two or three times changed , they will be in a
condition to be viewed for understanding their structure ;
ADAMS-1787-2,674.332

another method of preparation has been already shewn in page 162 .
ADAMS-1787-2,674.333

These are the vessels which have been called by some writers air , by
others tracheal vessels . ADAMS-1787-2,674.334

It is , however , to be remarked , that most of those who have
considered them as air vessels , refer us to the tree while in a more
herbaceous state ; ADAMS-1787-2,674.335

in this case they say , that we shall find these parts filled with a
fine spiral filament . ADAMS-1787-2,674.336

As these vessels are often to be found empty , they have been supposed
to answer the purposes of lungs to the plant . ADAMS-1787-2,674.337

Malphigi <P_675> asserts , that if they are examined in winter , they
often exhibit a vermicular motion , which astonishes the spectator .
ADAMS-1787-2,675.338

Those who suppose the corona to contain the whole structure of the tree
in miniature , and that it is the embryo of future shoots , suppose it
to contain the vessels proper for each part , a subject that must be
left to the decision of future observers . ADAMS-1787-2,675.339

<heading>

Of the Vasa Propria Intima . ADAMS-1787-2,675.341

<$$heading>

These are the only vessels which remain to be spoken of .
ADAMS-1787-2,675.343

They are large , conspicuous , and important ; ADAMS-1787-2,675.344

their natural place is in the blea , though they are sometimes repeated
in the wood and the corona . ADAMS-1787-2,675.345

Their coats are thicker than those of any other vessels .
ADAMS-1787-2,675.346

It is not difficult , after a successful maceration , to separate some
of these vessels from the blea ; ADAMS-1787-2,675.347

in this state they appear perfect cylinders , with thick white coats ,
of a firm , solid , and uniform texture . ADAMS-1787-2,675.348

It has generally been supposed , that each of those concentric circles ,
which are to be observed in the transverse section of almost every tree
, was the product of one year , or the quantity of wood added to the
tree in that space ; ADAMS-1787-2,675.349

here , however , Dr. Hill differs again from the general opinion .
ADAMS-1787-2,675.350

From what has been said we may deduce the following general ideas
relative to the organization of trees . ADAMS-1787-2,675.351

The most obvious and remarkable parts of a plant , or tree , are the
root , the stem , <P_676> the branches , the leaves , the flower , and
the fruit . ADAMS-1787-2,676.352

The component parts of these divisions are not complicated ,
ADAMS-1787-2,676.353

they are simple when compared to those of an animal , and this because
the offices of the vegetable are fewer than those of the animal .
ADAMS-1787-2,676.354

The interior part may be considered as consisting of lignous fibres ,
interspersed with a vast number of bladders , which are here named the
cellular tissue , the vasa propria , and the sap vessels ; though these
are considered by some writers as mere air vessels .
ADAMS-1787-2,676.355

The lignous fibres are very fine tubes , proceeding nearly in a vertical
direction from the top to the bottom of the tree ; ADAMS-1787-2,676.356

they are sometimes parallel to each other , ADAMS-1787-2,676.357

sometimes they divaricate , ADAMS-1787-2,676.358

and often leave oblong intervals or spaces . ADAMS-1787-2,676.359

There is great reason for supposing them to be a species of lymphatic
vessels . ADAMS-1787-2,676.360

The vacant spaces between these fibres are filled up by a vesicular
membrane , lying in an horizontal direction , and which is called in
this chapter the cellular tissue . ADAMS-1787-2,676.361

The vasa propria are formed of lignous fibres , ADAMS-1787-2,676.362

but differ from the foregoing in their size , and in the juices which
they contain . ADAMS-1787-2,676.363

In the part properly called the wood , we meet with the sap vessels ;
ADAMS-1787-2,676.364

but as in some states they seem as if they were formed of , a
silver-coloured spiral membrane , and are found without any juices ,
they have been supposed to be air vessels , and called the trachea ,
making up an arterial system , and supplying the place of the heart in
animals . ADAMS-1787-2,676.365

<P_677> The interior part of the tree may be further considered as
divided into four principal concentric strata , the bark , the blea ,
the wood , and the pith : ADAMS-1787-2,677.366

to these Dr. Hill has added the corona . ADAMS-1787-2,677.367

Whatever part of a plant we examine , we find these and no more .
ADAMS-1787-2,677.368

The root , it's ascending stalk , and descending fibre , are formed of
one , and not three different substances . ADAMS-1787-2,677.369

Thus the whole vegetable is reduced to one entire body .
ADAMS-1787-2,677.370

And what appears in the flower to be formed of altogether distinct parts
, will be found to originate in these . ADAMS-1787-2,677.371

The bark , which is the exterior covering of the tree , is divided into
two parts , a thin outer rind , and a much thicker inner one .
ADAMS-1787-2,677.372

The exterior one seems to be little more than a fine film of irregular
meshes , the inner one composed of large blebs , leaving in some
subjects large vacant spaces , which form it's vasa propria .
ADAMS-1787-2,677.373

It is made up of several strata , laying one over the other .
ADAMS-1787-2,677.374

Next to this is the blea , which is of an uniform structure .
ADAMS-1787-2,677.375

It is an imperfect wood , waiting only for the hand of time to be
brought to perfection . ADAMS-1787-2,677.376

The duration of the blea in this middle state depends on the internal
powers and strength of the tree , being so much shorter as this is more
vigorous . ADAMS-1787-2,677.377

The wood , including the corona , comes next ; ADAMS-1787-2,677.378

it differs in density and duration , both from the blea , the bark , and
the wood . ADAMS-1787-2,677.379

It is made up of strong fibres . ADAMS-1787-2,677.380

The life of the vegetable seems to reside in it ; ADAMS-1787-2,677.381

from it all the other parts are produced . ADAMS-1787-2,677.382

It shoots a pith inwards , and a blea and a bark outwards .
ADAMS-1787-2,677.383

<P_678>

Every tree may be considered as consisting of numerous {TEXT:numerou}
concentric strata , or flakes , forming so many cones , inscribed one
within the other , and whose number is almost indefinite .
ADAMS-1787-2,678.385

The most exterior contain the rudiments of the bark , the more interior
those of the wood . ADAMS-1787-2,678.386

In the germ they are gelatinous , ADAMS-1787-2,678.387

by degrees they become herbaceous , ADAMS-1787-2,678.388

and in process of time it assumes the consistency of wood .
ADAMS-1787-2,678.389

Thus the stem , the root , and the branch , may be considered as formed
of a prodigious number of concentric vertical strata , each composed of
different fascicles of fibres , which fibres are again formed of smaller
ones . ADAMS-1787-2,678.390

The spaces between these , and among the fibres , are filled up ,
interwoven with and connected by the cellular tissue , of which the
radial insertions are formed . ADAMS-1787-2,678.391

The strata harden successively one after the other ;
ADAMS-1787-2,678.392

the most interior stratum is that which hardens first ,
ADAMS-1787-2,678.393

this is then covered by another which is more ductile and herbaceous ,
and so on . ADAMS-1787-2,678.394

From the extension in breadth the tree acquires bulk ,
ADAMS-1787-2,678.395

from that in length it gains it's height . ADAMS-1787-2,678.396

The strata gradually diminish in size as they gain in length ; from
hence the conical figure of the root and stem , and branch .
ADAMS-1787-2,678.397

All the parts of the plant are the same , differing in nothing more than
in shape and size . ADAMS-1787-2,678.398

The roots are sharp and pointed , that they may make their way more
readily through the earth . ADAMS-1787-2,678.399

The leaves are broad , that they may more effectually catch the moisture
from the atmosphere , &c. ADAMS-1787-2,678.400

When the root of a tree is elevated above , instead of being retained
under the earth , it assumes the appearance of a perfect plant , with
leaves and branches . ADAMS-1787-2,678.401

Experiment shews that a young tree may have it's branches placed in the
earth , and it's roots elevated in the air , ADAMS-1787-2,678.402

and in that inverted state it will continue to live and <P_679> grow .
ADAMS-1787-2,679.403

The principal source of the phaenomena of vegetation is the simplicity
and uniformity of their organization . ADAMS-1787-2,679.404

The figures in Plate XXVII. XXVIII. XXIX. are portions of transverse
sections of trees and herbs . ADAMS-1787-2,679.405

The sections were cut by Mr. Custance , who first brought this art to
perfection , and remains unrivalled as yet in these performances .
ADAMS-1787-2,679.406

Fig. I , Plate XXVII. a piece of an herb growing on dunghills , and
known by the name of fat-hen ; ADAMS-1787-2,679.407

it is one of the species of orach . ADAMS-1787-2,679.408

Fig. 2 , a microscopic view of the same . ADAMS-1787-2,679.409

Fig. 3 , a magnified representation of a section of a reed that comes
from Portugal . ADAMS-1787-2,679.410

Fig. 4 , the real size of the section . ADAMS-1787-2,679.411

Fig. 1 , Plate XXVIII. a magnified view of a section of the althea
frutex . ADAMS-1787-2,679.412

Fig. 3 , a ditto of the hazel . ADAMS-1787-2,679.413

Fig. 5 , a ditto from a branch of the lime-tree . ADAMS-1787-2,679.414

Fig. 2 , 4 , 6 , represent the real size of the sections .
ADAMS-1787-2,679.415

Plate XXIX. Fig. 5 a magnified view of a section of common cane .
ADAMS-1787-2,679.416

Fig. 3 , one of the bamboo cane . ADAMS-1787-2,679.417

Fig. 1 , one of sugarcane . ADAMS-1787-2,679.418

Fig. 2 , 4 , 6 , the real size of the sections . ADAMS-1787-2,679.419

<P_680>

<heading>

Chap. X . ADAMS-1787-2,680.422

Of the Crystallization of Salts , as seen by the Microscope ; together
with a concise list of objects . ADAMS-1787-2,680.423

<$$heading>

Crystallization , in general , signifies the natural formation of any
substance into a regular figure , resembling that of natural crystal .
ADAMS-1787-2,680.425

Hence the phrases of crystallized ores , crystallized salts , &c. and
even the basaltic rocks are now generally reckoned to be effects of this
operation ; ADAMS-1787-2,680.426

the term , however , is most commonly applied to bodies of the saline
kind ; ADAMS-1787-2,680.427

and their separation in regular figures from the water , or other fluid
in which they were dissolved , is called their crystallization .
ADAMS-1787-2,680.428

If the word crystallization were to be confined to it's most proper
sense , as it seems to have been formerly , it could only be applied to
operations by which certain substances are disposed to pass from a fluid
to a solid state , by the union of their parts , which so arrange
themselves , that they form transparent and regularly-@ @figured <P_681>
masses , like native crystal ; from which resemblance the word
crystallization has evidently been taken . ADAMS-1787-2,681.429

But modern chemists and naturalists have much extended this expression ,
ADAMS-1787-2,681.430

and it now signifies a regular arrangement of the parts of any body
which is capable of it , whether the masses so arranged be transparent
or not . ADAMS-1787-2,681.431

Thus opake stones , pyrites , and minerals , when regularly formed , are
said to be crystallized , as well as transparent stones and salts .
ADAMS-1787-2,681.432

The opacity and transparency of substances are justly disregarded , in
considering whether they be crystallized or not ; ADAMS-1787-2,681.433

for these qualities are perfectly indifferent to the regular arrangement
of the integrant parts of substances , which is the essential object of
crystallization . ADAMS-1787-2,681.434

This being established , crystallization may be defined , an operation
by which the integrant parts of a body , separated from each other by
the interposition of a fluid , are disposed to unite again , and to form
solid , regular , and uniform masses . ADAMS-1787-2,681.435

To understand as much as we can of the mechanism of crystallization , we
must remark , 1. That the integrant parts of all bodies have a tendency
to each other , by which they approach , unite , and adhere together ,
when not prevented by an obstacle . <P_682> 2. That in simple or
little-@ @compounded bodies , this tendency of integrant parts is more
obvious and sensible than in others more compounded : hence the former
are much more disposed to crystallize . 3. That although we do not
know the figure of the primitive integrant molecules of any body , we
can@ @not doubt but that those of every different body have a constantly
uniform and peculiar figure . 4. That these integrant parts can@ @not
have an equal tendency to unite indiscriminately by any of their sides ,
but by some preferably to others , excepting all the sides of an
integrant part of a body be equal and similar ; and probably the sides ,
by which they tend to unite , are those by which they can touch most
extensively and immediately . ADAMS-1787-2,682.436

The most general phaenomena of crystallization may be conceived in the
following manner : ADAMS-1787-2,682.437

Let a body be supposed to have it's integrant parts separated from each
other by some fluid ; ADAMS-1787-2,682.438

if a part of this fluid be taken away , these integrant parts will
approach together ; ADAMS-1787-2,682.439

and as the quantity of intervening fluid diminishes , they will at last
touch and unite . ADAMS-1787-2,682.440

They may also unite when they come so near to each other , that their
mutual tendency shall be capable of overcoming the distance between them
. ADAMS-1787-2,682.441

If , besides , they have time and liberty to unite with each other by
the sides most disposed to this union , they will form masses of a
figure constantly uniform and similar . ADAMS-1787-2,682.442

For the same reason , when the interposed fluid is hastily <P_683> taken
away , so that the integrant parts shall be approximated , and be
brought into contact before they have taken the position of their
natural tendency , then they will join confusedly by such sides as
chance presents to them ; ADAMS-1787-2,683.443

they will , in such circumstances , form solid masses , whose figures
will not be determinate , but irregular and various .
ADAMS-1787-2,683.444

Different salts assume different figures in crystallization ,
ADAMS-1787-2,683.445

and are , by this means , easily distinguished from one another .
ADAMS-1787-2,683.446

But besides the large crystals produced in this way , each salt is
capable of producing a very different appearance of the crystalline kind
, when only a drop of the saline solution is made use of , and the
crystallization viewed through a microscope . ADAMS-1787-2,683.447

For our knowledge of this species of crystallization we are indebted to
Mr. Henry Baker , who was presented by the Royal Society with a gold
medal for the discovery , in the year 1744 . ADAMS-1787-2,683.448

These microscopical crystals he distinguishes from the larger ones by
the name of configurations ; ADAMS-1787-2,683.449

but this term seems inaccurate , ADAMS-1787-2,683.450

and the distinction may be properly preserved by calling the large ones
the common , and the small ones the microscopical crystals of the salt .
ADAMS-1787-2,683.451

It has not yet been shewn by any writer on the subject , why salts
should assume any regular figure , much less why every one should have a
form peculiar to itself . ADAMS-1787-2,683.452

Sir Isaac Newton endeavoured to account for this , by supposing the
particles of salt to be diffused through the solvent fluid , at equal
distances from each other ; and that then the power of the attraction
between the saline particles could not fail to bring them together in
regular figures , as soon as the diminution of heat suffered them to act
on <P_684> each other . ADAMS-1787-2,684.453

But it is certain some other agent must be concerned in this operation
besides mere attraction , ADAMS-1787-2,684.454

otherwise all salts would crystallize in the same manner .
ADAMS-1787-2,684.455

Others have , therefore , had recourse to some kind of polarity in the
particles of each salt , which determined them to arrange themselves in
such a certain form ; ADAMS-1787-2,684.456

but unless we give a reason for this polarity , we only explain
crystallization by itself . ADAMS-1787-2,684.457

One thing seems to have been overlooked by those who have endeavoured to
investigate this subject , namely , that the saline particles do not
only attract one another , but they also attract some part of the water
which dissolves them . ADAMS-1787-2,684.458

Did they only attract each other , the salt , instead of crystallizing ,
would fall to the bottom as a powder ; whereas , a saline crystal is
composed of salt and water , as certainly as the body of an animal is
composed of flesh and blood , or a vegetable of solid matter and sap ;
ADAMS-1787-2,684.459

if a saline crystal is deprived of it's aqueous part , it will as
certainly lose it's crystalline form as if it was deprived of the saline
part . ADAMS-1787-2,684.460

It is , therefore , not improbable , that crystallization is a species
of vegetation , and is accomplished by the same powers to which the
growth of plants and animals are to be ascribed . ADAMS-1787-2,684.461

Some kinds of crystallization resemble vegetation so much , that we can
scarce avoid attributing them to the same cause . ADAMS-1787-2,684.462

It has been imagined , that all the great operations in nature may be
reduced to two principles , those of crystallization and organization ;
but that often they are so concealed as to be invisible .
ADAMS-1787-2,684.463

<P_685>

Hence crystallized substances have been often mistaken for organized
ones , and vice_versa . ADAMS-1787-2,685.465

They differ , however , essentially in their growth and origin .
ADAMS-1787-2,685.466

Organized beings spring from a germ , in which all the essential parts
are concentrated , ADAMS-1787-2,685.467

and they grow by intusception ; whereas crystallized substances increase
by the successive apposition of certain molecules , of a determined
figure , which unite in one common mass . ADAMS-1787-2,685.468

Thus crystallized beings do not grow , properly speaking ;
ADAMS-1787-2,685.469

though their substance is augmented , they are not preformed , but
formed daily . ADAMS-1787-2,685.470

We have already shewn , page 163 , how to prepare the various salts for
microscopical observations . ADAMS-1787-2,685.471

The beautiful crystallizations represented in Pl. XXX. and XXXI. were
produced in the manner there described . ADAMS-1787-2,685.472

Fig. 2 , Plate XXX. shews the microscopical crystals of nitre .
ADAMS-1787-2,685.473

These shoot from the edges with very little heat , in flattish figures ,
of various lengths , and exceedingly transparent , the sides nearly
parallel , though rather jagged , and tapering to a point ;
ADAMS-1787-2,685.474

after a number of these are formed , they often dissolve under the eye ,
ADAMS-1787-2,685.475

and disappear entirely ; ADAMS-1787-2,685.476

but in a little time new shoots will push out , and the process go on
afresh . ADAMS-1787-2,685.477

Beautiful ramifications are formed round the edge , ADAMS-1787-2,685.478

and many regular figures are to be observed in different parts of the
drop . ADAMS-1787-2,685.479

Fig. 2 is the real size of the drop . ADAMS-1787-2,685.480

