<BEGIN_albin-1736-1>

<P_1>

<heading>

A <font> Natural History <$$font> of Spiders , <font> &c. <$$font>
ALBIN-1736-1,1.4

N=o=. I . ALBIN-1736-1,1.5

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a scarlet colour , much resembling that of velvet ;
ALBIN-1736-1,1.7

its feelers were something longer than is usually found in Spiders of
this bigness . ALBIN-1736-1,1.8

It was found in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> at the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,1.9

They are likewise found in gardens on the bodies of trees :
ALBIN-1736-1,1.10

these last are something smaller than those found in the woods .
ALBIN-1736-1,1.11

These Spiders are accounted venomous . ALBIN-1736-1,1.12

<heading>

N=o=. II . ALBIN-1736-1,1.14

<$$heading>

This Spider was of an ash colour , the upper side of the belly marked
with black , the under side , of the same colour , without marks or
spots . ALBIN-1736-1,1.16

It had two black shining spots on the fore part of the body , and <P_2>
three on each side , two between the feelers , ALBIN-1736-1,2.17

in these spots stand their eyes , in number eight , placed in a
semicircular manner , the two uppermost being the largest .
ALBIN-1736-1,2.18

I have observed the Spiders , which have their eyes standing in this
manner , catch their prey , by jumping on it . ALBIN-1736-1,2.19

<heading>

N=o=. III . ALBIN-1736-1,2.21

<$$heading>

These Spiders are of a blackish colour , with a lightish streak on their
back . ALBIN-1736-1,2.23

They are found in the spring time running on the ground , under the dead
grass in the fields and hedges . ALBIN-1736-1,2.24

In the beginning of <font> June <$$font> , they are found with their
egg-bag , which is flattish and of a darkish colour , fastned to the
under part of their bellies , which they run very lightly away with .
ALBIN-1736-1,2.25

By the best observation with glasses , they are found to have but four
eyes ; which are placed as they are expressed over the head of the
Spider in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,2.26

<heading>

N=o=. IV . ALBIN-1736-1,2.28

<$$heading>

This Spider is of a dark ash colour , finely spotted with black all over
the belly , back , and legs ; having a streak of white in the middle of
the back , and upper side of the belly . ALBIN-1736-1,2.30

Its legs are something lighter than the other parts , and the specks
something smaller . ALBIN-1736-1,2.31

It had six eyes , standing as they are placed over the Spider in the
Plate , the two foremost of which are the least . ALBIN-1736-1,2.32

<heading>

N=o=. V . ALBIN-1736-1,2.34

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was of a lead colour , the upper side of the
belly of a reddish or brownish cast , finely marked . ALBIN-1736-1,2.36

The legs were marked with large spots of black and hair-colour .
ALBIN-1736-1,2.37

Its feelers are like shining globes , a little inclining to an oval
figure , of a dark colour , almost black . ALBIN-1736-1,2.38

It could not be distinctly observed how many eyes it had .
ALBIN-1736-1,2.39

It was taken , in the beginning of <font> April <$$font> , on a burdock
. ALBIN-1736-1,2.40

<P_3>

<heading>

N=o=. VI . ALBIN-1736-1,3.43

<$$heading>

The body and legs of this Spider was of a hair-colour , with a small
black mark across the upper end of the back : its belly of a blackish
colour . ALBIN-1736-1,3.45

It was taken in the fields , in the beginning of <font> April <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,3.46

The eyes are so small , that it could not be perceived how many it had ,
or their manner of standing . ALBIN-1736-1,3.47

<heading>

N=o=. VII . ALBIN-1736-1,3.49

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a light hair-colour , with a black spot on
the upper side of its belly , the under side of which was of an ash
colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,3.51

it was taken in the fields , in the beginning of <font> April <$$font> ,
running amongst the leaves and dead grass . ALBIN-1736-1,3.52

<heading>

N=o=. VIII . ALBIN-1736-1,3.54

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a dark colour , the upper side of the belly being
finely marked with a row of circular spots from the back to the end of
the tail with a scolloped {COM:sic} line on each side ;
ALBIN-1736-1,3.56

the back was dark on each side , and light in the middle .
ALBIN-1736-1,3.57

It had two eyes standing as they are placed in the Plate , over the head
of the Spider . ALBIN-1736-1,3.58

Its feelers were long and slender , as are all those of the female
Spiders , the male having globular bunches or knobs at the ends of their
horns or feelers : ALBIN-1736-1,3.59

the young ones are marked exactly like the old ones ; ALBIN-1736-1,3.60

only they look very pale which makes them appear as if they were naked ,
ALBIN-1736-1,3.61

but may be easily known . ALBIN-1736-1,3.62

This is one of the house Spiders , whose vertues are excellent in the
cure of intermitting fevers , when the bark and other remedies have
failed , as I have often experienced on several , both old and young ;
the use of which I will now publish for the benefit of the poor and
country people , who are remote from the help of physicians .
ALBIN-1736-1,3.63

<font> The Use . <$$font> ALBIN-1736-1,3.64

" Rx. As much of the clean web of the house Spider as the weight of two
scruples ; Mithridate two drams ; mix and give <P_4> it to the patients
the night before the fit ; let them take after it four ounces of
treacle-water , and go to bed and cover themselves warm , endeavouring
to sweat . They will have a most severe fit after the taking the first
dose , ALBIN-1736-1,4.65

but after the second dose it will leave them . ALBIN-1736-1,4.66

By this method I have cured many people of stubborn and long continu'd
<font> tertian <$$font> , <font> quartan <$$font> , and <font> quotidian
<$$font> Fevers , particularly some of the servants of the Honourable
Colonel <font> Schutz <$$font> , when their taking the Bark for a long
time failed : as also Dame <font> Hughs <$$font> of <font>
Tottenham-Court <$$font> Road of a <font> tertian <$$font> Ague of three
years continuance , with many others . ALBIN-1736-1,4.67

I have likewise cured several children , both male and female , by
hanging a large Spider confined alive in a box about their neck ,
reaching to the pit of the stomach , without giving any internal
remedies . ALBIN-1736-1,4.68

Their web , with the addition of Frog-spawn , is a most excellent
styptick for bleeding at the nose , or any slight wound of the body . "
ALBIN-1736-1,4.69

<font> The Use . <$$font> ALBIN-1736-1,4.70

Rx. " The clean web of the house Spider , ALBIN-1736-1,4.71

and dip it in the spawn of Frogs , beaten as you would the whites of
eggs , several times letting it dry on pewter , or earthen plates ,
between each time of dipping it , ALBIN-1736-1,4.72

and keep it in a box close stopt from air , ALBIN-1736-1,4.73

and apply it when you have occasion . ALBIN-1736-1,4.74

With this remedy I saved a gentleman of worth in <font>
Lincolns-Inn-Fields <$$font> , who had bled at the nose several hours ,
when all the applications failed which were used by two eminent Surgeons
. " ALBIN-1736-1,4.75

I have observ'd , since I writ this , a small Ichneumon Fly to lay its
eggs on the egg-bags of the house Spider , ALBIN-1736-1,4.76

the worms of them penetrating the bag , eat up the eggs , leaving the
skins ; ALBIN-1736-1,4.77

and then make themselves small brown cases , in which they change into
Flies , which come out in the beginning of <font> May <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,4.78

<heading>

N=o=. IX . ALBIN-1736-1,4.80

<$$heading>

This Spider is of a blackish colour on the back , ALBIN-1736-1,4.82

the upper side of its belly was of a yellowish dark ash-colour , mark'd
with black ; <P_5> the legs particolour'd of black and hair-colour ; the
feelers long and smooth . ALBIN-1736-1,5.83

It had eight eyes standing as they are placed over the head of the
Spider in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,5.84

This is one of the female house Spiders . ALBIN-1736-1,5.85

It was taken in the beginning of <font> April <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,5.86

<heading>

N=o=. X . ALBIN-1736-1,5.88

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a black colour where the eyes stood ;
ALBIN-1736-1,5.90

the other part adjoining to the belly was of a redish chesnut colour ,
the upper side of the belly of a yellowish dark ash colour ,
ALBIN-1736-1,5.91

the legs of this Spider are pretty long and of a reddish {TEXT:redish}
colour , ALBIN-1736-1,5.92

the feelers were globular and hairy , ALBIN-1736-1,5.93

and on the outsides of them there was a bright knob of white , incircled
with yellow , which made it appear as if a little stone had been set
therein : ALBIN-1736-1,5.94

it had eight eyes standing as they are expressed over the Spider in the
Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,5.95

This was a male Spider , ALBIN-1736-1,5.96

and was taken in a house in the beginning of <font> April <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,5.97

<heading>

N=o=. XI . ALBIN-1736-1,5.99

<$$heading>

This Small Spider is of a brownish colour with a yellow mark cross part
of the belly next the back , the upper side of the belly being marked
with a large triangular mark with a cross in it ; ALBIN-1736-1,5.101

the legs were spotted : ALBIN-1736-1,5.102

it had long feelers , and four eyes , which were perceptible , standing
as they are expressed over the Spider in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,5.103

It was taken in a garden in <font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,5.104

<heading>

N=o=. XII . ALBIN-1736-1,5.106

<$$heading>

This Spider was black and white ; ALBIN-1736-1,5.108

the black marks on the upper side of the belly cross it horizontally ;
ALBIN-1736-1,5.109

it had eight eyes standing as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,5.110

This is one of the Spiders which catches his prey by jumping on it , and
can move backwards and forwards , or sideways at its pleasure with great
agility . ALBIN-1736-1,5.111

It was taken in a garden about the middle of <font> April <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,5.112

<P_6>

<heading>

N=o=. XIII . ALBIN-1736-1,6.115

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a dark hair-colour , with a small stroke of a lighter
colour on the upper side of the belly , and streak of light colour on
the back , bordered on each side with black , ALBIN-1736-1,6.117

it looks all over with a soft downy look : ALBIN-1736-1,6.118

it had long feelers , and eight eyes standing as they are expressed in
the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,6.119

It was taken in a garden at <font> Hackney <$$font> , about the middle
of <font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,6.120

Another of the same kind was taken about the middle of <font> May
<$$font> , with a large bag of eggs fastned to its tail , the outside of
which was white , with a cast of blew . ALBIN-1736-1,6.121

There has been found several degrees in bigness of these Spiders , and
the colours the same ; so that they do not alter or change their colours
as they grow bigger . ALBIN-1736-1,6.122

An endeavour was made to take the egg from it ; ALBIN-1736-1,6.123

but she was not willing to part with it , ALBIN-1736-1,6.124

but strove to hold it by clapping her legs about it a great many times :
ALBIN-1736-1,6.125

and when taken away , would run to it , and catch hold of it ,
endeavouring to pull it to her again . ALBIN-1736-1,6.126

<heading>

N=o=. XIV . ALBIN-1736-1,6.128

<$$heading>

This small Spider was black on the back ; ALBIN-1736-1,6.130

the upper side of the belly had a black line running through the middle
of it , with a border of white on each side of it , crossed on each
joint by a small black line ; ALBIN-1736-1,6.131

the feelers were very small . ALBIN-1736-1,6.132

It had eight eyes standing in a semicircular form , as they are
expressed in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,6.133

It was taken in a dry bank near <font> Islington <$$font> , on the
fourteenth of <font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,6.134

<heading>

N=o=. XV . ALBIN-1736-1,6.136

<$$heading>

This longish Spider hath a stripe of orange-colour on the middle of its
back , and down the middle of the upper side of the belly , edged with a
border of black ; the out-edges of which are composed of small black
lines , which make a faint shade ending in white . ALBIN-1736-1,6.138

Its <P_7> legs were of a chestnut-colour {TEXT:chesnut-colour} ;
ALBIN-1736-1,7.139

the feelers had thick knobs at the ends , ending in points .
ALBIN-1736-1,7.140

It had four eyes , standing as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,7.141

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , on the fourteenth of <font>
April <$$font> , running in the dead grass and leaves .
ALBIN-1736-1,7.142

<heading>

N=o=. XVI . ALBIN-1736-1,7.144

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a light brownish hair-colour , with a faint stripe of
yellow on its back , and upper side of its belly ; ALBIN-1736-1,7.146

its feelers were long and slender . ALBIN-1736-1,7.147

It had four eyes , standing , as is represented in the Plate by the dots
over the head of the Spider . ALBIN-1736-1,7.148

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , on the fourteenth of <font>
April <$$font> , running in the dead grass and leaves .
ALBIN-1736-1,7.149

This is a female . ALBIN-1736-1,7.150

<heading>

N=o=. XVII . ALBIN-1736-1,7.152

<$$heading>

This longish Spider was of a light hair-colour , the darkest part being
on the upper side of the belly , and coming off in a very light shadow
on the sides . ALBIN-1736-1,7.154

It had a light streak on the top of the back ; ALBIN-1736-1,7.155

the feelers had large knobbed and pointed ends . ALBIN-1736-1,7.156

It had four eyes , standing as is expressed over the Spider in the Plate
. ALBIN-1736-1,7.157

It was taken about the middle of <font> April <$$font> in <font>
Cain-Wood <$$font> , running on the ground under some dead leaves and
grass . ALBIN-1736-1,7.158

This is a male . ALBIN-1736-1,7.159

<heading>

N=o=. XVIII . ALBIN-1736-1,7.161

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider is of a dark hair-colour with a light streak in
the middle ; the upper side of the belly light hair-colour , the legs of
a reddish brown , the feelers long and slender , and of the same colour
of the legs . ALBIN-1736-1,7.163

It was taken the fourteenth of <font> April <$$font> , running
{TEXT:runinng} on the ground in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,7.164

<P_8>

<heading>

N=o=. XIX . ALBIN-1736-1,8.167

<$$heading>

This small Spider was all over black , ALBIN-1736-1,8.169

the feelers were knobbed at the ends . ALBIN-1736-1,8.170

It had six eyes , standing as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,8.171

They are found running about in great plenty , in the low wet grounds ,
about the middle of <font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,8.172

<heading>

N=o=. XX . ALBIN-1736-1,8.174

<$$heading>

This Spider is almost white on the top of the back : ALBIN-1736-1,8.176

the sides of the back were black , ALBIN-1736-1,8.177

it had a light mark all along the upper part of the belly even with that
on the back , ALBIN-1736-1,8.178

the legs and sides of the belly of a dark colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,8.179

its feelers were pretty thick : ALBIN-1736-1,8.180

it had six eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,8.181

Viewing the upper part of the belly of this Spider with a magnifying
glass , it was hairy and finely spotted : ALBIN-1736-1,8.182

It was found in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , running on the ground about
the middle of <font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,8.183

<heading>

N=o=. XXI . ALBIN-1736-1,8.185

<$$heading>

This Spider had a light mark along the top of the back ,
ALBIN-1736-1,8.187

the sides of the back black , going off into a faint shade of white ,
ALBIN-1736-1,8.188

the tail was of a dark colour . ALBIN-1736-1,8.189

Its feelers {TEXT:feleers} were slender , the legs finely marked ,
partly black and partly of sad colour : ALBIN-1736-1,8.190

it had six eyes standing as is expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,8.191

The belly of this Spider was shorter than is usually found in Spiders of
this bigness . ALBIN-1736-1,8.192

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , about the middle of <font>
April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,8.193

<heading>

N=o=. XXII . ALBIN-1736-1,8.195

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a hair-colour ; the sides of it dark , marked with
black ; ALBIN-1736-1,8.197

its belly rises pretty high on the upper side ; ALBIN-1736-1,8.198

its feelers were slender : ALBIN-1736-1,8.199

it had six eyes standing as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,8.200

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , near <font> Hampstead-Heath
<$$font> , about , {COM:comma_in_original} the middle of <font> April
<$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,8.201

<P_9>

<heading>

N=o=. XXIII . ALBIN-1736-1,9.204

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a dark colour , having a pretty broad streak of light
hair-colour in the middle ; and in the middle of that streak a small
black line , the rest of the back being black ; ALBIN-1736-1,9.206

the upper part of the belly had a small hair-colour's line , in shape of
a longish square . ALBIN-1736-1,9.207

It had six eyes standing as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,9.208

Its feelers were long and slender : ALBIN-1736-1,9.209

it was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> about the middle of <font>
April <$$font> , in the dead leaves . ALBIN-1736-1,9.210

One of these Spiders was taken at the beginning of <font> June <$$font>
with its egg-bag under its belly , which was round and white .
ALBIN-1736-1,9.211

<heading>

N=o=. XXIV . ALBIN-1736-1,9.213

<$$heading>

This small long_legged Spider was so finely marked that it was
impossible to describe it , either in words or colours ; there being so
fine a mixture of green , red , and black interchangeably put together
in pretty shapes ; ALBIN-1736-1,9.215

the legs were also finely marked in the same manner ; ALBIN-1736-1,9.216

the eyes were so small as not to be discerned . ALBIN-1736-1,9.217

It was taken on the body of a tree in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , about
the middle of <font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,9.218

<heading>

N=o=. XXV . ALBIN-1736-1,9.220

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider is of a chestnut {TEXT:chesnut} colour , and
small , the belly large , the upper part of which is of a yellow , white
, and orange colour , very agreeably mixed in pretty shapes , the legs
orange colour with dark spots . ALBIN-1736-1,9.222

The feelers were slender ; ALBIN-1736-1,9.223

it had six eyes standing as expressed in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,9.224

It was taken on a tree in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , about the middle
of <font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,9.225

<heading>

N=o=. XXVI . ALBIN-1736-1,9.227

<$$heading>

This small Spider was of a copper colour , the belly pretty large for
the bigness of the Spider . ALBIN-1736-1,9.229

It was found in the middle of a web , in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> ,
about the sixteenth of <font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,9.230

The eyes were so small as their number could not be perceived .
ALBIN-1736-1,9.231

<P_10>

<heading>

N=o=. XXVII . ALBIN-1736-1,10.234

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a longish shape , and of a yellowish green colour ;
ALBIN-1736-1,10.236

its feelers were slender . ALBIN-1736-1,10.237

It was taken about the middle of <font> April <$$font> in <font>
Cain-Wood <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,10.238

<heading>

N=o=. XXVIII . ALBIN-1736-1,10.240

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a blueish white , with a broad streak of white on the
middle of its back ; ALBIN-1736-1,10.242

bordered with black on each side , the upper side of the belly was
finely marked with black , and spotted with small black spots on the
legs . ALBIN-1736-1,10.243

It had small globular knobs at the ends of its feelers .
ALBIN-1736-1,10.244

<heading>

N=o=. XXIX . ALBIN-1736-1,10.246

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a hair-colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,10.248

it had a pretty large belly , the upper part of which , by the shadowing
of the colours , appeared in a square form ; ALBIN-1736-1,10.249

the two foremost legs were the longest ; the feelers small .
ALBIN-1736-1,10.250

It was taken about the middle of <font> April <$$font> , in <font>
Cain-Wood <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,10.251

<heading>

N=o=. XXX . ALBIN-1736-1,10.253

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a light brown or chesnut colour on the back ; the
upper side of the belly white shadowed towards the tail , with a deep
shade of yellow , and a row of darker spots of the same colour on each
side of the belly ; its feelers small ; ALBIN-1736-1,10.255

the two foremost legs were longer than the other {COM:sic} .
ALBIN-1736-1,10.256

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , about the middle of <font>
April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,10.257

<heading>

N=o=. XXXI . ALBIN-1736-1,10.259

<$$heading>

This is one of the most beautiful Spiders , if you look on it with a
<font> Microscope <$$font> , as is possible to be seen ; there is such a
variety of marbling in pretty shapes of several colours , <font> viz.
<$$font> black , chesnut , redish , and white <P_11> mixt all over the
back , the belly , legs and feelers . ALBIN-1736-1,11.261

It appears to the naked eye to be a greyish speckled Spider being all
over rough and hairy ; ALBIN-1736-1,11.262

the feelers have globular ends ALBIN-1736-1,11.263

and are hairy . ALBIN-1736-1,11.264

It had eight eyes placed as is expressed in the Plate , the two
middlemost in the top being the largest . ALBIN-1736-1,11.265

This Spider catches his prey by jumping on it , ALBIN-1736-1,11.266

and is extremely nimble in its moving any way it pleases .
ALBIN-1736-1,11.267

It was taken in a garden at <font> Hackney <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,11.268

<heading>

N=o=. XXXII . ALBIN-1736-1,11.270

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a dark colour , ALBIN-1736-1,11.272

there was a broad light streak of hair-colour in the middle of the back
; ALBIN-1736-1,11.273

the upper side of the belly was as if it was marbled or watered , and
all over very hairy . ALBIN-1736-1,11.274

The feelers had pointed knobs at the ends , of a shining black , and
below that another knob , which made them look as if they had been
turned by a <font> Turner <$$font> ; ALBIN-1736-1,11.275

it had six small eyes . ALBIN-1736-1,11.276

This was a male Spider , and taken in the house at the latter end of
<font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,11.277

<heading>

N=o=. XXXIII . ALBIN-1736-1,11.279

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a black colour , with a small stripe of lighter
colour in the middle of the back , ALBIN-1736-1,11.281

the upper part of the belly was lighter ; ALBIN-1736-1,11.282

the feelers had pointed knobs at the ends ; ALBIN-1736-1,11.283

it had four eyes standing as is expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,11.284

It was taken at the latter end of <font> April <$$font> , near <font>
Newington-Green <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,11.285

<heading>

N=o=. XXXIV . ALBIN-1736-1,11.287

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a hair-colour , ALBIN-1736-1,11.289

the back was short , the belly large , the upper side of which was
prettily marked with light colour in the middle , and dark on the sides
: ALBIN-1736-1,11.290

these marks were {TEXT:where} so regularly placed , as made it appear as
if jointed on the back , ALBIN-1736-1,11.291

it had a small triangular spot in the middle , with a white line round
it ; ALBIN-1736-1,11.292

and on the outside of that <P_12> line it was dark ; ALBIN-1736-1,12.293

the two foremost legs were the longest : ALBIN-1736-1,12.294

Its feelers were long and slender ; ALBIN-1736-1,12.295

it had six eyes , ALBIN-1736-1,12.296

the two foremost were very small , the two next pretty large :
ALBIN-1736-1,12.297

they were placed as are expressed in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,12.298

It was taken amongst some nettles near <font> Newington-Green <$$font> ,
at the end of <font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,12.299

<heading>

N=o=. XXXV . ALBIN-1736-1,12.301

<$$heading>

This small Spider is of a dark reddish or chesnut colour , its back dark
, ALBIN-1736-1,12.303

the upper side of its belly was prettily marked with white and light
chesnut colour : ALBIN-1736-1,12.304

It had globular bunches at the ends of the feelers , ALBIN-1736-1,12.305

the legs were very long for the bigness of the Spider , the two foremost
being the longest : ALBIN-1736-1,12.306

It had four eyes standing in a right line , in the forepart of his head
. ALBIN-1736-1,12.307

This Spider was taken at the latter end of <font> April <$$font> in
<font> Cain-Wood <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,12.308

<heading>

N=o=. XXXVI . ALBIN-1736-1,12.310

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a dark ash colour on the back , which was very small
, ALBIN-1736-1,12.312

the upper side of the belly was black and white , regularly marked ,
representing the shape of an <font> Oak-Leaf <$$font> , having a small
shade of chesnut colour in it , ALBIN-1736-1,12.313

the belly of this Spider was very large : its feelers small and long ;
ALBIN-1736-1,12.314

it had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,12.315

It was taken by the <font> New-River <$$font> , at the latter end of
<font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,12.316

<heading>

N=o=. XXXVII . ALBIN-1736-1,12.318

<$$heading>

This Spider was , on the upper part of its back , of a shining black ,
the lower part next the belly of a colour inclining to red , the belly
black , regularly marked with a lighter colour much resembling a leaf ;
ALBIN-1736-1,12.320

its legs were of a dark red or chesnut colour , spotted with black ;
ALBIN-1736-1,12.321

the feelers were slender : ALBIN-1736-1,12.322

Its back was so shining , and its eyes so small that they could not
without great difficulty be discerned , ALBIN-1736-1,12.323

they were eight in <P_13> number placed as they are expressed in the
Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,13.324

The hind legs were not very long . ALBIN-1736-1,13.325

It was taken in a <font> Cellar <$$font> , at the latter end of <font>
April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,13.326

<heading>

N=o=. XXXVIII . ALBIN-1736-1,13.328

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a hair-colour , with a light streak in the
middle of the back ; in which was a small black line ,
ALBIN-1736-1,13.330

the upper part of its belly was regularly marked representing joints ,
ALBIN-1736-1,13.331

the legs were finely spotted with black ; its feelers slender ;
ALBIN-1736-1,13.332

it {TEXT:It} had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,13.333

This Spider was taken in a <font> Cellar <$$font> , at the latter end of
<font> April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,13.334

The thick web of this , and all the house Spiders may be made <font> Use
<$$font> of , in the cure of all <font> intermittent <$$font> Fevers .
ALBIN-1736-1,13.335

<heading>

N=o=. XXXIX . ALBIN-1736-1,13.337

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was of a dark copper colour , the whole belly
perfectly black , the legs of a chesnut colour finely spotted with black
; ALBIN-1736-1,13.339

its feelers were slender : ALBIN-1736-1,13.340

The eyes were so small and close together as not rightly to be discerned
as to their number and form . ALBIN-1736-1,13.341

It was taken in a moist place under a shed at the latter end of <font>
April <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,13.342

<heading>

N=o=. XL . ALBIN-1736-1,13.344

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a brown colour : ALBIN-1736-1,13.346

the two foremost legs were the shortest , the two next the longest of
all ; the other two or third pair being short , the hind legs long :
ALBIN-1736-1,13.347

This Spider was taken at <font> Hackney <$$font> , in the beginning of
<font> May <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,13.348

This Spider seems to be one of the long-legged kind .
ALBIN-1736-1,13.349

<heading>

N=o=. XLI . ALBIN-1736-1,13.351

<$$heading>

This Spider is of a chesnut or redish colour on the back , with a shade
of green , the legs of the same colour , ALBIN-1736-1,13.353

the whole belly was of a very fine green , ALBIN-1736-1,13.354

on the upper part on each side was a row of dark_coloured <P_14> spots ,
and at the end of the tail a spot or tip of scarlet colour ; its feelers
small and of a transparent green colour , ALBIN-1736-1,14.355

it had six eyes placed as is expressed in the Plate ,
ALBIN-1736-1,14.356

they were very plain to be seen , the body being almost transparent ,
and the eyes black . ALBIN-1736-1,14.357

It was taken in a web on an <font> Elm-Tree <$$font> , eating a large
black <font> Fly <$$font> , at the beginning of <font> May , <$$font> on
<font> Epping-Forest <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,14.358

There was one taken at the same time much smaller , but marked exactly
like the great one . ALBIN-1736-1,14.359

<heading>

N=o=. XLII . ALBIN-1736-1,14.361

<$$heading>

This Spider was of the same colour , and marked exactly like the former
, the feelers of the former being of a transparent green :
ALBIN-1736-1,14.363

This Spider's feelers are of a muddy green with globular knobs at the
ends : ALBIN-1736-1,14.364

It had six eyes standing as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,14.365

It was taken on the <font> Forest <$$font> at the same place and time
with the former . ALBIN-1736-1,14.366

These two , I believe , to be male and female . ALBIN-1736-1,14.367

<heading>

N=o=. XLIII . ALBIN-1736-1,14.369

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was of a redish flesh colour with a lightish
spot of the same colour in the middle . ALBIN-1736-1,14.371

In the upper side of its belly which was pretty large , was a large dark
shade of the shape of a triangle , with a white line , reaching from the
back to the tail end , which white line was cut through in several
places by the dark shades ; ALBIN-1736-1,14.372

the feelers were slender ; ALBIN-1736-1,14.373

it {TEXT:It} had six eyes , placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,14.374

It was taken in a garden of Sir <font> Richard Child's <$$font> on
<font> Epping-Forest , {TEXT:.} <$$font> in the beginning of <font> May
<$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,14.375

<heading>

N=o=. XLIV . ALBIN-1736-1,14.377

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was chesnut colour , the belly almost black ,
with a cast of copper colour , on the upper side of which was a white
mark joining to the back , ALBIN-1736-1,14.379

the legs were of a light hair-colour very transparent , and finely
spotted with black ; ALBIN-1736-1,14.380

the feelers had small globular <P_15> knobs at their ends :
ALBIN-1736-1,15.381

The eyes were so small that their number and standing could not be
perceived . ALBIN-1736-1,15.382

This Spider was taken at the beginning of <font> May <$$font> , in a
garden at <font> Hackney <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,15.383

<heading>

N=o=. XLV . ALBIN-1736-1,15.385

<$$heading>

This Spider is of a hair-colour , ALBIN-1736-1,15.387

on the back are two small black lines , ALBIN-1736-1,15.388

the upper side of the belly was of a flesh colour finely marked with a
broad mark of black and white ; which mark is interrupted or broken off
, about the middle ; ALBIN-1736-1,15.389

the belly is shadowed and intermixed with a mixture of pale red .
ALBIN-1736-1,15.390

Its feelers are long and slender : ALBIN-1736-1,15.391

It had eight eyes standing as they are expressed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,15.392

The young ones of these Spiders , which are no bigger than a rape seed ,
are marked exactly like the old ones ; only something darker , and of a
copperish colour ; which shows they do not alter their marks in their
several degrees of bigness . ALBIN-1736-1,15.393

These Spiders were taken about the middle of <font> May <$$font> , by
the <font> New-River <$$font> near <font> Islington <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,15.394

<heading>

N=o=. XLVI . ALBIN-1736-1,15.396

<$$heading>

This Spider is of a dark colour , the back lighter , with a dark line in
the middle something like a nine-pin , but more pointed at each end ;
ALBIN-1736-1,15.398

on the upper side of the belly was a long dark_coloured mark with a
border of light colour round it , the whole being spotted with dark
spots ; ALBIN-1736-1,15.399

the feelers were slender : ALBIN-1736-1,15.400

It had four eyes standing as they are expressed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,15.401

This was taken near <font> Hornsey-Wood <$$font> , about the middle of
<font> May <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,15.402

<heading>

N=o=. XLVII . ALBIN-1736-1,15.404

<$$heading>

This Spider was long and slender , being all over of a hair-colour , and
finely speckled with small specks of dark colour , ALBIN-1736-1,15.406

the two foremost legs were very long , the two next something shorter ,
ALBIN-1736-1,15.407

the other pair next them were the shortest of all ; ALBIN-1736-1,15.408

the feelers were slender : ALBIN-1736-1,15.409

It had eight <P_16> eyes placed as is expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,16.410

These Spiders are very frequent in the <font> Hedges <$$font> about
<font> Hornsey-Wood <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,16.411

It was taken about the middle of <font> May <$$font> , at which time
there were a great many small ones running about , they not differing at
all from the old ones in shape or colour . ALBIN-1736-1,16.412

These are called the <font> Greyhound <$$font> Spider .
ALBIN-1736-1,16.413

They are so swift in running that they seem to fly .
ALBIN-1736-1,16.414

<heading>

N=o=. XLVIII . ALBIN-1736-1,16.416

<$$heading>

This Spider on the back is of a dark muddy yellow , inclining to a
blackish colour , the belly blackish , with a white hoary look ;
ALBIN-1736-1,16.418

the legs were yellow ; the feelers yellow and slender :
ALBIN-1736-1,16.419

It had eight eyes placed as is expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,16.420

It was taken about the middle of <font> May <$$font> , near <font>
Hornsey-Wood <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,16.421

One of these Spiders was taken near <font> Hambleton <$$font> in <font>
Buckingham-shire <$$font> , wraped up in a leaf of the winter_green ,
with a great many young ones with it ; ALBIN-1736-1,16.422

the legs and back of this Spider were not so yellow as the former but
more inclining to a chesnut colour . ALBIN-1736-1,16.423

<heading>

N=o=. XLIX . ALBIN-1736-1,16.425

<$$heading>

This Spider's back is of a blackish colour , the upper part of its belly
being finely marked with a redish , and blackish mixture ,
ALBIN-1736-1,16.427

and on the upper part next the back was a white mark in the form of a Y
. ALBIN-1736-1,16.428

Its legs were of a pale colour finely spotted ; ALBIN-1736-1,16.429

the feelers had small globular bunches at the ends .
ALBIN-1736-1,16.430

The eyes of this Spider could not be distinguished .
ALBIN-1736-1,16.431

<heading>

N=o=. L . ALBIN-1736-1,16.433

<$$heading>

This Spider was small and flat , almost resembling a tick .
ALBIN-1736-1,16.435

It was of an ash colour , each side of the back having a little mixture
of red ; ALBIN-1736-1,16.436

the feelers were slender , ALBIN-1736-1,16.437

the eyes of it could not be seen . ALBIN-1736-1,16.438

<P_17>

<heading>

N=o=. LI . ALBIN-1736-1,17.441

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was of an ash-colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,17.443

all the other parts were of a redish colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,17.444

on the upper part of the belly was a row of white marks ; from the back
to the end of the tail , ALBIN-1736-1,17.445

and between those white marks , it was finely marbled with a variety of
shades of red , in the shape of a triangle scolloped {COM:sic} on each
side , and a row of black spots on the outside of the scolloped line ;
ALBIN-1736-1,17.446

the legs were of a pale colour spotted with black ; ALBIN-1736-1,17.447

the feelers were slender and of an ash-colour : ALBIN-1736-1,17.448

It had eight eyes placed as is expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,17.449

It was taken in a garden at <font> Hackney <$$font> , about the middle
of <font> May <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,17.450

<heading>

N=o=. LII . ALBIN-1736-1,17.452

<$$heading>

This Spider seemed to be of a lead colour , and of an oval shape ;
ALBIN-1736-1,17.454

its back was very light ; the upper end or head white , with a line of
pale orange colour along the middle of the back ; ALBIN-1736-1,17.455

the upper part of the belly was very dark , almost black , going down
the sides in a lighter shade ; ALBIN-1736-1,17.456

the under side of the belly was of a sad colour : ALBIN-1736-1,17.457

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate ;
ALBIN-1736-1,17.458

Its feelers were long and slender . ALBIN-1736-1,17.459

It was taken near <font> Newington-Green <$$font> , about the latter end
of <font> May <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,17.460

<heading>

N=o=. LIII . ALBIN-1736-1,17.462

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a chesnut colour , with a streak of light
colour on the back ; ALBIN-1736-1,17.464

its belly was of an oval shape , the upper part of which was the darkest
; ALBIN-1736-1,17.465

the whole Spider had a velvet look : ALBIN-1736-1,17.466

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the copper plate ;
ALBIN-1736-1,17.467

the feelers were slender . ALBIN-1736-1,17.468

It was taken at the beginning of <font> June <$$font> , in <font>
Cain-Wood <$$font> , and put into a box over night , ALBIN-1736-1,17.469

and by the morning it had laid eggs and wrapped them up in a round white
ball , holding it under its belly . ALBIN-1736-1,17.470

<P_18>

<heading>

N=o=. LIV . ALBIN-1736-1,18.473

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a slender shape and its legs long , considering its
bigness ; ALBIN-1736-1,18.475

on the middle of its back was a whiteish line , on each side of that
black , and below that a light hair-colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,18.476

the upper part of the belly was of a dark chesnut colour ; that part
next the tail almost black ; the other end , next the back , inclining
to a dark red ; the sides of a whiteish colour , and below that black ;
ALBIN-1736-1,18.477

the legs were of a chesnut colour . ALBIN-1736-1,18.478

Its feelers were knobbed and pointed at the ends , ALBIN-1736-1,18.479

and on the inner side of those knobs there was a large black shining
spot looking like pollished jett . ALBIN-1736-1,18.480

It had eight eyes placed as in the Plate , ALBIN-1736-1,18.481

and was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , in the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,18.482

<heading>

N=o=. LV . ALBIN-1736-1,18.484

<$$heading>

This Spider was of an orange colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,18.486

it had on its back a streak of light , ALBIN-1736-1,18.487

and next to that on each side it had a dark shadow , ALBIN-1736-1,18.488

and on the outside of that shadow was a light line of the same colour of
the first ; ALBIN-1736-1,18.489

the upper side of the belly had on each side a line or streak of dark
colour ending in a point at the tail ; ALBIN-1736-1,18.490

the feelers were slender : ALBIN-1736-1,18.491

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,18.492

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , in the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,18.493

<heading>

N=o=. LVI . ALBIN-1736-1,18.495

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a most beautiful green colour , all over its body ,
legs and feelers , which last were slender : ALBIN-1736-1,18.497

It had eight eyes , placed as is expressed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,18.498

It was taken running on the ground in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the
beginning of <font> June <$$font> ; ALBIN-1736-1,18.499

it was very nimble and quick-sighted . ALBIN-1736-1,18.500

<P_19>

<heading>

N=o=. LVII . ALBIN-1736-1,19.503

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a dark colour , and shaped almost like a tick ;
ALBIN-1736-1,19.505

the middle of its back was of a light hair-colour , round which was a
pretty large mark of black ; ALBIN-1736-1,19.506

the upper side of the belly was of a dark hair-colour , finely marked
with a light hair-colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,19.507

on the outside of its belly was a fine shade of red ; its {TEXT:it} legs
finely speckled ; its feelers slender : ALBIN-1736-1,19.508

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,19.509

It was taken in a web in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the beginning of
<font> June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,19.510

<heading>

N=o=. LVIII . ALBIN-1736-1,19.512

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a yellowish colour , and shaped like a tick ;
ALBIN-1736-1,19.514

it had a black line on each side its back , the middle of it being of a
pale yellow ; ALBIN-1736-1,19.515

the under side of the belly was of the same colour , with small streaks
of a darker colour . ALBIN-1736-1,19.516

This was taken in <font> Cain-Wood , <$$font> at the beginning of <font>
June , <$$font> where a very small one was taken at the same time ,
exactly marked like the great one . ALBIN-1736-1,19.517

<heading>

N=o=. LIX . ALBIN-1736-1,19.519

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a whiteish sky-colour , with a black mark on each
side the back , and upper part of the belly ; the under side of a
blueish white ; ALBIN-1736-1,19.521

the legs were blueish , and finely speckled with black .
ALBIN-1736-1,19.522

Its feelers were small : ALBIN-1736-1,19.523

The number and standing of the eyes could not be distinguished , they
were so small and close together . ALBIN-1736-1,19.524

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,19.525

<heading>

N=o=. LX . ALBIN-1736-1,19.527

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a dark hair-colour , having a lighter stripe of the
same colour , in the middle of the back ; ALBIN-1736-1,19.529

the upper side of the belly was spotted with black ; ALBIN-1736-1,19.530

the whole underside was of a dark hair-colour <P_20> without spots ;
ALBIN-1736-1,20.531

the legs were of a light-@ @hair_colour , looking transparent with a few
black specks here and there on them . ALBIN-1736-1,20.532

Its feelers were slender . ALBIN-1736-1,20.533

It had eight eyes placed as in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,20.534

This Spider was taken from an <font> Ichneumon Fly <$$font> , in <font>
Cain-Wood <$$font> , in the beginning of <font> June <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,20.535

<heading>

N=o=. LXI . ALBIN-1736-1,20.537

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a hair-colour ; its back very dark ; the belly light
in the middle and clouded on the sides with a dark colour ; the whole
under side of a same {TEXT:same_of_a} dark colour ; its legs blackish ;
the feelers slender . ALBIN-1736-1,20.539

It had eight eyes standing in a semicircular form , as is expressed in
the copper Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,20.540

This is one of the Spiders which catches his prey by jumping on it .
ALBIN-1736-1,20.541

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , in the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,20.542

<heading>

N=o=. LXII . ALBIN-1736-1,20.544

<$$heading>

This Spider is all black , excepting four white specks on the upper side
of the belly ; ALBIN-1736-1,20.546

the feelers were of a whiteish , or very pale yellow ;
ALBIN-1736-1,20.547

the legs were of a dark yellow . ALBIN-1736-1,20.548

It had eight eyes standing in a semicircular form , as they are
expressed in the copper Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,20.549

This is another of the jumping Spiders , ALBIN-1736-1,20.550

and was taken at the same time and place as N=o=. LXI .
ALBIN-1736-1,20.551

<heading>

N=o=. LXIII . ALBIN-1736-1,20.553

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider is dark in the middle with a whiteish line round
it ; ALBIN-1736-1,20.555

its back is much broader and bigger than its belly ; ALBIN-1736-1,20.556

the upper side of the belly is of a light chesnut colour , with a darker
colour round it ; ALBIN-1736-1,20.557

the whole underside is blackish ; its legs speckled ; the feelers
slender . ALBIN-1736-1,20.558

It had eight eyes placed in a semicircular form , as they are expressed
in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,20.559

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> , ALBIN-1736-1,20.560

and is one of the jumping Spiders . ALBIN-1736-1,20.561

<P_21>

<heading>

N=o=. LXIV . ALBIN-1736-1,21.564

<$$heading>

This Spider's back and belly was of a curious shining black , with some
few spots and marks of white , on the top and sides of its belly ;
ALBIN-1736-1,21.566

the legs were of a redish chesnut colour ; its feelers black and slender
; ALBIN-1736-1,21.567

the belly was large for the bigness of the Spider . ALBIN-1736-1,21.568

It was so bright and shining that its eyes could not be discerned .
ALBIN-1736-1,21.569

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , in the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,21.570

<heading>

N=o=. LXV . ALBIN-1736-1,21.572

<$$heading>

The back , legs , and feelers of this Spider were of a hair-colour ; the
upper side of its belly finely marked with chesnut , orange and white ;
ALBIN-1736-1,21.574

on the under side there was a broad black mark , reaching from the head
to the tail . ALBIN-1736-1,21.575

It had six eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,21.576

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,21.577

<heading>

N=o=. LXVI . ALBIN-1736-1,21.579

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was large and black , with two red marks , on
the lower part next the belly , which was small and pointed at the tail
end , and finely marked with white ; ALBIN-1736-1,21.581

the legs were between a black and chesnut colour ; the feelers of a
light hair-colour with globular pointed knobs at the ends ; on the
innermost side of which was a shining black spot . ALBIN-1736-1,21.582

It had six eyes placed as is expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,21.583

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,21.584

<heading>

N=o=. LXVII . ALBIN-1736-1,21.586

<$$heading>

This long_legged Spider was of a yellowish hair-colour , the back ,
belly , and head making one entire {TEXT:intire} lump , having no
division between the back and belly , as in other Spiders ;
ALBIN-1736-1,21.588

the feelers were slender ; ALBIN-1736-1,21.589

towards <P_22> the head , on the upper side , was a rising knob , on
which were placed two pretty large eyes . ALBIN-1736-1,22.590

This was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the beginning of <font>
June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,22.591

<heading>

N=o=. LXVIII . ALBIN-1736-1,22.593

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider hath a small line of orange colour in the middle
, and on each side of that a broad stripe of black ; and on the outside
of the back a light hair-colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,22.595

the upper side of the belly was black , with marks of hair-colour down
the middle , in the shape of hearts ; the sides of the belly whitish ;
next to that black , which come off into a faint shade of ash colour ;
ALBIN-1736-1,22.596

the whole underside was of the same colour ; the legs and feelers both
of a hair-colour . ALBIN-1736-1,22.597

It had eight eyes placed as in@ @the copper Plate , the uppermost of
which , that stood in a row , were the smallest . ALBIN-1736-1,22.598

It was taken running on the ground by a hedge side near <font> Woolwich
<$$font> in <font> Kent <$$font> , about the middle of <font> June
<$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,22.599

<heading>

N=o=. LXIX . ALBIN-1736-1,22.601

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was black , with three white marks or specks on
it , the upper part of the belly , black , with a semicircular line of
white , {TEXT:white,_of} on the upper part next the back , and two
stripes of white on each side , pointing upwards towards the middle of
the belly ; ALBIN-1736-1,22.603

the legs were hair-colour , spotted with a darker colour ; the feelers
slender . ALBIN-1736-1,22.604

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,22.605

It was taken in a garden at <font> Hackney <$$font> , in the beginning
of <font> June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,22.606

<heading>

N=o=. LXX . ALBIN-1736-1,22.608

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a brown colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,22.610

its back and belly were near of a bigness ; ALBIN-1736-1,22.611

the belly had an indented stripe of a lighter colour rising in the
middle , making its belly appear gibbous ; ALBIN-1736-1,22.612

its legs were something long and finely spotted ; ALBIN-1736-1,22.613

its feelers were slender . ALBIN-1736-1,22.614

<P_23>

This Spider was taken with a small flatish ball of eggs , of a blueish
colour , which it held under its belly . ALBIN-1736-1,23.616

It was found near <font> Woolwich <$$font> in <font> Kent <$$font> ,
about the middle of <font> June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,23.617

<heading>

N=o=. LXXI . ALBIN-1736-1,23.619

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was of a dark red colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,23.621

the belly , which was pretty large for the bigness of the Spider , was
marked with black , white , and orange_coloured marks .
ALBIN-1736-1,23.622

It had a ball of eggs when it was taken , which was round , and of a
pale blue colour . ALBIN-1736-1,23.623

It was found about the middle of <font> June <$$font> , near <font>
Charlton <$$font> in <font> Kent <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,23.624

<heading>

N=o=. LXXII . ALBIN-1736-1,23.626

<$$heading>

This Spider had , on the middle of the back , a large dark spot edged
with a light colour , and on the outside of that black ;
ALBIN-1736-1,23.628

the upper side of the belly was prettily marked , with black and
hair-colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,23.629

the legs were of a dark colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,23.630

its feelers had globular ends . ALBIN-1736-1,23.631

This was taken near <font> Charlton <$$font> in <font> Kent <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,23.632

The eyes were so small that their number and standing could not be
distinguished . ALBIN-1736-1,23.633

<heading>

N=o=. LXXIII . ALBIN-1736-1,23.635

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was of a red colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,23.637

the upper side of the belly was black , with a whiteish yellow mark
along the middle , like a small sprig of the yew tree ;
ALBIN-1736-1,23.638

the end of its tail was forked ; ALBIN-1736-1,23.639

its feelers were slender . ALBIN-1736-1,23.640

It had eight eyes placed as {TEXT:at} they are described in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,23.641

It was taken in a warren near <font> Woolwich <$$font> in <font> Kent
<$$font> , about the middle of <font> June <$$font> , in a very thick
web on the ground , making a large hole for its ingress and egress ,
where it lays concealed till the prey is entangled , ALBIN-1736-1,23.642

and then coming forth it lays hold on it , ALBIN-1736-1,23.643

and killing it carries it into its hole . ALBIN-1736-1,23.644

Some of these Spiders are taken in <font> July <$$font> , much larger ;
but nothing differing in shape or colours . ALBIN-1736-1,23.645

<P_24>

<heading>

N=o=. LXXIV . ALBIN-1736-1,24.648

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider is of a reddish {COM:sic} colour , the upper
side of its belly black , striped with white like a sprig of yew ; its
tail forked ; the legs of a dark colour ; as were also the feelers ,
which were knobbed and pointed at the ends : ALBIN-1736-1,24.650

It had eight eyes standing as they are expressed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,24.651

It was taken in a thick web about the middle of <font> June : <$$font>
ALBIN-1736-1,24.652

I take this to be the male to N=o=. LXXIII . ALBIN-1736-1,24.653

<heading>

N=o=. LXXV . ALBIN-1736-1,24.655

<$$heading>

The back and belly , of this Spider both upper and under-@ @side , were
of a shining black , as if polished , or varnished ; ALBIN-1736-1,24.657

and on the upper side of its belly it had two rows of dents , or hollow
specks set in a regular order ; ALBIN-1736-1,24.658

the legs and feelers were of a very dark red ; ALBIN-1736-1,24.659

the eyes could not be seen by reason of its shining-blackness ;
ALBIN-1736-1,24.660

the tail was forked . ALBIN-1736-1,24.661

It was taken about the middle of <font> June <$$font> , creeping on the
ground , near <font> Charlton <$$font> in <font> Kent <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,24.662

<heading>

N=o=. LXXVI . ALBIN-1736-1,24.664

<$$heading>

This Spider's back and legs were of a dark redish hair-colour ; the
whole belly of a dark lead colour , rough and hairy , the tail forked
and of a flesh colour ; its feelers slender . ALBIN-1736-1,24.666

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,24.667

It was taken near <font> Woolwich <$$font> in <font> Kent <$$font> ,
about the middle of <font> June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,24.668

<heading>

N=o=. LXXVII . ALBIN-1736-1,24.670

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a hair-colour , finely marked and mottled
with black ; its legs long and smooth ; its feelers long and slender .
ALBIN-1736-1,24.672

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed , by the dots over the
Spider , <P_25> in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,25.673

It was taken about the middle of <font> June <$$font> , upon a dry bank
on <font> Putney-Heath <$$font> , where it spun a very thick web , and
had made two holes which led into a large hole in the bank , in which it
lay very still , expecting its prey which , as soon as it is entangl'd ,
it would run out and catch up , and run into the hole with it .
ALBIN-1736-1,25.674

<heading>

N=o=. LXXVIII . ALBIN-1736-1,25.676

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was of a flesh colour mix'd with a cast of green
; the legs and feelers of a chesnut colour , with a greenish cast ;
ALBIN-1736-1,25.678

the upper side of the belly was of a bright yellowish green in the
middle , and a blueish green on the outsides . ALBIN-1736-1,25.679

It had a beautiful red spot at the end of its tail : ALBIN-1736-1,25.680

It had six eyes placed as is expressed by the dots over the Spider in
the Plate , ALBIN-1736-1,25.681

It was found in a thin web on the bushes on <font> Putney-Heath <$$font>
, about the middle of <font> June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,25.682

<heading>

N=o=. LXXIX . ALBIN-1736-1,25.684

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a light yellowish green ;
ALBIN-1736-1,25.686

on the upper side of the belly there were two rows of small black spots
; ALBIN-1736-1,25.687

its feelers were slender ; the legs long for the bigness of the Spider .
ALBIN-1736-1,25.688

It had six eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,25.689

After it was taken it shed its skin , ALBIN-1736-1,25.690

but differed nothing from what it was before . ALBIN-1736-1,25.691

This was taken about the middle of <font> June <$$font> on <font>
Putney-Heath <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,25.692

<heading>

N=o=. LXXX . ALBIN-1736-1,25.694

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a buff colour , with a dark chesnut_coloured
mark on each side the back and belly , and two spots of the same colour
near the tail . ALBIN-1736-1,25.696

The feelers were long and slender . ALBIN-1736-1,25.697

It had eight eyes placed as is expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,25.698

It was taken on a furzebush {TEXT:furzsbush} on <font> Putney-Heath
<$$font> on the twenty_first of <font> June <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,25.699

<P_26>

<heading>

N=o=. LXXXI . ALBIN-1736-1,26.702

<$$heading>

This Spider was white both on the upper and under side of its legs and
feelers ; ALBIN-1736-1,26.704

it had a dark shade on each side its back . ALBIN-1736-1,26.705

It had a small shade of red on the head ; ALBIN-1736-1,26.706

on the upper side of the belly were two rows of dents or dimples , and
two specks of red near the back , and two larger on the side of the
belly . ALBIN-1736-1,26.707

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,26.708

It was taken on the twenty_eighth of <font> June <$$font> , in <font>
Bishop's-Wood <$$font> near <font> Hamstead-Heath <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,26.709

Two of these Spiders were taken in a <font> Wood <$$font> near <font>
Henley <$$font> upon <font> Thames <$$font> , about the middle of <font>
June <$$font> ; the red spots on one of these being much larger than the
spots on this Spider . ALBIN-1736-1,26.710

<heading>

N=o=. LXXXII . ALBIN-1736-1,26.712

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was of a redish cast ; the sides of a dark
colour ; ALBIN-1736-1,26.714

the upper side of its belly was of a dirty yellow , with a long square
mark in the middle ; ending in a large dark spot next the tail , which
was forked ; ALBIN-1736-1,26.715

the underside of the belly was of the same colour , having two large
spots thereon , as if gilded with fine gold . ALBIN-1736-1,26.716

It had eight eyes , as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,26.717

It was found spun up in the tops of green sorrel , and with it a bag of
eggs of a pale red colour , near <font> Lusham <$$font> near <font> Kent
<$$font> , at the beginning of <font> July <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,26.718

<heading>

N=o=. LXXXIII . ALBIN-1736-1,26.720

<$$heading>

The back of this Spider was of a flesh colour , finely marked with black
; ALBIN-1736-1,26.722

the upper side of the belly is black , as prettily marked with white ,
and on the white fine specks of black , as were also the sides of the
belly . ALBIN-1736-1,26.723

Its legs were spotted with a dark colour ; its feelers long and slender
. ALBIN-1736-1,26.724

It had eight eyes placed as is expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,26.725

It was taken in a very broad web , which was spread on the ground with a
large hole for its retreat , on the eight of <font> June <$$font> , near
<font> Dulwich <$$font> in <font> Kent <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,26.726

<P_27>

<heading>

N=o=. LXXXIV . ALBIN-1736-1,27.729

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a hair-colour ; the sides of its back of a
darker colour ; the legs and sides of its belly paler , and speckled
with the same dark colour . ALBIN-1736-1,27.731

Its feelers were slender . ALBIN-1736-1,27.732

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,27.733

It was found in a web spun up in the <font> Hasel-Leaf <$$font> , with a
ball of eggs of a yellow colour wrapped round with a white web , in a
<font> Wood <$$font> beyond <font> Peckham <$$font> , in the beginning
of <font> June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,27.734

<heading>

N=o=. LXXXV . ALBIN-1736-1,27.736

<$$heading>

This Spider was all over of a hair-colour ; the middle of its back light
, and the sides dark , almost black ; ALBIN-1736-1,27.738

on the upper side of the belly was a light_coloured mark in the shape of
a feather , and in it a longish black square . Its feelers slender .
ALBIN-1736-1,27.739

It had six eyes placed as in the Plate ; ALBIN-1736-1,27.740

the sides of the belly were of a chesnut colour . ALBIN-1736-1,27.741

It was taken at the beginning of <font> July <$$font> near <font>
Dulwich <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,27.742

<heading>

N=o=. LXXXVI . ALBIN-1736-1,27.744

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a light ash colour , with a white line in the middle
of its back , and a whitish mark in the middle of the upperside of its
belly ; the sides of the belly white ; its legs hairy ; the feelers long
and slender . ALBIN-1736-1,27.746

It had eight eyes placed as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,27.747

It was taken in the beginning of <font> July <$$font> , and with it a
ball of eggs , which it held fast with its legs ; which ball , when
broken , was found full of young Spiders all black .
ALBIN-1736-1,27.748

<heading>

N=o=. LXXXVII . ALBIN-1736-1,27.750

<$$heading>

This Spider was of a light hair-colour , streaked and speckled with
black ; ALBIN-1736-1,27.752

on the upperside of the belly there were two rows of marks <P_28>
spotted with black and white ; ALBIN-1736-1,28.753

the legs were long , and finely spotted ; the feelers slender .
ALBIN-1736-1,28.754

It had eight eyes standing as they are expressed over the head of the
Spider in the Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,28.755

At the end of its tail there were little short things like feathers
standing up , which it opened and shut like a fan at its pleasure .
ALBIN-1736-1,28.756

It was taken in the middle of <font> July <$$font> , in the <font>
Chamber-Window <$$font> , at the <font> Greyhound-Inn <$$font> at <font>
Maiden-Head <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,28.757

<heading>

N=o=. LXXXVIII . ALBIN-1736-1,28.759

<$$heading>

This is one of the long_legged Spiders , of a dark hair-colour ;
ALBIN-1736-1,28.761

its body was small and something flatter than is usual in these sorts of
Spiders ; ALBIN-1736-1,28.762

its legs and feelers were long . ALBIN-1736-1,28.763

It had but two eyes standing as they are expressed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,28.764

It was taken near <font> Peckham <$$font> , in the beginning of <font>
July <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,28.765

<heading>

N=o=. LXXXIX . ALBIN-1736-1,28.767

<$$heading>

This Spider's back was of a darkish ash colour with a cast of red ;
ALBIN-1736-1,28.769

the upper side of the belly was of a redish hair-colour , with a large
clouded triangle ; in the middle of which there were white marks ,
regularly placed from the back to the end of the tail .
ALBIN-1736-1,28.770

The legs of this Spider were hairy and finely spotted , and intermixed
with some bristles ; the feelers slender and hairy ; as was also the
whole Spider . ALBIN-1736-1,28.771

It had eight eyes standing as they are expressed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,28.772

<heading>

N=o=. XC . ALBIN-1736-1,28.774

<$$heading>

The back and legs of this Spider were of a dark green , the belly of a
fine grass green ; on the upperside of which there was a pretty large
mark of dark green , and round the mark of dark green , a yellowish
green . ALBIN-1736-1,28.776

Its feelers were slender . ALBIN-1736-1,28.777

It had eight eyes standing as they are expressed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,28.778

It was taken upon an <font> Oak-Tree <$$font> in <font> Cain-Wood
<$$font> , at the latter end of <font> July <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,28.779

<P_29>

<heading>

N=o=. XCI . ALBIN-1736-1,29.782

<$$heading>

The back and legs of this Spider looked transparent , like clear horn ,
excepting the spots , which were red and black , which made them look
like Tortoise-shell {TEXT:Torotise-shell} , ALBIN-1736-1,29.784

the upper side of the belly was yellow , except a very large mark on
that part next the tail , and about that two very small black specks .
ALBIN-1736-1,29.785

It had eight eyes , standing as they are placed in the copper Plate ;
ALBIN-1736-1,29.786

the feelers were slender . ALBIN-1736-1,29.787

It was taken in a <font> Leaf <$$font> closed together , near to a web
which it had made . ALBIN-1736-1,29.788

I took one of these on an <font> Oak <$$font> , in <font> Cain-Wood
<$$font> , at the beginning of <font> September <$$font> .
ALBIN-1736-1,29.789

<heading>

N=o=. XCII . ALBIN-1736-1,29.791

<$$heading>

The back and legs of this Spider were of a hair-colour ;
ALBIN-1736-1,29.793

the feelers {TEXT:feelers,} were slender and of the same colour ;
ALBIN-1736-1,29.794

on the upper side of the belly was a large indented mark of white
incompassed with a deep scarlet colour ; the sides of the belly yellow .
ALBIN-1736-1,29.795

It had six eyes placed as in the copper Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,29.796

It was found in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the end of <font> July
<$$font> , inclosed in an <font> Oak-Leaf <$$font> , with a web in which
was a ball of eggs of a pale blueish colour . ALBIN-1736-1,29.797

<heading>

N=o=. XCIII . ALBIN-1736-1,29.799

<$$heading>

The middle of the back of this Spider was dark , with a light colour
round it ; the upper side of the belly dark , with a light_coloured mark
, in the form of a cross ; ALBIN-1736-1,29.801

and below that , next the tail , there were small streaks or lines of a
light colour quite cross the lower part of the belly ; the under side of
the belly light and finely speckled with dark colour : Its feelers
slender . ALBIN-1736-1,29.802

It had eight eyes standing as they are expressed over the Spider in the
Plate . ALBIN-1736-1,29.803

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the latter end of <font>
July <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,29.804

<P_30>

<heading>

N=o=. XCIV . ALBIN-1736-1,30.807

<$$heading>

The back , belly , and feelers of this Spider were of a dark chesnut
colour , except some fine light_coloured spots on the upper side of the
belly ; the two lowermost of which were the biggest .
ALBIN-1736-1,30.809

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , folded up in a <font> Leaf
<$$font> , and with it a ball of eggs , at the latter end of <font> July
<$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,30.810

<heading>

N=o=. XCV . ALBIN-1736-1,30.812

<$$heading>

The back and legs of this Spider were of a dark green ; the belly of a
light-@ @green with a dark line on the upper side of it :
ALBIN-1736-1,30.814

This Spider was slender ; the feelers pretty long . ALBIN-1736-1,30.815

It had eight eyes standing as they are placed in the copper Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,30.816

It was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the latter end of <font>
July <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,30.817

<heading>

N=o=. XCVI . ALBIN-1736-1,30.819

<$$heading>

This long_legged Spider was , on the upperside of its body , black ; the
sides of a hair-colour ; the belly on its under side yellowish ; the
legs spotted from their middle to the body . ALBIN-1736-1,30.821

The feelers were long and slender and of a light hair-colour .
ALBIN-1736-1,30.822

This Spider was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , at the latter end
of <font> July <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,30.823

<heading>

N=o=. XCVII . ALBIN-1736-1,30.825

<$$heading>

This Spider's back and legs were of a hair-colour , the belly whitish ,
speckled and veined with black so curiously that it is impossible to
describe it ; ALBIN-1736-1,30.827

the feelers were long and slender . ALBIN-1736-1,30.828

it had six eyes standing as they are placed in the Plate .
ALBIN-1736-1,30.829

It was taken in the middle of <font> July <$$font> , in <font> Cain-Wood
<$$font> , ALBIN-1736-1,30.830

it was kept in a box two or three days , in which time it made a ball of
eggs very round and white . ALBIN-1736-1,30.831

<P_31>

<heading>

N=o=. XCVIII . ALBIN-1736-1,31.834

<$$heading>

The back and legs of this Spider were of a dark colour ; the upper side
of the belly white , and in the middle a dark mark , something like a
spleenwort leaf . ALBIN-1736-1,31.836

The feelers had shining globular knobs at the ends .
ALBIN-1736-1,31.837

It had six eyes standing as they are {TEXT:were} placed over the head of
the Spider in the Plate : ALBIN-1736-1,31.838

Two of its eyes were placed so near together that they seemed but one .
ALBIN-1736-1,31.839

This was taken in <font> Cain-Wood <$$font> , in the middle of its web ,
at the latter end of <font> June <$$font> . ALBIN-1736-1,31.840

