<BEGIN_andrews1-1785-2>

<P_2,180>

<heading>

Chap. XX . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.4

<font> Declaration of Independency . <$$font> ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.5

1776 . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.6

<$$heading>

While these various transactions were taking place in the different
Provinces throughout America , the Congress was deeply engaged in the
preparation of that event which began now to be universally expected .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.8

A circular address was sent to every Colony , stating several reasons
for which they judged it necessary that the authority of the Crown and
Legislature of Great Britain should be totally suppressed , and the
powers of government assumed respectively by the Assembly of each
Province . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.9

They founded the justice and propriety of this measure , on the conduct
held by Great Britain during a long time past , but especially on the
determinations contained in the prohibitory act lately passed , by which
all intercourse was forbidden with the Thirteen United Colonies .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.10

An interdiction of this kind , was , in their opinion , a formal
exclusion from that protection which the Crown owed to its subjects .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.11

They were , in fact , declared outlaws , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.12

and lay exposed to all people's mercy . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.13

They had nothing further to expect but ill usage and depredation ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.14

and they were by proclamation , given over to be plundered and despoiled
of their property by all who could seize upon it .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,180.15

Such was , they said , the answer they had received to the dutiful and
humble petition they had presented to the British throne , in the name
of all the inhabitants of America , for a friendly redress <P_2,181> of
grievances , in order to a sincere and permanent reconciliation .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.16

So determined and irrevocable was the resolution of Britain to establish
an arbitrary government in the Colonies , that not content with levying
numerous armies , and equipping powerful fleets at home for that purpose
, she had applied to her foreign allies for the assistance of their
troops , and was now preparing to invade the American continent with all
the force her treasures could procure . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.17

For these reasons , it was indispensibly incumbent upon them to unite
their arms and councils with the greatest vigour , unanimity , and speed
. ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.18

The danger was manifest and imminent ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.19

the exertions they had hitherto made , though considerable , must now be
increased in a proportion with those of their enemies .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.20

As these had divested themselves of all manner of regard and feeling for
the Americans , they were no longer bound to consider them as their
founders and parents , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.21

and were in all reason , absolved from any farther allegiance to that
monarchy and nation . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.22

Englishmen , said they , are no longer governed by those maxims of
equity and moderation , that led them to consider us as brethren .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.23

National pride , and criminal influence , have destroyed that integrity
and benevolence with which they used to attend to our concerns .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.24

Administration , for a series of years , have been our declared enemies
, ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.25

and despotism is the system they have long designed for the Colonies .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.26

The question is now , whether we shall persevere in the resistance we
have begun , or pusillanimously lay down those arms which we have
hitherto employed with honour and success ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.27

Such was the purport of the representations made by Congress and its
adherents . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.28

They were the natural result of the impressions made upon them by the
dread they felt at the vast preparations to reduce them .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,181.29

<P_2,182>

They now imagined that ministry intended to realize their fears , and to
compel them to the most servile submission . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.31

Until this apprehension began to prevail , whatever might have been the
secret views of individuals , the Colonists did not think themselves
necessitated to carry their opposition any farther than to prevent the
designs of ministry from taking place . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.32

They insisted on no more than the enjoyment of their ancient claims :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.33

a reconciliation on these terms was the utmost of their demands ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.34

and they had not yet fostered the idea of tearing themselves asunder
from a people from whom they derived their origin , and with whom a
variety of powerful motives had long contributed to cement , and still
continued to support their connection . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.35

Those , who relying on the temper and circumstances of the times , had
indulged themselves in the formation of another plan , and whose ideas
went much farther than those of the generality , had not yet dared to
unfold their minds . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.36

The public was not yet sufficiently irritated to countenance their
notions , and to eradicate old habits of attachment .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.37

But the news of what was transacting in Britain , excited an alarm of a
different kind from any of the former . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.38

Complaints and anger at the behaviour of the Colonists , had been
followed by threats , and afterwards by an attempt to compel them to
obedience ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.39

but still the quarrel remained confined to the subjects of Britain ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.40

they were the sole parties concerned , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.41

and all hope was not yet extinguished of composing these unhappy
dissentions without foreign interposition . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.42

But when they saw the sphere of discord enlarged by the association of
strangers to this domestic dispute , they began to be persuaded , that
those who had accused the British ministry of entertaining the most
sinister designs , were well founded . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,182.43

They were <P_2,183> now convinced that slavery or destruction was the
alternative intended for them in the councils of Britain .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.44

This conviction shortly became general , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.45

and operated with prodigious effect : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.46

it expelled all the remaining sentiments of respect and regard for the
parent state , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.47

and wrought a revolution in the minds of many , which paved the way for
that which sometime after entirely changed the face of affairs on the
northern continent of America . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.48

Numerous were the publications on this occasion , tending to inflame the
public against the measures of the British government .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.49

Many of them were composed with great art and energy ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.50

but none was so much read , and had such diffusive influence , as that
which appeared under the title of <font> Common Sense .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.51

<$$font> It was in every respect a bold and animated performance .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.52

As it spoke the language and opinions of a large proportion of the
people , it was received with vast applause , and recommended as a work
replete with truth , and against which none but the partial and
prejudiced would form any objections . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.53

The reasonings and arguments contained in these various writings ,
filled all companies and conversations , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.54

and excited a spirit of inquiry and discussion into the rights of human
nature , and society at large , such as had never been exceeded , if
ever equalled , in any country in christendom .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.55

The ingenuity and eloquence with which the advocates of America
supported the cause of their country against the claims of Great Britain
, were of a peculiar cast . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,183.56

They denoted men who had dived deep into the subject , and were
determined to bring to light the fruit of their lucubrations , and to
avail themselves of every plea , however it might prove out of the
common track , or offend established opinions , or wound the pride of
those who build <P_2,184> their authority on the weakness and credulity
of mankind . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.57

All such restraints vanished before individuals , who from their
situation , had nothing to apprehend from those of whom they were to
invalidate the pretensions or to lessen the character .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.58

The more freely they spoke of crowns and scepters , the more they knew
their maxims would be acceptable to a people , whose unpliant
disposition could bear submission to no power but their own .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.59

They were now , said they , involved in a contest of more importance
than any that had agitated the world for many ages .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.60

The dispute was not between states contending for some towns or
territories ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.61

the destiny of an immense continent was at stake :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.62

the interests they were defending were those of whole nations yet to
come : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.63

the decision of this dispute would reach many ages into futurity ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.64

and their posterity , long after they were no more , would have ample
cause either to respect or to despite their memory .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.65

Years had revolved since peace and reconciliation had been the continual
subject of their thoughts , their entreaties , and their endeavours :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.66

but they now were called upon to attend to other objects .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.67

The sword was drawn , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.68

blood had been shed ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.69

there was no more room for friendly discussions .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.70

They had entered upon another scene , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.71

and must now act the part of men who had a new character to support .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.72

There were people among them , who , casting their eyes on the long
connection that had subsisted between Great Britain and her Colonies ,
imagined that its protection was necessary for their welfare ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.73

but though while in their infancy it was of service , they were now
matured into a nation , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.74

and wanted it no longer . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.75

It was become dangerous , as they that are able to protect , may think
themselves intitled to rule . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,184.76

<P_2,185>

The connection with Great Britain carried a splendid appearance ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.78

but how dearly must it be purchased ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.79

Her honour and her interests often led her to take part in those
quarrels that were almost perpetual on the continent of Europe .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.80

Her enemies , of course , were no less those of America ,
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.81

and every disaster that befel her , must be participated by this
continent . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.82

The vicissitudes that time introduces into all human affairs , would
certainly put a period at last to the sovereignty of Britain over
America . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.83

The sooner it was done , the better for both : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.84

she would free herself from everlasting contentions , and from a
precarious authority ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.85

and America would establish that form of government which suited her
situation , and the inclinations of her inhabitants .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.86

Nature could not intend that countries so distant from each other ,
should be subject to the same government . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.87

What an absurdity for men to sail three_thousand miles in order to
receive directions from strangers how to manage their domestic concerns
? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.88

Was it not more rational , as well as more honourable , that the seat of
government in a great nation , and extensive country , should be at home
? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.89

Was it not a meanness unsupportable to generous minds , to be soliciting
, as favours , what they could demand as rights ? To depend upon the
will and capriciousness of a foreign ministry , for the settlement of
business in which they had no interest , from the nature of things were
little acquainted with , and could not therefore be competent to
super-intend ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.90

Great Britain and America could no longer trust each other .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.91

The feud between them was of a deadly nature , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.92

and had destroyed all mutual confidence . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.93

They were become , in fact , two separate states ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.94

and their interest were wholly different . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.95

Where suspicion reigned , friendship could not subsist .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,185.96

Britain <P_2,186> had clearly shown , that she meant to rule without
controul ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.97

and America had evidently made it appear , that she would not obey .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.98

Such being the determination on each side , what end could be answered
by talking of any other method of reconciliation than a treaty of peace
? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.99

This might take place in order to avoid effusion of blood ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.100

but a return to their former state of subordination to Great Britain ,
was a situation for which the Colonies were no longer calculated :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.101

they too much felt their own weight and importance :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.102

friends they might possibly become ; but not subjects to Britain :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.103

nor could even this be expected , until she had recognized the justness
of this requisition , and treated with them on the footing of equals .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.104

A reconciliation with Great Britain on the terms of dependence , would
involve America in continual scenes of domestic trouble and
inconveniency . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.105

The jealousy of Britain would labour covertly to obstruct all
improvements , and to stint the growth of her strength and prosperity .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.106

The Colonies , on the other hand , would not strive with less zeal to
counteract such endeavours : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.107

these would necessarily produce hatred and mistrust in the Americans .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.108

They would of course express their resentment , and again betake
themselves to resistance . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.109

What other re-remedy could they recur to ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.110

The negative right vested in the Crown , would be constantly exercised
in opposing every beneficial scheme they proposed ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.111

their industry would be cramped at home , and discouraged abroad ; and
every impediment thrown in their way , that rivalship could suggest .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.112

Thus , to be reconciled with Britain on the old plan , would be to admit
among them their most inveterate enemy , in quality of a friend and
protector . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,186.113

The absurdity of such a conduct was so obvious , that it was surprising
the British ministry should entertain <P_2,187> so contemptible an
opinion of the Colonists , as to hope they might be prevailed upon to
adopt it . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.114

The prospect of the miseries resulting from such a condition , justified
their determination never to submit to it . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.115

They had therefore the clearest right to take up arms in order to
preserve themselves from so great a calamity .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.116

They were not the aggressors ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.117

they acted purely on the defensive : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.118

their claims were not injurious to society ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.119

they were modest and founded on simple reason ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.120

therefore they were just . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.121

The Colonies had now attained to that maturity of political growth and
vigour , which entitled them to respect and consideration in the world .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.122

They claimed what was in consequence their lawful due , the rank and the
rights of a nation . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.123

There were many states much inferior to them in power , wealth , and
population , that enjoyed this prerogative ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.124

why should they be denied it ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.125

It was the universal desire that they should be placed on the footing of
a free state . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.126

They were far removed from the country from which their ancestors
originated . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.127

The land they dwelt in furnished them with the necessaries of life in
the greatest abundance , and with many staple commodities upon which to
found an extensive and beneficial trade with every nation in Europe .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.128

So situated , no restraints but those of absolute coercion , would
prevent them from making the most of the many advantages bestowed upon
them by nature . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.129

But it was evident that Great Britain would find it very difficult to
enforce a monopoly , were she able to retain them under subjection .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.130

The vast extent of coast she must guard with her cruisers , the immense
tracts of land over which she must keep a perpetual watch , would , in
spite of her vigilance , elude the regulations she might enact to
preserve the commercial benefits of America entirely to herself .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.131

Other nations would come in for an ample share ,
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,187.132

and <P_2,188> would , whenever the Americans were desirous of an
emancipation from the authority of Britain , assist them with all
readiness in effecting it . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.133

It was therefore no less the interest of other powers than their own ,
that they should withdraw themselves from a connection with which they
had every reason to be highly dissatisfied , and which it was
experimentally found , could not be continued without being productive
of incessant altercation . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.134

This was itself a sufficient motive to engage them to put an end to it .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.135

They had now gone deep into the contest ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.136

it had already cost them dear , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.137

and was not probably near an end . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.138

The wisest course they could pursue , was to extend it at once to a
nobler object than that which gave it rise . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.139

This was merely to prevent Britain from ruling them oppressively ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.140

but were it not more advisable to take a final determination not to
suffer Britain to rule them at all ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.141

If they could resist her oppression , they could also resist her power :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.142

the first depended on the last . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.143

It was a duty they owed to themselves , to attain , as soon as possible
, a state of security from the grievances of which they had so much
complained . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.144

If having it in their option to remove them for ever , they should
consent to remain exposed to them , they would be guilty of an
unpardonable folly . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.145

It would render a repetition of the provocations they had endured ,
highly probable ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.146

and would reduce them to the necessity of re-commencing anew , what they
had now more than half completed . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.147

America was no less worthy of holding a place among free and independent
countries , than Britain herself . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.148

In extent it was far superior , nor less in the variety of its
productions . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,188.149

The natives were the descendants of those resolute Englishmen who left
their country in quest of a freedom , which they could not find at home
; or of those industrious <P_2,189> multitudes who had emigrated from
other parts of Europe , to enjoy , in this happy region of liberty ,
that toleration of civil and religious sentiments , which they were
denied in the land of their nativity . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.150

Men of this description were the most respectable of all characters .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.151

It was to such that nations owed their felicity and grandeur .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.152

Activity and enterprisingness of disposition , were the most useful
qualifications in a state . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.153

From such forefathers they were sprung ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.154

and the world bore them witness that they had not degenerated .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.155

Superior to Britain in the advantages of soil , equal to it in the merit
of its inhabitants , the only inferiority of America was in numbers .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.156

But that was a deficiency which time was remedying with a rapidity that
astonished all those who beheld it . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.157

By fair and unexaggerated computations , the population of America was
reckoned to double in less than thirty years .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.158

It amounted at the present to more than two millions of white people .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.159

What a fund was this for increase , when once delivered from all
restraints , and left entirely to the full operation of their
unincumbered exertions ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.160

But what need was there to justify their endeavours to obtain freedom ?
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.161

It belonged to them of right . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.162

They had purchased it with their blood at Lexington , at Bunker's Hill ,
and at the many other places where they had been called upon to assert
it , by those who would have denied them its possession .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.163

America was now in its prime . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.164

It had attained that stage of political existence which is so
emphatically , and no less truly stiled the youth of nations .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.165

Now , therefore , was the season to employ its energy and vigour in
asserting all the pretensions it could form ; in securing all its rights
; in a word , in establishing its independence of all sovereignty abroad
. ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,189.166

<P_2,190>

The Colonies abounded with strong , healthy , and laborious men , full
of courage and resolution to maintain the claims and the honour of their
country . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.168

They had motives to animate them in its defence , peculiar to themselves
. ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.169

They were possessors and freeholders of the land they occupied :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.170

they did not hold it by those precarious tenures that degrade the rural
classes in Europe : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.171

they cultivated it for themselves : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.172

it was in every respect their own : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.173

the life they led kept them at a distance from effeminacy ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.174

their bodies were robust , and their dispositions manly .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.175

In the small space of time since the Americans had taken up arms , they
had exhibited specimens of valour and ability that had surprized their
enemies , and attracted the admiration of Europe .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.176

They had fully confuted those base aspersions that represented them as
an unwarlike people , fit only for the occupations of peace , and unable
to contend with such veterans as would be employed against them :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.177

but they had met these veterans more than once in the field ,
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.178

and had not belied the character they had assumed of being as ready to
fight for their liberty , as the English themselves had been formerly ;
though now meanly consenting to forge fetters for their American fellow
subjects . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.179

America need not despair of furnishing individuals equal to the arduous
task of conducting their affairs in the field , having already produced
men who had conducted their councils with so much prudence .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.180

It was in tempestuous times like the present , that men of genius came
forwards , and displayed their talents to the world .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.181

Many an exalted character would have lain dormant , but for those
revolutions that call forth and set in motion the abilities of mankind .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.182

The formation of statesmen and heroes was due chiefly to them .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,190.183

Active scenes were a signal for great and capacious minds to show
<P_2,191> themselves : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.184

they naturally took their station in the midst of storms , to increase ,
to direct , or to allay them at pleasure . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.185

Nature gave birth to such men in all countries :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.186

but it was chiefly in seasons of trouble and confusion that they made
their appearance ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.187

such only were favourable to those who were born to fix the destiny of
states and nations . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.188

Without assuming more merit than was due to them , the Americans might
challenge any people to exhibit , within the same proportion of time , a
larger number of brave and resolute men , of enterprising commanders ,
of intrepid soldiers , than the Colonies had afforded in the few months
the operations of the field had lasted . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.189

They had started up unexpected , and in a manner self-formed .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.190

But such had , in all ages , been the consequences of struggles for
national freedom : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.191

all history showed it : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.192

and they only trod in the footsteps of those patriotic champions of
their country , who had preceded them in so many parts of the world ;
whose examples had been so frequently cited and followed by others , as
well as themselves ; and would always raise up imitators among those who
had too much spirit to bear with oppression . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.193

The union of America was founded on the strongest tie ; a common
apprehension of great misfortunes threatened indiscriminately to all .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.194

This which in appearance was an object of terror , was in fact the most
efficient cause of their security . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.195

It compelled them to be unanimous and faithful to each other .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.196

It was therefore the firmest basis on which to erect such a constitution
, as would equally benefit and protect them . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.197

The season of danger was the most proper , as well as the most cogent
for such a purpose : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.198

people then forgot their petty interests , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.199

and cordially joined for their public good . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.200

Too much safety unnerved those great passions on which the common
welfare so much depended . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,191.201

<P_2,192>

Were America arrived to that pitch of opulence and internal prosperity ,
which must , in the course of things , become her portion , it were much
to be questioned , whether the same zeal and fortitude in opposing an
enemy , the same disposition to encounter hardships and difficulties ,
and above all , whether the same unanimity would have been found among
them , as now happily characterised the Americans .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.203

Such a situation would , with all its advantages , have also been
attended with its concomitant flaws and deficiencies :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.204

corruption would have crept in together with excess of wealth ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.205

pride would have created those odious distinctions that render one part
of the community an object of flight and indifference to the other ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.206

parties would , of course , have been more easily formed in favour of an
enemy , whose maxims corresponded with the deigns of the proud and the
haughty ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.207

disunion would have followed , with its constant attendants , debility
and dispiritedness . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.208

Instead of the manly resistance that now did them so much honour , the
Americans would either have tamely and passively submitted to whatever
Britain had thought proper to prescribe ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.209

or if some of them , less sunk in degeneracy than the rest , had erected
the standard of liberty , and summoned their countrymen to the common
defence of their interest , they would have been but feebly supported ,
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.210

and must quickly have yielded to the mean disposition of the times , and
have conformed to the ideas and temper of the majority .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.211

Such fortunately was not the case of America .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.212

- It was precisely in that situation which is most favourable for union
and defence : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.213

it consisted of a number of detached parts , which necessity alone had
united for their preservation ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.214

they felt their respective weakness while in a separate state ,
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.215

they were no less conscious of the strength that would accrue from their
conjunction . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,192.216

Mutual <P_2,193> feeling and friendship grew from the ill treatment they
had received , and the terrors they experienced from a common enemy .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.217

In private life , no attachment was more lasting than that which arose
from a participation of adversity . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.218

Men never forgot their reciprocal willingness to assist each other in
the day of distress ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.219

they always remembered it with a peculiar complacency ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.220

and they who had been sincere friends on these trying occasions , never
after would become , or remain long foes . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.221

In the same manner , those alliances and associations between public
bodies , which were the most solid and lasting , as well as prosperous ,
had been concluded between nations involved in one common peril and
calamity . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.222

In remoter ages , the invasions of the Persians , by uniting the Grecian
republics , had rendered them invincible . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.223

In later periods , the Cantons of Switzerland had emerged into freedom ,
by being forced to stand by each other in opposing the tyranny of their
sovereigns ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.224

and the seven provinces composing the Dutch commonwealth , owed their
liberty to the same cause . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.225

These illustrious precedents stood before them like so many invitations
to America , to make one more in the catalogue of nations delivered from
oppression by their virtue and perseverance . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.226

It might with the strictest truth be added , that the case of those
celebrated nations was far from being so favourable as their own .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.227

The two last had a multitude of obstacles to contend with , from the
proximity of the enemy , and the perpetual facility with which he was
able to renew his attacks , and to weary out their patience , had not
experience proved it unconquerable . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.228

To these examples others might be added , were it necessary .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,193.229

But these were sufficiently conspicuous and splendid to awaken the
people of America <P_2,194> to a just sense of their condition , and to
the propriety of improving the advantages that lay before them .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.230

They were evident and manifold . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.231

It was now in their power to form at once a republic which would become
at the instant of its formation , the most potent and respectable of any
now existing . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.232

No iniquitous plans would concur in its establishment ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.233

it would not be founded on bloodshed and conquest , but on the very
reverse ; the spirit of peace and unanimity . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.234

The mere willingness and consent of those who were to be concerned in
forming it , were the only requisites wanting to give it immediate
existence . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.235

It was therefore to be presumed , that with so noble a prospect before
them , there would not be a dissentient voice heard against so
beneficial and honourable a proposal . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.236

Fortune seemed to have had this great work long in contemplation , and
to have gradually prepared it by such ways and means as should render it
infallible . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.237

It was now two centuries since she first laid the foundation of her plan
. ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.238

Small were the beginnings by which it made its first appearance ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.239

but even then , such as could look into futurity , foresaw and foretold
the future destiny of this immense continent .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.240

Founded under the auspices of a great and mighty people , colony arose
after colony , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.241

and settlements were spread in one continued range along its wide
extended shores . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.242

In the mean time , the seeds of that spirit which now animates America ,
were plentifully sown every where . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.243

They were brought from a soil where they more vigorously fructified than
in any other . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.244

The sentiments , the dispositions , the government of the people of whom
the first emigrators had made a part , accompanied them to this new
world . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.245

They transmitted them whole and entire to their descendants , by whom
they were faithfully conveyed to the present generation .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,194.246

<P_2,195>

Thus every Colony , however it might differ from others in some peculiar
modes and forms of polity , still concurred with each other in retaining
the essentials of the English constitution : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.248

they knew its value , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.249

and prized it accordingly ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.250

in such hands it suffered no contamination ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.251

and in the various modifications through which it had passed , its
features were clear and visible . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.252

Hence a communion of ideas and inclinations was universally established
among all the Colonies founded by Great Britain .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.253

They were constitutionally one and the same people , though divided by
the boundaries that nature has thrown between the different parts of
this extended region . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.254

Whatever therefore affected any one of them in this important respect ,
equally affected all . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.255

They had before them the lessons , and what was still stronger , the
examples of the parent state , to guide and to authorise them in the
observance of the maxims which its constitution so forcibly inculcated .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.256

To the singular praise of the Americans , they had adhered to them with
a fidelity which was not even found in the mother country .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.257

While a great proportion of its inhabitants was so infatuated by weak
prejudices , as to embrace opinions contradictory to the very essence of
this constitution , and even to assert them with their lives , America
remained immovably attached to them , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.258

and became , in this instance , an example to Britain .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.259

A people so framed , were not to be led out of their way by deception ,
nor to be driven out of it by fears . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.260

They stood on a ground of which they too well knew the solidity to
abandon it . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.261

No other , they were conscious , would afford them equal security for
the advantages they had so long enjoyed . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.262

They had too much sense to expect the continuance of them in a change of
situation , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.263

and were possessed of too much spirit to resign them upon demand .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,195.264

<P_2,196>

When in the plenitude of conquest and glory , Britain began to cast an
eye of pride and haughtiness on these distant dependencies , and to
divest herself of that complacency with which she had hitherto treated
them , America still waited with patience for a return of her
benevolence . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.266

She did not avail herself of the improper behaviour of the parent state
, to cast off a connection of which she was not bound to suffer the
continuance , whenever it became oppressive . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.267

It was borne , however , ten long years , in the midst of insults and
mortifications , on the one part , and of intreaties and remonstrances
on the other . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.268

Pride , ambition , and avarice , were the motives that stimulated
Britain in this unhappy trial of the temper of the Colonies .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.269

she had lately been used to see her enemies at her feet ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.270

She had spread her triumphant banners , and extended her dominion
through every quarter of the globe ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.271

riches poured in upon her from all parts . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.272

But in the midst of this grandeur and prosperity , she forgot that
America had stood by her in its acquisition . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.273

She seemed unwilling to admit her Colonies to a participation of her
honours and emoluments , and determined to confine them to herself .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.274

She sought to abridge them of those benefits that resulted from their
situation , and to deprive them of those rights that belonged equally to
both , and without which no people can claim the title of British
subjects , and can only be considered as the vassals of Britain .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.275

But this was an appellation which the spirit of America would not brook
. ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.276

She had been taught to glory in the rank and privileges of Englishmen ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.277

she would give up neither . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.278

She was resolved to assert them , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.279

and was conscious of her ability to do it . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.280

Britain was unfortunately of opinion , she wanted both the courage and
the means requisite for that purpose ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,196.281

and in that persuasion , continued those <P_2,197> provocations , which
roused at last the resentment of America to a degree that showed she was
deficient in neither . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.282

In an evil hour did Britain think meanly of these Colonies :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.283

but the day was come which fortune had long projected for their
deliverance from a situation unworthy of the greatness and importance to
which they had attained . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.284

They were duly sensible of the regard that was owing to them ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.285

and had it been properly paid , never would have conceived the design of
a separation . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.286

They bowed before the parent state with a respect and humility , which
neither that , nor any other potentate will ever again experience .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.287

They besought Britain to recollect , that though they were her children
, yet they were come to their full growth . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.288

They would assist her , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.289

they would bleed , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.290

they would die for her ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.291

but they would not be burthened with the yoke of servitude .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.292

There is unhappily a propensity in human nature to overload those who
are willing to bear . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.293

Long had the Colonies acquiesced in restrictions of various sorts , on
every branch of their external commerce , and their internal trade .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.294

Accustomed to peaceable obedience from them , Britain imagined it would
have no bounds . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.295

In that imprudent expectancy , she rashly transgressed all those of
moderation , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.296

and invaded those privileges of which the possession had always been
left entire to the Colonists , on which the very existence of their
freedom depended , and which ought therefore to have remained untouched
, while Britain meant to secure them by any other tie than that of
thraldom . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.297

Such a change of conduct on the one hand , naturally produced an
alteration of behaviour on the other . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.298

The bonds of friendship once broken , enmity , as usual , increased
apace ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.299

but according to experience , was much greater in the aggressor than in
the sufferer . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,197.300

America would willingly have been <P_2,198> reconciled ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.301

but the injury came from Britain , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.302

and she knew not how to forgive . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.303

She judged of the resentments of America by her own ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.304

and confiding in the superiority of her power , determined to crush an
opponent whom she was afraid to trust . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.305

Compelled to draw the sword in her defence , still America looked
forward with an eye to reconciliation . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.306

But the arrogance of Britain demanded unconditional submission .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.307

Despairing of being able to soften the rigour of so unreasonable a
demand , what measures were the Colonists to take , but such as the
spirit and wisdom of those who had been in the same circumstances as
themselves , pointed out as just and necessary ?
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.308

But let not America repine at her fate ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.309

it was the happiest that could befal her . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.310

If she knew her own interest , she would rejoice at the opportunity and
the right jointly given her by Britain , to dissolve a connection that
must henceforth prove a source of perpetual embarassment .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.311

The hour was come for the Colonies alone to be connected in government ,
and to form an exclusive sovereignty . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.312

The strength of America , when collected , would equally astonish and
daunt her enemy . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.313

Britain relied upon the dispersed situation of the people in her
Colonies , and the small proportion of those who would take the field .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.314

She calculated the resources of America by the rule of European politics
, ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.315

and fondly believed that pacific occupations would prevent the Americans
from affording sufficient numbers for the support of their cause .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.316

But herein the least attention to experience , and to the circumstances
of the Colonists , would have undeceived her .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.317

There are cases wherein all men are soldiers ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.318

the defence of liberty , and of property is the most interesting of
these cases ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.319

it always has , and always will put arms into the hands of all those who
can wield them . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,198.320

- There are also nations wherein men are sooner fitted <P_2,199> for
soldiers than in others ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.321

this is peculiarly the case of America ; where greater multitudes spend
their lives in the laborious business of clearing and cultivating the
ground , than in any country whatever . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.322

But Britain was blinded by the impetuosity of her resentment ,
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.323

and bethought herself of nothing but instant revenge .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.324

She now beheld , however , a union of force in America that began to
alarm her . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.325

She had hastened a determination which would have lingered many a year ,
unless it had been thus forced into completion .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.326

She had brought America to that point , at which no option remained
between servility and independence . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.327

Could she flatter herself that the Americans would hesitate about the
choice ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.328

Now therefore was the auspicious moment to carry the system of their
government to perfection . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.329

With all its excellencies , it would admit of many others .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.330

Fond of their constitution as the English were , it had involved them in
many terrible disputes . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.331

This proved its imperfection , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.332

and showed that some radical deficiency lurked at bottom , which unless
eradicated , would always be productive of evils , which might be
palliated , but never thoroughly cured . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.333

To what were due the civil wars that deluged England with blood in the
last century ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.334

Whence arose those intestine feuds , that filled it with heart-burnings
and animosities , after the restoration of Royalty ?
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.335

What causes had brought about the Revolution ?
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.336

What was it , that in spite of these terrible remedies , still continued
to afflict the constitution of England , and to render its boasted
eminence highly problematic ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.337

These were questions which they forebore to answer , lest they should
seem to assume the province of dictators to the rest of mankind .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.338

But they were masters at home ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,199.339

and without meaning to offend the <P_2,200> sovereigns of the world ,
they would venture to lodge the supremacy of the state in those from
whom it proceeded . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.340

The people of America , after so many examples of the inconveniences
England had suffered under its present form of government , would now
make trial of another . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.341

The situation of America was particularly fortunate in this respect :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.342

she could chuse that model which appeared most eligible , without
exciting any civil strife ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.343

and she lay too far off , in case of an erroneous choice , to be exposed
to the interference of ambitious neighbours . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.344

All she had to guard against , was domestic dissentions .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.345

But there were no individuals among them possessed of riches and
influence enough to disturb the peace of society on their own private
account ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.346

the only danger they had to apprehend , was from an union among the
principal families . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.347

But even this was a very remote apprehension ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.348

there was so general an equality in the fortunes and circumstances of
most men , and such a levelling disposition among all , that it would be
an impracticable attempt in any set of men , much more in a single
individual , to aspire at exclusive power . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.349

A government suited to the disposition and wishes of the Americans ,
seemed , in the universal opinion , to be very attainable .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.350

Ambition was a vice foreign to their character ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.351

the desire of domineering had never appeared in the most opulent and
considerable among them ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.352

a kind and friendly behaviour to each other , marked all denominations
of people ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.353

and placed them on a footing of neighbourliness , that peculiarly
distinguished them from all others . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.354

To men of this description , a government that would set their rulers at
a great height above them , must prove highly unacceptable .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,200.355

Such a system would please them best in which laws would be respected
more than individuals , and wherein all <P_2,201> distinctions would be
avoided that were not evidently and indispensably necessary .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.356

It was therefore their duty to frame a constitution corresponding with
inclinations of this kind , which were well known to be uppermost in the
generality . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.357

Few nations , if any , had , like the Americans , been favoured with so
desirable an opportunity of constructing a government entirely to their
liking . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.358

Force , and the pressure of circumstances , had decided the fortune of
most nations in this respect . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.359

How careful , therefore , ought they to be in seizing this critical
opportunity , while nothing obstructed them , while their enemies were
unable to prevent it , and while themselves were unanimous in their
endeavours to obtain it . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.360

Were they to delay so salutary a work , difficulties might arise , of
which they had at present no conception . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.361

The enemy they had to encounter would undoubtedly assail them with every
weapon of which he was possessed . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.362

One he had of universal power ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.363

that was his gold . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.364

If arms were to fail him , still he had that resource .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.365

Before he tried it , he would employ the other .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.366

This was the interval to come to a resolution among them to settle their
affairs on so firm a foundation , as to frustrate all his attempts to
overcome them by the temptation of lucre , which was in truth the only
one they had to fear . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.367

In order to effect this purpose beyond all danger of a defeat , nothing
now remained to do , but to confirm all they had already done , and
resolve to abide by all the determinations they had taken .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.368

These were the best preparations they could have made for the great
business that was next to be transacted . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.369

This business , great and important as it was , might be accomplished
with the greatest facility . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.370

It consisted in no more than a declaration of independency .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,201.371

In doing this , they did no more than <P_2,202> assert the plainest
truth . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.372

Of whom were they dependant at this day , but Providence and their own
strength and courage . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.373

But though this measure was attended with no difficulty , contrary to
those things that were easily obtained , it would be productive of a
multitude of benefits . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.374

It corresponded with the wishes of an incomparable majority , if indeed
the diminutive proportion of such as might disapprove of it , deserved
even a mention . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.375

It lifted America to the rank of a sovereign state ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.376

and impressed foreign nations with a respect much greater than that
which they would , or were inclined to pay them , while they continued
to acknowledge the sovereignty of Britain . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.377

Such an acknowledgment entitled her , in some measure , to call them
rebellious subjects ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.378

but when they had cast off their allegiance , they would speedily meet
with those who would recognize their independency .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.379

Even the very act of claiming it , would give them a consideration ,
which is never refused to a brave and magnanimous people .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.380

It would procure them a respectful treatment even among those whom the
dread of disobliging Britain kept in awe ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.381

and among such as were known to be inimical to her , it would secure
every favour that could be granted to them , without coming to an open
rupture with the British Court . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.382

A measure that came accompanied with so many advantages , ought not to
be delayed . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.383

To waver and hesitate was the readiest method to awaken the vigilance of
the enemy , and to excite him to counteract it .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.384

No uncertainty should be allowed to take place in such a case ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.385

to resolve and to execute should be the same deed ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.386

the enemy ought to be apprized of both at once :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.387

he then would be convinced of the inutility of striving to divide them ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,202.388

and , together with this conviction , would feel a <P_2,203> diminution
of the influence of which he deemed himself possessed .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.389

To some this might seem an hazardous enterprize , full of danger , and
tending to exasperate an enemy equally vindictive and formidable , and
whose resources were an object no less of notoriety than amazement .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.390

He would exert them unquestionably to the utmost on so urgent an
occasion ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.391

and they might at length be found of superior weight in the scale of
comparison with theirs . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.392

To those who argued in this manner , no other answer could be given ,
than that in all emergencies of a similar nature to the present , to
require an absence of all peril , betrayed imbecility of mind and
weakness of heart in the extreme . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.393

When was so great an object as that proposed , ever compassed without
difficulty and danger ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.394

Allowing both to be ever so pressing and imminent , still it were more
imprudent and rash to fly from than to face them :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.395

they would pursue and overtake the cowardly ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.396

the brave only stood a chance to overcome them .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.397

It was wiser , therefore , at all events , to embrace resolute measures
; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.398

the more daring they appeared , the safer they were in reality :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.399

none but such could possibly procure success ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.400

all others led to certain destruction . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.401

But the hazards at which some people were so terrified , were imaginary
. ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.402

Britain had already summoned her utmost strength to this contest .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.403

Whatever further steps the Colonies might take to oppose or to irritate
her , would not produce more effectual efforts against them , than those
she had made : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.404

they would indeed show the inflexible resolution in those who governed
the American councils , to resist her endeavours to the very last ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.405

but she could not too soon be apprized of this intention ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,203.406

it might incline her to ponder on the ruinous expence attending the
reduction of a people thus resolved , the great uncertainty of
succeeding in such an enterprize , and <P_2,204> the dangers of various
kinds , to which , in the mean time , she would lie inevitably exposed .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.407

America had much more to apprehend from her internal foes , than her
open enemies : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.408

of these she knew the strength , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.409

and could observe the motions ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.410

but the others under the mask of friendship , concealed the basest
treachery : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.411

they made it their business to dishearten people , by exaggerated
informations of the numerousness of the forces that were to be employed
by Great Britain against the Colonies : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.412

they were continually extolling their valour , expertness , and
discipline ; recounting their exploits , insinuating , in short , that
they would prove irresistible . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.413

But who were these formidable troops against whom Americans would not be
able to stand ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.414

They had already withstood the bravest men in Britain .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.415

Was the pride of Englishmen so lowered , as to acknowledge any men
braver than themselves ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.416

Were the Hessians , or other Germans in British pay , better soldiers
than the natives of Britain ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.417

Were they more active and intrepid ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.418

Were they more zealous for the honour of their country ?
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.419

In a word , were they more completely qualified to wage war on the
continent of America ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.420

Certainly not . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.421

The advantages , on the contrary , were on the side of the English , in
a variety of considerations . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.422

They fought in their own cause , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.423

were acquainted with the people and country of America ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.424

spoke their language ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.425

knew their sentiments ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.426

they had more vivacity in their disposition , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.427

and would act with more expeditiousness . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.428

But were the British troops ever so superior to the German , as they had
not overcome the Americans , it was necessary for such as aimed at
intimidating these , to represent the Germans as much preferable to them
in point of soldiership . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,204.429

If such excellent troops as the British had not succeeded against the
Colonists , little had they to <P_2,205> apprehend from mercenaries ,
who came much more unwillingly to this distant scene of action , than
the English themselves . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.430

These , it was well known , expressed reluctance enough to the service
they were upon . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.431

Numbers , if not the far greater majority , disapproved of the quarrel
they were engaged in , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.432

but were professionally compelled to support it .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.433

While America was true to herself , she would maintain her ground
against all her adversaries . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.434

Those who betrayed her , were an inconsiderable number ; and to be
apprehended only on account of their malice and inveteracy .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.435

But if she had a few traitors at home , she had on the other hand such
numerous and powerful friends abroad , as would not fail to strike a
damp upon their enemies , when they beheld who they were , and with what
a force they intended to support the cause of America .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.436

Did Britain imagine that she would be left unmolested , to proceed at
her leisure and discretion against the Colonies ?
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.437

It was indeed the interest of the many secret ill_wishers who surrounded
her on every side , that she should indulge herself in this persuasion :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.438

they would compliment her with the fairest assurances of good will , and
pacific intentions , till she had wasted her strength , and exhausted
her finances : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.439

but the moment they saw her sufficiently debilitated , they would come
forth and avow their purposes ; and employ such a strength in their
execution , as Britain would not , in her enfeebled condition , be able
to oppose . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.440

Nor would the Colonies in the mean time be left unassisted .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.441

Such a relinquishment would ill agree with the settled system of
European politics . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.442

They would be supported by indirect and clandestine means from various
quarters : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.443

these would fully enable them to keep the field , and weary out the
enemy . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.444

It were needless to enumerate those parts of the world from whence help
would come . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,205.445

It <P_2,206> might reasonably be expected from every nation and
potentate , to whom the greatness of Britain was an object of envy .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.446

Among these were some of the most powerful states in Europe .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.447

The maritime powers , in particular , would not certainly neglect so
favourable an opportunity to deprive her of that naval superiority of
which they stood in so much dread . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.448

These were powerful motives to induce the people of America to go on
cheerfully with the work they had begun ; and to hope for a prosperous
issue . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.449

To these might be added the certainty of being abundantly supplied at
home with able hands to perform it . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.450

It was not only in the bravery of its inhabitants , and their aptitude
for war , that America had reason to place the highest confidence ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.451

their numbers were an object no less interesting ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.452

the country was full of people , not only willing , but eager to act in
the common defence . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.453

A specimen of their readiness was given the very first moment it was
required : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.454

within a few hours notice , upwards of twenty_thousand assembled on the
memorable day of Lexington . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.455

They were not multitudes hastily gathered , and as easily dispersed :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.456

they were men sincerely animated with the love of their country , and
earnestly desirous to signalize themselves in {TEXT:it} its cause .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.457

It was not from the necessity of procuring a livelihood , that they
embraced the possession of a soldier ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.458

they ventured their lives freely and cheerfully for the protection of
all that was dear to mankind : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.459

they left comfortable homes , the seats of plenty and content ,
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.460

and submitted to the hardships and distresses of a military life , from
a far nobler prospect than that of pay and plunder :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,206.461

these they left to their enemies , whose chief inducements they must
necessarily be , from the character of those individuals of whom their
troops were composed ; men picked up wherever they could be found ,
depressed with <P_2,207> indigence , corrupted through sloth , or
immersed in all kind of iniquity . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.462

Such were the recruits on which Britain was to depend for the supply of
those armies that were to conquer America . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.463

But experience had shown that such men were not to be placed in
competition with those who fought in reality , for what most nearly
interested them . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.464

King and country were words of course , employed in all monarchies for
want of something more substantial and significant :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.465

but what were king and country to individuals , who , from their
situation in life , could feel for neither ; who , for an increase of
wages , would abandon their party , and act against it without the least
remorse ? ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.466

Add to these considerations , that most of those whom they were to
encounter , were new levies like themselves : ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.467

the troops expected from Great Britain and Ireland , were in fact
inferior to them ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.468

by far the major part had never seen service , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.469

and numbers were fresh from the plough , the loom , and the shop ; their
equals in condition at best ; though certainly not provided with such
cogent reasons as those which ought to inspirit the Americans to acquit
themselves manfully in the approaching trial .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.470

With so many inducements to look forward with the brightest expectations
, it would be unworthy of men contending for their all , to suffer one
moment's despondency . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.471

The part they were acting had raised them to a station of conspicuity
that attracted the eyes of the whole world . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.472

Europe had fixed its entire attention on the transactions upon this
continent , ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.473

and waited with continual anxiety for the arrival of intelligence , what
progress the Colonists were making . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.474

They had the wishes of all the brave , the learned , and the wise , in
that most enlighted region of the globe . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.475

It behoved them to preserve that esteem and predeliction .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,207.476

The unanimity with which it was bestowed , was a proof they . <P_2,208>
were not undeserving of it . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.477

They were precisely in the same position the valiant , though
unfortunate Corsicans had been a few years before ; praised and admired
by all nations . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.478

There was indeed an essential difference in their own favour ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.479

the Corsicans were , from a concatenation of unhappy circumstances ,
abandoned and left singly to struggle ineffectually against the heavy
weight that crushed them at last . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.480

But they stood , as it were , in the midst of every kind of
encouragement and assistance . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.481

Their own strength was great and respectable ; that of their friends
still more considerable . While Britain , their only enemy , had not a
single ally deserving of the name . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.482

They who adhered to her , were needy and mercenary hirelings , of no
consideration in the system of European affairs .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.483

They lent their troops to Britain , from the same motive they would lend
them to any other power , pay and subsidy . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.484

They would withdraw them from the service of Britain , and devote them
to another , to its enemies if required , for a larger stipend .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.485

From these premises it was incontestable , that no people engaged in
dispute with another , could possibly stand on more advantageous ground
than the Americans . ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.486

No discouraging circumstances could be pointed out to alarm them :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.487

the prospect on every side was clear and open :
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.488

they had none but the common dangers of war to provide against ;
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.489

and they were duly prepared for them ; ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.490

but they had at the same time every reason to promise themselves a
prosperous termination of it , and the completest success in the
attainment of that object for which it was undertaken .
ANDREWS1-1785-2,2,208.491

