<BEGIN_andrews2-1796-2>

<P_2,1>

<heading>

<font> History <$$font> of Great Britain . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,1.4

Book VII {COM:see_errata} . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,1.5

Chap. III . - PART II . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,1.6

Section I . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,1.7

History of the constitution , government , and laws , of England , from
A.D. 1547 , to A.D. 1603 . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,1.8

<$$heading>

Although in examining the state of the English constitution , during the
latter half of the sixteenth century , we shall find no variation in the
great outline , yet some useful observations may be made on the slow
gradation <P_2,2> of the commons towards national importance .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,2.10

Browbeaten , fined , and imprisoned , by the most stern of sovereigns ,
they had yet gained , before the close of Elizabeth's long reign , a
sort of passive courage , which rendered them awful to her less resolute
successors . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,2.11

There was something worth notice in the consultation which was held in
1547 by the counsellors of the late king , concerning the form of the
young Edward's coronation . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,2.12

It had been usual , they agreed , to shew the new king to the people at
the four corners of the stage , and to demand the consent of those there
assembled to his coronation . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,2.13

The ceremony was judged too tedious for the tender years of Edward to
support , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,2.14

and , in consequence , some parts were left out , and the terms used at
the presentation of the king to his people , left to the discretion of
the primate . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,2.15

The despotism of Henry VIII. which , though odious , had vigor and
enterprise , was succeeded by a kind of nerveless aristocracy .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,2.16

A few potent noblemen , throughout the reign of Edward , <P_2,3>
struggled for power and profit , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.17

and left the people to be plundered and ruined by bribed senators and
iniquitous judges . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.18

Edward undoubtedly had good dispositions ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.19

but , except the spirited Latimer , who attempted by his plain but
satirical discourses to open his eyes , he seemed hardly to have a
single person about him who was not a party in supporting the wretched
system of corruption then prevailing . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.20

The mildness of Cranmer rendered his advice ineffectual ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.21

and Somerset , though not a bad man , was notoriously greedy ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.22

and was governed by his wife , the vainest of women .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.23

Great attention was paid by those who governed to maintain the supremacy
of the crown in every point . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.24

Every person in office was made to resign his commission , and provide
himself with a new one in the name of the young king .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.25

Even the bishops were not exempted from this ordinance ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.26

nor were these new powers granted without a special note that they were
held only during the king's pleasure ; nor without a positive averment ,
that all manner of authority , whether civil or military , is derived
from the crown . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.27

Little can be said for the state of the English , during the reign of
Edward VI. as to their security in person or property .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,3.28

Somerset , the protector , setting aside his unbounded depredations
<P_2,4> on the church , for which , perhaps , his hatred to popery
furnished to his ready conscience some plausible extenuation , was an
honest pious man . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.29

He saw the depraved state of the administration of civil justice ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.30

but , having neither resolution nor capacity to reform the courts , he
attempted a measure which , though perfectly well intended , was illegal
, and hastened his downfall . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.31

He erected in his own palace a ' Court of Requests , ' to which the
injured suitors , or the distressed poor , unable to pay counsel , might
apply for redress . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.32

The corruption of the judges , although it was connived at by the great
, or passed by as incurable , could not escape the piercing eye of the
good Hugh Latimer , who , having been appointed preacher to the king ,
could make his counsel be heard where , only , redress could be had .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.33

There is no point which this honest preacher pressed more closely on the
young monarch , and on Somerset , than the necessity of reforming the
conduct of his profligate magistracy : ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.34

' I must desire , ' says he , ' my Lord Protector's grace to hear me in
this matter , and likewise , that your grace would hear poor men's suits
yourself ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.35

put them to no other to be heard ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.36

let them not be delayed . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.37

The saying is now , that " Money is heard every where ; "
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.38

if a man be rich there shall soon be an end of his matters .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,4.39

Others are fain <P_2,5> to go home with tears for any help they can have
from any judge's hand . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.40

Hear men's suits yourself , I require you in God's behalf !
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.41

and put them not in the hearing of those velvet coats and up-skips ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.42

now a man can scarce know them from the ancient knights of the county .
' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.43

He proceeds : ' And you , proud judges , hearken what God says in his
holy book : ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.44

" Hear the poor " he says , " as well as the rich ! "
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.45

Mark that sentence , thou proud judge ! ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.46

The devil will bring this sentence at the day of doom .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.47

Hell will be full of such proud judges . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.48

' Now-a-days , ' says he in another place , ' the judges are afraid to
hear a poor man against the rich ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.49

they will either pronounce against him , or drive the suit so that he
shall not be able to go through with it . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.50

But the greatest man in the realm can@ @not hurt the judge so much as a
poor widow , such a shrewd turn she can do him . '
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.51

He then relates the tale of a judge who was skinned for taking bribes ,
and his skin nailed to a chair for future judges to sit in ; {TEXT:;'}
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.52

and adds , with bitterness , ' surely it was a goodly sign , the sign of
a judge's skin . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.53

I pray God we may once have the sign of the skin in England ! '
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.54

Again he advances with spirit : ' The magistrates shew favor to some ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.55

and will not suffer them to be rooted out or put to shame : "
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,5.56

Oh ! he is such <P_2,6> a one's servant , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.57

we may not meddle with him . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.58

Oh ! he is a gentleman , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.59

we may not put him to shame . " ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.60

Again , ' If there be a judgment between a poor man and a great man ,
what ! ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.61

must there be a corruption of justice ? ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.62

" Oh ! he is a great man , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.63

I dare not displease him . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.64

" Fie upon thee ! ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.65

Art thou a judge , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.66

and wilt be afraid to give right judgment ? ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.67

Fear him not be he ever so great a man , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.68

but uprightly do true justice . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.69

In one point , at least , the rough satire of Latimer was successfully
employed . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.70

He inveighed bitterly against those who bought or sold offices under the
king . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.71

' Oh that your grace , ' said the nervous preacher , ' would seek
through your realm for men meet for offices , yea , and give them
liberally for their pains , rather than that they should give money for
them ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.72

you should seek out wise men , and men of activity , that have stomach
to do their business , not milk-sops , nor white-livered knights , but
fearers of God ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.73

for he that feareth God will be no briber . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.74

It was probably in consequence of this that a very strict ordinance was
made in parliament against the selling of any office which might be
connected with the administration or execution of justice .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,6.75

Except this act , no notice appears to have been taken of the spirited
<P_2,7> orator's reproofs ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,7.76

but it speaks in favor of one of the worst-principled courts which
history can produce , that so bold and sarcastic a monitor was not
driven from his pulpit , and pursued by ministerial vengeance .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,7.77

When the faction of Warwick overpowered that of the Protector , matters
went on still worse ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,7.78

and the execution of martial law on the most trivial occasions , and on
the slightest evidence , rendered the possession of life extremely
precarious . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,7.79

Under the same administration , an act of parliament was promulgated ,
teeming with perilous and contradictory folly . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,7.80

It enacted , that whoever should style the king , or any of his heirs
<paren> named in stat. 35 Henry VIII. <$$paren> , heretic , schismatic
, &c. should , for the first offence , forfeit goods and chattels ; for
the second , incur a premunire ; and for the third , the penalty of
treason . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,7.81

At this period , it is to be noted , the king and his next heir were of
opposite religions . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,7.82

The same house of commons , though so careless in this great point , had
refused to renew the cruel statutes of Henry VIII. concerning treason ,
which Edward in his first year had repealed . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,7.83

The first act of Mary's reign , which abolished all treasons except
those in the famous act of Edward III. and all felonies except those
that were so before Henry VIII. would have been popular ; had not the
clauses of a riot act , passed under Edward VI. <P_2,8> which
re-instated many penalties , been revived before the end of the sessions
. ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,8.84

It appears that , at this period , the office of a magistrate was in
danger of becoming an appendage to the train of opulent and potent
noblemen . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,8.85

It was to prevent this , that in the reign of Philip and Mary a bill was
passed , that ' no man's servants , wearing their cloth , shall be
justices_of_the_peace , but the king's and queen's . '
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,8.86

The conveying of landed property from one to another , seems to have
been transacted nearly in the same manner as in the 17th and 18th
centuries . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,8.87

The following verses , printed in 1586 , as <font> ' Olde <$$font>
English rules for purchasing lande , ' will give no bad specimen of the
science , whatever it may of the poetry , of its composer .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,8.88

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_2,9>

The judges who presided during the reign of Elizabeth were probably more
attentive to their duty than those who disgraced the indolent reign of
Edward , and less sanguinary than those of Mary ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,9.91

but the country magistrates seem to have deserved little approbation .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,9.92

A justice_of_the_peace was described , towards the close of Elizabeth's
reign , by a member in the lower house , as ' an animal who for half a
dozen of chickens would readily dispense <P_2,10> with a_dozen penal
laws ; ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,10.93

and Elizabeth herself , in an earlier juncture , complains bitterly of
negligence in the magistrates . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,10.94

She had good reason , if we may trust to a sensibly-@ @written account
of the state of Somersetshire at that period , preserved by Strype , and
written by an eminent magistrate of that county .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,10.95

This avers , that ' forty persons were executed in a year within the
shire for robberies and other felonies ; thirty-five burnt in the hand ;
thirty-seven whipt ; and 183 discharged . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,10.96

These last were all desperate rogues ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,10.97

none would employ them , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,10.98

nor would they do work if they had it . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,10.99

That not the fifth part of the felonies committed in the county were
brought to trial , so negligent or so fearful were the magistrates ;
that the innumerable vagabonds terrified the country people and forced
them to watch their flock , herds , corn , woods , &c. all the night .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,10.100

That other counties fared as ill or worse , that 300 or 400 vagabonds
infested every shire , and met in bodies of sixty rogues together , that
they might plunder with impunity . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,10.101

That if all the felons of this sort were assembled , they would give
strong battle to the most potent enemy the queen has ; that the
magistrates dreaded them , and that instances might be given that some
have been intimidated by the confederates of the condemned felons into
an interposition to prevent the execution <P_2,11> of a sentence which
they themselves had pronounced . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,11.102

Yet this accumulation of villany was by no means owing to the want of
penal statutes . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,11.103

These increased wonderfully ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,11.104

the stealers of horses , the cutpurses or pickpockets , the breakers
into houses , and the violators of female chastity , were declared
felons without benefit of clergy ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,11.105

perjury and forgery were punished by loss of ears ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,11.106

and clipping coin was made high-treason . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,11.107

The process of outlawry in the distant and detached districts , such as
Wales and Cheshire , was rendered more easy and more effectual ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,11.108

vagabonds were made slaves , and gypsies felons .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,11.109

<P_2,12>

It will probably astonish those who look for the perfection of
civilization under Elizabeth , to hear that the ' trial by combat '
might be legally demanded during her reign , and that in 1571 , on the
18th of June , the judges of the common pleas actually sat in
Tothill-fields , Westminster , to decide on a fight between ' George
Thorne , a big , broad , strong fellow , ' the champion for Thomas
Paramore , and Henry Nailor , ' a proper slender man , ' who came to
fight for Simon Lowe and John Kyme . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,12.111

The person of the Englishman , of the 16th century , was no better
protected against the malice of the informer , than were his goods
against the interested rapacity of a corrupt judge .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,12.112

The power of exerting that summary species of judicature styled Martial
Law was allowed to reside in the sovereign , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,12.113

and seems to have been intended against the remains of subdued rebel
cities , or of revolters conquered in the field .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,12.114

The executions in the West , in the reign of Edward , by Kingston , and
in the North by Bowes , had the resentment of recent outrages committed
by a military force to excuse them , if any thing can excuse inhumanity
. ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,12.115

But it was not only in rebellious countries , or in time of war , that
this odious law was exercised . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,12.116

During the minority of Edward VI. the <P_2,13> bailiff of Rumford , in
Essex , a worthy and respected man , was executed on a gibbet before the
door of Stowe , the historian , in London ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.117

he had been accused of treasonable words <paren> which words he utterly
denied <$$paren> by Sir Stephen , the zealous but fanatical curate of
Cree-church ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.118

had been tried by martial law , and sentenced to be immediately hanged .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.119

His malicious accuser was obliged to leave the place , and shrowd
himself in obscurity from the reproaches of the people .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.120

It can@ @not be supposed that the daughter of Henry VIII. would be
sparing in the use of an ordinance so well suited to her despotic turn .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.121

A letter still exists in her own hand , reproaching Lord Sussex for not
exerting this law after the Northern rebellion had been quelled .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.122

But she , too , thought that its advantages ought not to be limited to
times of war and rebellion ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.123

and when Peter Burchet wounded the navigator Hawkins , Elizabeth would
fain have exerted martial law against him , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.124

but was dissuaded by her counsellors . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.125

She was not always so cautious ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,13.126

we have <paren> in Strype's Collections <$$paren> a proclamation of
her's , ordering martial law to be used against such as import bulls ,
or even forbidden books or pamphlets , from abroad , ' any law or
statute to <P_2,14> the contrary in any wise notwithstanding . '
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,14.127

And another time she was so much irritated at the slow proceedings of
the Star-Chamber {TEXT:star-chamber} <paren> none of the mildest of
courts <$$paren> , in the punishment of the vagabonds with which the
metropolis abounded , that she gave to Sir Thomas Wilford the commission
of provost-martial , ordering him to seize such persons as the
justices_of_the_peace should point out to him as worthy to be executed
by martial law , and to execute them on the gallows or gibbet , openly ,
near the place of the offence . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,14.128

It can@ @not be supposed that , when a Tudor reigned , the liberty of
the subject should be better secured than his property , or his life .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,14.129

Numberless snares were indeed laid for his freedom ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,14.130

and the practice of ' pressing ' , as then managed <paren> comprehending
<P_2,15> the forcing employments on persons who wanted them not
<$$paren> , was one of the easiest <P_2,16> methods of putting obnoxious
persons out of the way . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,15.131

' In case , ' says Osborne , ' she <paren> Elizabeth <$$paren> found any
likely to interrupt her occasions , she did seasonably prevent him by a
chargeable employment abroad , or putting him on some service at home ,
which she knew was least grateful . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,15.132

It were indeed a curious task , to review the favorite reign of
Elizabeth , and to remark the despotic power which she <font> might
<$$font> have exercised over her subjects . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,15.133

The observer would find more motives of gratitude for her forbearance of
evil , than for all the splendid glories of her active reign .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,15.134

The court of star-chamber , whose members held their places at the will
of the sovereign , might fine , imprison , and punish corporally , by
<P_2,17> whipping , branding , slitting nostrils and ears .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,17.135

The sovereign , if present , was sole judge . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,17.136

The high-commission court has been described . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,17.137

Its powerful vengeance was aimed at errors in doctrine or worship , or ,
more fairly , against any deviation from what the sovereign thought
right in religious matters . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,17.138

' No man , ' wrote the orthodox Elizabeth to Archbishop Whitgift , '
should be suffered to decline either to the right or left hand from the
drawn line limited by authority . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,17.139

The short but sharp operations of martial law have been already amply
described ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,17.140

and the great Lord Bacon thought that Essex and his friends had great
indulgence shewn to them in not being instantly put to death by that
judicature . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,17.141

It does not seem needful that the sovereign should be possessed of any
farther means of <P_2,18> doing ill ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,18.142

yet had Elizabeth <paren> and her predecessors had the same <$$paren> a
power to give her secretaries and privy-counsellors the exercise of
unlimited despotism . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,18.143

Each of these might , by his sole warrant , imprison any one whom he
thought a suspicious person for as long a time as he thought proper ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,18.144

and , at his own discretion <paren> are we reading of England or of
Morocco ! <$$paren> , might stretch him on the rack !
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,18.145

<P_2,19>

In running through the oppressive powers of Elizabeth's reign no mention
has been made of ' the Court of Wards , ' which gave to the sovereign
the possession of estates during the minority of the heir , and
authority to dispose of heir or heiress in marriage ; nor of '
Purveyance , ' by virtue of which she might victual not only her court ,
but her fleets and armies , at the cost of suffering individuals , not
regularly taxed , but partially marked out for oppression .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,19.147

' When the queen's majesty <P_2,20> doth remove , ' says a contemporary
writer , ' from one place to another , there are usually 400 carewares ,
which amount to the summe of 2,400 horses , appointed out of the
countries adjoining , whereby her carriage is conveyed safely to the
appointed place . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,20.148

Elizabeth was praised in parliament for not imitating the practice ,
common among her predecessors , of stopping the course of justice by
special warrants . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,20.149

Each time that she refrained from this gross abuse of her power she was
certainly laudable . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,20.150

But there remain still , in the public records , warrants signed by her
, exempting certain persons from all suits and prosecutions :
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,20.151

' These warrants , ' she says , ' she grants from her royal prerogative
, which she will not allow to be disputed . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,20.152

The crown of England had indeed , in the 16th century , every power
which the most uncontroled {TEXT:uncontrolled} despotism could wish for
, except that of regular and legal taxation . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,20.153

' This limitation , ' says <P_2,21> an ingenious historian , '
unsupported by other privileges , appears rather prejudicial to the
people ; since it engaged to the queen to erect monopolies , and grant
patents for exclusive trade ; ' schemes so very pernicious , that , had
they proceeded , they must have rendered the industry of England useless
, and her soil barren for want of cultivation .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,21.154

Nor did the sovereign stop here . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,21.155

When the patent and the monopoly gave not a sufficient supply , the loan
was at hand ; a loan which none could safely refuse , and which , even
if repaid after a time , which was seldom the case , was yet injurious
to the lender ; as he had no interest for his money .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,21.156

What then , it may be fairly asked , was the duty of the parliament
during the dynasty of the Tudor family ? ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,21.157

The members were not to meddle with state affairs or the succession ,
nor with the church . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,21.158

This last subject they were expressly directed to avoid , in every
speech which , during Elizabeth's <P_2,22> reign , opened the session .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,22.159

They might , however , direct the tanning of leather or the milling of
cloth ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,22.160

they might attend to the preservation of the game , to the repair of
bridges and highways , and to the punishment of vagabonds and beggars .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,22.161

It is true , that the court could do all that was necessary by
proclamations , which were allowed to have the force of acts of
parliament , and which were much more strictly executed ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,22.162

but they were not so durable , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,22.163

and were sooner forgotten . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,22.164

In the year 1601 , the list of commodities which were granted out by
patent from the queen <P_2,23> to her greedy courtiers , was read over
to the house of commons , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.165

and excited , even among those broken-spirited legislators , a temporary
resentment . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.166

' Is not bread among them ? ' said an indignant member ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.167

' If it be not now , it will be in the catalogue before next parliament
. ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.168

In this place it would be unpardonable not to repeat the arguments which
were used in defence of the queen's conduct ; which , as they were found
in the mouths , by turns , of the country-gentlemen as well as of the
courtiers , and admitted on all sides , must be allowed to compose the
political creed of the times . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.169

The {TEXT:'The} queen , it was affirmed , possessed an enlarging and a
restraining power ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.170

by her prerogative she might set free what was limited by statute or
otherwise , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.171

or she might restrain what was free . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.172

The royal prerogative was neither to be canvassed , nor disputed , nor
examined . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.173

It could admit of no limitation . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.174

Absolute princes , as the sovereigns of England , were a species of
divinities . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.175

By her dispensing power , the queen might annul any statute ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.176

and she could even make void a clause inserted by that very dispensing
power . {COM:missing_close_quote} ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.177

' A conversation , ' writes the indignant reporter , ' more worthy of a
Turkish Divan than of an English house of commons . '
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,23.178

<P_2,24>

On this occasion the queen most strangely relaxed from her usual
severity ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.180

and , instead of sending the foes of monopolizers to prison , she
promised immediate redress ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.181

and the astonished house thought no phraseology too high to express the
merits of such condescension , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.182

and applied to their frail , and almost expiring , sovereign , those
epithets which are usually appropriated to the Creator .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.183

Her message was ' gospel or glad tidings ; ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.184

she had , like the Deity , been herself the agent ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.185

' they praised her ' preventing grace , ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.186

and affirmed that , like the Divinity , she was ' all truth , ' and ,
like him too , ' performed all she promised . '
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.187

Thus stood , or rather , thus servilely crept , the last parliament of
Elizabeth's despotic reign . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.188

Let us close the account with an instance of disqualifying oratory .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.189

It was usual <paren> the custom still lasts <$$paren> for the member
proposed as Speaker of the lower house , to urge his own incapacity .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.190

Yelverton was singularly eloquent on this subject in 1597 .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.191

' Your Speaker , ' said he , ' ought to be a man big and comely ,
stately and well-spoken ; his voice great , his carriage majestical ;
his nature haughty , and his purse plentiful and heavy .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.192

But , contrarily , the stature of my body is small , myself not so
well_spoken , my voice low , my carriage lawyer-like and of the common
fashion ; my nature soft and bashful , my purse thin , light , and never
yet plentiful . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,24.193

<P_2,25>

The house lent no ear to this modest apology ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.195

and Yelverton filled the chair with sufficient dignity .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.196

It may now be asked , what was the power , and what the use , of
parliaments , when such despotic powers were lodged in the crown ?
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.197

The parliament entirely regulated the taxation of the subject ; a power
which was only valuable from becoming , under an irresolute monarch ,
the means of extorting , gradually , all those privileges which form the
basis of that admirable constitution of which Great Britain boasts in
the 18th century . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.198

The parliament had no <font> real <$$font> legislative power .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.199

So long as there existed an authority which could dispense with the
penalties of its acts , such acts were futile .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.200

The forms of parliament were little altered from those of the preceding
reigns ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.201

the sons of peers appear to have been first elected to sit in the lower
house about 1550 . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.202

In the same year the first journal of the house's proceedings appears to
have been taken down . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.203

In the year 1555 a singular circumstance occurred in consequence of a
dispute between the two houses of parliament . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.204

Several members of the lower house seceded , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.205

and would not attend their duty . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.206

The queen proceeded against them . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,25.207

Six <P_2,26> submitted ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.208

and paid their fines ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.209

the rest traversed , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.210

and the death of Mary stopped the whole process .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.211

The extreme delicacy of Elizabeth concerning her supremacy of the church
, was a source of perpetual vexation to her commons , as it excited her
to resist with great sternness every attempt which they , who were
{TEXT:missing_"were"} almost all Puritans , incessantly formed against
her much favored cap and robes . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.212

These , as has been already shewn , she guarded with care from their
attacks ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.213

nor was she less attentive to her own lucrative prerogative of granting
patents and monopolies . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.214

In 1571 Robert Bell , a noted Puritan , who had spoken against an
exclusive patent of ruinous consequence , granted to a merchant of
Bristol , drew upon the house a command from the queen ' to spend little
time in motions , and to avoid long speeches . '
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.215

Bell himself was sent for by the council , and so severely reprimanded ,
that , on his return to the house , ' his amazed countenance ' terrified
the members from freedom of speech for some space of time
{COM:missing_period} ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.216

It was in this session that a bribe of four pounds was proved to have
been given by a member of the lower house to the mayor of a borough , in
order to secure his seat . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,26.217

In the session of 1576 Peter Wentworth , the most sturdy of the Puritan
members , uttered a speech <P_2,27> fraught with such principles of
liberty , and such strong intimations of the extreme despotism of the
court and servility of the senate , that the commons , standing aghast
at his intrepidity , committed him prisoner to the serjeant at arms ,
and ordered him to be examined by a committee ; which , chusing to meet
in the star-chamber , seemed disposed to add the powers of that
arbitrary court to their own . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,27.218

But the discerning Puritan refused to plead before any court except a
committee acting exclusively as members of parliament ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,27.219

and Elizabeth , not liking the perverse steadiness of the man , gave up
the point ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,27.220

and , with great apparent mildness , restored him to his liberty and
place in parliament . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,27.221

It was on this occasion that Sir Walter Mildmay , in a celebrated speech
to the house , extolled the benevolence of the queen , and told the
commons that they must not speak all they thought , since such freedoms
had frequently been punished , both in past ages and in the present .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,27.222

That gentleman , with a Mr. Fleetwood , and Sir Humphry Gilbert <paren>
a man designed by nature for a hardy mariner , not a court flatterer
<$$paren> , made on all occasions such servile adulatory speeches , so
fraught with the doctrines of passive obedience , and so menacing to
that part of the commons which harbored any idea of freedom in speaking
, that they exposed them to the most cutting raillery from their
<P_2,28> opponents , who dared to speak of <font> them <$$font> ,
although themselves terrified at any whisper ' that the queen or the
council would be displeased . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.223

It were endless to record the repeated humiliations to which the
parliaments of Elizabeth were bound to submit ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.224

one farther instance only shall be adduced . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.225

In 1593 , Puckering , the lord keeper , in his answer to the speaker's
three usual demands , explained liberty of speech to be no more than a
liberty of aye and no . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.226

This was the text . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.227

A proper comment soon appeared ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.228

for Peter Wentworth and three other members , were sent to prison for
most respectfully proposing that the queen should be intreated to settle
the succession of her crown . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.229

After a fortnight had passed , the house was moved to petition the queen
for the release of their members ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.230

but being told by the courtiers , that Elizabeth would like to take her
own time , the cautious senate humbly acquiesced .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.231

The ranks of society continue nearly as they had been during the former
part of the century , except the unhappy denomination of slaves .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.232

That order , disgraceful to the ages in which it had existed , was
nearly annihilated ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,28.233

even the word <P_2,29> was banished , and only to be found in an
impracticable act of parliament as a bugbear to vagabonds .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.234

In their room arose to notice , a division of the community emphatically
styled ' the poor . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.235

For these Judge Blackstone writes , that he finds no legal or compulsive
provision set apart in early times . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.236

Their maintenance , then , fell chiefly on the ecclesiastics ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.237

and a fourth part of the tithes was originally set apart for that
purpose . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.238

When gradually the tithes became the property of monasteries , the
support of the poor became their duty . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.239

In the reign of Henry VIII. the first act was passed which immediately
affected this division of the people . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.240

The magistrates were directed to search for the poor , and to give
begging licences to all weak , old , and impotent persons ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.241

but such as were ' whole and mighty in body , ' and yet were found
idling away their time , were to be severely whipped and sent to their
parishes . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.242

And here it should be observed , that this regulation took place some
years before the dissolution of religious houses .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,29.243

This remark confutes at once the favorite system of those who date the
commencement <P_2,30> of the poor's rates from the destruction of
monasteries . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.244

Early in the reign of Edward VI. an act passed whose extreme inhumanity
shortened its own duration . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.245

First , vagabonds were averred to be more in number in England than in
other regions ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.246

the servants out of place , wanderers , &c. were all huddled together
under the name of vagabonds , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.247

and were decreed to become slaves for two years , and to be driven to
work by dint of blows , and kept to it by chains .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.248

If such oppressed being should absent himself fourteen days , he might
be branded with a hot iron , and became a slave for ever .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.249

Any child found in such vagabond's company , incurred the same penalty .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.250

The free and generous nature of the English revolted at this cruel law .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.251

It was found to be useless from its inhumanity ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.252

and a new one was framed in its stead . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,30.253

By this and another subsequent act , collectors were appointed to gather
alms , {TEXT:.} <P_2,31> for the relief of the poor ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,31.254

and if any one would not add what appeared to be his fair quota to the
contribution , he was to be reprimanded by the bishop who might also ,
if he found him obstinate , take order for the reformation of his
conduct . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,31.255

In the fourteenth of Elizabeth a statute appears which directs '
assessments to be made in every parish for the relief of the poor . '
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,31.256

This was for a limited time ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,31.257

and <paren> says Mr. Barrington <$$paren> was probably suffered to
expire from its great severity against vagabonds ; who , if above
fourteen , were to be whipped , burned in the ear with a hot iron to the
compass of an inch , and for the second offence to suffer death .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,31.258

The important act which passed in almost the last year of Elizabeth , at
a period when she , from the gloom which over-shadowed her once active
mind , could have little merit in the composition of a law so voluminous
and intricate , is extremely and judiciously particular ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,31.259

and appoints not only the method of raising a tax for the support of the
poor , and the persons who are to collect it and to distribute it , but
also those who are to oversee and criticise on that distribution ; a
task allotted with the most discerning propriety to the neighboring
justices_of_the_peace . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,31.260

It regulates also the settlement of the poor , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,31.261

that is to say , it appoints <P_2,32> <font> to <$$font> what parishes ,
families , circumstanced as described by the act , have a right to apply
for relief . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,32.262

The whole act is allowed to possess great merit ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,32.263

nor have the attempts to explain and improve it , always succeeded .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,32.264

England is the only country which has provided for the laborer when his
strength has forsaken him , and when the merits of a life spent in
industry , call loudly on the more opulent members for support ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,32.265

nor can the short account which has been given of this most meritorious
institution be better concluded than by the words of the humane and
intelligent Barrington : ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,32.266

' If merits in an individual are sometimes supposed to be rewarded in
this world , I do not think it too presumptuous to suppose that national
virtues may likewise meet with their blessings ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,32.267

England has , to its peculiar honor , not only made its poor free ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,32.268

but hath provided a certain and solid establishment to prevent their
necessities and indigence when they arise from what the law terms " the
act of God . " ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,32.269

And are not these beneficent attentions to the miseries of our fellow
creatures , the first of those poor pleas <P_2,33> which we are capable
of offering in behalf of our imperfections to an all-wise and merciful
Creator . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.270

We have no very clear lights as to the revenues of Edward VI .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.271

Great sums were spent by war , and still more by the carelessness of his
ministers . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.272

The parliament , as it usually did to every new prince , gave him
tonnage and poundage for his life ; besides the duties on wood and
leather , expressly for the guard of the seas .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.273

The French king had paid him 400,000 crowns for Boulogne ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.274

the companies of London had given him 20,000 l. as a composition ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.275

he had the produce of many chantries which were publicly sold ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.276

and the bishoprics were robbed of many manors for his use , or rather
for to supply the exigencies of his rapacious courtiers .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.277

Besides this , a large sum was raised for the treasury by the worst of
all methods , that of debasing the coin . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.278

Yet he died indebted more than three_hundred_thousand pounds to his
subjects and others . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,33.279

<P_2,34>

His sister Mary was by no means scrupulous in the methods of increasing
her revenue . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,34.281

She put in practice ' forced loans ; ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,34.282

she made the merchants buy off embargoes on their goods ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,34.283

and she sometimes seized all the leather and the wood of a whole county
. ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,34.284

These extortions aided her not ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,34.285

her debts were considerable at her death ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,34.286

and were left , as well as those of her brother Edward , to be
discharged by their more oeconomical successor Elizabeth .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,34.287

It is not easy to state the revenue of Elizabeth with any kind of
exactitude , as she had so many ways of increasing the usual perquisites
of the crown . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,34.288

Her ordinary income appears to have <P_2,35> been under 500,000 l.
per_annum . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,35.289

The customs of London , one of the firmest of its branches , flourished
so luxuriantly , that she raised the annual rent from 14,000 l. to
50,000 l. ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,35.290

She was presented , during her long reign , with only twenty subsidies ,
and thirty-nine fifteenths . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,35.291

The value of a subsidy was changeable , sometimes 120,000 l. sometimes
no more than 80,000 l. ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,35.292

On the whole , Mr. Hume supposes the queen to have received not more
than three millions from her people , in regular taxes , during
forty-five years . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,35.293

But she had innumerable ways of raising money , the produce of which can
no way be estimated . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,35.294

She took from the Roman_Catholics above 20,000 l. annually , by selling
them licences and dispensations from attending the Protestant service ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,35.295

and she received almost as much every new-year's day in donations .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,35.296

Once being disgusted with the small share which she might fairly demand
of a rich Spanish prize taken by Raleigh , in 1592 , the proprietors
soothed her with a present of 80,000 l. in addition to the 20,000 l.
to which alone she had a just claim : ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,35.297

' The largest <P_2,36> gift ever made , ' says Sir Walter , ' by private
persons to their sovereign . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,36.298

Add to this the vast sums accruing from the pillage of bishoprics
<paren> and from receiving their whole revenues , as she did that of Ely
during nineteen years <$$paren> , from exclusive patents , monopolies ,
&c. and the amount of the whole must be inconceivably extensive .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,36.299

She needed , indeed , vast sums , if , as some have written , she had
four millions of pounds to pay at her accession for the debts of her
predecessors ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,36.300

this however is incredible . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,36.301

In one point Elizabeth set a good example to all her successors .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,36.302

When money was wanted it had been usual for the English princes to
borrow at Antwerp ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,36.303

and so low was their credit , that even , with the weight of the city of
London on their side , they never paid less than ten or twelve per_cent.
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,36.304

But she , more oeconomical , gained so good a character for paying the
interest of her loans , that she went no farther than her own subjects
for <P_2,37> pecuniary aid ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,37.305

and , by the interference of the active and enterprizing Gresham , the
queen found means to borrow what she wanted , on more reasonable terms ,
of the company of English merchant adventurers .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,37.306

<P_2,38>

<heading>

Chap. {TEXT:Chap} III . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,38.309

Section II . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,38.310

History of the constitution , government , and laws , of Scotland , from
A.D. 1542 , to A.D. 1603 . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,38.311

<$$heading>

At the commencement of this period , and for many succeeding years ,
aristocracy , in its most odious form , bore the sway in Scotland .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,38.313

It had not there , as in most parts of Europe , been undermined by the
progress of commerce and its concomitant opulence .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,38.314

The successive kings of Scotland had exerted every means in their power
to weaken the ascendant of the nobility , but in vain , as repeated
minorities gave to that order time and opportunity to recruit its vigor
. ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,38.315

When the king was of age , and in possession of the resources with which
his station naturally furnished him , he could , by his influence in
parliament , in some degree counteract this dangerous power ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,38.316

and the deadly feuds which reigned among these fierce , untractable
barons , afforded to a politic prince a still easier way of lessening
their consequence . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,38.317

But repeated minorities , and , at length , a sceptre swayed by a female
, not resolute and politic , like the English Elizabeth , but delicate ,
timid , and susceptible , would have deprived the monarchy of every
prerogative , had not James VI. been endowed with a certain kind of
nerveless but enduring policy <paren> he called it ' King-craft '
<$$paren> , which , by fair and mild means , preserved the influence of
the crown against not only contending factions of <P_2,39> the nobility
, but against the most bold and assuming hierarchy which ever emulated
the powers of the court of Rome . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,39.318

It is not during the turbulent governments of Arran , or of Mary of
Guise , the widow of James V. that we are to seek for any changes in
Scottish constitution ; nor yet in the short and ill-starred reign of
Mary Stuart ; nor in the precarious regencies which ensued ; when the
ecclesiastical and military force united , and governed the realm ,
under the concealed but firm direction of the wise Elizabeth ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,39.319

it is to the administration of James , the son of Mary , that recourse
must be had for observations on a government which needed years of
tranquillity before it could demand attention as a political system .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,39.320

In a former book we have seen the parliaments , or conventions , and the
assemblies of the church , alternately proceeding on the same plan ;
forwarding reformation , opposing the interest of France , and
supporting the authority of the infant James against that party which
espoused the unfortunate cause of his mother Mary .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,39.321

On the arrival of that period when James VI. was capable of holding the
reins of government , he found it necessary to pay particular attention
to the formation of parliament , which had , in general , been merely an
assemblage of bishops , abbots , and greater barons , with a few
commissioners from counties , who met in one house , and transacted
<P_2,40> the business of the nation ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,40.322

nor did the lesser barons think their influence in parliament an object
worth the cost which an attendance on the house must have occasioned ,
at a time when a numerous train of vassals and dependants would have
accompanied the senator to the capital , and have been supported at his
charge during the session . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,40.323

On very great occasions these inferior members came forward in vast
numbers <paren> for the feuds , originally great , being now split into
small divisions , the freeholders were numerous , and each had a vote
<$$paren> , from the most remote districts , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,40.324

and filled the house with that honest but undesirable clamor which
ill-regulated zeal always produces . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,40.325

James I. of Scotland had tried long before to persuade this
well-meaning but confused mob of patriots , to be contented with
electing representatives , and by them to form a lower house as in
England ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,40.326

but they could not be reconciled to this measure , although three
successive <P_2,41> monarchs approved the system , and endeavored to
support it . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,41.327

To enforce so salutary a regulation was the earnest wish of James VI.
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,41.328

and in 1587 , as soon as he became of age , he caused this plan of his
ancestors to be introduced again to the consideration of parliament .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,41.329

The noblemen extremely disapproved of a system calculated to reduce
their consequence by forming a constitutional balance to their authority
; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,41.330

but , as the king had it in his power to carry any point by convoking
the lesser barons and out-voting them , they gave way ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,41.331

and the burghs , as well as the counties , sent representatives to
parliament from that time to the union . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,41.332

There was another branch of the legislature , of great importance to the
regal authority , in which the policy of James suggested an alteration .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,41.333

<P_2,42>

The Lords of the Articles <paren> like the triers of petitions once
known in England <$$paren> had been long used to receive supplications ,
and to prepare for the house of parliament such bills as they thought
worthy of regard , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,42.335

nor could any laws even be debated on without their sanction first
obtained . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,42.336

These were usually composed of eight spiritual and eight temporal lords
; of eight representatives and eight great officers of the crown .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,42.337

Of this body , which in fact engrossed the essence of parliamentary
power , the first and the last divisions were sure to vote for the court
; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,42.338

and as it was improbable that the other sixteen could be all united
under the standard of opposition , the king may be said to have
possessed a complete command of the legislative body ; and , by means of
the Lords of Articles , to have been able to put a decided negative on
every proposed law , even before it was brought forward or known to the
people . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,42.339

But although it appears that all the members of this very important
selection were generally chosen and appointed immediately by the royal
authority , before the meeting of parliament , yet James VI. anxious
lest an appointment on which <P_2,43> the whole regal importance
depended , should escape from his direction , contrived an act which ,
under pretence of the vast overflow of petitions for new laws , created
a new power ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,43.340

this was decreed to reside in four persons only out of each estate , who
should meet twenty days before the sitting of parliament , to receive
all supplications , &c. and , rejecting what they thought frivolous ,
should recite in a book what they thought worthy the attention of the
Lords of the Articles . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,43.341

As these commissioners were naturally left to be chosen by the king ,
they formed a restriction on those lords , should they at any period
prove refractory to the royal behest . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,43.342

And in this position affairs appear to have rested , when the accession
of James to the English throne , invested him with power to carry on the
Scottish government as he pleased , without having recourse to the arts
of policy . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,43.343

No particular change in the courts of judicature appears to have taken
place during the period here treated of . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,43.344

During the latter part of the century , the civil and the ecclesiastical
branches of authority were frequently engaged in disputes , particularly
concerning the Popish peers ; who , having the wishes of the irresolute
king in their favor , set the laws at defiance .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,43.345

The Scottish criminal code was voluminous and severe , especially
towards the beginning of the reformation ; <P_2,44> when affectation of
extreme purity of manners , joined to the rigid spirit of the stern Knox
, swelled follies into vices , and hunted down a juvenile frolic with a
rancor which could only have been justified by the supposition of an
enormous crime . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,44.346

The first essay of the reformers' legal acrimony seems to have pointed
very justly at the violators of the nuptial tie ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,44.347

for , in 1560 , they caused Sanderson , deacon of the fleshers <paren>
president of the butchers <$$paren> , to be carted for adultery through
the streets of Edinburgh . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,44.348

A riot was the consequence , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,44.349

and the culprit was liberated by force ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,44.350

but the magistrates were brought to a severe account for their
negligence . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,44.351

The less guilty fornicator was treated with equal harshness .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,44.352

His punishment was a month's imprisonment on bread and water , and then
a severe whipping . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,44.353

Soon after this , adultery was made a capital crime ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,44.354

it was divided into three distinct degrees , 1. That of having children
' procreat ' between the parties , 2. That of keeping ' company and
<P_2,45> bed together , notoriously knowen ; ' and , 3. The being '
suspect of adulterie , giving sclander to the kirk , and being
excommunicate ' in consequence . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,45.355

Yet it appears needless to have made these distinctions , since ' all
these three , and every one of them , shall incur and suffer the pain of
death . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,45.356

Some time after this , a very rational law decreed any marriage between
the divorced wife and her gallant <paren> supposing them to have eluded
the capital punishment <$$paren> to be null and void ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,45.357

and incapacitated the children of such couple from inheriting the goods
of either party . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,45.358

It may be presumed that swearing was not a vice peculiar to the southern
district of the island ; since we find , in 1591 , an act against those
who swear ' abhominable aithes , execrationes , and blasphemationes of
the name of God , swearand in vain be his precious blod , bodie ,
passion , and wounds , devil stick , cummer , gore , roist or riese them
, and sik uther ougsum aithes , ' &c. ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,45.359

And in 1581 the same act appears again renewed , with an increase of
penalties , and a strong intimation that the fair sex had its share in
the charge , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,45.360

' and women to be weyed and considdered conforme to their bluide and
estaite of their parties that they are cupled with . '
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,45.361

Destroyers of parks and inclosures , for the third fault are punished
with death . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,45.362

<P_2,46>

Carrying arms without licence , having been accounted felony , escaped
any punishment , as death seemed too heavy a penalty .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.364

It was therefore changed to a severe fine . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.365

Beggars were treated harshly ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.366

' sik as make themsels fules , and are bairdes , ' are to be kept in
irons while they have any thing left to live upon ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.367

after that they are to have their ears cut off and be banished ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.368

and if they return into the country they are to be hanged .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.369

The respect due to the regal person had always been great ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.370

nor could any thing be more closely guarded in Scotland than the honor
and safety of the king . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.371

This is proved by the following act , which is supported by many others
: ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.372

' Publicly to declaime or privately to speake or write any purpose of
reprocht or slander of the king's persone , estaite , or government ; or
to deprave his lawes or actes of parliament ; or misconstrue his
proceedings whereby any mislike can be mooved betwixt his hienesse and
his nobilitie , loving subjects , ' &c. &c. is declared a crime worthy
death ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.373

and ' the said paine of deathe shall {TEXT:sall} be execute on them with
all rigor . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,46.374

<P_2,47>

But an act ' against leasing-making , or raising slanders against the
king , ' &c. , far exceeded that above mentioned in severity ; since it
denounced the penalty of treason to all such as might hear ' such
leasings , calumnies , &c. and not apprehend the person , ' or at least
give evidence of his offence to the proper magistrate .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,47.376

Except the instances above recorded , the criminal laws of Scotland
differed little from those of its Southern neighbours .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,47.377

The criminal law was in general ill executed , especially on the borders
; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,47.378

for there the inhabitants , strangers to the arts of peace , and looking
on industry as a species of dastardly fatigue , subsisted entirely by
spoil and pillage ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,47.379

and , <P_2,48> being powerfully connected and confederated , set the
common ministers of justice at defiance . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,48.380

Contemptible as these hereditary plunderers may appear , there were few
of the Scottish monarchs who did not find themselves obliged to make
expeditions in person against them ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,48.381

and the aid of their lawless bands was always sought by the barons when
in arms against their king , or against one another ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,48.382

and almost always ensured victory . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,48.383

A constant warfare was indeed carried on between the martial inhabitants
of the separate districts , which , by keeping their military faculties
in continual exercise , fitted them for sudden enterprizes ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,48.384

nor were their bows unbent until 1595 ; when James VI. of Scots ,
dreading lest his succession to the English throne might be endangered
by this <P_2,49> habitual enmity , severely prohibited the Scots , by
proclamation , from continuing their incursions ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,49.385

and , the same care being exerted on the English border , the '
debateable land , ' as it was used to be called , was no longer manured
by the blood of its inhabitants or the ashes of their mansions .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,49.386

It was then for the first time that the sister kingdoms received from
their insular position all its due advantages .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,49.387

But it was some time before the predatory spirit of the borderers could
be totally subdued ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,49.388

and the removal of one whole clan , or sept , was found a necessary step
to the complete restoration of tranquillity . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,49.389

The revenues of the Scottish crown would have received a large addition
in 1561 , when one third of the rich estates possessed by the
Roman_Catholic clergy was settled on the queen , on condition of her
engaging for the subsistence of the unprovided Protestant preachers .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,49.390

But that third was <P_2,50> reduced to so low an ebb , by the enormous
peculations of the great barons and powerful leaders , who had
dispossessed the bishops and abbots , that it scarcely could afford a
wretched , hungry pittance to the reformed clergy ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,50.391

nor did Mary , who then governed the realm , venture to look closely
into the account . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,50.392

During the minority of James no savings appear to have been made ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,50.393

for , almost immediately after his taking the government into his own
hands , we find his treasury empty , and himself necessitous , craving ,
and submitting to the will of his politic neighbour Elizabeth , in
consideration of sums apparently trifling . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,50.394

The same extreme want of money attended on this incautious prince during
the whole life of the English queen ; ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,50.395

and it is probably to the precarious state of his revenues , <P_2,51>
which , preventing him from setting his benefactress at defiance ,
preserved the connection between the kingdoms , that that union is owing
, which has doubled the power , security , and happiness of both .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,51.396

<P_2,52_missing>

<P_2,53>

<heading>

History of Great Britain . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,53.400

Book VIII . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,53.401

Chap. IV . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,53.402

- Part II . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,53.403

Section I . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,53.404

History of learning , of learned men , and of the chief seminaries of
learning that were founded in Great Britain , from A.D. 1547 , to A.D.
1603 . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,53.405

<$$heading>

The extreme avidity of Edward's ministers , which tempted them to
impoverish every ecclesiastical foundation for their own benefit , had
well nigh destroyed all the good effects which might be expected to
accrue to England both as to literature and education .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,53.407

Exhibitions and pensions were taken from the students of the
universities , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,53.408

and at Oxford the public schools were neglected , and even applied to
the lowest purposes . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,53.409

<P_2,54>

How far the system of education then adopted in the most accomplished
and noblest houses might be expected to supply the place of public
discipline , we may be enabled to judge by an extract from Roger
Ascham's ' Schoolmaster , ' which will give a striking instance of
parental harshness in the case of the amiable and unfortunate Lady Jane
Gray . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,54.411

He visited her at her father's seat in Leicestershire ,
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,54.412

and found her studying the Phaedon <P_2,55> of Plato .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.413

' After salutation , ' he writes , ' and dewty done , and after some
other tauke , I asked her , " Why she wolde leese such pastime in the
parke ? ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.414

" Smiling , she answered me , " I wisse all their sport in the parke is
but a shadoe to the pleasure that I find in Plato .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.415

Alas , good folkes ! they never felt what trewe pleasure meant ! "
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.416

" And how came you , madam , " quoth I , " by this knowledge of pleasure
? ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.417

And what did chieflie allure you to it ? ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.418

Seeinge not many women , and but very fewe men , have attained thereunto
. " ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.419

" I will tell you , " quoth she , " and tell you a truth which perchance
ye will marvell at : ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.420

one of the greatest benefites that God gave me is , that he sent me so
sharpe and severe parentes , and so jentle a school-master .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.421

For , when I am in presence eyther of father or mother ; whether I
speake , keepe silence , sitt , stand , or go ; eate , drinke , be merie
or sad ; be sowying , playing , dauncing , or doing anie thing else , I
must do it , as it were , in suche measure , weighte , and number , even
so perfetlie as God made the world , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,55.422

or else I am so sharplie taunted , so cruellie threatened , yea ,
presentlie , sometimes , with pinches , nippes , bobbes <paren> and
other waies which I will not name for the honor I bear them <$$paren> ,
so without measure misordered , that I thinke myselfe in hell till time
come that I must go to Mr. <P_2,56> Elmer , who teacheth me so
pleasantlie , so jentlie , and with such faire allurements to learninge
, that I thinke alle the times nothing whiles I am with him .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,56.423

And when I am called from him , I fall on weepynge , ' &c. &c. &c.
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,56.424

It is , perhaps , to this affecting scene that we owe the great
attention which Ascham shews , in the above-cited work , to the dictates
of humanity ; and the pains he takes to render his plan of education
desirable to the master , and pleasant to the pupil ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,56.425

and this is the more singular as the treatise is visibly written with
the stern pen of a Puritan . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,56.426

<P_2,57>

The English language was much neglected in the middle of the sixteenth
century , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,57.428

but a double share of attention was bestowed on classical knowledge ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,57.429

nor was any rank deemed so exalted as to exclude the necessity of a
thorough acquaintance with the learned tongues .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,57.430

Four successive sovereigns might justly be styled proficients in
literature . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,57.431

Henry VIII. wrote a grammar , ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,57.432

and composed several pieces in Latin . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,57.433

Edward VI. besides a clear knowledge of his own tongue , has left
several specimens of his Latinity . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,57.434

Of Queen <P_2,58> Mary , Erasmas says , ' Scripsit bene Latinas
epistolas . ' ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,58.435

The classical erudition of Elizabeth is beyond a doubt ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,58.436

her extemporary answers to the poetic insolence of the ambassadors from
Philip II. and the Polish monarch , have been already recorded .
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,58.437

Yet the Latin written in the reign of that princess , is inferior to
that of Henry VIII.@ @'s reign , when the novelty of classical
literature excited a general emulation to imitate the Roman authors ;
ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,58.438

and so very much was the taste of the sixteenth century vitiated towards
the close , that Palingenius , Sedulius , and Prudentius , modern
classics , <P_2,59> and inferior in merit as in antiquity , were
recommended by the learned Grindal to be studied , in a school which he
had founded . ANDREWS2-1796-2,2,59.439

