<BEGIN_anon4-1791-2>

<P_133>

<heading>

<font> Aix la Chapelle . <$$font> <$$heading> The entrance to which is
very indifferent , ANON4-1791-2,133.4

on each side of you the most wretched , dirty hovels I ever beheld -
ANON4-1791-2,133.5

Aix lies very low , and , in my opinion , damp , though the inhabitants
will not allow it , the medical tribe <P_134> especially , who are here
in great numbers , and extol the salubrity of the air -
ANON4-1791-2,134.6

As you advance further into the town the streets get broader ,
ANON4-1791-2,134.7

and you see some very good houses ; ANON4-1791-2,134.8

yet , what is extraordinary , you do not see one street , in the whole
city , regularly built - ANON4-1791-2,134.9

This place is not , in general , much frequented by the English ;
ANON4-1791-2,134.10

this year , however , owing to the aforementioned quarrel at Spa , it
was remarkably full of English - ANON4-1791-2,134.11

The Poles , Swedes , Germans , and Russians , make this their watering
place , as the more Southern nations do Spa - ANON4-1791-2,134.12

The season is at the height six weeks before the commencement of the Spa
season , and six weeks after its conclusion ; ANON4-1791-2,134.13

there is , however , a great deal of company here from May to October -
ANON4-1791-2,134.14

In favour of the amusements of the place I can@ @not say much -
ANON4-1791-2,134.15

I am sorry to observe , that , like Spa , it is chiefly calculated for a
description of men not the most honourable , <P_135> who found the
structure of their own happiness on the ruin of others ;
ANON4-1791-2,135.16

it is almost needless , after this , to describe them under the name of
Gamesters - ANON4-1791-2,135.17

From morning to night your ears are incessantly dinned with the rattling
of the dice-box , ANON4-1791-2,135.18

not an hour but is employed in cards or dice - ANON4-1791-2,135.19

There are settled hours for every game , beyond which they can@ @not
{TEXT:cannnot} play at {COM:see_errata} it - ANON4-1791-2,135.20

yet , as soon as one Bank shuts , another opens ; ANON4-1791-2,135.21

and to those , who are only actuated by the avaritious motive of
possessing more than they already have , <paren> for as to pleasure , I
can allow no gamester to enjoy any , whilst his mind is thus agitated by
the different emotions of hope and fear , <$$paren> it matters very
little at what game he hazards his money , provided the chances are
equal - ANON4-1791-2,135.22

Biribi , Hazard , Faro , Trent-un , each have their respective turns in
the day , ANON4-1791-2,135.23

and are most under the direction of a distinct person .
ANON4-1791-2,135.24

- The chief Banker <P_136> here pays a_thousand Louis <font> per_annum
<$$font> for his licence during the season ; ANON4-1791-2,136.25

and it is said , that his profit in general exceeds four_thousand , and
sometimes double that sum - ANON4-1791-2,136.26

There are two gaming-houses a mile or two from the town , to which at
stated hours all the gamblers resort - ANON4-1791-2,136.27

Indeed , I know no police more regularly <paren> I will not say better
<$$paren> governed than this - ANON4-1791-2,136.28

Each gaming house , each room , nay , each part of a room , has its
peculiar hour , two only of which , from the commencement of play to the
conclusion <paren> which is from ten in the morning to two or three the
next <$$paren> are allotted for meals , and often not one employed .
ANON4-1791-2,136.29

- When I was at Aix , there was a little Italian , who , within a
fortnight , had undergone as many revolutions of fortune , as in general
fall to the lot of the most extraordinary gamester during his whole life
- ANON4-1791-2,136.30

He came there , as an adventurer , with a <P_137> few Louis_d'Ors in his
pockets , determined to try the favour of Fortune - ANON4-1791-2,137.31

his first attempt was at Hazard , where he played crown stakes , and ,
as Fortune kindly smiled on him , increased to an half guinea , guinea ,
and so on , to Bank notes . ANON4-1791-2,137.32

- In the space of twenty-four hours , he had stripped the Bank of
upwards of four_thousand pounds , ANON4-1791-2,137.33

and the next morning , resuming his operations , broke the Bank entirely
, his winnings amounting to more than nine_thousand pounds -
ANON4-1791-2,137.34

One would have imagined , that a poor needy adventurer , who , most
probably , had never seen a twentieth part of such a sum before , would
have packed up his all immediately , and returned <paren> in his own
mind a prince <$$paren> to his native country - ANON4-1791-2,137.35

Content , however , was a stranger to his mind , ANON4-1791-2,137.36

and the accession of one sum only brought with it anxiety for a greater
- ANON4-1791-2,137.37

For several days , however , the Bankers could not play , so <P_138>
completely had he reduced them to their last stake - ANON4-1791-2,138.38

A supply of cash , however , at last arrived , which enabled them to
open a fresh campaign . ANON4-1791-2,138.39

- Our little adventurer , as usual , stuck close to them ;
ANON4-1791-2,138.40

and , for a few hours , his usual success attended him .
ANON4-1791-2,138.41

- The tables , however , at last turned on him , ANON4-1791-2,138.42

and , from being the possessor of ten_thousand pounds , he left the Bank
reduced to his very last Louis - ANON4-1791-2,138.43

When he reached his lodging , he could not help taking a retrospective
view of his conduct . ANON4-1791-2,138.44

- How did he bewail his situation ! how lament that he had not been
content with his former gain , and retired to his own country , to enjoy
the fruits of his success ! ANON4-1791-2,138.45

- To complain , however , of his situation could not mend it ;
ANON4-1791-2,138.46

convinced of this , he determined to make one more vigorous effort to
recover the money he had lost ; fully , however , in his own mind
determined to leave Aix directly , if Fortune <P_139> should once more
smile upon him - ANON4-1791-2,139.47

yet , how to raise money sufficient to put himself into the fickle
Jade's way , he could not tell - ANON4-1791-2,139.48

At last , however , he recollected a friend , whom he had assisted in
several emergencies , and who resided only a few miles distant from the
city - ANON4-1791-2,139.49

To him he immediately dispatched a messenger with a request of the loan
of thirty pounds - ANON4-1791-2,139.50

This was immediately complied with , ANON4-1791-2,139.51

and our little Italian returned to the gaming-table , much to the
discomfort of the Bankers , who , from the success that attended his
play , had conceived no small dread of him - ANON4-1791-2,139.52

His usual run of good luck attended him , ANON4-1791-2,139.53

and , from being master of only thirty pounds , he left the table with
more than ten_thousand , ANON4-1791-2,139.54

and not forgetting the resolution he had formed in his fit of poverty ,
retired to an inn , ANON4-1791-2,139.55

ordered a carriage , ANON4-1791-2,139.56

and packed up his baggage - ANON4-1791-2,139.57

In the interim , however , one <P_140> of the Directors of the Bank ,
learning his intention , set off immediately to him , resolved to use
all the rhetoric he was master of , to persuade him to relinquish his
design - ANON4-1791-2,140.58

His arguments were too specious not to destroy the resolution of the
poor Italian ; ANON4-1791-2,140.59

his fortitude vanished in a moment , ANON4-1791-2,140.60

and , instead of returning to his native country , he returned to the
gaming-table , where , in a very few hours , he was stripped of every
sol he had in the world , and left to reflect on the diversity of
Fortune , which he had known in the space of so short a time -
ANON4-1791-2,140.61

The moment he returned to his lodgings he sold the greatest part of his
clothes , ANON4-1791-2,140.62

and by this means raised a few Louis , ANON4-1791-2,140.63

and returned to his own haunt in a more humble line than before .
ANON4-1791-2,140.64

- When I left Aix , he had by half-crown stakes so far retrieved his
affairs , as to repay the thirty pounds he had borrowed of his friend ,
and to be ambitious of increasing <P_141> his stake -
ANON4-1791-2,141.65

I never heard whether success again attended him , ANON4-1791-2,141.66

nor , from his avarice and imprudence , was I much interested in his
fate . ANON4-1791-2,141.67

The rides and walks round Aix are but very indifferent , and the roads ,
when compared with those of Spa , most wretched - ANON4-1791-2,141.68

There are two balls a week at the Redoute , where the gaming tables are
kept - ANON4-1791-2,141.69

English country dances are allowed , ANON4-1791-2,141.70

but , in general , the dancing consists of a minuet or two , cotillions
, and a Polish dance - ANON4-1791-2,141.71

This last is performed by two persons , ANON4-1791-2,141.72

and is , in some respects , similar to our <font> Minuet de la Cour
<$$font> , only rather more grave and solemn ; ANON4-1791-2,141.73

the performers are continually crossing each other at right angles ,
ANON4-1791-2,141.74

and , upon the whole , it is not to the spectators the most pleasing
dance in the world - ANON4-1791-2,141.75

I saw two daughters of the Grand Mayor of the town dance it -
ANON4-1791-2,141.76

they seemed very pleasing , shewy women - ANON4-1791-2,141.77

as soon as <P_142> they had finished it , the company expressed their
approbation in the same manner we do to our actors and actresses in
London , by clapping their hands - ANON4-1791-2,142.78

In the Redoute the music is very good - ANON4-1791-2,142.79

The moment one set has done dancing , another starts up , and sometimes
only one couple , unasked and without ceremony - ANON4-1791-2,142.80

They are , at present , building a New Redoute , and Com√©die all in one
, on the plan of the Spa Old Redoute , part of which tumbles
occasionally into a play-house - ANON4-1791-2,142.81

This New Redoute at Aix is close to the old one , ANON4-1791-2,142.82

it was begun by a jeweller , who lives on the spot , but who , for want
of money , has been obliged to dispose of it half finished ;
ANON4-1791-2,142.83

when completed , I dare say , it will be a most capital building -
ANON4-1791-2,142.84

The concert is another amusement here , ANON4-1791-2,142.85

they are held only once a week - the performers , some good and some bad
; ANON4-1791-2,142.86

they are , in general , but thinly attended - ANON4-1791-2,142.87

The <P_143> Com√©die is much frequented by the independent gentry , by
which I mean , those who are not professedly gamesters .
ANON4-1791-2,143.88

- The language is German , consequently rather harsh to the ear -
ANON4-1791-2,143.89

The dancing is , however , very good - ANON4-1791-2,143.90

You meet at Aix such a quantity of nobility , of Princes , Counts ,
Barons , &c. that you rather fancy yourself at court , than at a
bathing-place - ANON4-1791-2,143.91

Honours , in Germany , are not very difficult to obtain ,
ANON4-1791-2,143.92

and are to be purchased with money - ANON4-1791-2,143.93

A very humorous droll fellow , whom I met at Aix , gave me the reputed
price of most German distinctions of rank - ANON4-1791-2,143.94

Barons he rated at fifty Louis_D'Ors ; Counts <paren> real , not adopted
titles <$$paren> at one_hundred ; and Chamberlain <paren> which entitles
you to wear a ribband , and a key in your button-hole <$$paren> from ten
to twenty guineas , and other titles in proportion - ANON4-1791-2,143.95

I am , in some respects , inclined to give credit to my informer ,
though I <P_144> make not a little allowance for his talent of ridicule
- ANON4-1791-2,144.96

After having given you some brief account of the manner of spending your
time here , <paren> and which , I am sorry to say , can@ @not , for any
continuance , give pleasure to a rational mind <$$paren> it is necessary
I should give you some account of the place itself , of its curiosities
, internal policy , &c. - ANON4-1791-2,144.97

This is a free , imperial city , ANON4-1791-2,144.98

its freedom was given to the inhabitants by the great Charlemagne ,
ANON4-1791-2,144.99

and it has enjoyed it uninterruptedly ever since - ANON4-1791-2,144.100

It is governed by two Burgomasters , one of whom presides over all
affairs relative to the inhabitants of the town ; the other , those of
strangers - ANON4-1791-2,144.101

The police of the city is extremely good , ANON4-1791-2,144.102

and though such a diversity of people resort here from all parts of the
world , either for health or pleasure , you seldom hear of any riot or
disturbance in the town - ANON4-1791-2,144.103

Any man may be a Bourgeois for six or seven Louis ; ANON4-1791-2,144.104

without <P_145> it , though he may open a shop , he can@ @not sell
retail - ANON4-1791-2,145.105

There are several merchants , not Burgesses , some of cloth ,
ANON4-1791-2,145.106

but they must all sell by the piece - ANON4-1791-2,145.107

There are a vast number of people in Aix , miserably poor ,
ANON4-1791-2,145.108

and the streets throng with wretched objects , who come from all parts
of the adjacent country for the benefit of the baths -
ANON4-1791-2,145.109

Each hotel has a bath , ANON4-1791-2,145.110

you pay five skelins to go in , ANON4-1791-2,145.111

most of them are hot ; one so much so , as to boil <paren> so say the
inhabitants <$$paren> an egg hard in five minutes - ANON4-1791-2,145.112

There is one cold bath - ANON4-1791-2,145.113

The baths are chiefly used in scrophulous or rheumatic cases ;
ANON4-1791-2,145.114

I have also heard them recommended in paralytic disorders -
ANON4-1791-2,145.115

For one of these complaints was sent hither by her physicians the lovely
Mrs. R-n , well known in the annals of gallantry , attended by her
noble Colonel - ANON4-1791-2,145.116

I did not see her , ANON4-1791-2,145.117

but understood that she was quite a cripple , not being able to use any
of her <P_146> limbs - ANON4-1791-2,146.118

On hearing a calamity of this nature , I could scarce restrain the tear
of pity - ANON4-1791-2,146.119

The ill-natured and unfeeling world , the prude and over-chaste damsel
may laugh at , and condemn my feelings in such a cause ;
ANON4-1791-2,146.120

they may applaud the justice of Heaven in the exemplary punishment
bestowed on a guilty woman - ANON4-1791-2,146.121

I endeavour not even to palliate her errors , much less to dispute the
justice of the Almighty ; ANON4-1791-2,146.122

yet let not us mortals be " extreme to mark what is done amiss " -
ANON4-1791-2,146.123

Let us rather endeavour to veil over the faults and crimes of our fellow
creatures , nor refuse to drop the tear of compassion , even for the
woes of a frail unhappy sister . ANON4-1791-2,146.124

But to return to my subject - The manners of the people at Aix , are ,
in general , affable , agreeable , and polite ; ANON4-1791-2,146.125

the women are not famed for their modesty , or for the strictness of
their conduct - ANON4-1791-2,146.126

There were several married women who lived openly with their <P_147>
gallants ; ANON4-1791-2,147.127

nor did their husbands give themselves much concern about the matter -
ANON4-1791-2,147.128

There are several curiosities in the place , which strangers are in
general shewn , as the Town-house , the Great Church , Charlemagne and
his wig - ANON4-1791-2,147.129

The first is a noble magnificent structure , ANON4-1791-2,147.130

and is situated in the Market-place - ANON4-1791-2,147.131

there are several very handsome rooms in it - ANON4-1791-2,147.132

the Magistrates meet here to transact all their business -
ANON4-1791-2,147.133

In the grand saloon are the portraits of the Ambassadors of England ,
France , Germany , and Holland , who signed the famous treaty of 1748 ,
concluded at this place - ANON4-1791-2,147.134

They are painted by Rubens and Fourniers - ANON4-1791-2,147.135

the drapery of two or three of them is beyond description good -
ANON4-1791-2,147.136

There are paintings in several other rooms , which by no means disgrace
the artists who executed them - ANON4-1791-2,147.137

The elliptick arches to the ceiling {TEXT:cieling} of most of the rooms
have an elegant light appearance , ANON4-1791-2,147.138

and add <P_148> much to its beauty - ANON4-1791-2,148.139

The view from the Town-house over the country is very extensive -
ANON4-1791-2,148.140

The Great Church is not far from the <font> Maison de Ville <$$font> -
ANON4-1791-2,148.141

It is a fine handsome building , and the architecture very peculiar -
ANON4-1791-2,148.142

I hardly know to what order to attribute it - ANON4-1791-2,148.143

it bears most resemblance to the Ionick , ANON4-1791-2,148.144

yet rather seems to be a mixture of all - ANON4-1791-2,148.145

The choir is very rich and elegant , ANON4-1791-2,148.146

and the whole church has a pleasing air of grandeur and dignity with it
- ANON4-1791-2,148.147

There are no very capital pictures to be seen in it of consequence ;
ANON4-1791-2,148.148

you have no conductor , ANON4-1791-2,148.149

but must contrive to see it whilst it is opened for divine service ,
which is the greatest part of the day - ANON4-1791-2,148.150

The next object , for the notice of strangers , is Charlemagne , who ,
in all the pomp of imperial dignity , is placed erect <font> <paren> sad
dire disgrace <$$paren> <$$font> in a cobwebbed closet , near the
Town-house - ANON4-1791-2,148.151

You generally give the man who shews him you half-@ @a-@ @crown , which
<P_149> can@ @not be called a great sum to see a great king -
ANON4-1791-2,149.152

I know nothing remarkable about his august Majesty , but his wig , which
consisting of five or six_hundred curls , well adjusted , and most
amazingly powdered , reminds you of Mrs. Wright's waxen image of Lord
Chatham in Westminster Abbey - ANON4-1791-2,149.153

Charlemagne is carried , thus dressed out and powdered , thrice every
year round the town , in order to imprint on the minds of the
inhabitants , a due sense of the benefits they have received from him -
ANON4-1791-2,149.154

I believe it answers that effect , ANON4-1791-2,149.155

for you scarcely see any one , even the poorest person , who is not
intimately acquainted with the liberality of the Emperor , and who has
not the whole story at their {COM:changed_in_errata_to_"his"} fingers
end - ANON4-1791-2,149.156

Several go to see the prison here , ANON4-1791-2,149.157

it is a fine old building , and the different wards kept very neat and
regular ; ANON4-1791-2,149.158

you seldom see many criminals , and still fewer executions ;
ANON4-1791-2,149.159

all are beheaded for capital offences , though <P_150> not , I think ,
with the axe - ANON4-1791-2,150.160

the dreadful torture is made use of to extort confession ;
ANON4-1791-2,150.161

I know nothing else here , that would in the least gratify your
curiosity - ANON4-1791-2,150.162

It seems very extraordinary to many , that so fine a city as Aix la
Chapelle , from whence could be drawn a revenue , if properly managed ,
far exceeding that of several Princes of the German empire , should have
remained thus long a free city , and totally independent of any state
whatever - ANON4-1791-2,150.163

The Emperor , or Elector Palatine , from their situation , are most
likely to take possession of it ; ANON4-1791-2,150.164

yet , as to the first , though I make no doubt but he would , with the
greatest avidity , snatch every opportunity of making what addition he
could to the extensive dominions he already possesses , yet it would be
a bad system of policy for him to seize Aix - ANON4-1791-2,150.165

The inevitable consequence would be a war with France , whose claims to
this city the Emperor <P_151> knows are equally as great and just as his
own ; ANON4-1791-2,151.166

and the little power and influence the Elector Palatine possesses
amongst the Princes of the Empire would be crushed and annihilated by
such a step - ANON4-1791-2,151.167

it would not only be impossible for him to preserve possession of it ,
but also to defend his own dominions from the powerful , and too
rapacious hand of the Emperor - ANON4-1791-2,151.168

These are , in my opinion , the causes which have established the
liberties and independence of this city on the secure foundation which
supports it at this moment ; ANON4-1791-2,151.169

nor does it seem probable it ever will exist , but as an independent
free city . ANON4-1791-2,151.170

- I think I have now detained you long enough in this dirty town -
ANON4-1791-2,151.171

I have been longer , and more particular in my account of it , because
it is , in general , so little known to the English , as most make Spa
the extent of their tour Northward - ANON4-1791-2,151.172

I think , in the space of a very few years , Aix <P_152> la Chapelle
will be much more resorted to than it is at present -
ANON4-1791-2,152.173

The improvements making in the town , and the publick building which is
going forwards , and will be by next year completed , will render it a
lively place - ANON4-1791-2,152.174

I took up my lodgings at the Hotel <font> D'Angleterre , <$$font> where
I had very good accommodations , and considering it was at a public
place , not at all extravagant - ANON4-1791-2,152.175

For every room you have you pay five skelins a night , which is very
extravagant in proportion to the other charges - ANON4-1791-2,152.176

If you purpose staying here for any length of time , the best way would
be to hire lodgings ; ANON4-1791-2,152.177

you may procure very handsome ones at a Louis per week -
ANON4-1791-2,152.178

There are several very good inns at Aix , in particular that kept by
Dubigh , - <font> Table_D'Hotes <$$font> at almost all of them , at
which you can dine for four skelins a head - ANON4-1791-2,152.179

There is one <paren> I forget which <$$paren> where ladies are admitted
, and mix with gentlemen - ANON4-1791-2,152.180

<P_153>

At all the <font> Table_D'Hotes <$$font> they follow the French custom
of dining early , seldom later than one - ANON4-1791-2,153.182

From Aix I took a coach and four horses to Maestricht , which is six
leagues distant - ANON4-1791-2,153.183

They will ask you four , five , or six crowns , according to the season
and scarcity of horses - ANON4-1791-2,153.184

It was so full a season , that I was obliged to give six -
ANON4-1791-2,153.185

The carriages are all most miserably shabby , much inferior to the very
worst of our Hackney coaches - ANON4-1791-2,153.186

The road is but indifferent all the way - ANON4-1791-2,153.187

The country , however , is open , and fine , and the land cultivated -
ANON4-1791-2,153.188

The horses are by no means bad , ANON4-1791-2,153.189

and seldom are longer carrying you from Aix to Maestricht than three
hours - ANON4-1791-2,153.190

You may talk of coachmanship in England , ANON4-1791-2,153.191

but I never in my own country saw any thing to equal the dexterity with
which the drivers <paren> who have no box , but sit on the near hind
horse <$$paren> turn round the sharpest winding and corners of <P_154>
the streets , directing the two first horses with cords , which are used
instead of leather reins - ANON4-1791-2,154.192

You pass through no place in your way at all considerable -
ANON4-1791-2,154.193

The distance is , I think , somewhat better than three leagues .
ANON4-1791-2,154.194

<heading>

<font> Maestricht <$$font> <heading> Lies rather low -
ANON4-1791-2,154.196

you see it for more than two miles before you reach it -
ANON4-1791-2,154.197

At your entrance , the ramparts , draw-bridges , and fortifications
<paren> the last amazingly strong <$$paren> present themselves -
ANON4-1791-2,154.198

Maestricht is situated on the Maese in the province of Brabant ;
ANON4-1791-2,154.199

that part of the town , which is on the West side of the river , is in
the province of Brabant , and subject to the Dutch ;
ANON4-1791-2,154.200

but the Wyche or Suburb , which lies on the East side of the river , is
in the Bishoprick of Liege , ANON4-1791-2,154.201

and that Prince has the civil government of it - ANON4-1791-2,154.202

The Dutch took this town from the Spaniards in 1632 -
ANON4-1791-2,154.203

The French King , <P_155> however , retook it from the Dutch more than
forty years after the Spaniards had lost it to them -
ANON4-1791-2,155.204

At the treaty of Nimeguen in 1679 , the Dutch had it again restored to
them - ANON4-1791-2,155.205

The fortifications are now in the highest repair , ANON4-1791-2,155.206

nor do I know any place more strongly fortified both by nature and art -
ANON4-1791-2,155.207

At the time of my arrival , the inhabitants were in no little alarm from
the Emperor , as in case of the commencement of hostilities , there is
no doubt but Maestricht would , from its contiguity to the dominions of
the Emperor , be the first place attacked - ANON4-1791-2,155.208

Yet , I am well persuaded , that a small body of disciplined troops ,
well provided with ammunition , stores , &c. <paren> and I am convinced
, they might with ease store themselves with twelve months provision
<$$paren> would be able to defend it against any force that could be
brought against it - ANON4-1791-2,155.209

I think myself justified in this opinion by the resistance it made for
<P_156> four or five months in 1579 against an army of 20,000 men ,
commanded by an officer of the first military experience of the age in
which he lived , the Great Farnese , Duke of Parma -
ANON4-1791-2,156.210

The garrison did not then exceed four_thousand men ,
ANON4-1791-2,156.211

<paren> in 1785 there were more than four_thousand most excellently
disciplined troops <$$paren> ANON4-1791-2,156.212

and half of these were newly drawn from the adjacent country - men
ignorant of military duty , and unaccustomed to hardships and distresses
; ANON4-1791-2,156.213

yet , with all these disadvantages , it was defended for the time I have
before mentioned , with incredible obstinacy and good conduct ;
ANON4-1791-2,156.214

nor was it at last taken but by surprize - ANON4-1791-2,156.215

The barracks here are very good - ANON4-1791-2,156.216

there were in them seven Dutch regiments , so that the town was quite
alive - ANON4-1791-2,156.217

The troops were under the command of the Prince of Hesse Cassel , who is
governor of Maestricht , and has his residence there -
ANON4-1791-2,156.218

The streets are in <P_157> general very well built ,
ANON4-1791-2,157.219

and there are several very good houses in appearance -
ANON4-1791-2,157.220

The <font> Grand March√© <$$font> and the <font> Parade <$$font> are both
fine open places , and some very elegant buildings in them -
ANON4-1791-2,157.221

The civil government of the town is lodged in the Burgomaster and
Schepens - ANON4-1791-2,157.222

There are not many curiosities here which would attract the notice of
strangers ; ANON4-1791-2,157.223

they shew you the Town-house , two or three churches , and the
subterraneous passage - ANON4-1791-2,157.224

As to the first , I can say very little in its praise ,
ANON4-1791-2,157.225

the external appearance of it is but indifferent , the internal still
worse ; ANON4-1791-2,157.226

the churches are nothing capital - No very good pictures in any of them
; ANON4-1791-2,157.227

they are in general neat edifices , ANON4-1791-2,157.228

and when you have said this , you have said all - ANON4-1791-2,157.229

The subterraneous passage I had the curiosity to go and see , though it
was a full mile and an half from the inn - ANON4-1791-2,157.230

It is like all passages under_ground - ANON4-1791-2,157.231

They tell you it is possible to go all the <P_158> way to Lille
under_ground by this passage , ANON4-1791-2,158.232

<font> Credat Judaeus Apella , non Ego <$$font> - ANON4-1791-2,158.233

It is certainly of very great extent , and perhaps , even in length ,
ANON4-1791-2,158.234

you might go four or five miles - ANON4-1791-2,158.235

a man and boy light you , each with a torch - ANON4-1791-2,158.236

The moment you enter , you find yourself astonishingly oppressed with
the cold , and the moment you come out , with the contrary sensation -
ANON4-1791-2,158.237

It seems to be a kind of stone quarry , supported by a great number of
square stone pillars - ANON4-1791-2,158.238

All the stone they use for building in the adjacent country is fetched
from it ANON4-1791-2,158.239

and under one part of it I saw great quantities of hay and corn divided
into small portions - ANON4-1791-2,158.240

this is private property , deposited there by the peasants , to defend
it from the inclemency of the weather ; ANON4-1791-2,158.241

and such is the force of honesty in this country , amongst even these
poor illiterate peasants , that I am told every man's property is as
safe here as <P_159> under lock and key . ANON4-1791-2,159.242

- In time of war , this passage serves as a secure asylum for the
inhabitants to hide their goods in on the approach of an enemy -
ANON4-1791-2,159.243

Your conductor shews you a part of the passage , where some years since
a young lad fell down , I suppose not less than sixty feet ;
ANON4-1791-2,159.244

he laid there between two or three days , ANON4-1791-2,159.245

was then found and taken alive , ANON4-1791-2,159.246

and is now living at Maestricht - ANON4-1791-2,159.247

I took a man from the inn to shew me all the curiosities of the place -
not that there was any occasion for it ; ANON4-1791-2,159.248

but the poor fellow came ANON4-1791-2,159.249

and offered his services so genteelly , ANON4-1791-2,159.250

and resembled so much Shakespear's apothecary in Romeo and Juliet , that
I could not resist the inclination I felt to present him with a <font>
petit ecu {COM:sic_no_accent_in_text} <$$font> , ANON4-1791-2,159.251

and I dare say his pride would not have permitted him to accept it as a
douceur - ANON4-1791-2,159.252

The man who lights you through the subterraneous passage expects half-@
@a-@ @crown - ANON4-1791-2,159.253

The public amusements <P_160> at Maestricht are very good ,
ANON4-1791-2,160.254

and I dare say the town is very lively in the winter , as many Dutch
families of consequence reside in it . ANON4-1791-2,160.255

The <font> Com√©die <$$font> is a very good one , performed by a French
company , who are esteemed very capital - ANON4-1791-2,160.256

I took up my abode at the <font> Moulin √† Vent - <$$font>
ANON4-1791-2,160.257

It is by much the best inn here , ANON4-1791-2,160.258

but there are none good ; ANON4-1791-2,160.259

this inn is famous for good Champagne , ANON4-1791-2,160.260

I never drank so good in my life - ANON4-1791-2,160.261

it was however dear , eight skelins a bottle , which is four Shillings
English - ANON4-1791-2,160.262

All the way I have travelled from Brussels to this place the wines have
been getting better , and dearer ; Burgundy six skelins a bottle , and
<font> Vin du Rhin <$$font> the same price - ANON4-1791-2,160.263

From Maestricht to Bois le Due , you may go by water ,
ANON4-1791-2,160.264

but it is a wretched tedious conveyance - ANON4-1791-2,160.265

I therefore preferred land carriage , ANON4-1791-2,160.266

and hired at the Post-house a coach and four horses , which I engaged to
carry me thither in two days , for which <P_161> I paid three Louis , a
crown , one skelin , and ten liards , which is the regulated price -
ANON4-1791-2,161.267

The Post-Master has <paren> to make use of the words of an able and
witty Senator , who , in a certain respectable assembly , often
entertains his hearers by the sprightliness of his fancy and brilliancy
of his wit <$$paren> a great deal of the <font> insolence of office ,
<$$font> ANON4-1791-2,161.268

and thinks it derogatory to his dignity to use one word more than is
absolutely necessary - ANON4-1791-2,161.269

he is indeed a complete Flemish boor - ANON4-1791-2,161.270

As you enter , and as you go out of Maestricht , you are stopped at the
gates to write your name , the next place you design to go to , with the
inn at which you mean to lodge ; ANON4-1791-2,161.271

but here , contrary to the former places , you find civility , and I may
add politeness , without one interested view - ANON4-1791-2,161.272

you receive a low bow , ANON4-1791-2,161.273

and they do not expect <paren> and probably , if you offered , would not
accept <$$paren> any douceur - ANON4-1791-2,161.274

The moment you leave <P_162> Maestricht , you get into an open ,
disagreeable , flat country - ANON4-1791-2,162.275

The road is , for the greatest part of the way , over a barren , sandy
heath , through cross roads , which , in winter , must be often
impassable - ANON4-1791-2,162.276

The country is very thinly populated , ANON4-1791-2,162.277

and you meet with but few villages - ANON4-1791-2,162.278

The only ones are Stockem , Bree , Weert , <paren> commonly called
Falcon Weert , from being famous for the breed of those birds , and from
which place Lord Orford in general procures them <$$paren> which you
pass through the first day - ANON4-1791-2,162.279

You go forty-eight miles before night , ANON4-1791-2,162.280

and have a very long day's journey , almost as much as eighty miles in
England - ANON4-1791-2,162.281

I would advise all who travel this road , to get out very early from
Maestricht - ANON4-1791-2,162.282

I sat out myself before seven o'clock , ANON4-1791-2,162.283

and did not get to the end of my day's journey till past eight at night
- ANON4-1791-2,162.284

Had it been later in the year , I should have got off much earlier , as
it would <P_163> have been very disagreeable , as well as unsafe to
travel such roads in the dark - ANON4-1791-2,163.285

From Maestricht to within a league of Weert , you continue in the
dominions of the Bishop of Liege ; ANON4-1791-2,163.286

afterwards you get into the Dutch territories - ANON4-1791-2,163.287

The people you see on the road look miserably poor ,
ANON4-1791-2,163.288

and send all their children out to beg of you , as you pass -
ANON4-1791-2,163.289

You dine at Br√©e , which is a little bourck rather prettily situated -
ANON4-1791-2,163.290

I must recommend to all travellers , when they enter their <font>
Auberge <$$font> <paren> in case it is on a Friday , or any day in Lent
<$$paren> to remember , that the first thing they say to their host is ,
that they are Protestants ; ANON4-1791-2,163.291

otherwise , though they have had nothing to eat since six o'clock in the
morning , some weak soup , a few potatoes and oil , with a stinking
pickled herring , will be all their dinner - ANON4-1791-2,163.292

I do not know what there was in my face , which induced them to suffer
me to come within the pale of their church - ANON4-1791-2,163.293

I <P_164> am sure , I never felt myself less inclined to embrace their
tenets , than after the bad dinner I had - ANON4-1791-2,164.294

Very fortunately I found a piece of cheese in the house , which was the
very best I had eaten , since I left England - ANON4-1791-2,164.295

The Dutch think they have this article of provisions in the very highest
perfection - ANON4-1791-2,164.296

I am not inclined to own it ; ANON4-1791-2,164.297

I can@ @not think it can be compared with either the North Wiltshire ,
or Cheshire cheese of our country - ANON4-1791-2,164.298

At the different places you stop at , you find none but the landlord and
landlady who speak French - ANON4-1791-2,164.299

The common people either speak a confused jargon of their own , or
Low_Dutch - ANON4-1791-2,164.300

You sleep at <heading> <font> Eyndhover , <$$font> <$$heading> Which is
a very inconsiderable little town , though sufficiently important to be
under <P_165> the government of a Burgomaster and Schepens -
ANON4-1791-2,165.301

There are two or three neat churches here ; yet nothing to be seen in
the inside of them - ANON4-1791-2,165.302

Travellers would do well to get rid of their German money here , as the
coin which goes current in Holland , is entirely different from the
German ; ANON4-1791-2,165.303

the chief pieces of money are , The reyder , which is fourteen gilders .
The ducat , five gilders , five sols . The gilder , 20 sols . The
styver one sol ; ANON4-1791-2,165.304

besides these , there are double reyders , half reyders , five styvers
and an half , &c. in common use - ANON4-1791-2,165.305

French crowns and half-crowns are also very current in every part of
Holland - ANON4-1791-2,165.306

Eyndhover is only six leagues from Bois le Duc - ANON4-1791-2,165.307

When you get half way , you meet again the pav√© , which forsook you when
you left <P_166> Maestricht - ANON4-1791-2,166.308

When you come to a little village named Boxtel , the country grows
delightfully pleasant , ANON4-1791-2,166.309

and you see several gentlemens' elegant houses . ANON4-1791-2,166.310

It is not a little remarkable , that all the way from Maestricht to Bois
le Duc , you neither ascend , or descend one hill , scarce is there any
elevation of the ground the whole way - ANON4-1791-2,166.311

This is a circumstance I dare say , not to be met with in going the same
number of miles in any other part of Europe , and which , in my opinion
, makes very great amends for the barrenness of the country , and
sameness of prospect - ANON4-1791-2,166.312

You are carried at Eyndhover to the Post-house , ANON4-1791-2,166.313

the sign is , I think , the Star ; ANON4-1791-2,166.314

and , considering it is so trifling a thoroughfare , the accommodations
are by no means bad - ANON4-1791-2,166.315

When you reach <P_167> <heading> Bois le Duc , <$$heading> You are
stopped , as usual , for your name , &c. ANON4-1791-2,167.316

The entrance to this place is over two or three draw-bridges -
ANON4-1791-2,167.317

the ramparts and fortifications appear very strong -
ANON4-1791-2,167.318

This place , during the troubles of the war between Spain and Holland ,
suffered less than most towns ; ANON4-1791-2,167.319

it was only besieged once by Prince Maurice , ANON4-1791-2,167.320

but the Archduke Albert coming to its relief , he was obliged to raise
the siege - ANON4-1791-2,167.321

in 1629 , however , the Dutch succeeded better , ANON4-1791-2,167.322

and took it with very little resistance on the part of the inhabitants ,
ANON4-1791-2,167.323

and ever since it has been subject to them - ANON4-1791-2,167.324

There is one regiment almost always in the town , and on account of the
jealousy subsisting between the French and Dutch , <paren> though the
former are dignified by the latter with the <P_168> appellation of their
<font> Great and Good Allies <$$font> <$$paren> ANON4-1791-2,168.325

The new raised regiment of Count Maillebois was sent there by the States
a few months after I left the place - ANON4-1791-2,168.326

At Bois le Duc I know no curiosities worthy your attention ;
ANON4-1791-2,168.327

it is an ill-built , poor-looking town , ANON4-1791-2,168.328

and being no thoroughfare , must be in general very dull -
ANON4-1791-2,168.329

I went down to look at the Bason for the Shipping , which is indeed no
despicable one , though the vessels are but small ; ANON4-1791-2,168.330

they carry , however , merchandize of different kinds to all the ports
of Holland - ANON4-1791-2,168.331

There is a vessel constantly sails three times a week to Amsterdam ,
Rotterdam , and the Hague - ANON4-1791-2,168.332

However partial I may be to water carriage ; yet it is only when that
conveyance is certain , and the time of being on board limited , which
is always the case when you go by the canals , ANON4-1791-2,168.333

yet I like not to trust myself to the uncertainty , <paren> which to me
is worse than the inclemency <$$paren> with respect <P_169> to time of
the winds and waves ; ANON4-1791-2,169.334

and therefore I the rather chose to go in the most wretched land
carriage , which human ingenuity <paren> or more properly human
stupidity <$$paren> could devise - ANON4-1791-2,169.335

They call the machine a post-waggon , ANON4-1791-2,169.336

and if jolting and shaking are esteemed peculiar good qualities in a
waggon , I know not any thing which has greater pretensions to the title
- ANON4-1791-2,169.337

Had the weather been at the freezing point , I am well convinced no one
who travelled in such equipage would feel the smallest inconvenience
from cold - ANON4-1791-2,169.338

they resemble very much the Newmarket rabbit caravans ,
ANON4-1791-2,169.339

and when I have said this , I pay the post-waggons of Bois le Duc a very
high compliment - ANON4-1791-2,169.340

I did not mean in this description to include all the post-waggons of
Holland , ANON4-1791-2,169.341

for I have really seen some built with very great taste , and hung on a
light and easy principle - ANON4-1791-2,169.342

I must in justice however to the carriages of <P_170> Bois le Duc ,
acknowledge the cause of my bad conveyance , which was the grand fait of
the town , this being an amusement more followed after than any other in
Holland ; ANON4-1791-2,170.343

the young Damons had hired all the better sort of carriages for their
Phillis's - ANON4-1791-2,170.344

Bad as was my conveyance , I was glad to put up with it , and contented
to pay seventeen gilders for it - ANON4-1791-2,170.345

I have entirely forgot the sign of the inn I stopt at ,
ANON4-1791-2,170.346

it seemed not a very good one ; ANON4-1791-2,170.347

yet , as we only stayed to breakfast , it did not much signify what sort
of an inn it was - ANON4-1791-2,170.348

The road from Bois le Duc to Utrecht is all through a cross country ,
and sometimes <paren> even in the summer <$$paren> impassable -
ANON4-1791-2,170.349

You must think you have a good coachman , and remarkable good horses ,
if you go as fast as three miles an hour - ANON4-1791-2,170.350

you cross the Maese and Rhine several times ; ANON4-1791-2,170.351

each passenger pays two sols , ANON4-1791-2,170.352

the carriage and horses are paid for by the coachman -
ANON4-1791-2,170.353

<P_171>

You are ferryed by means of ropes fixed to stakes on each side of the
river , which run by means of pullies - ANON4-1791-2,171.355

The only place you meet with in your way is <heading> Bommel ,
<$$heading> Which is about nine miles from Bois le Duc -
ANON4-1791-2,171.356

It is the capital of the island of that name , situated on the Maese ,
ANON4-1791-2,171.357

and is in the confines of Brabant - ANON4-1791-2,171.358

This place was besieged towards the close of the sixteenth century by
the Spaniards - ANON4-1791-2,171.359

The Dutch , however , contrived to throw succours into it ,
ANON4-1791-2,171.360

and the army of the States coming to its relief , obliged the Spaniards
to relinquish their undertaking - ANON4-1791-2,171.361

Bommel has , on account of its important situation , been always well
garrisoned , and the fortifications kept up at no small expence to the
States - ANON4-1791-2,171.362

<P_172>

it had five_hundred regular troops in it , under the command of the
Prince of Hesse Darmstadt {TEXT:D'Armstadt} , who is Governor of the
Island - ANON4-1791-2,172.364

It is as neat a town as ever I saw , and not unpleasantly situated -
ANON4-1791-2,172.365

It is the residence of several merchants and Dutch gentlemen of middling
fortunes , who retire here to enjoy the <font> otium cum dignitate
<$$font> at a moderate expence - ANON4-1791-2,172.366

You pay four sols each passenger for liberty to pass through this town -
a kind of turnpike on the human race , which is demanded of you as you
go out of the gates - ANON4-1791-2,172.367

We were detained so long here , from the owner of the ferry-boat not
being to be met with , that we found it impossible to reach Utrecht that
night - ANON4-1791-2,172.368

After going therefore not more than a couple of leagues from Bommel , we
took up our residence for that night at a small village , called
Geldermalsen - ANON4-1791-2,172.369

a most miserable night's lodging it was ; ANON4-1791-2,172.370

few hedge ale-house in England have <P_173> such very bad accommodations
, ANON4-1791-2,173.371

and what added to the unpleasantness , neither host , hostess , coachman
, or any person in the house spoke any other language but Low_Dutch ,
which was next to speaking no language at all - ANON4-1791-2,173.372

I would recommend to all , who purpose travelling this road , to stay
all night at Bois le Duc , and set out from thence by four o'clock in
the morning - ANON4-1791-2,173.373

By this means they will avoid every inconvenience , and reach Utrecht
the same night - ANON4-1791-2,173.374

From Geldermalsen , after you have gone two or three miles , the road
mends much , ANON4-1791-2,173.375

- yet all the way from Bois le Duc , the country is miserably poor -
ANON4-1791-2,173.376

On each side the traveller beholds large swampy meadows , almost
constantly covered with water - ANON4-1791-2,173.377

his journey is on a sandy , heavy road , rendered doubly fatiguing by
the immense quantity of rain that fell last autumn -
ANON4-1791-2,173.378

The country is very thinly populated , ANON4-1791-2,173.379

and the <P_174> people you do see have all the marks of extreme poverty
and wretchedness - ANON4-1791-2,174.380

This , to an Englishman accustomed to see in his own country rich ,
cultivated corn fields , with dry , beautiful pastures , is wretched
beyond description . ANON4-1791-2,174.381

<heading>

Utrecht <$$heading> Is rather prettily situated , ANON4-1791-2,174.383

and the entrance to it looks chearful - ANON4-1791-2,174.384

the face of the country mends in every respect the nearer you get to
this city - ANON4-1791-2,174.385

This is the capital of the province of the same name ,
ANON4-1791-2,174.386

and stands pleasantly situated on the Northern branch of the Rhine -
ANON4-1791-2,174.387

it is the see of a Bishop , ANON4-1791-2,174.388

and has a most capital university in it ; by some preferred to that of
Leyden - ANON4-1791-2,174.389

Utrecht was the first province which resisted the collection of the tax
on the subjects of his <P_175> master in the Netherlands in 1672 , which
gave rise to the revolt of the Low_Countries - ANON4-1791-2,175.390

The resolute conduct pursued by the rulers in this city and province ,
in opposing the levy of the tenth penny , may with great justice be said
to be the original cause of the independency of the United Provinces ;
ANON4-1791-2,175.391

for as the other States had only agreed to the levy of this tax , on
condition that all the provinces agreed to it , so this resistance , on
the part of Utrecht , annulled immediately the obligation -
ANON4-1791-2,175.392

To the famous treaty of alliance , which was concluded between the
provinces of Flanders , Friezland , Holland , Guelderland , Zealand ,
and Brabant , some years after the revolt , do the Dutch owe the
foundation of their now flourishing and powerful republic ;
ANON4-1791-2,175.393

and this treaty of union has ever been considered by them , as
containing the fundamental principles of their present constitution -
ANON4-1791-2,175.394

In latter times <P_176> Utrecht has supported its consequence by the
famous treaty concluded here in 1713 . ANON4-1791-2,176.395

The inhabitants of this province have been always famous for the
turbulence and restlessness of their dispositions , and for a rooted
aversion to the Stadtholder - ANON4-1791-2,176.396

Faction has been , for several months past , higher here than in any of
the provinces - The Prince of Orange <paren> for what cause I know not
<$$paren> held in the greatest detestation and contempt at Utrecht , and
every thing done to thwart his measures , without considering whether
they tend to promote the public good , or not - ANON4-1791-2,176.397

and their inveteracy is not confined to the Prince alone ,
ANON4-1791-2,176.398

but extends even to his partizans - ANON4-1791-2,176.399

A clergyman , a little previous to my going to Utrecht , having the
imprudence to mix politicks and religion together in his sermon , and to
enforce from the pulpit a proper submission and respect to the
Stadholder , was driven <P_177> from his church , ANON4-1791-2,177.400

and had nearly paid his life as a forfeiture to his rashness and folly -
ANON4-1791-2,177.401

And , as in so large a city , it is impossible an union of sentiment can
exist amongst the different ranks of men in political affairs , so the
weaker part have been obliged <paren> as is in general the case
<$$paren> to yield to the stronger ; ANON4-1791-2,177.402

and though disapproving the violent measures of their opponents are ,
under the necessity of suffering their discontents to remain hidden ,
ready to burst forth on some future occasion , when it may be their turn
to boast a superiority in point of numbers , and consequently in power .
ANON4-1791-2,177.403

A merchant of Utrecht , not more than a fortnight before my arrival ,
having delivered his sentiments in favour of the Stadtholder , with
rather too much warmth , and too little reserve , was marked out
immediately by the opposite party as an object of revenge -
ANON4-1791-2,177.404

They combined together to ruin him , ANON4-1791-2,177.405

and <P_178> by underselling him in his trade , &c. &c. so far
succeeded as to drive him from the city - ANON4-1791-2,178.406

It seems to me at present , that the resolute tone in which several of
the powers of Europe , especially the late King of Prussia , have spoke
{COM:sic} their sentiment to their High Mightinesses against the
impropriety and disrespectfulness {TEXT:disrepectfulness} of their
conduct to the Prince of Orange , has had in some measure the desired
effect , ANON4-1791-2,178.407

and will at last induce them to permit him the exercise of those rights
, and of that proper authority and power , always attached to the office
of Stadtholder , and which the moderation and prudence of the present
Stadtholder's conduct has certainly never justly forfeited -
ANON4-1791-2,178.408

Utrecht is a very large populous city , ANON4-1791-2,178.409

and has some very fine churches in it , though <paren> after coming out
of a Roman_Catholick country <$$paren> they appear at a very great
disadvantage - ANON4-1791-2,178.410

Very few good paintings are ever <P_179> to be seen within the churches
of Protestants - ANON4-1791-2,179.411

The church of St. Martin , at Utrecht , is an elegant building ,
ANON4-1791-2,179.412

the tower of it is three_hundred_and_sixty feet high -
ANON4-1791-2,179.413

from the top you may very plainly see Amsterdam , and they tell you
fourteen more considerable cities or towns - ANON4-1791-2,179.414

The day was , however , considerably too cloudy to see them when I was
there - ANON4-1791-2,179.415

The streets are built very regular , ANON4-1791-2,179.416

and some very handsome private edifices stand in them -
ANON4-1791-2,179.417

The Mall is a very charming walk , and of a Sunday , or an holiday ,
crowded immensely with the Bourgeois and their wives -
ANON4-1791-2,179.418

There is a very noble prison here , a rasp-house , and spin-house , the
same as at Amsterdam - ANON4-1791-2,179.419

It is observed , that there are fewer executions in Utrecht than in any
other province of Holland , ANON4-1791-2,179.420

and it is a great number of years since an execution has been here ;
ANON4-1791-2,179.421

there are also fewer debtors , and convicts of every <P_180> kind ;
ANON4-1791-2,180.422

I know not to what cause this can be attributed - ANON4-1791-2,180.423

The inhabitants of the Province boast much of this circumstance -
ANON4-1791-2,180.424

I think however , they are more indebted to good fortune , than to any
other cause - ANON4-1791-2,180.425

From Utrecht to Amsterdam , you may go all the way by water ,
ANON4-1791-2,180.426

and it is so delightful a ride by the canal , that most travellers , I
am convinced , would prefer that mode of conveyance to any other -
ANON4-1791-2,180.427

indeed very few people in Holland travel any other way than by water -
ANON4-1791-2,180.428

There is a track-scoot sails every day , or more properly several times
in a day - ANON4-1791-2,180.429

I would advise those who go by it , and who wish to be at all
comfortable , to take the small cabin to themselves ,
ANON4-1791-2,180.430

otherwise they will be crammed into a place , where should it be as bad
weather as when I was conveyed by it , they will be almost stifled ; the
only inlets for air being in that case closed - ANON4-1791-2,180.431

The cabin you are put in , if you go <P_181> as a common passenger , a
tall man can scarce sit upright in , much less stand -
ANON4-1791-2,181.432

thirty or forty people are stowed together in it as close as possible ,
and those of every description and size - ANON4-1791-2,181.433

Merchants , Jews , sailors , women , and children , promiscuously crowd
this wretched stowage - ANON4-1791-2,181.434

the men , for the most part , smoke all the way - ANON4-1791-2,181.435

This mode of travelling can@ @not therefore be very pleasant to an
Englishman - ANON4-1791-2,181.436

The small cabin , at the stern of the barge , only holds four people ,
ANON4-1791-2,181.437

it is therefore necessary to bespeak it over night ,
ANON4-1791-2,181.438

else you will hardly be able to procure it - ANON4-1791-2,181.439

You pay forty-two sols for it , which is at the rate of six sols an hour
- ANON4-1791-2,181.440

For a place in the common cabin you pay only two sols an hour
ANON4-1791-2,181.441

<paren> they reckon here by hours , not miles <$$paren> -
ANON4-1791-2,181.442

They travel here much faster than in Flanders , ANON4-1791-2,181.443

and are scarce seven hours going from Utrecht to Amsterdam -
ANON4-1791-2,181.444

All the way you see on each <P_182> side of you large handsome houses ,
with most delightful gardens , which come quite down to the water's edge
, and are laid out with a great deal of taste and elegance -
ANON4-1791-2,182.445

These belong most of them to the rich Bourgeois of Amsterdam and Utrecht
, who retire here <paren> as our English cits do to the villages in the
environs of the metropolis <$$paren> from the hurry and bustle of
business , to enjoy a Saturday and Sunday's rest , free from care and
interruption - ANON4-1791-2,182.446

In this little ride you have a specimen <paren> and no unsuccessful one
<$$paren> of the efforts of art to supplant nature -
ANON4-1791-2,182.447

In a country unusually swampy and marshy , in the midst of meadows
covered with water , and scarcely a corn field to be seen , yet on the
banks of the river , in this wretched situation by description , and
still more wretched in reality , you see gardens laid out in a stile of
elegance , which would do no discredit to the most fertile spot in the
globe <P_183> - ANON4-1791-2,183.448

The water is all drained off by sluices from the houses ,
ANON4-1791-2,183.449

and I am informed they are all perfectly dry - ANON4-1791-2,183.450

The moment you reach the place of landing at Amsterdam , swarms of
porters , most of them Jews , meet you with out-stretched arms , ready
to grasp your baggage - ANON4-1791-2,183.451

They are all , for the most part , a set of iniquitous villains -
ANON4-1791-2,183.452

The best thing a stranger can do , is to fix his eye upon one who is not
a Jew , or <paren> if he is a sufficient good physiognomist <$$paren>
one who has the least spark of honesty written on his countenance -
ANON4-1791-2,183.453

this man will fetch you a wheelbarrow , ANON4-1791-2,183.454

and , in the mean time , I would advise , that yourself or servants
watch narrowly your baggage , to take care these light_fingered
gentlemen do not ease you of part of it - ANON4-1791-2,183.455

When all your things are put into the wheelbarrow , make your porter
drive them before you to the hotel you mean to reside <P_184> at -
ANON4-1791-2,184.456

Give him for his trouble one , two , or three gilders , according to the
distance ; ANON4-1791-2,184.457

the landlord will , however , tell you his proper fare -
ANON4-1791-2,184.458

I went to the White Hart , in Warmoes-street , which is in a very good
part of the town , and is a good hotel , kept by one Lewis , who was
formerly in our navy , ANON4-1791-2,184.459

he accommodates you well and reasonably . ANON4-1791-2,184.460

On entering <heading> Amsterdam <$$heading> You are immediately stricken
with the extreme neatness and grandeur of the city -
ANON4-1791-2,184.461

Trade here wears a most flourishing , chearful aspect ,
ANON4-1791-2,184.462

nor do you see one idle fellow in the streets - ANON4-1791-2,184.463

This city is situated on the river Amstel , ANON4-1791-2,184.464

and is esteemed the greatest port in the world , ANON4-1791-2,184.465

yet the entrance to it is so very dangerous , and attended with such
<P_185> disadvantages , that it is very inconvenient , as well as
hazardous , for loaded ships , and men of war , to enter it -
ANON4-1791-2,185.466

The foundations of this city are laid on large piles of wood , driven
into the morass , the Stadthouse alone having near 14,000 to support it
- ANON4-1791-2,185.467

This city , in the fourteenth century , was only a little insignificant
fishing town ; ANON4-1791-2,185.468

since that time it has risen to the state in which it is at present - a
state of magnificence , grandeur , and riches , not to be surpassed ,
and scarcely to be equalled by any city in Europe - ANON4-1791-2,185.469

It has in several instances evinced the resources it possesses within
itself , independent of the other provinces - ANON4-1791-2,185.470

It was amongst the last cities which acceded to the confederacy of the
States , ANON4-1791-2,185.471

nor did it shake off its allegiance to Spain till the year 1578 , six
years after the first breaking out of the disturbances in the
Low_Countries - ANON4-1791-2,185.472

Surrounded at this time by enemies <P_186> on all sides , deprived of
its inland trade by the States , who forbade {TEXT:forbad} any
communication with them , while under the Spanish yoke , it was obliged
<paren> though with reluctance <$$paren> to accede to the confederacy ,
and submit to the government of the States - ANON4-1791-2,186.473

In the year 1672 , Louis XIVth invaded the United Provinces ,
ANON4-1791-2,186.474

and such brilliant success at first attended his arms , that , in the
course of a few weeks , he gained possession of the provinces of
Gueldres , Utrecht , and Overryssel , and had he not wasted his time at
Utrecht in vain pomp and useless parade , all the United Provinces would
undoubtedly have fallen under the dominion of France -
ANON4-1791-2,186.475

At this period Amsterdam alone retained the smallest degree of courage
or resolution - ANON4-1791-2,186.476

The rapid success which had attended the arms of the French Monarch had
struck such a panic into the other provinces , as deprived them of all
ability to make any <P_187> exertions for the common good -
ANON4-1791-2,187.477

The conduct of Amsterdam raised them from the stupor into which they
were fallen - ANON4-1791-2,187.478

That city alone made those exertions which astonished all Europe -
ANON4-1791-2,187.479

The Magistrates appointed an extraordinary guard of the Bourgeois -
ANON4-1791-2,187.480

the populace were kept under subjection by the influence of money -
ANON4-1791-2,187.481

ships were stationed to guard the coast , and prevent supplies from
coming to the French army - ANON4-1791-2,187.482

the greatest part of the adjacent country was also laid under water -
ANON4-1791-2,187.483

These precautions <paren> intelligence of which was constantly
transmitted to the French Monarch <$$paren> induced him to give up the
attempt of any further conquest that campaign , ANON4-1791-2,187.484

and he returned , crowned with laurels , to Paris , amidst the
congratulations and rejoicings of his subjects , who , in viewing the
glory he had acquired from his rapid successes , forgot the price at
which they had been purchased , <P_188> as well as the little advantage
they were likely to derive from it - ANON4-1791-2,188.485

Not more than three months after his return , the Provinces were
recovered by the States , ANON4-1791-2,188.486

and their old masters resumed the government . ANON4-1791-2,188.487

- I shall now proceed to give you an account of the public buildings ,
curiosities , &c. in this place ; ANON4-1791-2,188.488

and as the government of the different cities in Holland vary {COM:sic}
very little , I shall detain you just long enough to give you some idea
of the internal policy of Amsterdam - ANON4-1791-2,188.489

I shall begin with the public buildings &c. ANON4-1791-2,188.490

and shall premise my account by informing you , that after you have been
in the Netherlands , and seen the churches of the Roman_Catholicks , you
will find none here which claim your attention . ANON4-1791-2,188.491

The Town-house is the first building I shall recommend to your notice -
ANON4-1791-2,188.492

It was <P_189> erected in the year 1648 , ANON4-1791-2,189.493

and does very great honour to the different artists , who have been
employed in the design and execution of the building , both within and
without - ANON4-1791-2,189.494

In the architecture of this edifice , you find three orders , the Ionick
, Roman , and Corinthian , all so happily blended together , as to shew
the distinct beauties of each - ANON4-1791-2,189.495

The different apartments , halls , &c. are extremely well proportioned
, ANON4-1791-2,189.496

and through the <font> tout ensemble <$$font> reigns an elegance and
just proportion , which strikes the beholder at first sight -
ANON4-1791-2,189.497

The hall is about one_hundred_and_sixteen feet high , more than
two_hundred_and_eighty long , and between two_hundred_and_fifty and
two_hundred_and_sixty in breadth , so that it is in fact almost square -
ANON4-1791-2,189.498

To take up your time with giving you an exact representation of the
rooms , statues , busts , paintings , &c. would only be putting your
patience to a severe trial , ANON4-1791-2,189.499

nor <P_190> could be interesting to any but those who have been on the
spot , and who may buy an antient English translation of the curiosities
, &c. to be seen at the Townhouse , for something less than sixpence ,
of an old woman who sits at the bottom of the stairs -
ANON4-1791-2,190.500

I shall , however , venture to mention some , amongst the many things ,
to be seen within this building , which particularly attracted my
attention , and will <paren> I doubt not <$$paren> most of those who
visit Amsterdam - ANON4-1791-2,190.501

In the first place I would recommend to your notice in the <font> Salle
de Haute Justice <$$font> <paren> for your attendant speaks French , and
therefore I shall use this language in giving you the names of the
different apartments <$$paren> three pieces of most beautiful white
marble <font> en bas relief <$$font> , between eight and nine feet high
, and at least six broad - ANON4-1791-2,190.502

These contain antient histories as of King Solomon deciding the famous
dispute between the two <P_191> harlots - Seleucus , lawgiver of Locria
, loseing his eye to preserve one of his son , condemned to lose both ,
being convicted of adultery - Brutus witnessing the death of his sons ,
who suffered as traitors to their country ; ANON4-1791-2,191.503

all these are of the most beautiful marble , and strongly expressive of
the different representations they are meant to convey ,
ANON4-1791-2,191.504

and are the work of that very eminent master , Artus Quellin , of
Antwerp - ANON4-1791-2,191.505

The ceiling in the <font> Salle de Bourgeois <$$font> has been done
after the designs of John Goeree , the painting executed by Hoogzaat ,
and the architecture by Gerard Rademaker - ANON4-1791-2,191.506

it deserves your notice very much - though to particularize the several
beauties of it , would be only doing it a very great injustice , as well
as in part anticipating the pleasure you will receive from viewing it -
ANON4-1791-2,191.507

In the chamber <font> des Bourgumaitres <$$font> is a most beautiful
picture , which represents the son of <P_192> Fabius Maximus , who ,
during his consulship , obliged his father to alight from his horse when
he approached him - ANON4-1791-2,192.508

this is the work of John Lievenz , ANON4-1791-2,192.509

and is executed wonderfully well - ANON4-1791-2,192.510

You see not far from it a picture of Ferdinand de Bols - the subject of
which is the fortitude and patriotism of Fabricius , sent Ambassador by
the Romans to Pyrrhus , whom neither threats , nor flattering promises ,
could entice from his allegiance to this country - ANON4-1791-2,192.511

There is also here a picture of Joesph and his brethren , two or three
beautiful portraits of Mary de Medicis , and some others not very
capital - ANON4-1791-2,192.512

in the chamber <font> Du Conseil <$$font> is an excellent picture by
Flink , of Solomon asking wisdom of the Almighty ; and another ,
representing Moses chusing some of the elders , as judges in common
affairs - ANON4-1791-2,192.513

this is the work of John Brankhort - ANON4-1791-2,192.514

In the hall of <font> Beaux Arts , <$$font> which is the marine office ,
you see a number <P_193> of precious pieces of painting and sculpture ,
some of which belong to the Stadthouse , and some to the different
artists residing in the city , who wish to sell them , and therefore
place them there for the inspection of strangers - ANON4-1791-2,193.515

in the <font> Schepen's {COM:see_errata} Chamber <$$font> are several
very good pictures , amongst which there is one of Moses giving the law
to the Israelites ; another representing the children of Israel in the
desert {TEXT:desart} , who , in the absence of Moses , worship the
golden calf ; ANON4-1791-2,193.516

the colours of these are in the highest preservation imaginable ,
ANON4-1791-2,193.517

and will , I am sure , particularly please you - ANON4-1791-2,193.518

In the <font> Secr√©taire <$$font> you are shewn the picture of Mary de
Medicis , and of Charles Vth , both of which are esteemed very excellent
paintings - ANON4-1791-2,193.519

The ceiling {TEXT:cieling} in the Treasury <font> Ordinaire <$$font>
particularly merits your attention , ANON4-1791-2,193.520

it is remarkably elegant , ANON4-1791-2,193.521

and boasts the fertile invention of Holstein - ANON4-1791-2,193.522

The statues in the cabinet <font> Des <P_194> Bourgue Maitres <$$font>
are well worthy the notice of all those who are curious in sculpture -
ANON4-1791-2,194.523

The eight which represent Venus , Diana , Cybele , Saturn , Jupiter ,
Mars , Mercury , and Apollo , are the finest and most beautiful white
marble , as large as life , the work of the very best masters -
ANON4-1791-2,194.524

At the bottom of the gallery , between the pillars , you see several
beautiful pictures , descriptive of the wars between the antient
Batavians and Romans , ANON4-1791-2,194.525

one represents the consultation between Claudius Civilis , and the
Chiefs of the Batavians , to shake off the Roman yoke -
ANON4-1791-2,194.526

the piece is executed by Ovens - ANON4-1791-2,194.527

Another describes the peace concluded between the Batavians and Romans ,
ANON4-1791-2,194.528

is esteemed amongst the <font> chef_d'oeuvres <$$font> of that excellent
artist , Jordaans - ANON4-1791-2,194.529

There are two or three other pictures executed by the same master , one
representing Samson slaying the Philistines with the jaw-bone of an ass
; the other , <P_195> David in the combat with Goliah {COM:sic} -
ANON4-1791-2,195.530

In the several rooms there are different paintings by Vandyke , Rubens ,
Vander Hulst , and other eminent artists , yet not a great number , in
my opinion , which would gratify your curiosity - ANON4-1791-2,195.531

It is worth your while to go up to the top of the Townhouse , from which
you have the most extensive and pleasing view over the whole city and
part of the adjacent country - ANON4-1791-2,195.532

To the woman who shews you the Stadthouse , it is customary to give a
gilder ; and two , if the company are numerous - ANON4-1791-2,195.533

On the ground-floor of the Stadthouse is the prison for malefactors ,
which , on account of the neatness of the wards , and the regularity and
good order that are preserved , is well worth your attention -
ANON4-1791-2,195.534

There was but one criminal under confinement when I was there -
ANON4-1791-2,195.535

you are shewn the horrid instruments of torture , and which , I much
fear , are often used to <P_196> extort proof , when it is not other
wise to be obtained - ANON4-1791-2,196.536

On the sight of these instruments , an Englishman reflects with
heart-felt satisfaction on the inestimable blessing <paren> which amidst
all the disadvantages and burthen of taxes <$$paren> he enjoys in the so
truly boasted liberty of his own country , where he knows his life ,
property , and every thing valuable to him , are protected by laws ,
agreed to by the majority of his fellow countrymen , to which even the
highest stations are amenable . ANON4-1791-2,196.537

- Tried by his own peers , he feels conscious of being acquitted , if
innocent ; and punished , if guilty - ANON4-1791-2,196.538

he fears no torture , no violence , to produce a confession of imaginary
guilt , when none real exists - ANON4-1791-2,196.539

I regard it as one of the most extraordinary circumstances in the civil
government of the United Provinces , that a criminal can@ @not be
capitally convicted by the concurrent testimony of a_thousand witnesses
, <P_197> except he himself confesses the crime laid to his charge ,
which , if he will not voluntarily do , he is immediately put to the
rack , where it is very seldom <paren> however innocent he may be
<$$paren> that he possesses fortitude sufficient to withstand the
excruciating pain of this severe punishment for a supposed offence -
ANON4-1791-2,197.540

If he confesses his crime , the deposition is taken down ,
ANON4-1791-2,197.541

and he is released from the torture - ANON4-1791-2,197.542

Two surgeons and physicians stand by the whole time <paren> as your
conductor informs you <$$paren> to see justice done him -
ANON4-1791-2,197.543

When his life is in danger , they order him to be taken off -
ANON4-1791-2,197.544

To shew , however , the futility of the torture , there has been an
instance lately here , of a malefactor , who resisted all the
excruciating pains of the rack , and of every other torture , which the
invention of the most cruel genius could devise - ANON4-1791-2,197.545

Though undoubtedly guilty of the crime laid to his charge , as the proof
<P_198> against him amounted to a certainty , yet they could not make
him confess his guilt - ANON4-1791-2,198.546

Justice , however , forgot herself here , ANON4-1791-2,198.547

and the civil power took a stride , which , in the most tyrannical
government , it would scarcely have dared to do ; ANON4-1791-2,198.548

though , according to the fundamental maxims , <paren> as I have before
related <$$paren> punishment can only follow confession ; yet this poor
wretch was executed , under pretence that he was insolent to the
magistrates , which certainly was an offence , which could not in
justice be punished more than by confinement , or by a slight
chastisement - ANON4-1791-2,198.549

Who is there amongst the warmest advocates for despotism and tyranny ,
that can reconcile this breach of justice with any system of policy ?
ANON4-1791-2,198.550

