<BEGIN_anon3-1772-2>

<P_7,3>

<heading>

British Biography . ANON3-1772-2,7,3.4

The Life of John Locke . ANON3-1772-2,7,3.5

<$$heading>

This great Philosopher was born at Wrington in Somersetshire , on the
29th of August , 1632 . ANON3-1772-2,7,3.7

His father who had been bred to the law , was possessed of a competent
estate , though he acted as steward or court-keeper to Colonel Alexander
Popham ; ANON3-1772-2,7,3.8

and upon the breaking out of the civil war , he became a captain in the
Parliament service . ANON3-1772-2,7,3.9

The celebrated M. Le {TEXT:Le.} Clerc , who was an intimate friend of
our authors , and who published some account of his life in his <font>
Bibliotheque Choisie , <$$font> observes , that ' Mr. Locke's father
took great care of his education , and carried himself towards him in
such a manner as his son hath often commended : ANON3-1772-2,7,3.10

he was severe to him while a child , ANON3-1772-2,7,3.11

and kept him at a very great distance ; ANON3-1772-2,7,3.12

but as he grew up he was more free and familiar with him ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,3.13

and when he was come to years of discretion , they lived together rather
as two friends , than as two persons , one of whom might justly claim
respect from the other ; insomuch that <paren> as Mr. Locke has said
<$$paren> his father excused himself to him for having beaten him once
in his childhood , rather in anger than because he deserved it . '
ANON3-1772-2,7,3.14

He was educated at Westminster-school , where he continued till the year
1651 , when he was removed to Christ's Church College
{TEXT:church_college} in Oxford . ANON3-1772-2,7,3.15

And the ingenious foreign writer whom we have just quoted {TEXT:quoted-}
observes , that Mr. Tyrrel , grandson to the famous archbishop <P_7,4>
' Usher , sufficiently known by his works , remembers that Mr. Locke
was then looked upon as the most ingenious young man in the college . '
ANON3-1772-2,7,4.16

But although <paren> proceeds M. le Clerc <$$paren> ' Mr. Locke had
gained such a reputation in the university , he has been often heard to
say , of the first years of his being there , that he found so little
satisfaction in the method that was prescribed them for their studies ,
that he wished his father had never sent him to Oxford .
ANON3-1772-2,7,4.17

And when he found that what he <P_7,5> had learnt there was of little
use to him , to enlighten and enlarge his mind , or to make him more
exact in his reasonings , he fancied it was because his genius was not
suited to those studies . ANON3-1772-2,7,5.18

I myself have heard him complain of the method he took in his studies at
first , in a discourse which I had with him one day on that subject ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,5.19

and when I told him that I had a Cartesian professor for my tutor , a
man of a clear head , he said he was not so happy ; <paren> though it is
well known that he was no Cartesian <$$paren> and that he lost a great
deal of time when he first applied himself to study , because the only
Philosophy then known at Oxford was the Peripatetic , perplexed with
obscure terms , and stuffed with useless questions . '
ANON3-1772-2,7,5.20

Le Clerc also says , that ' the works of Descartes were the first books
that brought Mr. Locke <paren> as he himself told me <$$paren> to
relish the study of philosophy : ANON3-1772-2,7,5.21

for though he did not assent to the truth of all his notions , he found
that he wrote with great clearness , which made him think that it was
the fault of the authors , rather than his own , that he had not
understood some other philosophical books . ' ANON3-1772-2,7,5.22

When Mr. Locke had taken both the degrees in arts , he entered on the
physic line , ANON3-1772-2,7,5.23

and went through the usual courses preparatory to the practice ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,5.24

and it is said that he got some business in that profession at Oxford .
ANON3-1772-2,7,5.25

But in 1664 , he left England , ANON3-1772-2,7,5.26

and went into Germany as secretary to Sir William Swan , who was Envoy
from King Charles II. to the Elector of Brandenburgh , and some other
German princes . ANON3-1772-2,7,5.27

But in less than a year he returned , ANON3-1772-2,7,5.28

and resumed his studies at the university of Oxford ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,5.29

and , among other things , he applied himself to natural philosophy .
ANON3-1772-2,7,5.30

In 1666 , an accident brought him acquainted with Lord Ashley ,
afterwards Earl of Shaftesbury . ANON3-1772-2,7,5.31

That nobleman being advised to drink the mineral waters at Astrop , for
an abscess in his breast , wrote to Dr. Thomas , a physician at Oxford
, to procure a quantity of those waters to be ready at his coming there
. ANON3-1772-2,7,5.32

But Thomas being called away by other business , easily prevailed with
his friend Mr. Locke to undertake the affair ; who happening to employ
a person that failed him , was obliged to wait upon his lordship on his
arrival , to excuse the disappointment . ANON3-1772-2,7,5.33

Lord Ashley received him with great politeness , ANON3-1772-2,7,5.34

and was satisfied with his apology ; ANON3-1772-2,7,5.35

and being much pleased with his conversation , <P_7,6> detained him to
supper , ANON3-1772-2,7,6.36

and engaged him to dinner the next day , and even to drink the waters ,
which Mr. Locke had expressed some intention of doing , that he might
have the more of his company . ANON3-1772-2,7,6.37

He afterwards invited him to his house , ANON3-1772-2,7,6.38

and prevailed on him to take up his residence with him ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,6.39

and he followed his advice in opening the abscess in his breast , which
saved his life , though it never closed . ANON3-1772-2,7,6.40

That cure gave his lordship a great opinion of Mr. Locke's skill in
physic ; ANON3-1772-2,7,6.41

yet upon a further acquaintance with him , he regarded this as the least
of his qualifications . ANON3-1772-2,7,6.42

He advised him to turn his thoughts another way , ANON3-1772-2,7,6.43

and would not suffer him to practise physic out of his house except
among some of his particular friends . ANON3-1772-2,7,6.44

He urged him to apply himself to the study of state affairs , and
political subjects , both ecclesiastical and civil : ANON3-1772-2,7,6.45

and Mr. Locke succeeded so well in these studies , that his lordship
began to consult him on all occasions of that nature .
ANON3-1772-2,7,6.46

He also introduced him into the acquaintance of the Duke of Buckingham ,
the Earl of Halifax , and some other of the most eminent persons of that
age . ANON3-1772-2,7,6.47

M. Le Clerc relates a story of Mr. Locke's behaviour , when he was
once in company with some of these noblemen , which shews how much
averse he was to the ordinary methods of spending , or rather trifling
away time . ANON3-1772-2,7,6.48

Three or four of these lords , says he , having met at Lord Ashley's ,
rather for conversation than business , after some compliments very
little conversation had passed when a servant brought in the cards .
ANON3-1772-2,7,6.49

Mr. Locke looked on for some time while they were at play ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,6.50

and then taking his pocket book , began to write with great attention .
ANON3-1772-2,7,6.51

One of them observing this , asked him what he was writing .
ANON3-1772-2,7,6.52

" My lord <paren> said he <$$paren> I am endeavouring to profit , as far
as I am capable , in your company ; ANON3-1772-2,7,6.53

for having waited with impatience for the honour of being in an assembly
of the greatest geniusses of the age , and having at length obtained
this good fortune , I thought I could not do better than write down your
conversation ; ANON3-1772-2,7,6.54

and indeed I have set down the substance of what has been said for this
hour or two . " ANON3-1772-2,7,6.55

He had no occasion to read much of this dialogue ; ANON3-1772-2,7,6.56

those noble persons saw the ridicule , ANON3-1772-2,7,6.57

and diverted themselves with improving the jest ; ANON3-1772-2,7,6.58

and presently quitting their play , entered into a conversation more
suitable to their characters , ANON3-1772-2,7,6.59

and spent the rest of the day in that manner . ANON3-1772-2,7,6.60

In 1668 , the Earl and Countess of Northumberland having resolved to
take a journey into France , they desired Mr. Locke to take one at
their company . ANON3-1772-2,7,6.61

He complied with this invitation , ANON3-1772-2,7,6.62

and staid in France with the Countess , whilst the Earl went to Rome .
ANON3-1772-2,7,6.63

But this nobleman dying at Turin soon after , his Lady returned again to
England , and Mr. Locke with her ; who continued afterwards to reside
with Lord Ashley . ANON3-1772-2,7,6.64

And when that Nobleman , in conjunction with some other lords , obtained
a grant of Carolina , Mr. Locke was employed to draw up the fundamental
constitutions of that province ; ANON3-1772-2,7,6.65

but the articles relative to <P_7,7> religion and public worship , being
drawn upon more liberal and enlarged principles of toleration , than was
agreeable to the sentiments of some of the narrow-minded clergy , they
expressed their dissatisfaction at them , ANON3-1772-2,7,7.66

and procured an additional article to be inserted . ANON3-1772-2,7,7.67

In 1672 , the Earl of Shaftesbury being raised to the office of Lord
Chancellor , appointed Mr. Locke secretary of the presentations ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,7.68

but he did not hold this place above a year , on account of the Earl's
being removed from the chancellorship . ANON3-1772-2,7,7.69

He was afterwards made secretary to the board of trade ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,7.70

but he did not enjoy this employment long , the commission being
dissolved in December , 1674 . ANON3-1772-2,7,7.71

In the mean time , he kept possession of his student's place at Oxford ,
whither he used frequently to resort , both for the conveniency of books
, and also on account of his health , the air of London not agreeing
with his constitution . ANON3-1772-2,7,7.72

In 1675 , he took the degree of Bachelor of Physic ; ANON3-1772-2,7,7.73

and it appears that he continued to prosecute this study , and kept up
an acquaintance with several of the faculty . ANON3-1772-2,7,7.74

And in what estimation he was held by some of the most eminent of them ,
we may judge from the honourable testimonial that was given of him by
the celebrated Dr. Sydenham ; who in a dedication prefixed to a medical
treatise , published in 1676 , expresses himself to this purpose : ' You
know likewise how much my method has been approved by a person who has
examined it to the bottom , and who is our common friend .
ANON3-1772-2,7,7.75

I mean Mr. John Locke , who , if we consider his genius , and
penetrating and exact judgment , or the strictness of his morals , has
scarce any superior , and few equals now living . ' ANON3-1772-2,7,7.76

In the summer of the year 1675 , Mr. Locke went over into France ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,7.77

and resided some time at Montpelier , being apprehensive of a
consumption . ANON3-1772-2,7,7.78

Here he became acquainted with Mr. Thomas Herbert , afterwards Earl of
Pembroke , to whom he communicated his design of writing his <font>
Essay on Human Understanding . <$$font> ANON3-1772-2,7,7.79

From Montpelier he went to Paris , where he contracted a friendship with
Mons. Justel and several other persons of eminent learning .
ANON3-1772-2,7,7.80

<P_7,8>

In 1679 , the Earl of Shaftesbury being again taken into favour at court
, and made president of a new council , sent to desire Mr. Locke to
return to England , which he accordingly did ; ANON3-1772-2,7,8.82

but his lordship being removed in less than half a year , had no
opportunity of serving him in that post . ANON3-1772-2,7,8.83

In 1682 , the Earl retiring to Holland , to avoid the effects of those
designs against his life which had been formed by the court , Mr. Locke
followed him thither ; ANON3-1772-2,7,8.84

and upon his lordship's death , which happened soon after , he did not
think it prudent to return home , his attachment to the Earl of
Shaftesbury having procured him some powerful enemies .
ANON3-1772-2,7,8.85

Mr. Locke had not been a year in Holland , when he was accused at the
English court of having written some tracts against the government ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,8.86

and though another person was afterwards discovered to be the author ,
yet being observed to join in company with several persons at the Hague
, who were not very well affected to the present management
{TEXT:magnagement} of public affairs in England , <paren> and which
indeed no man who was attached to a free , legal , and limited
government , could be <$$paren> this conduct was communicated by our
resident there to the Earl of Sunderland , then secretary of state .
ANON3-1772-2,7,8.87

His lordship acquainted the king with this intelligence ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,8.88

and thereupon received orders from his Majesty to write the following
letter to Bishop Fell , then also Dean of Christ-church .
ANON3-1772-2,7,8.89

' Whitehall , Nov. 6 , 1684 . ANON3-1772-2,7,8.90

- The King having been given to understand , that one Locke , who
belonged to the late Earl of Shaftesbury , and has , upon several
occasions , behaved himself <P_7,9> very factiously against the
government , is a student of Christ-church ; his majesty commands me to
signify to your lordship , that he would have him removed from being a
student ; and that , in order thereunto , your Lordship would let him
know the method of doing it , &c ' . ANON3-1772-2,7,9.91

To this the Bishop replied in the following terms , in a letter dated
November 8 . ANON3-1772-2,7,9.92

' Mr. Locke being a great friend of the late Earl of Shaftesbury , and
being suspected not to be well affected to the government , I have had
my eye over him for several years ; ANON3-1772-2,7,9.93

but he has always been so much upon his guard , that after several
strict enquiries I can confidently assure you , there is no person in
our college , how familiar soever he has been with him , that has heard
him say any thing against the government , or that any ways concerns it
. ANON3-1772-2,7,9.94

And though we have often designedly given him occasion in public and
private discourse to talk of the Earl of Shaftesbury , by speaking ill
of him , his party , and designs , yet we could never see , either by
his words or looks , that he thought himself at all concerned in the
matter : so that we believe there is not a man in the world so much
master of his tongue and passions as he is . ANON3-1772-2,7,9.95

He has a physic place here , which frees him from the exercise of the
college , and the obligation which others have to residence in it ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,9.96

and he is now abroad for want of health . ANON3-1772-2,7,9.97

But notwithstanding this , I have summoned him to return home , which is
done with this prospect , that if he come not back , he will be liable
to expulsion for contumacy ; ANON3-1772-2,7,9.98

and , if he does , he will be answerable to the law for that which he
shall be found to have done amiss . It being probable , that , though
he may have been thus cautious here , where he knew himself suspected ,
he has laid himself more open at London , where a general liberty of
speaking was used , and where the execrable designs against his majesty
and his government were managed and pursued . ANON3-1772-2,7,9.99

If he do@ @n't return by the first of January , which is the time
limited to him , I shall be enabled of course to proceed against him to
expulsion . ANON3-1772-2,7,9.100

But if this method seems not effectual or speedy enough , and his
Majesty , our founder and visitor , shall please to command his
immediate remove , upon the receipt thereof , directed to the Dean and
Chapter , it shall accordingly be executed by your Lordship's , &c. '
ANON3-1772-2,7,9.101

In answer to this , the following was received , enclosed in a letter
from Lord Sunderland , and addressed to the Dean and Chapter .
ANON3-1772-2,7,9.102

' Whereas we have received information of the factious and disloyal
behaviour of Locke , one of the students of that our college , we have
thought fit hereby to signify our will and <P_7,10> pleasure to you ,
that you forthwith remove him from his student's place , and deprive him
of all rights and advantages thereunto belonging ; for which this shall
be your warrant . ANON3-1772-2,7,10.103

And so we bid you heartily farewell . ANON3-1772-2,7,10.104

Given at our Court of Whitehall , the 11th of November , 1684 .
ANON3-1772-2,7,10.105

By His Majesty's Command , Sunderland . ' ANON3-1772-2,7,10.106

Bishop Fell was too ready to comply with the desires of the court , to
be disposed to raise any further obstacles on this occasion ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,10.107

and therefore on the 16th of the same month he returned the following
answer . ANON3-1772-2,7,10.108

' Right Honourable , I hold myself bound to signify to your Lordship ,
that his Majesty's command for the expulsion of Mr Locke from this
college is fully executed . ' ANON3-1772-2,7,10.109

Upon the accession of King James the Second , William Penn , the famous
Quaker , who had some interest at court , and who had been acquainted
with Mr Locke at the university , procured the promise of a pardon for
him ; ANON3-1772-2,7,10.110

but he declined the acceptance of that offer , alledging , " that he had
no occasion for a pardon , not having been guilty of any crime . "
ANON3-1772-2,7,10.111

However , in May , 1685 the English envoy at the Hague demanded him to
be delivered up by the States_General , upon suspicion of having been
concerned in the Duke of Monmouth@ @'s rebellion .
ANON3-1772-2,7,10.112

And though this suspicion was not only groundless , but without even a
shadow of probability , yet it obliged him to lie concealed near twelve
months , till it became sufficiently known that he had no hand in the
enterprize . ANON3-1772-2,7,10.113

Towards the latter end of the year 1686 , he appeared again in public ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,10.114

and , in the following year , he formed a weekly assembly at Amsterdam ,
with Limborch and Le Clerc , who were joined by some others , in the
design of holding conferences upon subjects of learning .
ANON3-1772-2,7,10.115

In 1689 , Mr. Locke printed in Holland , in Latin , his first " Letter
concerning Toleration . " ANON3-1772-2,7,10.116

This is a most excellent performance , ANON3-1772-2,7,10.117

and has always been held in great esteem by the best judges .
ANON3-1772-2,7,10.118

It was translated into Dutch and French the same year , <P_7,11> and
also printed in English . ANON3-1772-2,7,11.119

In the preface to the English edition , it is observed , that " our
government has not only been partial in matters of religion ; but those
also who have suffered under that partiality , and have therefore
endeavoured by their writings to vindicate their own rights and
liberties , have for the most part done it upon narrow principles ,
suited only to the interests of their own sects . ANON3-1772-2,7,11.120

- This narrowness of spirit on all sides has undoubtedly been the
principal occasion of our miseries and confusions .
ANON3-1772-2,7,11.121

But whatever has been the occasion , it is now high time to seek for a
thorough cure . ANON3-1772-2,7,11.122

We have need of more generous remedies than what have yet been made use
of in our distemper . ANON3-1772-2,7,11.123

- Absolute liberty , just and true liberty , equal and impartial liberty
, is the thing that we stand in need of . ANON3-1772-2,7,11.124

Now though this has indeed been much talked of , I doubt it has not been
much understood ; ANON3-1772-2,7,11.125

I am sure not at all practised , either by our governors towards the
people , in general , or by any dissenting parties of the people towards
one another . " ANON3-1772-2,7,11.126

Soon after the Revolution , Mr. Locke returned to England ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,11.127

and he afterwards put in a claim to his student's place at Christ-church
; ANON3-1772-2,7,11.128

but that society rejected his claim , pretending that the proceedings in
his deprivation were conformable to their statutes .
ANON3-1772-2,7,11.129

And an attempt is made in the <font> Biographia Britannica , <$$font> to
justify the proceedings against him ; ANON3-1772-2,7,11.130

but what is there alledged with this view , is very insufficient for the
purpose . ANON3-1772-2,7,11.131

As to its being said , that " he had given sufficient grounds for
suspicion of being obnoxious to the government , by assisting his patron
in some of his seditious libels ; " it is not only certain , that no
legal proof was ever made of this ; but also that there is no just
ground for the suggestion , that his flight out of the kingdom was such
as amounted to a legal implication of guilt . ANON3-1772-2,7,11.132

For at the time when he went to Holland , no charge whatever had been
brought against him ; ANON3-1772-2,7,11.133

nor could his going abroad be with any propriety considered as a crime .
ANON3-1772-2,7,11.134

It is said , indeed , that " the bare fact alone of going out of the
kingdom , without leave from the college , was , in strictness , a
forfeiture of his studentship ; by the statutes of that as well as other
colleges . " ANON3-1772-2,7,11.135

But it is evident that Bishop Fell , who must be allowed to be the best
judge in this matter , did not think he could be expelled upon this
ground . ANON3-1772-2,7,11.136

For in a letter of that prelate's which we have before recited , he says
, " He has a physic place here , which frees him from the exercise of
the college , and the obligation which others have to residence in it ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,11.137

and he is now abroad for want of health . " ANON3-1772-2,7,11.138

The Bishop indeed adds , I have summoned him <P_7,12> to return home ,
which is done with this prospect , that if he comes not back , he will
be liable to expulsion for contumacy . " ANON3-1772-2,7,12.139

But it is evident from the letters which passed between the Bishop and
Lord Sunderland on this occasion , that Mr. Locke was expelled not for
any refusal to return home , but merely in consequence of the King's
order . ANON3-1772-2,7,12.140

And surely there could be no justice in expelling him from his college ,
without the least proof of any crime whatever . ANON3-1772-2,7,12.141

We are informed by Mr. Des Maizeaux , that Mr. Locke once told King
William , that " if the two universities were not reformed , and other
principles taught there than had been of late inculcated , they would
either destroy him or some of his successors . " ANON3-1772-2,7,12.142

And it is suggested in the <font> Biographia Britannica , <$$font> that
Mr. Locke was induced to make this declaration against the universities
, by his strong resentment on account of his expulsion .
ANON3-1772-2,7,12.143

But this is an unjust and uncandid insinuation . ANON3-1772-2,7,12.144

For we have all the reason in the world to believe , from the general
sentiments and conduct of Mr. Locke , that what he said to King William
on this subject , was the result of his deliberate judgment , and not
dictated by private pique or resentment . ANON3-1772-2,7,12.145

It is well known that in the universities , and especially that of
Oxford , great numbers openly avowed and propagated anti-revolution
principles ; ANON3-1772-2,7,12.146

and it was natural for Mr. Locke to suppose , that this would have a
tendency to endanger the new settlement under King William .
ANON3-1772-2,7,12.147

He was by no means singular in this sentiment ; ANON3-1772-2,7,12.148

and many have thought it a very considerable evil , that the slavish
doctrines of passive obedience and non-resistance , should have been so
much inculcated at our universities . ANON3-1772-2,7,12.149

It must surely be a just subject of regret , if those who are trained up
to the liberal professions , in our highest seminaries of learning , are
in danger of imbibing such political opinions there , as are unworthy of
free men , and inconsistent with a free constitution .
ANON3-1772-2,7,12.150

As Mr. Locke was considered as a sufferer for the principles of the
Revolution , he might easily have obtained a very considerable post .
ANON3-1772-2,7,12.151

But he contented himself with that of Commissioner of Appeals , worth
about 200 l. a year , which was procured for him by Lord Mordaunt ,
afterwards Earl of Monmouth , and then of Peterborough .
ANON3-1772-2,7,12.152

In July , 1689 , he wrote a letter to his friend Limborch , with whom he
frequently corresponded , in which he took occasion to speak of the act
of Toleration , which had then just passed , and at which he expressed
his satisfaction ; though he at the same time intimated , that he
considered it as defective , and not sufficiently comprehensive .
ANON3-1772-2,7,12.153

' I doubt not , says he , but you have already heard , that Toleration
is at length established among us by law . Not however , perhaps , with
that latitude which you , and such as you , true Christians , devoid of
envy and ambition , would have wished . ANON3-1772-2,7,12.154

But it is somewhat to have proceeded thus far . ANON3-1772-2,7,12.155

<P_7,13>

And I hope these beginnings are the foundations of liberty and peace ,
which shall hereafter be established in the church of Christ . '
ANON3-1772-2,7,13.157

About this time Mr. Locke was offered to go abroad in a public
character ; ANON3-1772-2,7,13.158

and it was left to his choice , whether he would be envoy at the court
of the Emperor , that of the Elector of Brandenburgh , or any other ,
where he thought the air most suitable to him ; ANON3-1772-2,7,13.159

but he waved all these , on account of the infirm state of his health .
ANON3-1772-2,7,13.160

He continued , however , his application to his studies ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,13.161

and in 1690 , he published his celebrated " Essay on Human Understanding
" in folio . ANON3-1772-2,7,13.162

This great work , which will immortalize his name , and which an eminent
and learned writer has stiled " one of the noblest , the usefullest ,
the most original , books the world ever saw , " notwithstanding its
extraordinary merit , met with considerable opposition from some
quarters . ANON3-1772-2,7,13.163

It was attacked by several writers ; ANON3-1772-2,7,13.164

and it was proposed at a meeting of the heads of houses at the
university of Oxford , to censure and discourage {TEXT:discourge} the
reading of it : ANON3-1772-2,7,13.165

but after various debates among themselves , it was concluded , that
each head of a house should endeavour to prevent its being read in his
college , without coming to any public censure . ANON3-1772-2,7,13.166

But these attacks did very little injury to the reputation either of the
work , or its author , which continued to increase in every part of
Europe . ANON3-1772-2,7,13.167

It was translated into French and Latin , ANON3-1772-2,7,13.168

and the fourth edition in English , with alterations and additions , was
printed in the year 1700 ; ANON3-1772-2,7,13.169

and since that time it has passed through a great number of editions .
ANON3-1772-2,7,13.170

It was in 1690 , that Mr. Locke also published his " second Letter
concerning Toleration , " in 4to. in answer to Jonas Proast , chaplain
of All Souls College , Oxford , who had written against his first letter
on that subject . ANON3-1772-2,7,13.171

The same year he likewise published , " Two Treatises of Government .
ANON3-1772-2,7,13.172

In the former , the false principles and foundation of Sir Robert Filmer
and his followers are detected and overthrown . ANON3-1772-2,7,13.173

The latter is an Essay concerning the true , original
{TEXT:true_original,} extent , and end of civil government . "
ANON3-1772-2,7,13.174

This is a most valuable work , and superior to any other that has
appeared upon the subject . ANON3-1772-2,7,13.175

Mr. Locke resided in London about two years after the Revolution ,
esteemed by all who knew him , and conversing familiarly with persons of
the highest rank , particularly with the Earl of Pembroke .
ANON3-1772-2,7,13.176

But the air of London affecting his lungs , he sometimes went to the
Earl of Peterborough@ @'s seat , near Fulham , where he always met with
an hearty welcome . ANON3-1772-2,7,13.177

He was , however , afterwards obliged to think of quitting London
entirely , at least all the winter season , and to go to some place at a
greater distance . ANON3-1772-2,7,13.178

<P_7,14>

He had made some visits at different times to Sir Francis Masham , who
lived at Oates in Essex , about twenty miles from London , where he
found the air so good , that he thought there was none which would suit
better with his constitution . ANON3-1772-2,7,14.180

This consideration , together with the agreeable company which he found
at Sir Francis Masham's , induced him to desire that gentleman to
receive him into his family , that he might settle here , and apply
himself to his studies as much as his infirm state of health would allow
. ANON3-1772-2,7,14.181

He was received on his own terms , that he might have his entire liberty
there , and look upon himself as at his own house ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,14.182

and it was in this agreeable society that he chiefly passed the rest of
his life , and from which he was absent as little as possible , because
the air of London grew more and more troublesome to him .
ANON3-1772-2,7,14.183

In 1691 , he published " some considerations on the consequences of the
lowering of interest , and raising the value of the money sent in a
letter sent to a member of parliament . " ANON3-1772-2,7,14.184

He afterwards published some other small pieces upon the same subject ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,14.185

and was consulted with by the ministry relative to the new coinage of
the silver . ANON3-1772-2,7,14.186

In 1692 , he published a third letter concerning Toleration ; which
being replied to about twelve years after by his old antogonist Jonas
Proast , Mr. Locke began to draw up a fourth letter upon the subject ,
but did not live to finish it . ANON3-1772-2,7,14.187

What he had written of it was printed among his Posthumous Work .
ANON3-1772-2,7,14.188

In 1693 he published his " Thoughts concerning Education in 8vo. which
was soon after translated into French and Low_Dutch .
ANON3-1772-2,7,14.189

In 1695 King William appointed him one of the Commissioners of Trade and
Plantations ; ANON3-1772-2,7,14.190

and this place obliged him to reside more in London than he had now done
for some time . ANON3-1772-2,7,14.191

The same year he published his treatise intitled , " The Reasonableness
of Christianity as delivered in the Scriptures . "
ANON3-1772-2,7,14.192

This being attacked in 1696 by Mr. Edwards , in his <font> Socinian
unmasked <$$font> , Mr. Locke wrote two Vindications of his book the
same year . ANON3-1772-2,7,14.193

He was scarcely disengaged from this controversy , before he entered
into another on the following occasion . ANON3-1772-2,7,14.194

Some arguments in his " Essay on Human Understanding " having been made
use of by Mr. Toland , in his " Christianity not mysterious , " and
several treatises being published about the same time by the Unitarians
, maintaining , that there was nothing in the Christian religion but
what was conformable to reason , a sentiment which had been advanced by
Mr. Locke ; Dr. Stillingfleet , Bishop of Worcester , was therefore
induced to make an attack upon our author . ANON3-1772-2,7,14.195

And accordingly in his Defence of the Trinity , published in 1697 , that
Prelate censured some passages in the " Essay on Human Understanding , "
<P_7,15> as tending to subvert the fundamental doctrines of Christianity
. ANON3-1772-2,7,15.196

Mr. Locke immediately published an answer to this charge , to which the
Bishop replied ; ANON3-1772-2,7,15.197

and the controversy was carried on in the following year , 1698 , when
it was put a period to by the death of Stillingfleet .
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.198

It was generally admitted , that Mr. Locke had greatly the advantage of
the Bishop in this controversy ANON3-1772-2,7,15.199

An Irish prelate in a letter to Mr. Molyneux , an intimate friend of Mr
Locke's , expresses himself on this subject in the following manner .
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.200

' I read Mr. Locke's letter to the Bishop of Worcester with great
satisfaction , ANON3-1772-2,7,15.201

and am wholly of your opinion . that he has fairly laid the great
Bishop on his back ; ANON3-1772-2,7,15.202

but 't@ @is with so much gentleness , as if he were afraid not only of
hurting him but even of spoiling or tumbling his cloaths .
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.203

Indeed , I can@ @not tell which I most admire , the great civility and
good manners in his book , or the force and clearness of his reasonings
. ' ANON3-1772-2,7,15.204

M Le Clerc says , ' Every body admired the strength of Mr. Locke's
reasonings , and his great clearness and exactness , not only in
explaining his own notions , but in laying open those of his adversary .
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.205

Nor were they {TEXT:the} less surprized , that a man of the Bishop's
learning should engage in a controversy , wherein he had all the
disadvantages possible : ANON3-1772-2,7,15.206

for he was by no means able to maintain his opinions against Mr. Locke
, whose notions he neither understood , nor the subject itself about
which he disputed . ANON3-1772-2,7,15.207

This eminent Prelate had spent the greatest part of his time in the
study of ecclesiastical antiquities , and reading an infinite number of
books ; ANON3-1772-2,7,15.208

but was no great Philosopher , ANON3-1772-2,7,15.209

nor had ever used himself to that close correct way of thinking and
writing , in which Mr Locke particularly excelled .
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.210

However , this excellent Philosopher , though he had much the better in
the controversy , and had reason enough to complain of the Bishop for
having charged him unjustly , and without a sufficient knowledge of the
subject he handled , was yet very far from abusing the advantages he had
, ANON3-1772-2,7,15.211

but always detected and refuted his errors with civility and respect .
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.212

He shews , indeed , that the Bishop did not understand the things he
wrote about , and was very incorrect in his expressions ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.213

but rather seems to insinuate this by producing his own words , and
leaving the world to judge , than by reflecting on him for it .
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.214

For my own part , I never read a dispute managed with so much coolness ,
or with so much art and exactness on the one side ; nor on the other ,
so unjustly and confusedly , or so little to the credit of the author .
' ANON3-1772-2,7,15.215

In the year 1700 . Mr Locke resigned his post of Commissioner of Trade
and Plantations . ANON3-1772-2,7,15.216

He acquainted none of his friends with his design of quitting that place
, till he had given up his commission into the King's hands .
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.217

His majesty was extremely unwilling to receive it ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,15.218

and told Mr. Locke he should be very <P_7,16> glad if he would continue
in his service , though he gave never so little attendance : and that he
did not desire him to stay in town a single day to the prejudice of his
health . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.219

But he told his majesty , that he could not in conscience hold a place
to which a considerable salary was annexed , without performing the
duties of it ; upon which the King reluctantly accepted his resignation
. ANON3-1772-2,7,16.220

Mr. Locke's behaviour in this instance discovered a degree of integrity
and virtue , which does him more honour than his extraordinary
intellectual endowments . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.221

M. Le Clerc informs us , that King William , who was asthmatic as well
as Mr. Locke , having heard of his skill in physic , desired to
discourse with him relative to the state of his own health .
ANON3-1772-2,7,16.222

And having had some conversation upon the subject , Mr. Locke advised
the King to abstain from wine , and all foods that were heavy and
clogging . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.223

It is said , however , that his majesty kept to his usual manner of
living , though he signified to some of those that were about his person
the high esteem that he had conceived for Mr. Locke .
ANON3-1772-2,7,16.224

Some years before his death Mr. Locke applied himself entirely to the
study of the Holy Scriptures , in which he found so much pleasure , that
he regretted his not having employed more of his time in that study in
the former part of his life . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.225

And his great regard for the Sacred Writings , appears by his answer to
Mr. Richard King , to whom he was related , and who had enquired of him
, What was the shortest and surest way for a young gentleman to attain a
true knowledge of the Christian religion ? ANON3-1772-2,7,16.226

" Let him study <paren> said Mr. Locke <$$paren> the Holy Scripture ,
especially the New Testament . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.227

Therein are contained the words of eternal life . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.228

It has God for its author ; salvation for its end ; and Truth , without
any mixture of error , for its matter " . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.229

It appears by several letters which passed between Mr. Locke and Mr.
Molyneux , that they had some thoughts of endeavouring to procure some
ecclesiastical preferment in Ireland , for our author's learned friend
Le Clerc . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.230

But there were so many difficulties attended this design , that they
could not effectuate it . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.231

In one of his letters to Mr. Locke on this subject , Mr. Molyneux says
, speaking of Le Clerc , ' The clergy here have given that learned ,
pious , and candid man , a name that will frighten any bishop from
serving him , though otherwise inclinable enough in his own breast .
ANON3-1772-2,7,16.232

I know but two or three that are in any post in the church capable to
help him , on whom I could rely to do it ; ANON3-1772-2,7,16.233

but , at the same time , I know them to be such cautious wary men , and
so fearful of the censure of the rest of the tribe , that they would
hardly be brought to it . ANON3-1772-2,7,16.234

I take Mons. Le Clerc to be one of the greatest scholars in Europe ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,16.235

I look up on him as one of the most judicious , pious , and sincere
Christians that has appeared publickly ; ANON3-1772-2,7,16.236

and it would be an infinite <P_7,17> honour to us to have him amongst us
; ANON3-1772-2,7,17.237

but , I fear , an ecclesiastical preferment will be very difficult to be
obtained for him . ' ANON3-1772-2,7,17.238

And any success in this scheme is supposed to have been at last
frustrated , by Mons. Le Clerc's declining either to submit to a new
ordination , or to comply with the subscriptions required in the church
of England . ANON3-1772-2,7,17.239

Mr. Locke found his Asthmatic disorder extremely troublesome to him ,
though it did not prevent his preserving great cheerfulness of mind .
ANON3-1772-2,7,17.240

In one of his letters to his friend Mr. Molyneux , is the following
passage . ANON3-1772-2,7,17.241

' I find such a weakness of my lungs , that if I stir ever so little I
am immediately out of breath , ANON3-1772-2,7,17.242

and the very dressing or undressing me is a labour that I am fain to
rest after to recover my breath ; ANON3-1772-2,7,17.243

and I have not been once out of the house since I came last hither .
ANON3-1772-2,7,17.244

I wish nevertheless that you were here with me to see how well I am :
ANON3-1772-2,7,17.245

for you would find , that , sitting by the fire-side , I could bear my
part in discoursing , laughing , and being merry with you , as well as
ever I could in my life . ANON3-1772-2,7,17.246

If you were here , <paren> and if wishes of more than one could bring
you , you would be here to_day <$$paren> you would find three or four in
the parlour after dinner , whom you would say passed their afternoon as
agreeably and as jocundly , as any people you have this good while met
with . ' ANON3-1772-2,7,17.247

The agreeableness of Mr. Locke's situation in the house of Sir Francis
Masham , at Oates , <paren> from whence this letter is dated <$$paren>
was much encreased by the conversation of the accomplished Lady Masham ,
daughter of the learned Dr. Cudworth ; as this lady and Mr. Locke had
a great esteem and friendship for each other . ANON3-1772-2,7,17.248

Mr. Locke's strength began to fail him more remarkably than ever , at
the entrance of the summer of the year 1703 . ANON3-1772-2,7,17.249

And he seemed now convinced that his dissolution was at no great
distance , ANON3-1772-2,7,17.250

and often spoke of it himself , but with great composure ; though he
omitted none of the precautions , which his skill in physic taught him
that had any tendency to prolong his life . ANON3-1772-2,7,17.251

Mr. Coste , who lived in Sir Francis Masham's family , says , " Two or
three weeks before Mr. Locke's death , as he was sitting in a garden ,
taking the air in a bright sun-shine , whose warmth afforded him a great
deal of pleasure , which he improved as much as possible , by causing
his chair to be drawn more <P_7,18> and more towards the sun as it went
down ; we happened to speak of Horace , I know not on what occasion ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,18.252

and having repeated to him these verses , where that Poet says of
himself , that he was Solibus aptum ; Irasci celerem , tamen ut
placabitis essem : that he loved the warmth {TEXT:warm_h} of the sun ,
and that though he was naturally choleric , his anger was easily
appeased . " Mr. Locke replied , that if he durst presume to compare
himself with Horace in any thing , he thought he was perfectly like him
in those two respects . ANON3-1772-2,7,18.253

But that you may be the less surprized at his modesty upon this occasion
, I must at the same time inform you , that he looked upon Horace to be
one of the wisest and happiest Romans that lived in the age of Augustus
, by means of the care he took to preserve himself clear of ambition and
avarice , to keep his desires within bounds , and to cultivate the
friendship of the greatest men of those times , without living in their
dependence . " ANON3-1772-2,7,18.254

Mr. Locke's weakness continued to increase , ANON3-1772-2,7,18.255

and at length his legs began to swell ; ANON3-1772-2,7,18.256

and for some weeks before his death he could not walk ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,18.257

but was carried about the house in an armed chair .
ANON3-1772-2,7,18.258

As he had been incapable for a considerable time of going to church , he
thought proper to receive the sacrament at home ; ANON3-1772-2,7,18.259

and two of his friends communicating with him , as soon as the office
was finished , he told the minister , " That he was in perfect charity
with all men , and in a sincere communion with the church of Christ , by
what name soever it might be distinguished . " ANON3-1772-2,7,18.260

His weak and languishing state did not prevent his conversing with his
usual cheerfulness and good humour ; ANON3-1772-2,7,18.261

and when some persons seemed to wonder at it , he said , " While we are
alive let us live . " ANON3-1772-2,7,18.262

On the day before his death , Lady Masham going to see him , and not
finding him in his study where he used to be , but in bed , seemed to
wonder at that alteration . ANON3-1772-2,7,18.263

He told her he could not bear the fatigue of rising , having wearied
himself too much with it the day before , and that he did not know
whether he should ever rise again . ANON3-1772-2,7,18.264

He could not eat that day ; ANON3-1772-2,7,18.265

and in the afternoon some persons who kept him company , went into his
chamber , ANON3-1772-2,7,18.266

and asked him if they should read something to amuse him ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,18.267

but he declined it . ANON3-1772-2,7,18.268

However , some papers being brought into his chamber , he enquired what
they were , ANON3-1772-2,7,18.269

and caused them to be read to him ; after which he said , " That his
work here was almost at an end , and he thanked God for it . "
ANON3-1772-2,7,18.270

Soon after somebody coming near his bed , he desired they would remember
him in the evening prayers . ANON3-1772-2,7,18.271

They told him , that if <P_7,19> he pleased , the family would come to
prayers into his chamber , to which he agreed . ANON3-1772-2,7,19.272

They asked him , if he thought he was near death : ANON3-1772-2,7,19.273

he answered , " That he might perhaps die that night , but that he could
not live above three or four days . " ANON3-1772-2,7,19.274

He was then in a cold sweat , ANON3-1772-2,7,19.275

but that left him in a little time . ANON3-1772-2,7,19.276

He was asked to drink some Mum , a liquor which he had drank with
pleasure the week before , and which he considered as the most wholesome
of all strong drinks . ANON3-1772-2,7,19.277

He took some spoonfuls then , ANON3-1772-2,7,19.278

and drank to the health of the company , " wishing all of them happiness
when he should be gone . " ANON3-1772-2,7,19.279

There being afterwards nobody else in the chamber but Lady Masham , who
sat by the bed-side , he exhorted her " to look on this world only as a
state of preparation for a better . " ANON3-1772-2,7,19.280

He added , " That he had lived long enough , and that he thanked God he
had enjoyed an happy life ; but that after all he looked upon this life
to be nothing but vanity . " ANON3-1772-2,7,19.281

After supper , the family came up into his chamber to prayers ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,19.282

and between eleven and twelve o'clock he seemed to be a little better .
ANON3-1772-2,7,19.283

Lady Masham would have sat up with him , ANON3-1772-2,7,19.284

but he would not permit her , saying that perhaps he might sleep , and
if he should find any alteration he would send for her .
ANON3-1772-2,7,19.285

He did not rest that night , ANON3-1772-2,7,19.286

but resolved to try to rise the next day , which he did .
ANON3-1772-2,7,19.287

He was carried into his study , ANON3-1772-2,7,19.288

and was seated in an easy chair , where he slept by fits some
considerable time . ANON3-1772-2,7,19.289

Then thinking himself somewhat better , he had a mind to be dressed as
usual , ANON3-1772-2,7,19.290

and asked for some small beer , which he used very seldom to taste .
ANON3-1772-2,7,19.291

After that he desired Lady Masham , who was reading to herself in the
Psalms while they dressed him , to read aloud , which accordingly she
did , ANON3-1772-2,7,19.292

and he seemed very attentive , till he was hindered by the nearer
approaches of death ; upon which he desired her to read no more , and
expired a few minutes after , on the 18th of October , 1704 , about
three in the afternoon , in the seventy-third year of his age .
ANON3-1772-2,7,19.293

Such was the end of John Locke ! one of the greatest philosophers of
the age in which he lived , and who was rendered illustrious not only by
his wisdom , but by his piety and virtue , by his love of truth and
diligence in the pursuit of it , and by his generous ardour in defence
of the civil and religious rights of mankind . ANON3-1772-2,7,19.294

He was remarkable for the easiness and politeness of his manners ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,19.295

and those who knew him only by his writings , or by the great reputation
which he had acquired , and who had supposed him a reserved or austere
man , were surprized , if they happened to be introduced to him , to
find him nothing but affability , good-humour , and humanity ; and
always ready to hear them , and to talk with them of those things which
they best understood ; and much more desirous of informing himself in
what they understood better than himself , than to make a display
<P_7,20> of his own learning or abilities . ANON3-1772-2,7,20.296

He could accommodate himself with ease to the reach of all capacities ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.297

and he had a peculiar art in conversation , of leading people to talk of
what they understood best . ANON3-1772-2,7,20.298

With a gardener he discoursed of gardening , with a jeweller of diamonds
, with a chymist of chymistry , &c. ANON3-1772-2,7,20.299

" By this , <paren> said he himself <$$paren> I please all those men ,
who commonly can speak pertinently upon nothing else .
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.300

As they believe I have an esteem for their profession , they are charmed
with shewing their abilities before me ; ANON3-1772-2,7,20.301

and I , in the mean_while , improve myself by their discourse . "
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.302

And , indeed , Mr. Locke by this method acquired a great insight into
all the arts : ANON3-1772-2,7,20.303

and he used to observe , that the knowledge of the arts contained more
true philosophy , than all those fine learned hypotheses , which having
no relation to the nature of things are fit for nothing at bottom , but
to make men lose their time in inventing , or comprehending them .
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.304

The easiness with which Mr. Locke knew how to converse with all sorts
of men , and the pleasure he took in doing it , at first surprized those
who had never talked with him before . ANON3-1772-2,7,20.305

They were charmed with this condescension , not very common among men of
letters ; and which they so little expected from a person , whose great
qualities raised him so very much above other men .
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.306

As Mr Locke was very polite in his own behaviour , so if there was any
thing which he could not bear in others , it was ill-manners : with
which he was always greatly disgusted , and the rather if he perceived
it did not arise from want of conversation , and knowledge of the world
, but from pride , ill nature , brutality , and other vices of that
nature . ANON3-1772-2,7,20.307

Otherwise he was very far from despising others , though their persons
were ever so mean . ANON3-1772-2,7,20.308

He looked on civility to be not only something very agreeable and proper
to win upon men , but also a duty of Christianity , and which ought to
be more pressed , and urged upon men than it commonly is .
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.309

He recommended for this purpose a treatise written by the Messieurs of
Port Royal , " concerning the means to preserve peace among men ; "
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.310

and he greatly admired some sermons he heard from Dr. Whichcote on this
subject . ANON3-1772-2,7,20.311

His dress was neat , without either affectation or singularity .
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.312

He was naturally very active , ANON3-1772-2,7,20.313

and employed himself as much as his health would permit .
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.314

Sometimes he diverted himself with working in the garden , which he very
well understood . ANON3-1772-2,7,20.315

He loved walking , ANON3-1772-2,7,20.316

but not being able to walk much through the disorder of his lungs , he
used to ride out after dinner ; and when he could not bear a horse , in
an open chaise . ANON3-1772-2,7,20.317

He always chose to have company with him , though it were but a child ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.318

for he took much pleasure in talking with children of a good education .
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.319

The weakness of his health was a disturbance to none but himself ;
ANON3-1772-2,7,20.320

for as he did not trouble others with his complaints , they might look
on him without any other concern than that of <P_7,21> seeing him suffer
. ANON3-1772-2,7,21.321

He did not differ from others in his diet , but only in his ordinary
drink , which was nothing but water ; ANON3-1772-2,7,21.322

and he thought that was the cause of his life being lengthened out to
such an age , though he was of so weak a constitution ; and that it was
to this he owed the preservation of his eye-sight , which was but little
impaired when he died , ANON3-1772-2,7,21.323

nor had he ever made use of spectacles . ANON3-1772-2,7,21.324

He had no other distemper but his asthma , excepting that about four
years before his death he was for sometime very deaf , but did not
continue so above six months . ANON3-1772-2,7,21.325

His deafness depriving him of the pleasure of conversation , in a letter
which he then wrote to one of his friends , he said , " he did not know
but it was better to be blind than deaf . " ANON3-1772-2,7,21.326

Though Mr. Locke loved truths that were useful , and was best pleased
to converse on such as were instructive ; yet he used to say , that in
order to employ one part of this life in serious and important
occupations , it was necessary to spend another in mere amusements :
ANON3-1772-2,7,21.327

and when an occasion naturally offered , he gave himself up with
pleasure to the charms of a free and facetious conversation .
ANON3-1772-2,7,21.328

He remembered many agreeable stories , which he introduced with great
propriety ; ANON3-1772-2,7,21.329

and generally made them yet more delightful , by his natural and
agreeable way of telling them . ANON3-1772-2,7,21.330

Nor was he any foe to raillery , provided it was innocent and delicate .
ANON3-1772-2,7,21.331

One thing , which those who lived for any time with Mr. Locke , could
not help observing in him , was , that he took a delight in making use
of his reason in every thing he did : and nothing that was attended with
any usefulness seemed unworthy of his care ; so that we may say of him ,
what was said of Queen Elizabeth , that he was no less capable of small
things , than of great . ANON3-1772-2,7,21.332

And his knowledge was so comprehensive , that when he sat at the Board
of Trade , as one of the lords commissioners , the most experienced
merchants were surprized , that a man who had spent his life in the
study of physic , of polite literature , or of philosophy , should have
more extensive and certain views than themselves , in matters which they
had wholly applied themselves to from their youth .
ANON3-1772-2,7,21.333

As he always kept utility in his eye in all his disquisitions , he
esteemed the employments of men only in proportion to the good they were
capable of producing : for which reason he had no great value for those
critics , or mere grammarians , that waste their lives in comparing
words and phrases , and in coming to a determination in the choice of a
various reading , in a passage that has nothing important in it .
ANON3-1772-2,7,21.334

He cared yet less for those professed disputants , who being wholly
taken up with the desire of coming off with the victory , fortify
themselves behind the ambiguity of a word , to give their adversaries
the more trouble . ANON3-1772-2,7,21.335

And whenever he had to deal with persons of this class , if he did not
beforehand take a strong resolution of keeping his temper , he was apt
<P_7,22> to be somewhat warm . ANON3-1772-2,7,22.336

For it is observed , that if he was subject to any passion , it was
anger ; ANON3-1772-2,7,22.337

but he had made himself so much master of it by reason , that it was
very rarely troublesome to himself or others . ANON3-1772-2,7,22.338

Nor could any one better expose that passion , or place it in a more
ridiculous light . ANON3-1772-2,7,22.339

He would say , it was of no use , either in the educating children , or
keeping servants in order ; but that it did indeed make a man lose his
authority . ANON3-1772-2,7,22.340

He was very kind to his servants ; ANON3-1772-2,7,22.341

and would take the trouble to instruct them , with a great deal of
mildness , in what manner he expected to be served by them .
ANON3-1772-2,7,22.342

He was very charitable to the Poor , except such as were idle Or profane
, and spent the Sunday in ale-houses , and went not to church ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,22.343

but he particularly compassionated those , who after they had laboured
as long as their strength would permit , were reduced to poverty ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,22.344

He said , it was not enough to keep them from starving , but that such a
provision ought to be made for them , that they might live comfortable .
ANON3-1772-2,7,22.345

Accordingly , he sought occasions of doing good to those who deserved it
: ANON3-1772-2,7,22.346

and when he walked out , he would often visit the poor of the
neighbourhood , and give them wherewith to supply their necessities ; or
buy the remedies which he prescribed them , if they were sick , and had
no other physician . ANON3-1772-2,7,22.347

He never willingly played at cards , or any other game ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,22.348

and when he did it was merely out of complaisance ; although being often
in company with those who used it , he could play very well , if he set
about it ; ANON3-1772-2,7,22.349

but he would never propose it , ANON3-1772-2,7,22.350

for he said , " it was but an amusement for those who wanted
conversation . " ANON3-1772-2,7,22.351

He was , however , far from assuming those affected airs of gravity , by
which some persons , as well learned as unlearned , love to distinguish
themselves from the rest of the world ; but which he looked upon as an
infallible mark of impertinence . ANON3-1772-2,7,22.352

And he would sometimes divert himself with imitating that studied
gravity , in order to turn it the better into ridicule :
ANON3-1772-2,7,22.353

and upon such occassions he always remembered this maxim of
Rochefoucault's , which he much admired , " That Gravity is a mystery of
the body , invented to conceal the defects of the mind . "
ANON3-1772-2,7,22.354

He was a warm and steady friend , ANON3-1772-2,7,22.355

and therefore felt a strong indignation at any discovery of treachery ,
or insincerity in those in whom he had confided . ANON3-1772-2,7,22.356

It is said that a particular person , whose name is not mentioned , but
with whom he had contracted an intimate friendship , in the earlier part
of his life , was afterwards discovered by him to be extremely base and
treacherous . ANON3-1772-2,7,22.357

This false friend had not only taken every method privately of doing Mr.
Locke whatever injury he could with those with whom he was connected ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,22.358

but also went off with a large sum of money that was his property , at a
time when he knew it must involve him in considerable difficulties .
ANON3-1772-2,7,22.359

Mr. Locke felt severely for the <P_7,23> perfidy of his friend ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,23.360

and was to the last degree surprized when informed of the various arts
he had made use of to injure him . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.361

All intercourse between them was now broken off , ANON3-1772-2,7,23.362

and for a long time he heard nothing of him , ANON3-1772-2,7,23.363

nor knew what became of him . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.364

But many years after , one morning , while he was at breakfast , at the
time he was one of the lords of trade and plantations , word was brought
him that a man in a very shabby habit requested the honour of speaking
to him . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.365

Mr. Locke with the politeness and humanity that were natural to him ,
immediately ordered him to be admitted ; ANON3-1772-2,7,23.366

and found to his great astonishment , his old friend reduced , by a life
of cunning and extravagance , to the greatest poverty and distress , and
come to solicit his forgiveness , and implore his assistance .
ANON3-1772-2,7,23.367

Mr. Locke looked at him for some time very stedfastly , without
speaking one word . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.368

At length , taking out a fifty pound note , he presented it to him with
the following remarkable declaration : ANON3-1772-2,7,23.369

" Though I sincerely forgive your behaviour to me , yet I must never put
it in your power to injure me a second time . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.370

- Take this trifle ; which I give , not as a mark of my former
friendship , but as a relief to your present wants , and consign to the
service of your necessities , without recollecting how little you
deserve it . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.371

No reply ! ANON3-1772-2,7,23.372

- it is impossible to regain my good opinion ; ANON3-1772-2,7,23.373

for know , friendship once injured , is for ever lost . "
ANON3-1772-2,7,23.374

A few days before his death , Mr. Locke wrote a letter to his friend
Anthony Collins , Esqr. which he directed not to be delivered till
after his decease . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.375

It concludes {TEXT:conclude} in the following terms :
ANON3-1772-2,7,23.376

" May you live long and happy in the enjoyment of health , freedom ,
content , and those blessings which providence has bestowed on you , and
your virtue intitles you to . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.377

I know you loved me living ; and will preserve my memory , now I am dead
. ANON3-1772-2,7,23.378

All the use to be made of it , is , that this life is a scene of vanity
, that soon passes away ; and affords no solid satisfaction , but in the
consciousness of doing well , and in the hopes of another life .
ANON3-1772-2,7,23.379

This is what I can say upon experience ; and what you will find to be
true , when you come to make up the account . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.380

Adieu : I leave my best wishes with you . " ANON3-1772-2,7,23.381

Mr. Locke was interred in the church of Oates , where there is a decent
monument erected to his memory , with a modest inscription in Latin
written by himself . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.382

He left several manuscripts behind him , which were published soon after
his death by Sir Peter King , and Anthony Collins , Esqr. whom he
appointed his executors , and to whom he gave his library to be equally
divided between them . ANON3-1772-2,7,23.383

In 1705 , his Paraphrase and notes upon St. Paul's epistle to the
Galatians were published in 4to. and which were soon followed <P_7,24>
by those upon the Corinthians , Romans , and Ephesians : to which were
prefixed , An Essay for the understanding of St. Paul's Epistles , by
consulting St. Paul himself . ANON3-1772-2,7,24.384

In 1706 , " Posthumous Works of Mr. Locke , " were published in one
volume , 8vo. ANON3-1772-2,7,24.385

In 1708 , " Some familiar letters between Mr. Locke and several of his
friends , " were also published in 8vo. ANON3-1772-2,7,24.386

and in 1720 , Mr. Des Maizeaux also published in the same size , " A
Collection of several pieces of Mr. Locke never before printed , &c. "
ANON3-1772-2,7,24.387

But all our Author's Works have been collected together , and frequently
reprinted , in three volumes , folio . ANON3-1772-2,7,24.388

<P_7,25>

<heading>

The Life of Sir Christopher Wren . ANON3-1772-2,7,25.391

<$$heading>

This celebrated Architect was the only son of Dr. Christopher Wren ,
rector of East Knoyle in Wiltshire , where he was born on the 20th of
October , 1632 . ANON3-1772-2,7,25.393

He received a part of his education under Dr. Busby at
Westminster-school ; from whence he was sent to Oxford , and admitted a
gentleman-commoner at Wadham-college , when he was about fourteen years
of age . ANON3-1772-2,7,25.394

And the advancements which he made there in mathematical knowledge ,
before he was sixteen years of age , are spoken of by that eminent
mathematician Mr. Oughtred , as very extraordinary .
ANON3-1772-2,7,25.395

His uncommon abilities excited the attention and admiration of Dr.
Wilkins , then warden of his college , and of Dr. Seth Ward , the
Savilian professor of astronomy , who then resided in that college .
ANON3-1772-2,7,25.396

By Dr. Wilkins he was introduced into the notice and favour of Charles
Elector Palatine , to whom he presented several mechanical instruments
of his own invention . ANON3-1772-2,7,25.397

In 1657 , he became acquainted with Sir Charles Scarborough , at whose
request he undertook the translating of Oughtred's geometrical Dialling
into Latin ; ANON3-1772-2,7,25.398

and the same year he invented several other mathematical instruments ,
ANON3-1772-2,7,25.399

and wrote a treatise of Spherical Trigonometry in a new method .
ANON3-1772-2,7,25.400

He took the degree of bachelor of arts in 1650 ; ANON3-1772-2,7,25.401

and the following year he published a short algebraical tract , relating
to the Julian period . ANON3-1772-2,7,25.402

He was elected a fellow of All Souls College , in the beginning of
November , 1653 , ANON3-1772-2,7,25.403

and on the 11th of December following , he took the degree of master of
arts . ANON3-1772-2,7,25.404

In the mean time , he became one of the first members of the
philosophical society at Oxford . At whose first assemblies in
Wadham-college , he exhibited many new theories , inventions ,
experiments , and mechanic improvements . ANON3-1772-2,7,25.405

In 1657 , when he was in the twenty-fifth year of his age , he was
appointed Professor of Astronomy in Gresham college :
ANON3-1772-2,7,25.406

and his lectures there on that science were attended by many eminent and
learned persons . ANON3-1772-2,7,25.407

One subject of his lectures was upon Telescopes , to the improvement of
which he had greatly contributed . ANON3-1772-2,7,25.408

In 1658 , he solved the problem proposed by the famous Mons. Pascal ,
under the feigned name of Jean de Montfert , to all the English
mathematicians ; ANON3-1772-2,7,25.409

and returned another to the mathematicians of France <paren> formerly
proposed by Kepler , and <P_7,26> then solved likewise by Mr. Wren
<$$paren> of which they never gave any solution . ANON3-1772-2,7,26.410

On the 5th of February , 1661 , he was chosen Savilian professor of
Astronomy at Oxford , in the room of Dr. Seth Ward , upon which he
resigned his Gresham professorship on the 8th of March following , and
on the 15th of May entered on the other . ANON3-1772-2,7,26.411

On the 12th of September the same year , he was created Doctor of the
civil law . ANON3-1772-2,7,26.412

