<BEGIN_anon1-1711-1>

<P_3>

<heading>

An Essay upon Education , <font> &c. <$$font> ANON1-1711-1,3.4

<$$heading>

It is evident by Experience , that there are several Arts and Sciences ,
which can@ @not be learn'd in any great Perfection , without the
Knowledge of <font> Latin <$$font> , or <font> Greek <$$font> , or other
Ancient {TEXT:Antient} Languages . Upon which Account it must be
confess'd , that those Persons . who design to Study such Arts or
Sciences , ought to be very well acquainted with these Languages ;
seeing an imperfect Knowledge of them , only serves for Ostentation
amongst the Ignorant , but is of no great real use or Advantage .
ANON1-1711-1,3.6

And as these Languages ought to be well understood , so they shou'd be
learn'd in as short a Time as may be . ANON1-1711-1,3.7

For the longer we are in learning them , the longer it must be , before
we can enter upon the Study of those Arts , to which they are necessary
; ANON1-1711-1,3.8

and consequently , the sooner we are Masters of the Languages the more
Time we may employ about the Arts themselves , and therefore make a
greater Progress in them . ANON1-1711-1,3.9

As for the present usual Method of Teaching these Languages , I can@
@not look upon it to be the best . ANON1-1711-1,3.10

Boys commonly go to the Grammar-School
{COM:font_change_around_"Grammar"} <P_4> at Eight or Nine Years of Age ,
ANON1-1711-1,4.11

and continue there 'till they are Sixteen or Seventeen before they are
sent to the Universities : So that about Eight or Nine Years are
generally spent in Learning , scarcely any thing but <font> Latin
<$$font> and <font> Greek . <$$font> ANON1-1711-1,4.12

And yet after all this Expence of Time , they are generally speaking but
ordinary Proficients in these Two Languages , as I believe , most Tutors
in the Two Universities will be ready enough to confess .
ANON1-1711-1,4.13

Now to what Cause must we impute this slow Progress in these Languages ?
To the great difficulty of them , or to the Negligence of the Masters ,
or the Incapacity of the Scholars ? ANON1-1711-1,4.14

For my part , I can@ @not impute it to any of these Causes , but rather
to an imprudent Method of Teaching them . ANON1-1711-1,4.15

I am perswaded {TEXT:persuaded} , they might be learn'd after some other
manner , more easily , quickly and perfectly ; ANON1-1711-1,4.16

and therefore , I shall beg leave to propose in this short Essay , what
Methods in my Judgment are more proper , than that which is commonly
observ'd , ANON1-1711-1,4.17

and I hope the Reader will not condemn them , without first examining
the Reasons upon which they are Grounded . ANON1-1711-1,4.18

I assure him , I have no manner of private Interest or Design in Writing
this Essay , and that I shall propose nothing in it , but what in my own
Judgment I am perswaded {TEXT:persuaded} is very practicable , and may
prove of publick Advantage : ANON1-1711-1,4.19

and if others may receive any Benefit from it , I shall have the End I
propos'd . ANON1-1711-1,4.20

There are Three Methods , by which I think these Languages might be much
better learn'd , than by that , which is commonly us'd .
ANON1-1711-1,4.21

The first is this : {TEXT:,:} ANON1-1711-1,4.22

Let as many Children as you please , when they are just learning to
speak <paren> or if they have learn'd a few <font> English <$$font>
Words , they will quickly forget <P_5> them <$$paren> be kept in such a
Place , where they can@ @not Converse with any but those who speak
<font> Latin ; <$$font> which need be no great Confinement to them ,
considering how many Places of this Nature there are , where they may
live with great Liberty , Pleasure and Satisfaction . Let One or Two
Masters , who can talk the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue fluently and
correctly , Converse daily with them ; and let the Servants , which wait
upon them , be able to speak as much <font> Latin <$$font> , as they
shall have occasion for , when they are necessarily oblig'd to talk with
them : By this means , they can@ @not fail of learning the <font> Latin
<$$font> Tongue . ANON1-1711-1,5.23

For naturally , all Languages are equal to us ; ANON1-1711-1,5.24

and we are no more fram'd to talk <font> English <$$font> or any other
Modern Language , than we are to talk <font> Latin <$$font> : So that
<font> Latin <$$font> , may as well be our first Language , as <font>
English <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,5.25

For , if Children heard nothing at first but <font> Latin <$$font> they
cou'd not fail of Learning it , as well as they do <font> English
<$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,5.26

The <font> Roman <$$font> Children talk'd <font> Latin <$$font> , as
well as our Children talk <font> English <$$font> ; ANON1-1711-1,5.27

and undoubtedly , our Children wou'd talk <font> Latin <$$font>
according to the Method I have mention'd , as well as their's did .
ANON1-1711-1,5.28

For their Children spoke it , because they heard nothing else spoke
{COM:sic} ; ANON1-1711-1,5.29

and surely ours wou'd do the same , provided , all who speak to them ,
speak in <font> Latin <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,5.30

We are naturally sociable Creatures , and desirous of Conversation ;
ANON1-1711-1,5.31

and consequently , we must have some Language , in which to express our
Sentiments . ANON1-1711-1,5.32

Now since all Languages are naturally equal to us , therefore the first
Language we hear , that we shall first understand ; ANON1-1711-1,5.33

and consequently , if nothing but <font> Latin <$$font> were talk'd to
Children , they wou'd first understand that Language .
ANON1-1711-1,5.34

The same Reasons will hold good for learning <font> Greek <$$font> , or
any other Ancient {TEXT:Antient} Language after this Method , as well as
<font> Latin <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,5.35

<P_6>

And as it is altogether reasonable , to think that <font> Latin <$$font>
may be Learn'd after this Method , so Experience has evidently shew'd
the great Success of it . ANON1-1711-1,6.37

<font> Quintilian <$$font> tells us , that some <font> Roman <$$font>
Children learn'd <font> Greek <$$font> before <font> Latin <$$font> ,
which they cou'd not do , but after some such Method , as I have
propos'd ; ANON1-1711-1,6.38

this Method has likewise succeeded in latter Ages . ANON1-1711-1,6.39

The Famous <font> Montaigne {TEXT:Montagne} <$$font> Lib. 1. cap. 25.
of his Essays assures us , that he learn'd <font> Latin <$$font>
according to it . ANON1-1711-1,6.40

His Words are to this Effect , " My Father committed me to the Education
of a <font> German <$$font> , who was ignorant of the <font> French
<$$font> Language , but understood <font> Latin <$$font> in very great
perfection . ANON1-1711-1,6.41

I was always treated by him with the utmost Affection and Tenderness .
ANON1-1711-1,6.42

I had other Boys with me , who understood the <font> Latin <$$font>
Language , ANON1-1711-1,6.43

nothing but <font> Latin <$$font> was heard amongst us .
ANON1-1711-1,6.44

My Mother , and the Servants never talk'd with me but in <font> Latin
<$$font> , which they had learn'd by our Conversation :
ANON1-1711-1,6.45

For by our Discourse , my Mother and the Servants had got so much <font>
Latin <$$font> , that they cou'd understand me , and entertain me with
short Dialogues . ANON1-1711-1,6.46

I was Six Years of Age , when I was as perfectly Ignorant of the <font>
French <$$font> , as of the <font> Persian <$$font> and <font> Arabick
<$$font> Languages . ANON1-1711-1,6.47

Thus without <font> Grammar <$$font> Precepts or Whipping , I understood
<font> Latin <$$font> , as well as the School-Masters themselves , whose
Scholars I far exceeded : ANON1-1711-1,6.48

For when they had a Theme given them to turn into <font> Latin <$$font>
, I had a <font> Latin <$$font> Theme full of <font> Solecisms <$$font>
, and <font> Barbarisms <$$font> given me to turn into more pure and
Elegant <font> Latin . ANON1-1711-1,6.49

Nicholas Gruchius <$$font> , who Wrote a Treatise <font> de Comitiis
Romanorum , Gulielmus Gerentus <$$font> , who Wrote Comments upon <font>
Aristotle , Buchanan <$$font> the <font> Scotch <$$font> Poet , <font>
Antonius <$$font> and <font> Muretus <$$font> . My Domestick Masters
often told me , that at that Age , I <P_7> talk'd <font> Latin <$$font>
so fluently , that they were even afraid to talk with me .
ANON1-1711-1,7.50

<font> Buchanan <$$font> said , he wou'd write a Treatise concerning the
Education of Children ; ANON1-1711-1,7.51

and told me , he wou'd chiefly have an Eye to that Method , according to
which I was Educated . " ANON1-1711-1,7.52

There is an Instance of another Boy Educated after this manner , who far
exceeded the Famous <font> Montaigne {TEXT:Montagne} <$$font> .
ANON1-1711-1,7.53

The Account of him is given us in an <font> English <$$font> Book ,
Translated out of <font> French <$$font> , the Title of which is ,
<font> An Examen <$$font> of the way of Teaching the <font> Latin
<$$font> Tongue to little Children by use alone , <font> Lond. <$$font>
1669 . 12=o= . ANON1-1711-1,7.54

In this Book we are told of a Boy that cou'd talk <font> Latin <$$font>
so fluently at Four Years of Age , that the King of <font> France
<$$font> , and all who heard him , look'd upon {COM:sic} as a Prodigy .
ANON1-1711-1,7.55

The method according to which he was Educated was this .
ANON1-1711-1,7.56

His Father had Two Friends , who cou'd speak <font> Latin <$$font>
fluently and elegantly . ANON1-1711-1,7.57

He took his Son when he was but Twenty_Two Months Old ,
ANON1-1711-1,7.58

and committed him to their Education . ANON1-1711-1,7.59

He quickly forgot those few <font> French <$$font> Words , he had
learn'd from his Mother and his Nurse , by Reason that those with whom
he Convers'd talk'd nothing but <font> Latin <$$font> .
ANON1-1711-1,7.60

And his Masters being careful to talk good Sense as well as good <font>
Latin <$$font> ; by this means , the Boy cou'd not only talk Elegantly ,
ANON1-1711-1,7.61

but also cou'd pass a very good Judgment upon several matters .
ANON1-1711-1,7.62

The Author of this Book , shews this Method of Education to be Ancient
{TEXT:Antient} and Infallible , ANON1-1711-1,7.63

and admires that others do not follow it . ANON1-1711-1,7.64

All the Modern Languages , as he says , are learn'd to a great
Perfection only by Conversation ; ANON1-1711-1,7.65

and thence concludes the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue may be learn'd the
same way , which is certainly very true . ANON1-1711-1,7.66

For , as I shew'd before , the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue is as much
natural to us as the <font> English <$$font> , ANON1-1711-1,7.67

and therefore , if we hear nothing <P_8> but <font> Latin <$$font>
talk'd to us at first , we shou'd as easily and perfectly learn it as we
do <font> English <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,8.68

If this method were observ'd , Children might with much Ease and
Pleasure learn the <font> Latin <$$font> Language , before they were Six
or Seven Years of Age . ANON1-1711-1,8.69

For if their Masters perfectly understood the <font> Latin <$$font>
Tongue , <paren> as I suppose them to do <$$paren> and always talk'd
with them in pure <font> Latin <$$font> , they cou'd not fail of talking
it Elegantly likewise . ANON1-1711-1,8.70

And if such Diversions were contriv'd , as wou'd oblige them to talk
much , they wou'd also talk it very fluently : ANON1-1711-1,8.71

Besides this , at the same Time they might be taught to Read ;
ANON1-1711-1,8.72

and as they grew up , some Elegant <font> Latin <$$font> Authors might
be put into their Hands , ANON1-1711-1,8.73

and by this means , they might Read over most of the <font> Roman
<$$font> Authors before the Age that other Boys , who are Educated after
the common Method , are able tolerably to understand a <font> Latin
<$$font> author . ANON1-1711-1,8.74

It may perhaps , be thought a great Disadvantage to a Boy to be
perfectly Ignorant of his Country Language , at Six or Seven Years of
Age : ANON1-1711-1,8.75

But this Disadvantage is easily and quickly repair'd ; ANON1-1711-1,8.76

for when he comes Abroad into the World , and hears all other Persons
talk <font> English <$$font> , he can@ @not fail of Learning it .
ANON1-1711-1,8.77

It will be continually buzz'd in his Ears , ANON1-1711-1,8.78

and he must understand it whether he will or no . ANON1-1711-1,8.79

Nor need we be afraid , that he will never be so perfect a Master of the
Language of his Country , as if he had Learn'd it first .
ANON1-1711-1,8.80

For what Man in the Age in which he liv'd , Writ better <font> French
<$$font> than <font> Montaigne {TEXT:Montagne} <$$font> , tho' he knew
not a Syllable of it when he was Six Years Old ? ANON1-1711-1,8.81

And I do not in the least question , but such as are Educated after this
Method , wou'd talk <font> English <$$font> as Fluently and Elegantly ,
as if they had been taught it by their Mother . ANON1-1711-1,8.82

Nay , in all <P_9> probability , they wou'd be better Masters of it ,
since the true Knowledge of the <font> English <$$font> Language doth in
so great a Measure depend upon the Knowledge of the <font> Latin
<$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,9.83

It may also be objected , that they wou'd forget the <font> Latin
<$$font> Tongue , or at least to Speak , and Write it truly , because
they know nothing of <font> Grammar <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,9.84

But this Reason is of no Force , if we consider that <font> Grammars
<$$font> were made from Authors , and not Authors compos'd by the
Directions of <font> Grammars <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,9.85

Upon supposition therefore , that they Read the best <font> Roman
<$$font> Authors , their Reading wou'd supply the want of the Knowledge
of <font> Grammar : <$$font> ANON1-1711-1,9.86

But granting <font> Grammar <$$font> to be necessary , yet when they
understand the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue , they may easily look over
it , and fix in their Minds all the necessary Rules of it .
ANON1-1711-1,9.87

And I take this to be a much more proper time , for them to consider the
<font> Ratio <$$font> and <font> Idioms <$$font> of that Language , than
when they know but very little of it . ANON1-1711-1,9.88

2. Another Method of Learning <font> Latin , Greek <$$font> , &c. is
to learn them by Conversation , notwithstanding {TEXT:nothwithstanding}
we know the <font> English <$$font> , or any other Modern Language .
ANON1-1711-1,9.89

That this Method of learning them is very practicable , is evident from
this , <font> viz. <$$font> that the very same thing in Effect is daily
practic'd . ANON1-1711-1,9.90

The <font> French , Spanish , Italian <$$font> and other Languages are
learn'd after this manner by our Merchants , who always attain the
Language of the Country where they Trade , so well , that they can
Discourse very readily in it , provided they continue there any
considerable time , and Converse with the Natives . ANON1-1711-1,9.91

Nay , even those Common Sea-Men , who can neither Write nor Read , by
hearing the Natives Discourse , arrive by degrees to a considerable
Knowledge in their Languages . ANON1-1711-1,9.92

As for Travellers , they having generally <P_10> had a more liberal
Education , commonly attain in a much shorter Time , and with more ease
, to a great Perfection in the Language of the Country where they Travel
. ANON1-1711-1,10.93

'T@ @is true , some of them , before they leave <font> England <$$font>
, learn in a great Degree the Language of those Countries , in which
they design to Travel , and consequently , can@ @not be so properly said
to Learn those Languages by Conversation , as thereby , to perfect
themselves in them . ANON1-1711-1,10.94

But it is as true , that several who are perfectly Ignorant of <font>
French , Spanish , Italian <$$font> and other Languages , by Travelling
in those Countries where they are commonly spoke , obtain the Knowledge
of them by Conversation , as any one must know , that has any Experience
in the World . ANON1-1711-1,10.95

And I must confess , I see no Reason why the <font> Latin <$$font>
Tongue may not be learn'd after the same Manner , ANON1-1711-1,10.96

nor can think it more impossible to learn it by Conversation , than to
learn the <font> French , Spanish , Italian <$$font> , or any other
Modern Language . ANON1-1711-1,10.97

For that these Languages are living Languages , and the <font> Latin
<$$font> a dead Language , seems no good Argument to me , that <font>
Latin <$$font> can@ @not be learn'd by Conversation : ANON1-1711-1,10.98

For pray what is it that makes a Language a living Language in respect
of me but this , <font> viz. <$$font> That I hear Men daily discoursing
in that Language . ANON1-1711-1,10.99

If therefore I cou'd daily hear others talking <font> Latin <$$font> ,
the <font> Latin <$$font> Language wou'd be as much a living Language ,
in respect of me , as any Language whatever . ANON1-1711-1,10.100

I suppose no Person will be so weak as to imagine that we learn the
Modern Languages by Conversation , purely because they are Modern ;
ANON1-1711-1,10.101

and consequently , it must be acknowledg'd that the Cause of our
learning them , is our hearing Men daily discourse in them :
ANON1-1711-1,10.102

If therefore we <P_11> did but hear others talk <font> Latin <$$font> ,
and endeavour'd to understand them , and talk with them , as much as we
do to understand and talk with those who speak in the Modern Tongues ,
we cou'd not fail of learning the <font> Latin <$$font> Language , as
well as we do the Modern Languages . ANON1-1711-1,11.103

Nay , in such Places where the Modern Languages are not commonly spoke ,
any more than the <font> Latin <$$font> , we find the Modern Languages
taught only by Conversation . ANON1-1711-1,11.104

In <font> England <$$font> the <font> French , Spanish <$$font> and
<font> Italian <$$font> Languages are not the Languages of our Country ,
and spoke only by few Persons , ANON1-1711-1,11.105

and yet 't@ @is evident they are taught in <font> London <$$font> , and
several other Places of the Kingdom , purely by Conversation .
ANON1-1711-1,11.106

And what shou'd hinder us from learning the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue
after the same Manner ? ANON1-1711-1,11.107

For tho' there be <font> Grammars <$$font> writ for the <font> Latin
<$$font> Tongue , yet this doth not hinder but that it may be learn'd
without them . ANON1-1711-1,11.108

For it is well known that there are <font> Grammars <$$font> writ for
the <font> French , Italian <$$font> and <font> Spanish <$$font>
Languages , ANON1-1711-1,11.109

and yet notwithstanding , these Languages are learn'd by Conversation .
ANON1-1711-1,11.110

Travellers and Merchants generally never trouble their Heads with <font>
Grammar <$$font> , ANON1-1711-1,11.111

and yet make themselves Masters of the languages of any Country , in
less than a Year's time , by discoursing with the Natives :
ANON1-1711-1,11.112

and in <font> England <$$font> little Children , who know not what
<font> Grammar <$$font> means , are bred up to speak foreign Languages
fluently and correctly ; ANON1-1711-1,11.113

tho' therefore there be <font> Grammars <$$font> writ for the <font>
Latin <$$font> Tongue , yet this is no good Reason why it may not be
learn'd without <font> Grammar <$$font> , as well as other Languages .
ANON1-1711-1,11.114

There are indeed some in <font> England <$$font> , that teach Modern
Languages by <font> Grammar : <$$font> ANON1-1711-1,11.115

But this is not at all necessary , as is unanswerably evident , from
those <P_12> Persons who perfectly learn them without it .
ANON1-1711-1,12.116

However , those who teach the Modern Languages by <font> Grammar
<$$font> , only teach their Scholars so much of it , as to know how to
decline Nouns and Verbs , and understand some few Rules
ANON1-1711-1,12.117

For as the Languages themselves , they are generally taught not by Books
, but Conversation , which is found by Experience , to be much the
readiest , easiest and best Method of teaching them .
ANON1-1711-1,12.118

If therefore Men be so much in love with <font> Grammar <$$font> , as to
think nothing can be done without it , let them imitate those who teach
the Modern Tongues by <font> Grammar <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,12.119

Let them teach their Scholars how to decline Nouns and Verbs , and if
they please , a few Rules ; ANON1-1711-1,12.120

but as for the Language it self , it is the best learn'd by Conversation
. ANON1-1711-1,12.121

If after all they be afraid without any Reason , that their Scholars
will never rightly understand the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue , unless
they have their <font> Grammar <$$font> at their Finger's Ends <paren>
as they say <$$paren> they may enjoin {TEXT:enjoyn} them to get a little
of it every Morning and Evening , and let other Times be spent in
discoursing in <font> Latin <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,12.122

If it be objected that the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue is more
difficult to be learn'd than the Modern Languages , and therefore it
can@ @not be learn'd by Conversation , as the Modern Languages are ; I
answer , that I do not perceive it to be more difficult in it self .
ANON1-1711-1,12.123

But allowing it to be , yet all that can be fairly concluded from hence
is , that it can@ @not be so quickly learn'd as the Modern Tongues are .
ANON1-1711-1,12.124

Now since the Modern Languages are so quickly learn'd by Conversation ,
it is surely the best Way to teach the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue so
too . ANON1-1711-1,12.125

For supposing Men were a Year longer in learning <font> Latin <$$font> ,
than in learning any of the Modern Languages , yet how much Time wou'd
be sav'd after <P_13> this Method , in comparison of learning it
according to that tedious Manner , in which it is commonly taught :
ANON1-1711-1,13.126

Some by great Application have learn'd <font> French <$$font> , or
<font> Italian <$$font> , in half a Year's Time , by Conversation ;
ANON1-1711-1,13.127

and indeed any foreign {TEXT:forreign} Tongue is ordinarily taught in a
Year , or a Year and a Half : ANON1-1711-1,13.128

And such as are two Years in learning any one of them , are accounted
either very negligent , or else very incapable of retaining them .
Whereas , we are Eight or Nine Years or more in Learning <font> Latin
<$$font> , and a little <font> Greek <$$font> after the common Method of
teaching them . ANON1-1711-1,13.129

Allowing therefore the most , <font> viz. <$$font> Two Years for
learning a Modern Language by Conversation ; and that <font> Latin
<$$font> , by reason of the difficulty of it , requires a Year more ;
yet even upon this Supposition , it will be Learn'd by Conversation in
Three Years , ANON1-1711-1,13.130

and consequently several Years will be gain'd : ANON1-1711-1,13.131

But I am perswaded {TEXT:persuaded} , it might be Learn'd after this
Method in less than Three Years . ANON1-1711-1,13.132

Notwithstanding what I have said , that the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue
may be Learn'd by Conversation , yet there may be some , who will not
believe it to be Practicable , unless I cou'd shew them that it has
actually been Learn'd by it : ANON1-1711-1,13.133

To satisfy these Men therefore , I shall produce some Instances .
ANON1-1711-1,13.134

<font> Robert <$$font> the Son of <font> Albericus Gentilis <$$font> ,
when he was but Seven Years of Age , talk'd <font> Latin <$$font> ,
<font> French <$$font> and <font> English <$$font> , by Reason , that
his Father talk'd to him in nothing but <font> Latin <$$font> , and his
Mother , who was a <font> French <$$font> Woman , in nothing but <font>
French <$$font> , and the rest of the Family , <paren> for he Liv'd at
that time in <font> Oxford <$$font> <$$paren> in nothing but <font>
English <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,13.135

He Read <font> Virgil <$$font> when he was not full Eight Years of Age ,
ANON1-1711-1,13.136

and Publish'd Commentaries upon it , as he was entering {TEXT:entring}
<P_14> upon his Eleventh Year : So perfectly did he understand the
<font> Latin <$$font> Tongue at that Age . ANON1-1711-1,14.137

He therefore knowing by Experience , of what great Advantage it is to
Learn the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue by Conversation ; Wrote a Book ,
in which he Advises all Men to Learn it after the same Method .
ANON1-1711-1,14.138

The Book is at present , in the <font> Bodleian <$$font> Library ,
ANON1-1711-1,14.139

and the Title of it is , <font> Roberti Gentilis le chemin Abregé , Or a
Method for attaining of Sciences in a short Time <$$font> , London 1654
. 8=vo= . ANON1-1711-1,14.140

The Learned <font> Gaspar Scioppius <$$font> , in his Preface to his
Philosophical {TEXT:Phylosophical} <font> Grammar <$$font> , tells us ,
that after he had Learn'd to decline <font> Nouns <$$font> and <font>
Verbs <$$font> , by daily Conversing with those who talk'd <font> Latin
<$$font> ; he was so good a Proficient in that Language , that in Six
Months' {TEXT:Month's} Time he cou'd express himself in it , concerning
all such Matters as he had occasion to Discourse about .
ANON1-1711-1,14.141

<font> Montaigne {TEXT:Montagne} <$$font> Lib. 1. cap 25. of his
Essays assures us , that his Mother and his Servants , by hearing his
Master and him Discourse in <font> Latin <$$font> , cou'd not only
understand , but also talk with him about Matters of daily Concern .
ANON1-1711-1,14.142

The Ingenious Mr. <font> Cowley <$$font> , cou'd never remember the
<font> Grammar <$$font> Rules , as we find in his Life before the last
Edition of his Works , ANON1-1711-1,14.143

and yet no Man for many Years has Writ finer <font> Latin <$$font> than
he did . ANON1-1711-1,14.144

The Incomparable Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , who understood <font>
Latin <$$font> and <font> Greek <$$font> in a very great Perfection ,
besides {TEXT:besides,} several of the Modern Languages , never made use
of any <font> Grammar <$$font> , after she had Learn'd to Decline a
<font> Noun <$$font> and a <font> Verb <$$font> , as her Tutor <font>
Roger Ascham <$$font> tells us , <font> Pag. <$$font> 23. of the
Second Part of his Book , Entituled , <font> The School-Master <$$font>
, London 1570 . ANON1-1711-1,14.145

'T@ @is true , the 2 last learn'd <font> Latin <$$font> chiefly from
Books . ANON1-1711-1,14.146

But since they learn'd it without <font> Grammar <$$font> , it must be
allow'd , that they wou'd with more Ease , and I am <P_15> perswaded
{TEXT:persuaded} more readily , have learn'd it by Conversation .
ANON1-1711-1,15.147

I am told that the Restorers of Polite Learning in <font> Italy <$$font>
, had a Project of Making the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue by
Conversation , the Vulgar Language of the Country , and that they
carry'd their Design so far , that in a great many Places , <font> Latin
<$$font> was commonly spoke , instead of <font> Italian <$$font> : Which
if true , is a plain Argument , that <font> Latin <$$font> may be taught
by Conversation . ANON1-1711-1,15.148

However , it is evident from the Instances I have given , and from the
Reason of the thing , that <font> Latin <$$font> may be learn'd after
this Method . ANON1-1711-1,15.149

And since it may , I wonder much that this Method shou'd not be
preferr'd before the usual Method of teaching it , since 't@ @is
certainly more excellent than that which is generally observ'd .
ANON1-1711-1,15.150

For whereas <font> Latin <$$font> is commonly forc'd into Boys by
Threats , and Rods , and Ferrulas , on the contrary by Conversation it
must come with Ease and Pleasure . ANON1-1711-1,15.151

For whilst the Master is discoursing in <font> Latin <$$font> , he may
entertain his scholars with many innocent Diversions , and make the
School in a proper Sense a <font> Ludus Literarius <$$font> .
ANON1-1711-1,15.152

But when <font> Latin <$$font> is impos'd as a Task upon Boys , they set
about it with great Uneasiness and Reluctancy . ANON1-1711-1,15.153

And as <font> Latin <$$font> is learn'd with much more Ease and
{COM:sic} Conversation , so it is likewise not only learn'd more readily
, as I have before made it appear , but also more perfectly :
ANON1-1711-1,15.154

For Boys who learn <font> Latin <$$font> after the common Method for
seven or eight Years , are neither able to read an Author with Ease ,
nor speak <font> Latin <$$font> fluently . Whereas it is certain from
Experience that such as learn the Modern Languages by Conversation ,
both speak them fluently , and read with Pleasure the best Books that
are writ in them . ANON1-1711-1,15.155

And if the <font> Latin <$$font> Tongue were learn'd after the same
Manner , we <P_16> need not question but the Success wou'd be the same .
ANON1-1711-1,16.156

By this means also , Boys wou'd gain some Years , which they might spend
very usefully in reading good Books , in learning Arithmetick , in
Geography , in Chronology , History , practical Mathematicks , and such
other Arts as are suitable to their Capacities , besides other
Advantages which wou'd accrue to them from the Use of this Method .
ANON1-1711-1,16.157

I will venture to add , that <font> Latin <$$font> may be learn'd by
Conversation without hindering {TEXT:hindring} any Business :
ANON1-1711-1,16.158

For if as many as cou'd conveniently shou'd meet together every Night
<paren> which is a leisure Time <$$paren> and had a Master who cou'd
talk <font> Latin <$$font> fluently and correctly , I am perswaded
{TEXT:persuaded} they wou'd learn it with Pleasure , and in two or three
Years Time make themselves Masters of it . ANON1-1711-1,16.159

For since Men who know little or nothing of <font> French , Italian
<$$font> , or <font> Spanish <$$font> , quickly learn any one of these
Languages , only by going twice or thrice a Week to a Club , where they
are oblig'd to speak it ; we may reasonably think that Men wou'd learn
<font> Latin <$$font> after the same Method , and almost with the same
Ease ANON1-1711-1,16.160

If after all , it shou'd be objected that the School-Masters themselves
are forc'd to have frequent Recourse to <font> Grammar <$$font> , in
order to satisfy themselves in many Cases what is , or is not , true
<font> Latin <$$font> , and consequently , that they can@ @not warrant
the Trueness of a <font> Latin <$$font> Conversation : I answer , That I
take it to be undoubtedly certain , that he , who can correct <font>
Latin <$$font> when it is writ <paren> as all School-masters do their
Boys' {TEXT:Boy's} Exercises <$$paren> can correct it when it is spoke .
ANON1-1711-1,16.161

And what hinders them from consulting the <font> Grammar <$$font> upon
Occasion in Discourse , as well as in correcting Exercises
{TEXT:Exercise} ? ANON1-1711-1,16.162

When I press learning by Conversation , I <P_17> wou'd not be
misunderstood , as if I absolutely condemn'd the use of <font> Grammar
<$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,17.163

For I sincerely declare , I shou'd be very much for learning the <font>
Grammar <$$font> , provided we had one that cou'd be depended upon :
ANON1-1711-1,17.164

But the present national <font> Grammar <$$font> is so very faulty and
imperfect , as Mr. <font> Johnson <$$font> has made it appear , that it
is , as he calls it , an errant Trifle . ANON1-1711-1,17.165

And besides , provided we had a good <font> Grammar <$$font> , the Main
of the Language ought first to be learn'd by Conversation , before
Persons apply themselves to the Study of <font> Grammar <$$font> .
ANON1-1711-1,17.166

For it seems improper to me to begin with <font> Grammar <$$font> first
, which must be acknowledged the difficultest Task in learning <font>
Latin <$$font> , and what requires the ripest Judgment .
ANON1-1711-1,17.167

I shall add nothing more concerning this Method , but only that I think
it requisite , there shou'd be two Masters at least , that so they might
keep up Discourse , and their Scholars improve the more by their
Conversation . ANON1-1711-1,17.168

The two former Methods shewing how <font> Latin , &c. <$$font> may be
learn'd by Conversation , I shall consider in the third Place , what in
my Judgment is the best Method of learning Languages by Books .
ANON1-1711-1,17.169

It is usual for Masters to keep their Scholars a Year , or a Year and an
half , or longer , only in the <font> Grammar <$$font> , upon Pretence
of grounding them well , or laying a solid Foundation ,
ANON1-1711-1,17.170

and will not put them into any other Book , 'till they can give Rules
for what they learn ; as if a Mother shou'd teach her Child no more
<font> English <$$font> , than the Child can give Rules for .
ANON1-1711-1,17.171

This is certainly a very imprudent Method in teaching , and an odd Way
to instruct Boys , to be Criticks in a Language , before they understand
it . ANON1-1711-1,17.172

For we must not think of being at first of all perfect <font>
Grammarians <$$font> , and <P_18> then <font> Linguists <$$font> ;
ANON1-1711-1,18.173

but we must understand a Language tolerably well , before we can pretend
to apply the <font> Grammar <$$font> Rules to any Purpose . Wherefore ,
before Boys begin to read Books , I am perswaded {TEXT:persuaded} it is
sufficient for them to know how to decline Nouns , and conjugate Verbs :
ANON1-1711-1,18.174

And when they know so much , they may be enjoin'd to get by Heart , a
little of the <font> Grammar <$$font> , every Morning and Evening :
ANON1-1711-1,18.175

as for all the rest of the Day , they may employ it in learning the
Language from some Book ; ANON1-1711-1,18.176

and the best Book I can recommend to them , to begin with , is the
<font> New Testament <$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,18.177

For in learning <font> Latin <$$font> by Books , ought always to begin
with those which are the easiest ; ANON1-1711-1,18.178

and those Books are the easiest to us , the <font> English <$$font> of
which we are best acquainted with : ANON1-1711-1,18.179

Seeing therefore we generally read , when we are Children , the <font>
New Testament <$$font> twice or thrice over , especially the Gospels ,
and consequently know the <font> English <$$font> of it , much better
than of any other Book , it is the most reasonable to begin with it ,
ANON1-1711-1,18.180

nor is there any Book of a more easy , and familiar Stile than the
Gospels , and consequently more fit for the Capacity of Boys .
ANON1-1711-1,18.181

Besides , to begin with the <font> New Testament <$$font> , wou'd not
only be of great Benefit to them in learning <font> Latin <$$font> , but
also in learning other Languages . ANON1-1711-1,18.182

For by reading it in <font> Latin <$$font> , they must necessarily be
better acquainted with the Sense of it , ANON1-1711-1,18.183

and consequently , they may still with greater Ease begin with it , in
what Language soever they learn , seeing it is to be had in all
Languages , which I believe they@ @'ll have occasion to learn .
ANON1-1711-1,18.184

I wou'd therefore advise every Master to observe the following Method ,
which I am perswaded {TEXT:persuaded} wou'd be easy to himself , as well
as advantageous to those whose Education he has the Charge of .
ANON1-1711-1,18.185

<P_19>

Let him order one of his Scholars , every Night to read a Chapter
leisurely , distinctly and with an audible Voice ; ANON1-1711-1,19.187

at the same time let him take care , that every one of his Scholars have
his <font> Latin , Greek <$$font> or <font> Hebrew Testament <$$font> ,
according as they learn any of these Languages , and that they go along
in them , with him that reads it in <font> English <$$font> :
ANON1-1711-1,19.188

Let this Chapter be constru'd the next Morning . ANON1-1711-1,19.189

The Master may call for what Class , or Boy he pleases ,
ANON1-1711-1,19.190

and by this means every Boy will be kept in suspense which Part will
fall to his Share , ANON1-1711-1,19.191

and consequently , they will all be oblig'd to prepare themselves , to
give an Account of every Part of it . ANON1-1711-1,19.192

Thus the same Chapter may go through the whole School ,
ANON1-1711-1,19.193

and it may be both constru'd every Morning , and the Boys examin'd in it
, in about half an Hour . ANON1-1711-1,19.194

After the same manner a Chapter may be read before they go to dinner ,
and constru'd and examin'd at Night . ANON1-1711-1,19.195

Thus two Chapters wou'd be learn'd every Day , ANON1-1711-1,19.196

and consequently the whole <font> New Testament <$$font> wou'd be gone
through thrice a Year . ANON1-1711-1,19.197

For , as for Holy-days , and other Vacancies , they may be supply'd by
reading upon Occasion , two short Chapters at a time .
ANON1-1711-1,19.198

Considering therefore , that every Chapter is first read in <font>
English <$$font> , and constru'd , and examin'd , and that between it's
being read in <font> English <$$font> and constru'd and examin'd we must
suppose that every Boy wou'd at least look it once carefully over ; it
is evident , that by this Method the whole <font> New Testament <$$font>
wou'd be gone over Nine times a Year . By which means , Boys cou'd not
but be very well acquainted with it , which wou'd be of vast Advantage
to them : ANON1-1711-1,19.199

For by knowing the <font> English <$$font> so well , it must needs be
very easy for them to translate the <font> Latin <$$font> into <font>
English <$$font> , ANON1-1711-1,19.200

if they do but understand two or three <font> Latin <$$font> Words in a
Verse , these will easily lead them into the Knowledge of <P_20> the
Rest . ANON1-1711-1,20.201

For they must necessarily know the <font> English <$$font> so well ,
after they have gone over the <font> New Testament <$$font> Nine times ,
that if they have but a Hint at a Verse , they can@ @not but remember it
, by Reason they can almost say the <font> English <$$font> by Rote
ANON1-1711-1,20.202

and consequently they may easily Translate the <font> Latin <$$font> .
ANON1-1711-1,20.203

As I think it proper that two Chapters shou'd be learn'd every Day ,
according to the fore-going Method , so I wou'd have Boys , immediately
after they have learn'd to decline Nouns and Verbs , taught no other
Book for some Time , but the <font> New Testament <$$font> , because ,
for the Reasons already alledg'd , I look upon it to be the best Book
for them to begin with . ANON1-1711-1,20.204

If it be objected , that they ought not to read the <font> Latin
Testament <$$font> , because it is not fine <font> Latin <$$font> , I
answer , that all that I contend for , is that it is the easiest Book ,
and the properest for them to begin with . ANON1-1711-1,20.205

And Notwithstanding , the Plainness of the <font> Latin <$$font> , it
wou'd no more spoil their <font> Latin <$$font> Stile , than reading the
<font> English Testament <$$font> will spoil the <font> English <$$font>
Stile . ANON1-1711-1,20.206

As for the <font> Roman <$$font> Authors , which are proper for their
Imitation , and from whom the Beauties and Elegancies of the <font>
Latin <$$font> Tongue are to be learn'd , I shall mention them hereafter
. ANON1-1711-1,20.207

When Boys can construe the <font> Latin Testament <$$font> tolerably
well , it wou'd be proper for them to learn <font> Geography <$$font> ,
and a little <font> Chronology <$$font> , before they enter upon
Classical Authors . ANON1-1711-1,20.208

For as these two Sciences are justly reckon'd the two Eyes of History ,
and consequently , wou'd be of great Advantage to them in reading the
<font> Roman <$$font> Historians so they are very suitable to their
Capacities . ANON1-1711-1,20.209

The <font> Geography <$$font> which I recommend , is Dr. <font> Well
<$$font> 's little Book of <font> Geography <$$font> , together with the
Maps , in which there is an admirable good System of both <P_21> New and
Ancient {TEXT:Antient} <font> Geography <$$font> , done after a plain
and easy Method , ANON1-1711-1,21.210

and may be learn'd in a very short Time . ANON1-1711-1,21.211

As for <font> Chronology <$$font> , it is enough for Boys to know the
more remarkable <font> Epochs {TEXT:Epochas} <$$font> , that so they may
not be quite Ignorant when such an Author liv'd , or when such an Action
was done . ANON1-1711-1,21.212

A little Knowledge of these two Sciences , will not only make Authors
more easy to them , ANON1-1711-1,21.213

will qualify them to read them with greater Pleasure and Advantage .
ANON1-1711-1,21.214

When they have learn'd <font> Geography <$$font> , and a little <font>
Chronology <$$font> , the <font> Roman <$$font> Historians seem to be
the Properest for them , <font> viz. Cornelius Nepos , Caesar's
Commentaries , Quintus Curtius , Justin <$$font> and <font> Livy
<$$font> . ANON1-1711-1,21.215

And since some of these Authors are very well translated into <font>
English <$$font> <paren> as <font> Cornelius Nepos <$$font> by different
Hands , <font> Caesar's Commentaries <$$font> by <font> Martin Bladen ,
Justin <$$font> by <font> Tho. Brown <$$font> <$$paren> it may be
convenient to allow them the <font> English <$$font> Translation , at
least at first , in order to render them more easy and agreeable
{TEXT:agreable} to them . ANON1-1711-1,21.216

After these Authors , they may learn <font> Cicero's select Orations .
<$$font> ANON1-1711-1,21.217

In the <font> Greek <$$font> Tongue , when they can decline Nouns and
Verbs , and understand the <font> New Testament <$$font> tolerably well
, they ought to read the Best Authors , as <font> Xenophon
{TEXT:Zenophon} , Socrates , Demosthenes , Thucydides <$$font> , &c.
and learn from them , the Beauties and Elegancies of the <font> Greek
<$$font> Tongue . ANON1-1711-1,21.218

As for <font> Grammar <$$font> , observe the same Method I have above
directed : ANON1-1711-1,21.219

And as for the best Editions of Authors , I refer you to <font> Joh.
Alberti Fabricii Bibliotheca Latina <$$font> , 1 Vol. and his <font>
Bibliotheca Graeca <$$font> , 3 Vol. ANON1-1711-1,21.220

As for Poetry , tho' it be a pleasant and entertaining Amusement , yet
it contributes very little towards making us Useful in our Generation ,
since neither Law , nor Divinity , nor Physick , nor <P_22> any other
Profession that I know of is much benefitted by it ; ANON1-1711-1,22.221

and therefore I have often wonder'd that so much Time shou'd be spent as
there commonly is , not only in reading the Poets , but also in
composing Poetical Exercises . ANON1-1711-1,22.222

But , supposing Poetry were of Advantage , yet Poets ought not to be
read in the Method which they are , but after those Authors which are
writ in Prose . ANON1-1711-1,22.223

For in Prose , the Words are generally easy , and plac'd in a Natural
Order ; whereas , in Poetry they are study'd , and plac'd more
Perplexedly , and Confusedly . ANON1-1711-1,22.224

As therefore we ought to begin with the easiest , so we ought first to
read such Authors as have writ in Prose , before we attempt to read the
Poets . ANON1-1711-1,22.225

Besides , Learning by Books in the Method I have propos'd , a <font>
Latin <$$font> Conversation upon Occasion , wou'd be of vast Advantage .
ANON1-1711-1,22.226

If therefore , the Master at some vacant Hours , wou'd be pleas'd to
converse familiarly , with as many Boys as he pleas'd in <font> Greek
<$$font> or <font> Latin <$$font> , according to their Capacity , they
wou'd , without all Questions , receive great Benefit from his Discourse
, learn to speak fluently and correctly , and improve much more in that
Time , than if they had been reading an Author . ANON1-1711-1,22.227

And if they were accustom'd to converse with the Master in <font> Latin
<$$font> or <font> Greek <$$font> , they wou'd , without Doubt ,
endeavour in their Master's Absence to discourse with one another in
these Languages . ANON1-1711-1,22.228

As for Exercise , I wou'd not have them put upon composing it , before
they have some Stock of Learning . ANON1-1711-1,22.229

For tho' it be undoubtedly of great Advantage , yet they must have
Materials , ANON1-1711-1,22.230

or else how is it possible for them to compose it ? ANON1-1711-1,22.231

And whence can they have their Matter , but either from Books or
Experience ? ANON1-1711-1,22.232

So that their <P_23> only Business must be to Translate , 'till they
have learn'd from Authors to Compose out of their own Heads .
ANON1-1711-1,23.233

Tho' this last Method of learning <font> Latin , &c. <$$font> be
tedious , yet I look upon it to be preferable to that , which is
commonly observ'd . ANON1-1711-1,23.234

But however , I do@ @n't think it comparable to the second Method ,
which I am perswaded {TEXT:persuaded} is not only practicable and easy ,
but quick and pleasant : ANON1-1711-1,23.235

And if any Persons wou'd be pleas'd to put it in Practice , I am
confident they wou'd find the Success of it , more than answer their
Expectations . ANON1-1711-1,23.236

I am satisfy'd how much it wou'd be for the Advancement of Religion ,
the Honour of the Establish'd Church of <font> England <$$font> , the
Prevention of Vice , and Promotion of Virtue , to learn Languages in a
short Time . ANON1-1711-1,23.237

And if by this Essay , I may be the Instrument of promoting these Noble
Ends , I shall think my_self very happy . ANON1-1711-1,23.238

<font> Finis . <$$font> ANON1-1711-1,23.239

