<BEGIN_anon2-1732-2>

<P_7>

<heading>

A Thought relating to Education . ANON2-1732-2,7.4

<$$heading>

The Reader will excuse me for beginning this Discourse with a Recital of
the Advantages that <paren> according to my Apprehension <$$paren> will
attend this new Method of Institution ; when I ingenuously acquaint him
, that this is done with a Design to dispose him to a favourable
Attention to the Method it_self , the next Thing to be treated on ;
towards the friendly Reception of which , it ca@ @n't be thought
improper to bespeak his Candor and good Will . ANON2-1732-2,7.6

And that what I have to offer may be fully understood , and have its due
Weight , he is desired to keep this in his Mind , constantly in View
while he is reading this Essay , this Thought relating to Education ,
founded on a right Use of Bishop <font> Wilkin <$$font> 's Philosophical
Tables and Dictionary ; that the Design of that Reverend Author in these
Tables is to give a regular Enumeration and Description of all kinds of
Things and Notions that fall under Discourse : As 't@ @is his Purpose
and Endeavour in the Dictionary to explain , <P_8> and according to
their various Significations , give the Meaning of all kinds of Words ,
or Names of Things . ANON2-1732-2,8.7

That this Mark which the ingenious Speculator in his elaborate Treatise
aimed at , may be still present to his Thoughts , continually before his
Eye . ANON2-1732-2,8.8

So much by way of Introduction , that the Tract may without Prejudice be
read , without Disadvantage weighed and considered . ANON2-1732-2,8.9

Now the first obvious Advantage that will recommend this methodical Way
of Institution is this ; that hereby a plain and short Way will be
opened for the Attainment not only of verbal but real Knowledge ; to
which , 't@ @is thought , this will be found a more direct and readier
Course , than any that has hitherto been put in Practice , that has yet
been taken for the instructing and training up of Youth .
ANON2-1732-2,8.10

It ca@ @n't be deny'd , that the getting and settling in our Minds clear
and distinct Ideas of Things is the first necessary Step towards
Knowledge ; ANON2-1732-2,8.11

it will be own'd that our Knowledge can@ @not exceed our Ideas and
Notions of Things , that where they are imperfect , obscure , or
confus'd , to imagine that our Knowledge should be certain and clear ,
would be a foolish Thought , a vain and groundless Expectation ;
ANON2-1732-2,8.12

it will likewise be granted , that true Definitions , Descriptions not
unartfully made , are Means no ways improper to convey just and adequate
Conceptions . ANON2-1732-2,8.13

And lastly , it will be confessed , that where the Mind that is to be
furnished with these Ideas is weak , the Understanding small , and the
Capacity narrow ; in that Case the Method pitched upon , and made choice
of for presenting these Materials of Knowledge , in Conformity to the
Nature of the Subject , ought to be , at the same time , both clear and
short . ANON2-1732-2,8.14

As , I say , the <P_9> Knowledge of Things arises from the Clearness and
Distinctness of our Ideas ; so does the Knowledge of Words , no mean
part of Science , from a right Understanding of their various Meanings
and Acceptations , according to their primary and proper , or their
secondary and improper Significations . ANON2-1732-2,9.15

Now whether the Dictionary be so contriv'd as to answer that useful Part
of Initiation , the giving the exact and precise Meaning of Words , it
becomes not , nor shall I take upon me to affirm : ANON2-1732-2,9.16

Let any Gentleman of the University spend at different Times about
twenty Hours in comparing several Words in the Dictionary with the
Tables to which they are referred ; ANON2-1732-2,9.17

and after the Experiment made with Care and Attention , let him be his
own Judge of the Performance , ANON2-1732-2,9.18

and as it shall appear to him upon Trial , accordingly let him determine
. ANON2-1732-2,9.19

As the Tables contain a regular Enumeration and Description of all
Things and Notions , plac'd according to such an Order , that the bare
Disposition and Arraignment of them may help towards , and contribute to
the defining them ; so by this Artifice , this Juxtaposition
{TEXT:Juxta-position} of Things similar , that have an Affinity and
Relation to , and a mutual Dependance on each other ; the Descriptions
become the plainer and shorter , ANON2-1732-2,9.20

are reduced into a narrow Compass , and couch'd in a very few Words ;
sufficient however by the help of Method and Order , to determine their
primary Significations , to convey the main and principal Ideas .
ANON2-1732-2,9.21

On these two Accounts therefore are they the fitter to be apply'd to the
Use I propose , more accommodate and subservient to this Design of
laying a Foundation for Knowledge in the Minds of young Children ; as
they exhibit to their Minds clear Ideas , and in a manner adapted <P_10>
and well suited to their Capacity . ANON2-1732-2,10.22

When I call this Method of Institution a more direct and readier Way to
the Knowledge of Things as well as Words , tho' I plainly by that
Sentence declare in Favour thereof , and give it Preference to , and a
Place above others : I assign a Reason at the same time for this Esteem
, ANON2-1732-2,10.23

shew what moves and induces me to give it this Preference ; while it
answers an End to which other Methods of Instruction can contribute very
little , are no ways fitted to promote : An End so little regarded by
the present Instructors in the Scheme they proceed by , that it seems
almost wholly excluded , and scarce even so much as intended .
ANON2-1732-2,10.24

Another and no small Benefit from this new Method will be , that as
Ideas and Words are presented to , and fix'd upon the Mind in a natural
Order ; that whereas it receives at the same time such and such only as
have some Affinity and Relation to each other ; that those betwixt which
there is a Congruity , Likeness and mutual Dependence , are orderly and
in a regular way offered to the Imagination ; in consequence of this
methodical Arrangement ; ANON2-1732-2,10.25

as they have been deposited and plac'd , so will they arise ; not
confusedly <paren> as in others who have so received their Ideas
<$$paren> but regularly , and in a manner agreeable to that by which
they have been received . ANON2-1732-2,10.26

They who have been educated in the common Way , according to the
ordinary and accustomed Forms , are too apt , I am afraid , to fall into
the Extravagancies of <font> Horace <$$font> 's Painter , and think in
the same Manner that he drew . ANON2-1732-2,10.27

A Way then chalk'd out to keep the Fancy in some Bounds , and fix that
mercurial Quality ; to confine the Thoughts within a narrow Compass ,
always upon the Wing , and for rambling ; to prevent these exorbitant
Sallies of the Imagination , <P_11> and exclude all vain , wild and
impertinent Ideas , and that lays a Foundation for a sober , clear ,
regular Course of Thinking , such as I presume this Method of
Instruction will introduce , where the mental Pictures will be drawn
truly , and according to Nature ; compos'd of congruous , coherent Ideas
, that have a near Relation , Agreement and mutual Correspondence with
one another ; an Institution thus helpful to exact Writing , and true
Reasoning , wants only to be try'd in order to be receiv'd and valu'd ,
by such whose Business has lay in the Employment and Exercise of the
Mind , the Severity of Study , and the Fatigue of Thinking ; who need
not be told how laborious , tedious and unpleasant Composition has been
rendered to them on this account , and from this Cause chiefly ; that a
vast Number of idle , foreign and impertinent Ideas have been
continually arising in , offering themselves to , solliciting of , and
diverting the Mind from Attention to the Subject under Consideration ;
the Matter exercising their rational and discursive Faculties .
ANON2-1732-2,11.28

A third Advantage I shall name with respect to the Learner , is , that
hereby his Memory will be improv'd and strengthen'd ; to which <paren>
as we are taught by Experience <$$paren> nothing can more contribute ,
prove more serviceable , and be of greater Benefit than Clearness and
Order : The two special and recommendatory Properties of this new Method
, so calculated as to be an Auxiliary , and give Assistance to another
Operation of the Mind , that in young Persons ca@ @n't be too much
promoted and furthered ; that , I mean , of Invention , by suggesting
proper and pertinent Ideas , in an orderly and methodical way .
ANON2-1732-2,11.29

Nor will the Judgment <paren> whose Office and Business it is to
compound and compare Notions of near Affinity and Relation together
<P_12> so as to make a right Estimate of Things and Consequences
<$$paren> be left unassisted ; but on the contrary , be enabled by the
Light it will receive from Clearness , Distinctness and Order , to make
Determinations with more Certainty and Exactness , nearer Conformity to
the Nature of Things , and Agreement to what should be the end of all
our Study , the Effect and Result of all our Labours and Disquisitions ,
and for the Discovery of which that Faculty was given us ; I say , a
more perfect Agreement to Truth itself . To all which may be added ,
that the Pupil having been thus early , and in his first Years
constantly accustom'd to Method , he will at length become a Methodist
himself , grow by degrees dextrous in the use of those Arms he has daily
handled ; and by the help of that Art he has been continually exercised
in , an expert and compleat Artist . ANON2-1732-2,12.30

The next Thing to be done , is to give a short Account of the Work on
which is built this New Method of Institution . ANON2-1732-2,12.31

The Author in his Scheme has reduc'd all Things or Notions to forty
Genus's or common Heads : ANON2-1732-2,12.32

The first six of these comprehend such Matters , as by reason of their
Generalness , or in some other Respect , are above all those common
Heads of Things , call'd Predicaments : ANON2-1732-2,12.33

The Reason for beginning his Tables in this metaphysical Manner he gives
in these Words , " That in the Enumeration of all Things and Notions ,
those are first to be considered which are more general or comprehensive
, belonging either to Metaphysick , or to Grammar and Logick . And that
tho' Particulars are first in the Order of Being , yet Generals are
first in the Order of Knowing , because by these such Things and Notions
as are less general , are to be distinguish'd and defin'd . " On which
I shall make this Remark , <P_13> That let the Reason for making his
Tables of Transcendentals the first six of the forty , be never so good
, it will be very improper , and indeed ridiculous to begin with them in
this New Method ; being in many Particulars beyond the Capacity of a
Child , and therefore to be postpon'd , till an Acquaintance and
Familiarity with several other of the easier Tables has prepar'd the Way
, and render'd him capable of receiving Instruction by these more
difficult Tables by these Schemes harder to be understood .
ANON2-1732-2,13.34

The remaining thirty-four belong to the several Predicaments , of which
he reckons only five . ANON2-1732-2,13.35

Of these Substance takes in fourteen Genus's , Quantity three , Quality
five , Action four , and Relation eight . ANON2-1732-2,13.36

As to his Tables relating to Substance , which contain 130 Pages , and
make about half of what he calls the Scientifical Part ; I think they
are easy enough , and may be well understood by a Lad of eight or nine
Years of tolerable Parts , and forwarded by the Help and Assistance of a
diligent Tutor : So that if those Tables are not read thro' , 't@ @is
not on account of any great Difficulty in them , that renders them too
hard for the young Student ; but because they contain Things that may be
thought not very material , and of Consequence too minute to be
particularly and thoroughly considered . ANON2-1732-2,13.37

The three belonging to the Predicament of Quantity , <font> viz.
<$$font> Magnitude , Space and Measure , are , 't@ @is own'd , not so
easy ; ANON2-1732-2,13.38

and the Instructor will meet with some Particulars therein , the Meaning
whereof if he can convey to his young Pupil , he will shew his Ability
and Dexterity , his fitness to give Instructions , and how well
qualified he is to convey Knowledge . ANON2-1732-2,13.39

The next five Tables concern Quality , the Genus's belonging to which
are natural Power , <P_14> Habit , Manners , sensible Quality , and
Disease , with the various Differences and Species under each of these ,
as in the preceding and subsequent Tables . ANON2-1732-2,14.40

These Schemes reach from Page 194 to 225 , ANON2-1732-2,14.41

and explain many Things useful to be known ; ANON2-1732-2,14.42

part of this Knowledge young Master is capable of , ANON2-1732-2,14.43

and part thereof is beyond his Understanding and above his Reach ; so
that in the use of these , as indeed of almost all the Tables , it will
be proper , I may say necessary for the Preceptor to apply his Judgment
, without which this new propos'd Method will not in any degree answer
what is intended by this Way of Institution . ANON2-1732-2,14.44

Next to the Predicament of Quality succeeds that of Action ; the several
Kinds of which may be distributed into such as have for their Agent a
Spirit , or spiritual Faculty , call'd Spiritual Action . A Body or
material Substance , respecting chiefly either the Actions of animate
Bodies , call'd Corporeal Action , Passage of animate Bodies from one
place to another , stil'd Motion . Sundry Heads of Works , about which
Men of several Callings are to employ themselves , stil'd Operation .
ANON2-1732-2,14.45

These four Genus's take up about four_and_twenty Pages ,
ANON2-1732-2,14.46

and consist of Particulars , some more , some less useful and difficult
to be known ; on which account we must here again call on the Tutor to
make a just Distinction , and such a Choice as tends most to promote the
Improvement of the young Gentleman he is to direct , whom he has taken
under his Care , and is in the best and most advantageous manner to
instruct . ANON2-1732-2,14.47

Relation takes in eight Genus's , three of a more private Nature ,
namely , 1st . Oeconomical , or Family Relation , together with the
several Kinds of Things relating to those in that Capacity . As , 2dly
, Possessions . Or , 3dly , Provisions . ANON2-1732-2,14.48

By Relation <P_15> more publick , is included civil Relation , Judicial
, Military , Naval , and Ecclesiastical . ANON2-1732-2,15.49

These Genus's , as are most of the rest , are divided into six
Differences ; a Limitation 't@ @is acknowledged arbitrary , but
nevertheless convenient , and of use . ANON2-1732-2,15.50

Under each Difference are enumerated the several Species belonging to
that Difference . ANON2-1732-2,15.51

The Species are commonly joined together by Pairs , for the better
helping the Memory . ANON2-1732-2,15.52

Those Things which naturally have Opposites , are joined with them
according to such Opposition , whether single or double .
ANON2-1732-2,15.53

Those Things that have no Opposition are paired together , with respect
to some Affinity which they have one to another . ANON2-1732-2,15.54

And what is said of the Species in these five last Tables is to be
understood , tho' not particularly express'd , in the short Account I
gave of the other thirty_five . ANON2-1732-2,15.55

If but half that is contain'd under this Predicament Relation be made
clear to the Understanding of the Learner , not a little useful
Knowledge may thereby be imparted ; ANON2-1732-2,15.56

and thus by the help of these , and what he may learn from the former
Schemes , will the Understanding receive an Improvement beyond what has
been found at the Age of twelve , not inferior to what is usually to be
met with at sixteen . ANON2-1732-2,15.57

After all , I would not have any one believe that I think this Essay of
Bishop <font> Wilkins <$$font> 's compleatly finish'd , with all the
Advantages such a Work is capable of . ANON2-1732-2,15.58

'T@ @is no easy matter to enumerate all kinds of Things and Notions ,
ANON2-1732-2,15.59

and it will be no wonder that , upon a strict Examination , several
Things should be found wanting . ANON2-1732-2,15.60

It must be owned , that the Business of Defining , is , amongst all
others , a Thing the most nice and difficult , and that the doing this
for all kinds of Things and Notions , in a compleat and exact manner ,
is a Task too hard <P_16> for one Man , beyond any single Abilities ,
and is sufficient to employ the combin'd Studies , exercise the joint
Abilities of many Men , even of a College . So that great Allowance is
to be made for the many Slips of this ingenious and diligent Author in
this knotty part of the Work . ANON2-1732-2,16.61

'T@ @is no Business of mine to cry up these Tables as finish'd and in
all respects perfect , ANON2-1732-2,16.62

't@ @is enough to shew , that as imperfect as they are they come up to
my Design , and that a way of instructing Youth , between the Age of
Eight and Twelve , preferable to any other Method now in use , may , by
a learned and judicious Tutor , be thence collected and deriv'd . Not
but that the compleating the Tables , to render them more beneficial and
useful , is a thing to be desir'd , that merits the Endeavours and
Labours of such as approve of , and are willing to promote this part of
Education hitherto neglected , and here humbly offered and recommended
to the Publick . ANON2-1732-2,16.63

And I take the liberty of proposing a Way how this may with the least
Difficulty be brought about and effected . ANON2-1732-2,16.64

It may be taken for granted , that those Gentlemen who have instructed
Youth by these Tables for three or four Years <paren> the time proposed
for their thorough Understanding such a part of them as shall be thought
most useful , most suited to their Capacity <$$paren> will , by their
close Application to this Work , be enabled to make several very
material Amendments ; ANON2-1732-2,16.65

now if publick Notice was given by ten or twelve Persons who had been
thus employ'd , that their Alterations should be communicated to a
Person they approved of , and judg'd qualified , by the help of those
Emendations to compleat the Tables ; 't@ @is not improbable but some Man
of Leisure and Judgment might be found out willing to take the Pains of
making use of , and uniting their learned Labours towards finishing that
Work . ANON2-1732-2,16.66

<P_17>

When I assign three or four Years for the attaining the Knowledge that
is to be communicated by the Tables , it ca@ @n't be deny'd , that in
that Space of Time they be thoroughly understood , proper Defalcations
being made , what is judged unnecessary , or what appears too difficult
therein being omitted . ANON2-1732-2,17.68

Tho' I suppose the Study of these Tables to be the daily Business of the
young Gentleman , I would not be thought to intend that this should be
his whole Employment ; ANON2-1732-2,17.69

an Hour or two each Day will be thought too much by him , and full
enough by the Tutor , who will find himself under the necessity of more
than ordinary Study and Application of Thought to facilitate
{TEXT:falicitate} the Work , to bring down what is above to the Level of
the Child's Capacity , to make that which is of it_self difficult , by a
proper Explication easy to be understood . ANON2-1732-2,17.70

I would not have it thought while I am thus earnestly recommending and
pressing these of the Tables , that I have no regard to the Dictionary ,
that I look on it as a thing unserviceable to the present Proposal , and
to be neglected as useless : ANON2-1732-2,17.71

A frequent Use ought to be made of this in conjunction with those :
ANON2-1732-2,17.72

From this should be selected a great number of Words that refer to the
Tables , which are themselves upon those References to be turn'd to and
consulted . ANON2-1732-2,17.73

The Dictionary and the Tables should go Hand in Hand ,
ANON2-1732-2,17.74

must mutually assist each other , and jointly contribute to the
conveying of Knowledge , by giving as well a clear understanding of
Words , as just and adequate Notions and Conceptions of Things .
ANON2-1732-2,17.75

And the Instructor must apply to this what <font> Horace <$$font> says
of Nature and Art , Study and Wit : - <font> Alterius sic Alter poscit
opem Res , & conjurat Amice . <$$font> ANON2-1732-2,17.76

<P_18>

The twelfth Chapter of the second Part of the Essay <paren> which is a
general Explication of the Tables , and contains a few Instances for the
better Guidance and Direction of those who would reap the greater
Advantage and Benefit from them <$$paren> ca@ @n't be read too often by
the Scholar , ANON2-1732-2,18.78

ca@ @n't be too much considered by him , or too deeply imprinted on his
Mind ; ANON2-1732-2,18.79

and the Tutor would do well to enlarge the Numbers of Examples to make
this explanatory Discourse still more advantageous and useful .
ANON2-1732-2,18.80

There is one Consideration on this Occasion not to be omitted , that
concerns , and is not unworthy the Notice of the Teacher himself ; as
what has an immediate relation to , and in a peculiar manner belongs to
him . That whereas , according to the common Method of Education , the
Preceptor <paren> when the Learner is of the Age of one just entering
{TEXT:entring} on this new Way of Institution <$$paren> has Work cut out
for him not at all suitable to his Character and Temper ; no ways
befitting a Scholar and a Gentleman ; and is employed in Things in an
inferior Nature , vastly below him ; in this Case , following this New
Method , he will not be engaged in mean and trivial Matters , in
unscholastick Occupations , in Ways low , unprofitable and
unentertaining ; but in a Business {TEXT:Buness} worthy of , beneficial
and delightful to himself ; ANON2-1732-2,18.81

his Ideas of Things will become more clear and distinct ; his Skill in
Words more accurate and exact ; ANON2-1732-2,18.82

his Mind , as well as his Knowledge , will be enlarged , and his
Imagination in no small Degree entertain'd and pleas'd .
ANON2-1732-2,18.83

Thus will he be rewarded for his great Pains , ANON2-1732-2,18.84

and the extraordinary Labours he is at , will bring its own Recompence
with it ; ANON2-1732-2,18.85

and if his Mind be put upon an unusual Strain and Exercise , it will
receive Advantage in proportion , an answerable and unusual Benefit .
ANON2-1732-2,18.86

<P_19>

This Encouragement he will have to quit the old Path , and strike into a
new Road ; a Way where he will meet with something still new and
agreeable to entertain him ; something useful to improve him ; nothing
trifling and below his Notice to discompose and disquiet him ; in a word
, whatever he can desire , and much more than he can expect , who has
taken upon him the humble Task , and is employ'd in that inferior Office
of giving Instructions to Children . ANON2-1732-2,19.88

Our Author having dispatch'd the second Thing propos'd to be treated of
, the Scientifical Part , containing a regular Enumeration and
Description of all Things and Notions , proceeds to the Organical Part ,
or an Enquiry after such kind of Helps , as may assist us in the forming
these more simple Notions into complex Propositions and Discourses ,
which he calls Grammar , which he treats of , not according to any
instituted and particular {COM:sic} ; but philosophically , and after a
manner rational and universal ; considering such Grounds and Rules as
naturally and necessarily belong to the Philosophy of Letters and Speech
in general ; which being on that account to his Purpose , and answering
his Design of a real Character , <font> &c. <$$font> he was oblig'd to
take a particular and distinct View of . ANON2-1732-2,19.89

What I have to say concerning this his natural Grammar , is this , that
as to the five last Chapters of this Discourse , I think there is little
in them to my Purpose , and that they may be entirely omitted as
unserviceable to this End . That out of the five first , if the Tutor
will give himself the trouble of making judicious Extracts , he may
collect some Rules and general Remarks , which would not prove unuseful
to his young Scholar . That as to the sixth and seventh Chapters ,
treating of Transcendential Particles , exhibiting Instances of the
<P_20> great Usefulness of these Particles , and Directions how they are
to be apply'd ; I take the liberty of recommending them to his Attention
, and serious Study ; not examining them as subservient to the Authors ,
but as conducive to , and promoting this new Method at Instruction .
ANON2-1732-2,20.90

And here I think fit to leave him to himself to try his Ability , and
make use of his own Sagacity , that he may have the Fatigue and Labour ,
as well as the Benefit and Pleasure of the Discovery .
ANON2-1732-2,20.91

A Child that has gone thro' this Essay , and been successful in these
initial and preparatory Studies ; that has made himself well acquainted
with his Mother Tongue ; learnt some general Rules of Grammar ; and
attain'd a Degree of Knowledge above his Age ; will soon adorn the
School he enters , ANON2-1732-2,20.92

will by a sudden and surprising Improvement , under the Instructions of
an able Grammarian , bring Reputation to this Method as well as to his
Master ; learning in a man-like , and not a puerile and childish Way ;
not as other Novices by roat , but as he has been accustomed , according
to his former Practice , by reason - ANON2-1732-2,20.93

And if we follow him from the School to the University , from <font>
Westminster <$$font> to <font> Oxford , <$$font> we shall find him as
apt to receive Academical Learning , with the same Facility as he had
before receiv'd Grammatical Literature and Classical .
ANON2-1732-2,20.94

From Acuteness in Distinguishing , Closeness in Reasoning , Certainty
and Firmness in Infering , he will soon commence a Logician , and become
Master of the second Science ; the Stiffness of which his first
Instructions will enable him to soften , to use the Art as a Gentleman ,
not a servile Follower , not with a pedantick Formality , but still
artfully , with Exactness and Regularity . ANON2-1732-2,20.95

And when the Mathematician takes him under his Instruction , <P_21> and
<font> Aristotle <$$font> gives Place to <font> Euclid <$$font> ; when
he quits the Common Field , and enters Inclosures ; when he begins to
contract his View , and from Generals descends to Particulars ; when he
confines his Thoughts to , and imploys his Talent in Reasoning about
Magnitude ; the two Qualities he brings along with him , Clearness and
Attention , will soon produce a third Earnestness and Intention ; by the
help whereof he will soon pass thro' the Elements , and be led to <font>
Archimedes <$$font> by <font> Euclid . <$$font> ANON2-1732-2,21.96

In a word , whether Chronology or History , natural or moral Philosophy
, Law or Divinity be the Object of his Study , the Imployment of his
Thoughts , the Diversion and Improvement of his Mind ; whether he
undertakes the Service of his Prince or his Country ; whether he shines
at Court or in Parliament ; his Skill in each Art , the Figure he makes
in every Station , will shew the Advantage of a good Foundation , of an
uncommon and philosophical Education . ANON2-1732-2,21.97

I had almost forgot one thing , the Instructor ought to be advertis'd of
, that in this Work there are several mean and vulgar Words not fit for
a Gentleman to use or to know ; ANON2-1732-2,21.98

if therefore I may on this Occasion be allowed to turn Adviser , I would
request the Gentleman who undertakes the Care and Direction of young
Persons , to strike out whatever Words he meets with either in the
Tables or Dictionary that come under this Denomination , deserve Censure
, and ought to be exterminated and expunged . ANON2-1732-2,21.99

I own I am a little surpriz'd that so ingenious and learned a Man as
Bishop <font> Wilkins , <$$font> should be guilty of this Over-sight ,
should sink into this Meanness ; ANON2-1732-2,21.100

but give me leave to make this Apology for him , ANON2-1732-2,21.101

let this be his Excuse , that the Work he was engag'd in , the Essay he
was upon , was long and difficult : In which Case great Allowance is to
be made , and the Candid <P_22> and Ingenuous will not be offended with
, nor bear hard upon such a Writer for every slight Mistake , such as
the common Frailty of our Nature may excuse , such as large Volumes are
seldom free from ; remembring that in long Performances Sleep will
sometimes surprize : That <font> Homer <$$font> himself is not without
his Faults , and has been sometimes observ'd to Nod .
ANON2-1732-2,22.102

I have before given an Hint , that there is not the utmost Correctness
in the Tables , that there is room <paren> as will be found on
Examination <$$paren> for Additions and Emendations ; and that tho' they
pass'd the Hands of a careful and exact Writer , they may be render'd
still more compleat and perfect . ANON2-1732-2,22.103

And as it concerns them more particularly who are to make use of these
Tables , that they should be in all Respects exact and compleat ; it
lies upon them , is their proper Business , by their Study and Skill ,
to bring about and effect what will render their Labour more useful ,
their Instructions of greater Benefit and Advantage .
ANON2-1732-2,22.104

In promoting this Design , these Gentlemen may very laudably spend their
Time and Study , taking with them , and observing this Caution , That as
the Correcting and Amending these Tables will prove Work of no small
Difficulty , will require great Care , and all imaginable Exactness of
Judgment ; so when they have undertaken this Task , they would not be
too forward in making Alterations , which will require their second and
third Thoughts , ought to pass a strict Examination , and be the Effect
and Result of the most serious Deliberation ; that they may herein
proceed on the surer Grounds , lest otherwise they should happen to
deface what they intended to amend . ANON2-1732-2,22.105

As well as I think of this new Method of Instruction , others , 't@ @is
likely , will entertain very <P_23> different Sentiments about it ; some
without well considering and weighing it ; some perhaps without giving
themselves the Trouble so much as to understand it ; both Sorts out of a
good Opinion and over_Fondness for the Methods generally practised ,
that are in common Use . ANON2-1732-2,23.106

And this Way of Proceeding is agreeable enough to what Men have formerly
done on the like Occasions , to the Backwardness there is in most to
receive any thing new , what does not come recommended to them by the
common Vogue . ANON2-1732-2,23.107

There may be many Instances , I doubt not , brought to illustrate this ,
ANON2-1732-2,23.108

but being unwilling to over-do , I shall confine my_self to two or three
Particulars . ANON2-1732-2,23.109

No one can deny Logarithms to be an Invention of excellent Art , and
exceeding useful to facilitate Calculations , by making Addition and
Substraction to answer the End of tedious Multiplications and Divisions
, ANON2-1732-2,23.110

and yet it was a considerable time before Men in other Parts did so far
take notice of them as to bring them into Use . ANON2-1732-2,23.111

The Art of Shorthand , in its kind , an ingenious Device , and of no
small Use , applicable to any Language , wonder'd at by Travellers that
have seen the Experience of it in <font> England <$$font> , was not
within sixty Years after its Invention brought into common Practice in
any other Nation . ANON2-1732-2,23.112

But to bring this home to our_selves . Sir <font> Isaac Newton <$$font>
<paren> allow'd by all the ablest Mathematician {TEXT:Mathematicians} of
the Age <$$paren> in the Lectures he read during his Professorship at
<font> Cambridge <$$font> about sixty Years ago has given Solutions of
several Problems in an analytical way built on the <font> Data <$$font>
of <font> Euclid ; <$$font> ANON2-1732-2,23.113

these Demonstrations are publish'd in a Book entitled , <font> Elementa
Arithmeticae Universalis <$$font> , a Work well known to be his , tho'
his Name is not prefix'd to it ; ANON2-1732-2,23.114

and Judges see that masterly Hand in them , that is visible in all his
Performances : ANON2-1732-2,23.115

<P_24>

The same Method <paren> of which he was no small Admirer <$$paren> he
follow'd in solving some Problems in his fifth Section of the first Book
of his <font> Principia Mathematica Naturalis Philosophiae <$$font> ,
printed in 1687 . ANON2-1732-2,24.117

By the judicious Application of this Analysis he has made his Proofs
most elegant , neater than if he had made use of common Algebra .
ANON2-1732-2,24.118

Now one would think that the Name of this great Master , and the
Excellency of his Performances , could not fail of giving Credit and
recommending Reasoning on these Principles , this Method of Proving to
the World ; and that this great Geometer and Analyst would have had
Followers as well as Admirers . ANON2-1732-2,24.119

But it has happen'd otherwise , ANON2-1732-2,24.120

an over_Fondness to Algebra <paren> an Art deservedly esteem'd <$$paren>
has brought the ancient Analysis into Disesteem ; ANON2-1732-2,24.121

and tho' in some Cases vastly preferable , 't@ @is little regarded ,
ANON2-1732-2,24.122

and <font> Euclid <$$font> 's <font> Data <$$font> is become a Book most
injudiciously neglected . So that the only Cause of Wonder <paren> in
case this Thought be not disregarded <$$paren> can be this , that so
mean a Writer should meet with better Reception than the ancient <font>
Greek <$$font> , - than the modern Mathematical Philosopher .
ANON2-1732-2,24.123

I shall now make a little Excursion , and by way of Digression say
something from our Author relating to Pronunciation
{TEXT:Pronounciation} ; a thing that deserves the Attention of those who
speak in publick , such as would be listened to , and heard with
Attention . ANON2-1732-2,24.124

As for the Powers of Letters , they are very uncertain , no ways fix'd
and determin'd to the same Signification ; which , as to our <font>
English <$$font> Pronounciation , may be made to appear by abundance of
Instances both in the Vowels and the Consonants ; ANON2-1732-2,24.125

as to the Vowels 't@ @is generally acknowledged , that each of them have
several Sounds . ANON2-1732-2,24.126

<font> Vocales omnes Plurifonae <$$font> , says a learned Writer .
ANON2-1732-2,24.127

They are pronounced , says another , <P_25> <font> Aliquando tenuius ,
exitiusq ; nunc crassius , nuce intermedio sono . <$$font>
ANON2-1732-2,25.128

And I do@ @n't know but the Observation may be carried something further
, and that it may be affirmed , that each Vowel , besides its own , has
the Powers of the other four . ANON2-1732-2,25.129

As to the Consonants , these likewise are of very uncertain Powers .
ANON2-1732-2,25.130

Now , these Variations and Differences <paren> whether agreeable to
Reason or not <$$paren> are so settled by a long and general Custom ,
that every one must conform his way of speaking to this Law and Rule of
Speech . ANON2-1732-2,25.131

And on this Occasion it may be observ'd that Men of Reading are in this
Print , are not a little faulty , and may deserve a gentle Admonition ;
ANON2-1732-2,25.132

they are too apt to deliver themselves , and be govern'd by the way of
Spelling , and not according to the usual Manner of pronouncing . The
reason of which Mistake seems to be this , that they follow their Eye
more than their Ear ; in this Case a bad , because a false Guide ; when
't@ @is considered that the Words whose Sounds do disagree with their
Way of Writing , are vastly numerous , and make a considerable part of
our Language . ANON2-1732-2,25.133

And without any Complement to the Women , I may venture to say , that in
the Point of Reading they have the Advantage of Men ,
ANON2-1732-2,25.134

they offend the least against Custom ; ANON2-1732-2,25.135

their Ear , herein the surest Director , is what governs their Speech ,
by this Means render'd Easy , Natural and Agreeable .
ANON2-1732-2,25.136

Whoever has frequented publick Assemblies , heard Speeches in the Upper
or Lower House of Parliament , observ'd how much a well worded Oration
has been disparag'd by a bad Delivery , and how much an inartificial and
empty Harangue has been set off by an handsome way of Speaking , will
not think good Pronounciation , a Matter below the Notice , unworthy the
Care , no mean Accomplishment of a Scholar , a Gentleman , <P_26> and
what those two Characters constitute , an Orator . ANON2-1732-2,26.137

Whilst I was drawing up this Discourse a Fancy came in my Mind , that
the Character it_self , tho' it could no ways answer the Author's Design
, might be made serviceable to another Purpose , and was not on that
account to be laid aside as a Thing entirely insignificant and useless .
ANON2-1732-2,26.138

This Thought is not for the Use of Children , but propos'd to Gentlemen
of the University , who are the proper Persons to receive Benefit from
it , which can be only rendered useful by the help of Learning and
Knowledge : ANON2-1732-2,26.139

I will first transcribe a Passage from the Bishop's Dedication as an
Introduction to what I have to offer on this Head . ANON2-1732-2,26.140

This Design will contribute much to the clearing of some of our Modern
Differences in Religion , by unmasking many wild Errors , that shelter
themselves under the Disguise of affected Phrases ; which being
philosophically unfolded , and render'd according to the genuine and
natural import of Words , will appear to be Inconsistencies and
Contradictions . ANON2-1732-2,26.141

And several of those pretended Mysteries and profound Notions ,
expressed in great swelling Words , whereby some Men set up for
Reputation , being this way examin'd , will appear to be either Nonsense
, or very flat and jejune . ANON2-1732-2,26.142

And tho' it should be of no other Use but this , yet were it in these
Days well worth a Man's Pains and Study , considering the common
Mischief that is done , and the many Impostures and Cheats that are put
upon Men under the Disguises , and by the sophistical Use of Words .
ANON2-1732-2,26.143

Let it be observed that this Character has a reference to the Nature of
Things , and that common Notion of them wherein Mankind does agree ;
that the End of it is the Expression of <P_27> our Conceptions by Marks
which signify not Words but Things . ANON2-1732-2,27.144

'T@ @is next to be consider'd , that when Words were first learnt , in
our Infancy , a great part of them were imprinted on the Memory without
Notions ; the rest with Ideas very confus'd and indistinct ; and that by
this Means a Foundation has been laid for Error and Mistakes in
abundance ; which must be acknowledged , more or less , affect all Men ;
and from which the utmost Labour and Study has not been able wholly to
free them , several being undiscoverable by the Mind seeing them through
a Mist and Cloud of Words . ANON2-1732-2,27.145

It were therefore to be wished , that some Method could be found out
that might enable them to abstract , to separate Words from Things , to
excite Ideas in the Imagination as much as possible , unmasked and
disengaged from their Names ; in order to frame our Notions agreeable to
the Nature of Things , that our Conceptions may become just ; that is ,
clear , distinct , and determinate . ANON2-1732-2,27.146

To this End I beg leave to propose <paren> till some better Method can
be discovered <$$paren> to Gentlemen of Speculation
{COM:preceding_word_not_clear} and Learning , as no improper Means ,
this real Character of Bishop Wilkins . ANON2-1732-2,27.147

The ingenious Author fancies the Learning of this so easy a Work , that
it might be attain'd in a Month's time ; ANON2-1732-2,27.148

herein 't@ @is not unlikely he is mistaken , as most Men are apt to be
when they pass their Judgment upon the Easiness of what they thoroughly
understand , and are perfect Masters of . ANON2-1732-2,27.149

I should rather think it would take two or three Months for one of
Capacity , and Memory , so to understand it as to be able to express his
Mind by this Character with tolerable Ease and Readiness .
ANON2-1732-2,27.150

If it shall however appear a fit Means to rectify our Notions , by
giving us a clear <P_28> and naked Representation of Things ; they who
put a just Value on Truth , will not think the Time thus spent , lost ,
or unusefully employ'd . ANON2-1732-2,28.151

Now , that this Character may prove beneficial and useful , I am induced
to think when I consider , that in Arithmetical Operations , there is an
absolute Necessity to make use of Characters <paren> for such I may
properly call the <font> Greek <$$font> , the <font> Roman <$$font> ,
and the present way of Notation <$$paren> without which the Art of
Numbers could never in any tolerable Degree have been understood .
ANON2-1732-2,28.152

And because the Satisfaction a Man gives himself is most agreeable and
convincing ; I would advise any one who doubts of the Necessity of
Characters in Arithmetick , to try his Skill and Dexterity , and see
whether he can divide or multiply large Numbers express'd <paren> not in
the common way by Figures or Characters <$$paren> but by Words :
ANON2-1732-2,28.153

One or two Trials of this kind will give the most scrupulous Person
ample Satisfaction , that had there been no other way of setting down
Numbers but by Words , Arithmetick would not have made that Figure in
the World it does at present ; been in that universal Esteem for its
Usefulness which it now bears ; would never have been numbred among the
Liberal Sciences . ANON2-1732-2,28.154

And I leave it to Consideration whether the Clearness and Evidence in
Mathematical Demonstrations by which the Mind is convinc'd , and with
which 't@ @is so greatly delighted ; does not partly arise from , and is
in some measure owing to the Paucity of Words us'd in that way of
Proving ; <paren> by References as in this way of expressing the Mind by
a real Character <$$paren> to the Art of raising and exciting Ideas
unincumbered , not clouded by a Number and Multiplicity of Words .
ANON2-1732-2,28.155

And 't@ @is not altogether unworthy our Notice , that the close
Application , the very Intention <P_29> of Mind necessary to enable a
Man to express himself well by this Character , will not a little
contribute to that Clearness which is the best Preservative against
Errors , the surest Guide to Truth . ANON2-1732-2,29.156

By what I have said to recommend the Learning and Practice of this
Character , I would not be thought to intend that this sort of Study
should take up much of the Time and Thoughts of those who are employ'd
on a great variety of Matter , in a continued Progress towards new and
fresh Objects , worthy their Pursuit ; more eagerly to be desir'd ; more
diligently and assiduously to be labour'd for ; but by way of Amusement
and Diversion to be put in Practice now and then , to be at times and
occasionally , by way of Change and Variety , an Exercise of their Parts
and Learning , in a speculative and philosophick , and at the same time
no unuseful Way , no ways unbecoming a Scholar , a Man of Knowledge to
be engag'd in . ANON2-1732-2,29.157

But to return to , and speak a word or two more of the Tables .
ANON2-1732-2,29.158

In the fourth , fifth and sixth Chapters of the second Book of this
Essay , where our Author treats of Vegetables , under the Name of Herbs
, Shrubs , and Trees : Of Animals , under the Name of exsanguious
{TEXT:exanguious} Animals , Fishes , Birds , and Beasts ; and of the
Parts of animate Bodies , more peculiar , and more general : He is more
than ordinary particular , ANON2-1732-2,29.159

and has hereupon imploy'd about an_hundred_and_fifteen Pages , where a
less Number might have been sufficient . ANON2-1732-2,29.160

Now in Excuse for his over_Minuteness in these Tables , which may be
thought redundant , it may be urg'd , that the Bishop being a Virtuoso ,
and fond of those Parts of Knowledge that those Gentlemen commonly busy
themselves about , and the Work it_self being addrest to the President
and Fellows of the Royal <P_30> Society : He might be too apt to indulge
his Fancy , to gratify himself in pursuing his beloved Study ; and being
got into those immense Fields of Contemplation , might be tempted to
wander and expatiate upon those Subjects which would be no less
agreeable to the Gentlemen of the Society than to himself .
ANON2-1732-2,30.161

But our young Gentleman , who 't@ @is supposed to be designed for higher
and more useful Attainments , is not obliged to follow the Reverend
Author through these long and tedious Tables : ANON2-1732-2,30.162

As he is not to be a Botanist , he has no occasion to trouble himself
about getting a very exact and particular Knowledge of those numerous
kinds of Plants , which those that are most vers'd in the Study of them
, are under some Difficulty even fully to enumerate .
ANON2-1732-2,30.163

And as he is not to write of Fishes , Birds and Beasts , it belongs not
to him to enquire after , and understand the several Species of Animals
; ANON2-1732-2,30.164

and tho' Mr. <font> Willoughby <$$font> , in order to improve himself
in , and advance that part of Knowledge , might think it worth his while
to travel through the most considerable Parts of <font> Europe <$$font>
, to add to the ingenious Observations of other learned Authors those of
his own ; yet , if I was to advise , I would not have our young Scholar
spend so much Time as to traverse the Tables owing to the Labours of
that inqusitive Traveller . ANON2-1732-2,30.165

And of the hundred_and_fifteen Pages , let him content himself with
reading about fifty . ANON2-1732-2,30.166

On the other hand , where there is a Deficiency in the Tables , it will
deserve the Study of the Tutor , for the Benefit of his Pupil , to add
what is wanting , and supply these Defects . ANON2-1732-2,30.167

As I have in this Discourse a constant Eye to the Bishop's Essay , and
make frequent References to it , they who are Strangers to the Work ,
will complain of the Obscurity of this ; ANON2-1732-2,30.168

and I may be <P_31> blam'd by these Men for what they@ @'ll call an
unintelligible way of Writing : ANON2-1732-2,31.169

To such I shall only say this , that in giving account of a Folio of
above six_hundred Pages in an Octavo Pamphlet of thirty_one , this could
not be avoided . ANON2-1732-2,31.170

If indeed instead of referring my Reader to what is in Print , I had
sent my Reader to some un-come-at-able MS. I had then laid my_self open
to <font> Hudibras {TEXT:Hubibras} <$$font> 's witty Censure , <font> In
Western Clime there is a town To those that live therein well known .
<$$font> ANON2-1732-2,31.171

<font> Finis . <$$font> ANON2-1732-2,31.172

