<BEGIN_austen-181x-2>

<P_454>

{ED:128._To_Caroline_Austen._Sunday_21_April_1816}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Chawton AUSTEN-181X-2,454.5

Sunday April 21=st= AUSTEN-181X-2,454.6

My dear Caroline AUSTEN-181X-2,454.7

I am glad to have an opportunity of writing to you again ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,454.8

for my last Note was written so long before it was sent , that it seemed
almost good for nothing . AUSTEN-181X-2,454.9

The note to your Papa is to announce the death of that excellent woman
Miss Eliz=th= Leigh ; AUSTEN-181X-2,454.10

it came here this morning enclosed in a letter to Aunt Cassandra .
AUSTEN-181X-2,454.11

We all feel that we have lost a most valued old friend ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,454.12

but the death of a person at her advanced age , so fit to die and by her
own feelings so <font> ready <$$font> to die , is not to be regretted .
AUSTEN-181X-2,454.13

She has been so kind as to leave a little remembrance of 20 +L
{TEXT:+L20} to your Grandmama . AUSTEN-181X-2,454.14

I have had a letter from Scarlets this morning , with a very tolerable
account of health there . AUSTEN-181X-2,454.15

We have also heard from Godmersham , AUSTEN-181X-2,454.16

and the day of your Uncle and Fanny@ @'s coming is fixed ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,454.17

they leave home tomorrow se'night ; AUSTEN-181X-2,454.18

spend two days in Town AUSTEN-181X-2,454.19

and are to be with us on Thursday May 2=nd= . AUSTEN-181X-2,454.20

We are to see your cousin Edward likewise , but probably not quite so
soon . AUSTEN-181X-2,454.21

Your Uncle Henry talks of being in Town <P_455> again on Wednesday .
AUSTEN-181X-2,455.22

He will have spent a complete fortnight at Godmersham ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,455.23

and no doubt it will have done him good . AUSTEN-181X-2,455.24

Tell your Mama that he came back from Steventon much pleased with his
visit to her . AUSTEN-181X-2,455.25

Your Grandmama is not <font> quite <$$font> well , AUSTEN-181X-2,455.26

she seldom gets through the 24 hours without some pain in her head ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,455.27

but we hope it is lessening , and that a continuance of such weather as
may allow her to be out of doors and hard at work every day , will
gradually remove it . AUSTEN-181X-2,455.28

Cassy has had great pleasure in working <font> this <$$font> - whatever
it may be - for you , AUSTEN-181X-2,455.29

I believe she rather fancied it might do for a quilt for your little wax
doll , AUSTEN-181X-2,455.30

but you will find a use for it if you can I am sure .
AUSTEN-181X-2,455.31

She often <font> talks <$$font> of you AUSTEN-181X-2,455.32

and we should all be very glad to see you again - AUSTEN-181X-2,455.33

and if your Papa comes on Wednesday , as we rather hope , and it suited
everybody that you should come with him , it would give us great
pleasure . AUSTEN-181X-2,455.34

Our Fair at Alton is next Saturday which is also Mary Jane's Birthday ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,455.35

and you would be thought an <font> addition <$$font> on such a great day
. AUSTEN-181X-2,455.36

Yours affec=ly= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,455.37

{ED:128.1._To_Caroline_Austen._Sunday_21_April_1816}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

I shall say no more , because I know there may be
{COM:editor's_emendation_from_"th_many"} many circumstances to make it
inconvenient at <P_456> home . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.40

- We are almost ashamed to include your Mama in the invitation , or to
ask <font> her <$$font> to be at the trouble of a long ride for so few
days as we shall be having disengaged , AUSTEN-181X-2,456.41

for we <font> must <$$font> wash before the G=m= Party come
AUSTEN-181X-2,456.42

& therefore Monday would be the {TEXT:missing_"the"} last day that our
House could be comfortable for her ; AUSTEN-181X-2,456.43

but if she does feel disposed to pay us a little visit & you could
<font> all <$$font> come , so much the better . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.44

- We do not like to <font> invite <$$font> her to come on wednesday , to
be turned out of the house on Monday . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.45

{ED:129._To_Anna_Lefroy._Sunday_23_June_1816}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

My dear Anna AUSTEN-181X-2,456.48

Cassy desires her best thanks for the book . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.49

She was quite delighted to see it : AUSTEN-181X-2,456.50

I do not know when I have seen her so much struck by anybody's kindness
as on this occasion . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.51

Her sensibility seems to be opening to the perception of great actions .
AUSTEN-181X-2,456.52

These gloves having appeared on the Piano_Forte ever since you were here
on Friday , we imagine they must be yours . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.53

Mrs. Digweed returned yesterday through all the afternoon's rain
AUSTEN-181X-2,456.54

and was of course wet through , AUSTEN-181X-2,456.55

but in speaking of it she never once said ' It was beyond everything , '
which I am sure it must have been . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.56

Your Mama means to ride to Speen Hill tomorrow to see the Mrs. Hulberts
who are both very indifferent . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.57

By all accounts they really are breaking now . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.58

Not so stout as the old Jackass . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.59

Yours affec=ately= J A AUSTEN-181X-2,456.60

Chawton , Sunday , June 23=rd= . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.61

Uncle Charles's birthday . AUSTEN-181X-2,456.62

<P_457>

{ED:130._To_James_Edward_Austen,_son_of_James_Austen._Tuesday_9_July_1816}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Chawton AUSTEN-181X-2,457.66

Tuesday July 9 . 1816 AUSTEN-181X-2,457.67

My dear Edward AUSTEN-181X-2,457.68

Many Thanks . AUSTEN-181X-2,457.69

A thank for every Line , & as many to Mr. W. Digweed for coming .
AUSTEN-181X-2,457.70

We have been wanting very much to hear of your Mother ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,457.71

& are happy to find she continues to mend , AUSTEN-181X-2,457.72

but her illness must have been a very serious one indeed .
AUSTEN-181X-2,457.73

- When she is really recovered , she ought to try change of air & come
over to us . AUSTEN-181X-2,457.74

- Tell your Father I am very much obliged to him for his share of your
Letter & most sincerely join in the hope of her being eventually much
the better for her present Discipline . AUSTEN-181X-2,457.75

She has the comfort moreover of being confined in such weather as gives
one little temptation to be out . AUSTEN-181X-2,457.76

It is really too bad , AUSTEN-181X-2,457.77

& has been too bad for a long time , much worse than anybody <font> can
<$$font> bear , AUSTEN-181X-2,457.78

& I begin to think it will never be fine again . AUSTEN-181X-2,457.79

This is a finesse of mine , AUSTEN-181X-2,457.80

for I have often observed that if one writes about the weather , it is
generally completely changed before the Letter is read .
AUSTEN-181X-2,457.81

I wish it may prove so now , & that when Mr. W. Digweed reaches
Steventon tomorrow , he may find you have had a long series of hot , dry
weather . AUSTEN-181X-2,457.82

We are a small party at present , only G. Mama , Mary Jane & myself .
AUSTEN-181X-2,457.83

- Yalden's coach cleared off the rest yesterday . AUSTEN-181X-2,457.84

I suppose it is known at Steventon that Uncle Frank & Aunt Cassandra
were to go to Town <P_458> on some business of Uncle Henry's - & that
Aunt Martha had some business of her own which determined her to go at
the same time ; AUSTEN-181X-2,458.85

- but that Aunt Frank determined to go likewise & spend a few days with
her family , may not be known - nor that two other places in the Coach
were taken by Capt. & M=rs= Clement . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.86

- Little Cassy went also , AUSTEN-181X-2,458.87

& does not return at present . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.88

They are all going to Broadstairs again . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.89

- The Aunt Cass: & the Aunt Martha did not mean to stay beyond two whole
days , AUSTEN-181X-2,458.90

but the Uncle Frank & his Wife proposed being pressed to remain till
Saturday . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.91

I am glad you recollected to mention your being come home .
AUSTEN-181X-2,458.92

My heart began to sink within me when I had got so far through your
Letter without its being mentioned . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.93

I was dreadfully afraid that you might be detained at Winchester by
severe illness , confined to your Bed perhaps & quite unable to hold a
pen , & only dating from Steventon in order , with a mistaken sort of
Tenderness , to deceive me . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.94

- But now , I have no doubt of your being at home , AUSTEN-181X-2,458.95

I am sure you would not say it so seriously unless it actually were so .
AUSTEN-181X-2,458.96

- We saw a countless number of Postchaises full of Boys pass by
yesterday morn=g= - full of future Heroes , Legislators , Fools , and
Villains . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.97

- You have never thanked me for my last Letter , which went by the
Cheese . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.98

I can@ @not bear not to be thanked . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.99

You will not pay us a visit yet of course , AUSTEN-181X-2,458.100

we must not think of it . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.101

Your Mother must get well first , AUSTEN-181X-2,458.102

& you must go to Oxford and <font> not <$$font> be elected ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,458.103

after that , a little change of scene may be good for you ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,458.104

& your Physicians I hope will order you to the Sea , or to a house by
the side of a very considerable pond . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.105

Oh ! it rains again ; AUSTEN-181X-2,458.106

it beats against the window . AUSTEN-181X-2,458.107

- Mary <P_459> Jane & I have been wet through once already today ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,459.108

we set off in the Donkey Carriage for Farringdon as I wanted to see the
improvements Mr. Woolls is making , AUSTEN-181X-2,459.109

but we were obliged to turn back before we got there , but not soon
enough to avoid a Pelter all the way home . AUSTEN-181X-2,459.110

We met Mr. Woolls - AUSTEN-181X-2,459.111

I talked of it's being bad weather for the Hay - AUSTEN-181X-2,459.112

& he returned me the comfort of it's being much worse for the Wheat .
AUSTEN-181X-2,459.113

- We hear that Mrs. S- does not quit Tangier - AUSTEN-181X-2,459.114

why & wherefore ? AUSTEN-181X-2,459.115

- Do you know that our Browning is gone ? AUSTEN-181X-2,459.116

- You must prepare for a William when you come , a good_looking Lad ,
civil & quiet , & seeming likely to do . AUSTEN-181X-2,459.117

- Good_bye . AUSTEN-181X-2,459.118

I am sure Mr. W. D. will be astonished at my writing so much ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,459.119

for the Paper is so thin that he will be able to count the Lines , if
not to read them . AUSTEN-181X-2,459.120

- Yours affec=ly= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,459.121

My dear James AUSTEN-181X-2,459.122

We suppose the Trial is to take place this week , AUSTEN-181X-2,459.123

but we only feel sure that it can@ @not have taken place yet because we
have heard nothing of it . AUSTEN-181X-2,459.124

A letter from G=m= today tells us that <font> Henry <$$font> as well as
William K- goes to France with his Uncle . AUSTEN-181X-2,459.125

- Y=rs= ever - J. A AUSTEN-181X-2,459.126

{ED:131._To_Caroline_Austen._Monday_15_July_1816}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

My dear Caroline AUSTEN-181X-2,459.129

I have followed your directions AUSTEN-181X-2,459.130

& find your Handwriting admirable . AUSTEN-181X-2,459.131

If you continue to improve as <P_460> much as you have done , perhaps I
may not be obliged to shut my eyes at all half a year hence .
AUSTEN-181X-2,460.132

I have been very much entertained by your story of Carolina & her aged
Father , AUSTEN-181X-2,460.133

it made me laugh heartily , AUSTEN-181X-2,460.134

& I am particularly glad to find you so much alive upon any topic of
such absurdity , as the usual description of a Heroine's father .
AUSTEN-181X-2,460.135

- You have done it full justice - AUSTEN-181X-2,460.136

or if anything <font> be <$$font> wanting , it is the information of the
venerable old Man's having married when only Twenty_one , & being a
father at Twenty_two . AUSTEN-181X-2,460.137

I had an early opportunity of conveying your Letter to Mary Jane ,
having only to throw it out of the {COM:missing_"the"} window at her as
she was romping with your Brother in the Back Court .
AUSTEN-181X-2,460.138

- She thanks you for it - AUSTEN-181X-2,460.139

& answers your questions through me . AUSTEN-181X-2,460.140

- I am to tell you that she has passed her time at Chawton very
pleasantly indeed , that she does not miss Cassy so much as she expected
, & that as to Diana Temple , she is ashamed to say it has never been
worked at since you went away . AUSTEN-181X-2,460.141

- She is very glad that you found Fanny again . AUSTEN-181X-2,460.142

- I suppose you had worn her in your stays without knowing it , & if she
tickled you , thought it only a flea . AUSTEN-181X-2,460.143

Edward's visit has been a great pleasure to us . AUSTEN-181X-2,460.144

He has not lost one good quality or good Look , AUSTEN-181X-2,460.145

& is only altered in being improved by being some months older than when
we saw him last . AUSTEN-181X-2,460.146

He is getting very near our own age , AUSTEN-181X-2,460.147

for we do not grow older of course . AUSTEN-181X-2,460.148

Chawton AUSTEN-181X-2,460.149

Monday July 15 . AUSTEN-181X-2,460.150

<P_461>

{ED:132._To_Cassandra_Austen._Wednesday_4_Sept._1816}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Letter today . AUSTEN-181X-2,461.154

His not writing on friday gave me some AUSTEN-181X-2,461.155

{COM:room_for_12_letters} coming makes me more than amends .
AUSTEN-181X-2,461.156

- I know you heard from Edward yesterday , AUSTEN-181X-2,461.157

Henry wrote to me by the same post , AUSTEN-181X-2,461.158

& so did Fanny - AUSTEN-181X-2,461.159

I had therefore 3 Letters at once which I thought well worth paying for
! AUSTEN-181X-2,461.160

Yours was a treasure , so full of everything . AUSTEN-181X-2,461.161

- But how very much Cheltenham is to be preferred in May !
AUSTEN-181X-2,461.162

- Henry does not write diffusely , but chearfully ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,461.163

- at present he wishes to come to us as soon as we can receive him -
AUSTEN-181X-2,461.164

is decided for Orders &c. - AUSTEN-181X-2,461.165

I have written to him to say that after this week , he can@ @not come
too soon . AUSTEN-181X-2,461.166

- I do not really expect him however immediately ; AUSTEN-181X-2,461.167

they will hardly part with him at G=m= yet . AUSTEN-181X-2,461.168

- Fanny does not seem any better , or very little ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,461.169

she ventured to dine one day at Sandling AUSTEN-181X-2,461.170

& has suffered for it ever since . AUSTEN-181X-2,461.171

- I collect from her , that M=r= Seymour is either married or on the
point of being married to M=rs= Scrane . AUSTEN-181X-2,461.172

- She is not explicit , because imagining us to be informed .
AUSTEN-181X-2,461.173

I am glad I did not know that you had no possibility of having a fire on
saturday - & so glad that you have your Pelisse ! AUSTEN-181X-2,461.174

- Your Bed room describes more comfortably than I could have supposed .
AUSTEN-181X-2,461.175

- We go on very well here , AUSTEN-181X-2,461.176

Edward is a great pleasure to me ; AUSTEN-181X-2,461.177

- he drove me to Alton yesterday ; AUSTEN-181X-2,461.178

I went principally to carry news of you & Henry , AUSTEN-181X-2,461.179

& <P_462> made a regular handsome visit , staying there while Edw=d=
went on to Wyards with an invitation to dinner ; AUSTEN-181X-2,462.180

it was declined , AUSTEN-181X-2,462.181

& will be so again today probably , AUSTEN-181X-2,462.182

for I really believe {TEXT:beleive} Anna is not equal to the fatigue .
AUSTEN-181X-2,462.183

- The Alton 4 drank tea with us last night , AUSTEN-181X-2,462.184

& we were very pleasant : - Jeu de violon &c. - all new to Mr. Sweney
- AUSTEN-181X-2,462.185

& he entered into it very well . AUSTEN-181X-2,462.186

It was a renewal of former agreable evenings . AUSTEN-181X-2,462.187

- We all <paren> except my Mother <$$paren> dine at Alton tomorrow -
AUSTEN-181X-2,462.188

& perhaps may have some of the same sports again - AUSTEN-181X-2,462.189

but I do not think M=r= and M=rs= D. will add much to our wit .
AUSTEN-181X-2,462.190

- Edward is writing a Novel - AUSTEN-181X-2,462.191

we have all heard what he has written - AUSTEN-181X-2,462.192

it is extremely clever ; written with great ease and spirit ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,462.193

if he can carry it on in the same way , it will be a first-rate work , &
in a style , I think , to be popular . AUSTEN-181X-2,462.194

Pray tell Mary how much I admire it . AUSTEN-181X-2,462.195

- And tell Caroline that I think it is hardly fair upon her & myself ,
to have him take up the Novel Line , AUSTEN-181X-2,462.196

... but the coldness of the weather is enough to account for their want
of power . AUSTEN-181X-2,462.197

- The Duchess of Orleans , the paper says , drinks at my Pump .
AUSTEN-181X-2,462.198

Your Library will be a great resource . AUSTEN-181X-2,462.199

- Three Guineas a week for such Lodgings ! AUSTEN-181X-2,462.200

- I am quite angry . AUSTEN-181X-2,462.201

Martha desires her Love - AUSTEN-181X-2,462.202

& is sorry to tell you that she has got some Chilblains on her fingers -
AUSTEN-181X-2,462.203

she never had them before . AUSTEN-181X-2,462.204

- This is to go for a Letter . AUSTEN-181X-2,462.205

Y=rs= affec=ly= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,462.206

I shall be perfectly satisfied if I hear from you again on Tuesday .
AUSTEN-181X-2,462.207

<P_463>

{ED:133._To_Cassandra_Austen._Sunday_8_Sept._1816}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Chawton , AUSTEN-181X-2,463.211

Sunday Sept: 8 . AUSTEN-181X-2,463.212

My dearest Cassandra AUSTEN-181X-2,463.213

I have borne the arrival of your Letter today extremely well ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,463.214

anybody might have thought it was giving me pleasure .
AUSTEN-181X-2,463.215

- I am very glad you find so much to be satisfied with at Cheltenham .
AUSTEN-181X-2,463.216

While the Waters agree , everything else is trifling .
AUSTEN-181X-2,463.217

- A letter arrived for you from Charles last Thursday .
AUSTEN-181X-2,463.218

They are all safe , & pretty well in Keppel S=t= , the children
decidedly better for Broadstairs , AUSTEN-181X-2,463.219

& he writes principally to ask when it will be convenient to us to
receive Miss P. - the little girls & himself . AUSTEN-181X-2,463.220

They w=d= be ready to set off in ten days from the time of his writing ,
to pay their visits in Hampshire & Berkshire - AUSTEN-181X-2,463.221

& he would prefer coming to Chawton <font> first . <$$font>
AUSTEN-181X-2,463.222

I have answered him AUSTEN-181X-2,463.223

& said , that we hoped it might suit them to wait till the <font> last
<$$font> week in Sept=r= , as we could not ask them sooner , either on
your account , or the want of room . AUSTEN-181X-2,463.224

I mentioned the 23=d= , as the probable day of your return .
AUSTEN-181X-2,463.225

When you have once left Cheltenham , I shall grudge every half day
wasted on the road . AUSTEN-181X-2,463.226

If there were but a coach from Hungerford to Chawton !
AUSTEN-181X-2,463.227

- I have desired him to let me hear again soon . AUSTEN-181X-2,463.228

- He does not include a Maid in the list to be accommodated
{TEXT:accomodated} , AUSTEN-181X-2,463.229

but if they bring one , as I suppose they will , we shall have no bed in
the house even then for Charles himself - let alone Henry - .
AUSTEN-181X-2,463.230

But what can we do ? AUSTEN-181X-2,463.231

- We shall have the G=t= House quite at our <P_464> command ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,464.232

it is to be cleared of the Papillons' Servants in a day or two ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,464.233

- they themselves have been hurried off into Essex to take possession -
not of a large Estate left them by an Uncle - but to scrape together all
they can I suppose of the effects of a Mrs. Rawstorn a rich old friend
& cousin , suddenly deceased , to whom they are joint Executors .
AUSTEN-181X-2,464.234

So , there is a happy end of the Kentish Papillons coming here .
AUSTEN-181X-2,464.235

No morning service today , wherefore I am writing between 12 & 1 o'clock
. AUSTEN-181X-2,464.236

- Mr. Benn in the afternoon - & likewise more rain again , by the look
& the sound of things . AUSTEN-181X-2,464.237

You left us in doubt of Mrs. Benn's situation , AUSTEN-181X-2,464.238

but she has bespoke her Nurse . AUSTEN-181X-2,464.239

- Mrs. F. A. seldom either looks or appears quite well .
AUSTEN-181X-2,464.240

- Little Embryo is troublesome I suppose . AUSTEN-181X-2,464.241

- They dined with us yesterday , AUSTEN-181X-2,464.242

& had fine weather both for coming & going home , which has hardly ever
happened to them before . AUSTEN-181X-2,464.243

- She is still unprovided with a Housemaid . AUSTEN-181X-2,464.244

Our day at Alton was very pleasant - Venison quite right - Children
well-behaved - & Mr. & Mrs. Digweed taking kindly to our Charades , &
other Games . AUSTEN-181X-2,464.245

- I must also observe , for his Mother's satisfaction , that Edward at
my suggestion , devoted himself very properly to the entertainment of
Miss S. Gibson . AUSTEN-181X-2,464.246

- Nothing was wanting except Mr. Sweney ; AUSTEN-181X-2,464.247

but he alas ! had been ordered away to London the day before .
AUSTEN-181X-2,464.248

- We had a beautiful walk home by Moonlight . AUSTEN-181X-2,464.249

- Thank you , my Back has given me scarcely any pain for many days .
AUSTEN-181X-2,464.250

I have an idea that agitation does it as much harm as fatigue , & that I
was ill at the time of your going , from the very circumstance of your
going . AUSTEN-181X-2,464.251

- I am nursing myself up now into as beautiful a state as I can ,
because I hear that Dr. <P_465> White means to call on me before he
leaves the Country . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.252

- <font> Even=g= . <$$font> AUSTEN-181X-2,465.253

- Frank & Mary & the Child=n= visited us this morn=g= .
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.254

Mr. & Mrs. Gibson are to come on the 23=d= - AUSTEN-181X-2,465.255

& there is too much reason to fear they will stay above a week .
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.256

- Little George could tell me where you were gone to , as well as what
you were to bring him , when I asked him the other day .
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.257

- Sir Tho: Miller is dead . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.258

I treat you with a dead Baronet in almost every Letter .
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.259

- So , you have C. Craven among you , as well as the Duke of Orleans &
Mr. Pococke . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.260

But it mortifies me that <font> you <$$font> have not added one to the
stock of common acquaintance . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.261

Do pray meet with somebody belonging to yourself .
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.262

- I am quite weary of your knowing nobody . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.263

- Mrs. Digweed parts with both Hannah and old Cook ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.264

the former will not give up her Lover , who is a man of bad Character ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.265

the Latter is guilty only of being unequal to anything .
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.266

- Miss Terry was to have spent this week with her Sister ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.267

but as usual it is put off . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.268

My amiable friend knows the value of her company .
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.269

- I have not seen Anna since the day you left us , AUSTEN-181X-2,465.270

her Father & Brother visited her most days . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.271

- Edward & Ben called here on Thursday . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.272

Edward was in his way to Selborne . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.273

We found him very agreable . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.274

He is come back from France , thinking of the French as one could wish ,
disappointed in everything . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.275

He did not go beyond Paris . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.276

- I have a letter from Mrs. Perigord , AUSTEN-181X-2,465.277

she & her Mother are in London again ; AUSTEN-181X-2,465.278

- she speaks of France as a scene of general Poverty & Misery , - no
Money , no Trade - nothing to be got but by the Innkeepers -
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.279

& as to her own present prospects , she is not much less melancholy than
before . AUSTEN-181X-2,465.280

- I have also a letter from Miss Sharp , quite one of her Letters ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,465.281

<P_466>

- she has been again obliged to exert herself - more than ever - in a
more distressing , more harrassed state - AUSTEN-181X-2,466.283

& has met with another excellent old Physician & his wife , with every
virtue under Heaven , who takes to her & cures her from pure Love &
Benevolence . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.284

- Dr. & Mrs. Storer are <font> their <$$font> Mrs. & Miss Palmer -
AUSTEN-181X-2,466.285

for they are at Bridlington . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.286

I am happy to say however that the sum of the account is better than
usual . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.287

Sir William is returned ; AUSTEN-181X-2,466.288

from Bridlington they go to Chevet , AUSTEN-181X-2,466.289

& she <font> is <$$font> to have a Young Governess under her .
AUSTEN-181X-2,466.290

- I enjoyed Edward's company very much , as I said before ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,466.291

& yet I was not sorry when friday came . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.292

It had been a busy week , AUSTEN-181X-2,466.293

& I wanted a few days quiet , & exemption from the Thought &
contrivances which any sort of company gives . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.294

- I often wonder how <font> you <$$font> can find time for what you do ,
in addition to the care of the House ; AUSTEN-181X-2,466.295

- and how good Mrs. West c=d= have written such Books & collected so
many hard words , with all her family cares , is still more a matter of
astonishment ! AUSTEN-181X-2,466.296

Composition seems to me Impossible , with a head full of Joints of
Mutton & doses of rhubarb . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.297

- <font> Monday . <$$font> AUSTEN-181X-2,466.298

- Here is a sad morn=g= . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.299

- I fear you may not have been able to get to the Pump .
AUSTEN-181X-2,466.300

The two last days were very pleasant . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.301

- I enjoyed them the more for your sake . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.302

But today , it is really bad enough to make you all cross .
AUSTEN-181X-2,466.303

- I hope Mary will change her Lodgings at the fortnight's end ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,466.304

I am sure , if you looked about well , you would find others in some odd
corner , to suit you better . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.305

Mrs. Potter charges for the <font> name <$$font> of the High S=t= .
AUSTEN-181X-2,466.306

- Success to the Pianoforte ! AUSTEN-181X-2,466.307

I trust it will drive you away . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.308

- We hear now that there is to be <font> no Honey <$$font> this year .
AUSTEN-181X-2,466.309

Bad news for us . AUSTEN-181X-2,466.310

- We must husband our present stock of Mead ; AUSTEN-181X-2,466.311

<P_467>

- & I am sorry to perceive that our 20 Gal: is very nearly out .
AUSTEN-181X-2,467.313

- I can@ @not comprehend how the 14 Gal: c=d= last so long .
AUSTEN-181X-2,467.314

We do not much like Mr. Cooper's new Sermons ; AUSTEN-181X-2,467.315

- they are fuller of Regeneration & Conversion than ever - with the
addition of his zeal in the cause of the Bible Society .
AUSTEN-181X-2,467.316

- Martha's love to Mary & Caroline , & she is extremely glad to find
they like the Pelisse . AUSTEN-181X-2,467.317

- The Debarys are indeed odious ! AUSTEN-181X-2,467.318

- - We are to see my Brother tomorrow , but for only one night .
AUSTEN-181X-2,467.319

- I had no idea that he would care for the Races , <font> without
<$$font> Edward . AUSTEN-181X-2,467.320

Remember me to all . AUSTEN-181X-2,467.321

Yours very affec:=ly= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,467.322

{ED:134._To_J._Edward_Austen._Monday_16_Dec._1816}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Chawton , AUSTEN-181X-2,467.325

Monday Dec: 16 . AUSTEN-181X-2,467.326

My dear Edward AUSTEN-181X-2,467.327

One reason for my writing to you now , is that I may have the pleasure
of directing to you <font> Esq=re= . <$$font> AUSTEN-181X-2,467.328

- I give you Joy of having left Winchester . AUSTEN-181X-2,467.329

- Now you may own , how miserable you were there ; AUSTEN-181X-2,467.330

now , it will gradually all come out - your Crimes & your Miseries - how
often you went up by the Mail to London & threw away Fifty Guineas at a
Tavern , & how often you were on the point of hanging yourself -
restrained only , as some illnatured aspersion upon poor old <P_468>
Winton has it , by the want of a Tree within some miles of the City .
AUSTEN-181X-2,468.331

- Charles Knight & his companions passed through Chawton about 9 this
morning ; later than it used to be . AUSTEN-181X-2,468.332

Uncle Henry and I had a glimpse of his handsome face , looking all
health & good-humour . AUSTEN-181X-2,468.333

- I wonder when you will come & see us . AUSTEN-181X-2,468.334

I know what I rather speculate upon , AUSTEN-181X-2,468.335

but I shall say nothing . AUSTEN-181X-2,468.336

- We think Uncle Henry in excellent Looks . AUSTEN-181X-2,468.337

Look at him this moment AUSTEN-181X-2,468.338

& think so too , if you have not done it before ; AUSTEN-181X-2,468.339

& we have the great comfort of seeing decided improvement in Uncle
Charles , both as to Health , Spirits & Appearance .
AUSTEN-181X-2,468.340

- And they are each of them so agreable in their different way ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,468.341

& harmonize so well , that their visit is thorough enjoyment .
AUSTEN-181X-2,468.342

- Uncle Henry writes very superior Sermons . AUSTEN-181X-2,468.343

- You and I must try to get hold of one or two , & put them into our
Novels ; AUSTEN-181X-2,468.344

- it would be a fine help to a volume ; AUSTEN-181X-2,468.345

& we could make our Heroine read it aloud of a Sunday Evening , just as
well as Isabella Wardour in the Antiquary , is made to read the History
of the Hartz Demon in the ruins of St. Ruth - though I beleive , upon
recollection , Lovell is the Reader . AUSTEN-181X-2,468.346

- By the bye , my dear Edward , I am quite concerned for the loss your
Mother mentions in her Letter ; AUSTEN-181X-2,468.347

two Chapters & a half to be missing is monstrous !
AUSTEN-181X-2,468.348

It is well that <font> I <$$font> have not been at Steventon lately , &
therefore can@ @not be suspected of purloining them ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,468.349

- two strong twigs & a half towards a Nest of my own , would have been
something . AUSTEN-181X-2,468.350

- I do not think however that any theft of that sort would be really
very useful to me . AUSTEN-181X-2,468.351

What should I do with your strong , manly , spirited Sketches , full of
Variety and <P_469> Glow ? AUSTEN-181X-2,469.352

- How could I possibly join them on to the little bit <paren> two Inches
wide <$$paren> of Ivory on which I work with so fine a Brush , as
produces little effect after much labour ? AUSTEN-181X-2,469.353

You will hear from uncle Henry how well Anna is . AUSTEN-181X-2,469.354

She seems perfectly recovered . AUSTEN-181X-2,469.355

- Ben was here on Saturday , to ask Uncle Charles & me to dine with them
, as tomorrow , AUSTEN-181X-2,469.356

but I was forced to decline it , AUSTEN-181X-2,469.357

the walk is beyond my strength <paren> though I am otherwise very well
<$$paren> AUSTEN-181X-2,469.358

& this is not a Season for Donkey Carriages ; AUSTEN-181X-2,469.359

& as we do not like to spare Uncle Charles , he has declined it too .
AUSTEN-181X-2,469.360

- Tuesday . AUSTEN-181X-2,469.361

Ah , ha ! - M=r= Edward , I doubt your seeing Uncle Henry at Steventon
today . AUSTEN-181X-2,469.362

The weather will prevent your expecting him I think .
AUSTEN-181X-2,469.363

- Tell your Father , with Aunt Cass:'s {COM:sic} Love & mine , that the
Pickled Cucumbers are extremely good , AUSTEN-181X-2,469.364

& tell him also - ' tell him what you will ' ; AUSTEN-181X-2,469.365

No , do@ @n't {TEXT:do'nt} tell him what you will ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,469.366

but tell him that Grandmama begs him to make Joseph Hall pay his Rent if
he can . AUSTEN-181X-2,469.367

You must not be tired of reading the word <font> Uncle , <$$font>
AUSTEN-181X-2,469.368

for I have not done with it . AUSTEN-181X-2,469.369

Uncle Charles thanks your Mother for her Letter ; AUSTEN-181X-2,469.370

it was a great pleasure to him to know the parcel was received & gave so
much satisfaction ; AUSTEN-181X-2,469.371

& he begs her to be so good as to give <font> Three Shillings <$$font>
for him to Dame {TEXT:Da} Staples , which shall be allowed for in the
payment of her debt here . AUSTEN-181X-2,469.372

- I am happy to tell you that Mr. Papillon will soon make his offer ,
probably next Monday , as he returns on Saturday .
AUSTEN-181X-2,469.373

- His <font> intention <$$font> can be no longer doubtful in the
smallest degree , as he has secured the refusal of the House which M=rs=
Baverstock at present occupies <P_470> in Chawton & is to vacate soon ,
which is of course intended for M=rs= Eliz=th= Papillon .
AUSTEN-181X-2,470.374

Adieu {TEXT:Adeiu} Amiable ! AUSTEN-181X-2,470.375

- I hope Caroline behaves well to you AUSTEN-181X-2,470.376

Yours affec=ly= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,470.377

{ED:135._To_Anna_Lefroy._Thursday_late_in_1816}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

My dear Anna AUSTEN-181X-2,470.380

Your Grandmama is <font> very <$$font> much obliged to you for the
Turkey , AUSTEN-181X-2,470.381

but can@ @not help grieving that you should not keep it for yourselves .
AUSTEN-181X-2,470.382

Such Highmindedness is almost more than she can bear .
AUSTEN-181X-2,470.383

- She will be very glad of better weather that she may see you again
AUSTEN-181X-2,470.384

& so we shall all . AUSTEN-181X-2,470.385

Yours affec=ately= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,470.386

Thursday . AUSTEN-181X-2,470.387

{ED:136._To_Cassandra,_daugher_of_Charles_Austen._Wednesday_8_Jan._1817}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

{COM:every_word_in_next_letter_spelled_backwards}

My dear Cassy AUSTEN-181X-2,470.391

I wish you a happy new year . AUSTEN-181X-2,470.392

Your six cousins came here yesterday , AUSTEN-181X-2,470.393

and had each a piece of cake . AUSTEN-181X-2,470.394

<P_471>

This is little Cassy's birthday , AUSTEN-181X-2,471.396

and she is three years old . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.397

Frank has begun learning Latin . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.398

We feed the Robin every morning . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.399

- Sally often enquires after you . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.400

Sally Benham has got a new green gown . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.401

Harriet Knight comes every day to read to Aunt Cassandra .
AUSTEN-181X-2,471.402

- Good_bye my dear Cassy . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.403

- Aunt Cassandra sends her best love , AUSTEN-181X-2,471.404

and so we do all . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.405

Your Affectionate Aunt , Jane {TEXT:Iane} Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,471.406

Chawton , AUSTEN-181X-2,471.407

Jan. 8 . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.408

{ED:137._To_Caroline_Austen._Thursday_23_Jan._1817}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Chawton AUSTEN-181X-2,471.411

Thursday Jan: 23 . 1817 - AUSTEN-181X-2,471.412

My dear Caroline AUSTEN-181X-2,471.413

I am always very much obliged to you for writing to me ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,471.414

& have now I believe {TEXT:beleive} two or three Notes to thank you for
; AUSTEN-181X-2,471.415

but whatever may be their Number , I mean to have this Letter accepted
as a handsome return for all , AUSTEN-181X-2,471.416

for you see I have taken a complete , whole sheet of Paper , which is to
entitle me to consider it as a very long Letter whether I write much or
little . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.417

- We were quite happy to see Edward , AUSTEN-181X-2,471.418

it was an unexpected pleasure , AUSTEN-181X-2,471.419

& he makes himself as agreable as ever , sitting in such a quiet
comfortable way making his delightful little Sketches .
AUSTEN-181X-2,471.420

- He is generally thought grown since he was here last , & rather
Thinner , but in very good Looks . AUSTEN-181X-2,471.421

- We have used Anna as ill as we could , by not letting him leave us
before tomorrow morning , AUSTEN-181X-2,471.422

but it is a Vile World , AUSTEN-181X-2,471.423

we <P_472> are all for Self AUSTEN-181X-2,472.424

& I expected no better from any of us . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.425

But though <font> Better <$$font> is not to be expected , <font> Butter
<$$font> may , at least from M=rs= Clement's Cow , AUSTEN-181X-2,472.426

for she has sold her Calf . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.427

- Edward will tell you of the Grand Evening Party he has come in for .
AUSTEN-181X-2,472.428

We were proud to have a young Man to accompany us ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,472.429

& he acquitted himself to admiration in every particular except selling
his Deals at Vingt-un . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.430

- He read his two Chapters to us the first Evening ; - both good - but
especially the last in our opinion . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.431

We think it has more of the Spirit & Entertainment of the early part of
his Work , the first 3 or 4 Chapters , than some of the subsequent .
AUSTEN-181X-2,472.432

- M=r= Reeves is charming - & M=r= Mountain - & M=r= Fairfax - & all
their day's sport . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.433

And the introduction of Emma Gordon is very amusing .
AUSTEN-181X-2,472.434

- I certainly <font> do <$$font> altogether like this set of People
better than those at Culver Court . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.435

Your Anne is dreadful . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.436

But nothing offends me so much as the absurdity of not being able to
pronounce the word <font> Shift . <$$font> AUSTEN-181X-2,472.437

I could forgive her any follies in English , rather than the Mock
Modesty of that french word . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.438

She should not only place her Quilt in the Centre , but give it's
Latitude & Longitude , & measure its Dimensions by a Lunar Observation
if she chose . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.439

- Cook & Sally seem very properly pleased by your remembrance ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,472.440

& desire their Duty & Thanks . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.441

Sally has got a new red Cloak , which adds much to her happiness ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,472.442

in other respects she is unaltered , as civil & well meaning & talkative
as ever . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.443

- Only think of your lost Dormouse being brought back to you !
AUSTEN-181X-2,472.444

- I was quite astonished . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.445

- No time is fixed for Cassy's return , AUSTEN-181X-2,472.446

but <font> March <$$font> has always been her month hitherto for coming
down . AUSTEN-181X-2,472.447

Aunt Cass:- had a letter from her <P_473> very lately , extremely well
written in a large hand , but as you may suppose containing little
beyond her hope of every body's being well at Chawton , & Harriet &
Fanny@ @'s love . AUSTEN-181X-2,473.448

Uncle Charles , I am sorry to say , has been suffering from Rheumatism ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,473.449

& now he has got a great eruption in his face & neck - which is to do
him good however - AUSTEN-181X-2,473.450

but he has a sad turn for being unwell . AUSTEN-181X-2,473.451

- <font> I <$$font> feel myself getting stronger than I was half a year
ago , AUSTEN-181X-2,473.452

& can so perfectly well walk to Alton , <font> or <$$font> back again ,
without the slightest fatigue that I hope to be able to do both when
Summer comes . AUSTEN-181X-2,473.453

- I spent two or three days with your Uncle & Aunt lately ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,473.454

& though the Children are sometimes very noisy & not under such Order as
they ought & easily might , I can@ @not help liking them & even loving
them , which I hope may be not wholly inexcusable in their & your
affectionate Aunt , J. Austen
{TEXT:missing_"your_affectionate_Aunt_,_J._Austen"}
AUSTEN-181X-2,473.455

The Piano_Forte often talks of you ; - in various keys , tunes , &
expressions I allow - AUSTEN-181X-2,473.456

but be it Lesson or Country Dance , Sonata or Waltz , <font> you
<$$font> are really it's {COM:sic} constant Theme .
AUSTEN-181X-2,473.457

I wish you c=d= come and see us , as easily as Edward can .
AUSTEN-181X-2,473.458

{ED:138._To_Caroline_Austen._Wednesday_1817}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

You send me great News indeed my dear Caroline , about M=r= Digweed M=r=
Trimmer , & a Grand Piano_Forte . AUSTEN-181X-2,473.461

I wish it had been a small one , as then you <P_474> might have
pretended that M=r= D.'s rooms were too damp to be fit for it , &
offered to take charge of it at the Parsonage . AUSTEN-181X-2,474.462

- I am sorry to hear of Caroline Wiggetts being so ill .
AUSTEN-181X-2,474.463

M=rs= Chute I suppose would almost feel like a Mother in losing her .
AUSTEN-181X-2,474.464

- We have but a poor account of your Uncle Charles {COM:sic} 2=d= Girl ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,474.465

there is an idea now of her having Water in her head .
AUSTEN-181X-2,474.466

The others are well . AUSTEN-181X-2,474.467

- William was mistaken when he told your Mama we did not mean to mourn
for M=rs= Motley Austen . AUSTEN-181X-2,474.468

Living here we thought it necessary to array ourselves in our old Black
Gowns , because there is a line of Connection with the family through
the Prowtings & Harrisons of Southampton . AUSTEN-181X-2,474.469

- I look forward to the 4 new Chapters with pleasure .
AUSTEN-181X-2,474.470

- But how can you like Frederick better than Edgar -
AUSTEN-181X-2,474.471

You have some eccentric Tastes however I know , as to Heroes & Heroines
. AUSTEN-181X-2,474.472

- Good_bye . AUSTEN-181X-2,474.473

Y=rs= affec=ly= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,474.474

Wed: Night . AUSTEN-181X-2,474.475

{ED:139_To_Alethea_Bigg._Friday_24_Jan._1817}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Chawton AUSTEN-181X-2,474.478

Jan=y= 24 - 1817 AUSTEN-181X-2,474.479

My dear Alethea AUSTEN-181X-2,474.480

I think it time there should be a little writing between us , though I
believe the epistolary debt is on <font> your <$$font> side , and I hope
this will find all the Streatham party well , neither carried away by
the flood , nor rheumatic through the damps . AUSTEN-181X-2,474.481

Such mild weather is , <P_475> you know , delightful to <font> us ,
<$$font> AUSTEN-181X-2,475.482

and though we have a great many ponds , and a fine running stream
through the meadows on the other side of the road , it is nothing but
what beautifies us and does to talk of . AUSTEN-181X-2,475.483

We are all in good health AUSTEN-181X-2,475.484

& I have certainly gained strength through the winter
AUSTEN-181X-2,475.485

and am not far from being well ; AUSTEN-181X-2,475.486

and I think I understand my own case now so much better than I did , as
to be able by care to keep off any serious return of illness .
AUSTEN-181X-2,475.487

I am more & more convinced that <font> bile <$$font> is at the bottom of
all I have suffered , which makes it easy to know how to treat myself .
AUSTEN-181X-2,475.488

You will be glad to hear thus much of me , I am sure as I shall in
return be very glad to hear that your health has been good lately .
AUSTEN-181X-2,475.489

We have just had a few days' visit from Edward , who brought us a good
account of his father , AUSTEN-181X-2,475.490

and the very circumstance of his coming at all , of his father's being
able to spare him , is itself a good account . AUSTEN-181X-2,475.491

He is gone to spend this day at Wyards AUSTEN-181X-2,475.492

& goes home to-morrow . AUSTEN-181X-2,475.493

He grows still , AUSTEN-181X-2,475.494

and still improves in appearance , at least in the estimation of his
aunts , who love him better and better , as they see the sweet temper
and warm affections of the boy confirmed in the young man :
AUSTEN-181X-2,475.495

I tried hard to persuade him that he must have some message for William
, but in vain . AUSTEN-181X-2,475.496

Anna has not been so well or so strong or looking so much like herself
since her marriage as she is now ; AUSTEN-181X-2,475.497

she is quite equal to walking to Chawton , AUSTEN-181X-2,475.498

& comes over to us when she can , AUSTEN-181X-2,475.499

but the rain & dirt divide us a good deal . AUSTEN-181X-2,475.500

Her grandmama she can only see at Chawton as this is not a time of year
for donkey-carriages , and our donkeys are necessarily having so long a
run of luxurious idleness that I suppose we shall find they have
forgotten <P_476> much of their education when we use them again .
AUSTEN-181X-2,476.501

We do not use two at once however ; AUSTEN-181X-2,476.502

do@ @n't imagine such excesses . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.503

Anna's eldest child just now runs alone , which is a great convenience
with a second in arms , AUSTEN-181X-2,476.504

& they are both healthy nice children - AUSTEN-181X-2,476.505

I wish their Father were ordained & all the family settled in a
comfortable Parsonage house . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.506

The Curacy only is wanting I fancy to complete the business .
AUSTEN-181X-2,476.507

Our own new clergyman is expected here very soon , perhaps in time to
assist Mr. Papillon on Sunday . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.508

I shall be very glad when the first hearing is over .
AUSTEN-181X-2,476.509

It will be a nervous hour for our pew , though we hear that he acquits
himself with as much ease and collectedness , as if he had been used to
it all his life . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.510

We have no chance we know of seeing you between Streatham and Winchester
: AUSTEN-181X-2,476.511

you go the other road AUSTEN-181X-2,476.512

and are engaged to two or three houses ; AUSTEN-181X-2,476.513

if there should be any change , however , you know how welcome you would
be . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.514

Edward mentioned one circumstance concerning you my dear Alethea , which
I must confess has given me considerable astonishment & some alarm -
your having left your best gown at Steventon . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.515

Surely if you do not want it at Streatham , you will be spending a few
days with M=rs= G. Frere , AUSTEN-181X-2,476.516

& must want it there . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.517

I would lay any wager that you have been sorry you left it .
AUSTEN-181X-2,476.518

We have been reading the ' Poet's Pilgrimage to Waterloo , ' and
generally with much approbation . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.519

Nothing will please all the world , you know ; AUSTEN-181X-2,476.520

but parts of it suit me better than much that he has written before .
AUSTEN-181X-2,476.521

The opening - <font> the proem <$$font> I believe he calls it - is very
beautiful . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.522

Poor man ! one can@ @not but grieve for the loss of the son so fondly
described . AUSTEN-181X-2,476.523

Has he at all recovered it ? AUSTEN-181X-2,476.524

What do Mr. and Mrs. <P_477> Hill know about his present state ?
AUSTEN-181X-2,477.525

I hear from more than one quarter that Miss Williams is really better ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,477.526

& I am very glad , especially as Charlotte's being better also must I
think be the consequence of it . AUSTEN-181X-2,477.527

I hope your letters from abroad are satisfactory .
AUSTEN-181X-2,477.528

They would not be satisfactory to <font> me <$$font> , I confess ,
unless they breathed a strong spirit of regret for not being in England
. AUSTEN-181X-2,477.529

Kind love & good wishes for a happy New Year to you all , from all our
four here . AUSTEN-181X-2,477.530

Give our love to the little Boys , if they can be persuaded to remember
us . AUSTEN-181X-2,477.531

<font> We <$$font> have not at all forgot Herbert's & Errol's fine
countenances . AUSTEN-181X-2,477.532

Georgiana is very pretty I daresay . AUSTEN-181X-2,477.533

How does Edward like school ? AUSTEN-181X-2,477.534

- I suppose his holidays are not {TEXT:now} over yet .
AUSTEN-181X-2,477.535

Yours affec=ly= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,477.536

The real object of this letter is to ask you for a receipt ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,477.537

but I thought it genteel not to let it appear early .
AUSTEN-181X-2,477.538

We remember some excellent orange wine at Manydown , made from Seville
oranges , entirely or chiefly AUSTEN-181X-2,477.539

& should be very much obliged to you for the receipt , if you can
command it within a few weeks . AUSTEN-181X-2,477.540

<P_478>

{ED:140._To_Fanny_Knight._Thursday_20_Feb._1817}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Chawton AUSTEN-181X-2,478.544

Feb: 20 AUSTEN-181X-2,478.545

My dearest Fanny , You are inimitable , irresistable .
AUSTEN-181X-2,478.546

You are the delight of my Life . AUSTEN-181X-2,478.547

Such Letters , such entertaining Letters as you have lately sent ! -
Such a description of your queer little heart ! - Such a lovely display
of what Imagination does . AUSTEN-181X-2,478.548

You are worth your weight in Gold , or even in the new Silver Coinage .
AUSTEN-181X-2,478.549

- I can@ @not express to you what I have felt in reading your history of
yourself , how full of Pity & Concern & Admiration & Amusement I have
been . AUSTEN-181X-2,478.550

You are the Paragon of all that is Silly & Sensible , common-place &
eccentric , Sad & Lively , Provoking & Interesting .
AUSTEN-181X-2,478.551

- Who can keep pace with the fluctuations of your Fancy , the Capprizios
of your Taste , the Contradictions of your Feelings ?
AUSTEN-181X-2,478.552

- You are so odd ! - & all the time , so perfectly natural - so
peculiar in yourself , & yet so like everybody else !
AUSTEN-181X-2,478.553

- It is very , very gratifying to me to know you so intimately .
AUSTEN-181X-2,478.554

You can hardly think what a pleasure it is to me , to have such thorough
pictures of your Heart . AUSTEN-181X-2,478.555

Oh ! what a loss it will be when <P_479> you are married .
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.556

You are too agreable in your single state , too agreable as a Neice .
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.557

I shall hate you when your delicious play of Mind is all settled down
into conjugal & maternal affections . AUSTEN-181X-2,479.558

Mr. J. W. frightens me . AUSTEN-181X-2,479.559

- He will have you . AUSTEN-181X-2,479.560

- I see you at the Altar . AUSTEN-181X-2,479.561

- I have <font> some <$$font> faith in Mrs. C. Cage's observation , &
still more in Lizzy's ; AUSTEN-181X-2,479.562

& besides , I know it <font> must <$$font> be so .
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.563

He must be wishing to attach you . AUSTEN-181X-2,479.564

It would be too stupid & too shameful in him , to be otherwise ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.565

& all the Family are seeking your acquaintance . AUSTEN-181X-2,479.566

- Do not imagine that I have any real objection , AUSTEN-181X-2,479.567

I have rather taken a fancy to him than not , AUSTEN-181X-2,479.568

& I like Chilham Castle for you ; AUSTEN-181X-2,479.569

- I only do not like you sh=d= marry anybody . AUSTEN-181X-2,479.570

And yet I do wish you to marry very much , because I know you will never
be happy till you are ; AUSTEN-181X-2,479.571

but the loss of a Fanny Knight will be never made up to me ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.572

My ' affec: Neice F. C. Wildman ' will be but a poor Substitute .
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.573

I do not like your being nervous & so apt to cry : AUSTEN-181X-2,479.574

- it is a sign you are not quite well , AUSTEN-181X-2,479.575

but I hope Mr. Scud - as you always write his name , <paren> your Mr.
<font> Scuds: <$$font> amuse me very much <$$paren> will do you good .
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.576

- What a comfort that Cassandra should be so recovered !
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.577

- It is more than we had expected . AUSTEN-181X-2,479.578

- I can easily beleive she was very patient & very good .
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.579

I always loved Cassandra , for her fine dark eyes & sweet temper .
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.580

- I am almost entirely cured of my rheumatism ; AUSTEN-181X-2,479.581

just a little pain in my knee now and then , to make me remember what it
was , & keep on flannel . AUSTEN-181X-2,479.582

- Aunt Cassandra nursed me so beautifully ! AUSTEN-181X-2,479.583

- I enjoy your visit to Goodnestone , AUSTEN-181X-2,479.584

it must be a great pleasure to you , AUSTEN-181X-2,479.585

You have not seen Fanny Cage in any comfort so long .
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.586

I hope she represents & remonstrates & reasons with you , properly .
AUSTEN-181X-2,479.587

Why <P_480> should you be living in dread of his marrying somebody else
? AUSTEN-181X-2,480.588

- <paren> Yet , how natural ! <$$paren> AUSTEN-181X-2,480.589

- You did not chuse to have him yourself ; AUSTEN-181X-2,480.590

why not allow him to take comfort where he can ? AUSTEN-181X-2,480.591

- In your conscience you <font> know <$$font> that he could not bear a
comparison with a more animated Character . AUSTEN-181X-2,480.592

You can@ @not forget how you felt under the idea of it's {COM:sic}
having been possible that he might have dined in Hans Place .
AUSTEN-181X-2,480.593

- My dearest Fanny , I can@ @not bear you should be unhappy about him .
AUSTEN-181X-2,480.594

Think of his Principles , AUSTEN-181X-2,480.595

think of his Father's objection , of want of Money , of a coarse Mother
, of Brothers & Sisters like Horses , of sheets sewn across &c.
AUSTEN-181X-2,480.596

But I am doing no good - AUSTEN-181X-2,480.597

no , all that I urge against him will rather make you take his part more
, sweet perverse Fanny . AUSTEN-181X-2,480.598

- And now I will tell you that we like your Henry to the utmost , to the
very top of the Glass , quite brimful . AUSTEN-181X-2,480.599

- He is a very pleasing young Man . AUSTEN-181X-2,480.600

I do not see how he could be mended . AUSTEN-181X-2,480.601

He does really bid fair to be everything his Father and Sister could
wish ; AUSTEN-181X-2,480.602

and William I love very much indeed , AUSTEN-181X-2,480.603

& so we do all , AUSTEN-181X-2,480.604

he is quite our own William . AUSTEN-181X-2,480.605

In short we are very comfortable together - that is , we can answer for
<font> ourselves . <$$font> AUSTEN-181X-2,480.606

- Mrs. Deedes is as welcome as May , to all our Benevolence to her Son
; AUSTEN-181X-2,480.607

we only lamented that we c=d= not do more , & that the fifty-pound
{TEXT:+L50} note we slipt into his hand at parting was necessarily the
Limit of our Offering . AUSTEN-181X-2,480.608

- Good Mrs. Deedes ! - I hope she will get the better of this Marianne
, AUSTEN-181X-2,480.609

& then I w=d= recommend to her & Mr. D. the simple regimen of separate
rooms . AUSTEN-181X-2,480.610

- Scandal & Gossip ; AUSTEN-181X-2,480.611

- yes I dare say you are well_stocked ; AUSTEN-181X-2,480.612

but I am very fond of Mrs. C. Cage , for reasons good .
AUSTEN-181X-2,480.613

Thank you for mentioning her praise of Emma &c. - AUSTEN-181X-2,480.614

I have contributed the marking to <P_481> Uncle H.'s shirts ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,481.615

& now they are a complete memorial of the tender regard of many .
AUSTEN-181X-2,481.616

<font> Friday . <$$font> AUSTEN-181X-2,481.617

- I had no idea when I began this yesterday , of sending it before your
B=r= went back , AUSTEN-181X-2,481.618

but I have written away my foolish thoughts at such a rate that I will
not keep them many hours longer to stare me in the face .
AUSTEN-181X-2,481.619

Much obliged for the <font> Quadrilles , <$$font> which I am grown to
think pretty enough , though of course they are very inferior to the
Cotillions of my own day . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.620

- Ben & Anna walked here last Sunday to hear Uncle Henry ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,481.621

& she looked so pretty , it was quite a pleasure to see her , so young &
so blooming & so innocent , as if she had never had a wicked Thought in
her Life - which yet one has some reason to suppose she must have had ,
if we believe the Doctrine of original Sin , or if we remember the
events of her girlish days . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.622

- I hope Lizzy will have her Play . Very kindly arranged for her .
AUSTEN-181X-2,481.623

Henry is generally thought very good-looking , but not so handsome as
Edward . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.624

- I think <font> I <$$font> prefer his face . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.625

- Wm. is in excellent Looks , AUSTEN-181X-2,481.626

has a fine appetite AUSTEN-181X-2,481.627

& seems perfectly well . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.628

You will have a great Break-up at G=m= in the Spring ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,481.629

You <font> must <$$font> feel their all going . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.630

It is very right however . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.631

One sees many good causes for it . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.632

- Poor Miss C. - I shall pity her , when she begins to understand
herself . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.633

- Your objection to the Quadrilles delighted me exceedingly .
AUSTEN-181X-2,481.634

- Pretty well , for a Lady irrecoverably attached to <font> one <$$font>
Person ! AUSTEN-181X-2,481.635

- Sweet Fanny , beleive no such thing of yourself .
AUSTEN-181X-2,481.636

- Spread no such malicious slander upon your Understanding , within the
Precincts of your Imagination . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.637

Do not speak ill of your Sense , merely for the Gratification of your
Fancy . AUSTEN-181X-2,481.638

- Yours is Sense , which deserves more honourable Treatment .
AUSTEN-181X-2,481.639

- You are <font> not <$$font> <P_482> in love with him .
AUSTEN-181X-2,482.640

- You never have been really in love with him . AUSTEN-181X-2,482.641

- Y=rs= very affec=ly= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,482.642

Uncle H. & Miss Lloyd dine at Mr. Digweed's today , which leaves us
the power of asking Uncle & Aunt F. - to come & meet their Nephews here
. AUSTEN-181X-2,482.643

{ED:141._To_Fanny_Knight._Thursday_13_March_1817}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Chawton , AUSTEN-181X-2,482.646

Thursday March 13 . AUSTEN-181X-2,482.647

As to making any adequate return for such a Letter as yours my dearest
Fanny , it is absolutely impossible ; AUSTEN-181X-2,482.648

if I were to labour at it all the rest of my Life & live to the age of
Methuselah , I could never accomplish anything so long & so perfect ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,482.649

but I can@ @not let William go without a few Lines of acknowledgement &
reply . AUSTEN-181X-2,482.650

I have pretty well done with Mr. Wildman . AUSTEN-181X-2,482.651

By your description he can@ <font> @not <$$font> be in love with you ,
however he may try at it , AUSTEN-181X-2,482.652

& I could not wish the match unless there were a great deal of Love on
his side . AUSTEN-181X-2,482.653

I do not know what to do about Jemima Branfill . AUSTEN-181X-2,482.654

What does her dancing away with so much spirit , <P_483> mean ?
AUSTEN-181X-2,483.655

that she does not care for him , or only wishes to <font> appear
<$$font> not to care for him ? AUSTEN-181X-2,483.656

- Who can understand a young Lady ? AUSTEN-181X-2,483.657

- Poor Mrs. C. Milles , that she should die on a wrong day at last ,
after being about it so long ! AUSTEN-181X-2,483.658

- It was unlucky that the Goodnestone Party could not meet you ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,483.659

& I hope her friendly , obliging , social Spirit , which delighted in
drawing People together , was not conscious of the division and
disappointment she was occasioning . AUSTEN-181X-2,483.660

I am sorry & surprised that you speak of her as having little to leave ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,483.661

& must feel for Miss Milles , though she <font> is <$$font> Molly , if a
material loss of Income is to attend her other loss .
AUSTEN-181X-2,483.662

- Single Women have a dreadful propensity for being poor - which is one
very strong argument in favour of Matrimony , AUSTEN-181X-2,483.663

but I need not dwell on such arguments with <font> you <$$font> , pretty
Dear , AUSTEN-181X-2,483.664

you do not want inclination . AUSTEN-181X-2,483.665

- Well , I shall say , as I have often said before , Do not be in a
hurry ; AUSTEN-181X-2,483.666

depend upon it , the right Man will come at last ; AUSTEN-181X-2,483.667

you will in the course of the next two or three years , meet with
somebody more generally unexceptionable than anyone you have yet known ,
who will love you as warmly as ever <font> He <$$font> did , and who
will so completely attach you , that you will feel you never really
loved before . AUSTEN-181X-2,483.668

- And then , by not beginning the business of Mothering quite so early
in life , you will be young in Constitution , spirits , figure &
countenance , while M=rs= W=m= Hammond is growing old by confinements &
nursing . AUSTEN-181X-2,483.669

Do none of the Plumtres ever come to Balls now ? AUSTEN-181X-2,483.670

- You have never mentioned them as being at any ? AUSTEN-181X-2,483.671

- And what do you hear of the Gipps or of Fanny and her Husband ?
AUSTEN-181X-2,483.672

- M=rs= F. A. is to be confined the middle of April ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,483.673

& is by no means remarkably Large for <font> her . <$$font>
AUSTEN-181X-2,483.674

Aunt Cassandra walked <P_484> to Wyards yesterday with Mrs. Digweed .
AUSTEN-181X-2,484.675

Anna has had a bad cold , AUSTEN-181X-2,484.676

looks pale , AUSTEN-181X-2,484.677

& we fear something else . AUSTEN-181X-2,484.678

She has just weaned Julia . AUSTEN-181X-2,484.679

- How soon , the difference of temper in Children appears !
AUSTEN-181X-2,484.680

- Jemima has a very irritable bad Temper <paren> her Mother says so
<$$paren> - and Julia a very sweet one , always pleased & happy .
AUSTEN-181X-2,484.681

- I hope as Anna is so early sensible of it's {COM:sic} defects , that
she will give Jemima's disposition the early & steady attention it must
require . AUSTEN-181X-2,484.682

<font> I <$$font> have also heard lately from your Aunt Harriot ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,484.683

& can@ @not understand their plans in parting with Miss S- whom she
seems very much to value , now that Harriot & Eleanor are both of an age
for a Governess to be so useful to ; especially as when Caroline was
sent to School some years , <font> Miss Bell <$$font> was still retained
, though the others were then mere Nursery Children .
AUSTEN-181X-2,484.684

- They have some good reason I dare say , though I can@ @not penetrate
it , AUSTEN-181X-2,484.685

& till I know what it is I shall invent a bad one , and amuse myself
with accounting for the difference of measures by supposing Miss S. to
be a superior sort of Woman , who has never stooped to recommend herself
to the Master of the family by Flattery , as Miss Bell did .
AUSTEN-181X-2,484.686

I <font> will <$$font> answer your kind questions more than you expect .
AUSTEN-181X-2,484.687

Miss Catherine is put upon the Shelve for the present ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,484.688

and I do not know that she will ever come out ; AUSTEN-181X-2,484.689

but I have a something ready for Publication , which may perhaps appear
about a twelvemonth hence . AUSTEN-181X-2,484.690

It is short , about the length of Catherine . AUSTEN-181X-2,484.691

- This is for yourself alone . AUSTEN-181X-2,484.692

Neither Mr. Salusbury nor Mr. Wildman are to know of it .
AUSTEN-181X-2,484.693

I am got tolerably well again , quite equal to walking about & enjoying
the Air ; AUSTEN-181X-2,484.694

and by sitting down & resting a good while between my Walks , I get
exercise <P_485> enough . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.695

I have a scheme however for accomplishing more , as the weather grows
springlike . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.696

I mean to take to riding the Donkey . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.697

It will be more independant & less troublesome than the use of the
carriage , AUSTEN-181X-2,485.698

& I shall be able to go about with A=t= Cassandra in her walks to Alton
and Wyards . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.699

- I hope you will think Wm. looking well . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.700

He was bilious the other day , AUSTEN-181X-2,485.701

and Aunt Cass: supplied him with a Dose at his own request , which
seemed to have good effect . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.702

- I was sure <font> you <$$font> would have approved it .
AUSTEN-181X-2,485.703

Wm. & I are the best of friends . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.704

I love him very much . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.705

Everything is so <font> natural <$$font> about him , his affections ,
his Manners & his Drollery . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.706

He entertains & interests us extremely . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.707

- Max: Hammond and A. M. Shaw are people whom I can@ @not care for ,
in themselves , AUSTEN-181X-2,485.708

but I enter into their situation AUSTEN-181X-2,485.709

& am glad they are so happy . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.710

If I were the Duchess of Richmond , I should be very miserable about my
son's choice . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.711

What can be expected from a Paget , born & brought up in the centre of
conjugal Infidelity & Divorces ? AUSTEN-181X-2,485.712

- I will <font> not <$$font> be interested about Lady Caroline .
AUSTEN-181X-2,485.713

I abhor all the race of Pagets . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.714

Our fears increase for poor little Harriet ; AUSTEN-181X-2,485.715

the latest account is that Sir Ev: Home is confirmed in his opinion of
there being water on the brain . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.716

I hope Heaven in its mercy will take her soon . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.717

Her poor Father will be quite worn out by his feelings for her .
AUSTEN-181X-2,485.718

- He can@ @not spare Cassy at present , AUSTEN-181X-2,485.719

she is an occupation & a comfort to him . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.720

Adieu my dearest Fanny . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.721

Nothing could be more delicious than your Letter ; AUSTEN-181X-2,485.722

& the assurance of your feeling releived by writing it , made the
pleasure perfect . AUSTEN-181X-2,485.723

- But how could it possibly be any new idea to you that you have a great
deal of Imagination ? AUSTEN-181X-2,485.724

- <P_486> You are all over Imagination . AUSTEN-181X-2,486.725

The most astonishing part of your Character is , that with so much
Imagination , so much flight of Mind , such unbounded Fancies , you
should have such excellent Judgement in what you do !
AUSTEN-181X-2,486.726

- Religious Principle I fancy must explain it . AUSTEN-181X-2,486.727

Well , good_bye AUSTEN-181X-2,486.728

& God bless you . AUSTEN-181X-2,486.729

Y=rs= very affec=ly= J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,486.730

{COM:letter_141.1_out_of_order_in_edition}

{ED:142._To_Fanny_Knight._Sunday_23_March_1817}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Chawton , AUSTEN-181X-2,486.734

Sunday March 23 . AUSTEN-181X-2,486.735

I am very much obliged to you my dearest Fanny for sending me Mr.
Wildman's conversation , AUSTEN-181X-2,486.736

I had great amusement in reading it , AUSTEN-181X-2,486.737

& I <font> hope <$$font> I am not affronted & do not think the worse of
him for having a Brain so very different from mine ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,486.738

but my strongest sensation of all is <font> astonishment <$$font> at
your being able to press him on the subject so perseveringly -
AUSTEN-181X-2,486.739

and I agree with your Papa , that it was not fair .
AUSTEN-181X-2,486.740

When he knows the truth he will be uncomfortable .
AUSTEN-181X-2,486.741

- You are the oddest Creature ! - Nervous enough in some respects , but
in others perfectly without nerves ! - Quite unrepulsible , hardened &
impudent . AUSTEN-181X-2,486.742

Do not oblige him to read any more . AUSTEN-181X-2,486.743

- Have mercy on him , AUSTEN-181X-2,486.744

tell him the truth AUSTEN-181X-2,486.745

& make him an apology . AUSTEN-181X-2,486.746

He & I should not in the least agree of course , in our ideas of Novels
and Heroines ; AUSTEN-181X-2,486.747

pictures of perfection as you know make <P_487> me sick & wicked -
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.748

but there is some very good sense in what he says ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.749

& I particularly respect him for wishing to think well of all young
Ladies ; AUSTEN-181X-2,487.750

it shews an amiable & a delicate Mind . AUSTEN-181X-2,487.751

- And he deserves better treatment than to be obliged to read any more
of my Works . AUSTEN-181X-2,487.752

- Do not be surprised at finding Uncle Henry acquainted with my having
another ready for publication . AUSTEN-181X-2,487.753

I could not say No when he asked me , AUSTEN-181X-2,487.754

but he knows nothing more of it . AUSTEN-181X-2,487.755

- You will not like it , so you need not be impatient .
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.756

You may <font> perhaps <$$font> like the Heroine , as she is almost too
good for me . AUSTEN-181X-2,487.757

- Many thanks for your kind care for my health ; AUSTEN-181X-2,487.758

I certainly have not been well for many weeks , AUSTEN-181X-2,487.759

and about a week ago I was very poorly , AUSTEN-181X-2,487.760

I have had a good deal of fever at times & indifferent nights ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.761

but am considerably better now , & recovering my Looks a little , which
have been bad enough , black & white & every wrong colour .
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.762

I must not depend upon being ever very blooming again .
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.763

Sickness is a dangerous Indulgence at my time of Life .
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.764

Thank you for everything you tell me ; AUSTEN-181X-2,487.765

- I do not feel worthy of it by anything I can say in return ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.766

but I assure you my pleasure in your Letters is quite as great as ever ,
& I am interested & amused just as you could wish me .
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.767

If there is a <font> Miss <$$font> Marsden , I perceive whom she will
marry . AUSTEN-181X-2,487.768

<font> Even=g= <$$font> . - AUSTEN-181X-2,487.769

I was languid & dull & very bad company when I wrote the above ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,487.770

I am better now - to my own feelings at least - AUSTEN-181X-2,487.771

& wish I may be more agreable . AUSTEN-181X-2,487.772

- We are going to have Rain , & after that , very pleasant genial
weather , which will exactly do for me , as my Saddle will then be
completed - and air & exercise is what I want . AUSTEN-181X-2,487.773

Indeed I shall be very glad when the <P_488> event at Scarlets is over ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.774

the expectation of it keeps us in a worry , your Grandmama especially ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.775

she sits brooding over Evils which can@ @not be remedied & Conduct
impossible to be understood . AUSTEN-181X-2,488.776

- Now , the reports from Keppel St. are rather better ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.777

little Harriet's headaches are abated , AUSTEN-181X-2,488.778

& Sir Ev=d=: is satisfied with the effect of the Mercury ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.779

& does not despair of a Cure . AUSTEN-181X-2,488.780

The Complaint I find is not considered incurable nowadays , provided the
Patient be young enough not to have the Head hardened .
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.781

The Water in that case may be drawn off by Mercury .
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.782

But though this is a new idea to us , perhaps it may been long familiar
to you , through your friend Mr. Scud: AUSTEN-181X-2,488.783

- I hope his high renown is maintained by driving away William's cough .
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.784

Tell William that Triggs is as beautiful & condescending as ever , & was
so good as to dine with us today , AUSTEN-181X-2,488.785

& tell him that I often play at <font> Nines <$$font> and think of him .
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.786

- Anna has not a chance of escape ; AUSTEN-181X-2,488.787

her husband called here the other day , AUSTEN-181X-2,488.788

& said she was <font> pretty <$$font> well but not <font> equal <$$font>
to so long a walk ; AUSTEN-181X-2,488.789

she <font> must come in <$$font> her <font> Donkey Carriage . <$$font>
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.790

- Poor Animal , she will be worn out before she is thirty .
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.791

- I am very sorry for her . AUSTEN-181X-2,488.792

M=rs= Clement too is in that way again . AUSTEN-181X-2,488.793

I am quite tired of so many Children . AUSTEN-181X-2,488.794

- M=rs= Benn has a 13=th= . AUSTEN-181X-2,488.795

- The Papillons came back on Friday {TEXT:friday} night ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.796

but I have not seen them yet , as I do not venture to Church .
AUSTEN-181X-2,488.797

I can@ @not hear however , but that they are the same Mr. P. & his
sister they used to be . AUSTEN-181X-2,488.798

She has engaged a new Maidservant in Mrs. Calker's room , whom she
means to make also Housekeeper under herself . AUSTEN-181X-2,488.799

- Old Philmore was buried yesterday , AUSTEN-181X-2,488.800

& I , by way of saying something to Triggs , observed that it had been a
very handsome Funeral , AUSTEN-181X-2,488.801

but his <P_489> manner of reply made me suppose that it was not
generally esteemed so . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.802

I can only be sure of <font> one <$$font> part being very handsome ,
Triggs himself , walking behind in his Green Coat .
AUSTEN-181X-2,489.803

- Mrs. Philmore attended as chief Mourner , in Bombasin , made very
short , and flounced with Crape . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.804

<font> Tuesday . <$$font> AUSTEN-181X-2,489.805

- I have had various plans as to this Letter , AUSTEN-181X-2,489.806

but at last I have determined that Un: Henry shall forward it to London
. AUSTEN-181X-2,489.807

I want to see how Canterbury looks in the direction .
AUSTEN-181X-2,489.808

- When once Unc. H. has left us I shall wish him with you .
AUSTEN-181X-2,489.809

London is become a hateful place to him , AUSTEN-181X-2,489.810

& he is always depressed by the idea of it . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.811

- I hope he will be in time for your sick . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.812

I am sure he must do that part of his Duty as excellently as all the
rest . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.813

He returned yesterday from Steventon , AUSTEN-181X-2,489.814

& was with us by breakfast , bringing Edward with him , only that Edw=d=
staid to breakfast at Wyards . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.815

We had a pleasant family-day , AUSTEN-181X-2,489.816

for the Altons dined with us ; - the last visit of the kind probably ,
which <font> she <$$font> will be able to pay us for many a month ;
AUSTEN-181X-2,489.817

- Very well , to be able to do it so long , AUSTEN-181X-2,489.818

for she <font> expects <$$font> much about this day three weeks ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,489.819

& is generally very exact . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.820

- I hope your own Henry is in France & that you have heard from him .
AUSTEN-181X-2,489.821

The Passage once over , he will feel all Happiness .
AUSTEN-181X-2,489.822

- I took my 1=st= ride yesterday AUSTEN-181X-2,489.823

& liked it very much . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.824

I went up Mounters Lane , & round by where the new Cottages are to be ,
AUSTEN-181X-2,489.825

& found the exercise & everything very pleasant , AUSTEN-181X-2,489.826

and I had the advantage of agreable companions , as A=t= Cass: and
Edward walked by my side . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.827

- A=t= Cass. is such an excellent Nurse , so assiduous & unwearied !
AUSTEN-181X-2,489.828

- But you know all that already . AUSTEN-181X-2,489.829

- Very affec=ly= Yours J. Austen AUSTEN-181X-2,489.830

