<BEGIN_austen-1815-2>

<P_156>

<heading>

<font> Chapter X <$$font> AUSTEN-1815-2,156.4

<$$heading>

The appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered , was
tranquillity itself ; Mrs. Bates , deprived of her usual employment ,
slumbering on one side of the fire , Frank Churchill , at a table near
her , most deedily occupied about her spectacles , and Jane Fairfax ,
standing with her back to them , intent on her pianoforté
{COM:here_and_throughout,_sic} . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.6

Busy as he was , however , the young man was yet able to shew a most
happy countenance on seeing Emma again . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.7

" This is a pleasure , " said he , in rather a low voice , " coming at
least ten minutes earlier than I had calculated . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.8

You find me trying to be useful ; AUSTEN-1815-2,156.9

tell me if you think I shall succeed . " AUSTEN-1815-2,156.10

" What ! " said Mrs. Weston , " have not you finished it yet ?
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.11

you would not earn a very good livelihood as a working-silversmith at
this rate . " AUSTEN-1815-2,156.12

" I have not been working uninterruptedly , " he replied ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.13

" I have been assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument
stand steadily , AUSTEN-1815-2,156.14

it was not quite firm ; an unevenness in the floor , I believe .
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.15

You see we have been wedging one leg with paper . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.16

This was very kind of you to be persuaded to come .
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.17

I was almost afraid you would be hurrying home . " AUSTEN-1815-2,156.18

He contrived that she should be seated by him ; AUSTEN-1815-2,156.19

and was sufficiently employed in looking out the best baked apple for
her , and trying to make her help or advise him in his work , till Jane
Fairfax was quite ready to sit down to the pianoforté again .
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.20

That she was not immediately ready , Emma did suspect to arise from the
state of her nerves ; AUSTEN-1815-2,156.21

she had not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch it without
emotion ; AUSTEN-1815-2,156.22

she must reason herself into the power of performance ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.23

and Emma could not but pity such feelings , whatever their origin ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.24

and could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again .
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.25

At last Jane began , AUSTEN-1815-2,156.26

and though the first bars were feebly given , the powers of the
instrument were gradually done full justice to . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.27

Mrs. Weston had been delighted before , AUSTEN-1815-2,156.28

and was delighted again ; AUSTEN-1815-2,156.29

Emma joined her in all her praise ; AUSTEN-1815-2,156.30

and the pianoforté , with every proper discrimination , was pronounced
to be altogether of the highest promise . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.31

" Whoever Col. Campbell might employ , " said Frank Churchill , with a
smile at Emma , " the person has not chosen ill . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.32

I heard a good deal of Col. Campbell's taste at Weymouth ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.33

and the softness of the upper notes I am sure is exactly what he and
<font> all that party <$$font> would particularly prize .
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.34

I dare say , Miss Fairfax , that he either gave his friend very minute
directions , or wrote to Broadwood himself . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.35

Do not you think so ? " AUSTEN-1815-2,156.36

Jane did not look around . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.37

She was not obliged to hear . AUSTEN-1815-2,156.38

Mrs. Weston had been speaking to her at the same moment .
AUSTEN-1815-2,156.39

<P_157>

" It is not fair , " said Emma in a whisper , AUSTEN-1815-2,157.41

" mine was a random guess . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.42

Do not distress her . " AUSTEN-1815-2,157.43

He shook his head with a smile , AUSTEN-1815-2,157.44

and looked as if he had very little doubt and very little mercy .
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.45

Soon afterwards he began again , AUSTEN-1815-2,157.46

" How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on
this occasion , Miss Fairfax . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.47

I dare say they often think of you , and wonder which will be the day ,
the precise day of the instrument's coming to hand .
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.48

Do you imagine Col. Campbell knows the business to be going forward
just at this time ? AUSTEN-1815-2,157.49

- Do you imagine it to be the consequence of an immediate commission
from him , or that he may have sent only a general direction , an order
indefinite as to time , to depend upon contingencies and conveniencies ?
" AUSTEN-1815-2,157.50

He paused . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.51

She could not but hear ; AUSTEN-1815-2,157.52

she could not avoid answering , AUSTEN-1815-2,157.53

" Till I have a letter from Col. Campbell , " said she , in a voice of
forced calmness , " I can imagine nothing with any confidence .
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.54

It must be all conjecture . " AUSTEN-1815-2,157.55

" Conjecture - AUSTEN-1815-2,157.56

aye , sometimes one conjectures right , AUSTEN-1815-2,157.57

and sometimes one conjectures wrong . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.58

I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make this rivet quite firm .
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.59

What nonsense one talks , Miss Woodhouse , when hard at work , if one
talks at all ; AUSTEN-1815-2,157.60

- your real workmen , I suppose , hold their tongues ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.61

but we gentlemen labourers if we get hold of a word -
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.62

Miss Fairfax said something about conjecturing . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.63

There , it is done . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.64

I have the pleasure , madam , <paren> to Mrs. Bates , <$$paren> of
restoring your spectacles , healed for the present . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.65

He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.66

to escape a little from the latter , he went to the pianoforté ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.67

and begged Miss Fairfax , who was still sitting at it , to play
something more . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.68

" If you are very kind , " said he , " it will be one of the waltzes we
danced last night ; AUSTEN-1815-2,157.69

- let me live them over again . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.70

You did not enjoy them as I did ; AUSTEN-1815-2,157.71

you appeared tired the whole time . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.72

I believe you were glad we danced no longer ; AUSTEN-1815-2,157.73

but I would have given worlds - all the worlds one ever has to give -
for another half hour . " AUSTEN-1815-2,157.74

She played . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.75

" What felicity it is to hear a tune again which <font> has <$$font>
made one happy ! AUSTEN-1815-2,157.76

- If I mistake not that was danced at Weymouth . " AUSTEN-1815-2,157.77

She looked up at him for a moment , AUSTEN-1815-2,157.78

coloured deeply , AUSTEN-1815-2,157.79

and played something else . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.80

He took some music from a chair near the pianoforté ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.81

and turning to Emma , said , " Here is something quite new to me .
AUSTEN-1815-2,157.82

Do you know it ? AUSTEN-1815-2,157.83

- Cramer . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.84

- And here are a new set of Irish melodies . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.85

That , from such a quarter , one might expect . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.86

This was all sent with the instrument . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.87

Very thoughtful of Col. Campbell , was not it ? AUSTEN-1815-2,157.88

- He knew Miss Fairfax could have no music here . AUSTEN-1815-2,157.89

I honour that part of the attention particularly ; AUSTEN-1815-2,157.90

it shews <P_158> it to have been so thoroughly from the heart .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.91

Nothing hastily done ; AUSTEN-1815-2,158.92

nothing incomplete . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.93

True affection only could have prompted it . " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.94

Emma wished he would be less pointed , AUSTEN-1815-2,158.95

yet could not help being amused ; AUSTEN-1815-2,158.96

and when on glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught the remains
of a smile , when she saw that with all the deep blush of consciousness
, there had been a smile of secret delight , she had less scruple in the
amusement , and much less compunction with respect to her .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.97

- This amiable , upright , perfect Jane Fairfax was apparently
cherishing very reprehensible feelings . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.98

He brought all the music to her , AUSTEN-1815-2,158.99

and they looked it over together . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.100

- Emma took the opportunity of whispering , " You speak too plain .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.101

She must understand you . " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.102

" I hope she does . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.103

I would have her understand me . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.104

I am not in the least ashamed of my meaning . " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.105

" But really , I am half ashamed , AUSTEN-1815-2,158.106

and wish I had never taken up the idea . " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.107

" I am very glad you did , and that you communicated it to me .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.108

I have now a key to all her odd looks and ways . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.109

Leave shame to her . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.110

If she does wrong , she ought to feel it . " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.111

" She is not entirely without it , I think . " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.112

" I do not see much sign of it . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.113

She is playing <font> Robin Adair <$$font> at this moment - <font> his
<$$font> favourite . " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.114

Shortly afterwards Miss Bates , passing near the window , descried Mr.
Knightley on horseback not far off . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.115

" Mr. Knightley I declare ! AUSTEN-1815-2,158.116

- I must speak to him if possible , just to thank him .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.117

I will not open the window here ; AUSTEN-1815-2,158.118

it would give you all cold ; AUSTEN-1815-2,158.119

but I can go into my mother's room you know . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.120

I dare say he will come in when he knows who is here .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.121

Quite delightful to have you all meet so ! AUSTEN-1815-2,158.122

- Our little room so honoured ! " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.123

She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.124

and opening the casement there , immediately called Mr. Knightley's
attention , AUSTEN-1815-2,158.125

and every syllable of their conversation was as distinctly heard by the
others , as if it had passed within the same apartment .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.126

" How d'@ @ye do ? AUSTEN-1815-2,158.127

- how d'@ @ye do ? AUSTEN-1815-2,158.128

- Very well , I thank you , AUSTEN-1815-2,158.129

So obliged to you for the carriage last night . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.130

We were just in time ; my mother just ready for us .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.131

Pray come in ; AUSTEN-1815-2,158.132

do come in . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.133

You will find some friends here . " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.134

So began Miss Bates ; AUSTEN-1815-2,158.135

and Mr. Knightley seemed determined to be heard in his turn ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.136

for most resolutely and commandingly did he say , " How is your niece ,
Miss Bates ? AUSTEN-1815-2,158.137

- I want to inquire after you all , but particularly your niece .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.138

How is Miss Fairfax ? AUSTEN-1815-2,158.139

- I hope she caught no cold last night . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.140

How is she to-day ? AUSTEN-1815-2,158.141

Tell me how Miss Fairfax is . " AUSTEN-1815-2,158.142

And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear
her in any thing else . AUSTEN-1815-2,158.143

The listeners were amused ; AUSTEN-1815-2,158.144

and Mrs. Weston gave Emma a look of particular meaning .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.145

But Emma still shook her head in steady scepticism .
AUSTEN-1815-2,158.146

<P_159>

" So obliged to you ! AUSTEN-1815-2,159.148

- so very much obliged to you for the carriage , " resumed Miss Bates .
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.149

He cut her short with , " I am going to Kingston .
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.150

Can I do any thing for you ? " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.151

" Oh ! dear , Kingston - are you ? AUSTEN-1815-2,159.152

- Mrs. Cole was saying the other day she wanted something from Kingston
. " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.153

" Mrs. Cole has servants to send . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.154

Can I do any thing for you ? " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.155

" No , I thank you . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.156

But do come in . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.157

Who do you think is here ? AUSTEN-1815-2,159.158

- Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith ; AUSTEN-1815-2,159.159

so kind as to call to hear the new pianoforté . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.160

Do put up your horse at the Crown , and come in . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.161

" Well , " said he in a deliberating manner , " for five minutes ,
perhaps . " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.162

" And here is Mrs. Weston and Mr. Frank Churchill too !
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.163

- Quite delightful ; AUSTEN-1815-2,159.164

so many friends ! " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.165

" No , not now , I thank you . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.166

I could not stay two minutes . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.167

I must get on to Kingston as fast as I can . " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.168

" Oh ! do come in . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.169

They will be so very happy to see you . " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.170

" No , no , your room is full enough . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.171

I will call another day , and hear the pianoforté . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.172

" Well , I am so sorry ! AUSTEN-1815-2,159.173

- Oh ! Mr. Knightley , what a delightful party last night ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.174

how extremely pleasant . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.175

- Did you ever see such dancing ? AUSTEN-1815-2,159.176

- Was not it delightful ? AUSTEN-1815-2,159.177

- Miss Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill ; I never saw any thing equal
to it . " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.178

" Oh ! very delightful indeed ; AUSTEN-1815-2,159.179

I can say nothing less , AUSTEN-1815-2,159.180

for I suppose Miss Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill are hearing every
thing that passes . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.181

And <paren> raising his voice still more <$$paren> I do not see why Miss
Fairfax should not be mentioned too . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.182

I think Miss Fairfax dances very well ; and Mrs. Weston is the very
best country-dance player , without exception , in England .
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.183

Now , if your friends have any gratitude , they will say something
pretty loud about you and me in return ; AUSTEN-1815-2,159.184

but I can@ @not stay to hear it . " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.185

" Oh ! Mr. Knightley , one moment more ; AUSTEN-1815-2,159.186

something of consequence - AUSTEN-1815-2,159.187

so shocked ! AUSTEN-1815-2,159.188

- Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples ! "
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.189

" What is the matter now ? " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.190

" To think of your sending us all your store apples .
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.191

You said you had a great many , AUSTEN-1815-2,159.192

and now you have not one left . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.193

We really are so shocked ! AUSTEN-1815-2,159.194

Mrs. Hodges may well be angry . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.195

William Larkins mentioned it here . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.196

You should not have done it , AUSTEN-1815-2,159.197

indeed you should not . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.198

Ah ! he is off . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.199

He never can bear to be thanked . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.200

But I thought he would have staid now , AUSTEN-1815-2,159.201

and it would have been a pity not to have mentioned ...
AUSTEN-1815-2,159.202

Well , <paren> returning into the room , <$$paren> I have not been able
to succeed . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.203

Mr. Knightley can@ @not stop . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.204

He is going to Kingston . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.205

He asked me if he could do any thing " ... . AUSTEN-1815-2,159.206

" Yes , " said Jane , " we heard his kind offers , AUSTEN-1815-2,159.207

we heard every thing . " AUSTEN-1815-2,159.208

" Oh ! yes , my dear , I dare say you might , because you know the door
<P_160> was open , and the window was open , and Mr. Knightley spoke
loud . AUSTEN-1815-2,160.209

You must have heard everything to be sure . AUSTEN-1815-2,160.210

' Can I do any thing for you at Kingston ? ' said he ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,160.211

so I mentioned ... AUSTEN-1815-2,160.212

Oh ! Miss Woodhouse , must you be going ? AUSTEN-1815-2,160.213

- You seem but just come - AUSTEN-1815-2,160.214

so very obliging of you . " AUSTEN-1815-2,160.215

Emma found it really time to be at home ; AUSTEN-1815-2,160.216

the visit had already lasted long ; AUSTEN-1815-2,160.217

and on examining watches , so much of the morning was perceived to be
gone , that Mrs. Weston and her companion taking leave also , could
allow themselves only to walk with the two young ladies to Hartfield
gates , before they set off for Randalls . AUSTEN-1815-2,160.218

<heading>

<font> Chapter XI <$$font> AUSTEN-1815-2,160.220

<$$heading>

It may be possible to do without dancing entirely .
AUSTEN-1815-2,160.222

Instances have been known of young people passing many , many months
successively , without being at any ball of any description , and no
material injury accruing {TEXT:accrue} either to body or mind ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,160.223

- but when a beginning is made - when the felicities of rapid motion
have once been , though slightly , felt - it must be a very heavy set
that does not ask for more . AUSTEN-1815-2,160.224

Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury , AUSTEN-1815-2,160.225

and longed to dance again ; AUSTEN-1815-2,160.226

and the last half hour of an evening which Mr. Woodhouse was persuaded
to spend with his daughter at Randalls , was passed by the two young
people in schemes on the subject . AUSTEN-1815-2,160.227

Frank's was the first idea ; and his the greatest zeal in pursuing it ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,160.228

for the lady was the best judge of the difficulties , and the most
solicitous for accommodation and appearance . AUSTEN-1815-2,160.229

But still she had inclination enough for shewing people again how
delightfully Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse danced - for doing
that in which she need not blush to compare herself with Jane Fairfax -
and even for simple dancing itself , without any of the wicked aids of
vanity - to assist him first in pacing out the room they were in to see
what it could be made to hold - and then in taking the dimensions of the
other parlour , in the hope of discovering , in spite of all that Mr.
Weston could say of their exactly equal size , that it was a little the
largest . AUSTEN-1815-2,160.230

His first proposition and request , that the dance begun at Mr. Cole's
should be finished there - that the same party should be collected , and
the same musician engaged , met with the readiest acquiescence .
AUSTEN-1815-2,160.231

Mr. Weston entered into the idea with thorough enjoyment ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,160.232

and Mrs. Weston most willingly undertook to play as long as they could
wish to dance ; AUSTEN-1815-2,160.233

and the interesting employment had followed , of reckoning up exactly
who there would be , and portioning out the indispensable division of
space to every couple . AUSTEN-1815-2,160.234

" You and Miss Smith , and Miss Fairfax , will be three , and the two
<P_161> Miss Coxes five , " had been repeated many times over .
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.235

" And there will be the two Gilberts , young Cox , my father , and
myself , besides Mr. Knightley . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.236

Yes , that will be quite enough for pleasure . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.237

You and Miss Smith , and Miss Fairfax , will be three , and the two Miss
Coxes five ; AUSTEN-1815-2,161.238

and for five couple there will be plenty of room . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.239

But soon it came to be on one side , " But will there be good room for
five couple ? - I really do not think there will " . On another , "
And after all , five couple are not enough to make it worth while to
stand up . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.240

Five couple are nothing , when one thinks seriously about it .
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.241

It will not do to <font> invite <$$font> five couple .
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.242

It can be allowable only as the thought of the moment . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.243

Somebody said that <font> Miss <$$font> Gilbert was expected at her
brother's , and must be invited with the rest . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.244

Somebody else believed <font> Mrs. <$$font> Gilbert would have danced
the other evening , if she had been asked . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.245

A word was put in for a second young Cox ; AUSTEN-1815-2,161.246

and at last , Mr. Weston naming one family of cousins who must be
included , and another of very old acquaintance who could not be left
out , it became a certainty that the five couple would be at least ten ,
and a very interesting speculation in what possible manner they could be
disposed of . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.247

The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other .
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.248

" Might not they use both rooms , and dance across the passage ? "
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.249

It seemed the best scheme ; AUSTEN-1815-2,161.250

and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a better .
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.251

Emma said it would be awkward ; AUSTEN-1815-2,161.252

Mrs. Weston was in distress about the supper ; AUSTEN-1815-2,161.253

and Mr. Woodhouse opposed it earnestly , on the score of health .
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.254

It made him so very unhappy , indeed , that it could not be persevered
in . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.255

" Oh ! no , " said he ; " AUSTEN-1815-2,161.256

it would be the extreme of imprudence . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.257

I could not bear it for Emma ! AUSTEN-1815-2,161.258

- Emma is not strong . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.259

She would catch a dreadful cold . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.260

So would poor little Harriet . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.261

So you would all . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.262

Mrs. Weston , you would be quite laid up ; AUSTEN-1815-2,161.263

do not let them talk of such a wild thing . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.264

Pray do not let them talk of it . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.265

That young man <paren> speaking lower <$$paren> is very thoughtless .
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.266

Do not tell his father , AUSTEN-1815-2,161.267

but that young man is not quite the thing . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.268

He has been opening the doors very often this evening , and keeping them
open very inconsiderately . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.269

He does not think of the draught . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.270

I do not mean to set you against him , AUSTEN-1815-2,161.271

but indeed he is not quite the thing ! " AUSTEN-1815-2,161.272

Mrs. Weston was sorry for such a charge . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.273

She knew the importance of it , AUSTEN-1815-2,161.274

and said every thing in her power to do it away . AUSTEN-1815-2,161.275

Every door was now closed , the passage plan given up , and the first
scheme of dancing only in the room they were in resorted to again ; and
with such goodwill on Frank Churchill's part , that the space which a
quarter of an hour before he had deemed barely sufficient for five
couple , was now endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten .
AUSTEN-1815-2,161.276

<P_162>

" We were too magnificent , " said he . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.278

" We allowed unnecessary room . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.279

Ten couple may stand here very well . " AUSTEN-1815-2,162.280

Emma demurred . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.281

" It would be a crowd - a sad crowd ; AUSTEN-1815-2,162.282

and what could be worse than dancing without space to turn in ? "
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.283

" Very true , " he gravely replied ; AUSTEN-1815-2,162.284

" it was very bad . " AUSTEN-1815-2,162.285

But still he went on measuring , AUSTEN-1815-2,162.286

and still he ended with , " I think there will be very tolerable room
for ten couple . " AUSTEN-1815-2,162.287

" No , no , " said she , " you are quite unreasonable .
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.288

It would be dreadful to be standing so close ! AUSTEN-1815-2,162.289

Nothing can be farther from pleasure than to be dancing in a crowd - and
a crowd in a little room ! " AUSTEN-1815-2,162.290

" There is no denying it , " he replied ; AUSTEN-1815-2,162.291

" I agree with you exactly . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.292

A crowd in a little room - AUSTEN-1815-2,162.293

Miss Woodhouse , you have the art of giving pictures in a few words .
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.294

Exquisite , quite exquisite ! AUSTEN-1815-2,162.295

- Still , however , having proceeded so far , one is unwilling to give
the matter up . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.296

It would be a disappointment to my father - and altogether -
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.297

I do not know that - I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand
here very well . " AUSTEN-1815-2,162.298

Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a little self-willed
, and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure of dancing with
her ; AUSTEN-1815-2,162.299

but she took the compliment , AUSTEN-1815-2,162.300

and forgave the rest . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.301

Had she intended ever to <font> marry <$$font> him , it might have been
worth while to pause and consider , and try to understand the value of
his preference and the character of his temper ; AUSTEN-1815-2,162.302

but for all the purposes of their acquaintance , he was quite amiable
enough . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.303

Before the middle of the next day , he was at Hartfield ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.304

and he entered the room with such an agreeable smile as certified the
continuance of the scheme . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.305

It soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement .
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.306

" Well , Miss Woodhouse , " he almost immediately began ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.307

" your inclination for dancing has not been quite frightened away , I
hope , by the terrors of my father's little rooms .
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.308

I bring a new proposal on the subject : - a thought of my father's ,
which waits only your approbation to be acted upon .
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.309

May I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dances of this
little projected ball , to be given , not at {TEXT:as} Randalls , but at
the Crown Inn ? " AUSTEN-1815-2,162.310

" The Crown ! " AUSTEN-1815-2,162.311

" Yes ; if you and Mr. Woodhouse see no objection , and I trust you
can@ @not , my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him
there . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.312

Better accommodations , he can promise them , and not a less grateful
welcome than at Randalls . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.313

It is his own idea . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.314

Mrs. Weston sees no objection to it , provided you are satisfied .
AUSTEN-1815-2,162.315

This is what we all feel . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.316

Oh ! you were perfectly right ! AUSTEN-1815-2,162.317

Ten couple , in either of the Randalls rooms , would have been
insufferable ! - Dreadful ! AUSTEN-1815-2,162.318

- I felt how right you were the whole time , AUSTEN-1815-2,162.319

but was too anxious for securing <font> any thing <$$font> to like to
yield . AUSTEN-1815-2,162.320

Is not it a good exchange ? AUSTEN-1815-2,162.321

- You consent - AUSTEN-1815-2,162.322

I hope you consent ? " AUSTEN-1815-2,162.323

<P_163>

" It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to , if Mr. and Mrs.
Weston do not . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.325

I think it admirable ; AUSTEN-1815-2,163.326

and , as far as I can answer for myself , shall be most happy -
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.327

It seems the only improvement that could be . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.328

Papa , do you not think it an excellent improvement ? "
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.329

She was obliged to repeat and explain it , before it was fully
comprehended ; AUSTEN-1815-2,163.330

and then , being quite new , further representations were necessary to
make it acceptable . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.331

" No ; he thought it very far from an improvement - a very bad plan -
much worse than the other . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.332

A room at an inn was always damp and dangerous ; never properly aired ,
or fit to be inhabited . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.333

If they must dance , they had better dance at Randalls .
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.334

He had never been in the room at the Crown in his life -
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.335

did not know the people who kept it by sight . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.336

- Oh ! no - a very bad plan . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.337

They would catch worse colds at the Crown than any where . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.338

" I was going to observe , sir , " said Frank Churchill , " that one of
the great recommendations of this change would be the very little danger
of any body's catching cold - so much less danger at the Crown than at
Randalls ! AUSTEN-1815-2,163.339

Mr. Perry might have reason to regret the alteration ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.340

but nobody else could . " AUSTEN-1815-2,163.341

" Sir , " said Mr. Woodhouse , rather warmly , " you are very much
mistaken if you suppose Mr. Perry to be that sort of character .
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.342

Mr. Perry is extremely concerned when any of us are ill .
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.343

But I do not understand how the room at the Crown can be safer for you
than your father's house . " AUSTEN-1815-2,163.344

" From the very circumstance of its being larger , sir .
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.345

We shall have no occasion to open the windows at all - not once the
whole evening ; AUSTEN-1815-2,163.346

and it is that dreadful habit of opening the windows , letting in cold
air upon heated bodies , which <paren> as you well know , sir <$$paren>
does the mischief . " AUSTEN-1815-2,163.347

" Open the windows ! AUSTEN-1815-2,163.348

- but surely , Mr. Churchill , nobody would think of opening the
windows at Randalls . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.349

Nobody could be so imprudent ! AUSTEN-1815-2,163.350

I never heard of such a thing . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.351

Dancing with open windows ! AUSTEN-1815-2,163.352

- I am sure , neither your father nor Mrs. Weston <paren> poor Miss
Taylor that was <$$paren> would suffer it . " AUSTEN-1815-2,163.353

" Ah ! sir - but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behind
a window-curtain , and throw up a sash , without its being suspected .
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.354

I have often known it done myself . " AUSTEN-1815-2,163.355

" Have you indeed , sir ? AUSTEN-1815-2,163.356

- Bless me ! AUSTEN-1815-2,163.357

I never could have supposed it . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.358

But I live out of the world , AUSTEN-1815-2,163.359

and am often astonished at what I hear . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.360

However , this does make a difference ; AUSTEN-1815-2,163.361

and , perhaps , when we come to talk it over - but these sort of things
require a good deal of consideration . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.362

One can@ @not resolve upon them in a hurry . AUSTEN-1815-2,163.363

If Mr. and Mrs. Weston will be so obliging as to call here one morning
, we may talk it over , and see what can be done . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.364

" But , unfortunately , sir , my time is so limited - "
AUSTEN-1815-2,163.365

" Oh ! " interrupted Emma , AUSTEN-1815-2,163.366

" there will be plenty of time for talking <P_164> every thing over .
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.367

There is no hurry at all . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.368

If it can be contrived to be at the Crown , papa , it will be very
convenient for the horses . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.369

They will be so near their own stable . " AUSTEN-1815-2,164.370

" So they will , my dear . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.371

That is a great thing . Not that James ever complains ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.372

but it is right to spare our horses when we can . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.373

If I could be sure of the rooms being thoroughly aired -
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.374

but is Mrs. Stokes to be trusted ? AUSTEN-1815-2,164.375

I doubt it . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.376

I do not know her , even by sight . " AUSTEN-1815-2,164.377

" I can answer for every thing of that nature , sir , because it will be
under Mrs. Weston's care . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.378

Mrs. Weston undertakes to direct the whole . " AUSTEN-1815-2,164.379

" There , papa ! AUSTEN-1815-2,164.380

- Now you must be satisfied - AUSTEN-1815-2,164.381

Our own dear Mrs. Weston , who is carefulness itself .
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.382

Do not you remember what Mr. Perry said , so many years ago , when I
had the measles ? AUSTEN-1815-2,164.383

' If Miss <font> Taylor <$$font> undertakes to wrap Miss Emma up , you
need not have any fears , sir . ' AUSTEN-1815-2,164.384

How often have I heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her ! "
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.385

" Aye , very true . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.386

Mr. Perry did say so . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.387

I shall never forget it . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.388

Poor little Emma ! You were very bad with the measles ; that is , you
would have been very bad , but for Perry's great attention .
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.389

He came four times a day for a week . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.390

He said , from the first , it was a very good sort - which was our great
comfort ; AUSTEN-1815-2,164.391

but the measles are a dreadful complaint . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.392

I hope whenever poor Isabella's little ones have the measles , she will
send for Perry . " AUSTEN-1815-2,164.393

" My father and Mrs. Weston are at the Crown at this moment , " said
Frank Churchill , " examining the capabilities of the house .
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.394

I left them there AUSTEN-1815-2,164.395

and came on to Hartfield , impatient for your opinion , and hoping you
might be persuaded to join them and give your advice on the spot .
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.396

I was desired to say so from both . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.397

It would be the greatest pleasure to them , if you could allow me to
attend you there . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.398

They can do nothing satisfactorily without you . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.399

Emma was most happy to be called to such a council ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.400

and her father , engaging to think it all over while she was gone , the
two young people set off together without delay for the Crown .
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.401

There were Mr. and Mrs. Weston ; delighted to see her and receive her
approbation , very busy and very happy in their different way ; she , in
some little distress ; and he , finding every thing perfect .
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.402

" Emma , " said she , " this paper is worse than I expected .
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.403

Look ! AUSTEN-1815-2,164.404

in places you see it is dreadfully dirty ; AUSTEN-1815-2,164.405

and the wainscot is more yellow and forlorn than any thing I could have
imagined . " AUSTEN-1815-2,164.406

" My dear , you are too particular , " said her husband .
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.407

" What does all that signify ? AUSTEN-1815-2,164.408

You will see nothing of it by candle-light . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.409

It will be as clean as Randalls by candle-light . AUSTEN-1815-2,164.410

We never see any thing of it on our club-nights . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,164.411

<P_165>

The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant , " Men never know
when things are dirty or not ; " AUSTEN-1815-2,165.413

and the gentlemen perhaps thought each to himself , " Women will have
their little nonsenses and needless cares . " AUSTEN-1815-2,165.414

One perplexity , however , arose , which the gentlemen did not disdain .
AUSTEN-1815-2,165.415

It regarded a supper-room . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.416

At the time of the ball-room's being built , suppers had not been in
question ; AUSTEN-1815-2,165.417

and a small card-room adjoining , was the only addition .
AUSTEN-1815-2,165.418

What was to be done ? AUSTEN-1815-2,165.419

This card-room would be wanted as a card-room now ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,165.420

or , if cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by their four selves ,
still was not it too small for any comfortable supper ?
AUSTEN-1815-2,165.421

Another room of much better size might be secured for the purpose ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,165.422

but it was at the other end of the house , AUSTEN-1815-2,165.423

and a long awkward passage must be gone through to get at it .
AUSTEN-1815-2,165.424

This made a difficulty . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.425

Mrs. Weston was afraid of draughts for the young people in that passage
; AUSTEN-1815-2,165.426

and neither Emma nor the gentlemen could tolerate the prospect of being
miserably crowded at supper . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.427

Mrs. Weston proposed having no regular supper ; merely sandwiches , &c.
set out in the little room ; AUSTEN-1815-2,165.428

but that was scouted as a wretched suggestion . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.429

A private dance , without sitting down to supper , was pronounced an
infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women ; AUSTEN-1815-2,165.430

and Mrs. Weston must not speak of it again . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.431

She then took another line of expediency , AUSTEN-1815-2,165.432

and looking into the doubtful room , observed , " I do not think it is
so very small . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.433

We shall not be many , you know . " AUSTEN-1815-2,165.434

And Mr. Weston at the same time , walking briskly with long steps
through the passage , was calling out , " You talk a great deal of the
length of this passage , my dear . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.435

It is a mere nothing after all ; AUSTEN-1815-2,165.436

and not the least draught from the stairs . " AUSTEN-1815-2,165.437

" I wish , " said Mrs. Weston , " one could know which arrangement our
guests in general would like best . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.438

To do what would be most generally pleasing must be our object - if one
could but tell what that would be . " AUSTEN-1815-2,165.439

" Yes , very true , " cried Frank , " very true . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.440

You want your neighbours' opinions . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.441

I do not wonder at you . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.442

If one could ascertain what the chief of them - the Coles , for instance
. AUSTEN-1815-2,165.443

They are not far off . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.444

Shall I call upon them ? Or Miss Bates ? AUSTEN-1815-2,165.445

She is still nearer . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.446

- And I do not know whether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand
the inclinations of the rest of the people as any body .
AUSTEN-1815-2,165.447

I think we do want a larger council . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.448

Suppose I go and invite Miss Bates to join us ? " AUSTEN-1815-2,165.449

" Well - if you please , " said Mrs. Weston rather hesitating , " if
you think she will be of any use . " AUSTEN-1815-2,165.450

" You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates , " said Emma .
AUSTEN-1815-2,165.451

" She will be all delight and gratitude , AUSTEN-1815-2,165.452

but she will tell you nothing . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.453

She will not even listen to your questions . AUSTEN-1815-2,165.454

I see no advantage in consulting Miss Bates . " AUSTEN-1815-2,165.455

<P_166>

" But she is so amusing , so extremely amusing ! AUSTEN-1815-2,166.457

I am very fond of hearing Miss Bates talk . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.458

And I need not bring the whole family , you know . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,166.459

Here Mr. Weston joined them , AUSTEN-1815-2,166.460

and on hearing what was proposed , gave it his decided approbation .
AUSTEN-1815-2,166.461

" Aye , do , Frank - AUSTEN-1815-2,166.462

Go AUSTEN-1815-2,166.463

and fetch Miss Bates , AUSTEN-1815-2,166.464

and let us end the matter at once . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.465

She will enjoy the scheme , I am sure ; AUSTEN-1815-2,166.466

and I do not know a properer person for shewing us how to do away
difficulties . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.467

Fetch Miss Bates . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.468

We are growing a little too nice . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.469

She is a standing lesson of how to be happy . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.470

But fetch them both . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.471

Invite them both . " AUSTEN-1815-2,166.472

" Both sir ! AUSTEN-1815-2,166.473

Can the old lady ? " ... AUSTEN-1815-2,166.474

" The old lady ! AUSTEN-1815-2,166.475

No , the young lady , to be sure . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.476

I shall think you a great blockhead , Frank , if you bring the aunt
without the niece . " AUSTEN-1815-2,166.477

" Oh ! I beg your pardon , sir . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.478

I did not immediately recollect . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.479

Undoubtedly if you wish it , I will endeavour to persuade them both . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,166.480

And away he ran . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.481

Long before he re-appeared , attending the short , neat , brisk-@
@moving aunt , and her elegant niece , - Mrs. Weston , like a
sweet-tempered woman and a good wife , had examined the passage again ,
and found the evils of it much less than she had supposed before -
indeed very trifling ; AUSTEN-1815-2,166.482

and here ended the difficulties of decision . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.483

All the rest , in speculation at least , was perfectly smooth .
AUSTEN-1815-2,166.484

All the minor arrangements of table and chair , lights and music , tea
and supper , made themselves ; AUSTEN-1815-2,166.485

or were left as mere trifles to be settled at any time between Mrs.
Weston and Mrs. Stokes . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.486

- Every body invited , was certainly to come ; AUSTEN-1815-2,166.487

Frank had already written to Enscombe to propose staying a few days
beyond his fortnight , which could not possibly be refused .
AUSTEN-1815-2,166.488

And a delightful dance it was to be . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.489

Most cordially , when Miss Bates arrived , did she agree that it must .
AUSTEN-1815-2,166.490

As a counsellor she was not wanted ; AUSTEN-1815-2,166.491

but as an approver , <paren> a much safer character , <$$paren> she was
truly welcome . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.492

Her approbation , at once general and minute , warm and incessant ,
could not but please ; AUSTEN-1815-2,166.493

and for another half - hour they were all walking to and fro , between
the different rooms , some suggesting , some attending , and all in
happy enjoyment of the future . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.494

The party did not break up without Emma's being positively secured for
the two first dances by the hero of the evening , nor without her
overhearing Mr. Weston whisper to his wife , " He has asked her , my
dear . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.495

That@ @'s right . AUSTEN-1815-2,166.496

I knew he would ! " AUSTEN-1815-2,166.497

<heading>

<font> Chapter XII <$$font> AUSTEN-1815-2,166.499

<$$heading>

One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely
satisfactory to Emma - its being fixed for a day within the <P_167>
granted term of Frank Churchill's stay in Surry ; AUSTEN-1815-2,167.501

for , in spite of Mr. Weston's confidence , she could not think it so
very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to
remain a day beyond his fortnight . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.502

But this was not judged feasible . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.503

The preparations must take their time , AUSTEN-1815-2,167.504

nothing could be properly ready till the third week were entered on ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,167.505

and for a few days they must be planning , proceeding and hoping in
uncertainty - at the risk - in her opinion , the great risk , of its
being all in vain . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.506

Enscombe however was gracious , gracious in fact , if not in word .
AUSTEN-1815-2,167.507

His wish of staying longer evidently did not please ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,167.508

but it was not opposed . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.509

All was safe and prosperous ; AUSTEN-1815-2,167.510

and as the removal of one solicitude generally makes way for another ,
Emma , being now certain of her ball , began to adopt as the next
vexation Mr. Knightley's provoking indifference about it .
AUSTEN-1815-2,167.511

Either because he did not dance himself , or because the plan had been
formed without his being consulted , he seemed resolved that it should
not interest him , determined against its exciting any present curiosity
, or affording him any future amusement . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.512

To her voluntary communications Emma could get no more approving reply ,
than , " Very well . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.513

If the Westons think it worth while to be at all this trouble for a few
hours of noisy entertainment , I have nothing to say against it , but
that they shall not choose pleasures for me . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.514

- Oh ! yes , I must be there , AUSTEN-1815-2,167.515

I could not refuse ; AUSTEN-1815-2,167.516

and I will keep as much awake as I can ; AUSTEN-1815-2,167.517

but I would rather be at home , looking over William Larkins's week's
account ; much rather , I confess . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.518

- Pleasure in seeing dancing ! AUSTEN-1815-2,167.519

- not I , indeed - AUSTEN-1815-2,167.520

I never look at it - AUSTEN-1815-2,167.521

I do not know who does - AUSTEN-1815-2,167.522

Fine dancing , I believe , like virtue , must be its own reward .
AUSTEN-1815-2,167.523

Those who are standing by are usually thinking of something very
different . " AUSTEN-1815-2,167.524

This Emma felt was aimed at her ; AUSTEN-1815-2,167.525

and it made her quite angry . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.526

It was not in compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was so
indifferent , or so indignant : AUSTEN-1815-2,167.527

he was not guided by <font> her <$$font> feelings in reprobating the
ball , AUSTEN-1815-2,167.528

for <font> she <$$font> enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary
degree . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.529

It made her animated - open_hearted - AUSTEN-1815-2,167.530

she voluntarily said ; - " Oh ! Miss Woodhouse , I hope nothing may
happen to prevent the ball . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.531

What a disappointment it would be ! AUSTEN-1815-2,167.532

I do look forward to it , I own , with <font> very <$$font> great
pleasure . " AUSTEN-1815-2,167.533

It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have preferred
the society of William Larkins . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.534

No ! - she was more and more convinced that Mrs. Weston was quite
mistaken in that surmise . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.535

There was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on
his side - but no love . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.536

Alas ! there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with Mr. Knightley .
AUSTEN-1815-2,167.537

Two days of joyful security were immediately followed by the overthrow
of everything . AUSTEN-1815-2,167.538

A letter arrived from Mr. Churchill to urge his nephew's instant return
. AUSTEN-1815-2,167.539

Mrs. Churchill was unwell - far too unwell to <P_168> do without him ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.540

she had been in a very suffering state <paren> so said her husband
<$$paren> when writing to her nephew two days before , though from her
usual unwillingness to give pain , and constant habit of never thinking
of herself , she had not mentioned it ; AUSTEN-1815-2,168.541

but now she was too ill to trifle , AUSTEN-1815-2,168.542

and must entreat him to set off for Enscombe without delay .
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.543

The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma , in a note from Mrs.
Weston , instantly . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.544

As to his going , it was inevitable . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.545

He must be gone within a few hours , though without feeling any real
alarm for his aunt , to lessen his repugnance . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.546

He knew her illnesses ; AUSTEN-1815-2,168.547

they never occurred but for her own convenience . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.548

Mrs. Weston added , " that he could only allow himself time to hurry to
Highbury , after breakfast , and take leave of the few friends there
whom he could suppose to feel any interest in him ; and that he might be
expected at Hartfield very soon . " AUSTEN-1815-2,168.549

This wretched note was the finale of Emma's breakfast .
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.550

When once it had been read , there was no doing any thing , but lament
and exclaim . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.551

The loss of the ball - the loss of the young man - and all that the
young man might be feeling ! - It was too wretched !
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.552

- Such a delightful evening as it would have been !
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.553

- Every body so happy ! AUSTEN-1815-2,168.554

and she and her partner the happiest ! AUSTEN-1815-2,168.555

- " I said it would be so , " was the only consolation
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.556

Her father's feelings were quite distinct . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.557

He thought principally of Mrs. Churchill's illness ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.558

and wanted to know how she was treated ; AUSTEN-1815-2,168.559

and as for the ball , it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.560

but they would all be safer at home . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.561

Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.562

but if this reflected at all upon his impatience , his sorrowful look
and total want of spirits when he did come might redeem him .
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.563

He felt the going away almost too much to speak of it .
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.564

His dejection was most evident . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.565

He sat really lost in thought for the first few minutes ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.566

and when rousing himself , it was only to say , ' Of all horrid things ,
leave-taking is the worst . " AUSTEN-1815-2,168.567

" But you will come again , " said Emma . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.568

" This will not be your only visit to Randalls . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.569

" Ah ! - <paren> shaking his head <$$paren> - the uncertainty of when I
may be able to return ! AUSTEN-1815-2,168.570

- I shall try for it with a zeal ! AUSTEN-1815-2,168.571

- It will be the object of all my thoughts and cares !
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.572

- and if my uncle and aunt go to town this spring -
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.573

but I am afraid - AUSTEN-1815-2,168.574

they did not stir last spring - AUSTEN-1815-2,168.575

I am afraid it is a custom gone for ever . " AUSTEN-1815-2,168.576

" Our poor ball must be quite given up . " AUSTEN-1815-2,168.577

" Ah ! that ball ! AUSTEN-1815-2,168.578

- why did we wait for any thing ? AUSTEN-1815-2,168.579

- why not seize the pleasure at once ? AUSTEN-1815-2,168.580

- How often is happiness destroyed by preparation , foolish preparation
! AUSTEN-1815-2,168.581

- You told us it would be so . AUSTEN-1815-2,168.582

- Oh ! Miss Woodhouse , why are you always so right ? "
AUSTEN-1815-2,168.583

<P_169>

" Indeed , I am very sorry to be right in this instance .
AUSTEN-1815-2,169.585

I would much rather have been merry than wise . " AUSTEN-1815-2,169.586

" If I can come again , we are still to have our ball .
AUSTEN-1815-2,169.587

My father depends on it . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.588

Do not forget your engagement . " AUSTEN-1815-2,169.589

Emma looked graciously . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.590

" Such a fortnight as it has been ! " he continued ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,169.591

" every day more precious and more delightful than the day before !
AUSTEN-1815-2,169.592

- every day making me less fit to bear any other place .
AUSTEN-1815-2,169.593

Happy those , who can remain at Highbury ! " AUSTEN-1815-2,169.594

" As you do us such ample justice now , " said Emma , laughing , " I
will venture to ask , whether you did not come a little doubtingly at
first ? AUSTEN-1815-2,169.595

Do not we rather surpass your expectations ? AUSTEN-1815-2,169.596

I am sure we do . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.597

I am sure you did not much expect to like us . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.598

You would not have been so long in coming , if you had had a pleasant
idea of Highbury . " AUSTEN-1815-2,169.599

He laughed rather consciously ; AUSTEN-1815-2,169.600

and though denying the sentiment , Emma was convinced that it had been
so . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.601

" And you must be off this very morning ? AUSTEN-1815-2,169.602

" Yes ; my father is to join me here : AUSTEN-1815-2,169.603

we shall walk back together , AUSTEN-1815-2,169.604

and I must be off immediately . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.605

I am almost afraid that every moment will bring him . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,169.606

" Not five minutes to spare even for your friends Miss Fairfax and Miss
Bates ? AUSTEN-1815-2,169.607

How unlucky ! AUSTEN-1815-2,169.608

Miss Bates's powerful , argumentative mind might have strengthened yours
. " AUSTEN-1815-2,169.609

" Yes - I <font> have <$$font> called there ; AUSTEN-1815-2,169.610

passing the door , I thought it better . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.611

It was a right thing to do . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.612

I went in for three minutes , AUSTEN-1815-2,169.613

and was detained by Miss Bates's being absent . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.614

She was out ; AUSTEN-1815-2,169.615

and I felt it impossible not to wait till she came in .
AUSTEN-1815-2,169.616

She is a woman that one may , that one <font> must <$$font> laugh at ;
but that one would not wish to slight . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.617

It was better to pay my visit , then " - AUSTEN-1815-2,169.618

He hesitated , AUSTEN-1815-2,169.619

got up , AUSTEN-1815-2,169.620

walked to a window . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.621

" In short , " said he , " perhaps , Miss Woodhouse - I think you can
hardly be quite without suspicion " AUSTEN-1815-2,169.622

- He looked at her , as if wanting to read her thoughts .
AUSTEN-1815-2,169.623

She hardly knew what to say . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.624

It seemed like the fore-runner of something absolutely serious , which
she did not wish . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.625

Forcing herself to speak , therefore , in the hope of putting it by ,
she calmly said , " You were quite in the right ; AUSTEN-1815-2,169.626

it was most natural to pay your visit , then " - AUSTEN-1815-2,169.627

He was silent . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.628

She believed he was looking at her ; probably reflecting on what she had
said , and trying to understand the manner . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.629

She heard him sigh . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.630

It was natural for him to feel that he had <font> cause <$$font> to sigh
. AUSTEN-1815-2,169.631

He could not believe her to be encouraging him . AUSTEN-1815-2,169.632

A few awkward moments passed , AUSTEN-1815-2,169.633

and he sat down again ; AUSTEN-1815-2,169.634

and in a more determined manner said , " It was something to feel that
all the rest of my time might be given <P_170> to Hartfield .
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.635

My regard for Hartfield is most warm " - AUSTEN-1815-2,170.636

He stopt again , AUSTEN-1815-2,170.637

rose again , AUSTEN-1815-2,170.638

and seemed quite embarrassed . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.639

- He was more in love with her than Emma had supposed ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.640

and who can say how it might have ended , if his father had not made his
appearance ? AUSTEN-1815-2,170.641

Mr. Woodhouse soon followed ; AUSTEN-1815-2,170.642

and the necessity of exertion made him composed . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.643

A very few minutes more , however , completed the presented trial .
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.644

Mr. Weston , always alert when business was to be done , and as
incapable of procrastinating any evil that was inevitable , as of
foreseeing any that was doubtful , said , " It was time to go ; "
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.645

and the young man , though he might and did sigh , could not but agree ,
and rise to take leave . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.646

" I shall hear about you all , " said he ; AUSTEN-1815-2,170.647

" that is my chief consolation . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.648

I shall hear of every thing that is going on among you .
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.649

I have engaged Mrs. Weston to correspond with me .
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.650

She has been so kind as to promise it . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.651

Oh ! the blessing of a female correspondent , when one is really
interested in the absent ! AUSTEN-1815-2,170.652

- she will tell me every thing . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.653

In her letters I shall be at dear Highbury again . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.654

A very friendly shake of the hand , a very earnest " Good_bye , " closed
the speech , AUSTEN-1815-2,170.655

and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.656

Short had been the notice - short their meeting ; AUSTEN-1815-2,170.657

he was gone ; AUSTEN-1815-2,170.658

and Emma felt so sorry to part , AUSTEN-1815-2,170.659

and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from his absence as
to begin to be afraid of being too sorry , and feeling it too much .
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.660

It was a sad change . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.661

They had been meeting almost every day since his arrival .
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.662

Certainly his being at Randalls had given great spirit to the last two
weeks - indescribable spirit ; AUSTEN-1815-2,170.663

the idea , the expectation of seeing him which every morning had brought
, the assurance of his attentions , his liveliness , his manners !
AUSTEN-1815-2,170.664

It had been a very happy fortnight , AUSTEN-1815-2,170.665

and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common course of
Hartfield days . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.666

To complete every other recommendation , he had <font> almost <$$font>
told her that he loved her . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.667

What strength , or what constancy of affection he might be subject to ,
was another point ; AUSTEN-1815-2,170.668

but at present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm
admiration , a conscious preference of herself ; AUSTEN-1815-2,170.669

and this persuasion , joined to all the rest , made her think that she
<font> must <$$font> be a little in love with him , in spite of every
previous determination against it . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.670

" I certainly must , " said she . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.671

" This sensation of listlessness , weariness , stupidity , this
disinclination to sit down and employ myself , this feeling of every
thing's being dull and insipid about the house ! AUSTEN-1815-2,170.672

- I must be in love ; AUSTEN-1815-2,170.673

I should be the oddest creature in the world if I were not - for a few
weeks at least . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.674

Well ! evil to some is always good to others . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.675

I shall have many fellow-mourners for the ball , if not for Frank
Churchill ; AUSTEN-1815-2,170.676

but Mr. Knightley will be happy . AUSTEN-1815-2,170.677

He may spend the evening with his dear William Larkins now if he likes .
" AUSTEN-1815-2,170.678

<P_171>

Mr. Knightley , however , shewed no triumphant happiness .
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.680

He could not say that he was sorry on his own account ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.681

his very cheerful look would have contradicted him if he had ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.682

but he said , and very steadily , that he was sorry for the
disappointment of the others , AUSTEN-1815-2,171.683

and with considerable kindness added , " You , Emma , who have so few
opportunities of dancing , you are really out of luck ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.684

you are very much out of luck ! " AUSTEN-1815-2,171.685

It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax , to judge of her honest
regret in this woeful change ; AUSTEN-1815-2,171.686

but when they did meet , her composure was odious .
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.687

She had been particularly unwell , however , suffering from head-ache to
a degree , which made her aunt declare , that had the ball taken place ,
she did not think Jane could have attended it ; AUSTEN-1815-2,171.688

and it was charity to impute some of her unbecoming indifference to the
languor of ill-health . AUSTEN-1815-2,171.689

<heading>

<font> Chapter XIII <$$font> AUSTEN-1815-2,171.691

<$$heading>

Emma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love .
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.693

Her ideas only varied as to the how much . AUSTEN-1815-2,171.694

At first , she thought it was a good deal ; and afterwards , but little
. AUSTEN-1815-2,171.695

She had great pleasure in hearing Frank Churchill talked of ; and , for
his sake , greater pleasure than ever in seeing Mr. and Mrs. Weston ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.696

she was very often thinking of him , and quite impatient for a letter ,
that she might know how he was , how were his spirits , how was his aunt
, and what was the chance of his coming to Randalls again this spring .
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.697

But , on the other hand , she could not admit herself to be unhappy ,
nor , after the first morning , to be less disposed for employment than
usual ; AUSTEN-1815-2,171.698

she was still busy and cheerful ; AUSTEN-1815-2,171.699

and , pleasing as he was , she could yet imagine him to have faults ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.700

and farther , though thinking of him so much , and , as she sat drawing
or working , forming a_thousand amusing schemes for the progress and
close of their attachment , fancying interesting dialogues , and
inventing elegant letters ; the conclusion of every imaginary
declaration on his side was that she <font> refused him . <$$font>
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.701

Their affection was always to subside into friendship .
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.702

Every thing tender and charming was to mark their parting ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.703

but still they were to part . AUSTEN-1815-2,171.704

When she became sensible of this , it struck her that she could not be
very much in love ; AUSTEN-1815-2,171.705

for in spite of her previous and fixed determination never to quit her
father , never to marry , a strong attachment certainly must produce
more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings .
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.706

" I do not find myself making any use of the word <font> sacrifice , "
<$$font> said she . AUSTEN-1815-2,171.707

- " In not one of all my clever replies , my delicate negatives , is
there any allusion to making a sacrifice . AUSTEN-1815-2,171.708

I do suspect that he is not really necessary to my happiness .
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.709

So much the better . AUSTEN-1815-2,171.710

I certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than I do .
AUSTEN-1815-2,171.711

I am quite enough in love . AUSTEN-1815-2,171.712

I should be sorry to be more . " AUSTEN-1815-2,171.713

<P_172>

Upon the whole , she was equally contented with her view of his feelings
. AUSTEN-1815-2,172.715

<font> " He <$$font> is undoubtedly very much in love - every thing
denotes it - very much in love indeed ! AUSTEN-1815-2,172.716

- and when he comes again , if his affection continue , I must be on my
guard not to encourage it . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.717

- It would be most inexcusable to do otherwise , as my own mind is quite
made up . Not that I imagine he can think I have been encouraging him
hitherto . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.718

No , if he had believed me at all to share his feelings , he would not
have been so wretched . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.719

Could he have thought himself encouraged , his looks and language at
parting would have been different . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.720

- Still , however , I must be on my guard . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.721

This is in the supposition of his attachment continuing what it now is ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.722

but I do not know that I expect it will ; AUSTEN-1815-2,172.723

I do not look upon him to be quite the sort of man -
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.724

I do not altogether build upon his steadiness or constancy .
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.725

- His feelings are warm , AUSTEN-1815-2,172.726

but I can imagine them rather changeable . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.727

- Every consideration of the subject , in short , makes me thankful that
my happiness is not more deeply involved . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.728

- I shall do very well again after a little while -
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.729

and then , it will be a good thing over ; AUSTEN-1815-2,172.730

for they say every body is in love once in their lives ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.731

and I shall have been let off easily . " AUSTEN-1815-2,172.732

When his letter to Mrs. Weston arrived , Emma had the perusal of it ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.733

and she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made her
at first shake her head over her own sensations , and think she had
undervalued their strength . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.734

It was a long , well-written letter , giving the particulars of his
journey and of his feelings , expressing all the affection , gratitude ,
and respect which was natural and honourable , and describing every
thing exterior and local that could be supposed attractive , with spirit
and precision . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.735

No suspicious flourishes now of apology or concern ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.736

it was the language of real feeling towards Mrs. Weston ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.737

and the transition from Highbury to Enscombe , the contrast between the
places in some of the first blessings of social life was just enough
touched on to shew how keenly it was felt , and how much more might have
been said but for the restraints of propriety . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.738

- The charm of her own name was not wanting . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.739

<font> Miss Woodhouse <$$font> appeared more than once , and never
without a something of pleasing connection , either a compliment to her
taste , or a remembrance of what she had said ; AUSTEN-1815-2,172.740

and in the very last time of its meeting her eye , unadorned as it was
by any such broad wreath of gallantry , she yet could discern the effect
of her influence and acknowledge the greatest compliment perhaps of all
conveyed . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.741

Compressed into the very lowest vacant corner were these words - " I had
not a spare moment on Tuesday , as you know , for Miss Woodhouse's
beautiful little friend . AUSTEN-1815-2,172.742

Pray make my excuses and adieus to her . " AUSTEN-1815-2,172.743

This , Emma could not doubt , was all for herself .
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.744

Harriet was remembered only from being <font> her <$$font> friend .
AUSTEN-1815-2,172.745

His information and prospects as to Enscombe were neither worse nor
better than had been anticipated ; AUSTEN-1815-2,172.746

Mrs. Churchill was recovering , AUSTEN-1815-2,172.747

and he dared not yet , even in his <P_173> own imagination , fix a time
for coming to Randalls again . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.748

Gratifying , however , and stimulative as was the letter in the material
part , its sentiments , she yet found , when it was folded up and
returned to Mrs. Weston , that it had not added any lasting warmth ,
that she could still do without the writer , and that he must learn to
do without her . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.749

Her intentions were unchanged . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.750

Her resolution of refusal only grew more interesting by the addition of
a scheme for his subsequent consolation and happiness .
AUSTEN-1815-2,173.751

His recollection of Harriet , and the words which clothed it , the "
beautiful little friend , " suggested to her the idea of Harriet's
succeeding her in his affections . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.752

Was it impossible ? AUSTEN-1815-2,173.753

- No . - Harriet undoubtedly was greatly his inferior in understanding
; AUSTEN-1815-2,173.754

but he had been very much struck with the loveliness of her face and the
warm simplicity of her manner ; AUSTEN-1815-2,173.755

and all the probabilities of circumstance and connection were in her
favour . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.756

- For Harriet , it would be advantageous and delightful indeed .
AUSTEN-1815-2,173.757

" I must not dwell upon it , " said she . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.758

- " I must not think of it . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.759

I know the danger of indulging such speculations .
AUSTEN-1815-2,173.760

But stranger things have happened ; AUSTEN-1815-2,173.761

and when we cease to care for each other as we do now , it will be the
means of confirming us in that sort of true disinterested friendship
which I can already look forward to with pleasure . "
AUSTEN-1815-2,173.762

It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet's behalf , though it
might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom ; AUSTEN-1815-2,173.763

for evil in that quarter was at hand . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.764

As Frank Churchill's arrival had succeeded Mr. Elton's engagement in
the conversation of Highbury , as the latest interest had entirely born
down the first , so now upon Frank Churchill's disappearance , Mr.
Elton's concerns were assuming the most irresistible form .
AUSTEN-1815-2,173.765

- His wedding-day was named . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.766

He would soon be among them again ; Mr. Elton and his bride .
AUSTEN-1815-2,173.767

There was hardly time to talk over the first letter from Enscombe before
" Mr. Elton and his bride {TEXT:bde} " was in every body's mouth , and
Frank Churchill was forgotten . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.768

Emma grew sick at the sound . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.769

She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr. Elton ;
AUSTEN-1815-2,173.770

and Harriet's mind , she had been willing to hope , had been lately
gaining strength . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.771

With Mr. Weston's ball in view at least , there had been a great deal
of insensibility to other things ; AUSTEN-1815-2,173.772

but it was now too evident that she had not attained such a state of
composure as could stand against the actual approach - new carriage ,
bell ringing and all . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.773

Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all the
reasonings and soothings and attentions of every kind that Emma could
give . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.774

Emma felt that she could not do too much for her , that Harriet had a
right to all her ingenuity and all her patience ; AUSTEN-1815-2,173.775

but it was heavy work to be for ever convincing without producing any
effect , for ever agreed to , without being able to make their opinions
the same . AUSTEN-1815-2,173.776

Harriet listened submissively , AUSTEN-1815-2,173.777

and said " it was very true - it was just as Miss Woodhouse described -
it was not worth while to think about them - and <P_174> she would not
think about them any longer " - AUSTEN-1815-2,174.778

but no change of subject could avail , AUSTEN-1815-2,174.779

and the next half hour saw her as anxious and restless about the Eltons
as before . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.780

- At last Emma attacked her on another ground . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.781

" Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr.
Elton's marrying , Harriet , is the strongest reproach you can make
<font> me . <$$font> AUSTEN-1815-2,174.782

You could not give me a greater reproof for the mistake I fell into .
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.783

It was all my doing , I know . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.784

I have not forgotten it , I assure you . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.785

- Deceived myself ; I did very miserably deceive you -
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.786

and it will be a painful reflection to me for ever .
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.787

Do not imagine me in danger of forgetting it . " AUSTEN-1815-2,174.788

Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words of eager
exclamation . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.789

Emma continued , " I have not said , exert yourself Harriet for my sake
; think less , talk less of Mr. Elton for my sake ; because for your
own sake rather , I would wish it to be done , for the sake of what is
more important than my comfort , a habit of self-command in you , a
consideration of what is your duty , an attention to propriety , an
endeavour to avoid the suspicions of others , to save your health and
credit , and restore your tranquillity . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.790

These are the motives which I have been pressing on you .
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.791

They are very important - AUSTEN-1815-2,174.792

and sorry I am that you can@ @not feel them sufficiently to act upon
them . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.793

My being saved from pain is a very secondary consideration ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.794

I want you to save yourself from greater pain . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.795

Perhaps I may sometimes have felt that Harriet would not forget what was
due - or rather what would be kind by me . " AUSTEN-1815-2,174.796

This appeal to her affections did more than all the rest .
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.797

The idea of wanting gratitude and consideration for Miss Woodhouse ,
whom she really loved extremely , made her wretched for a while ,
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.798

and when the violence of grief was comforted away , still remained
powerful enough to prompt to what was right and support her in it very
tolerably . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.799

" You , who have been the best friend I ever had in my life - Want
gratitude to you ! AUSTEN-1815-2,174.800

- Nobody is equal to you ! AUSTEN-1815-2,174.801

- I care for nobody as I do for you ! AUSTEN-1815-2,174.802

- Oh ! Miss Woodhouse , how ungrateful I have been ! "
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.803

Such expressions , assisted as they were by every thing that look and
manner could do , made Emma feel that she had never loved Harriet so
well , nor valued her affection so highly before .
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.804

" There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart , " said she afterwards
to herself . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.805

" There is nothing to be compared to it . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.806

Warmth and tenderness of heart , with an affectionate , open manner ,
will beat all the clearness of head in the world , for attraction .
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.807

I am sure it will . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.808

It is tenderness of heart which makes my dear father so generally
beloved - which gives Isabella all her popularity .
AUSTEN-1815-2,174.809

- I have it not - AUSTEN-1815-2,174.810

but I know how to prize and respect it . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.811

- Harriet is my superior in all the charm and all the felicity it gives
. AUSTEN-1815-2,174.812

Dear Harriet ! - I would not change you for the clearest-headed ,
longest-sighted , best-judging female breathing . AUSTEN-1815-2,174.813

Oh ! the coldness of a Jane Fairfax ! AUSTEN-1815-2,174.814

- Harriet is worth a_hundred such . - AUSTEN-1815-2,174.815

<P_175>

And for a wife - a sensible man's wife - it is invaluable .
AUSTEN-1815-2,175.817

I mention no names ; AUSTEN-1815-2,175.818

but happy the man who changes Emma for Harriet ! "
AUSTEN-1815-2,175.819

