<BEGIN_austen-180x-1>

<P_160>

{ED:45._To_Cassandra_Austen._Saturday_24_Aug._1805}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted} Godmersham Park , AUSTEN-180X-1,160.4

Saturday Aug=st= 24 AUSTEN-180X-1,160.5

My dear Cassandra How do you do ? AUSTEN-180X-1,160.6

& how is Harriot's cold ? AUSTEN-180X-1,160.7

- I hope you are at this time sitting down to answer these questions .
AUSTEN-180X-1,160.8

- Our visit to Eastwell was very agreable , AUSTEN-180X-1,160.9

I found Ly Gordon's manners as pleasing as they had been described ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,160.10

& saw nothing to dislike in Sir Janison , excepting once or twice a sort
of sneer at M=rs= Anne Finch . AUSTEN-180X-1,160.11

He was just getting into Talk with Eliz=th= as the carriage was ordered
, AUSTEN-180X-1,160.12

but during the first part of the visit he said very little .
AUSTEN-180X-1,160.13

- Your going with Harriot was highly approved of by everyone ; & only
too much applauded as an act of virtue on your part .
AUSTEN-180X-1,160.14

I said all I could to lessen your merit . AUSTEN-180X-1,160.15

- The M=rs= Finches were afraid you would find Goodnestone very dull ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,160.16

I wished when I heard them say so , that they could have heard M=r= E.
Bridges's solicitude on the subject & have known all the amusements that
were planned to prevent it . AUSTEN-180X-1,160.17

- They were very civil to me , as they always are ; AUSTEN-180X-1,160.18

- Fortune was also very civil to me in placing M=r= E. Hatton by me at
dinner . AUSTEN-180X-1,160.19

- I have discovered that Ly Eliz=th= for a woman of her age & situation
, has astonishingly little to say for herself , & that Miss Hatton has
not much more . AUSTEN-180X-1,160.20

- Her eloquence lies in her fingers ; AUSTEN-180X-1,160.21

they were most fluently harmonious . AUSTEN-180X-1,160.22

- George is a fine boy , & well_behaved , AUSTEN-180X-1,160.23

but Daniel chiefly {TEXT:cheifly} delighted me ; AUSTEN-180X-1,160.24

the good humour <P_161> of his countenance is quite bewitching .
AUSTEN-180X-1,161.25

After Tea we had a cribbage Table , AUSTEN-180X-1,161.26

& he & I won two rubbers of his brother & M=rs= Mary .
AUSTEN-180X-1,161.27

- M=r= Brett was the only person there besides our two families .
AUSTEN-180X-1,161.28

It was considerably past eleven before we were at home ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,161.29

& I was so tired as to feel no envy of those who were at Ly Yates' Ball
. AUSTEN-180X-1,161.30

- My good wishes for it's being a pleasant one , were I hope successful
. AUSTEN-180X-1,161.31

Yesterday was a very quiet day with us ; AUSTEN-180X-1,161.32

my noisiest efforts were writing to Frank , & playing at Battledore &
Shuttlecock with William ; AUSTEN-180X-1,161.33

he & I have practiced together two mornings , AUSTEN-180X-1,161.34

& improve a little ; AUSTEN-180X-1,161.35

we have frequently kept it up <font> three <$$font> times , & once or
twice <font> six . <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,161.36

The two Edwards went to Canterbury in the chair , AUSTEN-180X-1,161.37

& found M=rs= Knight as you found her I suppose the day before ,
chearful but weak . AUSTEN-180X-1,161.38

- Fanny was met walking with Miss Sharp & Miss Milles , the happiest
Being in the world ; AUSTEN-180X-1,161.39

she sent a private message to her Mama implying as much - '
AUSTEN-180X-1,161.40

Tell Mama that I am quite Palmerstone ! ' AUSTEN-180X-1,161.41

- If little Lizzy used the same Language , she would I dare say send the
same message from Goodnestone . AUSTEN-180X-1,161.42

In the evening we took a quiet walk round the Farm , with George & Henry
to animate us by their races & merriment . AUSTEN-180X-1,161.43

- Little Edw=d= is by no means better , AUSTEN-180X-1,161.44

& his papa & mama have determined to consult D=r= Wilmot .
AUSTEN-180X-1,161.45

Unless he recovers his strength beyond what is now probable , his
brothers will return to School without him , AUSTEN-180X-1,161.46

& he will be of the party to Worthing . AUSTEN-180X-1,161.47

- If Sea-Bathing should be recommended he will be left there with us ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,161.48

but this is not thought likely to happen . AUSTEN-180X-1,161.49

- I have been used very ill this morning , AUSTEN-180X-1,161.50

I have received a letter from Frank which I ought to have had when
Eliz=th= & Henry had theirs , & which in it's way from <P_162> Albany to
Godmersham has been to Dover & Steventon . AUSTEN-180X-1,162.51

It was finished on y=e= 16=th= , AUSTEN-180X-1,162.52

& tells what theirs told before as to his present situation ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,162.53

he is in a great hurry to be married , AUSTEN-180X-1,162.54

& I have encouraged him in it , in the letter which ought to have been
an answer to his . AUSTEN-180X-1,162.55

- He must think it very strange that I do not acknowledge the receipt of
his , when I speak of those of the same dates to Eliz: & Henry ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,162.56

& to add to my injuries I forgot to number mine on the outside .
AUSTEN-180X-1,162.57

- I have found your white mittens , AUSTEN-180X-1,162.58

they were folded up within my clean nightcap , AUSTEN-180X-1,162.59

& send their duty to you . AUSTEN-180X-1,162.60

Eliz: has this moment proposed a scheme , which will be very much for my
pleasure , if equally convenient to the other party ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,162.61

it is that when you return on Monday , I should take your place at
Goodnestone for a few days . AUSTEN-180X-1,162.62

- Harriot can@ @not be insincere , let her try for it ever so much ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,162.63

& therefore I defy her to accept this self-invitation of mine , unless
it be really what perfectly suits her . AUSTEN-180X-1,162.64

- As there is no time for an answer , I shall go in the Carriage on
Monday , AUSTEN-180X-1,162.65

& can return with you , if my going on to Goodnestone is at all
inconvenient . AUSTEN-180X-1,162.66

- The Knatchbulls come on Wednesday to dinner , AUSTEN-180X-1,162.67

& stay only till Friday morng. at the latest . AUSTEN-180X-1,162.68

- Frank's letter to me is the only one that you or I have received since
Thursday . AUSTEN-180X-1,162.69

M=r= Hall walked off this morng. to Ospringe , with no inconsiderable
Booty . AUSTEN-180X-1,162.70

He charged Eliz=th= 5 s {TEXT:s_5} for every time of dressing her hair ,
& 5 s {TEXT:s_5} for every lesson to Sace , allowing nothing for the
pleasures of his visit here , for meat drink & Lodging , the benefit of
Country air , & the charms of M=rs= Salkeld's & M=rs= Sace's society .
AUSTEN-180X-1,162.71

- Towards me he was as considerate , as I had hoped for , from my
relationship to you , charging me only 2 s {TEXT:s_2} . 6 d {TEXT:d_6}
<P_163> for cutting my hair , tho' it was as thoroughly dress'd after
being cut for Eastwell , as it had been for the Ashford Assembly .
AUSTEN-180X-1,163.72

- He certainly respects either our Youth or our poverty .
AUSTEN-180X-1,163.73

My writing to you to_day prevents Eliz=th's= writing to Harriot , for
which Evil I implore the latter@ @'s pardon . AUSTEN-180X-1,163.74

- Give my best Love to her - & kind remembrances to her Brothers .
AUSTEN-180X-1,163.75

Yours very affec=ly= J. {TEXT:J} A. AUSTEN-180X-1,163.76

You are desired to bring back with you Henry's picture of Rowling for
the M=rs= Finches . AUSTEN-180X-1,163.77

Eliz=th= hopes you will not be later here on Monday than 5 o'clock , on
Lizzy's account . AUSTEN-180X-1,163.78

As I find on looking into my affairs , that instead of being very rich I
am likely to be very poor , I can@ @not afford more than ten shillings
for Sackree ; AUSTEN-180X-1,163.79

but as we are to meet in Canterbury I need not have mentioned this .
AUSTEN-180X-1,163.80

It is as well however , to prepare you for the sight of a Sister sunk in
poverty , that it may not overcome your Spirits . AUSTEN-180X-1,163.81

We have heard nothing from Henry since he went . AUSTEN-180X-1,163.82

Daniel told us that he went from Ospringe in one of the Coaches .
AUSTEN-180X-1,163.83

{ED:46._To_Cassandra_Austen._Tuesday_27_Aug._1805}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Goodnestone Farm : AUSTEN-180X-1,163.86

Tuesday August 27 AUSTEN-180X-1,163.87

My dear Cassandra We had a very pleasant drive from Canterbury ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,163.88

and reached this place about half-@ @past four , which seemed <P_164> to
bid fair for a punctual dinner at five ; AUSTEN-180X-1,164.89

but scenes of great agitation awaited us , AUSTEN-180X-1,164.90

and there was much to be endured and done before we could sit down to
table . AUSTEN-180X-1,164.91

Harriot found a letter from Louisa Hatton , desiring to know if she and
her brothers were to be at the ball at Deal on Friday , and saying that
the Eastwell family had some idea of going to it , and were to make use
of Rowling if they did ; AUSTEN-180X-1,164.92

and while I was dressing she came to me with another letter in her hand
, in great perplexity . AUSTEN-180X-1,164.93

It was from Captain Woodford , containing a message from Lady Forbes ,
which he had intended to deliver in person , but had been prevented from
doing . AUSTEN-180X-1,164.94

The offer of a ticket for this grand ball , with an invitation to come
to her house at Dover before and after it , was Lady Forbes's message .
AUSTEN-180X-1,164.95

Harriot was at first very little inclined , or rather totally
disinclined , to profit by her ladyship's attention ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,164.96

but at length , after many debates , she was persuaded by me and herself
together to accept the ticket . AUSTEN-180X-1,164.97

The offer of dressing and sleeping at Dover she determined on Marianne's
account to decline , AUSTEN-180X-1,164.98

and her plan is to be conveyed by Lady Elizabeth Hatton .
AUSTEN-180X-1,164.99

I hope their going is by this time certain , and will be soon known to
be so . AUSTEN-180X-1,164.100

I think Miss H. would not have written such a letter if she had not
been all but sure of it , and a little more . AUSTEN-180X-1,164.101

I am anxious on the subject , from the fear of being in the way if they
do not come to give Harriot a conveyance . AUSTEN-180X-1,164.102

I proposed and pressed being sent home on Thursday , to prevent the
possibility of being in the wrong place , AUSTEN-180X-1,164.103

but Harriot would not hear of it . AUSTEN-180X-1,164.104

<P_165>

There is no chance of tickets for the Mr. Bridgeses , as no gentlemen
but of the garrison are invited . AUSTEN-180X-1,165.106

With a civil note to be fabricated to Lady F. , and an answer written
to Miss H. , you will easily believe that we could not begin dinner
till six . AUSTEN-180X-1,165.107

We were agreeably surprised by Edward Bridges's company to it .
AUSTEN-180X-1,165.108

He had been , strange to tell , too late for the cricket match , too
late at least to play himself , AUSTEN-180X-1,165.109

and , not being asked to dine with the players , came home .
AUSTEN-180X-1,165.110

It is impossible to do justice to the hospitality of his attentions
towards me ; AUSTEN-180X-1,165.111

he made a point of ordering toasted_cheese for supper entirely on my
account . AUSTEN-180X-1,165.112

We had a very agreeable evening , AUSTEN-180X-1,165.113

and here I am before breakfast writing to you , having got up between
six and seven ; AUSTEN-180X-1,165.114

Lady Brydges's room must be good for early rising .
AUSTEN-180X-1,165.115

Mr. Sankey was here last night , AUSTEN-180X-1,165.116

and found his patient better , AUSTEN-180X-1,165.117

but I have heard from a maidservant that she has had but an indifferent
night . AUSTEN-180X-1,165.118

Tell Elizabeth that I did not give her letter to Harriot till we were in
the carriage , when she received it with great delight , and could read
it in comfort . AUSTEN-180X-1,165.119

As you have been here so lately , I need not particularly describe the
house or style of living , in which all seems for use and comfort ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,165.120

nor need I be diffuse on the state of Lady Brydges's bookcase and
cornershelves upstairs . AUSTEN-180X-1,165.121

What a treat to my mother to arrange them ! AUSTEN-180X-1,165.122

Harriot is constrained to give up all hope of seeing Edward here to
fetch me , as I soon recollected that Mr. and Mrs. Charles Knatchbull@
@'s being at Godmersham on Thursday must put it out of the question .
AUSTEN-180X-1,165.123

Had I waited till after breakfast , the chief of all <P_166> this might
have been spared . AUSTEN-180X-1,166.124

The Duke of Gloucester@ @'s death sets my heart at ease , though it will
cause some dozens to ache . AUSTEN-180X-1,166.125

Harriot's is not among the number of the last ; AUSTEN-180X-1,166.126

she is very well pleased to be spared the trouble of preparation .
AUSTEN-180X-1,166.127

She joins me in best love to you all , AUSTEN-180X-1,166.128

and will write to Elizabeth soon . AUSTEN-180X-1,166.129

I shall be very glad to hear from you , that we may know how you all are
, especially the two Edwards . AUSTEN-180X-1,166.130

I have asked Sophie if she has anything to say to Lizzy in
acknowledgment of the little bird , AUSTEN-180X-1,166.131

and her message is that , with her love , she is very glad Lizzy sent it
. AUSTEN-180X-1,166.132

She volunteers , moreover , her love to little Marianne , with the
promise of bringing her a doll the next time she goes to Godmersham .
AUSTEN-180X-1,166.133

John is just come from Ramsgate , AUSTEN-180X-1,166.134

and brings a good account of the people there . AUSTEN-180X-1,166.135

He and his brother , you know , dine at Nackington ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,166.136

we are to dine at four , that we may walk afterwards .
AUSTEN-180X-1,166.137

As it is now two , and Harriot has letters to write , we shall probably
not get out before . AUSTEN-180X-1,166.138

Yours affectionately , J. A. AUSTEN-180X-1,166.139

<font> Three o'clock . <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,166.140

- Harriot is just come from Marianne , AUSTEN-180X-1,166.141

and thinks her upon the whole better . AUSTEN-180X-1,166.142

The sickness has not returned , AUSTEN-180X-1,166.143

and a headache is at present her chief complaint , which Henry
attributes to the sickness . AUSTEN-180X-1,166.144

<P_167>

{ED:47._To_Cassandra_Austen._Friday_30_Aug._1805}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Goodnestone Farm : AUSTEN-180X-1,167.148

Friday August 30 AUSTEN-180X-1,167.149

My dear Cassandra I have determined on staying here till Monday .
AUSTEN-180X-1,167.150

Not that there is any occasion for it on Marianne's account , as she is
now almost as well as usual , AUSTEN-180X-1,167.151

but Harriot is so kind in her wishes for my company that I could not
resolve on leaving her to-morrow , especially as I had no reason to give
for its necessity . AUSTEN-180X-1,167.152

It would be inconvenient to me to stay with her longer than the
beginning of next week , on account of my clothes ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,167.153

and therefore I trust it will suit Edward to fetch or send for me on
Monday , or Tuesday if Monday should be wet . AUSTEN-180X-1,167.154

Harriot has this moment desired me to propose his coming hither on
Monday , and taking me back the next day . AUSTEN-180X-1,167.155

The purport of Elizabeth's letter makes me anxious to hear more of what
we are to do and not to do , AUSTEN-180X-1,167.156

and I hope you will be able to write me your own plans and opinions
to-morrow . AUSTEN-180X-1,167.157

The journey to London is a point of the first expediency ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,167.158

and I am glad it is resolved on , though it seems likely to injure our
Worthing scheme . AUSTEN-180X-1,167.159

I expect that <font> we <$$font> are to be at Sandling , while <font>
they <$$font> are in town . AUSTEN-180X-1,167.160

It gives us great pleasure to hear of little Edward's being better ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,167.161

and we imagine , from his mama's expressions , that he is expected to be
well enough to return to school with his brothers .
AUSTEN-180X-1,167.162

<P_168>

Marianne was equal to seeing me two days ago ; AUSTEN-180X-1,168.164

we sat with her for a couple of hours before dinner , and the same
yesterday , when she was evidently better , more equal to conversation ,
and more cheerful than during our first visit . AUSTEN-180X-1,168.165

She received me very kindly , AUSTEN-180X-1,168.166

and expressed her regret in not having been able to see you .
AUSTEN-180X-1,168.167

She is , of course , altered since we saw her in October , 1794 .
AUSTEN-180X-1,168.168

Eleven years could not pass away even in health without making some
change , AUSTEN-180X-1,168.169

but in her case it is wonderful that the change should be so little .
AUSTEN-180X-1,168.170

I have not seen her to advantage , as I understand she has frequently a
nice colour , AUSTEN-180X-1,168.171

and her complexion has not yet recovered from the effects of her late
illness . AUSTEN-180X-1,168.172

Her face is grown longer and thinner , and her features more marked ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,168.173

and the likeness which I remember to have always seen between her and
Catherine Bigg is stronger than ever , AUSTEN-180X-1,168.174

and so striking is the voice and manner of speaking that I seem to be
really hearing Catherine , AUSTEN-180X-1,168.175

and once or twice have been on the point of calling Harriot ' Alethea .
' AUSTEN-180X-1,168.176

She is very pleasant , cheerful , and interested in everything about her
, AUSTEN-180X-1,168.177

and at the same time shows a thoughtful , considerate , and decided turn
of mind . AUSTEN-180X-1,168.178

Edward Bridges dined at home yesterday ; AUSTEN-180X-1,168.179

the day before he was at St. Albans ; AUSTEN-180X-1,168.180

to-day he goes to Broome , and to-morrow to Mr. Hallett's , which
latter engagement has had some weight in my resolution of not leaving
Harriot till Monday . AUSTEN-180X-1,168.181

We have walked to Rowling on each of the two last days after dinner ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,168.182

and very great was my pleasure in going over the house and grounds .
AUSTEN-180X-1,168.183

We have also found time to visit all the principal walks of this place ,
<P_169> except the walk round the top of the park , which we shall
accomplish probably to-day . AUSTEN-180X-1,169.184

Next week seems likely to be an unpleasant one to this family on the
matter of game . AUSTEN-180X-1,169.185

The evil intentions of the Guards are certain , AUSTEN-180X-1,169.186

and the gentlemen of the neighbourhood seem unwilling to come forward in
any decided or early support of their rights . AUSTEN-180X-1,169.187

Edward Bridges has been trying to arouse their spirits , but without
success . AUSTEN-180X-1,169.188

Mr. Hammond , under the influence of daughters and an expected ball ,
declares he will do nothing . AUSTEN-180X-1,169.189

Harriot hopes my brother will not mortify her by resisting all her plans
and refusing all her invitations ; AUSTEN-180X-1,169.190

she has never yet been successful with him in any ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,169.191

but she trusts he will now make her all the amends in his power by
coming on Monday . AUSTEN-180X-1,169.192

She thanks Elizabeth for her letter , AUSTEN-180X-1,169.193

and you may be sure is not less solicitous than myself for her going to
town . AUSTEN-180X-1,169.194

Pray say everything kind for us to Miss Sharpe , who could not regret
the shortness of our meeting in Canterbury more than we did .
AUSTEN-180X-1,169.195

I hope she returned to Godmersham as much pleased with Mrs. Knight's
beauty and Miss Milles's judicious remarks as those ladies respectively
were with hers . AUSTEN-180X-1,169.196

You must send me word that you have heard from Miss Irvine .
AUSTEN-180X-1,169.197

I had almost forgot to thank you for your letter .
AUSTEN-180X-1,169.198

I am glad you recommended ' Gisborne , ' AUSTEN-180X-1,169.199

for having begun , I am pleased with it , AUSTEN-180X-1,169.200

and I had quite determined not to read it . AUSTEN-180X-1,169.201

I suppose everybody will be black for the D. of G.
AUSTEN-180X-1,169.202

Must we buy lace , AUSTEN-180X-1,169.203

or will ribbon do ? AUSTEN-180X-1,169.204

We shall not be at Worthing so soon as we have been used to talk of ,
shall we ? AUSTEN-180X-1,169.205

This will be no evil to <P_170> us , AUSTEN-180X-1,170.206

and we are sure of my mother and Martha being happy together .
AUSTEN-180X-1,170.207

Do not forget to write to Charles . AUSTEN-180X-1,170.208

As I am to return so soon , we shall not send the pincushions .
AUSTEN-180X-1,170.209

Yours affectionately , J. A. AUSTEN-180X-1,170.210

You continue , I suppose , taking hartshorn , and I hope with good
effect . AUSTEN-180X-1,170.211

{ED:48._To_Cassandra_Austen._Wednesday_7_Jan._1807}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Southampton : AUSTEN-180X-1,170.214

Wednesday January 7 AUSTEN-180X-1,170.215

My dear Cassandra You were mistaken in supposing I should expect your
letter on Sunday ; AUSTEN-180X-1,170.216

I had no idea of hearing from you before Tuesday , AUSTEN-180X-1,170.217

and my pleasure yesterday was therefore unhurt by any previous
disappointment . AUSTEN-180X-1,170.218

I thank you for writing so much ; AUSTEN-180X-1,170.219

you must really have sent me the value of two letters in one .
AUSTEN-180X-1,170.220

We are extremely glad to hear that Elizabeth is so much better ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,170.221

and hope you will be sensible of still further amendment in her when you
return from Canterbury . AUSTEN-180X-1,170.222

Of your visit there I must now speak ' incessantly ; '
AUSTEN-180X-1,170.223

it surprises , but pleases me more , AUSTEN-180X-1,170.224

and I consider it as a very just and honourable distinction of you , and
not less to the credit of Mrs. Knight . AUSTEN-180X-1,170.225

I have no doubt of your spending your time with her most pleasantly in
quiet and rational conversation , AUSTEN-180X-1,170.226

and am so far from thinking her expectations of you will be deceived ,
that my only fear is of your being so agreeable , so much to <P_171> her
taste , as to make her wish to keep you with her for ever .
AUSTEN-180X-1,171.227

If that should be the case , we must remove to Canterbury , which I
should not like so well as Southampton . AUSTEN-180X-1,171.228

When you receive this , our guests will be all gone or going ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,171.229

and I shall be left to the comfortable disposal of my time , to ease of
mind from the torments of rice puddings and apple dumplings , and
probably to regret that I did not take more pains to please them all .
AUSTEN-180X-1,171.230

Mrs. J. Austen has asked me to return with her to Steventon ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,171.231

I need not give my answer ; AUSTEN-180X-1,171.232

and she has invited my mother to spend there the time of Mrs. F. A.'s
confinement , which she seems half inclined to do .
AUSTEN-180X-1,171.233

A few days ago I had a letter from Miss Irvine , AUSTEN-180X-1,171.234

and as I was in her debt , you will guess it to be a remonstrance , not
a very severe one , however ; AUSTEN-180X-1,171.235

the first page is in her usual retrospective , jealous , inconsistent
style , AUSTEN-180X-1,171.236

but the remainder is chatty and harmless . AUSTEN-180X-1,171.237

She supposes my silence may have proceeded from resentment of her not
having written to inquire particularly after my hooping_cough , &c.
AUSTEN-180X-1,171.238

She is a funny one . AUSTEN-180X-1,171.239

I have answered her letter , AUSTEN-180X-1,171.240

and have endeavoured to give something like the truth with as little
incivility as I could , by placing my silence to the want of subject in
the very quiet way in which we live . AUSTEN-180X-1,171.241

Phebe has repented , AUSTEN-180X-1,171.242

and stays . AUSTEN-180X-1,171.243

I have also written to Charles , AUSTEN-180X-1,171.244

and I answered Miss Buller's letter by return of post , as I intended to
tell you in my last . AUSTEN-180X-1,171.245

Two or three things I recollected when it was too late , that I might
have told you ; AUSTEN-180X-1,171.246

one is , that the Welbys have lost their eldest son by a putrid fever at
Eton , and another that Tom Chute is going to settle in Norfolk .
AUSTEN-180X-1,171.247

<P_172>

You have scarcely ever mentioned Lizzy since your being at Godmersham .
AUSTEN-180X-1,172.249

I hope it is not because she is altered for the worse .
AUSTEN-180X-1,172.250

I can@ @not yet satisfy Fanny as to Mrs. Foote's baby's name ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,172.251

and I must not encourage her to expect a good one , as Captain Foote is
a professed adversary to all but the plainest ; AUSTEN-180X-1,172.252

he likes only Mary , Elizabeth , Anne , &c. AUSTEN-180X-1,172.253

Our best chance is of ' Caroline , ' which in compliment to a sister
seems the only exception . AUSTEN-180X-1,172.254

He dined with us on Friday , AUSTEN-180X-1,172.255

and I fear will not soon venture again , AUSTEN-180X-1,172.256

for the strength of our dinner was a boiled leg of mutton , underdone
even for James ; AUSTEN-180X-1,172.257

and Captain Foote has a particular dislike to underdone mutton ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,172.258

but he was so good-humoured and pleasant that I did not much mind his
being starved . AUSTEN-180X-1,172.259

He gives us all the most cordial invitation to his house in the country
, saying just what the Williams ought to say to make us welcome .
AUSTEN-180X-1,172.260

Of them we have seen nothing since you left us , AUSTEN-180X-1,172.261

and we hear that they are just gone to Bath again , to be out of the way
of further alterations at Brooklands . AUSTEN-180X-1,172.262

Mrs. F. A. has had a very agreeable letter from Mrs. Dickson , who
was delighted with the purse , and desires her not to provide herself
with a christening dress , which is exactly what her young correspondent
wanted ; AUSTEN-180X-1,172.263

and she means to defer making any of the caps as long as she can , in
hope of having Mrs. D.'s present in time to be serviceable as a pattern
. AUSTEN-180X-1,172.264

She desires me to tell you that the gowns were cut out before your
letter arrived , but that they are long enough for Caroline .
AUSTEN-180X-1,172.265

The <font> Beds <$$font> , as I believe they are called , have fallen to
Frank's share to continue , AUSTEN-180X-1,172.266

and of course are cut out to admiration . AUSTEN-180X-1,172.267

<P_173>

' Alphonsine ' did not do . AUSTEN-180X-1,173.269

We were disgusted in twenty pages , as , independent of a bad
translation , it has indelicacies which disgrace a pen hitherto so pure
; AUSTEN-180X-1,173.270

and we changed it for the ' Female Quixotte , ' which now makes our
evening amusement ; to me a very high one , as I find the work quite
equal to what I remembered it . AUSTEN-180X-1,173.271

Mrs. F. A. , to whom it is new , enjoys it as one could wish ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,173.272

the other Mary , I believe , has little pleasure from that or any other
book . AUSTEN-180X-1,173.273

My mother does not seem at all more disappointed than ourselves at the
termination of the family treaty ; AUSTEN-180X-1,173.274

she thinks less of <font> that <$$font> just now than of the comfortable
state of her own finances , which she finds on closing her year's
accounts beyond her expectation , as she begins the new year with a
balance of 30 <font> l. <$$font> in her favour ; AUSTEN-180X-1,173.275

and when she has written her answer to my aunt , which you know always
hangs a little upon her mind , she will be above the world entirely .
AUSTEN-180X-1,173.276

You will have a great deal of unreserved discourse with Mrs. K. , I
dare say , upon this subject , as well as upon many other of our family
matters . AUSTEN-180X-1,173.277

Abuse everybody but me . AUSTEN-180X-1,173.278

<font> Thursday . <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,173.279

- We expected James yesterday , AUSTEN-180X-1,173.280

but he did not come ; AUSTEN-180X-1,173.281

if he comes at all now , his visit will be a very short one , as he must
return to-morrow , that Ajax and the chair may be sent to Winchester on
Saturday . AUSTEN-180X-1,173.282

Caroline's new pelisse depended upon her mother's being able or not to
come so far in the chair ; AUSTEN-180X-1,173.283

how the guinea that will be saved by the same means of return is to be
spent I know not . AUSTEN-180X-1,173.284

Mrs. J. A. does not talk much of poverty now , though she has no hope
of my brother's being able to buy another horse <font> next <$$font>
summer . AUSTEN-180X-1,173.285

Their scheme against Warwickshire continues , AUSTEN-180X-1,173.286

but <P_174> I doubt the family's being at Stoneleigh so early as James
says he must go , which is May . AUSTEN-180X-1,174.287

My mother is afraid I have not been explicit enough on the subject of
her wealth ; AUSTEN-180X-1,174.288

she began 1806 with 68 <font> l. , <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,174.289

she begins 1807 with 99 <font> l. , <$$font> and this after 32 <font>
l. <$$font> purchase of stock . AUSTEN-180X-1,174.290

Frank too has been settling his accounts and making calculations ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.291

and each party feels quite equal to our present expenses ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.292

but much increase of house-rent would not do for either .
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.293

Frank limits himself , I believe , to four_hundred a year .
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.294

You will be surprised to hear that Jenny is not yet come back ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.295

we have heard nothing of her since her reaching Itchingswell ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.296

and can only suppose that she must be detained by illness in somebody or
other , and that she has been each day expecting to be able to come on
the morrow . AUSTEN-180X-1,174.297

I am glad I did not know beforehand that she was to be absent during the
whole or almost the whole of our friends being with us ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.298

for though the inconvenience has not been nothing , I should have feared
still more . AUSTEN-180X-1,174.299

Our dinners have certainly suffered not a little by having only Molly's
head and Molly's hands to conduct them ; AUSTEN-180X-1,174.300

she fries better than she did , but not like Jenny .
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.301

We did <font> not <$$font> take our walk on Friday ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.302

it was too dirty , AUSTEN-180X-1,174.303

nor have we yet done it ; AUSTEN-180X-1,174.304

we may perhaps do something like it to-day , as after seeing Frank skate
, which he hopes to do in the meadows by the beech , we are to treat
ourselves with a passage over the ferry . AUSTEN-180X-1,174.305

It is one of the pleasantest frosts I ever knew , so very quiet .
AUSTEN-180X-1,174.306

I hope it will last some time longer for Frank's sake , who is quite
anxious to get some skating ; AUSTEN-180X-1,174.307

he tried yesterday , AUSTEN-180X-1,174.308

but it would not do . AUSTEN-180X-1,174.309

Our acquaintance increase too fast . AUSTEN-180X-1,174.310

He was recognised <P_175> lately by Admiral Bertie ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,175.311

and a few days since arrived the Admiral and his daughter Catherine to
wait upon us . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.312

There was nothing to like or dislike in either . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.313

To the Berties are to be added the Lances , with whose cards we have
been endowed , and whose visit Frank and I returned yesterday .
AUSTEN-180X-1,175.314

They live about a mile and three-quarters from S. to the right of the
new road to Portsmouth , AUSTEN-180X-1,175.315

and I believe their house is one of those which are to be seen almost
anywhere among the woods on the other side of the Itchen .
AUSTEN-180X-1,175.316

It is a handsome building , AUSTEN-180X-1,175.317

stands high , and in a very beautiful situation . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.318

We found only Mrs. Lance at home , AUSTEN-180X-1,175.319

and whether she boasts any offspring besides a grand pianoforte did not
appear . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.320

She was civil and chatty enough , AUSTEN-180X-1,175.321

and offered to introduce us to some acquaintance in Southampton , which
we gratefully declined . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.322

I suppose they must be acting by the orders of Mr. Lance of Netherton
in this civility , as there seems no other reason for their coming near
us . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.323

They will not come often , I dare say . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.324

They live in a handsome style AUSTEN-180X-1,175.325

and are rich , AUSTEN-180X-1,175.326

and she seemed to like to be rich , AUSTEN-180X-1,175.327

and we gave her to understand that we were far from being so ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,175.328

she will soon feel therefore that we are not worth her acquaintance .
AUSTEN-180X-1,175.329

You must have heard from Martha by this time . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.330

We have had no accounts of Kintbury since her letter to me .
AUSTEN-180X-1,175.331

Mrs. F. A. has had one fainting fit lately ; AUSTEN-180X-1,175.332

it came on as usual after eating a hearty dinner , AUSTEN-180X-1,175.333

but did not last long . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.334

I can recollect nothing more to say . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.335

When my letter is gone , I suppose I shall . AUSTEN-180X-1,175.336

Yours affectionately , J. A. AUSTEN-180X-1,175.337

I have just asked Caroline if I should send her love to her godmama , to
which she answered ' Yes . ' AUSTEN-180X-1,175.338

<P_176>

{ED:49._To_Cassandra_Austen._Sunday_8_Feb._1807}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Southampton AUSTEN-180X-1,176.342

Feb. 8=th= AUSTEN-180X-1,176.343

My dearest Cassandra My expectation of having nothing to say to you
after the conclusion of my last , seems nearer Truth than I thought it
would be , AUSTEN-180X-1,176.344

for I feel to have but little . AUSTEN-180X-1,176.345

I need not therefore be above acknowledging the receipt of yours this
morn=g= ; or of {COM:text_has_anacoluthic_of} replying to every part of
it which is capable of an answer ; AUSTEN-180X-1,176.346

& you may accordingly prepare for my ringing the Changes of the Glads &
Sorrys for the rest of the page . AUSTEN-180X-1,176.347

- Unluckily however I see nothing to be glad of , unless I make it a
matter of Joy that Mrs. Wylmot has another son , & that L=d= Lucan has
taken a Mistress , both of which Events are of course joyful to the
Actors ; AUSTEN-180X-1,176.348

- but to be sorry I find many occasions , AUSTEN-180X-1,176.349

the first is that your return is to be delayed , AUSTEN-180X-1,176.350

& whether I ever get beyond the first is doubtful .
AUSTEN-180X-1,176.351

It is no use to lament . AUSTEN-180X-1,176.352

- I never heard that even Queen Mary's Lamentation did her any good ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,176.353

& I could not therefore expect benefit from mine .
AUSTEN-180X-1,176.354

- We are all sorry , AUSTEN-180X-1,176.355

& now that subject is exhausted . AUSTEN-180X-1,176.356

I heard from Martha yesterday : AUSTEN-180X-1,176.357

she spends this week with the Harwoods , AUSTEN-180X-1,176.358

goes afterwards with James & Mary for a few days to see Peter Debary &
two of his sisters at Eversley - the Living of which he has gained on
the death of Sir R. Cope - AUSTEN-180X-1,176.359

& means to be here on y=e= 24=th= , which will be Tuesday fortnight .
AUSTEN-180X-1,176.360

I shall be truely glad if she can keep to her day ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,176.361

but <P_177> dare not depend on it ; AUSTEN-180X-1,177.362

- & am so apprehensive of farther detention that , if nothing else
occurs to create it , I can@ @not help thinking she will marry Peter
Debary . AUSTEN-180X-1,177.363

It vexed me that I could not get any fish for Kintbury while their
family was large ; AUSTEN-180X-1,177.364

but so it was , AUSTEN-180X-1,177.365

& till last Tuesday I could procure none . AUSTEN-180X-1,177.366

I then sent them four pair of small soals , AUSTEN-180X-1,177.367

& should be glad to be certain of their arriving in good time ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,177.368

but I have heard nothing about them since , AUSTEN-180X-1,177.369

& had rather hear nothing than Evil . AUSTEN-180X-1,177.370

- They cost six shillings , AUSTEN-180X-1,177.371

& as they travelled in a Basket which came from Kintbury a few days
before with Poultry &c , I insist upon treating you with the Booking
<font> whatever it may be , <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,177.372

You are only Eighteen pence in my debt . AUSTEN-180X-1,177.373

Mrs. E. Leigh did not make the slightest allusion to my Uncle's
Business , as I remember telling you at the time , AUSTEN-180X-1,177.374

but you shall have it as often as you like . AUSTEN-180X-1,177.375

My Mother wrote to her a week ago . AUSTEN-180X-1,177.376

- Martha's rug is just finished , AUSTEN-180X-1,177.377

& looks well , tho' not quite so well as I had hoped .
AUSTEN-180X-1,177.378

I see no fault in the Border , AUSTEN-180X-1,177.379

but the Middle is dingy . AUSTEN-180X-1,177.380

- My Mother desires me to say that she will knit one for you , as soon
as you return to chuse the colours & pattern . AUSTEN-180X-1,177.381

I am sorry I have affronted you on the subject of Mr. Moore ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,177.382

but I do not mean ever to like him ; AUSTEN-180X-1,177.383

& as to pitying a young woman merely because she can@ @not live in two
places at the same time , & at once enjoy the comforts of being married
& single , I shall not attempt it , even for Harriet .
AUSTEN-180X-1,177.384

- You see I have a spirit , as well as yourself . AUSTEN-180X-1,177.385

Frank & Mary can@ @not at all approve of your not being at home in time
to help them in their finishing purchases , AUSTEN-180X-1,177.386

& desire me to say that , if you are not , they shall be as spiteful as
possible & chuse everything in the stile most likely <P_178> to vex you
, knives that will not cut , glasses that will not hold , a sofa without
a seat , & a Bookcase without shelves . AUSTEN-180X-1,178.387

- Our Garden is putting in order , by a Man who bears a remarkably good
character , has a very fine complexion & asks something less than the
first . AUSTEN-180X-1,178.388

The shrubs which border the gravel walk he says are only sweetbriar &
roses , & the latter of an indifferent sort ; AUSTEN-180X-1,178.389

- we mean to get a few of a better kind therefore ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,178.390

& at my own particular desire he procures us some Syringas .
AUSTEN-180X-1,178.391

I could not do without a Syringa , for the sake of Cowper's Line .
AUSTEN-180X-1,178.392

- We talk also of a Laburnam . AUSTEN-180X-1,178.393

- The Border under the Terrace Wall , is clearing away to receive
Currants & Gooseberry Bushes , AUSTEN-180X-1,178.394

& a spot is found very proper for raspberries . AUSTEN-180X-1,178.395

- The alterations & improvements within doors too advance very properly
, AUSTEN-180X-1,178.396

& the offices will be made very convenient indeed .
AUSTEN-180X-1,178.397

- Our Dressing-Table is constructing on the spot , out of a large
Kitchen Table belonging to the House , for doing which we have the
permission of Mr. Husket Lord Lansdown's Painter ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,178.398

- domestic Painter I sh=d= call him , AUSTEN-180X-1,178.399

for he lives in the Castle . AUSTEN-180X-1,178.400

Domestic Chaplains have given way to this more necessary office ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,178.401

& I suppose whenever the Walls want no touching up , he is employed
about my Lady's face . AUSTEN-180X-1,178.402

- The morning was so wet that I was afraid we should not be able to see
our little visitor , AUSTEN-180X-1,178.403

but Frank who alone could go to Church called for her after service ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,178.404

& she is now talking away at my side & examining the Treasures of my
Writing-desk drawer ; - very happy I beleive ; not at all shy of course
. AUSTEN-180X-1,178.405

- Her name is Catherine & her Sister's Caroline . AUSTEN-180X-1,178.406

- She is something like her Brother , & as short for her age , but not
so well-looking . AUSTEN-180X-1,178.407

- What is become of all the Shyness in <P_179> the World ?
AUSTEN-180X-1,179.408

- Moral as well as Natural Diseases disappear in the progress of time ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,179.409

& new ones take their place . AUSTEN-180X-1,179.410

- Shyness & the Sweating Sickness have given way to Confidence &
Paralytic complaints . AUSTEN-180X-1,179.411

I am sorry to hear of Mrs. Whitfield's increasing {TEXT:encreasing}
Illness , & of poor Marianne Bridges's having suffered so much ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,179.412

- these are some of my sorrows , AUSTEN-180X-1,179.413

- & that Mrs. Deedes is to have another Child I suppose I may lament .
AUSTEN-180X-1,179.414

- The death of Mrs. W. K. we had seen ; AUSTEN-180X-1,179.415

- I had no idea that anybody liked her , AUSTEN-180X-1,179.416

& therefore felt nothing for any Survivor , AUSTEN-180X-1,179.417

but I am now feeling away on her Husband's account ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,179.418

and think he had better marry Miss Sharpe . AUSTEN-180X-1,179.419

- I have this instant made my present , AUSTEN-180X-1,179.420

& have the pleasure of seeing it smiled over with genuine satisfaction .
AUSTEN-180X-1,179.421

I am sure I may on this occasion call Kitty Foote , as Hastings did H.
Egerton , my ' very valuable Friend . ' AUSTEN-180X-1,179.422

- <font> Even=g= . <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,179.423

Our little visitor has just left us , AUSTEN-180X-1,179.424

& left us highly pleased with her ; AUSTEN-180X-1,179.425

- she is a nice , natural , openhearted , affectionate girl , with all
the ready civility which one sees in the best Children in the present
day ; - so unlike anything that I was myself at her age , that I am
often all astonishment & shame . AUSTEN-180X-1,179.426

- Half her time here was spent at Spillikins , which I consider as a
very valuable part of our Household furniture , & as not the least
important Benefaction from the family of Knight to that of Austen .
AUSTEN-180X-1,179.427

- But I must tell you a story . AUSTEN-180X-1,179.428

Mary has for some time had notice from Mrs. Dickson of the intended
arrival of a certain Miss Fowler in this place ; AUSTEN-180X-1,179.429

- Miss F. is an intimate friend of Mrs. D. & a good deal known as
such to Mary . AUSTEN-180X-1,179.430

- On Thursday last she called here while we were out ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,179.431

- Mary found on our return her card with only her name on it ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,179.432

& she had <P_180> left word that she w=d= call again .
AUSTEN-180X-1,180.433

The particularity of this made us talk , AUSTEN-180X-1,180.434

& among other conjectures Frank said in joke ' I dare say she is staying
with the Pearsons . ' AUSTEN-180X-1,180.435

- The connection of the names struck Mary , AUSTEN-180X-1,180.436

& she immediately recollected Miss Fowler's having been very intimate
with persons so called ; AUSTEN-180X-1,180.437

- and upon putting everything together we have scarcely a doubt of her
being actually staying with the only Family in the place whom we can@
@not visit . AUSTEN-180X-1,180.438

- What a Contretems ! - in the Language of France ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,180.439

What an unluckiness ! in that of M=de= Duval : AUSTEN-180X-1,180.440

- The Black Gentleman has certainly employed one of his menial imps to
bring about this complete tho' trifling mischeif .
AUSTEN-180X-1,180.441

- Miss F. has never called again , AUSTEN-180X-1,180.442

but we are in daily expectation of it . AUSTEN-180X-1,180.443

- Miss P. has of course given her a proper understanding of the
Business ; AUSTEN-180X-1,180.444

- it is evident that Miss F. did not expect or wish to have the visit
returned , AUSTEN-180X-1,180.445

& Frank is quite as much on his guard for his wife as we c=d= desire for
her sake or our own . AUSTEN-180X-1,180.446

- We shall rejoice in being so near Winchester when Edward belongs to it
, AUSTEN-180X-1,180.447

& can never have our spare bed filled more to our satisfaction than by
him . AUSTEN-180X-1,180.448

Does he leave Eltham at Easter ? AUSTEN-180X-1,180.449

- We are reading Clarentine , AUSTEN-180X-1,180.450

& are surprised to find how foolish it is . AUSTEN-180X-1,180.451

I remember liking it much less on a 2=d= reading than at the 1=st=
AUSTEN-180X-1,180.452

& it does not bear a 3=d= at all . AUSTEN-180X-1,180.453

It is full of unnatural conduct & forced difficulties , without striking
merit of any kind . AUSTEN-180X-1,180.454

- Miss Harrison is going into Devonshire to attend Mrs. Dusautoy as
usual . AUSTEN-180X-1,180.455

- Miss Jackson is married to young Mr. Gunthorpe ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,180.456

& is to be very unhappy . AUSTEN-180X-1,180.457

He swears , drinks , AUSTEN-180X-1,180.458

is cross , jealous , selfish & Brutal ; AUSTEN-180X-1,180.459

the match makes <font> her <$$font> family miserable ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,180.460

& has occasioned <P_181> <font> his <$$font> being disinherited .
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.461

- The Browns are added to our list of acquaintance ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.462

He commands the Sea Fencibles here under Sir Tho. AUSTEN-180X-1,181.463

& was introduced at his own desire by the latter when we saw him last
week . AUSTEN-180X-1,181.464

- As yet the Gentlemen only have visited , as Mrs. B. is ill ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.465

but she is a nice_looking woman AUSTEN-180X-1,181.466

& wears one of the prettiest straw Bonnets in the place .
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.467

- <font> Monday . <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,181.468

The Garret-beds are made , AUSTEN-180X-1,181.469

& ours will be finished today . AUSTEN-180X-1,181.470

I had hoped it w=d= be finished on Saturday , AUSTEN-180X-1,181.471

but neither Mrs. Hall nor Jenny were able to give help enough for that
; AUSTEN-180X-1,181.472

& I have as yet done very little & Mary nothing at all .
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.473

This week we shall do more , AUSTEN-180X-1,181.474

& I sh=d= like to have all the 5 beds completed by the end of it .
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.475

- There will then be the Window-Curtains , sofa-cover , & a carpet to be
altered . AUSTEN-180X-1,181.476

I should not be surprised if we were to be visited by James again this
week ; AUSTEN-180X-1,181.477

he gave us reason to expect him soon ; AUSTEN-180X-1,181.478

& if they go to Eversley he can@ @not come next week .
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.479

- I am sorry & angry that his Visits should not give one more pleasure ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.480

the company of so good & so clever a Man ought to be gratifying in
itself ; AUSTEN-180X-1,181.481

- but his Chat seems all forced , his Opinions on many points too much
copied from his Wife's , AUSTEN-180X-1,181.482

& his time here is spent I think in walking about the House & banging
the doors , or ringing the bell for a glass of water .
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.483

- There , I flatter myself I have constructed you a smartish Letter ,
considering my want of Materials . AUSTEN-180X-1,181.484

But like my dear Dr. Johnson I beleive I have dealt more in Notions
than Facts . AUSTEN-180X-1,181.485

I hope your Cough is gone & that you are otherwise well .
AUSTEN-180X-1,181.486

- And remain with Love , Y=rs= affec=tely= J. A. AUSTEN-180X-1,181.487

<P_182>

{ED:50._To_Cassandra_Austen._Friday_20_Feb._1807}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Southampton AUSTEN-180X-1,182.491

Friday Feb=y= 20=th= AUSTEN-180X-1,182.492

My dear Cassandra We have at last heard something of M=r= Austen's Will
. AUSTEN-180X-1,182.493

It is beleived at Tunbridge that he has left everything after the death
of his widow to Mr. M=y= Austen's 3=d= son John ; AUSTEN-180X-1,182.494

& as the said John was the only one of the Family who attended the
Funeral , it seems likely to be true . AUSTEN-180X-1,182.495

- Such ill-gotten wealth can never prosper ! AUSTEN-180X-1,182.496

- I really have very little to say <font> this <$$font> week ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,182.497

& do not feel as if I should spread that little into the shew of much .
AUSTEN-180X-1,182.498

I am inclined for short sentences . AUSTEN-180X-1,182.499

- Mary will be obliged to you to take notice how often Eliz=th= nurses
her Baby in the course of the 24 hours , how often it is fed & with what
; AUSTEN-180X-1,182.500

- you need not trouble yourself to <font> write <$$font> the result of
your observations , AUSTEN-180X-1,182.501

your return will be early enough for the communication of them .
AUSTEN-180X-1,182.502

You are recommended to bring away some flower-seeds from Godmersham ,
particularly Mignionette seed . AUSTEN-180X-1,182.503

- My Mother has heard this morn=g= from Paragon . AUSTEN-180X-1,182.504

My Aunt talks much of the violent colds prevailing in Bath , from which
my Uncle has suffered ever since their return , AUSTEN-180X-1,182.505

& she has herself a cough much worse than any she ever had before ,
subject as she has always been to bad ones . AUSTEN-180X-1,182.506

- She writes in good humour & chearful spirits however .
AUSTEN-180X-1,182.507

The negociation between them & Adlestrop so happily over indeed , what
can have power to vex her materially ? AUSTEN-180X-1,182.508

<P_183>

- Elliston , she tells us has just succeeded to a considerable fortune
on the death of an Uncle . AUSTEN-180X-1,183.510

I would not have it enough to take <font> him <$$font> from the Stage ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,183.511

<font> she <$$font> should quit her business , & live with him in London
. AUSTEN-180X-1,183.512

- We could not pay our visit on Monday , AUSTEN-180X-1,183.513

the weather altered just too soon ; AUSTEN-180X-1,183.514

& we have since had a touch of almost everything in the weather way ; -
two of the severest frosts since the winter began , preceded by rain ,
hail & snow . AUSTEN-180X-1,183.515

- Now we are smiling again . AUSTEN-180X-1,183.516

<font> Saturday . <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,183.517

- I have received your letter , AUSTEN-180X-1,183.518

but I suppose you do not expect me to be gratified by it's contents .
AUSTEN-180X-1,183.519

I confess myself much disappointed by this repeated delay of your return
, AUSTEN-180X-1,183.520

for tho' I had pretty well given up all idea of your being with us
before our removal , I felt sure that March would not pass quite away
without bringing you . AUSTEN-180X-1,183.521

Before April comes , of course something else will occur to detain you .
AUSTEN-180X-1,183.522

But as <font> you <$$font> are happy , all this is selfishness , of
which here is enough for one page . AUSTEN-180X-1,183.523

- Pray tell Lizzy that if I had imagined her Teeth to be really out , I
should have said before what I say now , that it was a very unlucky fall
indeed , that I am afraid it must have given her a great deal of pain ,
& that I dare say her Mouth looks very comical . AUSTEN-180X-1,183.524

- I am obliged to Fanny for the list of Mrs. Coleman's Children , whose
names I had not however quite forgot ; AUSTEN-180X-1,183.525

the new one I am sure will be Caroline . AUSTEN-180X-1,183.526

- I have got Mr. Bowen's Recipe for you , AUSTEN-180X-1,183.527

it came in my aunt's letter . AUSTEN-180X-1,183.528

- You must have had more snow at G=m= , than we had here ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,183.529

- on Wednesday morn=g= there was a thin covering of it over the fields &
roofs of the Houses , AUSTEN-180X-1,183.530

but I do not think there was any left the next day .
AUSTEN-180X-1,183.531

Everybody used to Southampton <P_184> says that Snow never lies more
than 24 hours near it , AUSTEN-180X-1,184.532

& from what we have observed ourselves , it is very true .
AUSTEN-180X-1,184.533

- Frank's going into Kent depends of course upon his being unemployed ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,184.534

but as the 1=st= Lord after promising L=d= Moira that Capt. A. should
have the first good Frigate that was vacant , has since given away two
or three fine ones , he has no particular reason to expect an
appointment now . AUSTEN-180X-1,184.535

- <font> He <$$font> however has scarcely spoken about the Kentish
Journey ; AUSTEN-180X-1,184.536

I have my information cheifly from her , AUSTEN-180X-1,184.537

& she considers her own going thither as more certain if he sh=d= be at
sea , than if not . AUSTEN-180X-1,184.538

- Frank has got a very bad cough , for an Austen ; AUSTEN-180X-1,184.539

- but it does not disable him from making very nice fringe for the
Drawingroom-Curtains . AUSTEN-180X-1,184.540

- Mrs. Day has now got the Carpet in hand , AUSTEN-180X-1,184.541

& Monday I hope will be the last day of her employment here .
AUSTEN-180X-1,184.542

A fortnight afterwards she is to be called again from the shades of her
red-check'd bed in an alley near the end of the High Street to clean the
new House & air the Bedding . AUSTEN-180X-1,184.543

- We hear that we are envied our House by many people , & that the
Garden is the best in the Town . AUSTEN-180X-1,184.544

- There will be green baize enough for Martha's room & ours ; - not to
cover them , but to lie over the part where it is most wanted , under
the Dressing Table . AUSTEN-180X-1,184.545

Mary is to have a peice of carpetting for the same purpose ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,184.546

my Mother says <font> she <$$font> does not want any ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,184.547

- & it may certainly be better done without in her room than in Martha's
& ours , from the difference of their aspect . AUSTEN-180X-1,184.548

- I recommend M=rs= Grant's Letters , as a present to the latter ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,184.549

- what they are about , nor how many volumes they form I do not know ,
having never heard of them but from Miss Irvine , who speaks of them as
a new & much admired work , & as one which has <P_185> pleased her
highly . AUSTEN-180X-1,185.550

- I have enquired for the book here , AUSTEN-180X-1,185.551

but find it quite unknown . AUSTEN-180X-1,185.552

I believe <font> I <$$font> put five breadths of Linon also into my
flounce ; AUSTEN-180X-1,185.553

I know I found it wanted more than I had expected , & that I sh=d= have
been distressed if I had not bought more than I beleived myself to need
, for the sake of the even Measure , on which we think so differently .
AUSTEN-180X-1,185.554

- A light morn=g= gown will be a very necessary purchase for you ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,185.555

& I wish you a pretty one . AUSTEN-180X-1,185.556

I shall buy such things whenever I am tempted , AUSTEN-180X-1,185.557

but as yet there is nothing of the sort to be seen .
AUSTEN-180X-1,185.558

- We are reading Barretti's other book , AUSTEN-180X-1,185.559

& find him dreadfully abusive of poor M=r= Sharpe .
AUSTEN-180X-1,185.560

I can no longer take his part against you , as I did nine years ago .
AUSTEN-180X-1,185.561

- <font> Sunday . <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,185.562

- This post has brought me Martha's own assurance of her coming on
tuesday even=g= which nothing is now to prevent except William should
send her word that there is no <font> remedy <$$font> on that day .
AUSTEN-180X-1,185.563

- Her letter was put into the post at Basingstoke on their return from
Eversley , where she says they have spent their time very pleasantly ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,185.564

she does not own herself in any danger of being tempted back again
however , AUSTEN-180X-1,185.565

& as she signs by her maiden name we are at least to suppose her not
married yet . AUSTEN-180X-1,185.566

- They must have had a cold visit , AUSTEN-180X-1,185.567

but as she found it agreable I suppose there was no want of Blankets ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,185.568

and we may trust to her Sister's taking care that her love of many
should be known . AUSTEN-180X-1,185.569

- She sends me no particulars , having time only to write the needful .
AUSTEN-180X-1,185.570

- I wish You a pleasant party tomorrow , & not more than you like of
Miss Hatton's neck . AUSTEN-180X-1,185.571

- Lady B. must have been a shameless woman if she named H. Hales as
within her Husband's reach . AUSTEN-180X-1,185.572

It is a peice of impertinence indeed in a Woman to pretend to fix on
<P_186> any one , as if she supposed it c=d= be only ask & have .
AUSTEN-180X-1,186.573

A widower with 3 children has no right to look higher than his
daughter's Governess . AUSTEN-180X-1,186.574

- I am forced to be abusive for want of subject , having really nothing
to say . AUSTEN-180X-1,186.575

- When Martha comes , she will supply me with matter ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,186.576

I shall have to tell you how she likes the House & what she thinks of
Mary . AUSTEN-180X-1,186.577

- You must be very cold today at G=m= . AUSTEN-180X-1,186.578

- We are cold here . AUSTEN-180X-1,186.579

I expect a severe March , a wet April , & a sharp May .
AUSTEN-180X-1,186.580

- And with this prophecy I must conclude . AUSTEN-180X-1,186.581

- My love to everybody , AUSTEN-180X-1,186.582

- Y=rs= affec=tely= J. {TEXT:J} Austen AUSTEN-180X-1,186.583

{ED:51._To_Cassandra_Austen._Wednesday_15_June_1808}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Godmersham : AUSTEN-180X-1,186.586

Wednesday June 15 AUSTEN-180X-1,186.587

My dear Cassandra Where shall I begin ? AUSTEN-180X-1,186.588

Which of all my important nothings shall I tell you first ?
AUSTEN-180X-1,186.589

At half after seven yesterday morning Henry saw us into our own carriage
, AUSTEN-180X-1,186.590

and we drove away from the Bath Hotel ; which , by-@ @the-@ @bye , had
been found most uncomfortable quarters - very dirty , very noisy , and
very ill-provided . AUSTEN-180X-1,186.591

James began his journey by the coach at five . AUSTEN-180X-1,186.592

Our first eight miles were hot ; AUSTEN-180X-1,186.593

Deptford Hill brought to my mind our hot journey into Kent fourteen
years ago ; AUSTEN-180X-1,186.594

but after Blackheath we suffered nothing , AUSTEN-180X-1,186.595

and as the day advanced it grew quite cool . AUSTEN-180X-1,186.596

At Dartford , which we reached within the two hours and three-quarters ,
we went to the Bull , the same inn at which we breakfasted in that said
journey , AUSTEN-180X-1,186.597

and on the present occasion had about the same bad butter .
AUSTEN-180X-1,186.598

<P_187>

At half-@ @past ten we were again off , AUSTEN-180X-1,187.600

and , travelling on without any adventure reached Sittingbourne by three
. AUSTEN-180X-1,187.601

Daniel was watching for us at the door of the George ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,187.602

and I was acknowledged very kindly by Mr. and Mrs. Marshall , to the
latter of whom I devoted my conversation , while Mary went out to buy
some gloves . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.603

A few minutes , of course , did for Sittingbourne ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,187.604

and so off we drove , drove , drove , AUSTEN-180X-1,187.605

and by six o'clock were at Godmersham . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.606

Our two brothers were walking before the house as we approached , as
natural as life . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.607

Fanny and Lizzy met us in the Hall with a great deal of pleasant joy ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,187.608

we went for a few minutes into the breakfast parlour ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,187.609

and then proceeded to our rooms . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.610

Mary has the Hall chamber . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.611

I am in the Yellow room - very literally - AUSTEN-180X-1,187.612

for I am writing in it at this moment . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.613

It seems odd to me to have such a great place all to myself ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,187.614

and to be at Godmersham without you is also odd . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.615

You are wished for , I assure you : AUSTEN-180X-1,187.616

Fanny , who came to me as soon as she had seen her Aunt James to her
room , and stayed while I dressed , was as energetic as usual in her
longings for you . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.617

She is grown both in height and size since last year , but not
immoderately , AUSTEN-180X-1,187.618

looks very well , AUSTEN-180X-1,187.619

and seems as to conduct and manner just what she was and what one could
wish her to continue . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.620

Elizabeth , who was dressing when we arrived , came to me for a minute
attended by Marianne , Charles , and Louisa , AUSTEN-180X-1,187.621

and , you will not doubt , gave me a very affectionate welcome .
AUSTEN-180X-1,187.622

That I had received such from Edward also I need not mention ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,187.623

but I do , you see , because it is a pleasure . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.624

I never saw him look in better health , AUSTEN-180X-1,187.625

and Fanny says he is perfectly well . AUSTEN-180X-1,187.626

<P_188>

I can@ @not praise Elizabeth's looks , AUSTEN-180X-1,188.628

but they are probably affected by a cold . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.629

Her little namesake has gained in beauty in the last three years ,
though not all that Marianne has lost . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.630

Charles is not quite so lovely as he was . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.631

Louisa is much as I expected , AUSTEN-180X-1,188.632

and Cassandra I find handsomer than I expected , though at present
disguised by such a violent breaking-out that she does not come down
after dinner . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.633

She has charming eyes and a nice open countenance ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,188.634

and seems likely to be very lovable . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.635

Her size is magnificent . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.636

I was agreeably surprised to find Louisa Bridges still here .
AUSTEN-180X-1,188.637

She looks remarkably well AUSTEN-180X-1,188.638

<paren> legacies are very wholesome diet <$$paren> ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,188.639

and is just what she always was . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.640

John is at Sandling . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.641

You may fancy our dinner party therefore ; Fanny , of course , belonging
to it , and little Edward , for that day . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.642

He was almost too happy , AUSTEN-180X-1,188.643

his happiness at least made him too talkative . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.644

It has struck ten ; AUSTEN-180X-1,188.645

I must go to breakfast . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.646

Since breakfast I have had a <font> tête-à-tête <$$font> with Edward in
his room ; AUSTEN-180X-1,188.647

he wanted to know James's plans and mine , AUSTEN-180X-1,188.648

and from what his own now are I think it already nearly certain that I
shall return when they do , though not with them .
AUSTEN-180X-1,188.649

Edward will be going about the same time to Alton , where he has
business with Mr. Trimmer , and where he means his son should join him
; AUSTEN-180X-1,188.650

and I shall probably be his companion to that place , and get on
afterwards somehow or other . AUSTEN-180X-1,188.651

I should have preferred a rather longer stay here certainly ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,188.652

but there is no prospect of any later conveyance for me , as he does not
mean to accompany Edward on his return to Winchester , from a very
natural unwillingness to leave Elizabeth at that time .
AUSTEN-180X-1,188.653

I shall at any rate be glad not to be obliged to be an <P_189>
incumbrance on those who have brought me here , AUSTEN-180X-1,189.654

for , as James has no horse , I must feel in their carriage that I am
taking his place . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.655

We were rather crowded yesterday , though it does not become me to say
so , as I and my boa were of the party , AUSTEN-180X-1,189.656

and it is not to be supposed but that a child of three years of age was
fidgety . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.657

I need scarcely beg you to keep all this to yourself , lest it should
get round by Anna's means . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.658

She is very kindly inquired after by her friends here , who all regret
her not coming with her father and mother . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.659

I left Henry , I hope , free from his tiresome complaint , in other
respects well , and thinking with great pleasure of Cheltenham and
Stoneleigh . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.660

The brewery scheme is quite at an end : AUSTEN-180X-1,189.661

at a meeting of the subscribers last week it was by general , and I
believe very hearty , consent dissolved . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.662

The country is very beautiful . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.663

I saw as much as ever to admire in my yesterday's journey .
AUSTEN-180X-1,189.664

<font> Thursday . <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,189.665

- I am glad to find that Anna was pleased with going to Southampton ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,189.666

and hope with all my heart that the visit may be satisfactory to
everybody . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.667

Tell her that she will hear in a few days from her mamma , who would
have written to her now but for this letter . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.668

Yesterday passed quite <font> à_la <$$font> Godmersham :
AUSTEN-180X-1,189.669

the gentlemen rode about Edward's farm , AUSTEN-180X-1,189.670

and returned in time to saunter along Bentigh with us ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,189.671

and after dinner we visited the Temple Plantations , which , to be sure
, is a Chevalier Bayard of a plantation . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.672

James and Mary are much struck with the beauty of the place .
AUSTEN-180X-1,189.673

To-day the spirit of the thing is kept up by the two brothers being gone
to Canterbury in the chair . AUSTEN-180X-1,189.674

<P_190>

I can@ @not discover , even through Fanny , that her mother is fatigued
by her attendance on the children . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.676

I have , of course , tendered my services , AUSTEN-180X-1,190.677

and when Louisa is gone , who sometimes hears the little girls read ,
will try to be accepted in her stead . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.678

She will not be here many days longer . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.679

The Moores are partly expected to dine here to-morrow or Saturday .
AUSTEN-180X-1,190.680

I feel rather languid and solitary - perhaps because I have a cold ;
AUSTEN-180X-1,190.681

but three years ago we were more animated with you and Harriot and Miss
Sharpe . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.682

We shall improve , I dare say , as we go on . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.683

I have not yet told you how the new carriage is liked -
AUSTEN-180X-1,190.684

very well , very much indeed , except the lining , which does look
rather shabby . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.685

I hear a very bad account of Mrs. Whitefield ; a very good one of Mrs.
Knight , who goes to Broadstairs next month . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.686

Miss Sharpe is going with Miss Bailey to Tenby . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.687

The Widow Kennet succeeds to the post of laundress .
AUSTEN-180X-1,190.688

Would you believe it AUSTEN-180X-1,190.689

my trunk is come already ; AUSTEN-180X-1,190.690

and , what completes the wondrous happiness , nothing is damaged .
AUSTEN-180X-1,190.691

I unpacked it all before I went to bed last night ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,190.692

and when I went down to breakfast this morning presented the rug , which
was received most gratefully , and met with universal admiration .
AUSTEN-180X-1,190.693

My frock is also given , and kindly accepted . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.694

<font> Friday . <$$font> AUSTEN-180X-1,190.695

- I have received your letter , AUSTEN-180X-1,190.696

and I think it gives me nothing to be sorry for but Mary's cold , which
I hope is by this time better . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.697

Her approbation of her child's hat makes me very happy .
AUSTEN-180X-1,190.698

Mrs. J. A. bought one at Gayleard's for Caroline , of the same shape
, but brown and with a feather . AUSTEN-180X-1,190.699

I hope Huxham is a comfort to you ; AUSTEN-180X-1,190.700

I am glad you <P_191> are taking it . AUSTEN-180X-1,191.701

I shall probably have an opportunity of giving Harriot your message
to-morrow ; AUSTEN-180X-1,191.702

she does not come here , AUSTEN-180X-1,191.703

they have not a day to spare , AUSTEN-180X-1,191.704

but Louisa and I are to go to her in the morning .
AUSTEN-180X-1,191.705

I send your thanks to Eliza by this post in a letter to Henry .
AUSTEN-180X-1,191.706

Lady Catherine is Lord Portmore's daughter . AUSTEN-180X-1,191.707

I have read Mr. Jefferson's case to Edward , AUSTEN-180X-1,191.708

and he desires to have his name set down for a guinea and his wife's for
another ; AUSTEN-180X-1,191.709

but does not wish for more than one copy of the work .
AUSTEN-180X-1,191.710

Your account of Anna gives me pleasure . AUSTEN-180X-1,191.711

Tell her , with my love , that I like her for liking the quay .
AUSTEN-180X-1,191.712

Mrs. J. A. seems rather surprised at the Maitlands drinking tea with
you , AUSTEN-180X-1,191.713

but that does not prevent my approving it . AUSTEN-180X-1,191.714

I hope you had not a disagreeable evening with Miss Austen and her niece
. AUSTEN-180X-1,191.715

You know how interesting the purchase of a sponge-cake is to me .
AUSTEN-180X-1,191.716

I am now just returned from Eggerton ; AUSTEN-180X-1,191.717

Louisa and I walked together AUSTEN-180X-1,191.718

and found Miss Maria at home . AUSTEN-180X-1,191.719

Her sister we met on our way back . AUSTEN-180X-1,191.720

<font> She <$$font> had been to pay her compliments to Mrs. Inman ,
whose chaise was seen to cross the park while we were at dinner
yesterday . AUSTEN-180X-1,191.721

I told Sackree that you desired to be remembered to her , which pleased
her ; AUSTEN-180X-1,191.722

and she sends her duty , AUSTEN-180X-1,191.723

and wishes you to know that she has been into the great world .
AUSTEN-180X-1,191.724

She went on to town after taking William to Eltham ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,191.725

and , as well as myself , saw the ladies go to Court on the 4th .
AUSTEN-180X-1,191.726

She had the advantage indeed of me in being in the Palace .
AUSTEN-180X-1,191.727

Louisa is not so handsome as I expected , AUSTEN-180X-1,191.728

but she is not quite well . AUSTEN-180X-1,191.729

Edward and Caroline seem very happy here ; AUSTEN-180X-1,191.730

he has nice playfellows in Lizzy and <P_192> Charles .
AUSTEN-180X-1,192.731

They and their attendant have the boys' attic . AUSTEN-180X-1,192.732

Anna will not be surprised that the cutting off her hair is very much
regretted by several of the party in this house ; AUSTEN-180X-1,192.733

I am tolerably reconciled to it by considering that two or three years
may restore it again . AUSTEN-180X-1,192.734

You are very important with your Captain Bulmore and Hotel Master ,
AUSTEN-180X-1,192.735

and I trust , if your trouble overbalances your dignity on the occasion
, it will be amply repaid by Mrs. Craven's approbation , and a pleasant
scheme to see her . AUSTEN-180X-1,192.736

Mrs. Cooke has written to my brother James to invite him and his wife
to Bookham in their way back , which , as I learn through Edward's means
, they are not disinclined to accept , but that my being with them would
render it impracticable , the nature of the road affording no conveyance
to James . AUSTEN-180X-1,192.737

I shall therefore make them easy on that head as soon as I can .
AUSTEN-180X-1,192.738

I have a great deal of love to give from everybody .
AUSTEN-180X-1,192.739

Yours most affectionately , Jane AUSTEN-180X-1,192.740

My mother will be glad to be assured that the size of the rug does
perfectly well . AUSTEN-180X-1,192.741

It is not to be used till winter . AUSTEN-180X-1,192.742

