<BEGIN_bain-1878-1>

<P_359>

<heading>

Chapter X . BAIN-1878-1,359.4

<font> The value of the classics . <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,359.5

<$$heading>

The chapter on Education Values was purposely left incomplete ; the
vexed question of the study of the Classics demanding a separate and
full discussion . BAIN-1878-1,359.7

As respects the Higher Education this is the most important of all the
questions that can be raised at the present time . BAIN-1878-1,359.8

The thorough-going advocates of Classics hold Latin and Greek to be
indispensable to a liberal education . BAIN-1878-1,359.9

They do not allow of an alternative road to our University Degrees .
BAIN-1878-1,359.10

They will not admit that the lapse of three centuries , with their
numerous revolutions , and their vast developments of new knowledge ,
make any difference whatever to the education value of a knowledge of
the Greek and Roman classics . BAIN-1878-1,359.11

They get over the undeniable fact , that we no longer employ these
languages , as languages , by bringing forward a number of uses that
never occurred to Erasmus , Casaubon or Milton . BAIN-1878-1,359.12

In the Middle Ages , the use of Latin was universal .
BAIN-1878-1,359.13

After the taking of Constantinople , Greek literature burst upon Western
Europe , BAIN-1878-1,359.14

and so entranced the choicer spirits as to bring about a temporary
revival of Paganism . BAIN-1878-1,359.15

To the Christian scholarly enquirer , Greek was welcomed as laying open
the original of the New Testament , together <P_360> with the Eastern
Fathers of the Church . BAIN-1878-1,360.16

The zeal thus springing up rendered possible the imposition of a new
language upon educated youth , which might have well seemed too much for
human indolence . BAIN-1878-1,360.17

Our Universities accepted the addition ; BAIN-1878-1,360.18

and the teachers and pupils had to speak Latin , and read Greek .
BAIN-1878-1,360.19

The men of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries had their own follies ,
errors , and superstitions ; BAIN-1878-1,360.20

but their mode of estimating the worth of the classical tongues was
plain common sense . BAIN-1878-1,360.21

Says Hegius , the Dutch scholar <paren> master of Erasmus , head of the
College of Deventer , 1438 - 1468 <$$paren> : ' If anyone wishes to
understand grammar , rhetoric , mathematics , history , or Holy
Scripture , let him read Greek . BAIN-1878-1,360.22

We owe everything to the Greeks . ' BAIN-1878-1,360.23

Luther advocated the new learning , in his own vehement way :
BAIN-1878-1,360.24

' True though it be that the Gospel came and comes alone by the Holy
Spirit , yet it came by means of the tongues , BAIN-1878-1,360.25

and thereby grew , BAIN-1878-1,360.26

and thereby must be preserved . ' BAIN-1878-1,360.27

Melancthon regarded the languages solely as means to ends ,
BAIN-1878-1,360.28

and his scheme of education embraced all the departments of knowledge on
their own account . BAIN-1878-1,360.29

Hieronymus Wolf , of Augsburg , was emphatic on the same point :
BAIN-1878-1,360.30

' Happy were the Latins , ' he says , ' who needed only to learn Greek ,
and that not by school-teaching , but by intercourse with <P_361> living
Greeks . BAIN-1878-1,361.31

Happier still were the Greeks , who , so soon as they could read and
write their mother tongue , might pass at once to the liberal arts and
the pursuit of wisdom . BAIN-1878-1,361.32

For us , who must spend many years in learning foreign languages , the
entrance into the gates of Philosophy is much more difficult .
BAIN-1878-1,361.33

For , to understand Latin and Greek is not learning itself , but the
entrance-hall and antechamber of learning . ' <paren> Parker .
<$$paren> BAIN-1878-1,361.34

That the value of a knowledge of the classics , on the ground of the
information , exclusively contained in Greek and Latin authors , should
decrease steadily , was a necessary result of the independent research
of the last three_hundred years . BAIN-1878-1,361.35

The rate of decrease has been accelerated during the last century by the
abundance of good translations from the classics . BAIN-1878-1,361.36

In this progressive decrease a point must be reached when the cost of
acquiring the languages would be set against the residuum of valuable
information still locked up in them , and when the balance would turn
against their acquisition . BAIN-1878-1,361.37

In the meantime , however , other advantages have been put forward that
are considered sufficient to make up for the loss of value brought about
by the causes now mentioned . BAIN-1878-1,361.38

<heading>

I. <font> The Information still locked up in Greek and Latin Authors .
<$$font> BAIN-1878-1,361.40

<$$heading>

This is the professional argument , BAIN-1878-1,361.42

but the case respecting it is so very obvious that we can hardly be too
brief in presenting the matter . BAIN-1878-1,361.43

That there is not a fact or principle in the whole compass of physical
science , or in the arts and practice <P_362> of life , that is not
fully expressed in every civilized modern language , will be universally
allowed . BAIN-1878-1,362.44

There will not be quite the same consent as regards moral and
metaphysical science ; it being contended that in Plato and in Aristotle
, for example , there are treasures of thought that never can be
separated from their original setting in the Greek language .
BAIN-1878-1,362.45

Again , the ancient literatures are the exclusive depositories of the
historical and social facts of the ancient world ; BAIN-1878-1,362.46

but all this is eminently translatable , BAIN-1878-1,362.47

and has been abundantly reproduced in the modern tongues .
BAIN-1878-1,362.48

A certain exception , however , is made here also , namely , that for
the inner or subjective life of the Greeks and Romans , the best
translations must still be at fault . BAIN-1878-1,362.49

As regards Greek philosophy , it may be safely said that its doctrinal
positions and subtle distinctions are at this moment better understood
through translators and commentators , writing in English , French , and
German , than they could have been to Bentley , Porson , or Parr .
BAIN-1878-1,362.50

The truth is that , in translating , a knowledge of the subject is at
least co-essential with a knowledge of the language .
BAIN-1878-1,362.51

When the Professor of Greek Literature , in Cosmo's Platonic Academy at
Florence , lectured on Plato , the Latin Aristotelians asked with
indignation how a philosopher could be expounded by one who was none
himself . BAIN-1878-1,362.52

That the inner life of the Greeks and Romans can@ @not be fully
comprehended unless we know their own language , is a position that
gives way under a close assault . BAIN-1878-1,362.53

The inner life must be understood from the outer life ,
BAIN-1878-1,362.54

and that can be represented in any language . BAIN-1878-1,362.55

Whatever sets well before us the usages , the modes of <P_363> acting
and thinking , the institutions , and the historical incidents of any
people , will enable us to comprehend their inner life , as well as can
be done in surveying them at a distance ; BAIN-1878-1,363.56

and all this is quite possible through the medium of translators and
commentators . BAIN-1878-1,363.57

This seems enough as far as concerns the professions .
BAIN-1878-1,363.58

In medicine , for example , it will not be contended that there is
anything to be gained by classical scholarship . BAIN-1878-1,363.59

Hippocrates has been translated . BAIN-1878-1,363.60

Whatever Galen knew is known independently of his pages .
BAIN-1878-1,363.61

But indeed , only a purely historical value can attach to any medical
work of the ancient world . BAIN-1878-1,363.62

Again , the lawyer can obviously dispense with Greek .
BAIN-1878-1,363.63

There may be a certain claim made for Latin in his case , in consequence
of our position with reference to Roman Jurisprudence .
BAIN-1878-1,363.64

But this too has been sufficiently represented in English works to make
the whole subject accessible to an English reader . BAIN-1878-1,363.65

The Latin terms that have to be retained as untranslatable by single
words in English can be explained as they occur , without anyone
requiring {COM:sic} to master the entire Latin language .
BAIN-1878-1,363.66

As to the power of reading Latin title-deeds , if one man in a business
establishment possesses it , that is enough . BAIN-1878-1,363.67

The plea for classics to the clergy has always been accounted
self-evident and irresistible . BAIN-1878-1,363.68

Even here , however , there are qualifying circumstances .
BAIN-1878-1,363.69

It is the business of a clergyman to understand the Bible , which
involves Hebrew and Hellenistic Greek . BAIN-1878-1,363.70

Classical Greek and classical Greek authors are not necessary ; <P_364>
while the utility of Latin extends only to the Latin Fathers , the
scholastic theology , and the learned theologians of the Reformation ,
including Luther , Melancthon , Calvin , and Turretin .
BAIN-1878-1,364.71

Now there is no book that has been so abundantly commented on as the
Bible . BAIN-1878-1,364.72

Every light that scholarship can strike out has been made to shine
through the vernacular tongues ; BAIN-1878-1,364.73

there is scarcely a text but can be understood by an English reader as
the ablest scholars understand it ; BAIN-1878-1,364.74

and the study of the original languages must be prosecuted to a pitch of
first-rate scholarship before anything can be gained in addition to what
every one may know without scholarship . BAIN-1878-1,364.75

Among the caprices of opinion on the present question may be ranked the
very slight stress that is put upon the Hebrew language in the education
of the clergy . BAIN-1878-1,364.76

The most exacting churches receive a candidate for orders on a very easy
Hebrew pass ; BAIN-1878-1,364.77

and it is never supposed that more than a small number of preachers in
any church habitually consult the Hebrew Bible . BAIN-1878-1,364.78

Yet the Old Testament , containing as it does a large mass of sentiment
and poetry , and referring to a state of society far removed from our
own , is one of the books most difficult to exhibit in translation .
BAIN-1878-1,364.79

Granted that , as respects the Old Testament , there may be an
unexhausted , possibly an inexhaustible , suggestiveness in the
knowledge of the original tongue , the fact remains that inattention to
Hebrew is all but universal ; while , as respects the New Testament , a
knowledge of the original can scarcely add anything to the ample
exegesis provided by theological scholars . BAIN-1878-1,364.80

Whitfield knew no Hebrew and little Greek . BAIN-1878-1,364.81

<P_365>

The Hellenistic Greek of the New Testament does not involve classical
Greek authors . BAIN-1878-1,365.83

It might be taught like Hebrew in the Divinity schools , and entirely
disconnected from the literature of Pagan Greece . BAIN-1878-1,365.84

That these Pagan authors should be nursing fathers and nursing mothers
to the Christian Church , is a standing wonder . BAIN-1878-1,365.85

That Christian youth , so carefully withheld from the language of sexual
impurity , should be allowed such a liberal crop of wild oats as a
course of classical reading supplies , is not less wonderful .
BAIN-1878-1,365.86

The natural course as regards the clergy would be to encourage a small
number of scholars to prosecute the study of the original languages of
the Bible and all the allied learning , and to dispense with these
languages as regards the mass of working clergy , who may turn their
time to more profitable account . BAIN-1878-1,365.87

<heading>

II. <font> The Art Treasures of Greek and Roman Literature are
inaccessible except through the languages . <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,365.89

<$$heading>

It must ever remain true that certain artistic effects of literary
composition , and more especially poetry , are bound up with the
language of the writer , and can@ @not be imparted through another
language . BAIN-1878-1,365.91

These very peculiar effects , however , are not the greatest in
themselves , nor the most valuable for literary culture .
BAIN-1878-1,365.92

The translatable peculiarities far transcend in value the untranslatable
; BAIN-1878-1,365.93

if it were not so , where should we be with our Bible ?
BAIN-1878-1,365.94

Melody is the most intractable quality ; BAIN-1878-1,365.95

of this alone can little or no idea be imparted by translations .
BAIN-1878-1,365.96

Even the delicate associations with words can be expounded through our
own language ; just as they <P_366> must be to the pupil who is studying
the original . BAIN-1878-1,366.97

As regards all dead languages , much of this subtle essence must have
vanished beyond recovery . BAIN-1878-1,366.98

Learning Greek does not put one in the same position to Homer and
Sophocles , that learning German does to Goethe . BAIN-1878-1,366.99

All that a scholar can know he may find means of imparting to one that
is not a scholar . BAIN-1878-1,366.100

The subtle incommunicable aroma of classical poetry is one of the
luxuries of scholarship . BAIN-1878-1,366.101

The mass of students can@ @not reach it ; BAIN-1878-1,366.102

and it may be bought too dear . BAIN-1878-1,366.103

Moreover , the translatable virtue of the great poets is so great , that
we may have many a rich feast , through translations alone :
BAIN-1878-1,366.104

witness the enthusiasm for Pope's ' Homer ' . BAIN-1878-1,366.105

Horace is perhaps the most untranslatable poet of antiquity ;
BAIN-1878-1,366.106

but the difficulty has been a stimulus to marvels of verbal dexterity in
approaching the original ; BAIN-1878-1,366.107

and he that is conversant with the translations now accessible to the
English reader , can@ @not be far from the kingdom of heaven .
BAIN-1878-1,366.108

<heading>

III. <font> The Classical Languages train the mind as nothing else does
. <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,366.110

<$$heading>

This argument was not advanced in the days when the dead languages were
useful in their character as languages ; BAIN-1878-1,366.112

either it was not felt in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries ,
BAIN-1878-1,366.113

or it was unnecessary . BAIN-1878-1,366.114

That it is so much relied upon now , is tantamount to a surrender of the
previous arguments , BAIN-1878-1,366.115

or at least suggests doubts as to their sufficiency .
BAIN-1878-1,366.116

It has that amount of vagueness about it that would make a convenient
shelter to a bad case . BAIN-1878-1,366.117

We must ask specifically what the training consists in .
BAIN-1878-1,366.118

<P_367>

For one thing , there is abundant employment given to the memory ;
BAIN-1878-1,367.120

but the proper word for this is not ' trained ' but ' expended . '
BAIN-1878-1,367.121

A certain amount of the plastic force of the system is used up ,
BAIN-1878-1,367.122

and is therefore not available for other purposes . BAIN-1878-1,367.123

This is the cost of the operation , for which we have to show an
equivalent in solid advantages . BAIN-1878-1,367.124

The faculties supposed to be trained are the higher faculties named
Reason , Judgment , and Constructive or Inventive Power ;
BAIN-1878-1,367.125

and the exercises reckoned upon to give the training are conning grammar
, and translating . BAIN-1878-1,367.126

The influence of Grammar can soon be told . BAIN-1878-1,367.127

To learn Grammar is , besides employing memory , to understand certain
rules and to apply them as the cases arise , bearing in mind the
exceptions when there are any . BAIN-1878-1,367.128

Inflexion is the easiest part . BAIN-1878-1,367.129

Latin nouns in <font> a <$$font> of the first declension are declined
according to a type ; BAIN-1878-1,367.130

one example is given , as <font> penna , <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,367.131

and the pupil has to adhere to the type with <font> femina <$$font> and
the rest . BAIN-1878-1,367.132

This represents the operation that is requisite whenever we can rise
from particulars to general knowledge . BAIN-1878-1,367.133

' A fine day , ' ' a good road , ' ' a boiling kettle , ' ' a loaf of
bread , ' are general ideas that are connected with practical
injunctions , BAIN-1878-1,367.134

and whoever has to comply with these injuctions must understand the
ideas and apply them as the occasion serves . BAIN-1878-1,367.135

Sometimes the notion is accessible to the weakest capacity ,
BAIN-1878-1,367.136

sometimes it is the reverse ; BAIN-1878-1,367.137

there are all degrees of difficulty up to the subtleties of professional
lore , and the abstruseness of science or philosophy .
BAIN-1878-1,367.138

The chief point is , that no branch can have a monopoly of the exercise
of seeing the general in the particular ; BAIN-1878-1,367.139

we can@ @not evade the necessity of the task . BAIN-1878-1,367.140

Whether one subject <P_368> is better than another for our education in
the matter depends upon whether it is possible to ease the labour of
conceiving the more difficult abstractions by some thing foreign to them
; whether mathematics or metaphysics can be made easier by toiling in
some foreign lines of thought , as Latin Grammar , English Grammar , or
Botany . BAIN-1878-1,368.141

It remains for anyone to show that such an influence exists ;
BAIN-1878-1,368.142

the arguments for the efficacy of grammatical discipline do not reach
the point ; BAIN-1878-1,368.143

they assume that grammar has a monopoly of exercising the mind upon
generalities , a point that has yet to be proved . BAIN-1878-1,368.144

Grammar as exemplified in the Latin and Greek languages is particularly
devoid of subtlety , until we come to certain delicacies of syntax , as
in the construction of the tenses and moods of the Verb .
BAIN-1878-1,368.145

The Parts of Speech are assumed without any definition ;
BAIN-1878-1,368.146

they are recognized by the Inflexion test , and not by their function in
the sentence ; being in that respect very different from what is found
in English Grammar . BAIN-1878-1,368.147

This has been made an argument for taking Latin before English - the
easy grammar before the abstruse one . BAIN-1878-1,368.148

But the greater should imply the less . BAIN-1878-1,368.149

If , at the proper age , a pupil has mastered English Grammar , he has ,
in point of reasoning power , gone a step beyond Latin or Greek grammar
, BAIN-1878-1,368.150

and should therefore be relieved from further labour for perfecting his
reasoning faculties in the grammatical field . BAIN-1878-1,368.151

It is in the exercise of translating from Latin or Greek into English ,
and <font> vice_versâ , <$$font> that the highest mental efforts are
made , and the greatest strain put upon the faculties .
BAIN-1878-1,368.152

Accordingly , it is to this exercise that the supposed training more
especially applies . BAIN-1878-1,368.153

Now the mere conquering of difficulty is not special to any <P_369> line
of study ; BAIN-1878-1,369.154

we must further enquire what are the special difficulties to be overcome
. BAIN-1878-1,369.155

The exercise of translating is a constructive effort :
BAIN-1878-1,369.156

given a passage , a certain amount of grammatical and verbal knowledge ,
and the use of a dictionary , the pupil has to divine the meaning .
BAIN-1878-1,369.157

There are three stages in the pupil's progress . BAIN-1878-1,369.158

In the first , his information and resources are unequal to the task ,
in which case the labour can do him very little good ;
BAIN-1878-1,369.159

we are not the better for working at a point where we can@ @not make any
progress . BAIN-1878-1,369.160

The second stage is where , by a certain measure of application , the
pupil can succeed ; in which case , the operation is exhilarating and
rewarding , and will be achieved . BAIN-1878-1,369.161

The highest stage is when the work can be performed with ease , and
without any effort at all ; in which stage there is no difficulty to be
overcome , and , therefore , very little effect accruing from the
exercise . BAIN-1878-1,369.162

We are to assume , what is not always the case , that the student can be
uniformly placed in the second situation , BAIN-1878-1,369.163

and are to enquire what there is in the particular work to train ,
discipline , or strengthen any of the higher faculties .
BAIN-1878-1,369.164

The translation exercise is a tentative process ; BAIN-1878-1,369.165

the meanings of the separate words have to be ascertained ;
BAIN-1878-1,369.166

and out of several meanings of any one word , a selection has to be made
such as to give sense along with the selected meanings of the others .
BAIN-1878-1,369.167

Various combinations have to be tried ; BAIN-1878-1,369.168

baffled at one attempt , the student must make a second and a third ,
until at last he alights upon something that pays a due regard to every
word and every peculiarity of grammar . BAIN-1878-1,369.169

A considerable amount of patient effort is demanded ,
BAIN-1878-1,369.170

and the long-continued exercise of patient effort must do something to
<P_370> form habits of application . BAIN-1878-1,370.171

There is not , however , any thing specific , unique , or unparalleled
in the operation . BAIN-1878-1,370.172

All study whatsoever needs a similar exercise of patient application ;
BAIN-1878-1,370.173

and many kinds of study take precisely the same form , namely ,
assigning to words alternative meanings , until some one meaning is hit
upon that resolves a difficulty . BAIN-1878-1,370.174

It is the application needed to solve riddles and conundrums .
BAIN-1878-1,370.175

To make out the meaning of a scientific proposition , to find the rule
that fits a given case , we must try and try again ; BAIN-1878-1,370.176

we reject one supposition after another as not consistent with some of
the conditions of the problem , BAIN-1878-1,370.177

and remain in patient thought until others come to mind .
BAIN-1878-1,370.178

It is in the interpretation of language that most difficulty is felt in
keeping the pupil always in the medium position above described ; giving
him work to do that shall neither exceed his powers , nor be too easy to
call them into full exercise . BAIN-1878-1,370.179

With a passage that the dictionary does not give the means of rendering
, the chance is that the attempt will not be seriously made , so that
the mind is not put on the <font> qui_vive <$$font> to drink in with
avidity the master's explanation . BAIN-1878-1,370.180

It is , moreover , generally admitted that the use of ' cribs ' does
away with the good of the situation , as regards translating into
English . BAIN-1878-1,370.181

Hence to secure any discipline at all , the operation of translating
from English into Latin and Greek must be kept up , although in itself
the least useful of any . BAIN-1878-1,370.182

The remark could not fail to be made that the operation of translating
is necessarily the same for ancient and for modern languages ;
BAIN-1878-1,370.183

and , therefore , any modern language yields whatever discipline belongs
to the situation . BAIN-1878-1,370.184

<P_371>

It can@ @not avail much , in reply , to advert to the peculiarities of
the Latin and Greek Grammars - the more highly inflexional character of
the languages ; BAIN-1878-1,371.186

for each language has its specialities , BAIN-1878-1,371.187

and the business of the pupil simply is to attend to them .
BAIN-1878-1,371.188

Every language must express the same facts of time and manner ,
BAIN-1878-1,371.189

and it can@ @not be very material , as far as regards mental discipline
, whether it is by inflexion or by auxiliaries . BAIN-1878-1,371.190

The fact of inflexion is sufficiently experienced in any case ;
BAIN-1878-1,371.191

and how far it is carried is an inferior consideration .
BAIN-1878-1,371.192

In Science , far more than in Languages , is it possible to adjust the
difficulties at each stage to the strength of the pupils , although ,
undoubtedly , to do this in any subject needs very good teaching .
BAIN-1878-1,371.193

The Grammar of language being most nearly allied to science , can be
best graduated in this way ; while , in the miscellaneous chances of
translation , difficulties start up without any reference to order or
the preparation of mind of the pupils , and the thing can@ @not be
otherwise . BAIN-1878-1,371.194

The argument from Training is applied to certain special points , some
of which will be considered under separate heads : BAIN-1878-1,371.195

such are the discipline in English and in Philology generally .
BAIN-1878-1,371.196

Much stress is laid upon the remark that it is necessary to know more
languages than our own to be delivered from certain snares of language ;
BAIN-1878-1,371.197

and the favourite example is the ambiguity of the verb ' to be . '
BAIN-1878-1,371.198

It so happens , however , that this very ambiguity - predication and
existence - was pointed out by Aristotle <paren> <font> Grote's
Aristotle <$$font> i. 181 <$$paren> . BAIN-1878-1,371.199

<P_372>

In the interesting Rectorial Address of Professor Helmholtz , delivered
this year to the University of Berlin , the merits and demerits of the
different academical institutions of Europe are freely indicated .
BAIN-1878-1,372.201

With reference to the English Universities , Oxford and Cambridge , the
professor thinks his own countrymen should endeavour to rival them in
two things . BAIN-1878-1,372.202

' In the first place , they develop in a very high degree among their
students , at the same time a lively sense of the beauties and the
youthful freshness of antiquity , and a taste for precision and elegance
of language ; BAIN-1878-1,372.203

this is seen in the fashion in which the students manage their mother
tongue . ' BAIN-1878-1,372.204

This must refer to the prominence still given to the classics in Oxford
and Cambridge ; BAIN-1878-1,372.205

yet , in Germany , the classics are far more studied than in England ,
whether we consider the universal compulsion of the Gymnasia , or the
special devotion manifested by a select number at the Universities .
BAIN-1878-1,372.206

Whatever good mere classical study can effect must have reached its
climax in Germany . BAIN-1878-1,372.207

As regards Oxford and Cambridge , and particularly Oxford , the best
parts of the teaching seem to be those that depart most from the
classical teaching , as , for example , the very great stress laid upon
writing a good English essay . BAIN-1878-1,372.208

It is often said , that even in a professedly classical examination , a
candidate's success is more due to his English Essay than to his
acquaintance with Greek and Roman authors . BAIN-1878-1,372.209

After refuting a number of the alleged utilities of classical learning ,
Mr. Sidgwick still reserves certain distinct <P_373> advantages as
belonging to the study of language . BAIN-1878-1,373.210

' In the first place , the materials here supplied to the student are
ready to hand in inexhaustible abundance and diversity .
BAIN-1878-1,373.211

Any page of any ancient author forms for the young student a string of
problems sufficiently complex and diverse to exercise his memory and
judgment in a great variety of ways . BAIN-1878-1,373.212

Again , from the exclusion of the distractions of the external senses ,
from the simplicity and definiteness of the classification which the
student has to apply , from the distinctness and obviousness of the
points that he is called on to observe , it seems probable that this
study calls forth <paren> especially in young boys <$$paren> a more
concentrated exercise of the faculties it does develop than any other
could easily do . BAIN-1878-1,373.213

If both the classical languages were to cease to be taught in early
education , valuable machinery would , I think , be lost , for which it
would be somewhat difficult to provide a perfect substitute . ' <paren>
<font> Essays on a Liberal Education , <$$font> p. 133 . <$$paren>
BAIN-1878-1,373.214

The materials here spoken of must mean the subject matter of the ancient
authors , and not simply the languages ; BAIN-1878-1,373.215

this , however , does not help the case , as the matter can be far
better given in translations . BAIN-1878-1,373.216

The second reason - the exclusion of the senses , and the simplicity and
definiteness of the classification to be applied - must refer to the
language part ; BAIN-1878-1,373.217

but it contains nothing special to the classical languages .
BAIN-1878-1,373.218

Moreover , as regards putting before the mind of a student distinct
issues , and still more in adapting these to the state of his faculties
and advancement , the learning of a language seems to me far inferior to
most other exercises . BAIN-1878-1,373.219

<P_374>

<heading>

IV. <font> A Knowledge of the Classics is the best preparation for the
Mother Tongue . <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,374.222

<$$heading>

This must have reference either <paren> 1 <$$paren> to the Vocables of
the Language , or <paren> 2 <$$paren> to the Grammar and Structure of
our composition . BAIN-1878-1,374.224

<paren> 1 <$$paren> As regards the vocables , we have to deal with the
presence of Latin and Greek words in English . BAIN-1878-1,374.225

There being several thousands of our words obtained directly or
indirectly from the Latin , it may be supposed that we should go direct
to the fountain head , and learn the meanings in the parent language .
BAIN-1878-1,374.226

But why may not we learn them exactly as they occur in the mother tongue
? BAIN-1878-1,374.227

What economy is there in learning them in another place ?
BAIN-1878-1,374.228

The answer must be , with a qualification to be given presently , that
the economy is all in favour of the first course . BAIN-1878-1,374.229

The reasons are plain . BAIN-1878-1,374.230

For one thing , if we learn the Latin words as they occur in English ,
we confine ourselves to those that have been actually transferred to
English ; whereas in learning Latin as a whole , we learn a great many
words that have never been imported into our own language .
BAIN-1878-1,374.231

The other reason is probably still stronger , namely , that the meanings
of a great number of the words have greatly changed since their
introduction into English ; BAIN-1878-1,374.232

hence , if we go back to the sources , we have a double task ;
BAIN-1878-1,374.233

we first learn the meaning in the original , and next the change of
meaning that followed the appropriation of the word by our selves .
BAIN-1878-1,374.234

The meaning of ' servant ' is easiest arrived at , by observing the use
of the word among ourselves , and by neglecting its Latin origin ;
BAIN-1878-1,374.235

if we are to be informed <P_375> what ' servus ' meant in Latin , we
must learn further that such is <font> not <$$font> the present meaning
; so that the directing of our attention to the original , although a
legitimate and interesting effort , does not pertain to the right use of
our own language . BAIN-1878-1,375.236

Besides the vast body of Latin words entering into our language , as a
co-equal factor with the Teutonic element , there is a sprinkling of
special terms both Latin and Greek , adopted for technical and
scientific uses . BAIN-1878-1,375.237

The appropriation of many of these is recent , BAIN-1878-1,375.238

and the process is still going on . BAIN-1878-1,375.239

Even with these , however , it is unsafe to refer to the original
tongues for the meaning ; BAIN-1878-1,375.240

we must still see what they mean as at present applied .
BAIN-1878-1,375.241

A knowledge of Greek would be a fair clue to the meaning of '
thermometer , ' and ' photometer , ' and a few others ;
BAIN-1878-1,375.242

but for the vast mass of these appropriations , it gives no clue
whatever , BAIN-1878-1,375.243

or else it puts us on the wrong scent . BAIN-1878-1,375.244

' Barometer , ' as ' weight-measure , ' would be most suitably applied
to the common beam and scales ; BAIN-1878-1,375.245

the real meaning would never be guessed . BAIN-1878-1,375.246

So , ' eudiometer {COM:sic} ' can@ @not suggest its meaning to a Greek
scholar ; BAIN-1878-1,375.247

' hippopotamus ' is equally enigmatic . BAIN-1878-1,375.248

Of the ' ologies ' very few correspond to their derivation .
BAIN-1878-1,375.249

We have such conflicting names as ' astrology , astronomy ; ' '
phrenology , psychology ' ; ' geology , geography , ' ' logic ,
logographer , logomachy ' ; ' theology , theogony ' ; ' aerostatics ,
pneumatics . ' BAIN-1878-1,375.250

' Theology ' being the science of ' God , ' ' philology ' should be the
science of ' friendship ' or the affections . BAIN-1878-1,375.251

It was remarked by Mr. Lowe that the word ' aneurism , ' to a Greek
scholar , would be misleading ; BAIN-1878-1,375.252

he would not at once suppose that it is a derivative of the Greek verb
{COM:greek_omitted} , ' to widen . ' BAIN-1878-1,375.253

So <P_376> with the word ' methodist , ' the knowledge of Greek is not a
help but a snare . BAIN-1878-1,376.254

It is well understood to be a reason for borrowing foreign words , that
they do not suggest any meaning but the one intended to be coupled with
them . BAIN-1878-1,376.255

In obtaining words for new general ideas , our native terms contain
misleading associations ; BAIN-1878-1,376.256

the great virtue of the names - ' Chemistry , ' ' Algebra , ' '
rheumatism , ' ' hydrated , ' ' artery , ' ' colloid ' - is that we do
not know what they originally meant ; BAIN-1878-1,376.257

any designation that we could invent in our own language for such vast
sciences as Chemistry and Algebra would contain some narrow and
inadequate conception which would be a perpetual stumbling-block to the
learner . BAIN-1878-1,376.258

The only qualification to the principle of learning the meanings of
words from present use solely , is , that the classical words in our
language are mostly derivatives from a small number of roots ; so that a
knowledge of the meanings of say a_hundred roots assists in discovering
the meanings of thousands of derivatives . BAIN-1878-1,376.259

Not but that we must still check every derivative by present use ; yet
the memory is considerably assisted by a knowledge of the primitive
meaning as partly retained in the numerous compounds .
BAIN-1878-1,376.260

We must observe the present employment of the words - ' agent , ' '
actor , ' ' enact , ' ' action , ' ' transaction ' ; {TEXT:;'}
BAIN-1878-1,376.261

nevertheless , when we are informed of the original sense of the root '
ago , ' we are enabled thereby to obtain a speedier hold of the meanings
of the derivations . BAIN-1878-1,376.262

So with the Greek roots , - ' logos , ' ' nomos , ' ' metron , ' ' zoon
, ' ' theos , ' &c. BAIN-1878-1,376.263

This advantage , however , is attainable without entering upon a course
of classical study . BAIN-1878-1,376.264

The roots actually employed in the language <P_377> are separated and
presented apart , and their derivatives set forth ; BAIN-1878-1,377.265

and we are thus taught exactly that portion of the Latin and Greek
vocabulary that serves the end in view . BAIN-1878-1,377.266

<paren> 2 <$$paren> The argument as applied to the Grammar or Syntax of
our own language is equally at fault . BAIN-1878-1,377.267

The natural course in learning the grammatical order of English
sentences is to study and practise English composition .
BAIN-1878-1,377.268

To be habituated to different sentence arrangements must be rather
obstructive than otherwise . BAIN-1878-1,377.269

The reference to any other language can only be a matter of curiosity .
BAIN-1878-1,377.270

If it ever happened that our language could borrow an effective
arrangement of syntax from any other language , the borrowing should
have taken place once for all , so that all succeeding ages might adopt
it as a naturalized usage . BAIN-1878-1,377.271

In connection with this argument may be taken the frequent allegation
that the classics are an introduction to general Literature , as
affording the best models of taste and style ; in studying which we
improve our compositions in our own language . BAIN-1878-1,377.272

There is here a host of loose assumptions . BAIN-1878-1,377.273

The excellence of the ancient writers is not uniform ,
BAIN-1878-1,377.274

and some assistance must be given to the pupil in discriminating the
merits from the defects , a lesson that would be best begun in our own
language . BAIN-1878-1,377.275

Moreover , the remark just made applies again . BAIN-1878-1,377.276

Whatever effects can be transferred by us to our own compositions can@
@not remain to be transferred now . BAIN-1878-1,377.277

The vast series of classical scholars that have written in the modern
languages ought long before this time to have embodied whatever beauties
can be passed on from the ancient literatures . BAIN-1878-1,377.278

In modern European literature , <P_378> there is a large school of
imitators of the ancient authors , through whom we can derive at second
hand all the characteristic effects possible to be reproduced in modern
compositions . BAIN-1878-1,378.279

<heading>

V. <font> The Classical Languages are an introduction to Philology .
<$$font> BAIN-1878-1,378.281

<$$heading>

This argument is one of the recently discovered makeweights on the side
of classical teaching . BAIN-1878-1,378.283

The science of Philology is a new science ; BAIN-1878-1,378.284

and before launching it into the present controversy , its claims as a
branch of school or college education should be established on
independent grounds . BAIN-1878-1,378.285

Having its ultimate roots in the human mind , like a great many other
sciences , it is a recondite branch of the vast subject of Sociology ,
or Society , viewed both as structure and as history .
BAIN-1878-1,378.286

Its immediate sources are the existing languages of mankind , which are
made the subject of comparative study , with a view to trace community
as well as diversity of structure <paren> whence springs <font>
Universal Grammar <$$font> <$$paren> and also historical connection and
derivation . BAIN-1878-1,378.287

Such a subject may enter into the curriculum of the higher education ,
but not at a very early stage ; BAIN-1878-1,378.288

it must allow priority to the more fundamental sciences .
BAIN-1878-1,378.289

Assuming that the subject is to be received among school and college
subjects , the bearing of the classical languages is somewhat
insignificant . BAIN-1878-1,378.290

Latin and Greek , as usually taught , are both defective and redundant
in their bearing on General Philology . BAIN-1878-1,378.291

They are only two languages out of a multitude that have to be more or
less minutely compared . BAIN-1878-1,378.292

The examples taken from other languages , Sanscrit for example , are of
as great <P_379> importance as those from Greek and Latin ,
BAIN-1878-1,379.293

and we can@ @not be expected to make an equal study of all these
languages . BAIN-1878-1,379.294

In point of fact , we must be taught Philology by examples cited from
many languages , which we do not pay any further attention to ;
BAIN-1878-1,379.295

and the Greek and Latin examples may be obtained in the same partial way
. BAIN-1878-1,379.296

The full knowledge of the Greek and Latin authors does not avail us for
this subject . BAIN-1878-1,379.297

These are the leading arguments in favour of the present system of
classical study . BAIN-1878-1,379.298

The supposition is that by their cumulative effect they justify the
continuance of the system after the original occasion of its
introduction has ceased . BAIN-1878-1,379.299

On reviewing the tenor of these arguments , however , we find that ,
after all , they do not support the real contention ; which is , that
Latin and Greek , and they alone , as an undivided couple , shall
continue to form the staple of our higher education .
BAIN-1878-1,379.300

Several of the arguments apply equally to modern languages ,
BAIN-1878-1,379.301

and others would be met by the retention of Latin , by itself .
BAIN-1878-1,379.302

The case is not complete until we view the arguments on the other side .
BAIN-1878-1,379.303

<P_380>

<heading>

I. <font> The Cost . <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,380.306

<$$heading>

The amount of time consumed in classical teaching during the best years
of youth is well known to be very great , although not everywhere the
same . BAIN-1878-1,380.308

In most classical schools in this country more than half the time of the
pupils is occupied with Latin and Greek for a number of years ;
BAIN-1878-1,380.309

and not long ago , nearly the whole time was taken up in many of our
seminaries . BAIN-1878-1,380.310

In Germany , at the Gymnasia , six hours a week are given to Latin , for
four years , and seven hours a week for other two years <paren> age from
twelve to eighteen <$$paren> : BAIN-1878-1,380.311

seven hours a week are given to Greek , for two years , and six hours a
week for other two years <paren> age from fourteen to eighteen <$$paren>
. BAIN-1878-1,380.312

At the University , it is optional to pursue Classics .
BAIN-1878-1,380.313

The question , therefore , arises - Are the benefits commensurate with
this enormous expenditure of time and strength ? BAIN-1878-1,380.314

We might grant that a small portion of time - two or three hours a week
, for one or two years - might possibly be repaid by the advantages ;
BAIN-1878-1,380.315

but we are utterly unable to concede the equivalence of the results to
the actual outlay . BAIN-1878-1,380.316

In the more recent system of teaching , under which some attention is
given to the history and the institutions of Greece and Rome , a certain
amount of valuable knowledge is intermixed with the useless parts of the
teaching ; BAIN-1878-1,380.317

and for this a small figure must be entered on the credit side .
BAIN-1878-1,380.318

But all such knowledge could be imparted in a mere fraction of the time
given to the languages . BAIN-1878-1,380.319

The classical system has been the practical exclusion of all other
studies from the secondary or grammar <P_381> schools .
BAIN-1878-1,381.320

For a long time , the only subject tolerated in addition was a very
elementary portion of Mathematics - Euclid and a little Algebra .
BAIN-1878-1,381.321

The pressure of opinion has compelled the introduction of new branches -
as English , Modern Languages , and Physical Sciences ;
BAIN-1878-1,381.322

but either these are little more than a formality , BAIN-1878-1,381.323

or the pupils are subjected to a crushing burden of distracting studies
. BAIN-1878-1,381.324

To be in school five hours a day , with two or three hours for home
tasks , is too great a strain on youths between ten and sixteen .
BAIN-1878-1,381.325

Moreover , in the evening preparations , it is found that the classical
lessons absorb the greater part of the attention . BAIN-1878-1,381.326

The argument from disproportionate cost is sometimes met by alleging the
defectiveness of the usual methods of teaching the languages ;
BAIN-1878-1,381.327

and many short and easy methods have been propounded .
BAIN-1878-1,381.328

Experience has not yet shown any means of seriously reducing labour ;
BAIN-1878-1,381.329

and the thing is not likely . BAIN-1878-1,381.330

A vast acquisition is unavoidably involved in any cultivated language .
BAIN-1878-1,381.331

The Grammar and the Vocabulary can@ @not be committed to memory without
a large expenditure of strength ; BAIN-1878-1,381.332

and the authors to be read have each their special peculiarities to be
mastered . BAIN-1878-1,381.333

The observance of the methods of good teaching will make a considerable
and important difference , BAIN-1878-1,381.334

<P_382>

but will not dispense with the demand of two or three hours a day for
several years to attain a moderate proficiency in Latin and Greek .
BAIN-1878-1,382.336

Moreover , the system as practised , throws away the best known device
for accelerating lingual study ; namely , allowing a familiarity with
the subject matter of the several authors to be attained in advance .
BAIN-1878-1,382.337

The pupils in the Latin and Greek classes have not as yet been initiated
into any important subject ; BAIN-1878-1,382.338

and what renders the study tolerable is the large devotion of time to
the one theme of universal interest - personal narrative .
BAIN-1878-1,382.339

<heading>

II. <font> The mixture of conflicting studies impedes the course of the
learner . <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,382.341

<$$heading>

On the supposition that the classical languages are taught , not in
their simple character as languages , but with a view to logical
training , training in English , literary culture , general philology ,
- the carrying out of so many applications at one time , and in one
connection , is fatal to progress in any . BAIN-1878-1,382.343

Although the languages may never actually be used , the linguistic
difficulties of the acquisition must be encountered all the same ;
BAIN-1878-1,382.344

and the attention of the pupil must be engrossed in the first instance
with overcoming these difficulties . BAIN-1878-1,382.345

It is , therefore , an obvious mistake in teaching method to awaken the
mind to other topics and considerations , while the first point has not
been reached . BAIN-1878-1,382.346

I have everywhere maintained as a first principle of the economy or
conduct of the Understanding , that separate subjects should be made
separate lessons . BAIN-1878-1,382.347

This is not easy when two studies are embodied in the same composition ,
as language <P_383> and meaning ; BAIN-1878-1,383.348

in that case the separation can be effected only by keeping one of the
two in the background throughout each lesson . BAIN-1878-1,383.349

The least questionable effect of classical study <paren> although one
equally arising from modern languages <$$paren> is the exercise of
composing in our own language through translation . BAIN-1878-1,383.350

Still , it is but a divided attention that we can give to the exercise .
BAIN-1878-1,383.351

We are under the strain of divining the meaning of the original ,
BAIN-1878-1,383.352

and can@ @not give much thought to the best mode of rendering it in our
own language . BAIN-1878-1,383.353

This is necessarily a varying position . BAIN-1878-1,383.354

There may be occasions when the sense of the original is got without
trouble , and when we are free to apply ourselves to the expression - in
English , or whatever language we are using . BAIN-1878-1,383.355

But this is all a matter of chance ; BAIN-1878-1,383.356

and such desultory fits of consideration are not the way to make
progress in a vast study . BAIN-1878-1,383.357

Moreover , the master is a man chosen because he is a proficient in
classics , not because he has any special or distinguishing acquaintance
with the modern tongue . BAIN-1878-1,383.358

Now it must seem incontestable that the only way to overtake an
extensive and difficult department of information and training , is to
proceed methodically , and with exclusive devotion of mind at stated
times , under the guidance of an expert in the department .
BAIN-1878-1,383.359

All experience shows that only very inferior English composition is the
result of translating from Latin or Greek into English .
BAIN-1878-1,383.360

There is necessarily a good deal of straining to make the English fit
the original ; while the greater number of the most useful forms of the
language are never brought into requisition at all .
BAIN-1878-1,383.361

There is something plausible in the supposition of cultivating all the
faculties at one stroke , as if an exercise <P_384> could be invented
that could teach spelling , cooking , and dancing , simultaneously .
BAIN-1878-1,384.362

Because the same piece of imposition involves grammar , rhetoric ,
scientific information and logical method , we are not to infer that it
should be the text for all these lessons at one time .
BAIN-1878-1,384.363

It is not merely that the way to carry the mind forward in the several
departments is , to keep it continuously fixed on each for a certain
duration ; BAIN-1878-1,384.364

equally pertinent is the fact that , although every passage occurring in
a lesson must needs embody language , rhetoric , and information , the
same passage does not equally suit for all the applications .
BAIN-1878-1,384.365

It may be true that classical education is many-sided ;
BAIN-1878-1,384.366

but what if it is defective on each side ? BAIN-1878-1,384.367

' The very fact that the same instrument is made to serve various
educational purposes , which seems at first sight a very plausible
argument in its favour , is really , for the majority of boys , a
serious disadvantage . ' <paren> Sidgwick , <font> ut supra , <$$font>
p. 127 <$$paren> BAIN-1878-1,384.368

The study of fine Literary effects can@ @not be carried on in connection
with Latin and Greek , not only because of the distraction of the mind
with other things , but because of the random , uncertain ,
inconsecutive way that the examples are brought forward .
BAIN-1878-1,384.369

Even if there were no order whatever in the parts of a subject , still
the irregular presentation of these would be adverse to a cumulative
impression . BAIN-1878-1,384.370

The same would apply to General Philology , if that were regarded as one
of the uses of classical study . BAIN-1878-1,384.371

The conclusion on the whole is , that the teaching of language is most
rationally conducted when it stands on the original footing of the
classical languages in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries , <font>
i.e. <$$font> when the language <P_385> itself , as a means of
interpretation and communication , is the fact , and the whole fact .
BAIN-1878-1,385.372

The attention of the pupils could then be kept to the one point of
mastering grammar and vocables : BAIN-1878-1,385.373

the authors studied would be studied with this sole aim .
BAIN-1878-1,385.374

The language teacher is not an interpreter and expounder of history ,
poetry , oratory and philosophy , but an instrument for enabling the
pupils to extract these from their original sources in some foreign
tongue . BAIN-1878-1,385.375

<heading>

III. <font> The Study is devoid of interest . <$$font>
BAIN-1878-1,385.377

<$$heading>

This may not be universally admitted , BAIN-1878-1,385.379

but it is sufficiently attested for the purposes of the present argument
. BAIN-1878-1,385.380

There is , first , the dryness inseparable from the learning of a
language , especially at the commencement . BAIN-1878-1,385.381

There is , next , the circumstance that the literary interest in the
authors is not felt , for want of due preparation . BAIN-1878-1,385.382

It is a fact that , but for the never-failing resource of sensation
narrative , by which we arouse the dormant intellect of the child in the
second standard , the reading of classical authors would be intolerable
at the early age when they are entered upon . BAIN-1878-1,385.383

It is the nature of science to be more or less dry ; BAIN-1878-1,385.384

until its commanding power is felt the path of the learner is thorny .
BAIN-1878-1,385.385

But literature is nothing , if not interesting . BAIN-1878-1,385.386

There should be even in a course of Belles-Lettres , a certain amount of
science , in the shape of generalities and technicalities ;
BAIN-1878-1,385.387

but these are soon passed , BAIN-1878-1,385.388

and the mind is free to expatiate in the rich pastures of the literary
domain . BAIN-1878-1,385.389

Literature , instead of being the dismal part of the school exercises ,
should be the alternative <P_386> and relief from Mathematics and the
elements of Science generally . BAIN-1878-1,386.390

This can@ @not be , if the pupils are thrust prematurely upon a foreign
literature while mastering several new vocabularies .
BAIN-1878-1,386.391

It is now plain to the best educationists , that our own literature must
be the first to awaken literary interest , and prepare the way for
universal literature . BAIN-1878-1,386.392

<heading>

IV. <font> The study panders too much to authority in matter of opinion
. <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,386.394

<$$heading>

The classical student is unduly impressed with the views promulgated by
the Greek and Roman authors , from the very length of time that he is
occupied with them . BAIN-1878-1,386.396

The authority of Aristotle , once paramount in the world of thought ,
has long ceased to be infallible , BAIN-1878-1,386.397

but the reference to his supposed opinions is still out of proportion to
any value that can now belong to them . BAIN-1878-1,386.398

Any views of his as to the best form of government , as to happiness and
duty , are interesting as information , but useless as practice .
BAIN-1878-1,386.399

A curious and expressive incident occurred at a recent meeting of the
British Association . BAIN-1878-1,386.400

Sir William Thomson , in the course of a paper read before his section ,
desired his hearers , when they went to their homes , to draw their pens
through a certain paper of his in their copies of the ' Proceedings of
the Royal Society . ' BAIN-1878-1,386.401

It would be well if the example were imitated by every philosopher that
has happened to change any of his opinions . BAIN-1878-1,386.402

Even if we accorded to Aristotle a commanding sagacity in Ethics and in
Politics , we should like to have his latest decisions as to the value
of what we now possess as his writings . BAIN-1878-1,386.403

<P_387>

<heading>

<font> Note on recent views of the Classical question . <$$font>
BAIN-1878-1,387.406

<$$heading>

<font> Mr. Henry Sidgwick . <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,387.408

- The article that has been repeatedly referred to concludes with the
following recommendations as to the subjects suitable for Higher School
education . BAIN-1878-1,387.409

' I think that a course of instruction in our own language and
literature , and a course of instruction in natural science , ought to
form recognised and substantive parts of our school system . '
BAIN-1878-1,387.410

' I think also that more stress ought to be laid on the study of French
. ' BAIN-1878-1,387.411

To make room for these additions , the obvious remedy is ' to exclude
Greek from the curriculum , at least in its earlier stage . '
BAIN-1878-1,387.412

' It is supposed that there is a saving of time in beginning the study
of Greek early . BAIN-1878-1,387.413

I am inclined to think that very much the reverse is the case , and that
, if several languages have to be learnt , much time is gained by
untying the faggot and breaking them separately . BAIN-1878-1,387.414

There are two classes for whom the present system of education is more
or less natural , - the clergy , and persons with a literary bias and
the prospect of sufficient leisure to indulge it amply .
BAIN-1878-1,387.415

Boys with such prospects , and a previous training of the kind I
advocate , would in the average feel , as they approached the last stage
of their school life , an interest in Greek strong enough to make them
take to it very rapidly . ' BAIN-1878-1,387.416

' The advantage that young children have over young men in catching a
spoken language , has led some to infer that they have an equal
superiority in learning to read a language that they do not hear spoken
; an inference which , I think , is contrary to experience . '
BAIN-1878-1,387.417

<font> Mr. Alexander J. Ellis . <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,387.418

- In a Lecture , on the Acquisition of Languages , delivered before the
College of Preceptors , Mr. Ellis criticizes severely the English
School system . BAIN-1878-1,387.419

He remarks on the absurdity of talking of the humanizing effect of the
Latin and Greek languages , of the grand literatures they contain , and
so on - when the one condition is wanting , namely , ' that those who
acquire them should be able to use them . ' BAIN-1878-1,387.420

' The tree of language is indeed vast in our schools ;
BAIN-1878-1,387.421

but it is , after all , but <P_388> an overgrown weed .
BAIN-1878-1,388.422

Good masters learn to hang many a garland on its unsightly knots by the
way , and to bend many of its branches into unnatural but more or less
useful directions . ' BAIN-1878-1,388.423

' These results are not legitimate deductions from teaching languages .
' BAIN-1878-1,388.424

' Every speaker is bound to know his own language first , without
relation to other languages . ' BAIN-1878-1,388.425

' Lessons in language should be supplemented with lessons on things .
BAIN-1878-1,388.426

We must have something to speak and write about besides language itself
. ' BAIN-1878-1,388.427

After English , should come German and French . BAIN-1878-1,388.428

' Hitherto , German and French have been regarded as the accomplishments
, and Latin and Greek as the staple , of literary education .
BAIN-1878-1,388.429

It is time to reverse the terms . BAIN-1878-1,388.430

Latin and Greek have drifted into being accomplishments . '
BAIN-1878-1,388.431

' If a boy is " up " in English at ten ; knows his German , to the
extent indicated at twelve , and his French at fourteen ; he will be a
better Latin scholar at sixteen , and Greek scholar at eighteen , than
the majority of those who leave our public schools . '
BAIN-1878-1,388.432

' Literature is one of the very last things to be attacked .
BAIN-1878-1,388.433

To appreciate it , requires much education , often much experience of
life , and great familiarity with the language , and often with social
habits and customs . ' BAIN-1878-1,388.434

<font> Mr. Matthew Arnold . <$$font> BAIN-1878-1,388.435

- At the close of his Report to ' The Schools' Inquiry Commission ' on
the Middle Schools of Germany , Mr. Arnold adverts to the conflict of
the modern spirit with the old exclusive classical system ,
BAIN-1878-1,388.436

and indicates what he considers the true solution . BAIN-1878-1,388.437

' The ideal of a general , liberal training is , to carry us to a
knowledge of ourselves and the world . BAIN-1878-1,388.438

We are called to this knowledge by special aptitudes which are born with
us : BAIN-1878-1,388.439

the grand thing in teaching is to have faith that some aptitudes for
this everyone has . BAIN-1878-1,388.440

This one's special aptitudes are for knowing men - the study of the
humanities ; BAIN-1878-1,388.441

that one's special aptitudes are for knowing the world - the study of
nature . BAIN-1878-1,388.442

The circle of knowledge comprehends both , BAIN-1878-1,388.443

and we should all have some notion , at any rate , of the whole circle
of knowledge . BAIN-1878-1,388.444

<P_389>

The rejection of the humanities by the realists , the rejection of the
study of nature by the humanists , are alike ignorant .
BAIN-1878-1,389.446

He whose aptitudes carry him to the study of nature should have some
notion of the humanities ; BAIN-1878-1,389.447

he whose aptitudes carry him to the humanities should have some notion
of the phenomena and laws of nature . BAIN-1878-1,389.448

Evidently , therefore , the beginnings of a liberal culture should be
the same for both . BAIN-1878-1,389.449

The mother tongue , the elements of Latin and of the chief modern
languages , the elements of history , of arithmetic and geometry , of
geography , and of the knowledge of nature , should be the studies of
the lower classes in all secondary schools , BAIN-1878-1,389.450

and should be the same for all boys at this stage . BAIN-1878-1,389.451

So far , therefore , there is no reason for a division of schools .
BAIN-1878-1,389.452

But then comes a bifurcation , according to the boy's aptitudes and aims
. BAIN-1878-1,389.453

Either the study of the humanities or the study of nature is henceforth
to be the predominating part of his instruction . ' BAIN-1878-1,389.454

<P_390>

Chapter XI . BAIN-1878-1,390.456

The renovated curriculum . BAIN-1878-1,390.457

On the supposition that Languages are in no sense the main part of
Education , but only helps or adjuncts under definite circumstances ,
the inference seems to be , that they should not , as at present ,
occupy a central or leading position , but stand apart as side subjects
available to those that require them . BAIN-1878-1,390.458

I conceive that the curriculum of Secondary or Higher Education should ,
from first to last , have for its staple the various branches of
knowledge culture , including our own language . BAIN-1878-1,390.459

The principal part of each day should be devoted to these subjects ;
while there should be a certain amount of spare time to devote to
languages and other branches that are not required of all , but may be
suitable to the circumstances of individuals . BAIN-1878-1,390.460

The essentials of a curriculum of the Higher Education may be summed up
under three heads : - I. Science , including the Primary Sciences , as
already set forth ; some one or more of the Natural History Sciences -
Mineralogy , Botany , Zoology , Geology ; to which may be added
Geography . BAIN-1878-1,390.461

To what extent this vast course should enter into general education
<P_391> has already been sufficiently discussed . BAIN-1878-1,391.462

Our present purpose does not require the nice adjustment of details .
BAIN-1878-1,391.463

II. A course of the Humanities , under which I include <paren> 1
<$$paren> History , and the various branches of Social Science that can
be conveniently embraced in a methodical course . BAIN-1878-1,391.464

Mere narrative History would be merged in the Science of Government ,
and of Social Insitutions , to which could be added Political Economy ,
and , if thought fit , an outline of Jurisprudence or Law .
BAIN-1878-1,391.465

This would put in the proper place , and in the most advantageous order
of study , one large department recently incorporated with the teaching
of the classical languages , by way of redeeming their infertility .
BAIN-1878-1,391.466

<paren> 2 <$$paren> Under the Humanities might next be included a view ,
more or less full , of Universal Literature . BAIN-1878-1,391.467

Presupposing those explanations of the Literary Qualities and Arts of
Style that should be associated , in the first instance , with our own
language , and also some familiarity with our own Literature , we could
proceed to survey the course and development of the Literature of the
World through its principal streams , including of necessity the Greek
and Roman Classics . BAIN-1878-1,391.468

It is needless to add that this should be done without demanding a study
of the original languages . BAIN-1878-1,391.469

How far a Philosophy of Literature should penetrate the survey I do not
at present enquire . BAIN-1878-1,391.470

Materials already exist in abundance for such a course .
BAIN-1878-1,391.471

It is the beau-ideal of Rhetoric and Belles-Lettres as conceived by the
chief modern authorities in the department , as for example , Campbell
and Blair in the {TEXT:missing_"the"} last century .
BAIN-1878-1,391.472

Only I should propose that the elements of Rhetoric , in connection with
our own Literature , should lead the way . BAIN-1878-1,391.473

Such a course would carry out , with effect and <P_392> thoroughness ,
what is very imperfectly attempted in conjunction with the present
classical teaching . BAIN-1878-1,392.474

A tolerably complete survey of the chief authors of Greece and Rome ,
with studies upon select portions of the most important , could be
achieved in the first instance ; BAIN-1878-1,392.475

and it might be possible to include also a profitable acquaintance with
the great modern literatures . BAIN-1878-1,392.476

III. English Composition and Literature . BAIN-1878-1,392.477

- This might either pervade the entire curriculum , or be concentrated
in the earlier portions , the General Literature being deferred .
BAIN-1878-1,392.478

What it comprises , according to my view , has been sufficiently stated
. BAIN-1878-1,392.479

The survey of Universal Literature , would operate beneficially upon the
comprehension of our own . BAIN-1878-1,392.480

These three departments appear to me to have the best claims to be
called a Liberal Education . BAIN-1878-1,392.481

The deviation from the received views is more in form than in substance
. BAIN-1878-1,392.482

I would not call Science alone a Liberal Education , although a course
that implied a fair knowledge of the Primary Sciences , a certain amount
of Natural Science , and a wide grasp of Sociology , would be no mean
equipment for the battle of life . BAIN-1878-1,392.483

I think , however , that the materials of Sociology might be
accumulating all through the curriculum , and might serve to alleviate
the severity of the strictly scientific course . BAIN-1878-1,392.484

I think , moreover , that a Liberal Education would not be generally
considered complete without Literature , although people must needs
differ as to the amount . BAIN-1878-1,392.485

I hold that the three departments stated are sufficiently comprehensive
for all the purposes of a general education , <P_393> and that no other
should be exacted as a condition of the University Degree - the received
mode of stamping an educated man . BAIN-1878-1,393.486

Such a course should be so conducted as to leave a portion of time and
strength for additional subjects . BAIN-1878-1,393.487

An average of two to three hours a day might be occupied with the
continuous teaching in the three departments . BAIN-1878-1,393.488

Assuming a six years' curriculum - covering the Secondary School and the
University courses - it is easy to see that a large amount of thorough
instruction might be imparted in those limits ; leaving perhaps one
third of the pupils' available time , for other things .
BAIN-1878-1,393.489

