<BEGIN_baker-1742-2>

<P_177>

<heading>

Chap. XXI . BAKER-1742-2,177.4

<font> Of the <$$font> Louse . BAKER-1742-2,177.5

<$$heading>

The <font> Louse <$$font> has so transparent a Shell or Skin , that we
are able to discover more of what passes within its Body , than in most
other living Creatures ; which renders it a delightful Object for the
Microscope . BAKER-1742-2,177.7

It has naturally three Divisions , <font> viz. <$$font> The Head , the
Breast , and the Belly or Tail-part . BAKER-1742-2,177.8

- In the Head appear two fine black Eyes , with a Horn that has five
Joints , and is surrounded with Hairs , standing before each Eye ;
BAKER-1742-2,177.9

from the End of the Nose or Snout there is a pointed projecting Part ,
serving for a Sheath or Case to a Sucker , or Piercer , which the
Creature thrusts into the Skin , to draw out the Blood or Humours it
feeds on , as it has no Mouth that opens . BAKER-1742-2,177.10

This Piercer or Sucker is judged to be seven_hundred times slenderer
than a Hair ; BAKER-1742-2,177.11

is contained in another Case within the first , BAKER-1742-2,177.12

and can be thrust out or drawn in at Pleasure . BAKER-1742-2,177.13

The Breast is marked very prettily in the Middle , the Skin thereof
transparent , and <P_178> full of little Pits . BAKER-1742-2,178.14

From the under Part of it proceed six Legs , each having five Joints ,
their Skin resembling Shagreen , except towards the Ends , where it
appears smoother . BAKER-1742-2,178.15

Each Leg terminates in two hooked Claws of unequal Length and Size ,
which it uses as we would a Thumb and middle Finger .
BAKER-1742-2,178.16

There are Hairs between these Claws , as well as over all the Legs .
BAKER-1742-2,178.17

On the Back of the Tail-part we may discern some Ring-like Divisions ,
abundance of Hairs , and a sort of Marks that look like the Strokes of a
Rod on one that has been whipt . BAKER-1742-2,178.18

The Skin of the Belly seems like Shagreen , BAKER-1742-2,178.19

and towards the lower End is clear and full of little Pits ;
BAKER-1742-2,178.20

at the Extremity of the Tail are two little semicircular Parts , covered
all over with Hairs , which serve to conceal the Anus .
BAKER-1742-2,178.21

When the <font> Louse <$$font> moves its Legs , the Motion of the
Muscles <paren> which all unite in an oblong dark Spot in the Middle of
its Breast <$$paren> may be distinguished perfectly :
BAKER-1742-2,178.22

and so may the Motion of the Muscles in the Head be , when it moves its
Horns . BAKER-1742-2,178.23

The Motion of the Muscles is also visible in the several Articulations
of the Legs . BAKER-1742-2,178.24

We may likewise see the various Ramifications of the <P_179> Veins and
Arteries <paren> which are white <$$paren> with the Pulse regularly
beating in the Arteries . BAKER-1742-2,179.25

But the most surprising of all is the peristaltic Motion of the
Intestines , continued from the Stomach along all the Guts down to the
Anus . BAKER-1742-2,179.26

If a <font> Louse <$$font> , when very hungry , be placed on the Back of
the Hand , it will thrust its Sucker into the Skin , BAKER-1742-2,179.27

and the Blood may be seen passing in a fine Stream to the Fore-Part of
the Head ; where , falling into a roundish Cavity , it passes again , in
a like Stream , to another circular Receptacle in the Middle of the Head
; from thence through a smaller Vessel to the Breast ; and then to a Gut
that reaches to the hinder Part of the Body , where in a Curve it turns
a little upwards . BAKER-1742-2,179.28

- In the Breast and Gut the Blood is without Intermission moved with
great Force , especially in the Gut , and that with such a strong
Propulsion downwards and such a Contraction of the Gut as is amazing :
which continual and strong Action of the Stomach and Bowels upon the
Food of this Creature , to further its Digestion , is worthy to be
consider'd . BAKER-1742-2,179.29

- In the upper Part of the crooked ascending Gut just mentioned , the
propelled Blood stands still , BAKER-1742-2,179.30

and seems to undergo a Separation : some of it becoming clear and
waterish , while certain <P_180> little black Particles pass downwards
to the Anus . BAKER-1742-2,180.31

If a <font> Louse <$$font> be placed on its Back , two bloody darkish
Spots appear ; the larger in the Middle of the Body , and the lesser
towards the Tail . BAKER-1742-2,180.32

In the larger Spot a white Film or Bladder contracts and dilates upwards
and downwards from the Head towards the Tail ; the Pulse of which is
followed by a Pulse of the dark bloody Spot , in or over which the white
Bladder seems to lye . BAKER-1742-2,180.33

This Motion of Systole and Diastole , is seen best when the <font> Louse
<$$font> grows weak . BAKER-1742-2,180.34

The white pulsing Bladder seems to be the Heart , BAKER-1742-2,180.35

for on pricking it the <font> Louse <$$font> instantly dies .
BAKER-1742-2,180.36

In a large <font> Louse <$$font> the Pulsation may be seen in the Back ,
but the white Film not without turning the Belly upwards .
BAKER-1742-2,180.37

The lower darkish Spot Dr. Harvey conjectur'd to be the Excrements in
the Guts . BAKER-1742-2,180.38

<font> Lice <$$font> are not <font> Hermaphrodites , <$$font> as has
erroneously been imagined , but Male and Female . BAKER-1742-2,180.39

Mr. Leeuwenhoek discover'd that the Males have Stings in their Tails ,
but the Females none : BAKER-1742-2,180.40

and supposes the smarting Pain they sometimes give arises from their
Stinging , when made uneasy by Pressure <P_181> or otherwise ; since ,
if roughly handled , they may be seen to thrust out their Stings ; and
as he felt little Pain or Uneasiness from the Sucker or Piercer , tho'
seven or eight were feeding on his Hand at once . BAKER-1742-2,181.41

The Females lay Eggs or Nitts , whence <font> young Lice <$$font> come
forth , perfect in all their Members , and undergo no farther Change but
an Increase of Size . BAKER-1742-2,181.42

Mr. Leeuwenhoek being desirous to learn the Proportion and Time of
their Increase , put two Females into a black Stocking , which he wore
both Night and Day ; BAKER-1742-2,181.43

and found that in six Days one of them had laid fifty Eggs ,
BAKER-1742-2,181.44

and upon dissecting it saw as many more in the Ovary ; whence he
concludes , that in twelve Days it would have laid an_hundred Eggs .
BAKER-1742-2,181.45

These Eggs hatching in six Days <paren> which he found to be their
natural Time <$$paren> would probably produce fifty Males and as many
Females : BAKER-1742-2,181.46

and these Females coming to full Growth in eighteen Days , might each of
them be supposed , after twelve Days more , to lay also an_hundred Eggs
; which Eggs in six Days farther <paren> the Time required to hatch them
<$$paren> might produce a young Brood of five_Thousand . So that , in
eight Weeks , a <font> Louse <$$font> may see five_thousand of its own
Descendants ; an <P_182> Increase hardly credible , were it not proved
by Experience . BAKER-1742-2,182.47

A <font> Louse <$$font> may be dissected easily in a small Drop of Water
, upon a Slip of Glass that can be apply'd to the <font> Microscope
<$$font> ; BAKER-1742-2,182.48

but without Water the Parts are very difficult to divide ,
BAKER-1742-2,182.49

and when separated shrivel BAKER-1742-2,182.50

and dry up immediately . BAKER-1742-2,182.51

Thus , five or six Eggs of a full Size and ready to be laid may be found
in the Ovary of a Female , with sixty or seventy of different Sizes ,
but all much more minute , as the Eggs are in the Ovary of a Hen .
BAKER-1742-2,182.52

In the Male the Penis is remarkable , and also the Testes , whereof it
has a double Pair ; BAKER-1742-2,182.53

the Sting likewise deserves a curious Examination . BAKER-1742-2,182.54

These Creatures avoid the Light as much as possible ,
BAKER-1742-2,182.55

and are impatient of Cold . BAKER-1742-2,182.56

The Females if fasting appear very white , BAKER-1742-2,182.57

and even after feeding seem less red than the Males , the Blood not
appearing so plainly through their Vessels , from the Multitude of their
Eggs . BAKER-1742-2,182.58

The Picture of the <font> common Louse <$$font> is given Plate XIII.
Fig. IV . BAKER-1742-2,182.59

Its Piercer or Sucker is shewn by <font> a <$$font> . The Sting of the
Male by <font> b <$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,182.60

There@ @'s another Kind of <font> Louse , <$$font> found about uncleanly
People , which from its Shape is called the <font> Crab-Louse .
<$$font> BAKER-1742-2,182.61

The Vermin adhering to and feeding on the Bodies of different Animals ,
though much unlike <P_183> in Form and Size , are also commonly called
<font> Lice <$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,183.62

Of these there are numberless Species , several whereof we are obliged
to <font> Seignior <$$font> Redi for giving us the Drawings of , at the
End of his Treatise <font> de Generatione Insectorum <$$font> , whence
Mr. Albin has taken them into his <font> Book of Spiders : <$$font>
BAKER-1742-2,183.63

but few of these have been sufficiently examined by the <font>
Microscope <$$font> , BAKER-1742-2,183.64

and there are great Varieties of other Kinds that are yet quite unknown
. BAKER-1742-2,183.65

Even Insects are infested with Vermin that feed on them and torment them
. BAKER-1742-2,183.66

A Sort of Beetle known by the Name of the <font> Lousy Beetle , <$$font>
is remarkable for Numbers of little Creatures that run about it nimbly
from Place to Place , but will not be shaken off . BAKER-1742-2,183.67

Some other Beetles have Lice also , but of different Kinds .
BAKER-1742-2,183.68

The <font> Earwig <$$font> is troubled frequently with minute Insects ,
especially just under the setting on its Head . BAKER-1742-2,183.69

They are white and shining like Mites , but much smaller :
BAKER-1742-2,183.70

they are round-backed , flat-belly'd , BAKER-1742-2,183.71

and have long Legs , particularly the two foremost .
BAKER-1742-2,183.72

The same has not been observed on any other Animal .
BAKER-1742-2,183.73

<font> Snails <$$font> of all Kinds , but chiefly the large ones without
Shells , have many little Insects , extreamly nimble , that live and
feed upon them . BAKER-1742-2,183.74

Numbers of little <font> red Lice <$$font> , with a very small Head ,
and in Shape resembling a Tortoise , <P_184> are often to be seen about
the Legs of Spiders . BAKER-1742-2,184.75

Whilst the Spider lives they cling closely to it , BAKER-1742-2,184.76

but if it dies they leave it . BAKER-1742-2,184.77

Whitish Lice are frequently to be discovered running very nimbly on
Bumble-Bees {TEXT:Humble-Bees} : BAKER-1742-2,184.78

I have seen them frequently on Ants : BAKER-1742-2,184.79

many Kinds are discoverable on Fishes ; BAKER-1742-2,184.80

Kircher says , he has found Lice on Fleas ; BAKER-1742-2,184.81

and , probably , very few Creatures are free from them .
BAKER-1742-2,184.82

As some may be desirous to know what Kinds of <font> Lice <$$font>
Seignior Redi has observed and given <font> Drawings <$$font> of , the
following List is inserted to satisfy their Curiosity .
BAKER-1742-2,184.83

Lice found on the Hawk <font> three Sorts : <$$font> on the large Pigeon
, the Turtle-Dove , the Hen , the Starling , the Crane .
BAKER-1742-2,184.84

On the Moor-Hen <font> three Sorts <$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,184.85

On the Magpye , the Heron , the lesser Heron , the Swan , the Turkish
Duck , the Sea-Mew , the smaller Swan : on the wild Goose <font> two
Sorts <$$font> : on the Teal , the Kastrel , the Peacock , the white
Peacock , the Capon , the Crow , the white Starling : on Sweet-meats and
Drugs : on Men , <font> two Sorts , viz. <$$font> the <font> common
Louse <$$font> and the <font> Crab-Louse : <$$font> on the Goat , the
Camel , the Ass , the African Ram , the African Hen ;
BAKER-1742-2,184.86

on the Stag <font> two Sorts <$$font> , and on the Tiger .
BAKER-1742-2,184.87

<P_185>

<heading>

Chap. XXII . BAKER-1742-2,185.90

<font> Of the <$$font> Wood-Louse . BAKER-1742-2,185.91

<$$heading>

There@ @'s a little Animal , in Shape and Colour like a Louse , that
runs swiftly by Starts or Stops , and is commonly found on the Leaves
and Covers of Books , or amongst rotten Wood : BAKER-1742-2,185.93

't@ @is called a <font> Wood-Louse <$$font> or <font> Wood-Mite <$$font>
, BAKER-1742-2,185.94

and is known almost to every Body . BAKER-1742-2,185.95

The Eyes of this Creature are of a golden Colour , BAKER-1742-2,185.96

and can be drawn in or thrust out at Pleasure ; BAKER-1742-2,185.97

the peristaltic Motion of the Bowels appears in it distinctly ,
BAKER-1742-2,185.98

and what is still more wonderful , a Motion of the Brain is seen .
BAKER-1742-2,185.99

I take this to be the Animal Mr. Derham calls the <font> Pediculus
pulsatorius <$$font> or <font> Death-Watch , <$$font> <paren> in <font>
Phil. Transact. <$$font> Numb. 291 . <$$paren> where he says , the
<font> Pediculus Pulsatorius , <$$font> and the <font> Scarabaeus
sonicephalus <$$font> are the only two Insects that make regular
clicking Noises like the Beat of a Pocket Watch . BAKER-1742-2,185.100

<P_186>

<heading>

Chap. XXIII . BAKER-1742-2,186.103

<font> Of <$$font> Mites . BAKER-1742-2,186.104

<$$heading>

By <font> Mites <$$font> are commonly understood the minute Creatures
found in great Abundance on Cheese that is decaying .
BAKER-1742-2,186.106

To the naked Eye they appear like moving Particles of Dust ;
BAKER-1742-2,186.107

but the <font> Microscope <$$font> discovers them to be Animals ,
perfect in all their Members , having as regular a Figure , and
performing all the necessary Offices of Life , in as orderly a Manner ,
as Creatures that exceed them many Millions of times in Bulk .
BAKER-1742-2,186.108

They are crustaceous Animals , and usually transparent .
BAKER-1742-2,186.109

The principal Parts of them are , the Head , the Neck , and Body .
BAKER-1742-2,186.110

The Head is small in Proportion to the Body , with a sharp Snout , and a
Mouth that opens and shuts like a Mole's . BAKER-1742-2,186.111

They have two little Eyes , BAKER-1742-2,186.112

and are extremely quick-sighted ; BAKER-1742-2,186.113

for if you touch them once with a Pin or other Instrument , you@ @'ll
perceive how readily they avoid a second Touch . BAKER-1742-2,186.114

Some have six Legs , and others eight ; which proves them of different
Sorts , tho' in every Respect besides they appear alike .
BAKER-1742-2,186.115

Each Leg has six Joints , surrounded with Hairs , and two little <P_187>
Claws at the Extremity thereof , which can easily take up any Thing .
BAKER-1742-2,187.116

The hinder Part of the Body is plump and bulky , BAKER-1742-2,187.117

and ends in an oval Form , with a few exceeding long Hairs issuing
therefrom . BAKER-1742-2,187.118

Other Parts of the Body and Head are also thinly beset with long Hairs .
BAKER-1742-2,187.119

These Creatures are Male and Female . BAKER-1742-2,187.120

The Female lays Eggs ; whence <paren> as in Lice and Spiders <$$paren>
the young ones issue forth with all their Members perfect , though most
exceedingly minute : BAKER-1742-2,187.121

but , notwithstanding their Shape does not alter , they cast their Skins
several times before they attain their full Growth .
BAKER-1742-2,187.122

They may be kept alive many Months between two concave Glasses , and
applied to the Microscope at Pleasure , BAKER-1742-2,187.123

and by often looking at them many curious Particulars will be discovered
. BAKER-1742-2,187.124

They may thus frequently be seen <font> in coitu <$$font> , conjoined
Tail to Tail ; BAKER-1742-2,187.125

for though the Penis of the Male be in the Middle of the Belly , it
turns backwards like that of the <font> Rhinoceros . <$$font>
BAKER-1742-2,187.126

The Coitus is perform'd with an incredibly swift Motion .
BAKER-1742-2,187.127

Their Eggs , in warm Weather , hatch in twelve or fourteen Days ; but in
Wintertime and cold Weather not under several <P_188> Weeks .
BAKER-1742-2,188.128

'T@ @is not uncommon to see the young Ones struggling to get clear of
the Egg-Shell , which sometimes they are a Day about .
BAKER-1742-2,188.129

The Diameter of a <font> Mite <$$font> 's Egg seems equal to the
Diameter of the Hair of a Man's Head ; BAKER-1742-2,188.130

and six_hundred such Hairs are about equal to the Length of an Inch .
BAKER-1742-2,188.131

Supposing , then , a <font> Pigeon's <$$font> Egg is three quarters of
an Inch in Diameter : four_hundred_and_fifty Diameters of a <font>
Mite's <$$font> Egg are but equal to the Diameter of the Egg of a <font>
Pigeon : <$$font> BAKER-1742-2,188.132

and , consequently , if their Figures be alike , we must conclude , that
ninety_one_Millions_,_an_hundred_and_twenty_Thousand Eggs of a <font>
Mite <$$font> are not larger than one <font> Pigeon <$$font> 's Egg .
BAKER-1742-2,188.133

<font> Mites <$$font> are most voracious Animals ; BAKER-1742-2,188.134

for they devour not only Cheese , but likewise all Sorts of dryed Fish
or Flesh , dryed Fruits , Grain of all Sorts , and almost every Thing
beside that has a certain Degree of Moisture without being over wet :
BAKER-1742-2,188.135

nay , they may often be observed preying upon one another .
BAKER-1742-2,188.136

In eating they thrust one Jaw forewards and the other backwards
alternately , whereby they appear to grind their Food ;
BAKER-1742-2,188.137

and after they have done feeding , they seem to munch and chew the Cud .
BAKER-1742-2,188.138

<P_189>

These are the Vermin that find a Way into the Cabinets of the Curious ,
and eat up their fine <font> Butterflies <$$font> and other choice
<font> Insects , <$$font> leaving nothing in their stead but Dust and
Ruins . BAKER-1742-2,189.140

The only Way of preventing this , is , to keep the Drawers or Boxes
continually supply'd with <font> Camphire <$$font> , whose hot and dry
Effluvia penetrate , shrivel up , and destroy the tender Bodies of these
little mischievous Plunderers . BAKER-1742-2,189.141

It must however be remembered , that there are several <font> Species
<$$font> of <font> Mites <$$font> , which differ in some Particulars ,
though their general Figure and the Nature of them be the same .
BAKER-1742-2,189.142

For Instance , the <font> Mites <$$font> in Malt-Dust and Oatmeal-Dust
are nimbler than <font> Cheese-Mites <$$font> , BAKER-1742-2,189.143

and have more and longer Hairs . BAKER-1742-2,189.144

The <font> Mites <$$font> among Figs resemble Scarabs ,
BAKER-1742-2,189.145

have two Feelers at the Snout , and two very long Horns over them , with
three Legs only on each Side , BAKER-1742-2,189.146

and are more sluggish than those in Malt . BAKER-1742-2,189.147

Mr. Leeuwenhoek observed some <font> Mites <$$font> on Figs to have
longer Hairs than he had seen on any other Sorts ; BAKER-1742-2,189.148

and upon Examination found those Hairs were spicated , or had other
little Hairs issuing from their Sides : whence he imagin'd they might be
jointed at the little Distances where these Hairs came forth .
BAKER-1742-2,189.149

He <P_190> had also seen the like Hairs on other <font> Mites <$$font> ,
tho' very seldom . BAKER-1742-2,190.150

Mr. Hook describes a Sort of these Animals , which he terms <font>
wandring Mites , <$$font> as being to be found in every Place almost
where they can get Food . BAKER-1742-2,190.151

Happening , some Years ago , to look into an empty white Gallipot , I
fancy'd it was dusty ; BAKER-1742-2,190.152

but , on a nearer View , perceiving the Particles to move , I examin'd
them by the <font> Microscope , <$$font> BAKER-1742-2,190.153

and discovered what I had taken for Dust to be Swarms of these <font>
wandring Mites <$$font> , which were tempted and brought thither by the
Smell of some <font> Caviere <$$font> , that had been in the Gallipot a
few Days before . BAKER-1742-2,190.154

The <font> Mite <$$font> is exceedingly tenacious of Life ;
BAKER-1742-2,190.155

I have kept them in my Glasses Months together , even without Food ;
BAKER-1742-2,190.156

and Mr. Leeuwenhoek says , one he stuck upon a Pin before his <font>
Microscope <$$font> lived in that Condition eleven Weeks .
BAKER-1742-2,190.157

The Picture of the <font> Mite <$$font> is shewn Plate XIII. Fig. V .
BAKER-1742-2,190.158

One of its Eggs appears just by , at <font> a <$$font> .
BAKER-1742-2,190.159

<P_191>

<heading>

Chap. XXIV . BAKER-1742-2,191.162

<font> Of the <$$font> Flea . BAKER-1742-2,191.163

<$$heading>

This well-known little Creature is covered all over with black hard
shelly Scales , Plates , or Divisions , curiously jointed , and folded
over one another , in such a Manner , as to comply with all the nimble
Motions and Activity of the Animal . BAKER-1742-2,191.165

The Scales are curiously polished , and beset about the Edges with long
Spikes , in the most beautiful and regular Order possible .
BAKER-1742-2,191.166

It's Neck is finely arch'd , BAKER-1742-2,191.167

and much resembles the Form of a Lobster's Tail . BAKER-1742-2,191.168

The Head is very extraordinary ; BAKER-1742-2,191.169

for from the Snout-Part thereof proceed its two Fore-Legs ,
BAKER-1742-2,191.170

and between them lies the Piercer or Sucker wherewith it penetrates the
Skin of other living Creatures , and draws out its Food .
BAKER-1742-2,191.171

It has two large beautiful black Eyes , and a Pair of little Horns or
Feelers . BAKER-1742-2,191.172

Four other Legs are join'd on at the Breast , so that it has six in all
; which , when it leaps , fold short one within another , and exerting
their Spring all at the same Instant , carry the Creature to a
surprising Distance . BAKER-1742-2,191.173

The Legs have many Joints , BAKER-1742-2,191.174

are very hairy , BAKER-1742-2,191.175

and terminate in two long sharp hooked Claws , as may be seen Fig. VI.
Plate XIII . BAKER-1742-2,191.176

<P_192>

The <font> Flea's <$$font> Piercer or Sucker is lodged between its
Fore-Legs , BAKER-1742-2,192.178

and includes a Couple of Darts or Lancets , which , after the Piercer
has made an Entrance , are probably thrust farther into the Flesh , to
make the Blood flow from the adjacent Parts , that it may be sucked up ;
and seems to occasion that round red Spot , with a Hole in the Centre of
it , which we commonly call a <font> Flea-Bite <$$font> .
BAKER-1742-2,192.179

This Piercer , its Sheath opening sideways , and the two Lancets within
it are very difficult to be seen , unless the two Fore-Legs , between
which they usually are folded in and concealed from View , be cut off
close to the Head : BAKER-1742-2,192.180

for a <font> Flea <$$font> rarely puts out its Piercer except at the
Time of feeding , BAKER-1742-2,192.181

but on the contrary keeps it closely folded inwards :
BAKER-1742-2,192.182

the best Way therefore of coming at it is , by cutting the Head off
first , and then the Fore-Legs ; since , in the Agonies of Death , it
may easily be managed , and brought before the <font> Microscope
<$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,192.183

<font> Fleas <$$font> are Male and Female , BAKER-1742-2,192.184

and lay Eggs as well as <font> Lice <$$font> and <font> Mites ; <$$font>
BAKER-1742-2,192.185

but are extreamly different in all the Progress of their Lives besides ,
passing through the same Changes exactly as the <font> Silkworm <$$font>
does . BAKER-1742-2,192.186

They deposit {TEXT:deposite} their Eggs at the Roots of the Hair of Cats
, Dogs , <P_193> and other Animals , sticking them fast thereto by a
kind of glutinous Moisture . BAKER-1742-2,193.187

When the Eggs hatch , not perfect <font> Fleas <$$font> , but little
Worms or Maggots , whose Bodies have several annular Divisions thinly
cover'd with long Hairs , come out of them , BAKER-1742-2,193.188

and feed on the Juices of the Body , whereto they closely adhere .
BAKER-1742-2,193.189

These Maggots are very brisk and nimble , BAKER-1742-2,193.190

but if touch'd , or under any Fear , roll themselves up on a sudden in a
round Figure , BAKER-1742-2,193.191

and continue motionless for some Time ; after which they slowly open
themselves , and crawl away , as Caterpillars do , with a lively and
swift Motion . BAKER-1742-2,193.192

When the Time of their Change approaches , they conceal themselves as
much as possible ; BAKER-1742-2,193.193

eat nothing , BAKER-1742-2,193.194

lie quiet , BAKER-1742-2,193.195

and seem as if dying : BAKER-1742-2,193.196

but if viewed with the <font> Microscope <$$font> , will be found , with
the Silk or Web that comes out of their Mouth , weaving a Covering or
Bag round them , whose Inside is as white as Paper , though without it
always appears soil'd with Dirt . BAKER-1742-2,193.197

In this Bag they put on the <font> Chrysalis <$$font> or <font> Aurelia
<$$font> Form , BAKER-1742-2,193.198

and become Milk-white : BAKER-1742-2,193.199

but two or three Days before they break from this Prison , their Colour
darkens , BAKER-1742-2,193.200

they acquire Firmness and Strength , BAKER-1742-2,193.201

and as soon as they issue from the Bag are <font> perfect Fleas <$$font>
, and able to leap away . BAKER-1742-2,193.202

<P_194>

It has been discovered , by putting the Eggs of <font> Fleas <$$font> in
a small Glass Tube , and keeping it constantly warm in one's Bosom ,
that , in the Midst of Summer , they hatch in four Days :
BAKER-1742-2,194.204

then , feeding the Maggots with dead Flies , which they suck greedily ,
in eleven Days they come to the full Perfection of their reptile State :
when the Maggot spins its Bag , and in four Days more changes into a
<font> Chrysalis ; <$$font> after lying in which Condition nine Days ,
it becomes a <font> perfect Flea . <$$font> BAKER-1742-2,194.205

It is then immediately capable of Coition , BAKER-1742-2,194.206

and in three or four Days lays Eggs . So that in twenty-eight Days
<font> a Flea <$$font> may come from the Egg itself , and propagate its
Kind ; BAKER-1742-2,194.207

and their vast Increase will not seem so great a Wonder , if we consider
, that from <font> March <$$font> to <font> November <$$font> there may
be seven or eight Generations of them . BAKER-1742-2,194.208

After having laid their Eggs they soon die , as all Creatures do that
undergo such like Changes . BAKER-1742-2,194.209

By keeping <font> Fleas <$$font> in a Glass Tube corked at both Ends ,
but so as to admit fresh Air , their several Actions may be observed ,
and particularly their Way of coupling , which is performed Tail to Tail
, the Female <paren> which is much the larger <$$paren> standing over
the Male . BAKER-1742-2,194.210

They will also be seen to lay their Eggs , not all at once , but ten or
twelve in a Day for <P_195> several Days successively ; which Eggs hatch
in the same Order . BAKER-1742-2,195.211

A Dissection of the <font> Flea <$$font> may be effected after the same
Method as that of the <font> Louse <$$font> , that is , in Water ;
BAKER-1742-2,195.212

the Stomach and Bowels , with their peristaltic Motion may plainly be
distinguished , and also the Testes and Penis , together with Veins and
Arteries minute beyond Conception . BAKER-1742-2,195.213

Leeuwenhoek affirms , that he has likewise discover'd innumerable
Animalcules shaped like Serpents in the <font> Semen masculinum <$$font>
of a <font> Flea . <$$font> BAKER-1742-2,195.214

Two Things in this Creature deserve our Consideration , to wit , its
surprizing Agility , and its prodigious Strength , whereby it is enabled
to leap above an_hundred times its own Length : as has been proved by
Experiments . BAKER-1742-2,195.215

What vigorous Muscles ! what a Springiness of Fibres must here be !
BAKER-1742-2,195.216

and how weak and sluggish , in Proportion to its own Bulk , is the Horse
, the Camel , or the Elephant , if compared with this puny Insect !
BAKER-1742-2,195.217

A Flea's <font> Egg <$$font> is shewn Plate XIII. Fig. VI. 1 . The
<font> Worm <$$font> or <font> Maggot <$$font> proceeding from it Fig.
VI. 2 . BAKER-1742-2,195.218

<P_196>

<heading>

Chap. XXV . BAKER-1742-2,196.221

<font> Of <$$font> Spiders . BAKER-1742-2,196.222

<$$heading>

Every Body is so well acquainted with the general Form of a <font>
Spider , <$$font> even without the Assistance of a <font> Microscope
<$$font> , that I shall spend no Time in the Description of it : but
proceed to give an Account of some Particulars in this Animal , which
are discoverable only by that Instrument . BAKER-1742-2,196.224

As a Fly <paren> the <font> Spider <$$font> 's natural Prey <$$paren> is
extreamly cautious and nimble , and comes usually from above , it was
necessary the <font> Spider <$$font> should be furnished with a quick
Sight , and an Ability of looking upwards , forwards , and sideways at
the same time : BAKER-1742-2,196.225

and the <font> Microscope <$$font> shews , that the Number , Structure ,
and Disposition of its Eyes are wonderfully adapted to serve all these
Purposes . BAKER-1742-2,196.226

Most <font> Spiders <$$font> have eight Eyes : two on the top of the
Head or Body <paren> for there is no Division between them , a <font>
Spider <$$font> having no Neck <$$paren> that look directly upwards ;
two others in Front , a little below these , to discover all that passes
forwards : and on each side a couple more , one whereof points sideways
<P_197> forward , and the other sideways backward : so that it can see
almost quite round it . BAKER-1742-2,197.227

All Kinds of them have not indeed a like Number of Eyes ,
BAKER-1742-2,197.228

for we find ten in some , in others only eight , six , or four ; and in
the <font> Field , Long-Legs , <$$font> or <font> Shepherd-Spider ,
<$$font> no more than two . BAKER-1742-2,197.229

But whatever the Number be , they are immovable , and transparent :
BAKER-1742-2,197.230

are situated in a most curious Manner , BAKER-1742-2,197.231

and deserve the strictest Examination . BAKER-1742-2,197.232

The best Way of viewing them is , to cut off the Legs and Tail , and
bring only the Head-part before the <font> Microscope <$$font> .
BAKER-1742-2,197.233

All <font> Spiders <$$font> have eight Legs , which they employ in
walking , and two Arms or shorter Legs near the Mouth , that assist in
taking their Prey . BAKER-1742-2,197.234

They appear thickly beset with Hairs , BAKER-1742-2,197.235

have each six Joints , BAKER-1742-2,197.236

and end with two hooked Claws , serrated , or having Teeth like a Saw on
their Inside , whereby they cling fast to any thing ;
BAKER-1742-2,197.237

and at a little Distance from these Claws a sort of Spur stands out ,
without any Teeth at all . BAKER-1742-2,197.238

See Fig. VII. Plate XIII . BAKER-1742-2,197.239

But the dreadful Weapons wherewith the <font> Spider <$$font> seizes and
kills its Prey are a Pair of sharp crooked Claws or Forceps , <paren> by
some , tho' very improperly , called Stings <$$paren> in the Fore-part
of its Head . BAKER-1742-2,197.240

The <font> Scolopendra , <$$font> or <font> Indian Millepedes , <$$font>
and several other Insects have Weapons of the like Form , and <P_198>
serving to the same Purpose . BAKER-1742-2,198.241

These Claws or Pincers stand horizontally ; BAKER-1742-2,198.242

and are , when not made use of , concealed in two Cases contrived for
their Reception : into which they fold like a Clasp-knife , and there
lye between two Rows of Teeth , that are likewise employ'd to hold fast
its Prey . BAKER-1742-2,198.243

This Apparatus is better shewn than described : BAKER-1742-2,198.244

See Fig. VIII . BAKER-1742-2,198.245

Mr. Leeuwenhoek informs us , that each of these Claws or Pincers has a
small Aperture or Slit near its Point , as in a Viper's Tooth : through
which he supposes a poisonous Juice is injected into the Wound it makes
, occasioning Death to Flies and other Insects . BAKER-1742-2,198.246

But Dr. Mead , in his most excellent <font> Essay on Poisons <$$font> ,
believes this to be a great Mistake ; having not been able to discern
any Exit or Opening , though he viewed these Parts several times with a
very good <font> Microscope <$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,198.247

And he was the more confirmed in this Opinion , by examining a Claw of
the great <font> American Spider , <$$font> described by Piso , and
called <font> Nhamdu <$$font> , given him by Mr. Petiver : which being
above fifty times bigger than that of any <font> European Spider
<$$font> , if there had been any Slit in it , he doubted not his Glass
would have discover'd it ; BAKER-1742-2,198.248

but yet he found it to be quite solid . BAKER-1742-2,198.249

Besides , <P_199> " after repeated Trials he plainly saw that nothing
drop'd out at the Claws , which were always dry , while the <font>
Spider <$$font> bit , but that a short white Proboscis was at the same
time thrust out of the Mouth , which instilled a Liquor into the Wound .
" BAKER-1742-2,199.250

And he farther observes , " that the Quantity of Liquor emitted by our
common Spiders when they kill their Prey , is visibly so great , and the
wounding Weapons so minute , that they could contain but a very
inconsiderable Portion thereof , if it were to be discharged that way .
" BAKER-1742-2,199.251

<font> Spiders <$$font> frequently cast their Skins , which may be found
in Cobwebs , perfectly dry and transparent ; BAKER-1742-2,199.252

and from such Skins the Forceps or Claws <paren> for they are always
shed with the Skin <$$paren> may easier be separated , and examin'd with
more Exactness than in a living <font> Spider : <$$font>
BAKER-1742-2,199.253

for they commonly appear spread out fairly to view ,
BAKER-1742-2,199.254

and , by their Transparency every minute Part is seen with much
Distinctness . BAKER-1742-2,199.255

But neither this Way , nor any other , have I been ever able to discern
the Aperture Mr. Leeuwenhoek speaks of . BAKER-1742-2,199.256

The Contexture of the Webs of <font> Spiders , <$$font> and their Manner
of Weaving them , are farther Discoveries of the <font> Microscope
<$$font> ; BAKER-1742-2,199.257

for that informs us , that the <font> Spider <$$font> has five little
<P_200> Teats or Nipples near the Extremity of the Tail , whence a gummy
Liquor proceeds , which adheres to any thing it is pressed against , and
being drawn out , hardens instantly in the Air , and becomes a String or
Thread , strong enough to bear five or six times the Weight of the
<font> Spider <$$font> 's Body . BAKER-1742-2,200.258

This Thread is composed of several finer ones that are drawn out
separately , but unite together two or three Hairs Breadth distant from
the Body of the <font> Spider . <$$font> BAKER-1742-2,200.259

The Threads are finer or coarser according to the Bigness of the <font>
Spider <$$font> that spins them . BAKER-1742-2,200.260

Mr. Leeuwenhoek computes , that an_hundred of the finest Threads of a
<font> full-grown Spider <$$font> are not equal to the Diameter of the
Hair of his Beard ; and , consequently , if the Threads and the Hair be
round , ten_thousand such Threads are not bigger than such an Hair .
BAKER-1742-2,200.261

He calculates farther , that when <font> young Spiders <$$font> first
begin to spin , four_hundred of them are not larger than One that is
full grown ; and , therefore , the Thread of such a little <font> Spider
<$$font> is smaller by four_hundred times than the Thread of a
full-grown One : allowing which , four Millions of a young <font>
Spider's <$$font> Threads are not so big as the single Hair of a Man's
Beard . BAKER-1742-2,200.262

<P_201>

The Eggs of some <font> Spiders <$$font> are very pleasant Objects ,
being round at one End and flattish at the other , with a Depression in
the Center of the flattish End , and a yellowish Circle round it .
BAKER-1742-2,201.264

Their Colour is a blewish White like counterfeited Pearl ;
BAKER-1742-2,201.265

and when they hatch , the <font> little Spiders <$$font> come out
perfectly formed , BAKER-1742-2,201.266

and run about very nimbly . BAKER-1742-2,201.267

The Female deposits her Eggs , to the Number of five or six_hundred , in
a Bag strongly composed of her own Web , which she either carries under
her Belly and guards with the greatest Care , or else hides in some safe
Recess . BAKER-1742-2,201.268

As soon as the Eggs are hatch'd , the minute <font> Spiders <$$font>
appear very agreeable in the <font> Microscope . <$$font>
BAKER-1742-2,201.269

It has been before observed , that the Current of the Blood may be seen
in the Legs and Body of this Creature ; BAKER-1742-2,201.270

and the judicious Observer will discover many other Wonders in the
Dissection and Examination of its several Parts , which it would be
tiresome for me to dwell on here . BAKER-1742-2,201.271

I can@ @not , however , conclude this Head , without pointing out two or
three Kinds of <font> Spiders <$$font> as particularly worth Notice .
BAKER-1742-2,201.272

There is a little <font> white Field Spider <$$font> with short Legs ,
found plentifully among new Hay , whose Body appears like white Amber ,
with black Knobs , out of each whereof <P_202> grow Prickles like
Whin-Pricks . BAKER-1742-2,202.273

Some have six , some eight Eyes , that may be distinctly seen , quick
and lively : BAKER-1742-2,202.274

each Eye has a Violet-blew Pupil , clear and admirable , surrounded by a
pale_yellow Circle . BAKER-1742-2,202.275

The <font> wandring <$$font> or <font> hunting Spider , <$$font> who
spins no Web , but runs and leaps by Fits , has two Tufts of Feathers
fixt to its fore Paws , which well deserve being placed before the
<font> Microscope : <$$font> BAKER-1742-2,202.276

the Variety and Beauty of Colouring all over this little Creature afford
likewise a most delightful View . BAKER-1742-2,202.277

The <font> Long-Legs , Field , <$$font> or <font> Shepherd-Spider
<$$font> is a most wonderful Creature : BAKER-1742-2,202.278

It has two Fore-Claws at a great Distance from the Head , tip'd with
black like a Crab's , that open and shut in the Manner of a Scorpion's ,
and are Saw-like , or indented , on the Inside . BAKER-1742-2,202.279

- Cut all the Legs from this <font> Spider , <$$font> and place it
before the <font> Microscope , <$$font> and you@ @'ll discover , that
the Protuberance on the top of the Back is furnish'd with two fine
Jet-black Eyes . BAKER-1742-2,202.280

The little <font> red Spider <$$font> that creeps on the Barks of Trees
should also not be neglected . BAKER-1742-2,202.281

<P_203>

<heading>

Chap. XXVI . BAKER-1742-2,203.284

<font> Of the <$$font> Gnat . BAKER-1742-2,203.285

<$$heading>

The Production of this Creature is from an <font> Egg , <$$font>
deposited by its Parent upon the Waters , which first becomes a <font>
Worm <$$font> or <font> Maggot , <$$font> then a very odd <font> aquatic
Animal , <$$font> <paren> described pag. 88. <$$paren> and afterwards
a <font> Gnat . <$$font> BAKER-1742-2,203.287

The particular Beauties of it can@ @not possibly be discover'd without a
<font> Microscope <$$font> ; BAKER-1742-2,203.288

but by the Assistance of that Instrument , it appears to be adorned by
Nature in a more extraordinary Manner than most other living Creatures
are . BAKER-1742-2,203.289

Its Tail-part is covered over with Feathers , most exquisitely disposed
in Rows : of different Colours , but yet perfectly transparent .
BAKER-1742-2,203.290

The Breast <paren> which is crustaceous <$$paren> is bedeck'd with
little stiff Hairs or Bristles , instead of Feathers ;
BAKER-1742-2,203.291

and from thence six hairy Legs proceed , with six Joints to each , and
at the End two little Claws . BAKER-1742-2,203.292

The Feet are all over feather'd in a Manner resembling the Scales of
Fishes , with abundance of little black Hairs amongst them appearing
stubborn like Hogs Bristles . BAKER-1742-2,203.293

Its Wings are encompassed with a Furbelow of long Feathers :
BAKER-1742-2,203.294

and the Veins or Ribs that <P_204> serve to strengthen them are also
either feathered or scaled . BAKER-1742-2,204.295

Between these Ribs an exceeding thin transparent Membrane is extended ,
full of little black sharp pointed Hairs , that are ranged every where
with the utmost Regularity . BAKER-1742-2,204.296

But as there are different Sorts of Gnats , their Wings are also very
different , some having a Border of long Feathers , others of short ones
, and others none at all : BAKER-1742-2,204.297

the Rib-work of the Wings , likewise , in some is feather'd , in some
scaled , and in some beset with Prickles . BAKER-1742-2,204.298

But the most wonderful Part of this Creature is its Head : as it
contains the Horns , the Sting or Sucker , and the Eyes .
BAKER-1742-2,204.299

The Horns of the <font> brush-horn'd <$$font> or <font> Male Gnat
<$$font> are a most charming Object : BAKER-1742-2,204.300

it has two Pair , one whereof is surrounded , at little Distances , with
long Hairs , issuing out circularly : each Circle lessening more than
other as it stands near the Extremity of the Horns : and the whole
together exactly representing the Figure of the Plant called <font>
Equisetum <$$font> or <font> Horse-Tail . <$$font> BAKER-1742-2,204.301

The other Pair are longer and much thicker than the foregoing , and
hairy from End to End . BAKER-1742-2,204.302

In the <font> great_belly'd <$$font> or <font> Female Gnat , <$$font>
the first Pair of Horns , though of the <P_205> same Figure as the
Male's , has Hairs not near so long , BAKER-1742-2,205.303

and the second Pair is shorter than the first by at least three Parts in
four . BAKER-1742-2,205.304

The <font> Piercer , Sting , <$$font> or <font> Sucker <$$font> is a
Case covered with long Scales , that lies concealed under the <font>
Gnat <$$font> 's Throat when not made Use of . BAKER-1742-2,205.305

The Side opens , BAKER-1742-2,205.306

and four Darts are thrust out thence , occasionally ; one whereof ,
<paren> minute as it is <$$paren> serves for a Sheath to the other three
. BAKER-1742-2,205.307

The Sides of them are extreamly sharp , BAKER-1742-2,205.308

and they are barbed or indented towards the Point , whose Fineness is
inexpressible , and scarcely to be discerned by the greatest Magnifier .
BAKER-1742-2,205.309

When these Darts are thrust into the Flesh of Animals , either
successively , or in Conjunction , the Blood and Humours of the adjacent
Parts must flow to and cause a Tumour about the Wound , whose little
Orifice being closed up by the Compression of the external Air , can
afford them no Outlet . BAKER-1742-2,205.310

When a <font> Gnat <$$font> finds any tender juicy Fruits , or Liquors ,
she sucks up what she likes , through the outer Case , without using the
Darts at all : BAKER-1742-2,205.311

but if it is Flesh , that resists her Efforts , she stings very severely
, BAKER-1742-2,205.312

then sheaths her Weapons in their Scabbard , BAKER-1742-2,205.313

and through them sucks up the Juices she finds there .
BAKER-1742-2,205.314

The Pain they cause <P_206> is only while they are entering ,
BAKER-1742-2,206.315

and continues not when the <font> Gnat <$$font> is sucking :
BAKER-1742-2,206.316

nor is its Stinging out of Revenge , but from mere Necessity , to obtain
a proper Sustenance . BAKER-1742-2,206.317

The <font> Gnat <$$font> 's four Darts are shewn Plate XIII. Fig. IX.
<font> a. b. c. d <$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,206.318

A <font> Gnat <$$font> 's Eyes , which form the greatest Part of its
Head , are pearled , or composed of many Rows of little semicircular
Protuberances ranged with the utmost Exactitude . BAKER-1742-2,206.319

What these Protuberances are , and the Purposes whereto they serve ,
will be explained when we come to treat of the <font> Eyes <$$font> of
<font> Insects . <$$font> BAKER-1742-2,206.320

The Motion of the Intestines may be seen in the transparent Parts of
this Animal , BAKER-1742-2,206.321

and upon Dissection many curious Discoveries may be made .
BAKER-1742-2,206.322

Mr. Leeuwenhoek says , he found in the <font> Semen <$$font> of the
Male numberless <font> Animalcules <$$font> smaller than those in Fleas
, and in the Female a surprizing Quantity of Eggs .
BAKER-1742-2,206.323

And , indeed , the Spawn of this Insect is amazingly great , in
proportion to its Size , being seen floating on the Waters <paren>
though always fastened to something to prevent its swimming away
<$$paren> sometimes above an Inch in Length , and half a quarter in
Diameter ; the Eggs <paren> each of which has a little <P_207> black
Speck <$$paren> being placed in exact Order , and kept together by a
Sort of Gelly or glewy Matter , which the minute Maggots , when hatched
, carry down with them to the Bottom , and thereby cement together the
small Particles of Earth or Sand that form their Cells or Cases .
BAKER-1742-2,207.324

<heading>

Chap. XXVII . BAKER-1742-2,207.326

<font> Of the <$$font> Ox-Fly , <font> or <$$font> Gad-Bee .
BAKER-1742-2,207.327

<$$heading>

Another Creature that undergoes a like Change , is the <font> Ox-Fly ,
Dun-Fly , <$$font> or <font> Gad-Bee , <$$font> an Insect very
troublesome to Cows and Horses . BAKER-1742-2,207.329

This , like the Gnat , has a long Proboscis , with a sharp Dart or Darts
sheathed therein . BAKER-1742-2,207.330

The Use of these Darts is to penetrate the Flesh of Animals and feed on
their Blood : whereas the Proboscis can only serve to suck the Juices ,
Honies , or Dews , from Fruits , Flowers , or the Leaves of Plants : and
Providence seems to have kindly furnished it with this twofold
Instrument , that if one Sort of Provision fails , it may be able to
subsist on the other . BAKER-1742-2,207.331

It is worth Enquiry whether <font> Lice , Fleas , House-Bugs , <$$font>
&c. are not also provided for the same Purposes . BAKER-1742-2,207.332

<P_208>

The Eggs of this Insect are deposited in the Waters ,
BAKER-1742-2,208.334

and produce an extraordinary Kind of little <font> Worm <$$font> or
<font> Maggot <$$font> , the Extremity of whose Tail is incircled with
moveable Hairs , which , being expanded on the Surface of the Water ,
enable it to float along , as in Plate VII. Fig. XIII. <font> a
<$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,208.335

When it would descend towards the Bottom , these Hairs are made to
approach each other in an oval Form , and inclose a little Bubble of Air
; by means whereof it is able to rise again ; BAKER-1742-2,208.336

and if this Bubble escapes , as sometimes it will , the Insect
immediately squeezes out of its own Body another like Bubble to supply
the Place thereof . BAKER-1742-2,208.337

The <font> Maggot <$$font> , as descending , is shewn , Fig. XIII.
<font> b <$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,208.338

Its Snout has three Divisions , whence three little pointed Bodies are
thrust out , in continual Motion , like the Tongues of Serpents .
BAKER-1742-2,208.339

These <font> Maggots <$$font> are frequently to be met with in Water
taken from the Surface of Ditches . BAKER-1742-2,208.340

The Motion of their Intestines are perfectly singular and
distinguishable , BAKER-1742-2,208.341

and they are Objects well deserving our particular Observation .
BAKER-1742-2,208.342

<P_209>

<heading>

Chap. XXVIII . BAKER-1742-2,209.345

<font> Of the <$$font> Stings <font> of <$$font> Insects .
BAKER-1742-2,209.346

<$$heading>

The <font> sharp <$$font> and <font> penetrating Instruments <$$font>
wherewith the Tails of Bees , Wasps , Hornets , Ants , and some other
Insects are armed , I distinguish by the Name of <font> Stings :
<$$font> being Weapons given them by Nature to defend themselves and
offend their Enemies ; whereas the <font> Trunk <$$font> or <font>
Proboscis <$$font> which Gnats , Fleas , Lice , and many other Kinds
carry in their Mouth , though it may be equally sharp , is not intended
as an Instrument of Revenge , but for procuring and sucking in their
Food ; BAKER-1742-2,209.348

and , therefore , when such Creatures bite or sting us , as we term it ,
we must not imagine they do so out of Anger , but from Necessity .
BAKER-1742-2,209.349

Squeeze or strike a Bee or Wasp , it instantly puts forth its <font>
Sting <$$font> , BAKER-1742-2,209.350

but no Provocation can urge a Gnat or Flea to bite :
BAKER-1742-2,209.351

on the contrary , when disturbed or hurt they draw in their <font>
Proboscis <$$font> instead of thrusting it out , BAKER-1742-2,209.352

and never make Use of it but when they think themselves perfectly safe
and quiet . BAKER-1742-2,209.353

There is besides this farther Difference ; BAKER-1742-2,209.354

a <font> Sting injects <$$font> a venomous Liquor into the Wound it
makes , BAKER-1742-2,209.355

but a <font> Proboscis sucks <$$font> or <font> draws out <$$font> the
Blood and Humours from it . BAKER-1742-2,209.356

<P_210>

As the Structure and Contrivance of most Stings are nearly alike , by
describing one the rest will be understood : BAKER-1742-2,210.358

I shall , therefore , give a brief Account of the <font> Sting <$$font>
of a <font> Bee <$$font> , as discovered by the <font> Microscope
<$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,210.359

<heading>

Chap. XXIX . BAKER-1742-2,210.361

<font> Of a <font> Bee's <font> Sting <$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,210.362

<$$heading>

The <font> Sting <$$font> of a <font> Bee <$$font> is a horny Sheath or
Scabbard that includes two bearded Darts . BAKER-1742-2,210.364

This Sheath ends in a sharp Point : near the Extremity whereof a Slit
opens , through which , at the Time of stinging , two <font> bearded
Darts <$$font> are protruded beyond the End of the Sheath ; one whereof
being a little longer than the other , fixes its Beard first ;
BAKER-1742-2,210.365

but the other instantly following , they penetrate , alternately ,
deeper and deeper , taking hold of the Flesh with their Hooks , till the
whole Sting becomes buried in the Wound ; BAKER-1742-2,210.366

and then a venomous Juice is injected , thro' the same Sheath , from a
little Bag at the Root of the Sting , which occasions an acute Pain ,
and a Swelling of the Part , continuing sometimes several Days .
BAKER-1742-2,210.367

This is best prevented , by enlarging the Wound immediately to give it
some Discharge . BAKER-1742-2,210.368

<P_211>

The two Darts lye within the Sting as in Plate XIII. Fig. X. <font> a
<$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,211.370

When thrust out they appear as in Fig. X. <font> b <$$font> .
BAKER-1742-2,211.371

Mr. Derham says , he counted , in the <font> Sting <$$font> of a <font>
Wasp <$$font> , eight Beards on the Side of each Dart , somewhat like
the Beards of Fish-Hooks , BAKER-1742-2,211.372

and I have observed the same Number in that of a <font> Bee <$$font> .
BAKER-1742-2,211.373

When these Beards are struck deep in the Flesh , if the wounded Person
starts before the <font> Bee <$$font> can disengage them , she leaves
her <font> Sting <$$font> behind sticking in the Wound :
BAKER-1742-2,211.374

but if he has Patience to stand quiet , till she brings the Hooks close
down the Side of the Darts , she withdraws her Weapon ,
BAKER-1742-2,211.375

and the Wound become much less painful . BAKER-1742-2,211.376

A Wasp is not so liable as a Bee to leave its <font> Sting <$$font>
behind , the Beards of it being rather shorter , and the Animal stronger
and more nimble . BAKER-1742-2,211.377

To view the <font> Sting <$$font> of a <font> Bee <$$font> by the <font>
Microscope <$$font> , cut off the End of its Tail , and then touching it
with a Pin or Needle , it will thrust out the <font> Sting <$$font> and
<font> Darts <$$font> , which may be snipt off with a Pair of Scissors
{TEXT:Scissars} and kept for Observation . BAKER-1742-2,211.378

Also , if you catch a <font> Bee <$$font> in a Leather Glove , its
<font> Sting <$$font> will be <P_212> left therein , being unable to
disengage its Hooks from Leather : BAKER-1742-2,212.379

and when it is quite dead , which it will not be till after several
Hours , you may by Care and Gentleness extract it with its Darts and
Hooks . BAKER-1742-2,212.380

By squeezing the Tail , pulling out the Sting , and pressing it at the
Bottom , you may likewise force up the Darts ; BAKER-1742-2,212.381

but without some Practice this will be a little difficult .
BAKER-1742-2,212.382

The Bag containing the poisonous Juice may easily be found at the Bottom
of the <font> Sting <$$font> , and examin'd , being commonly pulled out
with it : BAKER-1742-2,212.383

and , by letting the <font> Bee <$$font> strike its <font> Sting
<$$font> upon some hard Body , enough of the said Juice may be obtained
to put upon a Slip of Glass , in order to view the <font> Salts <$$font>
, floating therein at first , and afterwards shooting into Crystals .
BAKER-1742-2,212.384

<heading>

<font> Of the <$$font> Sting <font> of a <$$font> Scorpion .
BAKER-1742-2,212.386

<$$heading>

How far the <font> Sting <$$font> of a <font> Scorpion <$$font> is of a
like Structure with that of a <font> Bee <$$font> I never had the
Opportunity of examining , as none of them are brought alive to <font>
England <$$font> ; BAKER-1742-2,212.388

but the Curious that go abroad into hot Countries , where they are
produced , would do well to observe , particularly , whether a Dart
<P_213> or Darts are not sheathed in the horny Sting at the Extremity of
their Tail . BAKER-1742-2,213.389

The Opinions of Authors are very different as to this Creature's having
or not having any opening in its <font> Sting <$$font> , through which a
Poison issues into the Wound that it makes . BAKER-1742-2,213.390

Galen says , there is none : BAKER-1742-2,213.391

Pliny , Tertullian , Elian , Aldrovand and others assert , on the
contrary , that there is . BAKER-1742-2,213.392

But I think this Matter is set in the truest Light by <font> Seignior
<$$font> Redi , that diligent Naturalist {TEXT:Nataralist} , who took
the Pains to examine <font> Scorpions <$$font> brought from Tunis , from
Egypt , and from Italy , in order to discover this Aperture , with two
of the best <font> Microscopes <$$font> in the <font> Musaeum <$$font>
of the <font> Grand Duke <$$font> of Tuscany , one whereof was made at
Rome , and the other in England : BAKER-1742-2,213.393

but , though these Glasses were excellent , he was unable to discern the
least Perforation . BAKER-1742-2,213.394

However , not satisfied with only viewing them , he endeavoured , by
Pressure , to squeeze from the Cavity of the <font> Sting <$$font> any
Liquor it might contain ; BAKER-1742-2,213.395

but he found it so hard and horny , that Squeezing could have no Effect
. BAKER-1742-2,213.396

He , moreover , caused a <font> Scorpion <$$font> to strike on a Place
of Iron , BAKER-1742-2,213.397

but no Moisture appeared thereon ; so that he began to conclude Galen's
Opinion right ; when he discovered , accidentally , an exceeding small
and almost invisible Drop of <font> white Liquor <$$font> upon the
<P_214> <font> Sting <$$font> ; which convinced him that Elian says true
, where he asserts , that the Perforation in a <font> Scorpion <$$font>
's Sting is small beyond the Possibility of being seen .
BAKER-1742-2,214.398

And such a Drop he frequently saw afterwards , in the Progress of his
Experiments , on the <font> Stings <$$font> of several <font> Scorpions
<$$font> , at the Time of their Striking : which Drop , entering the
Wound , produced the most fatal Effects . BAKER-1742-2,214.399

What a virulent and surprizing Poison must this be ! that , in so very
minute a Quantity , can contaminate the whole Mass of the Fluids , and
bring on sudden Death , not only in Man and other smaller Creatures ,
but even in Lions , Camels and Elephants , as we are assured it will !
BAKER-1742-2,214.400

How subtle {TEXT:subtile} , how penetrating , how divisible , must the
component Particles of this little Speck of Venom be !
BAKER-1742-2,214.401

and how strong Proof it affords , that the greatest Changes imaginable
may be wrought in the human Body , by the Admixture of different Liquors
with the Blood , even in the smallest Quantities ! BAKER-1742-2,214.402

<P_215>

<heading>

<font> Of the <$$font> Poison <font> of a <$$font> Viper .
BAKER-1742-2,215.405

<$$heading>

The Mischief done by the <font> Viper <$$font> , or any other Serpent ,
is not effected by means of a Sting , BAKER-1742-2,215.407

<paren> for what is darted out of its Mouth , and by the vulgar supposed
a Sting , is nothing but the Tongue of the Animal , and perfectly
harmless : <$$paren> BAKER-1742-2,215.408

but its <font> Teeth <$$font> are the dreadful Weapons wherein the
Poison lies , BAKER-1742-2,215.409

and its <font> Bite <$$font> is all we need to fear .
BAKER-1742-2,215.410

Dr. Mead , in his most valuable Essay on the <font> Poison of the Viper
<$$font> , has described these Teeth and their Poison so much better
than it is possible for me to do , that I shall beg Leave to borrow the
chief I have to say from him . BAKER-1742-2,215.411

The poisonous <font> Fangs <$$font> or great <font> Teeth <$$font> are
crooked and bent : BAKER-1742-2,215.412

they are hollow from the Root a considerable Way up , not to the very
Point , <paren> which is solid and sharp to penetrate the better
<$$paren> but to within a little Distance of it : as may be seen by
splitting a Tooth through the Middle . BAKER-1742-2,215.413

This Cavity ends in a visible Slit resembling a Nip or Cut of a Pen .
BAKER-1742-2,215.414

See Plate XIII. Fig. XI . BAKER-1742-2,215.415

The Poison is ejected through this Slit from a Bag at the Root of the
Teeth , into which it is discharg'd by a Duct just behind the Orbit of
the Eye , <P_216> from a conglomerated Gland that separates it from the
Blood . BAKER-1742-2,216.416

The venomous Juice of the <font> Viper <$$font> may be got by enraging
it till it bites on something solid . BAKER-1742-2,216.417

This Juice the Doctor put carefully on a Glass Plate ,
BAKER-1742-2,216.418

and examined it by the <font> Microscope <$$font> .
BAKER-1742-2,216.419

Upon the first Sight he could discover nothing but a Parcel of small
Salts nimbly floating in the Liquor : BAKER-1742-2,216.420

but in a very short Time the Appearance was changed BAKER-1742-2,216.421

and those saline Particles were now shot out as it were into Crystals of
an incredible Tenuity or Sharpness , with something like Knots , here
and there , from which they seemed to proceed : so that the whole
Texture did in a manner represent a Spider's Web , though infinitely
finer and more minute ; BAKER-1742-2,216.422

and yet withal , so rigid were these pellucid Spicula or Darts , that
they remain'd unaltered upon his Glass for several Months .
BAKER-1742-2,216.423

And , by considering the necessary Effects of such Spicula in the Blood
, the learned Physician accounts very reasonably for all the Symptoms
usually succeeding the Bite of this Animal . BAKER-1742-2,216.424

Galen says , the <font> Mountebanks <$$font> of this Time used , with
some kind of Paste , to stop the Perforations in the Teeth of <font>
Vipers <$$font> , whereby they kept in the Venom ; and then would suffer
themselves to be bit , pretending their Antidotes prevented any ill
Effects . BAKER-1742-2,216.425

<P_217>

<heading>

Chap. XXXII . BAKER-1742-2,217.428

<font> Of the <$$font> Snail . BAKER-1742-2,217.429

<$$heading>

The <font> Snail <$$font> has four Eyes , at the End of optic Nerves ,
sheathed in her Horns , which she can draw in , or thrust out , turn ,
or direct , as she finds more convenient . BAKER-1742-2,217.431

When the Horns are out , cut off nimbly the Extremity of one of them ,
and , placing it before the <font> Microscope <$$font> , you may
discover the black Spot at the End to be really a <font> Semiglobular
Eye <$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,217.432

The Dissection of this Animal is very curious ; BAKER-1742-2,217.433

for the <font> Microscope <$$font> does not only shew the Heart ,
beating , just against a round Hole near the Neck , which seems the
Place of Respiration ; but also the Liver Spleen , Stomach , Veins ,
Arteries , Guts , Mouth and Teeth . BAKER-1742-2,217.434

The Guts are green , from the Creature's eating Herbs , and branched all
over with fine capillary white Veins . BAKER-1742-2,217.435

The Mouth is like a Hare's or Rabbit's {TEXT:Rabbet's} , with four or
six <font> Needle-Teeth <$$font> resembling those of <font> Leeches
<$$font> , and of a Substance like Horn . BAKER-1742-2,217.436

<font> Snails <$$font> are all <font> Hermaphrodites <$$font> , having
both Sexes united in each Individual . BAKER-1742-2,217.437

They lay their Eggs with great Care in the Earth ; BAKER-1742-2,217.438

<P_218>

and the young ones come out , when hatched , with Shells completely
{TEXT:compleatly} formed , and of a Minuteness proportionable to their
own Size . BAKER-1742-2,218.440

These little Shells enlarge , as the <font> Snails <$$font> advance in
Growth , by the Addition of new Circles , of which Circles they always
continue to be the Center . BAKER-1742-2,218.441

Cutting off a <font> Snail <$$font> 's Head , a <font> little Stone
<$$font> appears , which from its diuretic Quality is of singular
Service in gravelly Disorders . BAKER-1742-2,218.442

Immediately under this <font> Stone <$$font> the beating <font> Heart
<$$font> is seen , with its <font> Auricles <$$font> , which are
membranous ; all of a white Colour , as are also the Vessels issuing
therefrom . BAKER-1742-2,218.443

This <font> little Stone <$$font> seems intended to serve instead of a
Breast-Bone , which most other Creatures have . BAKER-1742-2,218.444

It is very remarkable that <font> Snails <$$font> discharge their
Excrements at an Opening in the Neck , that they breathe there , and
that both their male and female Parts of Generation are situated near
the same Place . BAKER-1742-2,218.445

The male Part is very long , BAKER-1742-2,218.446

and in Shape resembles the <font> Penis <$$font> of a Whale .
BAKER-1742-2,218.447

<P_219>

<heading>

Chap. XXXIII . BAKER-1742-2,219.450

<font> Of the common <$$font> Fly . BAKER-1742-2,219.451

<$$heading>

The common <font> Fly <$$font> is adorn'd with Beauties not to be
conceived without a <font> Microscope <$$font> . BAKER-1742-2,219.453

It is studded from Head to Tail with Silver and Black ,
BAKER-1742-2,219.454

and its Body is all over beset with Bristles pointing towards the Tail .
BAKER-1742-2,219.455

The Head of it contains two large Eyes , encircled with Borders of
Silver Hairs ; a wide Mouth , and an hairy Trunk or Instrument to take
in its Food : a Pair of short Horns , several stiff black Bristles , and
many other Particulars discoverable by the <font> Microscope <$$font> .
BAKER-1742-2,219.456

Its Trunk consists of two Parts , folding over one another , and
sheathed in the Mouth . BAKER-1742-2,219.457

The Extremity thereof is sharp like a Knife , for the Separation of any
thing . BAKER-1742-2,219.458

The two Parts can also be form'd , occasionally , into a Pair of Lips
for taking up proper Quantities of Food , BAKER-1742-2,219.459

and by the <font> Fly <$$font> 's sucking in the Air , they become a
kind of Pump , to draw up the Juices of Fruits or other Liquors .
BAKER-1742-2,219.460

Some <font> Flies <$$font> are much lighter_coloured and more
transparent than others , BAKER-1742-2,219.461

and in such the Motion of the Guts may be seen very <P_220> distinctly ,
working from the Stomach towards the Anus ; and also the Motion of the
Lungs , contracting and dilating themselves alternately .
BAKER-1742-2,220.462

Upon opening a <font> Fly <$$font> , numberless Veins may likewise be
discover'd dispersed over the Surface of its Intestines :
BAKER-1742-2,220.463

for the Veins being blackish , and the Intestines white , they are
plainly visible by the <font> Microscope <$$font> , though
two_hundred_thousand Times slenderer than the Hair of a Man's Beard .
BAKER-1742-2,220.464

According to Mr. Leeuwenhoek , the Diameter of four_hundred_and_fifty
such minute Veins were about equal to the Diameter of a single Hair of
his Beard ; BAKER-1742-2,220.465

and consequently , two_hundred_thousand of them put together would be
about the Bigness of such an Hair . BAKER-1742-2,220.466

In most kinds of <font> Flies <$$font> , the Female is furnished with a
moveable Tube at the End of her Tail , by extending of which she can
convey her Eggs into convenient Holes and Receptacles , either in Flesh
, or such other Matters as may afford the Young Ones proper Nourishment
. BAKER-1742-2,220.467

From the Eggs come forth minute Worms or Maggots , which after feeding
for a while , in a voracious Manner , arriving at their full Growth ,
become transformed into little brown <font> Aurelias <$$font> ; <P_221>
whence , after some time longer , they issue perfect Flies .
BAKER-1742-2,221.468

It would be endless to enumerate the different Sorts of <font> Flies
<$$font> , which may continually be met with in the Meadows , Woods and
Gardens : and impossible to describe their various Plumes and
Decorations , surpassing all the Magnificence and Luxury of Dress in the
Courts of the greatest Princes . BAKER-1742-2,221.469

Every curious Observer will find them out himself , and , with Amazement
and Adoration , lift up his Eyes from the <font> Creature <$$font> to
the Creator . BAKER-1742-2,221.470

<heading>

Chap. XXXIV . BAKER-1742-2,221.472

<font> Of the <$$font> Weevil , <font> or <$$font> Corn-Beetle .
BAKER-1742-2,221.473

<$$heading>

The <font> Weevil <$$font> and the <font> Wolf <$$font> are two kinds of
small Insects that do abundance of Mischief to many Sorts of Grain , by
eating into them and devouring all their Substance .
BAKER-1742-2,221.475

The <font> Weevil <$$font> is somewhat bigger than a large Louse , of
the Scarab Kind , with two pretty jointed tufted Horns , and a Trunk or
Piercer {TEXT:Peircer} projecting from the Fore-part of its Head ; at
the End of which Trunk <paren> which is very long in Proportion to its
Body <$$paren> are a sort of Forceps or sharp Teeth , wherewith it gnaws
its Way into the Heart of the <P_222> Grain , either to seek its Food or
deposit its Eggs there . BAKER-1742-2,222.476

