<BEGIN_barclay-1743-2>

<P_39>

<heading>

Chap. III . BARCLAY-1743-2,39.4

<font> Of the duty of parents in the education of children . <$$font>
BARCLAY-1743-2,39.5

<$$heading>

Parents would , no doubt , wish their children accomplished in every
part of education ; that , besides an exact knowledge of language , they
were also instructed in philosophy , and whatever sciences are reckoned
necessary either in a publick or private station . BARCLAY-1743-2,39.7

But it is as certain , that few children are able to attain this height
of improvement , or answer the fond wishes of an indulgent father .
BARCLAY-1743-2,39.8

We can no more be all equally wise , than equally rich or fair .
BARCLAY-1743-2,39.9

In every family , therefore , that child only ought to have liberal
education , who discovers a particular fondness for instruction .
BARCLAY-1743-2,39.10

What can be more ridiculous , than the general way of recommending the
same task , and expecting the same application and progress from the
several children that meet together in a grammar-school ? as if all
were precisely of the same genius , and had equally a turn for <font>
Greek <$$font> and <font> Latin <$$font> . BARCLAY-1743-2,39.11

This <P_40> is not consistent with the variety of human dispositions .
BARCLAY-1743-2,40.12

I dare say , where one discovers an inclination for the learned
languages , twenty have none at all . BARCLAY-1743-2,40.13

The greatest application will never make them read the classicks with
any tolerable taste . BARCLAY-1743-2,40.14

Yet they may become very useful members of society .
BARCLAY-1743-2,40.15

We have all our several parts assigned us in the world ,
BARCLAY-1743-2,40.16

and whoever is not endued with this taste , will , upon examination ,
discover some other talent of his own , useful in the pursuit both of
private and publick advantage . BARCLAY-1743-2,40.17

Such as have no genius for philosophy or polite learning , commonly
enjoy a superior degree of health and courage , BARCLAY-1743-2,40.18

or possess such a turn for trade and business , as is sufficient to
distinguish them in the more active scenes of life .
BARCLAY-1743-2,40.19

Parents therefore should first observe the particular bent of Nature ,
and dispose of their children accordingly . BARCLAY-1743-2,40.20

It is she that must point out the end ; BARCLAY-1743-2,40.21

all our task is , prescribing the proper means for accomplishing her
intention . BARCLAY-1743-2,40.22

When this is not the case , education is only a formal course of
trifling inconsistency . BARCLAY-1743-2,40.23

<P_41>

When parents are satisfied with the diligence and capacity of a master ,
they ought to spare no expence in forming such of their children as are
capable of education . BARCLAY-1743-2,41.25

If any thing can excuse negligence in masters , it is the reward given
for their labour . BARCLAY-1743-2,41.26

This generally is so small , that a certain number must be had for
subsistence , BARCLAY-1743-2,41.27

and though nature forms but few for the muses , necessity creates a
great many pretenders ; as the ancients were sometimes obliged to lift
their slaves among the free citizens . BARCLAY-1743-2,41.28

But this inconvenience parents may very soon remove .
BARCLAY-1743-2,41.29

Would they but observe the same rule in education as in the general
course of life , and proportion the reward to the good done their
children ; then men of spirit , blessed with temper and extensive
learning , might perhaps undertake the laborious task , and the world
with pleasure observe youth employed according to their different genius
, and the original design of nature . BARCLAY-1743-2,41.30

But when teachers and menial servants are put so much on a level , while
they are equally rewarded and esteemed , we must expect the servile
station agreeable only to a <P_42> low and groveling disposition .
BARCLAY-1743-2,42.31

At least , nothing but the strongest necessity can dispose one of a
tolerable education , so far to sacrifice his freedom and happiness .
BARCLAY-1743-2,42.32

But parents have often , no doubt , reflected in this manner , though
they do not incline to violate a practice so much calculated for the
saving of expence . BARCLAY-1743-2,42.33

We received it from our frugal forefathers , BARCLAY-1743-2,42.34

and think it sufficient if we provide for our children after their
example . BARCLAY-1743-2,42.35

But , allowing we were as ignorant of the usefulness of learning as they
were , why do not we observe the same frugality in every part of
education ? BARCLAY-1743-2,42.36

Were all teachers upon the same pay , parents were at least impartial ,
BARCLAY-1743-2,42.37

and there were then less reason to complain . BARCLAY-1743-2,42.38

But are the heels more valuable than the head , that the
dancing-master's revenue so much exceeds what is given for teaching the
liberal sciences ? BARCLAY-1743-2,42.39

They live in all the pomp of luxury , while teachers of the arts and
sciences droop in mean obscurity . BARCLAY-1743-2,42.40

Parents then must either prefer this amusing exercise to learning , or
acknowledge , that , in such expences , they are rather directed <P_43>
by custom and fashion , than by the value and importance of the things
themselves . BARCLAY-1743-2,43.41

- It were surely more for a boy's advantage , and more worthy men of
sense , to think less of the charge , and be concerned rather for the
real improvement of children in the several branches of education .
BARCLAY-1743-2,43.42

When this is not neglected , or when children advance in proportion to
their genius and capacity , I presume such as are acquainted with the
valuable purchase , will reckon a right education very cheap at double
the price they commonly bestow . BARCLAY-1743-2,43.43

Sure they will allow we undergo the most laborious , and , I wish it
were not thought , the most contemptible profession under the sun .
BARCLAY-1743-2,43.44

What I have here said , will be taken , I hope , as it is designed .
BARCLAY-1743-2,43.45

Without the least regard to any circumstances whatever , I have spoke
{COM:sic} freely , as I thought the interest of education concerned ,
and as I was encouraged by Gentlemen of learning and distinction .
BARCLAY-1743-2,43.46

I have heard them often regret the small care that was taken to promote
education , and assign the present decay of learning chiefly to the want
of proper <P_44> encouragement . BARCLAY-1743-2,44.47

It is the publick cry , the voice of society which complains ,
BARCLAY-1743-2,44.48

or I should never have said one word upon my own authority .
BARCLAY-1743-2,44.49

Nay it has been a fault of some standing ; so that , like an inveterate
disease , I am afraid it never will be cured by any observations of mine
. BARCLAY-1743-2,44.50

What Mr. <font> Locke <$$font> says upon this subject , deserves
attention . BARCLAY-1743-2,44.51

" As to the charge of education , says he , I think it will be the money
best laid out , that can be , about our children ; BARCLAY-1743-2,44.52

and therefore , though it may be expensive more than is ordinary , yet
it can@ @not be thought dear . BARCLAY-1743-2,44.53

He that at any rate procures his child a good mind , well_principled ,
tempered to virtue and usefulness , and adorned with civility and good
breeding , makes a better purchase for him , than if he had laid out the
money for an addition of more earth to his former acres .
BARCLAY-1743-2,44.54

Spare it in toys and playgames , in silk and ribbons , laces , and other
useless expences , as much as you please ; BARCLAY-1743-2,44.55

but be not sparing in so necessary a part as this .
BARCLAY-1743-2,44.56

It is not good husbandry , <P_45> to make his fortune rich , and his
mind poor . BARCLAY-1743-2,45.57

I have often with great admiration seen people lavish it profusely , in
tricking up their children in fine cloaths , lodging and feeding them
sumptuously , allowing them more than enough of useless servants , and
at the same time starve their minds , and not take sufficient care to
cover that which is the most shameful nakedness , <font> viz. <$$font>
their natural wrong inclinations and ignorance . BARCLAY-1743-2,45.58

This I can look on as no other than a sacrificing to their own vanity ,
it shewing more their pride , than true care of the good of their
children . BARCLAY-1743-2,45.59

Whatsoever you employ to the advantage of your son's mind , will shew
your true kindness , though it be to the lessening of his estate .
BARCLAY-1743-2,45.60

A wise and good man can hardly want either the opinion or reality of
being great and happy ; BARCLAY-1743-2,45.61

but he that is foolish or vitious , can be neither great nor happy ,
what estate soever you leave him . BARCLAY-1743-2,45.62

And I ask you , whether there be not men in the world , whom you had
rather have your son be with five_hundred pounds <font> per_annum
<$$font> , <P_46> than some other you know with five_thousand pounds .
" BARCLAY-1743-2,46.63

But even the publick encouragement , or pensions , allowed the
instructors of youth , bear no manner of proportion to their vast labour
, and the services expected from them . BARCLAY-1743-2,46.64

What a poor reward is the most of our publick salaries for opening the
minds of children , instilling right habits and dispositions , and
helping them through all the difficulties of language , history and
antiquity ? BARCLAY-1743-2,46.65

Will ever any man of tolerable taste , spend both time and money in a
long course of education , that he may be capable of such instructions ,
and for all his expence and labour receive at last the poorest
gratification ? BARCLAY-1743-2,46.66

It is just sufficient to procure him a refuge from the winds and rain ,
BARCLAY-1743-2,46.67

raises him just a degree above the common objects of compassion ,
BARCLAY-1743-2,46.68

and after his death , leaves his family <paren> if he has one <$$paren>
to languish in the number of the poor and needy . BARCLAY-1743-2,46.69

While this is the case , publick schools among a variety of poor
scholars will no doubt be provided with masters in name and appearance ,
but , seldom or ever , <P_47> with men that are really capable of
rightly discharging the duties of such an important office .
BARCLAY-1743-2,47.70

- It is indeed very much to be regretted {TEXT:regreted} , that , while
we are careful in things of less consequence , we should be so very
indifferent in this article , and proceed thus from generation to
generation in contempt of the very best means to promote the welfare of
society , BARCLAY-1743-2,47.71

I mean the right education of youth . BARCLAY-1743-2,47.72

Nay , in this way , learning itself decays . BARCLAY-1743-2,47.73

There are a great many honest men without knowledge , who judge of her
use and value from the appearance , and respect paid to the persons who
teach the several sciences . BARCLAY-1743-2,47.74

When they thrive and prosper , learning , these people imagine , must
surely be a fine thing , BARCLAY-1743-2,47.75

and they discover all an emulation to give their children some little
share of it at least , and have them under the care of such able men .
BARCLAY-1743-2,47.76

But when teachers go about in a mean dress , as so many humble
suppliants , from door to door , men commonly shun their company , as
people below notice , BARCLAY-1743-2,47.77

and conceive the highest contempt for a profession which is not able to
<P_48> procure tolerable subsistence . BARCLAY-1743-2,48.78

If at any time they recommend the care of their children , they do it
with an air of superiority ; BARCLAY-1743-2,48.79

and , taking advantage of the master's poverty , let him know , he must
walk after their direction , and expect their countenance no longer than
he is careful to humour and please the children . BARCLAY-1743-2,48.80

No wonder such scholars despise the teacher , and , when they come to
school , imagine themselves so often superior to the poor Gentleman who
directs them . BARCLAY-1743-2,48.81

- It is of no consequence to say , that teachers have generally as much
as they deserve . BARCLAY-1743-2,48.82

The want of genius in masters , proceeds from the publick scorn of the
profession . BARCLAY-1743-2,48.83

But when proper encouragement is given , proper persons will appear for
the exercise of so useful an employment , and men of genius be no more
ashamed to bestow their whole care in improving the rising generation .
BARCLAY-1743-2,48.84

I am sorry to hear it observed , that , as the world goes now , surely
nothing but the fear of starving would make any man of the least merit
apply himself to the instruction of youth . BARCLAY-1743-2,48.85

