<BEGIN_barclay-1743-1>

<P_9>

<heading>

A Treatise on Education . BARCLAY-1743-1,9.4

<$$heading>

<heading>

Chap. I . BARCLAY-1743-1,9.7

<font> Of publick and private education ; of the character of teachers ,
their behaviour in school , and what particular things they ought to
encourage or prevent . <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,9.8

<$$heading>

The question concerning publick or private education has already been
the subject of much debate . BARCLAY-1743-1,9.10

Some insist for the publick way , as inspiring youth with more vigour ,
and giving them that degree of resolution which is necessary for all
that would prosper in <P_10> the busy world . BARCLAY-1743-1,10.11

Others prefer the private manner of instruction , as the best school for
virtue , where children may be taught a due balance of the passions ,
and such a regard to religion and virtue as afterwards influences the
whole of their behaviour . BARCLAY-1743-1,10.12

In this way they learn the best maxims for life , which in all events
direct their conduct much better than the forward assurance of a
rambling schoolboy . BARCLAY-1743-1,10.13

But , waiving {TEXT:waving} this controversy , it were better perhaps to
consider the different dispositions of children , and be determined in
our choice by them , rather than our own general apprehensions of the
good or bad consequences of private and publick education .
BARCLAY-1743-1,10.14

It is possible to shew , that any one of them may succeed , and answer
the design , when children are at due pains , and bestow the application
necessary in both ways . BARCLAY-1743-1,10.15

But when , on the other hand , we consider the various dispositions of
mankind , one would still imagine , it were not so natural to train them
all up in one general method : BARCLAY-1743-1,10.16

but , as every tree must be planted in a soil proper to its kind , and
requires particular culture , <P_11> so our various tempers and
dispositions demand each a different manner of instruction and
improvement . BARCLAY-1743-1,11.17

If so , the best method of education , is not that which is most publick
or private , but that which agrees best with the temper to be formed .
BARCLAY-1743-1,11.18

Boys of a lively turn , who seem to be born for action , are best
calculated for the discipline of a publick school .
BARCLAY-1743-1,11.19

There they may improve in natural resolution , while mutual emulation ,
if the master is at due pains , occasions uncommon progress . I say ,
if in such circumstances a teacher bestows proper care ;
BARCLAY-1743-1,11.20

for , if either the number of scholars or hurry of employment render him
neglectful , the livelier boys are , the more they are exposed to every
kind of danger . BARCLAY-1743-1,11.21

They are hurried away by the violence of passion , BARCLAY-1743-1,11.22

and , like a ship without balast , or the direction of a skilful pilot ,
sink ere they perform half the short voyage of life .
BARCLAY-1743-1,11.23

On the contrary , boys of a milder disposition , who scarce speak above
their breath , and are averse to rambling or any violent exercise ,
succeed better in a course of private education . BARCLAY-1743-1,11.24

The harsh discipline of a <P_12> publick school , must either break what
spirit they have , or keep them in such perpetual terror , as would very
much lessen application . BARCLAY-1743-1,12.25

Besides , their health is equally in danger by violent exercise , or the
oppressive injuries of the more robust . BARCLAY-1743-1,12.26

- There is indeed some danger , that such boys in private may be trained
up too tenderly . BARCLAY-1743-1,12.27

When we are educated in effeminacy , we come , no doubt , badly prepared
into the world , where we must not expect to live always at ease , and
where we contribute very little to the publick interest , if we be
incapable of toil and fatigue . BARCLAY-1743-1,12.28

But , notwithstanding , time and experience will better correct the
errors of a fond mother , or too indulgent tutor , than restore that
resolution and vigour which has been early crushed under a severe master
, or ruined in circumstances which are not agreeable to the natural
frame and disposition of mind . BARCLAY-1743-1,12.29

The best method of education seems , after all , to lie betwixt both
extremes ; BARCLAY-1743-1,12.30

and is that which is neither too publick nor too private ; where there
is a sufficient number of boys to encourage emulation , and no <P_13>
such numbers as are apt to occasion disorder ; where they could all
dwell in the same house , eat at the same table , be a check one upon
another , and be ever under the master's eye . BARCLAY-1743-1,13.31

In this way , boys at the same time improve in the principles of
knowledge and humanity , BARCLAY-1743-1,13.32

attend the pleasures of conversation , BARCLAY-1743-1,13.33

and insensibly fall into that settled course of complaisance , which
increases the pleasures of society , and procures us real love and
esteem . BARCLAY-1743-1,13.34

Here too the master beholds at leisure the difference of tempers ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,13.35

applies to each in every circumstance proper rewards and punishments ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,13.36

observes that every word and action be suitable to the general end of
education , BARCLAY-1743-1,13.37

and encourages virtue in a manner both inconceivable and impracticable
in too publick a method of education . BARCLAY-1743-1,13.38

But in any manner of instruction , publick or private , a great deal
depends upon the labour and industry of the teacher .
BARCLAY-1743-1,13.39

The world ought therefore to be well acquainted with his character and
abilities , before he is allowed to undertake an employment of such
importance . BARCLAY-1743-1,13.40

We ought to learn his <P_14> sentiments of education , what he knows of
grammar , and in what familiar method he proposes to convey the first
principles into the minds of children ; whether he thinks they may be
taught any thing besides <font> Greek <$$font> and <font> Latin <$$font>
, if such knowledge be universally necessary , and how far the rules and
expressions of the <font> English <$$font> language are to be regarded
at a grammar-school ; at what time a boy should read the poets , if
promiscuously with the historians , or if they would not rather be a
mutual hindrance , from their different manner and expression ; if it is
possible to inspire youth with any thing like taste , or when and in
what way such a thing is to be acquired . BARCLAY-1743-1,14.41

These , with a variety of other questions , of the use and method of
teaching geography , history , mythology , with the customs of antiquity
, are better proofs of his capacity , than turning one language into
another , or performing such exercises as some boys in the higher
classes could perhaps discharge with equal applause .
BARCLAY-1743-1,14.42

But teachers above all should excel in the art of communication , or
such a clear , familiar <P_15> expression , as may in a manner command a
boy's attention . BARCLAY-1743-1,15.43

Nature , in all her various ways of acting , is not so difficult to be
understood , as she is darkened by our hard expressions and obscure way
of speaking . BARCLAY-1743-1,15.44

Philosophers , lawyers , physicians , speak in a language peculiar to
themselves , BARCLAY-1743-1,15.45

and write each in their several professions so as to form many different
dialects of the same language : BARCLAY-1743-1,15.46

yet all this learned eloquence is of no great consequence ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,15.47

and plainer words might be used in explaining every science , with
greater ease and more general advantage ; especially with regard to
children , who find often less difficulty in apprehending the thought ,
than the manner of expression , so different from what they are wont to
hear in conversation . BARCLAY-1743-1,15.48

I shall not say , how far this refined stile is necessary in the learned
world , where we address ourselves to men ; BARCLAY-1743-1,15.49

but it surely retards the progress of youth , BARCLAY-1743-1,15.50

and keeps them longer from improving in the knowledge of nature .
BARCLAY-1743-1,15.51

Above all it is inexcusable in a teacher , who ought to lay aside all
the nicer turns of speech , and speak in the plain language of children
, <P_16> with whom he is chiefly concerned . BARCLAY-1743-1,16.52

This easiness of expression some reckon the gift of nature ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,16.53

and it is so necessary , that , without it , the most extensive learning
will never make a right teacher . BARCLAY-1743-1,16.54

Such a natural turn may be greatly improved by an exact knowledge of our
own language , which we should be able to command at pleasure , and vary
a_thousand different ways . BARCLAY-1743-1,16.55

We shall succeed in it too in proportion to our knowledge and experience
. BARCLAY-1743-1,16.56

The more we have studied mankind , the larger our view of their
interests and passions ; the better we are qualified , no doubt , to
teach youth , and describe in what manner happiness proceeds from the
practice of virtue . BARCLAY-1743-1,16.57

A master therefore can never apply too much to philosophy , those parts
especially which teach us the knowledge of ourselves , the nature and
consequences of our several actions , and in what things our real
interest and perfection consists . BARCLAY-1743-1,16.58

What we know , we should endeavour to communicate in a smooth , easy
accent . BARCLAY-1743-1,16.59

This with boys is a much greater help to attention , than the superior
beauties of reason <P_17> and fine sense . BARCLAY-1743-1,17.60

But few of them can perceive the strength of argument , or observe the
propriety and justness of sentiment . BARCLAY-1743-1,17.61

But the ear , which ripens before the understanding , immediately flies
the rough expression ; BARCLAY-1743-1,17.62

and the least wrong stop , or uncommon turn of voice , proportionably
lessens attention . BARCLAY-1743-1,17.63

By the way , I have observed this one defect often poison the best
qualities of an accurate preacher , when , for want of a proper accent
or delivery , truth and reason were but faintly heard : whereas soft
expressions , like musick , glide into the ear , excite a pleasing
transport , and gain attention in things of small importance .
BARCLAY-1743-1,17.64

Witness the opera , whose only charm is harmony of sound .
BARCLAY-1743-1,17.65

Thus too , of old , <font> Orpheus <$$font> restrained the savage
passions of mankind ; BARCLAY-1743-1,17.66

for by the woods and rocks which softened at his song , were meant the
first rude sons of men , whom his persuasive eloquence refined and
melted into love . BARCLAY-1743-1,17.67

A master ought also to be a man of understanding , who has seen the
world , and observed the duties and right manner of behaviour in the
several stations of life . BARCLAY-1743-1,17.68

Such <P_18> observations from his own experience , he should lay before
his scholars in the plainest words , and insist upon the good or bad
consequences of practising or neglecting what he recommends .
BARCLAY-1743-1,18.69

In this way , they arrive at an early knowledge of mankind ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,18.70

and learn , before they enter into the world , what they are to expect
in a larger scene of action . BARCLAY-1743-1,18.71

But teachers ought always to beware of any contradiction betwixt their
own behaviour and the advices they recommend . BARCLAY-1743-1,18.72

This would spoil all , as the least variance in our words and actions
makes either of them very little regarded . BARCLAY-1743-1,18.73

Example is allowed to be stronger than precept , BARCLAY-1743-1,18.74

and children especially are much readier to copy what they see , than
what they hear . BARCLAY-1743-1,18.75

There is a curiosity natural to children , which ought never to be
crushed . BARCLAY-1743-1,18.76

The master therefore , when he talks upon any subject , should encourage
them to ask questions , and relate every thing in such a manner as they
may be always some way or other concerned . BARCLAY-1743-1,18.77

He should never lose sight of his scholars , BARCLAY-1743-1,18.78

but whether he is talking of <font> Greece <$$font> or <font> Rome
<$$font> , let him now and then <P_19> make an application of the
circumstances to his little assembly , and ask them how they would have
behaved , and what they think of any action or expression .
BARCLAY-1743-1,19.79

This keeps them always attentive ; BARCLAY-1743-1,19.80

and leads them to ask a_thousand little questions of which one would
scarce think them capable . BARCLAY-1743-1,19.81

But even when they are wrong , this method is commendable , as it
encourages them to speak freely what they think , and gives the master
an occasion to point out every error in judgment , and how they came to
be mistaken . BARCLAY-1743-1,19.82

At any rate such conversation with children is surely better than
keeping them at a distance , and minding them no more when we are
speaking , than if they were strangers , or no way concerned .
BARCLAY-1743-1,19.83

I would observe , that teachers ought to be extremely attentive , and
even with boys of the lowest class be as much in earnest , and reckon
their tasks of as much importance as those of the more advanced .
BARCLAY-1743-1,19.84

If we scorn to be serious in the repetition of <font> penna <$$font> ,
the boy will soon catch the bad example , and proportionably lose his
attention . BARCLAY-1743-1,19.85

I remember , when at school , the masters used to <P_20> walk whole
hours in conversation , leaving us seemingly employed in our several
talks . BARCLAY-1743-1,20.86

We should however have read to better purpose , had they stood each over
their classes , observing the scholars , and sometimes encouraging them
to a closer application . BARCLAY-1743-1,20.87

Boys had better be asleep , than awake and idle . BARCLAY-1743-1,20.88

They not only spend time , BARCLAY-1743-1,20.89

but acquire such habits as destroy all serious attention , and do more
harm in the conduct of life , than all the advantages of <font> Greek
<$$font> and <font> Latin <$$font> are able to compensate .
BARCLAY-1743-1,20.90

But are there not some boys at school really incapable of applying by
themselves , who for want of experience can scarce read the task
prescribed , and are so little used to exercises of memory , that they
can hardly reckon up a_hundred ? BARCLAY-1743-1,20.91

What a deal of time and trouble might one redeem , would we but share
the toil with such of our pupils ? BARCLAY-1743-1,20.92

We need only patience for a while , BARCLAY-1743-1,20.93

and a little pains soon brings them where we wish .
BARCLAY-1743-1,20.94

The master indeed can@ @not be always employed in assisting the youngest
of his scholars . BARCLAY-1743-1,20.95

He should however , in his stead , appoint the most diligent boys in the
higher <P_21> classes . BARCLAY-1743-1,21.96

Among them the young creatures may be equally divided , and rewards
promised the most industrious . BARCLAY-1743-1,21.97

I have seen them apply in this way out of emulation , when nothing else
could prevail . BARCLAY-1743-1,21.98

Such exercises too , in etymology and syntax , must be useful even to
the more advanced ; so that boys employed in assisting the inferior
classes , are at no manner of loss . BARCLAY-1743-1,21.99

Besides , in talking with their young companions , they learn to speak
in a distinct manner , BARCLAY-1743-1,21.100

and improve in the necessary art of communication .
BARCLAY-1743-1,21.101

When boys thus disposed do not answer expectation , we should never
blame such as were appointed to give them assistance .
BARCLAY-1743-1,21.102

The faults of the younger , upon examination , may be the effect of
their own carelessness , which must be greater when they read with a
comrade , than when they are assisted by the master .
BARCLAY-1743-1,21.103

But , even in direct negligence , the boys who are employed to instruct
their companions , should always be well used . BARCLAY-1743-1,21.104

We may indeed express some surprise , that they were not at more pains
to oblige a schoolfellow , and confirm the good <P_22> opinion of their
industry , which was the occasion of giving them such a charge .
BARCLAY-1743-1,22.105

But to inflict real punishment , for omitting what is not properly their
duty , is what the youngest would resent , as an instance of tyranny and
oppression . BARCLAY-1743-1,22.106

Whatever boys behave well in forwarding their companions , deserve to be
commended , BARCLAY-1743-1,22.107

and the master should publickly acknowledge the favour .
BARCLAY-1743-1,22.108

By such encouragement , the generous mind overflows with joy ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,22.109

wishes again to please , and rise in our esteem . BARCLAY-1743-1,22.110

The noble emulation spreads over all , BARCLAY-1743-1,22.111

and in every breast awakens the same application , from the same
laudable ambition . BARCLAY-1743-1,22.112

Before they get any lesson by heart , the master should cause them first
read it distinctly on book , with the translation .
BARCLAY-1743-1,22.113

They imagine , BARCLAY-1743-1,22.114

and it certainly is easier in this way , though the very apprehension
contributes much to shorten the time of preparation .
BARCLAY-1743-1,22.115

When we give them no such assistance , but leave them with the
translation , the number of difficulties makes them quite idle ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,22.116

or , which is as bad , for one <font> Latin <$$font> word , in
explaining , they repeat <P_23> perhaps half_a_dozen <font> English .
<$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,23.117

This is what every day happens , when boys begin young , and are left to
themselves . BARCLAY-1743-1,23.118

To prevent this , we need only be at pains to read a little with them
upon the earlier authors , where there is occasion for translations ;
pointing out the particular manner of explaining by them , and how they
become useful . BARCLAY-1743-1,23.119

- Teachers should also explain , by word of mouth , the meaning of every
lesson , what it contains , how it is connected with the foregoing , and
shew that every part , when united , makes up one general narration or
history , adorned with agreeable reflections . BARCLAY-1743-1,23.120

When this is neglected , boys are ever in the dark , groping about at
random ; BARCLAY-1743-1,23.121

but neither read with that pleasure , BARCLAY-1743-1,23.122

nor reflect with that attention which is necessary for right improvement
. BARCLAY-1743-1,23.123

No impressions are durable , unless familiar to the understanding .
BARCLAY-1743-1,23.124

Whatever is learned by rote , will , I am afraid , be of little use in
the succeeding parts of education . BARCLAY-1743-1,23.125

When boys give an account of their lesson , the master should frequently
ask such as are not repeating , what was last said or <P_24> spoke .
BARCLAY-1743-1,24.126

I had better said , some words before the last ; BARCLAY-1743-1,24.127

for they may hear the sound , and notwithstanding be ignorant of the
connection and design . BARCLAY-1743-1,24.128

Such a method preserves attention , so that boys , by listening , may
profit near as much as when they are examined themselves .
BARCLAY-1743-1,24.129

Without this settled habit of attention , teaching is quite intolerable
. BARCLAY-1743-1,24.130

And , if boys in the ordinary way mind nothing but their own sentence ,
it must be quite ineffectual . BARCLAY-1743-1,24.131

For , of a lesson which consists of a number of lines , what a small
part must we suppose falls to the share of every particular boy ?
BARCLAY-1743-1,24.132

Yet this is all they are anxious about , and perhaps are at some pains
to prepare ; BARCLAY-1743-1,24.133

but with the rest of the lesson imagine they have no manner of concern .
BARCLAY-1743-1,24.134

The more easily this might be prevented , the more inexcusable are the
guardians of education , who take no pains to correct this dangerous
practice . BARCLAY-1743-1,24.135

The master should examine the classes as soon as possible after the
school is convened {TEXT:conveened} , upon whatever was assigned for a
task the night before . BARCLAY-1743-1,24.136

This causes them apply at home , BARCLAY-1743-1,24.137

and produces useful entertainment <P_25> for those hours which are too
often spent in a perpetual round of folly . BARCLAY-1743-1,25.138

Thus too we shorten the course of education ; since the closer our
application , the sooner we acquire the first principles , of language ,
and reap the fruit of our labour in the study of what is more advanced .
BARCLAY-1743-1,25.139

Reading at home does moreover promote right habits .
BARCLAY-1743-1,25.140

In this way we not only attain a greater degree of application ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,25.141

but learn what is still of more importance , to make a right use of time
, and have a due regard for every moment of life .
BARCLAY-1743-1,25.142

Teachers should narrowly observe children when they turn <font> English
<$$font> into <font> Latin <$$font> , or advance to the writing of
themes . BARCLAY-1743-1,25.143

Among the great numbers employed in such exercises , not one of twenty
composes himself . BARCLAY-1743-1,25.144

One good scholar does it for the whole class , who think themselves
highly obliged when they are allowed meanly to steal every word of a
theme from his performance . BARCLAY-1743-1,25.145

Whoever has the interest of his scholars at heart , or a due sense of
honour , might easily discover this fraud , in the resemblance and small
variety of the versions . BARCLAY-1743-1,25.146

But most teachers <P_26> are either so wilfully blind , or so extremely
lazy , that the case is quite otherwise . BARCLAY-1743-1,26.147

For a course of years , this scene of dissimulation succeeds ;
BARCLAY-1743-1,26.148

the scholars impose on the master , BARCLAY-1743-1,26.149

the master deceives the parents , till the world at last removes the
mask , and discovers their insufficiency when it is too late to be
redressed . BARCLAY-1743-1,26.150

The way to prevent this , is by striking immediately at the root , and
behaving so as boys shall disdain such poor assistance .
BARCLAY-1743-1,26.151

Before they are set a writing , let us carefully explain and illustrate
the rules of syntax , BARCLAY-1743-1,26.152

let them construe every sentence of their theme upon book , correct
their own errors , and observe how easily , and by what rules they might
have prevented the least mistake . BARCLAY-1743-1,26.153

When they go wrong , I would rather encourage , than beat them into
attention . BARCLAY-1743-1,26.154

<P_27>

<heading>

Chap. II . BARCLAY-1743-1,27.157

<font> Of the discipline to be observed in schools . <$$font>
BARCLAY-1743-1,27.158

<$$heading>

When masters behave in a familiar manner , some imagine it is impossible
to preserve authority . BARCLAY-1743-1,27.160

But this , from experience , I can say , has not the least foundation .
BARCLAY-1743-1,27.161

Diseases of the mind and body should be handled with the same tender
care ; BARCLAY-1743-1,27.162

and whoever pretends to cure either , ought first to gain the esteem of
his patient . BARCLAY-1743-1,27.163

Boys , like birds , must be caressed into obedience ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,27.164

or they pine away , BARCLAY-1743-1,27.165

and lose that spirit which should support them under labour .
BARCLAY-1743-1,27.166

By severe discipline , we surely can have no real knowledge of the
character and temper . BARCLAY-1743-1,27.167

Children , as <font> Terence <$$font> observes , never act with freedom
under the lash : BARCLAY-1743-1,27.168

<font> Nam qui scire possis , aut ingenium noscere , dum aetas , metus ,
magister prohibeant ? <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,27.169

Besides , indifference to the master is apt to engender {TEXT:ingender}
principles of revenge , and such gloomy passions as disorder the whole
mind , and corrupt the soundness of the best heart .
BARCLAY-1743-1,27.170

<P_28>

Did not the humane and gentle method observed by the ancients , occasion
less trouble than arises now from exercising the rod ?
BARCLAY-1743-1,28.172

I am convinced we should find admonition as effectual , were we but at
equal pains . BARCLAY-1743-1,28.173

Boys are still of the same nature , BARCLAY-1743-1,28.174

have the same desire to please , the same sense of shame and honour ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,28.175

and from these , duly improved , might be brought to conceive equal
esteem for their master . BARCLAY-1743-1,28.176

Various indeed are the ways of working on these principles , which one
can no more enumerate , than describe the various tempers whence they
proceed . BARCLAY-1743-1,28.177

Sometimes youth are reformed by a proper use of ridicule , when ,
instead of condemning , we seem to encourage their follies , and
recommend a courageous indifference for reading . BARCLAY-1743-1,28.178

Some are naturally so timorous , that they can@ @not bear a sharp
reproof : BARCLAY-1743-1,28.179

they must be commended even for the worst performance ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,28.180

or they despair , BARCLAY-1743-1,28.181

and turn quite insipid . BARCLAY-1743-1,28.182

I have seen others , who could not bear a direct insult , who were
inflexible by the rod , fired with emulation from the praises given some
little rival . BARCLAY-1743-1,28.183

Even play <P_29> may be rendered ridiculous , so as a boy shall blush to
receive it when the rest are employed . BARCLAY-1743-1,29.184

When such transient hints are ineffectual , we must have recourse to
more open punishment . BARCLAY-1743-1,29.185

Repeated instances of sloth should publickly be affronted , and
obstinacy meet with the contempt it deserves . BARCLAY-1743-1,29.186

But here we are to beware of any suspicion of injustice ;
BARCLAY-1743-1,29.187

nor ought the master , from his absolute authority , to pronounce
sentence in an arbitrary way . BARCLAY-1743-1,29.188

The matter should be fully examined , every argument in defence of the
criminal patiently heard without passion or partiality .
BARCLAY-1743-1,29.189

It is not enough that we ourselves are conscious of integrity :
BARCLAY-1743-1,29.190

the boy that is accused , every one of his comrades must also see and
own the just procedure , BARCLAY-1743-1,29.191

or the punishment will have no good effect . BARCLAY-1743-1,29.192

On the contrary , resentment on the least imagined injury , is apt to
beget revenge ; which too often occasions conspiracies , more dangerous
than the original quarrel . BARCLAY-1743-1,29.193

- For this reason , in any extraordinary fault , it is perhaps
adviseable to refer the punishment to a court of their own number .
BARCLAY-1743-1,29.194

This they <P_30> imagine to be an affront , BARCLAY-1743-1,30.195

and dread the master much less than such a tribunal .
BARCLAY-1743-1,30.196

The judges in honour are obliged to do justice , BARCLAY-1743-1,30.197

and compassion seldom renders them partial : though , when the sentence
is pronounced , it is agreeable enough to observe them full of concern
for the criminal . BARCLAY-1743-1,30.198

Thus a temper is formed , and such a one too as may greatly improve
their future conduct in life . BARCLAY-1743-1,30.199

- Is it not of further importance , that , when we correct in this
manner , they never think they are ill used , or that they suffer more
than their crimes deserve ? BARCLAY-1743-1,30.200

It is perhaps in this method only we can chastise , and preserve
affection , at the same time . BARCLAY-1743-1,30.201

- The punishments I have ever used , are , confinement after
school-hours , standing while the rest sit , wearing their hats on , and
the like . BARCLAY-1743-1,30.202

The least trifle applied in a certain way , may be raised to the highest
affront : BARCLAY-1743-1,30.203

and such things are ever more formidable than the rod .
BARCLAY-1743-1,30.204

The chief design of correction is , to raise aversion and sorrow for
what is done amiss ; BARCLAY-1743-1,30.205

and he that is so affected as to shed tears upon an affront , is , I
presume , <P_31> in as fair a way of amendment , as he who is lashed
into repentance . BARCLAY-1743-1,31.206

I must however acknowledge , the rod is necessary in great schools ,
where complaints are frequent , BARCLAY-1743-1,31.207

and , among such a variety of boys , some even think themselves above
advice . BARCLAY-1743-1,31.208

But , whatever necessity may sometimes require , let us , I pray , be
merciful , and apply the rod but seldom . BARCLAY-1743-1,31.209

Such as can@ @not be reformed with seeing the lash , or feeling it on
extraordinary occasions , should be entirely dismissed , rather than
continue the master's eternal plague , and the worst example of
obstinacy and disobedience to his companions . BARCLAY-1743-1,31.210

But , in punishing , we should carefully distinguish the crimes of youth
and inadvertency , from those more heinous , which proceed from inward
degeneracy of mind . BARCLAY-1743-1,31.211

We shall otherwise be incessantly chiding , BARCLAY-1743-1,31.212

and boys come to imagine the master needs reformation as well as
themselves . BARCLAY-1743-1,31.213

Besides , in reproving things of smaller consequence , do not we put it
out of our power to fix a particular mark of infamy upon greater crimes
? BARCLAY-1743-1,31.214

When masters take fire upon every <P_32> occasion , boys either imagine
all offences equal , or , which is as dangerous , despair of ever making
themselves agreeable . BARCLAY-1743-1,32.215

I am afraid too , reproof , when common , loses its chief end , and ,
instead of preserving from vice , poisons the temper with a sullen ,
sour indifference : like the winds , which at first disturb the timorous
mariner , but , after repeated injuries , blow over him unconcerned .
BARCLAY-1743-1,32.216

Better then wink at a great many faults ; that , when we are obliged to
chastise , boys may acknowledge we do it with reluctance , and only to
prevent the bad consequences of irregular passion .
BARCLAY-1743-1,32.217

- In order to bring them to such acknowledgement , let us also observe a
proper season for correction , when they are perfectly calm , and have
recovered the first transports of excessive rage .
BARCLAY-1743-1,32.218

Then all parties are more disposed to impartiality ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,32.219

and less care will reconcile them to reason and equity .
BARCLAY-1743-1,32.220

Influenced by anger , boys are rather objects of compassion than reproof
. BARCLAY-1743-1,32.221

I have known them more moved by such sincere marks of pity in the master
, than with the severest punishment and reproach .
BARCLAY-1743-1,32.222

<P_33>

As often as children do well , we should be at equal pains to encourage
them . BARCLAY-1743-1,33.224

We have all an early desire of esteem , BARCLAY-1743-1,33.225

and any scholar , with reasonable encouragement , will do more to gain
the master's affection , than when compelled by force .
BARCLAY-1743-1,33.226

Whoever will not , and are insensible of this laudable ambition , are
but little obliged to nature , being designed rather for the meaner
employments of life , than the pursuit of learning or knowledge .
BARCLAY-1743-1,33.227

When boys are young , any thing may raise emulation .
BARCLAY-1743-1,33.228

The whole art of encouragement depends not so much on the value , as
upon the manner of applying rewards agreeably to the several different
tempers . BARCLAY-1743-1,33.229

The brisker boys , have a strong desire for precedence ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,33.230

and spare no pains that they may lead the class , and stand in the
highest place . BARCLAY-1743-1,33.231

In this case , application is so easy , that the master is at little
trouble . BARCLAY-1743-1,33.232

The talk is got almost as soon as prescribed , BARCLAY-1743-1,33.233

and the fear of losing their usual respect , conquers every temptation
to indolence . BARCLAY-1743-1,33.234

The worst is , when they are excessively idle , or of such a slow
natural capacity as removes all <P_34> hopes of succeeding by the
closest application . BARCLAY-1743-1,34.235

Yet even here there is some relief . BARCLAY-1743-1,34.236

The promise of an hour's play is often of wonderful efficacy ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,34.237

rouzes sometimes the slowest capacity , BARCLAY-1743-1,34.238

and attracts the most wandering attention . BARCLAY-1743-1,34.239

In this way we discover the natural strength of genius ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,34.240

observe what children can easily perform , and what fruit we may
afterwards expect from their labour . BARCLAY-1743-1,34.241

With a view to such rewards , they often prepare in one hour , what they
have slept over more than three . BARCLAY-1743-1,34.242

After such a discovery , however , of the particular extent of genius ,
it is our own fault if ever they are allowed to return to the usual fit
of lethargy . BARCLAY-1743-1,34.243

But I must now mention some other parts of discipline , which , tho'
less valuable in themselves , are of equal consequence with regard to
what they may occasion . BARCLAY-1743-1,34.244

By what we think trifles , the worst habits are often produced ; so that
the mere neglect of external forms , is sometimes the cause of great
disorder . BARCLAY-1743-1,34.245

I mean , when boys , after school-hours , are allowed to remain idle in
the streets , losing not only time , but meeting <P_35> with accidents
which destroy health , and ruin the reputation of the school .
BARCLAY-1743-1,35.246

Besides , every particular neglect of order , must increase the degree
of carelessness ; BARCLAY-1743-1,35.247

and the more the head is filled with diversion , the less we are
qualified for application . BARCLAY-1743-1,35.248

- It is also of some importance , to recommend a care of their books ,
and of every thing else ; as we wish they should improve in that
exactness so useful in the higher scenes of life .
BARCLAY-1743-1,35.249

This early diligence , becomes at length habitual ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,35.250

and is remarkably useful when we desire to rise in the world .
BARCLAY-1743-1,35.251

Thousands are in the way to a fortune , BARCLAY-1743-1,35.252

but only the few who are possessed of this necessary quality , travel on
successfully to the end . BARCLAY-1743-1,35.253

- Particular care must also be taken , that boys neither exchange books
, nor any thing whatever ; a custom too frequent at schools .
BARCLAY-1743-1,35.254

This is of the worst consequence , exposing the younger to the crafty
snares of the more advanced , and encouraging such a turn to sharping as
may render them dishonest all the ensuing course of life .
BARCLAY-1743-1,35.255

I doubt if ever there was any remarkable thief or robber , who did not
in this manner acquire the <P_36> first principles of that lawless
profession , BARCLAY-1743-1,36.256

The school master who neglects to curb such dangerous passions in the
beginning , is perhaps as much to blame , as the rest {TEXT:reset} , who
encourages them after they are grown strong and ungovernable .
BARCLAY-1743-1,36.257

- Such things some may reckon below attention , BARCLAY-1743-1,36.258

but , from the greatest trifles at school , one may draw the best
instruction , and establish early in children such habits as are very
useful in life . BARCLAY-1743-1,36.259

There is also the greatest art in mixing recreation with study .
BARCLAY-1743-1,36.260

The mind can@ @not be always employed , BARCLAY-1743-1,36.261

but must rest after labour , as well as the body .
BARCLAY-1743-1,36.262

We are generally , however , on extremes , BARCLAY-1743-1,36.263

and boys are ruined either by indolence or too close application .
BARCLAY-1743-1,36.264

The worst way , I think , is , when they play whole days ; when this
part of discipline does not depend so much upon the master , as on the
most trifling accidental circumstances ; when play is not the reward of
merit , but the universal homage we are all accustomed to pay the
birth-days and solemnities of the great . BARCLAY-1743-1,36.265

The boys are then summoned from their books , and , <P_37> by the
cannon's {TEXT:cannons} thundering voice , called out to join the
general uproar . BARCLAY-1743-1,37.266

The first lesson too taught every new scholar , is , where and in what
manner he ought to play . BARCLAY-1743-1,37.267

He no sooner enters the school , than the whole squadron is dismissed ,
run to the well-known field , and mix in various tumult .
BARCLAY-1743-1,37.268

If we think the ordinary allowance too little , we had better join
<font> Wednesday <$$font> to <font> Saturday <$$font> afternoon , than
follow such an irregular , uncertain method . BARCLAY-1743-1,37.269

The common school-hours which we employ in study , are already
determined ; as we also agree in the superior advantages to be reaped
from an early application in the morning , when the mind is free from
care , and fresh after sleep . BARCLAY-1743-1,37.270

But early rising , however useful to people of age , I am afraid is not
so well calculated for children at a publick school ; those especially
of a tender constitution , who are incapable of fatigue .
BARCLAY-1743-1,37.271

They pine away if awaked too soon , BARCLAY-1743-1,37.272

and , for want of sleep , lose health , the greatest blessing in life ;
BARCLAY-1743-1,37.273

nay , it is a little extraordinary , that early rising rather lessens
than increases the time of application . BARCLAY-1743-1,37.274

<P_38>

The poor young creatures , for an appearance only of life in the morning
, are sure to sleep away the forenoon , and look after dinner so
fatigued and pale , that it were pity to add the labour of a book :
Besides the further disadvantage of this early hour , in the time
generally lost before they convene {TEXT:conveen} .
BARCLAY-1743-1,38.276

- I would therefore have such as are very young , or of a tender
constitution , meet every morning at nine ; especially in the
winter-season , when vigorous health dares scarcely look abroad .
BARCLAY-1743-1,38.277

Coming once to school under rain or snow , often confines them long at
home , where they lose more in one fortnight by the fire-side , than
they can recover afterwards at school in double the time .
BARCLAY-1743-1,38.278

Such particular inspection requires , no doubt , great labour and
patience in a master . BARCLAY-1743-1,38.279

But what learning , without these , will qualify any man for a teacher ?
BARCLAY-1743-1,38.280

Whoever does not bestow his whole care and every moment of his time for
the advantage of youth , is unworthy of that character .
BARCLAY-1743-1,38.281

<P_95>

<heading>

Chap. VI . BARCLAY-1743-1,95.284

<font> Of syntax , and the turning of <$$font> English <font> into
<$$font> Latin . BARCLAY-1743-1,95.285

<$$heading>

After an extensive view of etymology , children should be taught the
syntax . BARCLAY-1743-1,95.287

I would begin the first part , called <font> concord <$$font> , with
these general rules : BARCLAY-1743-1,95.288

<font> Every adjective must have a substantive ; Every verb , a
nominative ; Every relative , an antecedent <$$font> .
BARCLAY-1743-1,95.289

But as these are not always expressed , I would teach the method of
finding them , by asking the question , <font> Who ? <$$font> or <font>
What ? <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,95.290

This done , the master will easily explain the nature of their agreement
as to gender , number , case , or the like accidents .
BARCLAY-1743-1,95.291

We need afterwards no more to understand this part , than some
illustrations upon the relative , and the concord of two substantives
signifying the same thing . BARCLAY-1743-1,95.292

The second part , called <font> government <$$font> , extends only
through the five cases . BARCLAY-1743-1,95.293

The rules for each of these , I would separately explain ; beginning
with this useful rule : BARCLAY-1743-1,95.294

<P_96>

<font> The word governing , always makes sense with the word governed .
<$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,96.296

When a boy understands this by a variety of examples , I would proceed
to the government of the genitive , and the rules which relate to it ,
then , all the rest of the cases in order . BARCLAY-1743-1,96.297

The method of this explication will appear from the following account of
the genitive . BARCLAY-1743-1,96.298

Let him know , when he enters upon this case , that it must surely be
governed by some of the eight parts of speech . BARCLAY-1743-1,96.299

Observe then what it makes sense with ; a substantive or adjective noun
, a verb , or whatever it be . BARCLAY-1743-1,96.300

If with a substantive noun , then this rule takes place :
BARCLAY-1743-1,96.301

<font> One substantive governs another signifying a different thing in
the genitive <$$font> . BARCLAY-1743-1,96.302

If with an adjective , it must either be an adjective in the neuter
gender without substantive , or verbal adjectives , <font> &c. <$$font>
BARCLAY-1743-1,96.303

But if no adjective makes sense with the particular genitive , then
perhaps it is governed by a verb ; <font> misereor , miseresco ,
recordor , memini , verbs of accusing , &c. <$$font> -
BARCLAY-1743-1,96.304

I know by experience , that a boy can learn the ordinary rules of syntax
very easily in this way . BARCLAY-1743-1,96.305

One great advantage is , he applies <P_97> them as fast as he learns .
BARCLAY-1743-1,97.306

When he repeats the syntax , I see no great reason for mandating the
<font> Latin <$$font> half of the page . BARCLAY-1743-1,97.307

Any larger knowledge of this kind , must be had afterwards , from Mr.
<font> Ruddiman <$$font> 's <font> English <$$font> notes , and from the
grammar , which should be carefully read over . BARCLAY-1743-1,97.308

But the chief use of syntax , and what renders it familiar , is the
turning of <font> English <$$font> into <font> Latin . <$$font>
BARCLAY-1743-1,97.309

The first step commonly taken in this useful exercise , is reading
<font> Turner's <$$font> or <font> Clark's Introduction . <$$font>
BARCLAY-1743-1,97.310

Such books , as they immediately supply us with proper vocables , are
certainly best for beginners , BARCLAY-1743-1,97.311

and may usefully employ one part of the day , even till we arrive at
<font> Sallust . <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,97.312

In this way , syntax becomes easy , with the flexion of nouns and verbs
. BARCLAY-1743-1,97.313

When they arrive at the history of <font> Rome <$$font> , and have laid
up a number of phrases from the authors , it were not perhaps amiss that
the best scholars exchanged Mr. <font> Clark <$$font> 's <font> Latin
<$$font> for something of their own . BARCLAY-1743-1,97.314

I have known this succeed very well . BARCLAY-1743-1,97.315

As a further help to write <font> Latin <$$font> , the master himself
should , from <font> Cornelius Nepos , Caesar , Sallust , <$$font> or
<font> Cicero , <$$font> extract a collection <P_98> of <font> Latin
<$$font> and <font> English <$$font> phrases . BARCLAY-1743-1,98.316

But then he must be so acquainted with the idioms and proprieties of
both languages , as to translate the <font> Roman <$$font> phrases
precisely Into those which we generally use in expressing the same
thought . BARCLAY-1743-1,98.317

Our common phrase-books have few such expressions as are peculiar to the
<font> English <$$font> , by which we may know how far it differs from
the <font> Latin <$$font> idiom , and how the one might be translated
into the other . BARCLAY-1743-1,98.318

As for the common <font> English <$$font> in literal translations , or
that which boys themselves make from the <font> Latin <$$font> it is not
so much writing proper <font> English , <$$font> as turning our language
into the <font> Roman <$$font> idiom . BARCLAY-1743-1,98.319

In a word , there are many boys who shall easily translate into <font>
Latin Clark's Introduction <$$font> , or any book as much after the
<font> Latin <$$font> idiom , that can@ @not find phrases for one of
thirty expressions , frequent in our <font> Spectators , Guardians ,
<$$font> or whoever write with the same spirit and delicacy .
BARCLAY-1743-1,98.320

This can only proceed from his being kept a stranger to the pure <font>
English <$$font> stile , and used to another , comparatively low ; not
so much the language of our polite authors , as that <P_99> which the
<font> Romans <$$font> would have writ or spoke , had they been taught
<font> English . <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,99.321

The question then is , Whether a master who understands the <font>
English <$$font> propriety , might not , from a careful review of the
classicks , collect a number of <font> Latin <$$font> phrases , and , in
translating them , observe so happily the common <font> English <$$font>
idiom , or manner of speaking , as to remove this obvious difficulty ?
BARCLAY-1743-1,99.322

I have tried this method , BARCLAY-1743-1,99.323

and find , after frequent examination , that thereby the higher classes
improve in writing both languages with greater ease and purity .
BARCLAY-1743-1,99.324

And is it not of further use , that boys in this way know their
authority for every expression , and that the master , from a variety of
phrases , can the better describe the difference and peculiarity of
every particular author ? BARCLAY-1743-1,99.325

I would further have boys themselves translate <font> Sallust <$$font> ,
or any other book whence they have learned their phrases , into the best
<font> English <$$font> in their power BARCLAY-1743-1,99.326

These , when corrected , not only serve as the best versions to be
translated back into <font> Latin , <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,99.327

but bring children to a greater proficiency in their own language .
BARCLAY-1743-1,99.328

- When boys are <P_100> employed in turning such translations into
<font> Latin <$$font> , I would be under no concern how much they
remembered the stile of any author : the nearer the better , provided it
were the real product of attention , and not meanly stolen {TEXT:stoln}
from a concealed copy . BARCLAY-1743-1,100.329

After some time spent in this way , a boy falls insensibly into an
imitation of his author , BARCLAY-1743-1,100.330

and enriches his memory with expressions truly <font> Roman . <$$font>
So that I have known some , on different subjects , write very like the
author they were used to transcribe . BARCLAY-1743-1,100.331

In general , this seems to be a better way of attaining a true <font>
Latin <$$font> stile , than from the best dictionaries , or any of our
ordinary phrase-books . BARCLAY-1743-1,100.332

Another great help to this useful exercise is , when the master <font>
viva_voce <$$font> examines boys upon the <font> English <$$font>
version , and causes them answer every sentence of the <font> Latin
<$$font> , as it stands in the <font> Roman <$$font> author from which
the translation was made . BARCLAY-1743-1,100.333

In this manner , they observe the difference of the two languages in
what we call the <font> ordo verborum <$$font> , or placing of words ;
BARCLAY-1743-1,100.334

and will perhaps improve in that which is natural to <P_101> the <font>
Romans <$$font> , but has ever been matter of great difficulty to the
moderns . BARCLAY-1743-1,101.335

Hence it is , that a great many of our countrymen , when they would
appear in <font> Latin <$$font> , instead of writing that language , do
more properly write <font> English <$$font> in <font> Latin <$$font>
words . BARCLAY-1743-1,101.336

The same may be said of other nations . BARCLAY-1743-1,101.337

After all , the writing of <font> Latin <$$font> is a thing of great
labour , scarcely to be attained by composing a few themes at school .
BARCLAY-1743-1,101.338

People of mature age find it hard to imitate the <font> Roman <$$font>
authors , BARCLAY-1743-1,101.339

and seldom , by the closest application , can form themselves after any
particular stile . BARCLAY-1743-1,101.340

If this be practicable , it is , I think , in turning frequently our
best translations of the classicks back into <font> Latin <$$font> ,
correcting every error by the author from which the translation is made
. BARCLAY-1743-1,101.341

Perhaps masters as well as scholars should observe this method .
BARCLAY-1743-1,101.342

The best may improve , BARCLAY-1743-1,101.343

and numbers really want the instruction to be had by turning <font> Rowe
<$$font> 's <font> Sallust <$$font> , or any such free translation , in
the manner proposed . BARCLAY-1743-1,101.344

The phrases make a deeper impression by such a practice , than if we
only read the author . BARCLAY-1743-1,101.345

We discover also the idioms of <P_102> both languages ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,102.346

and observe what expressions in <font> Sallust <$$font> are proper for
all the different turns of the several <font> English <$$font>
proprieties , as they occur in the freedom of the translator .
BARCLAY-1743-1,102.347

Without this exercise , the greatest master of <font> Latin <$$font>
phrases will not easily apply them to all the various turns of the
<font> English <$$font> language . BARCLAY-1743-1,102.348

These are so different from <font> Latin <$$font> , that one can@ @not
with any elegance or beauty literally change one language into the other
. BARCLAY-1743-1,102.349

It is perhaps too , after a long habit of this kind , that we attain to
the speaking of <font> Latin . <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,102.350

This is so difficult , that boys are scarce capable of it at school :
BARCLAY-1743-1,102.351

at least it would require more time than they can allow without
neglecting many other things necessary in the course of education .
BARCLAY-1743-1,102.352

One may indeed supply them with materials very useful in acquiring this
singular excellency . BARCLAY-1743-1,102.353

Such are the phrases they should gradually learn from the <font> Roman
<$$font> authors , talking over by themselves the several colloquies of
<font> Cordery <$$font> , and , which is still more advantageous ,
observing in what manner the master expresses himself upon the various
<P_103> subjects of conversation . BARCLAY-1743-1,103.354

But supposing we were all qualified for setting boys so good an example
, I doubt if it can well be observed in any publick school .
BARCLAY-1743-1,103.355

There a man has generally so much ado , so many other things to look
after , that the small advantage to be reaped in this way by the more
advanced , would be much exceeded by the great neglect of the lower
classes . BARCLAY-1743-1,103.356

And , in speaking <font> Latin <$$font> , I perceive , that boys attend
more to the words , than the notions they are designed to convey ; so
that whatever expressions were remembered , they retained but very
little of the sense . BARCLAY-1743-1,103.357

Perhaps then we had better let it alone , considering the greater
importance of the <font> English <$$font> language , and the great
improvements we may therein acquire . BARCLAY-1743-1,103.358

To prevent the reflections of all who are offended with the preference
given the <font> English <$$font> language , I beg leave to introduce
the following paragraph from Mr. <font> Locke . <$$font>
BARCLAY-1743-1,103.359

Those that love to be convinced only by great men , will receive the
truth better from his mouth ; while such as are disposed to cavil about
my insufficiency , will not object <P_104> against this point at least ,
which is confirmed by the authority of so great a philosopher .
BARCLAY-1743-1,104.360

" To write and speak correctly , gives a grace , BARCLAY-1743-1,104.361

and gains a favourable attention to what one has to say :
BARCLAY-1743-1,104.362

and since it is <font> English <$$font> that an <font> English <$$font>
Gentleman will have constant use of , that is the language he should
chiefly cultivate , and wherein most care should be taken to polish and
perfect his stile . BARCLAY-1743-1,104.363

To speak and write better <font> Latin <$$font> than <font> English
<$$font> , may make a man be talked of , BARCLAY-1743-1,104.364

but he will find it more to his purpose to express himself well in his
own tongue , that he uses every moment , than to have the vain
commendation of others for a very insignificant quality .
BARCLAY-1743-1,104.365

This I find universally neglected , nor no care taken any where to
improve young men in their own language , that they may thoroughly
understand and be masters of it . BARCLAY-1743-1,104.366

If any one among us have a facility or purity more than ordinary in his
mother-tongue , it is owing to chance , or his genius , or any thing ,
rather than to his education , or any care of his teacher .
BARCLAY-1743-1,104.367

<P_105>

To mind what <font> English <$$font> his pupil speaks or writes , is
below the dignity of one bred up amongst <font> Greek <$$font> or <font>
Latin <$$font> , though he have but little of them himself .
BARCLAY-1743-1,105.369

These are the learned languages , fit only for learned men to meddle
with and teach ; BARCLAY-1743-1,105.370

<font> English <$$font> is the language of the illiterate vulgar :
though yet we see the polity of some of our neighbors hath not thought
it beneath the publick care to promote and reward the improvement of
their own language . BARCLAY-1743-1,105.371

Polishing and enriching their tongue , is no small business among them ;
BARCLAY-1743-1,105.372

it hath colleges and stipends appointed it , BARCLAY-1743-1,105.373

and there is raised amongst them a great ambition and emulation of
writing correctly : BARCLAY-1743-1,105.374

and we see what they are come to by it , and how far they have spread
one of the worst languages possibly in this part of the world , if we
look upon it as it was some few reigns backwards , whatever it be now .
BARCLAY-1743-1,105.375

The great men among the <font> Romans <$$font> were daily exercising
themselves in their own language ; BARCLAY-1743-1,105.376

and we find yet upon record the names of orators , who <P_106> taught
some of the Emperors <font> Latin <$$font> , tho' it were their
mother-tongue . BARCLAY-1743-1,106.377

It is plain , the <font> Greeks <$$font> were yet more nice in theirs .
BARCLAY-1743-1,106.378

All other speech was barbarous to them but their own ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,106.379

and no foreign language appears to have been studied or valued amongst
that learned and acute people ; though it be past doubt that they
borrowed their learning and philosophy from abroad . "
BARCLAY-1743-1,106.380

<P_107>

<heading>

Chap. VII . BARCLAY-1743-1,107.383

<font> The manner of reading and explaining the <$$font> Roman <font>
historians ; literal translations , or the master's help in explaining ,
how long necesary ; when to be laid aside , and boys explain by
themselves , with the help of the syntax ; reflections upon the analysis
, or parts of speech ; with observations wherein <$$font> Stirling
<font> hath failed in this and other parts of his classical performances
. <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,107.384

<$$heading>

The authors generally explained in the lower classes are <font> Cordery
<$$font> , <font> Erasmus <$$font> , and part of <font> Cornelius Nepos
<$$font> , with literal translations . BARCLAY-1743-1,107.386

These , whatever some may imagine , are absolutely necessary at first ,
when boys are young , saving both time to the master , and causing them
advance with greater chearfulness and ease . BARCLAY-1743-1,107.387

But , that they may not learn by rote , while they are allowed the help
of a translation , let them explain in these three ways ; from <P_108>
<font> Latin <$$font> to <font> English <$$font> , from <font> English
<$$font> to <font> Latin <$$font> , BARCLAY-1743-1,108.388

and then , without book , let them answer up and down as the master
inclines . BARCLAY-1743-1,108.389

Most boys , for want of this method , forget as fast as they learn ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,108.390

and can@ @not , though they have explained the moment before , answer
one word of the lesson , either <font> English <$$font> or <font> Latin
<$$font> , if you take away the book . BARCLAY-1743-1,108.391

Besides , this exercise improves thinking , as well as the memory ;
BARCLAY-1743-1,108.392

and thought is one great step to remove the natural heedlessness of
youth , which is very pernicious to education . BARCLAY-1743-1,108.393

The slowest boys should rehearse all or most of every lesson .
BARCLAY-1743-1,108.394

They gain least by attention , BARCLAY-1743-1,108.395

and feel such pain in application , that , if they be not frequently
examined , they entirely neglect what was assigned them for a task :
whereas we may depend upon those of a lively genius , especially if they
be duly encouraged , and if the master , explaining the nature and
design of every lesson , opens the understanding , and takes care to
preserve attention . BARCLAY-1743-1,108.396

Truth , when perceived , is always agreeable ; BARCLAY-1743-1,108.397

and a right understanding , once let into the method of acquiring
knowledge , will spare no <P_109> pains in the pursuit of what is in
itself so useful . BARCLAY-1743-1,109.398

Any boys that are careless , who have prepared little or nothing of the
lesson , should be ordered to some private corner , where they may
supply their former negligence by a closer application .
BARCLAY-1743-1,109.399

While children explain in this manner , they should be much employed in
declension and conjugation , and applying the several rules of syntax ;
and this not hastily , as in the manner of some , but without the
omission of almost one word . BARCLAY-1743-1,109.400

We should also go promiscuously through the conjugations and declensions
, and make them answer <font> extempore <$$font> through all the signs ,
moods , tenses , numbers , and persons . BARCLAY-1743-1,109.401

When they give an account of the analysis , let them always tell what
part of a noun or verb it is , which they meet with in the lesson .
BARCLAY-1743-1,109.402

Boys are not only heedless , but apt to forget what they learn ;
BARCLAY-1743-1,109.403

and if the master does not renew things in their memory , they may
acquire a superficial habit of very bad consequence .
BARCLAY-1743-1,109.404

During all this time too in every lesson , besides particular words up
and down , we should never fail to ask the <P_110> principal verb in the
sentence , either separately , or with the addition of two or more words
, by way of phrases . BARCLAY-1743-1,110.405

This will be useful afterwards , both in speaking and writing <font>
Latin <$$font> ; especially if , after some time spent in these
exercises , we cause them repeat the synonymous {TEXT:synonimous} <font>
Latin <$$font> words , for any <font> English <$$font> expressions .
BARCLAY-1743-1,110.406

Supposing , in <font> Cornelius Nepos <$$font> , they were to meet with
<font> cogitare <$$font> the master should then take occasion to ask
another word of the same signification , such as , <font> putare
<$$font> , <font> sentire <$$font> , <font> censere <$$font> , <font>
reri <$$font> , <font> arbitrari <$$font> , <font> opinari <$$font> ,
and whatever more the boy could remember . BARCLAY-1743-1,110.407

I have known this method pursued with all manner of <font> English
<$$font> words , BARCLAY-1743-1,110.408

and was surprised to observe the pains every boy took to excel .
BARCLAY-1743-1,110.409

When they arrive at <font> Caesar <$$font> , they need not so
particularly insist upon etymology . BARCLAY-1743-1,110.410

Nor , after this , would I admit of literal translations .
BARCLAY-1743-1,110.411

The principal intention then should be , learning how to understand that
author and the succeeding by the help of their syntax only .
BARCLAY-1743-1,110.412

The additional labour of this task will daily lessen , and improve the
scholar in a habit of thinking . BARCLAY-1743-1,110.413

<P_111>

As his attention increases , he must become readier at solving all
possible difficulties . BARCLAY-1743-1,111.415

Then it is a boy extends his views , and aspires beyond the narrow
limits of a single lesson . BARCLAY-1743-1,111.416

He perceives the resemblance of his author's whole stile ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,111.417

and every succeeding task appears less new and perplexing :
BARCLAY-1743-1,111.418

it is but the repetition of the same words and phrases placed in a
different order , which by the least knowledge in syntax , he will
easily discern . BARCLAY-1743-1,111.419

The common way , where the master explains every lesson , rather
improves the memory than the judgment . BARCLAY-1743-1,111.420

I have known boys who could translate <font> Horace <$$font> after the
master , blunder in things of less difficulty , for no other reason but
that they never had heard them explained . BARCLAY-1743-1,111.421

What must be the case of such scholars when they leave school , and come
so badly prepared for private study and meditation ?
BARCLAY-1743-1,111.422

The several methods of teaching children to explain themselves , neither
can nor ought to be enumerated . BARCLAY-1743-1,111.423

Different rules will arise from every new task , and from every error of
the child . BARCLAY-1743-1,111.424

Yet , that we <P_112> may render it something clearer , we shall suppose
a boy stops at this sentence about the beginning of <font> Caesar
<$$font> , <font> Item Dumnorigi Aeduo , fratri Divitiaci , qui eo
tempore principatum in civitate sua obtinebat , ac maxime plebi acceptus
erat , ut idem conaretur , persuadet . <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,112.425

Whatever wrong ways he may take to construe , there is but one right .
BARCLAY-1743-1,112.426

This he will soon perceive , by the inconsistency he must run into upon
every error in syntax . BARCLAY-1743-1,112.427

Yet I would hear him patiently , till he corrects himself , this being
far beyond any hasty correction of the master . BARCLAY-1743-1,112.428

If he be entirely at a loss , let him be told to begin in that and in
every sentence with the nominative and the verb ; the verb then leads
him to the case it governs : so that he might construe thus far , <font>
Item persuadet Dumnorigi <$$font> , and probably , <font> Aeduo , fratri
Divitiaci <$$font> , from the apparent connection of the sense .
BARCLAY-1743-1,112.429

But the greatest difficulty arises from these words , <font> qui eo
tempore , &c. acceptus erat <$$font> , which are added , as a
parenthesis , concerning the fortune and character of <font> Dumnorix .
<$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,112.430

Yet , by telling him , he must always add to any particular name or
substantive noun <P_113> whatever belongs to it , before he joins it to
another verb , or another sentence following , by means of a conjunction
, this difficulty will soon wear over . BARCLAY-1743-1,113.431

We shall suppose then he adds , <font> qui obtinebat principatum in sua
civitate eo tempore : <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,113.432

The conjunction <font> ac <$$font> after <font> obtinebat <$$font> ,
naturally leads him to <font> acceptus erat <$$font> , the verb of the
same mood ; BARCLAY-1743-1,113.433

<font> ut conaretur idem <$$font> falls in of course .
BARCLAY-1743-1,113.434

The whole will then be : <font> Item persuadet Dumnorigi Aeduo , fratri
Divitiaci , qui obtinebat principatum in sua civitate eo tempore , ac
maxime acceptus erat plebi , ut conaretur idem . <$$font>
BARCLAY-1743-1,113.435

One might have drawn out a much longer sentence , comprehending more
rules ; BARCLAY-1743-1,113.436

but this will sufficiently discover our intention .
BARCLAY-1743-1,113.437

I shall add of explaining , that , besides the lesson of every
particular day , a boy should frequently look over again what he has
read a month before , or any continued course of time .
BARCLAY-1743-1,113.438

By this means he will never forget what is past , BARCLAY-1743-1,113.439

and may , upon every perusal , observe something new , and useful in
what he has still to learn . BARCLAY-1743-1,113.440

The master , to increase , his diligence , should sometimes ask an
account of such lessons , <P_114> and reward or discourage him in
proportion to the degree of application . BARCLAY-1743-1,114.441

- I would also have such as are advanced , to attend the inferior
classes when they are applying the rules of grammar .
BARCLAY-1743-1,114.442

This improves them in declension and conjugation ,
BARCLAY-1743-1,114.443

and renews their acquaintance with the lower authors , which they are
too ready to forget . BARCLAY-1743-1,114.444

And when a class in <font> Caesar <$$font> is thus employed with one in
<font> Cornelius Nepos <$$font> , an emulation to excel , as it raises a
laudable ambition , proportionably increases their pleasure and
attention . BARCLAY-1743-1,114.445

I would observe under this head the difficulty of the analysis , or
parts of speech , and the great loss children are at in preparing them
for want of proper help . BARCLAY-1743-1,114.446

Till we have something better , I would advise masters , when they are
teaching <font> Cordery <$$font> , to write out the analysis of twenty
or thirty colloquies , reducing all the compounds to their simple parts
, and marking down the gender and signification .
BARCLAY-1743-1,114.447

This being laid before the scholar , saves time , BARCLAY-1743-1,114.448

and causes him advance much faster than if he ran <P_115> to ask every
word at {COM:sic} the teacher , or looked for in the dictionary .
BARCLAY-1743-1,115.449

<font> Stirling <$$font> seems to have been aware of this necessary
assistance for children , in preparing the parts of speech .
BARCLAY-1743-1,115.450

I am sorry , after so much pains to supply this defect , his method is
not more plain and useful . BARCLAY-1743-1,115.451

People of age may perhaps make a shift with his analysis , as he has
disposed it in an alphabetical order ; BARCLAY-1743-1,115.452

but children , when they begin <font> Cordery <$$font> have neither
patience nor capacity to run through every letter and column for a word
, as if they were consulting a dictionary . BARCLAY-1743-1,115.453

But they are still worse provided in his way of explaining .
BARCLAY-1743-1,115.454

They must then , for the <font> English <$$font> of every word not only
consult his dictionary at the end ; BARCLAY-1743-1,115.455

but , after that is found , having no more but the nominative case of
nouns , and what we call the themes of verbs , they are obliged
themselves to discover and apply the signification of the other
particular cases of nouns , and tenses of verbs , which happen to be
used in the colloquy . BARCLAY-1743-1,115.456

This requires so great attention , as , allowing they were capable of it
, would however consume time , and very much retard <P_116> a quick
progress . BARCLAY-1743-1,116.457

He had better then have kept by the select colloquies of <font> Cordery
<$$font> , translated by Mr. <font> Clark <$$font> , with the <font>
English <$$font> and <font> Latin <$$font> in opposite columns .
BARCLAY-1743-1,116.458

The analysis , or parts of speech , with greater ease might then have
been writ under every colloquy : so that , with one cast of the eye ,
children could immediately know the gender and declension of nouns , or
flexion of verbs . BARCLAY-1743-1,116.459

Thus I conceive he should have published the lower classicks , designed
chiefly for the easier education of children . BARCLAY-1743-1,116.460

In his editions of <font> Virgil <$$font> and <font> Terence <$$font> ,
his pains is perhaps equally thrown away . BARCLAY-1743-1,116.461

Before boys arrive at these authors , they either are or should be so
much masters of syntax and etymology , as neither to need his <font>
ordo verborum <$$font> , his tedious flexion of nouns , nor the
conjugation of verbs . BARCLAY-1743-1,116.462

They should then advance without any such help , proper only for young
beginners , and proceed entirely by a judicious application of the rules
of syntax , looking sometimes to <font> Ruaeus <$$font> or a dictionary
, when they find words that are either new , or which they do not
remember . BARCLAY-1743-1,116.463

When boys arrive at <font> Virgil <$$font> , they may be supposed
<P_117> capable of thinking ; BARCLAY-1743-1,117.464

if not , it is time to learn reflection , and study without the help of
a master . BARCLAY-1743-1,117.465

Literal translations , printed analysis , or any assistance in syntax ,
favour indolence , BARCLAY-1743-1,117.466

and do on some occasions much greater harm than good .
BARCLAY-1743-1,117.467

- But for the more advanced , Gentlemen who have read that excellent
poet with any taste , what benefit or pleasure can they receive from
such a dissection of <font> Virgil ? <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,117.468

None , I am convinced , except what arises from the use of his
geographical dictionary , which seems the best designed thing in all Mr.
<font> Stirling <$$font> 's editions . BARCLAY-1743-1,117.469

The other improvements , if at all necessary , are only so to those who
have been neglected at school , and by a late application would recover
all they formerly lost . BARCLAY-1743-1,117.470

To such , the more help , the better ; though they may be fully as well
supplied from Mr. <font> Ruddiman <$$font> 's syntax , and Mr. <font>
Clark <$$font> 's literal translations . BARCLAY-1743-1,117.471

- Of commentators in general , so numerous now-a-days , I am sorry to
observe , they deal so much in the dead letter , without entering into
the spirit of an author . BARCLAY-1743-1,117.472

We have a great many grammatical quirks , BARCLAY-1743-1,117.473

are told in what place one author writes exactly <P_118> the same words
with another , BARCLAY-1743-1,118.474

have a great deal of regular and elliptical syntax , mythology , various
readings , and the like ; but not a word of refined thought , or
delicacy of expression . BARCLAY-1743-1,118.475

<font> Procul este profani ! <$$font> BARCLAY-1743-1,118.476

