<BEGIN_bardsley-1807-1>

<P_1>

<heading>

Of chronic rheumatism . BARDSLEY-1807-1,1.4

<$$heading>

This is , perhaps , one of the most common of the many lingering and
painful maladies that afflict mankind . BARDSLEY-1807-1,1.6

It is a disease to which the poor and labouring classes are peculiarly
subject , BARDSLEY-1807-1,1.7

but the extent of its ravages is best ascertained by the medical
attendants on large Hospitals . BARDSLEY-1807-1,1.8

Chronic rheumatism , and its varieties , form a large proportion of the
medical cases which are admitted into the Manchester Infirmary ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,1.9

and it may be readily conceived that such cases are both numerous and
severe , when it {TEXT:i} is known , that the occupation of weaving is
carried on , not unfrequently by preference , and sometimes from
necessity , in damp and confined cellars within the town ; and that the
surrounding country abounds with colliers , bleachers , dyers , and
other artisans , who are necessarily exposed to sudden and great changes
of temperature . BARDSLEY-1807-1,1.10

But if the poor and industrious classes of society in this neighbourhood
are more than <P_2> commonly exposed to chronic rheumatism , they and
their medical advisers have the consolation to find , that in the
general Infirmary of the district , particular attention has been paid
to furnish every means for the comfort and relief of this description of
patients . BARDSLEY-1807-1,2.11

The institution of vapor and warm baths , both for general and local
purposes , an electrical and galvanic apparatus , and the convenience of
small , comfortable and distinct wards , are demonstrative proofs of the
attention paid to the rheumatic class of patients .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,2.12

Under such favorable circumstances , I entered upon the task of treating
the most inveterate cases of chronic rheumatism with every reasonable
prospect of success . BARDSLEY-1807-1,2.13

At all events , an excellent opportunity was afforded of ascertaining
the real nature of many remedies , which have been considered as
efficacious in the cure , or relief , of this disorder .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,2.14

It would be trifling and useless to enter into any detail of the
generality of the cases which have been submitted to my care .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,2.15

Indeed , the history of chronic rheumatism and its treatment , are both
too well known to afford an expectation of the discovery of much novelty
either of principles or facts ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,2.16

but still I am of opinion , that the communication of the <P_3> general
result of the treatment <paren> under circumstances favorable both for
practice and accurate observation <$$paren> of a large number of cases ,
will be likely to prove useful , by establishing on a firmer basis ,
some of the various modes which have been generally recommended for the
cure of this disease . BARDSLEY-1807-1,3.17

It will be proper to premise , that I mean to include under the term
chronic rheumatism , such painful affections of the muscular fibres ,
membranes , and joints as are unattended with fever , specific virus ,
or peculiar derangement of the stomach and bowels ; and which are seldom
accompanied with external tumor or inflammation , but are very liable to
shift suddenly from one part to another , and are readily propagated
along the course of the membranes and muscular fibres .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,3.18

This definition will include chronic <font> lumbago , sciatica ,
<$$font> and what has been considered a distinct disease , - <font>
nodosity <$$font> of the joints . BARDSLEY-1807-1,3.19

No doubt the violence and inveteracy of chronic rheumatism are modified
by the peculiar structure of the part which it affects .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,3.20

When the large joints with their ligaments , such as the hip joint , and
lumbar <font> vertebrae <$$font> become affected , the contiguous nerves
often suffer from the same cause , BARDSLEY-1807-1,3.21

and a long train <P_4> of aggravated symptoms arise , which are with
great difficulty subdued . BARDSLEY-1807-1,4.22

The practice therefore must be regulated according to these varying
circumstances ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,4.23

but I think myself intitled to assert , from a large induction of facts
, that the <font> rationale <$$font> of the practice in the cure of
every species of chronic rheumatism , is in general simple and uniform .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,4.24

It consists in removing passive inflammation , and restoring the
debilitated vessels and muscular fibres to their due tone and action .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,4.25

These ends are chiefly to be accomplished by topical applications ,
although internal remedies are by no means to be neglected .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,4.26

I find from an inspection of my medical-@ @case book , that
two_hundred_and_sixty-nine persons <paren> exclusively of a considerable
number which were of a mixed and doubtful nature <$$paren> labouring
under severe chronic rheumatism , have been admitted under my care as
in-patients of the Infirmary . BARDSLEY-1807-1,4.27

The majority of these cases were of long standing , BARDSLEY-1807-1,4.28

and had been brought from distant parts of the country to the Infirmary
, as the last resource , after the usual means had failed .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,4.29

I shall now proceed to offer some general <P_5> practical remarks on the
effects of those remedies which appear to be most efficacious in the
cure or relief of chronic rheumatism under its different forms ; and at
the same time , report a few cases to illustrate the effects of these
anti-rheumatic medicines , which have not been generally introduced into
practice ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,5.30

and , in order to bring the general result into one view , I shall
furnish tables from which some useful practical conclusions may be drawn
. BARDSLEY-1807-1,5.31

<heading>

<font> Warm , and Vapor Baths . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,5.33

<$$heading>

The general recommendation of the warm bath , to excite sweating , in
most instances of chronic rheumatism , led me to expect great advantage
from its use . BARDSLEY-1807-1,5.35

Experience , however , has corrected my too sanguine expectation .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,5.36

When the disease had raged for a length of time , and induced both local
and general debility , or when protracted deep-seated pains had infested
the larger joints , as in <font> sciatica <$$font> and <font> lumbago ,
<$$font> I have found much harm to result from the warm bath .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,5.37

Sweating indeed , in such cases , relieved for the moment ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,5.38

but it subsequently aggravated the local as well as general symptoms
{TEXT:symptons} . BARDSLEY-1807-1,5.39

When the pains were of more recent date , <P_6> chiefly attacked the
muscles and their membranous coverings , occasionally shifting from one
part to another , and the strength was at the same time but little
reduced , then a moderate use of the warm bath proved highly serviceable
. BARDSLEY-1807-1,6.40

If this remedy however , failed to produce good effects , after one or
two trials it was laid aside , as its continuance under such
circumstances , uniformly tended to protract the patient's recovery .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,6.41

By the term <font> warm-bath , <$$font> I allude to water heated to
an_hundred degrees and upwards . BARDSLEY-1807-1,6.42

But a <font> tepid <$$font> bath , from eighty-four to ninety , I have
found an useful auxiliary in soothing pain , relaxing the stiffened
joints and rigid fibres ; especially in elderly patients , whose
strength had been greatly reduced by the length and violence of the
disorder . BARDSLEY-1807-1,6.43

Still I consider both the warm and tepid bath as remedies of inferior
value , when compared with the topical and sometimes general use of hot
water in the form of <font> vapor . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,6.44

Whenever the joints were found so rigid as to be nearly immoveable , and
the pain upon motion exquisitely severe , or when the muscles had become
contracted and almost paralytic ; and indeed , in every protracted case
of the disease of the hip-joint , <font> lumbago , <$$font> or <font>
sciatica , <$$font> the vapor of <P_7> hot water , locally and properly
applied , afforded <paren> especially in conjunction with other topical
applications <$$paren> a safe , and often successful remedy .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,7.45

The mode of applying it must be regulated according to circumstances .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,7.46

Our apparatus consists of a boiler , from which steam is conveyed
through pipes , that are {TEXT:arc} so constructed , as to admit of
being conveniently applied to different parts of the body .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,7.47

In all obstinate affections of the joints , a pipe of nearly half-inch
diameter is to be preferred , BARDSLEY-1807-1,7.48

and a quarter of an hour is the shortest period for its application .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,7.49

It is better , as a general rule , to commence with a pipe of smaller
size , and only to permit the vapor to strike upon the affected part ,
at some distance from its aperture . BARDSLEY-1807-1,7.50

By these means an inconvenience will be avoided , which has sometimes
prevented the steady application of the remedy ; viz. too great
irritation of the skin from an excess of heat . BARDSLEY-1807-1,7.51

By degrees , the parts will be enabled to bear a considerable column of
vapor , at a very small distance from the extremity of the pipe ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,7.52

and thus the remedy will be most likely to produce its full effect .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,7.53

I have entered into these particulars , concerning the local application
of this remedy , from a conviction , that its advantages are not
generally <P_8> nor sufficiently appreciated . BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.54

At the same time I must observe , that it was found to act only as a
powerful auxiliary . BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.55

For I have in vain attempted to disperse some obstinate rheumatic
affections , by relying solely on its use . BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.56

My experience of the effects of the <font> general <$$font> vapor-bath
is but limited . BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.57

There have been but few cases in which I have deemed it prudent to
excite the violent degree of sweating , that is the consequence of this
application . BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.58

But whenever it was thought necessary to produce such an effect , I
found it the most certain and efficacious means that could be employed
for the purpose . BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.59

<heading>

<font> Electricity , and Galvanism . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.61

<$$heading>

The former of these powerful agents I have long been in the habit of
employing , as a remedy in obstinate rheumatic complaints .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.63

When the disease more particularly affected the muscular fibres , and
was attended with torpor , rigidity , and diminution of vital heat , the
application of electricity , by sparks or shocks , was often attended
with manifest advantage ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.64

but it was in conjunction with the topical applications of vapour that
its effects were more powerfully and beneficially exerted .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,8.65

The plan which I have generally pursued , is , <P_9> first to order the
diseased parts to be exposed to the action of vapor ; and , during this
operation , a stimulant liniment to be diligently rubbed upon their
surface ; and finally , the application of electricity .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,9.66

The operation of drawing sparks , more or less powerful , according to
the state of the disease , is , in general , to be preferred to the
administering of shocks . BARDSLEY-1807-1,9.67

I have seen some cases of purely chronic rheumatism of several years
standing , where the patients were so helpless as to be brought in a
litter to the Infirmary , completely recovered by the steady , diligent
, and conjoined use of these remedies , along with tonics and anodynes .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,9.68

It may not be improper to state , as a caution , that the parts which
have undergone the above-mentioned operations , ought to be carefully
enveloped in flannel ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,9.69

and indeed , such a covering should be constantly worn , where the
<font> natural heat <$$font> is any way deficient : BARDSLEY-1807-1,9.70

I mention this latter circumstance , because I have seen instances
<paren> especially in young subjects <$$paren> where flannel or other
warm covering aggravated the patients' sufferings , by increasing the
degree of heat , when it was already too abundant .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,9.71

But such an excess of local temperament does not often occur in <P_10>
chronic rheumatism , BARDSLEY-1807-1,10.72

and is generally of short duration . BARDSLEY-1807-1,10.73

My experience of galvanism in this disease , is at present rather
confined . BARDSLEY-1807-1,10.74

I have applied this remedy in some cases with advantage .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,10.75

But I have not been able to succeed in any instance where electricity ,
and other powerful remedies have entirely {TEXT:intirely} failed .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,10.76

It seems to be chiefly indicated , where the nervous energy , as well as
muscular activity and vigor , is much enfeebled by long_continued pain
and inaction {TEXT:in-action} . BARDSLEY-1807-1,10.77

In two cases of this kind , I found galvanism of great service ; but not
more so than what might have been expected from the application of
electricity . BARDSLEY-1807-1,10.78

<heading>

<font> Topical Bleeding , and Issues . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,10.80

<$$heading>

These remedies are of essential benefit in the relief and cure of some
of the most painful and harrassing species of rheumatic affections .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,10.82

Indeed , where the ligaments and membranes of the joints are the
peculiar seat of the disease , or an enlargement of the extremities of
the bones has taken place , the first attempt at relief , especially in
young and vigorous subjects , should be directed to local bleeding ;
either by leeches , or what is to be preferred , the operation of
cupping and <P_11> scarifying . BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.83

When the pain and irritation are abated by <font> repeated bleeding ,
<$$font> no time should be lost in securing a drain from the part by the
aid of issues . BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.84

I am enabled from numerous comparative trials , to recommend the
application of a caustic in preference to the knife , for the purpose of
establishing an effectual drain . BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.85

The <font> kali purum <$$font> answers the purpose better than any other
caustic which I have tried . BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.86

I have seen several hip-cases , of long standing , yield to the
persevering use of these means ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.87

but it was often necessary , in order to remove the rigidity and want of
tone in the parts which remained , after the subsidence of the more
violent symptoms , to have recourse to the combined aid of vapor and
electricity . {TEXT:,} BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.88

In very obstinate cases of <font> sciatica , <$$font> which resisted all
other means of relief , I have witnessed the happiest effects from
issues ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.89

but then it must be observed , that it was often necessary to surround
the joint with several of these drains , BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.90

and the degree of irritation and discharge , was moderated or increased
, according to the obstinacy of the disease , and the strength of the
patient . BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.91

I have seen in a hip-joint case , three of these artificial openings
succeed , when two have failed . BARDSLEY-1807-1,11.92

I am completely satisfied , that want of success in <P_12> the cure of
many of these long_protracted cases , is owing to the neglect of a
vigorous and persevering use of the means above recommended .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,12.93

For they have succeeded under the steady discipline of <font> Hospital
practice , <$$font> after their former failure under a feeble and
desultory mode of application in private . BARDSLEY-1807-1,12.94

<heading>

<font> Blisters , and Rubefacients . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,12.96

<$$heading>

When the pains affected only the <font> fascia <$$font> and superficial
fibres of the muscles , great relief was obtained by covering the
affected parts with a blister ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,12.98

but it was frequently found more beneficial to use this remedy at a
distance from the seat of the disease . BARDSLEY-1807-1,12.99

Thus , in some recent and slight cases of <font> sciatica , <$$font> a
blister proved speedily and certainly useful , when applied to the
inferior extremity of the thigh bone . BARDSLEY-1807-1,12.100

Indeed , whenever the complaint seized upon any of the larger and
deep_seated muscles , at their origin near the joint , the mode of
applying blisters to the inferior extremities of such muscles , and near
to the points of their insertion , was found to be highly beneficial .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,12.101

In every obstinate case of chronic rheumatism , where from the nature
and situation of the diseased part , issues could not with safety or
convenience be applied , recourse was always <P_13> had to blisters as a
substitute . BARDSLEY-1807-1,13.102

But experience has taught me never to rely upon blisters , in several
cases of a local nature , when the aid of issues can be obtained .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,13.103

With respect to their mode of application , I have found a repetition of
fresh blisters to be preferable , as producing less distress to the
patient , and greater effects upon the disease , to the practice of
keeping up a constant sore by stimulating the vesicated parts with
blistering ointment . BARDSLEY-1807-1,13.104

The utility of rubefacients in relieving pain , and entirely removing
slight instances of chronic rheumatism , was often experienced .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,13.105

They may be employed , according to circumstances , either in the form
of liniment or plaster . BARDSLEY-1807-1,13.106

When the pains were local and permanent , but not very severe , great
advantage resulted from stimulating the skin and supporting the heat of
the part by the aid of warm plasters . BARDSLEY-1807-1,13.107

The following composition proved of excellent use in that most tedious
kind of chronic rheumatism , which often attacks young females soon
after the age of puberty ; and is attended for the most part with
stiffness and swelling of the ankle {TEXT:ancle} and knee joints .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,13.108

Indeed , wherever the disease had left a thickening and almost indurated
state of the integuments , as well as rigidity of the tendons and
ligaments <P_14> of the joints , the local stimulus of this application
was attended with good effect . BARDSLEY-1807-1,14.109

<heading>

<font> Epithema Stimulans , <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,14.111

<$$heading>

{COM:symbol_for_recipe} : P. Gummi ammoniaci , {COM:symbol_for_ounce}
ss. Aceti scillae {COM:symbol_for_ounce} iij. coque simul leni igne .
ad spissitatem idoneam & materiam frigefactam cola ; deinde super alutâ
illam extende ; & Pulv: sal: ammoniae muriat: ad libitum superficiei
inspergito - ft. Epithema . BARDSLEY-1807-1,14.113

- The addition of more or less of the muriated ammonia , must be
regulated according to the degree of irritation which it may be thought
proper to excite . BARDSLEY-1807-1,14.114

In most cases it is better to use it sparingly at first .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,14.115

After the trial of numerous kinds of liquid rubefacients , with a view
to relieve pain , and remove the atony of the muscular fibres , which
more or less prevails in every case of chronic rheumatism , I give to
the following liniment a decided preference . BARDSLEY-1807-1,14.116

{COM:symbol_for_recipe} : Linimenti saponis , {COM:symbol_for_ounce} ij
Aq. ammoniae , Tinct Cantharid: opii a a
{COM:macron_on_preceding_two_words_omitted} {COM:symbol_for_dram} ij G:
Camphor , {COM:symbol_for_dram} i M. ft. Linimentum .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,14.117

The liniment should be diligently rubbed upon the parts affected , after
the skin has been warmed and irritated by the friction of hot , dry ,
and coarse cloths ; or the application of the flesh-brush .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,14.118

<P_15>

In almost every instance where it was adviseable to employ vapor locally
, but especially in <font> sciatica <$$font> and <font> lumbago <$$font>
, I have directed this liniment to be diligently and plentifully rubbed
in upon the parts , while they were exposed to the vapor pipe .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.120

By this method its stimulating effects were heightened ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.121

pain was abated , and the cure much accelerated .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.122

<heading>

<font> Internal Remedies . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.124

<$$heading>

I must confess I have met with much disappointment in the trial of many
remedies , highly recommended by practical writers for the cure of
chronic rheumatism . BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.126

There have been few examples , BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.127

but those are certainly of an important kind , where internal medicines
have singly completed the cure of very severe and obstinate cases .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.128

The internal remedies which have been most generally recommended , are
of two kinds : viz. 1. sudorifics , 2. medicines of a stimulating
nature , which abound in essential oils and resins .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.129

To these , mercurial preparations must be added .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.130

With respect to the use of sudorifics , I soon found that much caution
was required in their exhibition . BARDSLEY-1807-1,15.131

In more recent attacks , where the disease was diffused over the whole
frame , and attended with violent pain and occasional <P_16> febrile
accessions , much advantage was derived by exciting moderate sweating ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,16.132

but if this were carried to a profuse degree , not only great debility ,
but an aggravation of the pains ensued . BARDSLEY-1807-1,16.133

In short , I can speak decidedly of the injurious effects of sudorifics
, when pushed to any great extent , in every instance of severe and
local affection of the joints ; and also in most other cases where the
disease has been long continued , and the patient's constitution much
debilitated . BARDSLEY-1807-1,16.134

In chronic <font> lumbago <$$font> and <font> sciatica , <$$font> I have
never experienced any lasting benefit to result from this mode of
practice . BARDSLEY-1807-1,16.135

Small doses of antimonial powder combined with calomel and opium , were
certainly useful in allaying pain and irritation ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,16.136

but their efficacy consisted rather in palliating symptoms , than curing
the disease , when of a serious and obstinate kind .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,16.137

The same observation will nearly apply to the use of stimulant remedies
, such as <font> resin of guaiacum , <$$font> the class of
terebinthinates {TEXT:terebrinthinates} , and of essential oils .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,16.138

In the most aggravated instances of general chronic rheumatism , where
great torpor and debility prevailed , <font> guaiacum <$$font> in such
large doses as the stomach and bowels would bear , was found to be a
powerful auxiliary ; and certainly the most generally efficacious of all
the internal <P_17> remedies that were employed .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,17.139

But I have seen no instance of its complete success , when unaided by
topical applications in any species of the disease where much local
injury of the joints had taken place . BARDSLEY-1807-1,17.140

It acted most beneficially when exhibited in substance , well triturated
with mucilage ; to which was occasionally added , <font> Gum kino ,
<$$font> or <font> Tinct. opii , <$$font> , to prevent its effects on
the bowels . BARDSLEY-1807-1,17.141

In many obstinate cases the ammoniated tincture of guaiacum ,
incorporated with mucilage , and joined to a strong decoction of bark ,
proved of great service , where the constitution was broken down by the
violence and length of the disease . BARDSLEY-1807-1,17.142

There were but few protracted cases in which the Peruvian bark was not
prescribed with advantage as a tonic , especially at the close of the
disease . BARDSLEY-1807-1,17.143

It was , however , never administered with any other design than as an
auxiliary . BARDSLEY-1807-1,17.144

In future I shall certainly be induced to make a trial of this remedy as
a principal means {TEXT:mean} of relief . BARDSLEY-1807-1,17.145

The propriety of employing it in the cure of <font> acute <$$font>
rheumatism has been long sanctioned by the recommendation <P_18> of Dr.
G. Fordyce , Dr. Fothergill , and Sir Edward Hulse , and lately so
strongly confirmed by the extended and valuable experiments of Dr.
Haygarth , BARDSLEY-1807-1,18.146

<paren> and I would add the testimony , if it were necessary , of my own
recent experience of its superior efficacy <$$paren> that there can be
no reasonable distrust of the utility and safety of the practice .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,18.147

Now as there is no doubt of the affinity between the acute , and chronic
species of this disease <paren> the former frequently terminating in the
latter <$$paren> the bark would seem to be a remedy , under many
circumstances , equally suited to both . BARDSLEY-1807-1,18.148

Turpentine , in every form , was an ungrateful medicine to the stomach ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,18.149

often impaired the appetite ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,18.150

and did not produce , when even duly persisted in , such salutary
effects as the remedy before mentioned . BARDSLEY-1807-1,18.151

I shall notice hereafter the use of mercury in one kind of chronic
rheumatism , or at least in a disease nearly allied to it .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,18.152

There is another internal remedy which has enjoyed a very high local
reputation in Lancashire ; and was introduced about thirty years ago
into practice , by one of the physicians of the Manchester Infirmary .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,18.153

It is the <font> Oleum Jecoris aselli , <$$font> or Cod-liver oil ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,18.154

<P_19>

and was recommended to me by my late highly respected colleague and
friend Dr. Percival , as deserving a fair and extensive trial in
chronic rheumatism . BARDSLEY-1807-1,19.156

It is a medicine so very nauseous both in smell and taste , that however
disguised , many delicate stomachs can@ @not bear it ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,19.157

yet I have known this repugnance not only overcome ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,19.158

but , such is the power of habit , a relish for its high flavour
succeeds to the original disgust . BARDSLEY-1807-1,19.159

From long and repeated experience , I am enabled to speak of it as a
medicine of efficacious , but limited powers . BARDSLEY-1807-1,19.160

In some instances , where every other means have proved unsuccessful ,
it has operated in a manner so decidedly beneficial , as to excite
astonishment . BARDSLEY-1807-1,19.161

But , on the other hand , it has frequently failed in some of the mild ,
and more common rheumatic affections . BARDSLEY-1807-1,19.162

The circumstances under which I have found it most advantageous , when
used both externally and internally , are the following , 1st . In the
chronic rheumatism of elderly persons , where the muscles and tendons
have been rigid , and the joints nearly inflexible , in consequence of
the disease <P_20> having been brought on by excessive labor , hard fare
, dampness , and cold . 2nd . In women whose constitutions have been
worn out by repeated rheumatic attacks after parturition , and more
especially in the decline of life . BARDSLEY-1807-1,20.163

I have seen a few patients recover entirely {TEXT:intirely} by the
exhibition of the oil ; who , on their admission into the house , were
unable either to preserve the body in an erect posture , or support its
weight on the lower extremities . BARDSLEY-1807-1,20.164

I do not intend to enter into an explanation of the <font> modus
operandi <$$font> of this medicine in curing rheumatism .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,20.165

Whether it subdues the disease by exciting a specific action upon the
small obstructed vessels , or whether it serves to lubricate the rigid
fibres , by favoring the secretion of fat , I shall not pretend to
determine ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,20.166

but the fact certainly is , that patients who have for some time taken
this remedy , are disposed to increase in bulk and fatness ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,20.167

and it scarcely ever was attended with decisive advantages without
producing these effects , in a greater or less degree .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,20.168

Warm table-beer is the vehicle for the oil , which the lower order of
patients most commonly prefer . BARDSLEY-1807-1,20.169

The dose was from half an ounce , to an ounce and a half , twice or
thrice a-@ @day , according to the delicacy of the patient's stomach ,
and the <P_21> effects of the medicine . BARDSLEY-1807-1,21.170

It is seldom uniform in its mode of operation ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,21.171

sometimes it acts upon the kidneys , at others on the bowels , producing
griping and <font> diarrhoea . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,21.172

I have observed an eruption on the skin , preceded by prickling heat ,
in many patients , after first making use of the oil ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,21.173

but in a majority of cases , it produced , after a short period , none
of these sensible effects . BARDSLEY-1807-1,21.174

I have never found it to excite sweating , unless when taken in bed ,
and assisted by drinking plentifully of warm liquids .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,21.175

It was remarked that , if after about a fortnight's trial , no abatement
of the pain or rigidity ensued , it was in vain to persist solely in the
use of this remedy ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,21.176

but when its beneficial influence had once commenced , so slow and
gradual was the progress of cure in many instances , that patients have
continued to receive advantage during the whole course of six or eight
months trial . BARDSLEY-1807-1,21.177

In serious rheumatic affections of the large joints , no great benefit
was derived from its use , unless when joined with the local application
of vapor and electricity . BARDSLEY-1807-1,21.178

Indeed , as an internal remedy for chronic rheumatism , I consider it
inferior in many respects to gum guaiacum , although it exceeds that and
every other medicine <paren> with perhaps one exception , <P_22> which
will hereafter be noticed <$$paren> in the relief and cure of such
peculiar states of the disorder as have been just described .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.179

It is of importance to remark , that this medicine has preserved its
reputation in our Infirmary , nearly unimpaired , during the period of
thirty years ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.180

for I find its annual consumption to have been from fifty to sixty
gallons , soon after its introduction in 1776 ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.181

and the quantity dispensed from many years back has seldom fallen below
the above amount ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.182

the last year it exceeded forty gallons . BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.183

<heading>

<font> Arsenic . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.185

<$$heading>

The good effects arising from a judicious exhibition of this active and
deleterious mineral , in several severe and obstinate diseases , have
been long well known , and duly appreciated by medical practitioners .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.187

But the introduction of arsenic for the cure of chronic rheumatism , is
comparatively of late date . BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.188

An account of a successful trial of the remedy was widely dispersed ,
through the medium of a periodical Medical Journal ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.189

yet the practice seems to be nearly confined to a few members of the
profession , residing in Manchester . BARDSLEY-1807-1,22.190

<P_23>

Mr. Jenkinson , the late ingenious house-surgeon , and apothecary to
the Infirmary , is justly entitled to the merit of having first
discovered the internal efficacy of arsenic , in the cure of a
deplorable case of chronic rheumatism , which had resisted all the usual
modes of relief . BARDSLEY-1807-1,23.192

Soon afterwards , Mr. Hardman , a respectable surgeon in this town ,
exhibited this remedy in what was deemed an incurable case of the same
disease , with marked and decisive advantage . BARDSLEY-1807-1,23.193

Possessed of early information of these facts , and firmly relying upon
the abilities and integrity of both these gentlemen , I was desirous ,
on the score of humanity , as well as oeconomy , to introduce a trial of
the practice into the Infirmary , in all such obstinate rheumatic cases
as had resisted the usual means of relief . BARDSLEY-1807-1,23.194

An opportunity soon occurred for the purpose ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,23.195

and the following are some of the most important cases in which the
remedy was duly administered . BARDSLEY-1807-1,23.196

I have not thought it necessary to enter into all the detail of the
treatment of these patients , BARDSLEY-1807-1,23.197

and have therefore only given abstracts from the Infirmary books , and
my own private notes . BARDSLEY-1807-1,23.198

<P_24>

<heading>

William Chappel , Aet. 11 . BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.201

<$$heading>

<font> Admitted out-patient , October <$$font> 22 , 1804 .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.203

Has worked at a cotton-mill since he was five-@ @years old .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.204

Four years ago he was seized with an attack of acute rheumatism , which
left him so debilitated and crippled , particularly in the joints of the
lower extremities , as to be unable ever since to follow his employment
. BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.205

He is now become a miserable spectacle . BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.206

The knee and ankle {TEXT:ancle} joints are enlarged , stiff , and
exquisitely painful on motion . BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.207

He is greatly emaciated , BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.208

sleeps little , BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.209

and his appetite has nearly failed . BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.210

The muscles of the legs and thighs are shrunk , flabby , and scarcely to
be traced . BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.211

Blisters were ordered for each knee , BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.212

and gum guaiacum , in the decoction of bark , together with pills of
calomel and opium , at night , were internally exhibited .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.213

<font> November 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.214

Feels somewhat easier . BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.215

The blistered parts being nearly healed , the local application of vapor
was prescribed , and the medicines ordered to be continued .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.216

<font> 8th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.217

The patient remains nearly stationary : BARDSLEY-1807-1,24.218

his <P_25> pain is rather less ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.219

but he complains of loss of appetite and want of strength ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.220

and his night sweats have become very profuse ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.221

no sensible diminution in the swelling of the joints .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.222

The medicines to be repeated , and the affected joints to be covered
with the ammoniacal epithem , in form of plaster .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.223

<font> 19th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.224

No improvement in the local or general state of the disease having taken
place in this interval , I was induced to try the effect of arsenic .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.225

He was therefore directed to take four drops of Fowler's mineral
solution , <paren> prepared according to Duncan's Edinburgh Dispensatory
, p. 159 , Ed. 1803 . <$$paren> in a dose of decoction of bark , with
an equal quantity of tincture of opium , three times a day ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.226

and all local applications were ordered to be laid aside , except a
simple covering of flannel . BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.227

<font> 21st {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.228

The medicine has agreed well with the patient . BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.229

He feels much easier : BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.230

his appetite is improved ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.231

and his sweating is greatly abated . BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.232

<font> 26th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.233

Continues to amend . BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.234

The pains in the night have nearly disappeared ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,25.235

and he is able to bear a gentle extension of the joints , and even
<P_26> to support the weight of his body . BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.236

The medicines to be repeated . BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.237

<font> December 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.238

The improvement has been rapid and decisive . BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.239

The appetite and strength of the patient are much increased .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.240

He is able to walk with very little assistance ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.241

and the lower extremity of each thigh bone <paren> which was before
protuberant <$$paren> is now nearly reduced to its proper size ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.242

but the ankles {TEXT:ancles} are yet stiff and weak .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.243

As the medicine sat easy upon the stomach , and had brought on no other
inconvenience than a slight degree of constipation , a gentle aperient
was ordered , and the mineral solution to be administered in future
without opium . BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.244

<font> 10th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.245

The patient has been daily gaining ground . BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.246

He has acquired strength and flesh ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.247

and the local complaints are so far removed , as to admit of his walking
a considerable distance without much pain or fatigue .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.248

The enlargement of the knee and ankle {TEXT:ancle} joints has completely
disappeared ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.249

and except a slight degree of local debility , chiefly in the ankles
{TEXT:ancles} , he might be considered as entirely cured .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.250

Medicines ordered to be repeated . BARDSLEY-1807-1,26.251

<P_27>

<font> 15th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,27.253

No rheumatic symptoms being now apparent , the patient was discharged
cured . BARDSLEY-1807-1,27.254

I had the satisfaction to learn from his mother , that in a fortnight
from this period , her son had returned to his employment in the
cotton-mill , after a cessation from labor of four years , during which
time he had been constantly confined to the house , and harrassed with
pain . BARDSLEY-1807-1,27.255

<heading>

John Fullilove , Soldier , Aet. 31 . BARDSLEY-1807-1,27.257

<$$heading>

A home-patient , residing at No. 11 , Gibraltar {TEXT:Gibralter} , in
Manchester , was transferred to my care , March 21 , 1805 , upon the
change of districts . BARDSLEY-1807-1,27.259

He was first admitted under the preceding physician of the district , on
November 5 , 1804 , as a case of chronic rheumatism .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,27.260

The patient was suddenly attacked , more than two years ago , with
catarrh and acute rheumatism , in consequence of a march into Yorkshire
during a violent storm of snow . BARDSLEY-1807-1,27.261

The complaint at length settled in the joints of the lower extremities ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,27.262

and rendered him completely a cripple . BARDSLEY-1807-1,27.263

He was brought to Manchester , and placed under the care of a
respectable surgeon , who <paren> officiating for the surgeon of the
regiment <$$paren> attended him during <P_28> several months ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.264

but , his complaint continuing to increase , he was made an
Infirmary-patient , and immediately put upon the plan of diaphoretics
and blisters , but without any sensible advantage .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.265

At this period <paren> March 21st . <$$paren> the disease is chiefly
confined to the joints of the knee , ankle {TEXT:ancle} , and great toe
of the right leg . BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.266

The knee joint is much enlarged , quite rigid , and so contracted , as
to bring the patient's heel nearly into contact with the back part of
the thigh . BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.267

The pain he feels upon any motion of the limb , is intolerably severe .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.268

The great toe appears much distorted , and even dislocated at the first
joint . BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.269

From confinement to bed for eighteen months past , and almost constant
severe pain , night sweats , and loss of appetite , the patient's
strength and flesh are deplorably reduced . BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.270

His legs and thighs have lost almost every appearance of muscular
texture , BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.271

and his countenance is truly cadaverous . BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.272

I must confess that I entertained but feeble hopes of success in this
case , from any medical treatment ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,28.273

but , as a last resource , I immediately put the patient upon the
following plan . The knee joint to be enveloped in the ammoniacal
epithem before mentioned ; and five drops of the arsenical solution ,
with an equal quantity of tincture of opium , in spirituous cinnamon
<P_29> water , to be taken twice or thrice a-@ @day , according to their
effects ; and also a diaphoretic opiate , to produce a little respite
from pain in the night . BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.274

Great relief was obtained in the space of a few days , by this method .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.275

The pain became less severe , BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.276

the appetite amended , BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.277

and the patient passed more tranquil nights . BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.278

<font> April 6th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.279

I found him this day more improved than I even expected , from the
favorable reports of Mr. Thompson <paren> physician's clerk , <$$paren>
who had carefully watched the progress of the remedy .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.280

He was able to bear fifteen drops of the solution each twenty-four hours
; BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.281

and he observed with great satisfaction , that his pains were abated ,
his appetite much improved , and his sweating nearly gone .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.282

He could now suffer the knee to be handled , and also some extension of
the joint . BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.283

His countenance was remarkably brightened , BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.284

and he entertained sanguine hopes of obtaining a complete cure .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.285

Some slight degree of inflammation having been excited by the epithem ,
it was laid aside for the present . BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.286

The medicines were ordered to be continued , BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.287

and the patient enjoined the use of nourishing diet , with porter at
dinner . BARDSLEY-1807-1,29.288

<P_30>

<font> 18th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <font>
{COM:CHECK--should_this_be_end_font_change?}

During this interval , a gradual improvement has taken place .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.291

He can now sit upon the side of the bed , and bear the extension of the
knee-joint so far , as to admit the posture of the limb to be varied .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.292

There is no external pain felt upon pressing any of the enlarged joints
; and very little disturbance from this symptom at any other time .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.293

The arsenical solution has encreased the urinary discharge ; and , at
the same time , brought on some degree of <font> heat <$$font> in the
<font> fauces , <$$font> with a slight soreness of the gums , and
increased flow of <font> saliva . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.294

As these symptoms were moderate , it was thought better to restrict the
exhibition of the remedy to once a day , than to omit it altogether .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.295

From this period he gradually gained the power of locomotion ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.296

the joints became more flexible , BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.297

the pain vanished , BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.298

and the muscles of the legs and thighs acquired some degree of plumpness
and vigor . BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.299

He resumed , on June the 12th , the use of the solution , in conjunction
with bark , <font> three times a-@ @day , <$$font> without inconvenience
to his throat or gums . BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.300

A perseverance in this course of medicine recovered him , so far , that
on the 20th of June , he was able , with the help of a stick , to walk
to the Infirmary , BARDSLEY-1807-1,30.301

and was entered on <P_31> the list of <font> out-patients . <font>
{COM:CHECK--should_this_be_end_font_change?}

On minutely examining the diseased parts , I found the toe likely to
remain displaced , BARDSLEY-1807-1,31.303

but the joint was entirely {TEXT:intirely} free from pain or swelling .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,31.304

His right knee and ankle {TEXT:ancle} were reduced to their natural size
; BARDSLEY-1807-1,31.305

and , except a slight degree of rigidity about the tendons of the ham ,
and a want of a due tone in the muscles of the leg , his recovery might
be deemed complete . BARDSLEY-1807-1,31.306

He was ordered to cover the part simply with a flannel roller , and
continue his medicines ; care being taken at the same time to obviate
costiveness . BARDSLEY-1807-1,31.307

His visits at the Infirmary were from this time only occasionally
repeated , until the 24th of August , when he was discharged entirely
cured of his rheumatic affection , and so completely established in
health and strength , as to be enabled to resume his situation in the
regiment . BARDSLEY-1807-1,31.308

I had the satisfaction to learn from the patient , who called upon me
this day , September 19 , 1806 , that he continues free from any return
of his complaint ; and is in every respect fit for active duty .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,31.309

From my success in the above instances , where the cartilages and heads
of the bones had become enlarged by a long continuance of the disease ,
I was induced to try the effects of the mineral solution , in a severe
and marked case of nodosity of the joints . BARDSLEY-1807-1,31.310

This patient <paren> whose case will hereafter <P_32> be noticed
<$$paren> was put upon the trial of the remedy , after other means had
failed . BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.311

He began with five , BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.312

and gradually increased the dose to eight drops , along with <font>
Tinct. opii <$$font> twice , and sometimes thrice , a-@ @day .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.313

The medicine agreed well with his constitution ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.314

and it was so administered , as to produce its full effect .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.315

He persisted in its use , under my constant inspection and a proper
regimen , for nearly three weeks , before it was thought proper to
discontinue a further trial . BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.316

I have likewise ordered the solution in two other cases of mild chronic
rheumatism , where the muscles and their investing membranes were the
seat of complaint ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.317

but my success did not equal my expectation . BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.318

The recovery of both patients , who were females {TEXT:Females} , was
obliged to be expedited by calling in the aid of other remedies , as the
beneficial operation of the solution was neither speedy , nor decisive .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.319

I am therefore disposed to infer <paren> as far as my limited experience
will permit <$$paren> that it is only in the protracted chronic
rheumatism , where the vital powers are much diminished , and the ends
of the bones , periosteum , capsules or ligaments of the joints , are
likewise partially affected , that the use of arsenic is likely to prove
eminently successful . BARDSLEY-1807-1,32.320

However , there <P_33> can be no doubt , from its indisputable efficacy
in such instances as have already been published , or the propriety of
instituting a number of comparative trials of this remedy , with others
of an approved and established kind , in the cure of every variety of so
prevalent and distressing a malady as chronic rheumatism .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,33.321

It is my intention to enter , at no distant period , upon this
experimental enquiry . BARDSLEY-1807-1,33.322

I feel more encouraged to this undertaking , from a conviction , the
result of frequent and attentive observation , that arsenic is a safe
and harmless remedy , when <font> prudently <$$font> administered .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,33.323

<heading>

<font> Nodosity of the Joints . <$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,33.325

<$$heading>

A truly medical philosopher , Dr. Haygarth , is the first and only
writer I am acquainted with , who has given a separate and distinct view
of an affection of the joints under the above title .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,33.327

The complaint has been generally noticed as rheumatic-gout ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,33.328

and is evidently alluded to by Sauvages under this term , although his
description of the symptoms is not complete . BARDSLEY-1807-1,33.329

I am however of opinion , that it is more nearly allied to chronic
rheumatism <P_34> than to gout . BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.330

I have at this time two patients under my care , <paren> on account of
complaints of a different nature <$$paren> who have long been martyrs to
this dreadful malady . BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.331

One is a gentleman aged sixty , who has been a cripple from thirty years
of age . BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.332

All the affected joints are strangely distorted , BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.333

and the number of nodes <paren> which vary in size and hardness
<$$paren> occupying the upper and lower extremities , amount to nineteen
. BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.334

He stated the disease to have come on , in consequence of using the cold
bath , when he was much heated . BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.335

The joints of the wrist , and fingers of the right hand , were first
affected , but without exciting much attention , till at length the
disease seized upon the knees , and ankles {TEXT:ancles} , and in a few
years reduced him to a state of entire helplessness .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.336

He has no hereditary claim to the gout , BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.337

and has been rather abstemious in his mode of living .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.338

His general health has been uncommonly firm and good .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.339

His appetite and spirits have seldom failed him ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.340

and , with the exception of occasional pains in the muscles , as well as
the affected joints , he has passed the last twenty years of this life
with ease and tranquillity . BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.341

The other patient is a lady , aged forty-five , the mother of nine
children . BARDSLEY-1807-1,34.342

She was first affected <P_35> four years ago , when the <font> menses
<$$font> became irregular , with pain , and enlargement of the joints of
the wrists . BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.343

In six months the disease extended to the joints of two of the fingers
of the right hand , BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.344

and has lately attacked the right knee , and ankle {TEXT:ancle} : since
which time she has not been able to walk without assistance .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.345

She was troubled with chronic rheumatism after her last lying-in , five
years ago ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.346

and at present complains of shifting , and rheumatic pains in various
parts of the body . BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.347

She is likewise occasionally subject to a troublesome <font> diarrhoea .
<$$font> BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.348

In other respects she enjoys tolerable health . BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.349

Both these patients have undergone a variety of medical treatment ,
without any permanent advantage . BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.350

Local bleeding , and the warm-bath relieved the pain at the onset of the
disease ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.351

but the patients have latterly desisted from attempting any method of
relief , under a persuasion , that their complaint proceeds from gout .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.352

Indeed , in the former case , all hope of relief is at an end ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.353

in the latter , there is small chance of success , considering the
peculiarity of the malady , and delicate constitution of the patient .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,35.354

In treating on the effects of arsenic in chronic rheumatism , I merely
alluded to the case of a patient afflicted with nodosity of the <P_36>
joints , where the remedy had failed ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.355

but I shall now describe the history of this interesting case , and the
method of treatment which terminated in complete success .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.356

<heading>

James Bazeley , Aet. 22 . <font> Labourer , BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.358

December <$$font> 8 , 1805 . BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.359

<$$heading>

Admitted into the Infirmary from a distant part of the country .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.361

He has been ill nine or ten months ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.362

the joints of all the fingers of both hands are enlarged , stiff , and
painful . BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.363

His right knee , and both ankles {TEXT:ancles} , have become knotty and
protuberant , within these few weeks ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.364

and have rendered him incapable of walking many yards .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.365

The nodes are remarkably distinct and prominent , on the middle joints
of the fingers , and exquisitely sore to the touch ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.366

but the integuments are neither inflamed nor discoloured .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.367

The patient looks wan , and emaciated , from confinement , pain , and
anxiety . BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.368

He was first seized with stiffness , heat , and pain in the hands and
feet , after a severe day's labour , in getting turnips during inclement
weather . BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.369

The pains afterwards shifted to different parts of the body ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.370

and at length settled in the joints . BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.371

The complaint was treated before his admission , as rheumatism ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.372

and he supposed himself getting well when the nodes appeared .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,36.373

<P_37>

He was immediately put upon the arsenical solution , with an opiate at
bed-time ; care {TEXT:Care} being taken to obviate costiveness with
castor-oil . BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.375

The solution was exhibited , to the amount of five drops , three times
a-@ @day , until the 19th , without producing the slightest favorable
change in the disease ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.376

indeed the nodes were rather increased in size , BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.377

and so stiff and painful were the joints , as to compel the patient to
keep his bed . BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.378

<font> 20th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.379

Being unwilling to push the experiment any farther , recourse was had to
the trial of the <font> oleum jecoris aselli . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.380

He was ordered to take a table_spoonful twice or thrice a-@ @day , in
beer ; and frequently to rub the affected joints with the oil , made
warm . BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.381

<font> 30th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.382

The medicine having griped and purged him , a few drops of <font> tinct:
opii , <$$font> were added to each dose , with proper effect .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.383

He has been able to get down two ounces of the oil daily ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.384

and has conquered , in some measure , his repugnance to the medicine .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.385

Still there is no visible improvement in the state of the nodes ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.386

and his pains at night are more acute than ever .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,37.387

Under these circumstances , the oil was <P_38> ordered to be
discontinued , BARDSLEY-1807-1,38.388

and he was put upon the following plan . To go into a slipper-bath each
night at 100 degrees ; and afterwards to take 12 grains of the Pulv:
ipecac: comp: with a proper regimen , to encourage sweating . The
following powder to be exhibited three times a-@ @day .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,38.389

{COM:symbol_for_recipe} Pulv: Cort: peruv: {COM:symbol_for_dram} ss. G:
Guaiac: gr. x . Ammoniae . ppt. gr. vi . M. ft. Pulv.
BARDSLEY-1807-1,38.390

<font> January 7th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,38.391

The pains have been relieved by sweating ; BARDSLEY-1807-1,38.392

but the patient's strength is thereby diminished , and the swelling and
hardness of the nodes not in the least removed . BARDSLEY-1807-1,38.393

The sudorific powder was ordered to be omitted . The bath to be
continued ; but at the reduced temperature of 94 . The powders with
Cort: and G: Guaiac: to be repeated . BARDSLEY-1807-1,38.394

<font> 14th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,38.395

The above method having failed , in obtaining more than a temporary
respite of pain ; and the nodosity of the joints being rather increased
than diminished , I was resolved to try the effects of mercury ,
assisted by a tepid bath . BARDSLEY-1807-1,38.396

As the patient's stomach and bowels <P_39> were in too irritable a state
to permit its internal use , one scruple of strong mercurial ointment ,
was ordered to be rubbed upon the inside of the legs and thighs each
night , after the use of a slipper-bath , heated to 94 degrees .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.397

<font> 16th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.398

Bark , and opium were joined to the use of the mercurial friction , as
the patient feels himself remarkably debilitated .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.399

<font> 20th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.400

Pains considerably abated in the knees and ankles {TEXT:ancles} ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.401

but the nodes of the fingers have become rather inflamed .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.402

Ordered eight leeches to the joints most affected , and a continuance of
the bath , and other remedies , with half a pint of red-port , daily .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.403

<font> 28th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.404

The leeches produced an abatement of pain and inflammation ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.405

but there is no reduction in the size or hardness of the nodes .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.406

The soreness of the mouth is scarcely perceptible ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.407

but , from the quickness and debility of the pulse , there can be no
doubt of the constitution being affected by the ointment .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.408

<font> February 4th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.409

The patient is considerably improved within these few days .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.410

He suffers less pain {COM:missing_period} BARDSLEY-1807-1,39.411

The <P_40> nodes are evidently softer , and the joints less rigid .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.412

He is capable of moving every limb with more freedom and ease ;
BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.413

and sits upon the bed_side for an hour together .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.414

<font> 7th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.415

Has been gaining ground , though but slowly . BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.416

The tendency to salivation having disappeared , the quantity of ointment
was directed to be increased to half a drachm , night and morning ; and
the use of the tepid bath to be limited to three times a-@ @week .
BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.417

<font> 18th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.418

His mouth is now become very sore , BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.419

and the salivary discharge is increased to nearly a pint each
twenty-four hours . BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.420

The nodes of the ankles {TEXT:ancles} and knees are greatly reduced ,
BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.421

and those of the finger joints , are neither so hard nor so tender to
the touch . BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.422

The tepid bath and mercurial frictions to be continued ; and an
astringent with opium , occasionally administered , to check the action
of the mercury on the bowels . BARDSLEY-1807-1,40.423

