<BEGIN_barton-gresswell-1906-2>

<P_69>

<heading>

Chapter II . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,69.4

Anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,69.5

<$$heading>

From time immemorial Anthrax has been present in this and other
countries , constituting the <font> boil <$$font> or <font> blain
<$$font> in Egypt , as the sixth plague . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,69.7

In France it is known as charbon , and in certain parts of <font> India
as Loodianah disease <$$font> and Manipuri disease , the former owing to
the outbreak of the malady in a battery of horse artillery at Loodianah
, and its prevalence at Manipur . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,69.8

According to Plutarch , Rome <paren> 740 B.C. <$$paren> was the centre
of an outbreak of anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,69.9

The terms , " Ignis Sacra , " " Persian Fire , " and " Pustula " were
employed by the ancients to indicate this disease .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,69.10

In France , Russia , Germany , Poland , Hungary , Saxony , etc. , etc.
, this terrible malady has raged <paren> and still does in many parts
<$$paren> with the most devastating and impoverishing results that it is
possible to conceive . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,69.11

<P_70>

In Siberia it is called <font> Siberian plague . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,70.13

Amongst British veterinary surgeons , anthrax in cattle is commonly
spoken of as " <font> splenic apoplexy <$$font> , " owing to the
engorged condition observed , in most cases , though not in all , in the
spleen , post_mortem . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,70.14

In this country cattle are by far the most frequent sufferers from
anthrax ; BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,70.15

in fact , in many localities splenic apoplexy is a much commoner
complaint than one might suppose , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,70.16

and there is no doubt that a very large percentage of deaths from
anthrax , through ignorance upon the part of the owner , and unqualified
practitioners , are never reported . {TEXT:,}
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,70.17

consequently the local authorities' returns may not be regarded as
representing the actual number of cattle dying through anthrax infection
, and less frequently horses . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,70.18

The writer's experience of this disease amongst cattle has been
considerable , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,70.19

and there is abundant substantial evidence to show that anthrax carcases
have frequently found their way to market , and been there disposed of
for human consumption . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,70.20

<P_71>

When the inspection of meat was at a very loose end , the amount of
diseased carcases exposed for , and sold as sound food , must have been
alarming . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,71.22

Within the last few years the writer - at the time being veterinary
inspector for the district - often went to farms , only to find an
anthrax carcase already dressed and ready for despatch to London ,
Glasgow , or some other large city . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,71.23

The enormous amount of harm liable to occur through conduct of this kind
is beyond estimate . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,71.24

It is a general custom with certain farmers , directly they find an ox
taken suddenly ill , without any apparent hope of recovery , to begin to
bleed the animal - BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,71.25

many anthrax-stricken cattle will hardly bleed at all - thus allowing
the blood to foul the cattle-house floor , their own hands , the hide ,
etc. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,71.26

Those who have the slightest acquaintance with the deadly nature of this
malady know only too well what a dangerous course of procedure this is .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,71.27

<P_72>

The number of deaths that have occurred through infection in this manner
is beyond computation . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.29

In the present day , not uncommonly , one hears of a human being having
succumbed to anthrax through skinning a sheep , ox , etc. , infected
with the disease . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.30

As proof how easily anthrax may be transferred to the human subject ,
three well marked instances occur in the author's mind ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.31

and it may not be out of place to give a brief outline of these .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.32

The first case was that of an odd man working about a farm .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.33

Upon the latter a beast died suddenly , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.34

and the proprietor asked the worker to skin the animal .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.35

He did so , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.36

and having a few superficial abrasions upon his hands , contracted
anthrax , in the form of malignant pustules {TEXT:pustule} .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.37

The physician attending him at once recognised the true nature of the
malady , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.38

and adopted treatment that fortunately brought the patient successfully
through the disease , though not without a lot of suffering .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,72.39

In case No. 2 , the writer was called to inspect the carcase of a
yearling ox , perfectly well when <P_73> seen in the cattle-house at
nine o'clock the previous night , and standing alongside another
beautiful yearling . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.40

In the morning it was found dead . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.41

The belly was tympanitic and blood issuing from all the natural orifices
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.42

These facts alone almost spelt anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.43

However , the usual examination was made , revealing all the typical
lesions of anthrax , macroscopically and microscopically .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.44

Before removal to the selected burial ground , it was necessary to put
the head portion into a sack , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.45

and as the cattleman got hold of the ears to do so , a few drops of
blood issued from the auricular opening , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.46

and fouled his finger , on which there was a slight abrasion .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.47

I dressed the part at once with pure creolin ;
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.48

but in spite of this , in due course , his hand began to show signs of
malignant pustule developing , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.49

and this did happen , but in an aborted form .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.50

It seemed as though the power of the antiseptic had nullified the deadly
activity of the virus , because in a few days the patient returned from
hospital perfectly well . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.51

This was in the Aberdeen Hospital . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.52

Some reader may perhaps recall the case . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,73.53

<P_74>

Case No. 3 was that of a meat carrier at Smithfield Market .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.55

His physician was treating him for enteric .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.56

He had an ulcer just above his ankle , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.57

and his wife drew the medical attendant's attention to this " nasty sore
" as she described it , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.58

but he attached no significance to it , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.59

in fact , told the wife that there was no relationship between the
patient's illness and the sore . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.60

This illness had been going on for two or three weeks ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.61

but the patient was gradually growing worse , so that his medical
attendant sent him to hospital , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.62

and there the precise nature of his ailment was at once recognised ,
only , sad to relate , when it was too late , death taking place within
a few days , leaving a widow and family of five little ones to mourn the
bread-winner's loss . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.63

The question arises , " How did this individual contract anthrax ?
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.64

" and why was the physician so lax in his diagnosis of the <font>
characteristic local lesion , <$$font> accompanied by systemic
disturbance ? BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,74.65

A consideration of the man's occupation would at once have put one on
the track of the <P_75> malady , doubtless contracted during the
handling of an infected carcase . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.66

This shows the necessity of linking a <font> probable <$$font> and
<font> possible <$$font> source of infection when considering <font>
cause <$$font> and <font> effect . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.67

At this point there is one matter that the author considers demands
dealing with by those who have the power to do so ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.68

and that is , in connection with the <font> slaughtering of animals upon
any farmstead . <$$font> BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.69

Anthrax carcases would be rarely exposed for human consumption if this
was put a stop to . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.70

That it is illegal I am aware . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.71

This is the chief source of anthrax flesh .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.72

The opportunities for it coming through any other channel are very small
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.73

When a stock owner has to get rid of a carcase slaughtered upon farm
premises , he very often applies to some second hand butcher to consign
it to market for him , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.74

and most towns and country places are unfortunate enough to have a
purveyor of braxy mutton , anthrax cow , tuberculous , etc. , flesh .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.75

All <font> carcases consigned by agriculturists should only be passed
into market when accompanied by the certificate of a qualified
veterinary surgeon . <$$font> BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,75.76

<P_76>

Owing to the enormous amount of traffic in flesh it is quite impossible
for even the most rigid inspection to detect every diseased carcase .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,76.78

Heavy penalties - imprisonment whenever deserved - constitutes one of
the best safeguards against traffic in diseased meat .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,76.79

To see some of the meat exposed for sale - especially at night - in
certain poorer districts , is sufficient to make one understand the
obscure nature of many ailments placed before the physician for
diagnosis . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,76.80

No wonder the case often resolves itself into the patient having eaten
something that has not agreed with him <paren> speculative diagnosis
<$$paren> . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,76.81

If the public could only be persuaded that the best meat is the cheapest
, the vendors of unwholesome flesh would gradually become as extinct as
the Dodo . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,76.82

In the same way that almost every town and country place has its vendor
of filthy flesh , likewise it has those who have a reputation for <font>
killing only the best , <$$font> BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,76.83

and it is to these that <font> rich <$$font> and <font> poor <$$font>
<P_77> should give their pence . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.84

Effectual supervision of private slaughter-houses would be a step
further towards the preservation of public health .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.85

Tuberculous cattle are common - only too common -
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.86

and when a man has a <font> private slaughter-house <$$font> he can do
that which he would be unable to do in a public one .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.87

Demonstrations of this nature are only too common .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.88

Public enlightenment into the nature of disease will do much towards
preventing its dissemination in both man and animals .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.89

The writer's experience teaches him that one of the chief causes in
sowing broadcast disease is ascribable to <font> ignorance . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.90

Both glanders and anthrax are diseases that veterinary surgeons - in
different parts of this and other countries - are daily brought into
contact with , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.91

yet one but rarely hears of a practitioner receiving inoculation .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.92

Many remarkable cases of infection with anthrax bacteria have been
placed on record . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,77.93

In one case the disease was attributed to infection from a kid glove ,
and in another to a fly <P_78> having settled upon a pimple on the face
of a lady whilst gathering nuts in a wood .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,78.94

It is easy to conceive how readily a " blow_fly " {TEXT:"_blow_"_fly} ,
or some blood-sucking fly , might transfer the germs of anthrax , say
from an infected carcase , to a human being , or to other animals .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,78.95

Pasteur showed that earth worms are capable of bringing the germs from
an anthrax grave to the surface . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,78.96

Most veterinary surgeons are well aware that wherever there is an
anthrax grave <paren> not necessarily known to be such <$$paren> , in a
grazing ground - unless protected by fencing , etc. - therein resides
an incubator for the perpetuation of anthrax germs .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,78.97

Many outbreaks are easily traceable to such graves .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,78.98

How long an anthrax grave may remain a centre of infection does not
appear to have been shown , but probably indefinitely .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,78.99

Anyhow , the Board of Agriculture do not favour burial , so that anthrax
carcases are now cremated , and rightly so .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,78.100

Further , the dead body must not be cut or opened , microscopical
examination of blood , obtained from the veins of <P_79> the ear , being
relied upon for the purposes of diagnosis .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,79.101

The handling of such carcases was a most hazardous undertaking ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,79.102

and post_mortem appearance could not be relied upon .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,79.103

Moreover , it only increased the liability to spread infection .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,79.104

Recently the handling of hides from abroad has been the cause of several
deaths in man from anthrax , although the proprietors provide their
employés with gutta-percha gloves . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,79.105

Neglect to take advantage of these safeguards has been the cause of
several deaths . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,79.106

In one case a shoemaker succumbed to the disease , he having contracted
it whilst mending a pair of shoes , there being an abrasion upon his
hand , thus constituting a portal of entrance for the germs or their
spores - probably the latter . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,79.107

<font> Handlers of all kinds of leather goods <$$font> should take
particular care against having scratches upon their hands .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,79.108

The most trifling - even a pin prick - injury to the skin will serve as
well for inoculation as that of an extensive wound .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,79.109

<P_80>

In an enzoötic outbreak of anthrax , the disease was ascribed to
dressing the pasture with bone manure - a highly probable source of
infection , and one that should never be overlooked in the event of an
outbreak of anthrax amongst stock . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,80.111

Horses , cattle , sheep , goats , pigs , dogs , cats , fowls , etc. ,
are all liable to anthrax infection , though not in an equal degree .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,80.112

Algerian sheep , white rats , and adult grey rats , are said to be
immune . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,80.113

In man some individuals seem to possess natural immunity to anthrax ,
because I have seen a man dressing an anthrax carcase with wounds on his
hands - the latter besmeared with blood - yet suffer no after_effects .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,80.114

Workers in woollen goods , horsehair , mohair , etc. , etc. , not
uncommonly suffer from anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,80.115

Consequently wool-sorters , furriers , tanners , shepherds , cattlemen ,
horse-slaughterers , curriers , etc. , are the class in which there is
special liability to contract anthrax , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,80.116

therefore the possibility of its occurrence in any of these should be
borne in mind by the physician , more especially when there is no local
lesion , but obscure pulmonary and gastro_intestinal {COM:sic} symptoms
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,80.117

<P_81>

<heading>

Bacteriological outlines of anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.120

<$$heading>

The cause of this disease is <font> Anthrax Bacteria <$$font>
circulating in the blood and invading the tissues .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.122

Pollender discovered these organisms during 1849 in blood derived from a
diseased cow . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.123

Davaine's researches in 1863 are the most important in relation to the
bacteriological study of this malady . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.124

The rods are either square cut at their ends or else truncated , the
capsule giving the germ this appearance at the ends .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.125

According to Crookshank these rods are from 5 to 20 microns long , and 1
to 1.25 microns broad . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.126

They are non-motile , and easily discernible in unstained preparations
by taking a droplet of blood from an auricular vein , spreading on a
cover glass , and then examining with a 1$$6th objective .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.127

Stained preparations should also be examined .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.128

Take a cover slip BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.129

and clean it in hot water . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.130

Dry it BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.131

and spread a very thin film of anthrax blood upon it <paren> obtained
from ear <$$paren> . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,81.132

<P_82>

Allow this to dry BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.134

and then grasp it with forceps so that the film side is uppermost .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.135

Now pass rapidly three times through a spirit or Bunsen flame ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.136

and then put a couple of drops of stain - watery solution of fuchsine or
methyl violet - on the film , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.137

and allow this to remain in contact with the dried film for a minute or
so , subsequently washing off with distilled water , and allowing the
cover glass to dry . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.138

Mount in Canada balsam , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.139

and examine with high power . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.140

A drop of cedar oil may be used instead , and the specimen examined with
a 1$$12th immersion lens . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.141

By double staining with fuchsine and methylene blue , the spores are
stained orange red , and the threads blue .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.142

The organisms of anthrax exist in three forms , viz. , as <font> rods ,
spores , <$$font> and <font> threads . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.143

Free oxygen is necessary for spore formation ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.144

consequently this takes place when blood is exposed to air .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,82.145

<P_83>

Putrefaction destroys the virulence of the bacilli , but not of the
spores . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.147

At 35@ @=o= C. the bacilli grow luxuriantly ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.148

but at 45@ @=o= C. development is arrested , ceasing at 55@ @=o= C.
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.149

At 12@ @=o= C. and below , development ceases .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.150

Cultivation on the potato is most useful for showing spore formation .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.151

This should be kept at 30@ @=o= Centigrade for forty-eight hours , when
a pale_yellow layer grows upon the cut surface .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.152

The spores are oval , and the worst part relating to this disease ,
owing to their resistance to agents . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.153

The destruction of the bacteria is not so difficult , but that of the
spores another matter altogether . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.154

For the destruction of these they must be cooked by dry heat for three
hours at a temperature of 316@ @=o= Fahr. <paren> 140@ @=o= C <$$paren>
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.155

Boiling kills the spores , hence the value of the free use of boiling
water to fittings , etc. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.156

It is the spores that are chiefly instrumental in the perpetuation of
anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.157

These , in all probability , exist on vegetable matter , such as turnips
, etc. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,83.158

<P_84>

Hay grown on infected land is capable of re-producing anthrax .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.160

An outbreak of anthrax amongst horses in London was traceable to
imported fodder . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.161

<heading>

Symptoms in man . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.163

<$$heading>

<paren> 1 <$$paren> The disease is known as <font> malignant pustule
<$$font> when it is produced by inoculation .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.165

This takes place generally on the hands , arms , or face .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.166

At first there is itching , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.167

and then a pimple is formed . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.168

This soon contains a fluid , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.169

and becomes surrounded by an inflammatory hardened tissue .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.170

Within thirty-six hours there is a dark_brown scar , with small vesicles
around , much oedematous swelling , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.171

and the inflammatory process spreads along the lymphatic ducts to the
glands . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.172

The temperature rises , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.173

but gradually falls , even below the normal .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.174

If taken in time , there is a good percentage of recoveries from
malignant pustule . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.175

<paren> 2 <$$paren> Internal anthrax proceeds - <paren> <font> a
<$$font> <$$paren> Rarely from lying on infected ground . <paren>
<font> b <$$font> <$$paren> From eating the flesh or drinking the milk
of diseased animals . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,84.176

After eating the flesh <P_85> of an animal which had been infected ,
twenty-five persons were seized with the disease ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.177

and six died . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.178

A chill may herald the onset of vomiting , diarrhoea , rise of
temperature , pains in the legs and back , dyspnoea , cyanosis ,
muscle-spasms , and general restlessness .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.179

There may be haemorrhage from mucous membranes , and petechiae on the
skin . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.180

The spleen enlarges . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.181

After death the blood is fluid for some time .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.182

<paren> <font> c <$$font> <$$paren> Wool-sorters' disease occurs among
those who sort wool , hair , furs or leather , the virus being inhaled
or swallowed . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.183

Around Keighley , Bradford , and districts where this industry is
carried on , cases of this nature occur .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.184

The patient , after a chill , becomes prostrated ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.185

has pains in back and legs , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.186

and the temperature rises to 102@ @=o= or 103@ @=o= F.
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.187

The respirations are quick , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.188

and there is generally a bronchitic cough .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.189

The pulse is rapid and feeble . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.190

There may be vomiting , diarrhoea , grave delirium , or unconsciousness
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,85.191

These symptoms also sometimes occur <P_86> in cases of malignant pustule
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.192

Death may happen as early as within twenty-four hours .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.193

<heading>

Treatment . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.195

<$$heading>

In cases of inoculation , powdered corrosive sublimate , or chinosol ,
should be sprinkled over the raw surface ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.197

and in addition to this , a solution of perchloride of mercury or
chinosol should be sub-cutaneously injected on all sides of the wound at
points four or five inches distant from it , twice or thrice daily .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.198

This treatment may appear to be too vigorous , because it may produce a
large sloughing wound ; BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.199

but it is the best procedure we know of for destroying the virus , and
arresting the disease . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.200

The strength of the sufferer must be maintained by nutritious food and
by stimulants . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.201

A good method of diagnosing the disease is that of inoculating a mouse ,
rabbit , or guinea-pig with some of the excretion from the patient ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.202

or , if the case be one of malignant pustule , examine a dried film of
pus on a cover-glass . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.203

Death generally occurs within two or three days .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,86.204

<P_87>

<heading>

Equine anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.207

<$$heading>

In this country anthrax in the horse is not of uncommon occurrence .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.209

There are good reasons for believing that it does occur oftener than is
supposed , many sudden and unaccountable abdominal apoplexies being
rather suggestive of <font> intestinal anthrax . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.210

The presence of post_mortem splenic lesions are not necessarily <paren>
see Hobday's case in <font> Veterinary Record <$$font> <$$paren> present
in anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.211

In the majority of cases , splenic engorgement is present , and fairly
characteristic , more especially if accompanied by acute enteritis and
free blood in the bowels . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.212

The attack is sometimes delivered so suddenly ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.213

and so stormy is its character , and rapid in its termination , that one
has little opportunity for noting symptoms .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.214

The pulse will probably be about 120 per minute and without any volume ;
the breathing rapid and laboured , and abdominal pain severe .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.215

Cerebral symptoms <paren> delirium <$$paren> are often observed .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.216

The internal temperature is usually high <paren> 106@ @=o= F. <$$paren>
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,87.217

<P_88>

In the so-called <font> sub-acute <$$font> cases there is frequently
diarrhoea , or dysentery , and the severity of the general symptoms less
marked . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.219

Tenesmus may be very severe . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.220

In India the respiratory form of anthrax is said to be most frequently
encountered . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.221

Paralytic symptoms are not uncommon . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.222

A form of disease not uncommonly observed in both horses and cattle , is
that known as <font> gloss-anthrax , <$$font> the prefix indicating
implication of the tongue . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.223

The question has been asked , Is this disease really anthrax ?
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.224

There is very satisfactory evidence to show that it is anthrax .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.225

<paren> See Mr. Hollingham's cases in <font> Veterinary Record <$$font>
for 1887 ; splenic apoplexy and gloss_anthrax prevailing amongst stock
at same time <$$paren> . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.226

Cases of this disease are not uncommonly observed in Fen districts .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.227

The writer's experience is that the anthrax is usually fatal , though
recoveries are by no means rare . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,88.228

In gloss-anthrax the whole head becomes oedematous ; the tongue cyanotic
and covered with angry_looking sores ; <P_89> saliva dribbling from the
mouth . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.229

The oedematous condition and tumefaction in the laryngeal and pharyngeal
regions leads to asphyxia , unless relieved by tracheotomy .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.230

In this , as in other forms of anthrax , the sub-cutaneous cellular
tissue contains a yellowish effusion , of the consistence of calves'
foot jelly that has not set . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.231

Death by lightning stroke has been confused with anthrax ;
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.232

therefore if there has been a lightning storm , this fact should not be
overlooked . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.233

<font> In the camel <$$font> anthrax has often been observed .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.234

The animals usually die very suddenly . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.235

Sometimes swellings appear inside the thighs .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.236

<heading>

Bovine anthrax <paren> splenic apoplexy <$$paren> .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.238

<$$heading>

This is common in some counties , in others hardly ever observed .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.240

Cattle occasionally do recover from it , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.241

but the mortality is extremely high <paren> 90 per_cent. <$$paren> .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.242

It assumes acute and <font> sub-acute <$$font> forms .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.243

Commonly the stock are apparently all healthy when seen late in the
evening , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,89.244

yet one or more are found dead on entering the cattle-house <P_90> or at
pasture the following morning , the belly being extremely tympanitic ,
and blood oozing from one or more of the natural orifices .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.245

In other instances one or two of the animals <paren> or it may be a colt
and an ox <$$paren> are slightly out of sorts ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.246

and the cattleman gives them a dose of salts or oil , thinking that
their stomachs are out of order . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.247

However , it commonly happens that the animals are , much to the dismay
of the owner , either dead or dying when next visited .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.248

If caught in the latter act , in goes the knife ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.249

and the carcase is dressed . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.250

We must draw the veil over what may follow .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.251

In acute cases the temperature runs up to 105@ @=o= or 106@ @=o= F. ,
more or less ; BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.252

the animal shakes from head to foot ; BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.253

the hind quarters give way , and brain mischief supervenes .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.254

In other instances there are bloody emanations from the bowels ,
accompanied by tenesmus . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,90.255

It is the author's experience that anthrax - apart from microscopical
examination of blood - <font> is a very difficult disease <$$font> to
diagnose during life , especially in its <font> pulmonary <$$font> and
<font> gastro_intestinal <$$font> {COM:font_change_around_"gastro"}
<P_91> forms , unless microscopical examination of the blood be resorted
to . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.256

In its <font> sub-acute <$$font> forms anthrax may continue a week or
more , and the animal then die . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.257

Carbuncles sometimes appear upon the head , shoulders , belly , udder ,
flanks , etc. , etc. , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.258

but these show no tendency towards suppuration .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.259

<heading>

Ovine anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.261

<$$heading>

There is no doubt that anthrax is pretty frequent amongst sheep , and
may be included under that doubtful cognomen - <font> braxy . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.263

Shepherds do not appreciate the risks they run in cutting up and
skinning carcases of sheep dying suddenly , more especially <font> braxy
<$$font> sheep . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.264

The animal begins to breathe very rapidly ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.265

trembles all over , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.266

staggers , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.267

and loses consciousness , death being the rule within a few hours .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.268

<heading>

Anthrax in swine . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.270

<$$heading>

According to McFadyean , extensive swelling under the jaws during acute
illness , is almost pathognomonic of anthrax .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,91.272

<P_92>

The temperature of the body rises rapidly ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.274

the skin becomes discoloured , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.275

and the animal moves and breathes with great difficulty , the latter due
to the extremely oedematous condition around the throat .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.276

Many outbreaks of anthrax amongst pigs have been recorded , the result
of feeding these animals upon the offal from an infected carcase .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.277

Death is the rule . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.278

Crookshank has produced anthrax in swine by re-inoculation from infected
mice and guinea-pigs . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.279

<heading>

Canine and feline anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.281

<$$heading>

Dogs may be infected through feeding on meat from an infected carcase ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.283

or they may escape infection , yet be capable of carrying the organisms
to the human subject , or to other animals , either of the same or of a
different species . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.284

Quite recently a case was recorded where two valuable dogs showed
unmistakeable signs of anthrax , succumbing to the disease .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.285

It usually shows itself in the form of a malignant angina , the
sub-cutaneous swelling in the laryngeal and tracheal regions being
severe . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,92.286

<P_93>

Gastro-enteric forms have been recorded .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.288

Some dogs recover after severe illness , whereas others have the disease
only very lightly . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.289

This shows the necessity for preventing sheep , dogs , etc. , from
devouring a braxy , etc. , carcase . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.290

The symptoms in cats are very similar to the foregoing .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.291

<heading>

Avian anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.293

<$$heading>

Birds of prey are said to be immune . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.295

There is fairly good evidence to show that turkeys and other farmyard
fowls can contract the disease by picking up the flesh , dried blood ,
etc. , coming from the infected source .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.296

At one farm large numbers of fowls died through feeding upon the flesh
of an anthrax bullock . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.297

The late Mr. McGillavray , of Banff , was apparently aware of the
communicability of anthrax to fowls , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.298

and recorded cases . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.299

A foetid and bloody diarrhoea was observed .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.300

Post_mortem revealed the ovules in a black and tarry condition , with an
offensive odour . Similar changes in oviduct . Haemorrhages in the
kidneys , etc. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.301

It is generally <font> fatal <$$font> in poultry .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,93.302

<P_94>

<heading>

Recapitulation . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.305

<$$heading>

It has been stated that the high temperature of birds renders them
immune to anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.307

This does not appear to be true . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.308

1. - That anthrax in man is commonest as <font> malignant pustule
<$$font> and as <font> wool-sorter's disease . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.309

2. - That the best chance of a successful issue in the human subject is
that afforded by <font> early <$$font> excision , and the injection ,
three or four times per day at six points around the sore , of a strong
solution of chinosol or sol hydr. bichlor.
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.310

Further , to encircle the pustule by the application of argent nit. ,
and so isolate it . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.311

The writers think that much benefit would be obtained by smearing the
whole arm with unguentum hydrargyri . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.312

3. - Isolation of the diseased . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.313

4. - The advisability of inquiry into a patient's avocation during
consultation . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.314

5. - Early recognition of the disease . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.315

6. - To employ microscopical examination and inoculation of a mouse ,
guinea-pig , etc. , to confirm diagnosis .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,94.316

<P_95>

7. - In animals : BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,95.318

to warn persons against skinning cattle , sheep , etc. , that have died
suddenly . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,95.319

8. - Immediate isolation of an animal upon a farm directly it shows any
signs of illness , no matter how simple the ailment may appear at first
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,95.320

9. - To caution workers in , and handlers of , leather goods , hides ,
wool , etc. , etc. , against having any scratches upon their hands ,
arms , etc. , and to wear gloves when handling these materials .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,95.321

To avoid touching any pimples with either hands or gloves .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,95.322

10. - To endeavour to suppress traffic in meat that spreads disease
broadcast . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,95.323

11. - To assist the local authority and those invested with power , in
the suppression of communicable diseases .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,95.324

12. - Rigid disinfection of all objects <paren> or subjects <$$paren>
animate and inanimate , that have been exposed to the risk of infection
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,95.325

<P_96>

<heading>

<font> Anthrax in men and animals - Death of a man , cats and pigs .
<$$font> BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.328

<$$heading>

On February 9th last I was called up at night to see a young heifer
belonging to a gentleman in this neighbourhood , who is a large feeder
of cattle . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.330

On my arrival the manager informed me that it had just died .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.331

I found it tied up by the side of other animals ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.332

and as nothing was known to be wrong with it two hours previous I was
asked by the manager to stick it , which I did for reasons of my own .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.333

He in the meantime sent for the butcher , as he intended to have it
dressed . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.334

I had with a lighted candle made a casual examination .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.335

I found a slight discharge of frothy saliva from mouth , and a little
blood mixed with the faeces per rectum . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.336

Not being satisfied with these signs , I determined to await the arrival
of the butcher , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.337

and gave a helping hand , along with some other men , in conveying the
carcase to another building . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.338

In so doing some blood was left in the foldyard where a number of pigs
were kept . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.339

When the animal was dressed I again , with the aid of a light , examined
the internal organs . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,96.340

Heart and lungs were healthy , stomach distended with food , the spleen
<P_97> very much engorged with blood ; BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.341

intestines contained a quantity of blood .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.342

From these post_mortem appearances , and also not having seen the animal
alive , I concluded this was a case of splenic apoplexy ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.343

and I at once informed the manager so . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.344

I never saw the carcase afterwards , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.345

but have reasons to know it was consumed .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.346

The internal organs were buried in a dunghill , which is situate
{COM:sic} close by the cattle sheds , and where the cattle and pigs are
at times allowed to roam . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.347

The dunghill , I may say , contains the remains of other carcases which
have been deposited there at different times ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.348

and I have thought while writing this article that it is possible this
animal may have got something from the dunghill , so as to bring about a
fatal result . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.349

I know , from my own personal knowledge , for upwards of twenty-five
years no disease has ever broken out among these cattle that have been
brought on the premises from time to time to be fed off .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.350

At present all the other animals are doing well .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.351

Such is a general outline of the history of this case .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,97.352

<P_98>

The pigs on the following day gathered up the blood in the foldyard ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.354

and also got to the remains in the dunghill ;
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.355

on the third day they showed signs of illness ;
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.356

on the fourth one pig died . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.357

I was again called in , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.358

but before I could give an opinion a messenger arrived , ordering all
the others to be slaughtered off . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.359

Two valuable cats that fed on the remains also died ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.360

but the worst of the story remains to be told .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.361

On the sixth day after assisting with the heifer one man , whom I will
call number one , broke down with illness , a large swelling appearing
in his arm . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.362

He consulted the village surgeon , who at first thought little of it .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.363

However , he continued to get worse BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.364

and died at the end of the fifth day of his illness .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.365

Number two , the writer of this article , when in the act of sticking
the animal , hurt his wrist , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.366

and on the eighth day a small ulcer appeared on the part .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.367

Caustic was applied , but to no purpose , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.368

the arm commenced to swell , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.369

and suspicions were now aroused that we had contracted a blood poison .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.370

My arm was swollen to an alarming extent ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.371

and caused great pain . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,98.372

I had to cease work and call in a physician , as signs of mortification
<P_99> now threatened . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.373

I was placed under chloroform BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.374

and underwent an operation , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.375

and my life was saved . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.376

I am now recovering , but still under medical care , and unable to
follow my employment . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.377

Number three . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.378

This man showed signs of illness on the twelfth day , while attending
the funeral of number one , an ulcer appearing on his hand .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.379

He at once called the village surgeon , under whose treatment he has
been for a number of weeks ; BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.380

has now recovered and following his employment .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.381

These cases have caused very great alarm and excitement among the
inhabitants of the neighbourhood . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.382

Another strange part of this case is that the butcher , who had a cut on
one of his fingers , and one or two others who assisted , have shown no
symptoms whatever up to the present time .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.383

- <paren> Recorded by J. Hepton , M. R. C. V. S. , <font>
Veterinary Record . <$$font> <$$paren> BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.384

<heading>

<font> Death of a cowman from anthrax . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,99.386

<$$heading>

Mr. J. Booth <paren> Coroner <$$paren> held an inquest at the North
Staffordshire Infirmary on Friday on the body of Joseph Lymer , aged 61
, a cowman , in the <P_100> employ of Mr. J. Knight , solicitor ,
Hartshill . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.388

It appeared from the evidence that one of Mr. Knight's cows having died
, Mr. Harry Potts , assistant to Mr. Trigger , veterinary surgeon ,
Newcastle , was instructed to make a post_mortem examination of the body
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.389

This he did on the morning of the 13th inst. ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.390

and the deceased assisted him in the operation .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.391

While opening the chest of the animal , deceased accidentally scratched
his left arm with a bone . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.392

The scratch was a very slight one , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.393

but Mr. Potts at once sent for some boiling water
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.394

and caused it to be well washed , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.395

and the washing was afterwards repeated with carbolic soap .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.396

It was subsequently ascertained that the cow had died from anthrax ,
whereupon Mr. Potts himself washed the deceased@ @'s injury with a
disinfectant solution , and told him to poultice his arm at night .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.397

The deceased , who was said to be an obstinate man , and impatient of
advice , made very light of his injury , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.398

and said that he should take no harm . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.399

Four days afterwards , however , his arm became very painful ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.400

and on the 19th inst. he was so ill that he had to be conveyed to the
infirmary . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,100.401

While <P_101> in that institution he was visited by his son , to whom he
explained how his injury was occasioned ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,101.402

and he attached no blame to anyone . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,101.403

He stated that the doctor had told him that his life might be saved if
he had his arm off , but he would rather die than be a cripple .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,101.404

Dr. Cockill , house physician , stated that when the deceased was
admitted to the Infirmary he found on the left arm a scratch with local
lesion from anthrax . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,101.405

He suggested to the deceased that he should have his arm amputated ,
telling him that it was the only chance of saving his life ;
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,101.406

but the man refused , saying he would rather die with his arm on .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,101.407

He died at a quarter-@ @past eleven o'clock on the night of the 22nd
inst. , from blood poisoning . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,101.408

The Coroner said the deceased seemed to have virtually sacrificed his
own life to his obstinacy . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,101.409

The jury found " That the deceased died from blood poisoning , caused by
being accidentally scratched on the arm while opening a carcase affected
with anthrax . " BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,101.410

<P_102>

<heading>

<font> Malignant pustule . <$$font> BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,102.413

<$$heading>

M. Le Roy des Barres has recently met with two cases of malignant
pustule occurring in persons engaged in working with hair which had come
partly from the Cotes du Nord , a district where no case of anthrax has
been reported for several months , and partly from Buenos Ayres ;
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,102.415

four other cases were met with in patients who had been working among
hides brought from Turkey and Kazan . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,102.416

The local use of the thermo-cautery , injections containing 10 per_cent.
of iodine , together with the internal administration of oxygenated
water and iodised water , were fortunately successful in saving the
patients' lives . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,102.417

One of the patients who suffered from very marked general oedema of the
whole of the upper part of the body , was in great danger for a long
time , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,102.418

and it was necessary to inject pure tincture of iodine into the eyelid
where the pustule had formed and where the bacteria were localised .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,102.419

In his communication to the Academy of Medicine M. Le Roy des Barres
stated that in the <P_103> course of some years he had observed
seventy-two cases of malignant pustule , among which there were
sixty-two recoveries . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,103.420

Fifty-seven of these patients were leather-dressers ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,103.421

and fifteen were workers among hair . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,103.422

Anthrax is invariably conveyed by hides , skins , wool , and hair coming
from abroad , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,103.423

and it is obvious that the importation of these products can@ @not be
prohibited , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,103.424

and it is almost impossible to sterilise or disinfect them .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,103.425

- <paren> <font> The Lancet . <$$font> <$$paren>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,103.426

<P_171>

<heading>

Chapter VI . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,171.429

Rabies and Hydrophobia . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,171.430

<$$heading>

Just in the same manner that we come to regard glanders as a disease
belonging to the equinidae , so we look upon rabies as a malady
originating in the canine tribe . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,171.432

Happily rabies or hydrophobia has , practically , been blotted out of
existence in this country ; BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,171.433

hence , the muzzling system and quarantine regulations have conferred
upon mankind and animals the greatest boon that could possibly have been
bestowed . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,171.434

The horror of the existence of rabies in any country and the agony of a
living death in any person the subject of inoculation by a rabid animal
, are too terrible to contemplate . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,171.435

The writer's experience of rabies in dogs will never be effaced from his
memory . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,171.436

In Russia , many parts of the Indian Empire , and other countries ,
rabies and hydrophobia still ride rampant .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,171.437

<P_172>

In countries where wolves and other animals of this and allied tribes
abound , rabies is very prevalent . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.439

Rabies is an extremely ancient disease , Aristotle being aware of its
existence during the 4th century B.C. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.440

Virgil , Horace , Plutarch , etc. , also refer to it .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.441

All these ancient writers were aware of its transferable nature when one
rabid animal bit another . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.442

In this country Messrs. Blaine and Youatt did good work towards
increasing a knowledge of this deadly malady .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.443

Chief amongst modern workers must be mentioned the names of Pasteur ,
Koch , Nocard , Roux , Renault , Galtier , Hertwig , etc.
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.444

In spite of the many years of patient labour by these and numerous other
workers , the precise cause of rabies still remains to be discovered .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.445

Whatever be the nature of the toxic material , there is every reason for
believing that such is contained in the saliva , and transferred when a
rabid animal inflicts the bite . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.446

All animals inoculated in this manner do not develop rabies ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.447

but probably 40 per_cent. of them do . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,172.448

The same <P_173> remark applies to man , some human beings suffering no
after_effects . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,173.449

A remarkable feature in connection with the virus of rabies is that of
the extremely variable period of incubation , in the human subject
especially . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,173.450

In a case occurring at Huddersfield Infirmary , five years elapsed
before the subject of inoculation developed clinical signs of
hydrophobia . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,173.451

The average period in the dog may be set down at six weeks , but any
time from five days to six months . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,173.452

The saliva has been found to be virulent for twenty-four hours after
death , whereas material from the brain , etc. , retains its virulence
for several weeks . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,173.453

The following are the approximate incubative periods of rabies : - Dogs
, three to six weeks ; horse , four to twelve weeks ; cattle , four to
eight weeks ; sheep , two to four weeks ; cats , ten days to a month ;
pigs , one to four weeks . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,173.454

Various other animals - foxes , ferrets , and birds , etc. - are all
inoculable with rabific virus . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,173.455

<heading>

Hydrophobia . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,173.457

<$$heading>

The above name indicates fear of water ; BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,173.459

but this dread of fluids in affected human beings is <P_174> not
invariably present , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.460

and probably springs from the difficulty of swallowing , owing to the
spasms of the pharynx , oesophagus , and other near organs .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.461

This aversion to liquids is seldom observed in the case of rabid animals
, BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.462

and is rare even in man . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.463

The virus may be dormant in a man for a period of from three days to
nine months , and sometimes longer . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.464

There are three stages . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.465

<paren> 1 <$$paren> <font> Premonitory stage .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.466

<$$font> - Should receive notice . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.467

At and near the site of the bite irritation , pain and numbness are felt
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.468

Depression , irritability , headache , and sleeplessness may be observed
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.469

The voice becomes husky , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.470

and difficulty in swallowing is experienced .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.471

<paren> 2 <$$paren> <font> Stage of excitement . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.472

- A man attacked with the disease , whom I saw at St. Bartholomew's
Hospital , displayed great excitement and restlessness .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.473

There were also spasms of the larynx and mouth , and dyspnoea , even
with the mouth open . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.474

Attempts to swallow cause violent spasms of the laryngeal muscles and
elevators of the hyoid bone . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.475

The mind seems to be overcome with terror , which causes maniacal acts ;
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,174.476

but between the attacks the <P_175> mind regains its balance .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.477

The temperature is from 100@ @=o= to 103@ @=o= .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.478

<paren> 3 <$$paren> <font> Stage of paralysis . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.479

- In rabbits this may be the only stage .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.480

It lasts from six to eighteen hours . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.481

Then the patient is quiet and unconscious .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.482

Death occurs by syncope . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.483

<heading>

Treatment in Man . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.485

<$$heading>

<paren> <font> a <$$font> <$$paren> <font> Ordinary . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.487

- The wounds should be carefully washed , treated with antiseptics , and
kept open for five or six weeks . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.488

The sufferer should be put to bed in a dark room with two attendants
<paren> who should be strong , so as to be able to control the patient
<$$paren> . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.489

In order to allay the violent spasmodic seizures , chloroform or morphia
, or perhaps both in small amount , may be requisite .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.490

If there be much irritation of throat , cocaine may be applied ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.491

but as there is a good deal of frothy mucus , and the patient is likely
to resist , it may be difficult and even dangerous to apply it otherwise
than externally . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.492

Nutrient enemata or suppositories must be given , the bowels having been
acted on previous to having recourse to them .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,175.493

The best plan is to give an aperient enema before starting the nutrient
<P_176> ones . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.494

In order to act upon the skin , pilocarpine has been used ;
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.495

but neither this nor any other known drug probably has any real
influence in arresting the malady when contracted .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.496

<paren> <font> b <$$font> <$$paren> <font> Preventive inoculation .
<$$font> BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.497

- Pasteur discovered that if an ape was inoculated with material taken
from the spinal cord of an animal that had died of the disease , and the
virus of the resulting disease were passed on to successive apes , the
virus gradually became milder and milder .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.498

The contrary effects were produced in guinea-pigs and rabbits , in which
the virus became successively stronger .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.499

At least in rabbits , the virus is capable of producing the disease in
seven days , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.500

and is called <font> virus fixé . <$$font>
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.501

If the spinal cords of these rabbits be preserved in dry air , their
virus diminishes in strength , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.502

and if dogs are inoculated with cords which have been thus preserved in
dry air for fourteen days , and afterwards with cords kept for a less
time , they gradually <font> acquire the power of resisting the
strongest virus . <$$font> BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,176.503

The success of Pasteur's treatment is seen in observing the mortality in
cases of wounds on <P_177> hands and face inflicted by a rabid animal ,
which is about 1.8 per_cent. in those treated on this plan , whereas it
is about 88 per_cent. in those not so treated .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.504

<heading>

Symptoms of Canine Rabies . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.506

<$$heading>

These may be either of a <font> furious <$$font> nature , or exist as
<font> dumb <$$font> rabies . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.508

The temperament of the animal becomes altered .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.509

It seeks seclusion , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.510

appears restless , peevish , and nervous .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.511

If there is a wound , the dog will be seen biting at it .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.512

Depravity of appetite is exhibited by biting and gnawing at various
foreign substances , such as wood , stones , etc. , and by lapping up
urine , faeces , and so forth . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.513

Snapping and biting at real or imaginary objects do not , as a rule ,
come on until the later stages of the malady .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.514

Many well marked cases of rabies I have handled <paren> unconsciously
<$$paren> without the animal showing any inclination to bite me .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.515

Even when the disease is well advanced , a rabid dog has often
sufficient respect left for his master .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.516

There is a disposition to wander . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,177.517

In <P_178> other cases the slightest provocation will cause the dog to
snap at any person , animal , or other object within its reach .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,178.518

In some of the cases seen by the writer the final stages of the
complaint were manifested by extreme violence , more especially if the
animal were irritated in any way . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,178.519

It is now unable to swallow . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,178.520

The altered change in the animal's bark is very significant , and once
heard , not readily forgotten . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,178.521

In all probability it is due to the inflamed and oedematous condition of
the larynx , so frequently seen post_mortem .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,178.522

It is a semi-bark and howl . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,178.523

Staggering , a glassy appearance of the eyes , and paralysis usually
appear before death , frequently accompanied by either delirium or coma
. BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,178.524

The <font> dumb form of rabies <$$font> is indicated by paralysis of the
lower jaw , along with the altered temperament of the animal .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,178.525

Inoculation with the salivary discharge from a dog affected with this
form is liable to produce the furious manifestation of the malady .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,178.526

<P_179>

The most marked lesions discoverable post_mortem are those in connection
with the tonsils , larynx , pharynx , and stomach , cerebral and spinal
lesions being inconstant . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,179.528

In a large proportion of cases , foreign substances are found in the
stomach , but not in all . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,179.529

The gastric membrane is inflamed , the hyperaemia being usually of a
patchy character . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,179.530

Numerous cases of <font> rabies <$$font> have been reported in horses ,
cattle , sheep and deer . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,179.531

<heading>

Rabies in the Horse {COM:missing_period} BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,179.533

<$$heading>

A rabid horse usually bites and tears not only at the stable fittings ,
but also his own flesh , more especially if he can get at the part where
he was bitten by a rabid dog . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,179.535

Depraved appetite , sexual excitement , muscular spasms , a wild and
staring condition of the eyes , violence , and paralysis are some of the
leading phenomena observed in a typical case of equine rabies .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,179.536

The late Professor Walley and other British veterinarians have recorded
cases of this malady . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,179.537

<P_180>

<heading>

Rabies in the Ox . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.540

<$$heading>

Bellowing , butting at other animals , a wild look about the face ,
inability to swallow , dribbling of saliva from mouth , increased sexual
desire subsequently paralysis and death .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.542

<heading>

Rabies in Sheep and Pigs . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.544

<$$heading>

Rabid sheep show great excitement by running and jumping about ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.546

tear at their wool , directing particular attention to the seat of
inoculation . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.547

Pigs are restless , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.548

squeal , slobber , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.549

and attack other pigs , if they have an opportunity .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.550

They also bite at the inoculated part , usually dying in two or three
days . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.551

<heading>

<font> Case of Hydrophobia Five Years after Having been Bitten .
<$$font> BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.553

<$$heading>

H. L. , aged 17 , was admitted to the Huddersfield Infirmary with
symptoms of hydrophobia about midday on September 5th , 1892 .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.555

He had been bitten near Shepley , a country district , by a mad dog
<paren> fox terrier <$$paren> on August 1st , 1887 .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.556

A brother and neighbour were bitten at the same time .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,180.557

The bite was on his left hand , his brother being <P_181> bitten on the
wrist and arm more severely . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.558

All three went to Paris on August 5th , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.559

and stayed there until August 19th , being treated by Pasteur .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.560

On October 4th his brother was admitted into the infirmary suffering
from hydrophobia , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.561

and died on October 5th . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.562

His age was 26 . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.563

Since the bite H. L. had been perfectly well with the exception of
lymphangitis of his left arm two years ago , for which he was treated by
Dr. Alister Macgregor , who traced the mischief on that occasion to a
deep scratch from a rusty nail ; BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.564

the inflammation soon subsided , although at the time the lad's mother
was deeply concerned , thinking it was the result of the dog bite three
years previously . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.565

His parents stated that he first complained on August 31st of pain about
the neck and the back of the head . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.566

He thought it was a cold , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.567

but as Dr. A. Macgregor , the family medical attendant , has kindly
supplied me with an account of the illness previous to his admission to
the infirmary , I give it in his own words .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.568

He writes : I was called to see H. L. on September 4th .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,181.569

On arriving at his house I met his father outside <P_182> the door ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.570

and he said to me that his son was sleeping on the hearth-rug , and that
I should not waken him , as he had been very violent .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.571

He went on to explain that on September 1st H. had complained of a pain
in his left shoulder and in his back , which pain steadily grew worse ,
much to his father's alarm , as his other son F. <paren> who died of
hydrophobia five years ago <$$paren> had been taken the same way .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.572

They bathed the shoulder , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.573

and the pain in it disappeared on the morning of September 4th ,
although the pain in the back <paren> where M. Pasteur had inoculated
<$$paren> still remained , though not so severe .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.574

During this time the lad seemed out of sorts ,
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.575

but took his food fairly well , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.576

and showed no aversion to fluids . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.577

On September 4th , at dinner time , he had taken some food , when , on
beginning to drink some beer , he was seized with a spasm , and said the
beer stuck in his throat , and he could not swallow it .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.578

Immediately afterwards he began to look very wild , as the father
expressed it . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.579

The poor parents were very alarmed , BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.580

and sent for me . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.581

After hearing this history , I entered the house
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.582

and found the patient lying on the hearth-rug , apparently sleeping .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,182.583

I had hardly <P_183> sat down when he wakened and spoke quite sensibly
to me - so sensibly , in fact , that I formed the impression that the
parents <paren> who had never really got over the death of the other son
<$$paren> had got needlessly alarmed about him .
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,183.584

H. told me that the pain in his shoulder and back had kept him from
sleeping for three nights , but that he thought he could sleep a bit now
that the pain was rather better . BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,183.585

He said he " did@ @n't ail so much now . "
BARTON-GRESSWELL-1906-2,183.586

