<BEGIN_beale-1898-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

Section I . BEALE-1898-2,1.4

Introduction . BEALE-1898-2,1.5

By Dorothea Beale . BEALE-1898-2,1.6

<$$heading>

I have been asked to undertake one section of a book on the education of
girls , and to confine myself , as far as possible , to the intellectual
aspects of education , leaving to others the task of dealing with the
physical and moral aspects . BEALE-1898-2,1.8

I shall try to keep within the assigned limits - abstain from any
systematic treatment of the laws of hygiene , and write no formal
treatise on school ethics - BEALE-1898-2,1.9

but all the intellectual work must of course be conditioned by the
necessities of the physical life , BEALE-1898-2,1.10

and the final cause of all education must be the development of a right
character . BEALE-1898-2,1.11

I am to treat the subject too with special reference to the large
secondary schools which have come into existence during the last fifty
years , BEALE-1898-2,1.12

and in doing so , I must dwell briefly , upon the changes which have
taken place in the ideals and theories regarding the education of girls
, which have found expression in these schools , and in the Women's
Colleges . BEALE-1898-2,1.13

I shall speak of what has yet to be accomplished , BEALE-1898-2,1.14

for we are still in a period of transition , BEALE-1898-2,1.15

and I shall consider by what means we may best realise our ideals .
BEALE-1898-2,1.16

<P_2>

Now in education there is always a twofold object . BEALE-1898-2,2.18

Bacon tells us the furthest end of knowledge is " the glory of the
Creator and the relief of man's estate " - in other words , the
perfection of the individual , and the good of the community .
BEALE-1898-2,2.19

In some periods , indeed in pre-Christian times generally , the latter
was emphasised , BEALE-1898-2,2.20

men were to live for the commonwealth ; BEALE-1898-2,2.21

the individual was regarded as an instrument for accomplishing certain
work - BEALE-1898-2,2.22

he was not thought of as an end in himself . BEALE-1898-2,2.23

Thus even the most enlightened among ancient writers have spoken of
slaves , as if they were mere chattels . BEALE-1898-2,2.24

Our moral sense is shocked by much that we read in Plato and Aristotle ,
and still more by what the laws of Rome permitted . BEALE-1898-2,2.25

Christianity on the other hand taught that the primary relationship of
each was to the All-Father , the primary duty of each to realise God's
ideal for His children , to become perfect , and by glorifying human
nature to glorify God . BEALE-1898-2,2.26

This was the first commandment , BEALE-1898-2,2.27

but the second was implied in the first - BEALE-1898-2,2.28

self-love was not selfish , BEALE-1898-2,2.29

the love of God descending from heaven became the enthusiasm of humanity
. BEALE-1898-2,2.30

" Education , " writes Mr. Ruskin <paren> <font> Queen's Gardens
<$$font> <$$paren> , " is the leading human souls to what is best and
making what is best out of them ; BEALE-1898-2,2.31

and these two objects are always attainable together , and by the same
means ; BEALE-1898-2,2.32

the training which makes men happiest in themselves , also makes them
most serviceable to others , " BEALE-1898-2,2.33

" The only safe course , " <P_3> writes Miss Shirreff <paren> <font>
Intellectual Education <$$font> <$$paren> , " is to hold up individual
perfectness as the aim of education . " BEALE-1898-2,3.34

And so the task of the educator is in the first instance to develop to
the highest perfection all the powers of the child , that he may realise
the ideal of the All-Father . BEALE-1898-2,3.35

But the perfection of man " the thinker , " the anthropos , " the upward
looker , " can be attained only when as a son he enters into , and
co-operates with the Divine purpose in thought and act :
BEALE-1898-2,3.36

therefore to know God and His laws for His children's education and
development , is the beginning and the end . BEALE-1898-2,3.37

These laws man reads <paren> 1 <$$paren> in the world of Nature with
which science has to do ; <paren> 2 <$$paren> in human history and
institutions ; <paren> 3 <$$paren> in the hidden life of the soul - of
which philosophy and religion and ethics treat . BEALE-1898-2,3.38

He has to seek first to know truth , to bring his will into conformity
with the Divine thought , and then to utter what is true and right in
word and deed ; BEALE-1898-2,3.39

only thus will the kingdom of righteousness be set up , and the
perfection of the whole - the well-being of the commonwealth - of " man
writ large " be secured . BEALE-1898-2,3.40

The most civilised nations are devoting their best energies to the work
of education , realising that upon this depends their very existence -
that it is not by starving the individual life , and merging it in the
general , but by developing each to perfection , that the common good
will be secured . BEALE-1898-2,3.41

They trust less to the power of laws and institutions , more to the
power of a right education - less to external restraint , more to the
wisdom that comes of a wisely directed experience . BEALE-1898-2,3.42

These principles have guided the new movement for women's education ,
BEALE-1898-2,3.43

and those who have followed the changes in public <P_4> opinion , since
people have thought more of each individual as an end in himself , are
full of confidence and hope . BEALE-1898-2,4.44

The reformers said : " Let us give to girls an invigorating dietary ,
physical , intellectual , moral ; BEALE-1898-2,4.45

seclusion from evil is impossible , BEALE-1898-2,4.46

but we can strengthen the patient to resist it " . BEALE-1898-2,4.47

'T@ @is life , not death for which we pant , More life and fuller , that
we want ! BEALE-1898-2,4.48

Such were , I believe , the feelings and the thoughts of those who
initiated just fifty years ago the great movement , which found its
first visible expression in the foundation of Queen's College by Maurice
and Kingsley and Trench and others like-minded and less known .
BEALE-1898-2,4.49

This was soon followed by the opening of Bedford College , 1849 , and
the Cheltenham Ladies' College , 1853 . BEALE-1898-2,4.50

Miss Buss and her brothers , in association with Mr. Laing ,
established the first great High School , BEALE-1898-2,4.51

and Mrs. Grey and Miss Shirreff carried on the movement in that
direction ; BEALE-1898-2,4.52

from the Union founded by them grew up the G. P. D. S. Co. , while
Miss Davies with far-seeing wisdom won over Cambridge professors <paren>
amongst whom I may specially mention Professor Henry Sidgwick and James
Stuart <$$paren> to offer the highest culture to women .
BEALE-1898-2,4.53

The leaders had to ask and answer many questions . BEALE-1898-2,4.54

What direction , what shape should the new movement for higher education
take ? BEALE-1898-2,4.55

Should there be two sorts of education for girls and boys ?
BEALE-1898-2,4.56

The Schools' Inquiry Commission had shown that a specially feminine
education had not produced very successful results , BEALE-1898-2,4.57

and the leaders said : Let us give to girls the solid teaching in
languages and mathematics and <P_5> science , which are found to
strengthen the powers of boys , and prepare them to do good work of many
kinds . BEALE-1898-2,5.58

If it was objected that women were to rule in the home , and men in the
larger world , they argued , that for girls as for boys , the right
course was to give a liberal education . BEALE-1898-2,5.59

The boy does not learn in the school the things which will be required
in his future business or profession , BEALE-1898-2,5.60

but he brings to these the cultivated mind , the power of work , the
disciplined will . BEALE-1898-2,5.61

And the world is more and more recognising that the leaders were right ,
BEALE-1898-2,5.62

and schools have arisen in all our great towns . BEALE-1898-2,5.63

Fifty years ago there were dismal prophecies - an outcry that study
would ruin health . BEALE-1898-2,5.64

Now it is a common remark that there is a general improvement in
physique . BEALE-1898-2,5.65

Women too are more conscious of their responsibilities in the life of
the family , as well as in that of the country , especially in social
and church life . BEALE-1898-2,5.66

They feel , that though they may have but the " smallest scruple " of
excellence , they must render for it " thanks and use " .
BEALE-1898-2,5.67

Besides , another good has been more and more realised ;
BEALE-1898-2,5.68

as Mrs. Jameson , in her beautiful lecture , set forth , girls taught
on the same lines , and women who can enter into the subjects of study
and thought which occupy the minds of their fathers , husbands , sons ,
have more understanding , more sympathy , more power to make the home
what it should be ; BEALE-1898-2,5.69

the only healthy intellectual companionship is communion between active
minds , BEALE-1898-2,5.70

and the highest purposes of marriage are unfulfilled , if either husband
or wife lives in a region <P_6> of thought which the other can@ @not
enter . BEALE-1898-2,6.71

Besides , those many women who remain unmarried can , if well educated ,
find in some form of service the satisfaction of their higher nature .
BEALE-1898-2,6.72

Surely women trained in good schools and colleges have as wives and
mothers shared the labours and entered more fully as companions into the
lives of husbands and children . BEALE-1898-2,6.73

The names of many will occur to my readers , BEALE-1898-2,6.74

but one cares not to name the living . BEALE-1898-2,6.75

We see every year at the Conference of Women Workers , that the seed
sown in faith has brought forth fruit ; that the whole aspect of the
woman's realm has changed since the days of Evelina and Miss Austen .
BEALE-1898-2,6.76

But none of us may rest in that which has been attained .
BEALE-1898-2,6.77

We ask for the " wages of going on and not to die " . BEALE-1898-2,6.78

There is earnest endeavour on the part of all engaged in the work of
education , which has found expression in such societies as the Parents'
Educational Union , the Child Study Society , and the Teachers' Guild .
BEALE-1898-2,6.79

Teachers are not content with the school year , BEALE-1898-2,6.80

but holiday courses are the order of the day , BEALE-1898-2,6.81

and many are seeking training , BEALE-1898-2,6.82

and others ask for a year or a term to improve , BEALE-1898-2,6.83

and books on education are pouring from the press , BEALE-1898-2,6.84

and some of us , who have gained experience which may be helpful to
others , feel bound , though much hindered by the calls of active life ,
to share those experiences , and say what we can about the ideals , the
principles , the methods , which , we trust , have already , in spite of
the gloomy portents of years gone by , improved the physical , the
intellectual and moral vigour of those who have shared the larger life ,
entered into the higher intellectual interests , and undergone the
strengthening discipline of our large schools . BEALE-1898-2,6.85

<P_7>

If what I have said is true , the subject can@ @not be treated in
reference to girls only ; not because I would assimilate the teaching of
girls to that of boys , but because the teaching of both should aim at
developing to the highest excellence the intellectual powers common to
both . BEALE-1898-2,7.87

The teaching of modern science tells us that both pass through the same
lower stages , that they may rise into the higher , BEALE-1898-2,7.88

and all history tells us that men and women Rise or sink Together ,
dwarfed or godlike , bond or free . BEALE-1898-2,7.89

So we ask generally what is the Education of Man ? BEALE-1898-2,7.90

Fröbel has rightly emphasised the last word . BEALE-1898-2,7.91

It is the development of that which distinguishes man from all the lower
forms of life " summed up " in him , that can alone be properly called
the Education of Man : BEALE-1898-2,7.92

other creatures can live , as he does , the nutritive or vegetable life
, which goes on of itself - BEALE-1898-2,7.93

other animals live the conscious life , BEALE-1898-2,7.94

they see and know , BEALE-1898-2,7.95

but to man alone it is possible to objectify all things by transcending
them , and even that lower self , which is part of his dual nature ;
BEALE-1898-2,7.96

he is able to know himself both as " I " and " me " ; BEALE-1898-2,7.97

he brings to sensation the formative power of his own thought ,
BEALE-1898-2,7.98

makes , as Kant has said , the <P_8> universe which he did not create .
BEALE-1898-2,8.99

And so man does not merely perceive , but apperceive ,
BEALE-1898-2,8.100

takes into his own being ideas , thoughts ; BEALE-1898-2,8.101

combines , BEALE-1898-2,8.102

associates these , BEALE-1898-2,8.103

- and indeed it is difficult to speak of these ideas otherwise than
Herbart does , as entities , by which the mind grows , fashioning them
to its own uses , as the body does , the food on which it lives .
BEALE-1898-2,8.104

Because he can objectify thus , language is possible .
BEALE-1898-2,8.105

Man gives to thoughts , these " airy nothings , a local habitation and a
name " ; BEALE-1898-2,8.106

he is able to plan , to project and therefore to form judgments .
BEALE-1898-2,8.107

But if he is related to that world to which the senses reach , he is
also in relation , through an inward feeling which we call sympathy ,
with other " subjects , " able to recognise in others that which he
knows in himself as mind ; BEALE-1898-2,8.108

if he finds himself so related to the world of sense , that he responds
to its touch , much more nearly is he in relation with other
personalities ; BEALE-1898-2,8.109

these he knows , before he recognises objective nature ;
BEALE-1898-2,8.110

through other minds his own is educated , BEALE-1898-2,8.111

and so the humanities take the first place ; BEALE-1898-2,8.112

he enters into relations through the <font> communis sensus <$$font>
with a world of thinking beings . BEALE-1898-2,8.113

These persons communicate thoughts , specially through <paren> <font> a
<$$font> <$$paren> language immediate , and through written language .
BEALE-1898-2,8.114

By written speech the limitations of space and time are abolished ,
BEALE-1898-2,8.115

and we are able to speak not only of men , but of man ,
BEALE-1898-2,8.116

for not only is his physical life continuous , BEALE-1898-2,8.117

but his mental and moral life through the ages is one .
BEALE-1898-2,8.118

So from language we pass to <paren> <font> b <$$font> <$$paren> history
and literature and historic act , the record of what men have done and
suffered and thought and recorded , not in books only but in all
material things ; BEALE-1898-2,8.119

for man the dead live ; BEALE-1898-2,8.120

and as the actors pass from the stage , history , no less than
philosophy and science , tends upwards to those <P_9> higher regions of
thought , where we ponder on the <paren> <font> c <$$font> <$$paren>
mysteries of man's self-conscious life , on his relation to other minds
, and to the One whose offspring we are , and in Whom all things live
and move and have their being . BEALE-1898-2,9.121

The subjects of study then may also be classified under five headings :
BEALE-1898-2,9.122

- I. The Humanities : which have to do with man , known objectively
through word and deed , in language and literature , in history and art
; subjectively , as in ethics , religion , philosophy .
BEALE-1898-2,9.123

II. Mathematics : embracing three divisions relating to space , number
, energy in the abstract - BEALE-1898-2,9.124

these have to do with necessary truth . BEALE-1898-2,9.125

III. Science : which rests not on a basis of thought only , but on
facts given through sense objectively . BEALE-1898-2,9.126

IV. Aesthetics : which may be classed under the three heads , as music
, painting and the other arts - considered subjectively .
BEALE-1898-2,9.127

V. The exercises suitable for the physical development .
BEALE-1898-2,9.128

It is with the first section that every teacher has to do ;
BEALE-1898-2,9.129

though he may be a specialist for science or mathematics or music , he
has always to do with man in his manifold relations , BEALE-1898-2,9.130

he has ever to do with the humanities . BEALE-1898-2,9.131

It must be the constant study of the teacher to find the best means of
developing the powers of thought , of calling forth right motives of
action , developing right habits , and so forming noble characters ,
which is the final cause of all his labours . BEALE-1898-2,9.132

Ever throughout life he will by study and experience deepen and extend
his knowledge , BEALE-1898-2,9.133

but it is earnestly to be desired that he should have some leisure for
definite preparation by <P_10> {COM:table_omitted} <P_11>
{COM:table_omitted} <P_12> the study of education as an art , a science
, a philosophy , before entering on his responsible work .
BEALE-1898-2,10.134

In this , as in everything else , only those who have gained the
knowledge are really judges of its value . BEALE-1898-2,10.135

The man who knows no foreign tongue , supposes he understands English ,
BEALE-1898-2,10.136

but we know in how poor and faulty a way . BEALE-1898-2,10.137

A study of the mysteries of our own being , of the fundamental basis of
philosophy and psychology , personal knowledge of and sympathy with the
great thinkers and philosophers and martyrs of education , must move us
to more purposeful and thoughtful and devoted lives , and give us a joy
that we can@ @not feel when we are working blindly and mechanically ,
without the faith which works by love . BEALE-1898-2,10.138

I have mentioned at the close of the introduction some books not too
large or difficult which will be helpful to those who desire to begin
the serious study of the subjects included under the general heading of
pedagogy . BEALE-1898-2,10.139

In the table <paren> p. 10 <$$paren> I have arranged courses of study
and grouped pupils according to age , BEALE-1898-2,10.140

but only for those called B and C have I attempted to give the time each
week , which might be allowed on an average for serious study .
BEALE-1898-2,10.141

I think the Bs generally and the Cs almost always should follow a fixed
course , though some variation should be permitted to the Cs .
BEALE-1898-2,10.142

The Ds and Es should take special directions , dropping some subjects
and giving much time to others . BEALE-1898-2,10.143

Under the head of B , I have given what is perhaps the nearest approach
to the normal type in my own school . BEALE-1898-2,10.144

Those who do not learn music , can of course take an extra language , or
otherwise cultivate a special subject ; BEALE-1898-2,10.145

those who are but slightly pervious to mathematical ideas are allowed to
drop Euclid , after having done <P_13> enough to profit by the wholesome
discipline of writing out propositions say up to Euclid 1.26 .
BEALE-1898-2,13.146

These may perhaps add another musical instrument or some manual work .
BEALE-1898-2,13.147

The principle I would insist on is that our curriculum should , to use a
sensible figure , be pyramidal , having a broad base and narrowing ;
BEALE-1898-2,13.148

the total cubic content might be the same each year ,
BEALE-1898-2,13.149

but in proportion as the subjects taken were fewer , there would be
greater depth . BEALE-1898-2,13.150

Thus the Cs would specialise to a slight extent , BEALE-1898-2,13.151

the Ds should do so still more , BEALE-1898-2,13.152

and the Es have found out their vocation , so that for these last no
time-table can be given . BEALE-1898-2,13.153

In drawing up a time-table I have given only the general lines , and
assigned an average time for each section ; BEALE-1898-2,13.154

the case of every individual must be separately considered ,
BEALE-1898-2,13.155

and there should always remain some hours of leisure -
BEALE-1898-2,13.156

in the highest classes I have arranged for school work about eight hours
out of the twenty-four . BEALE-1898-2,13.157

If we give four hours to meals and outdoor exercise , and eight to sleep
, we have a margin of four hours - a considerable amount of time , if
multiplied by six ; BEALE-1898-2,13.158

part of this may be given to general reading , part to social and family
life , BEALE-1898-2,13.159

but for the growing and developing mind there must be time for solitude
, for entering into the secret chamber , and listening for the voice
heard only in the stillness . BEALE-1898-2,13.160

We read much in praise of " Eyes " and much in dispraise of " No-eyes ,
" BEALE-1898-2,13.161

but there are times when great thinkers are blind to outward things ,
and deaf to earthly voices ; BEALE-1898-2,13.162

it is at such times there rise before the mind's eye ideals which
fashion the whole life . BEALE-1898-2,13.163

I am sure that in these days the <P_14> young lose much for want of more
quiet on Sundays . BEALE-1898-2,14.164

There may have been over_strictness in the past - BEALE-1898-2,14.165

there is now a surprising ignorance of the Bible and the grounds of
faith . BEALE-1898-2,14.166

The silence rules of a good school tend to produce a spirit of repose ,
BEALE-1898-2,14.167

and a library where no speaking is allowed is a help .
BEALE-1898-2,14.168

Rules which hinder idle talk in the bedrooms are a great boon to those
who find the value of quiet at the beginning and end of the day ,
BEALE-1898-2,14.169

and I earnestly hope that the excitement of the playground may never
supersede the country rambles which have been fruitful of spiritual
health to many of us . BEALE-1898-2,14.170

In considering how I shall best make this small volume of use to
teachers in high schools , I propose to adopt the following plan .
BEALE-1898-2,14.171

First to treat of a few general matters which belong to organisation and
the methods of management - <font> e.g. <$$font> , distribution and
economy of time , corrections , marks , etc. BEALE-1898-2,14.172

Then to deal with the subjects of the curriculum in order , in a series
of papers by myself and my colleagues . BEALE-1898-2,14.173

In Part I , I have written first of language generally , embracing
reading , speaking , grammar , composition , foreign tongues .
BEALE-1898-2,14.174

It will be clear to all that I could not possibly , in the few pages
assigned to each subject , treat the matter exhaustively ,
BEALE-1898-2,14.175

but I hope I may strike out some lines of thought which will be helpful
, BEALE-1898-2,14.176

and the lists of books may assist teachers in their studies .
BEALE-1898-2,14.177

In most subjects I have been able to get a few papers from members of my
staff , past and present . BEALE-1898-2,14.178

Under the head of Language I have one from Mr. Rouse , a most able
teacher , who had many years' experience with our elder pupils ,
specially those reading for classical honours in the University of
London . BEALE-1898-2,14.179

<P_15>

In History and Literature I have papers by Miss A. Andrews , Miss
Hanbidge and Miss Lumby , the very successful teachers who take these
subjects in the London and Higher Cambridge class ; BEALE-1898-2,15.181

there is also a paper on Economics by Miss Bridges .
BEALE-1898-2,15.182

In Part III. I have papers by four specially able and experienced
teachers - Miss de Brereton Evans , D.Sc. Lond. , Miss Reid , B.Sc.
Lond. , Miss Leonard , B.Sc. Lond. , and Miss Laurie .
BEALE-1898-2,15.183

In Part IV. I have a number of short papers by members of our teaching
staff . BEALE-1898-2,15.184

Section II. has been assigned by the publishers to another hand ,
BEALE-1898-2,15.185

and for that I am not responsible . BEALE-1898-2,15.186

Upon the basis of this classification , I have drawn up a table showing
how the methods of teaching these subjects will vary with the age of the
pupil , and what is , I consider , the best order of subjects .
BEALE-1898-2,15.187

I have also added some chapters on various subjects - as Spelling Reform
and the Relation of School to Home . BEALE-1898-2,15.188

Before proceeding further it will be best to consider what is the amount
of time at our disposal for school teaching . BEALE-1898-2,15.189

The division of the year into three terms of about twelve weeks ,
consisting of five or six days each , is so generally adopted that we
may take that for granted . BEALE-1898-2,15.190

The years of school life are at the utmost about ten - in the case of
most girls far less . BEALE-1898-2,15.191

For day schools in large towns , attended by pupils from considerable
distances , two attendances are impossible , BEALE-1898-2,15.192

and the morning has to last from about 9 or 9.30 to 1 or 1.30 .
BEALE-1898-2,15.193

Of the four hours about three_and_a_half are available for lessons , the
remaining half-hour being taken up with the general assembly for prayers
and a brief <P_16> interval for recreation ; BEALE-1898-2,16.194

but these twenty-one or twenty-four hours are not spent , as parents are
apt to imagine , in poring over books , BEALE-1898-2,16.195

but are varied by lessons in gymnastics , drawing , singing .
BEALE-1898-2,16.196

Some pupils in large towns remain to dine at the school ,
BEALE-1898-2,16.197

and have afternoon teaching in accomplishments . BEALE-1898-2,16.198

In small towns they return . BEALE-1898-2,16.199

Thirty hours a week should , I think , be the limit of time given to
study for girls of school age . BEALE-1898-2,16.200

Students fully grown may study six hours a day . BEALE-1898-2,16.201

Eight should , I think , not be exceeded by any . BEALE-1898-2,16.202

In arranging the time-table , several things have to be considered .
BEALE-1898-2,16.203

<paren> 1 <$$paren> A , the youngest children , would have no lessons of
more than half an hour , and not more than two hours of definite
instruction , the remainder being occupied with games , drill , singing
and various hand occupations . BEALE-1898-2,16.204

Those under eight would have a larger proportion of these last , and
perhaps attend for a shorter time . BEALE-1898-2,16.205

The elder children can have a reading lesson before the general assembly
, BEALE-1898-2,16.206

and the little ones might leave half an hour before the morning closes .
BEALE-1898-2,16.207

If they wait for elder sisters , amusements may be devised .
BEALE-1898-2,16.208

<paren> 2 <$$paren> In the case of all , an endeavour should be made to
place those studies which make the heaviest demands on the attention as
far as possible in the early morning hours . BEALE-1898-2,16.209

<paren> 3 <$$paren> The lessons for Sections B and C would average about
fifty minutes , some being thirty minutes , others an hour , the drawing
lesson being perhaps longer , whilst religious instruction following
upon prayers would occupy half an hour , as would drill and singing .
BEALE-1898-2,16.210

<paren> 4 <$$paren> Care should be taken to vary the subjects , so that
if possible two lecture lessons should not follow one another , nor two
on language , nor two mathematical lessons . BEALE-1898-2,16.211

<P_17>

We have next to consider the order of study , what subjects are best
adapted to the state of development of the child , or in what different
ways the same subject may be treated to make it suitable at different
ages . BEALE-1898-2,17.213

In this matter fatal mistakes are still made . BEALE-1898-2,17.214

Happily the teachings of educational reformers have brought before us
the evils of the neglect of psychological principles .
BEALE-1898-2,17.215

We are shocked when we hear of mothers ignorant of physiology , feeding
infants on bread and tea , and giving soothing syrups ;
BEALE-1898-2,17.216

we recognise the danger of too many sweets , and of cigars for growing
boys - BEALE-1898-2,17.217

these have their parallels in the mental dietary . BEALE-1898-2,17.218

But it is not so much giving wrong things as the deprivation of right
things at the right time that is fatal . BEALE-1898-2,17.219

It is wonderful how much unwholesome food can be disposed of by a
vigorous child - BEALE-1898-2,17.220

there is a fit of sickness BEALE-1898-2,17.221

and it is gone ; BEALE-1898-2,17.222

but we see in the adult bodily framework , the stunted skeleton , the
decaying teeth , etc. , the effect of starvation during years of growth
. BEALE-1898-2,17.223

To deprive the child of the mental food and exercise necessary for his
development at each period of his growth is a fatal error , the
consequences of which are irreparable . BEALE-1898-2,17.224

This has been forcibly put by Dr. Harris , Chief Commissioner of
Education , U.S.A . BEALE-1898-2,17.225

Speaking of the prolongation for man of the period of infancy required
for his development , <P_18> that he may be adapted to the spiritual
environment of the social community into which he is born , he writes :
" Is it not evident that if the child is at any epoch inured into any
habit or fixed form of activity belonging to a lower stage of
development , the tendency will be to arrest growth at that point , and
make it difficult or next to impossible to continue the growth of the
child into higher and more civilised forms of soul-activity ?
BEALE-1898-2,18.226

A severe drill in mechanical habits of memorising , any over-cultivation
of sense-perception in tender years , may arrest the development of the
soul , form a mechanical method of thinking , and prevent the further
growth into spiritual insight - BEALE-1898-2,18.227

especially on the second plane of thought , that which follows
sense-perception , namely , the stage of classifying or even the search
for causal relations , there is most danger of this arrested development
BEALE-1898-2,18.228

The absorption of the gaze upon the adjustments within the machine ,
prevents us from seeing it as a whole . BEALE-1898-2,18.229

The attention to details of colouring or drawing may prevent one from
seeing the significance of the great works of art . ...
BEALE-1898-2,18.230

To keep the intellect out of the abyss of habit , and to make the
ethical behaviour more and more a matter of unquestioning habit , seems
to be the desideratum . " BEALE-1898-2,18.231

Tradition furnishes those who have made no formal study of the subject
of mental growth with some empirical rules for a healthy dietary , - as
Mr. Barnett has shown , BEALE-1898-2,18.232

or our children would fare badly ; BEALE-1898-2,18.233

but the evils of misplacing subjects in the order of study , of
neglecting to teach the right subjects at the right <P_19> time , and of
partial starvation , are too apparent . BEALE-1898-2,19.234

Let me conclude with an illustrative anecdote - an object lesson .
BEALE-1898-2,19.235

At school I always kept caterpillars ; BEALE-1898-2,19.236

they were regularly fed , BEALE-1898-2,19.237

and seldom failed to come out in perfect condition .
BEALE-1898-2,19.238

Once some " woolly bears " escaped ; BEALE-1898-2,19.239

they were found after a few days , and again provided with ample food ;
BEALE-1898-2,19.240

but it was too late , BEALE-1898-2,19.241

they came out with only rudimentary wings . BEALE-1898-2,19.242

But not only have we to provide the right subjects at the right time ,
BEALE-1898-2,19.243

we have to consider how the manner of teaching the same subject may be
adapted to the age of the pupil . BEALE-1898-2,19.244

In an excellent Report on the Schools of St. Louis some years ago , Dr.
Harris expounded the spiral system . BEALE-1898-2,19.245

In studying say botany in the lowest class , the children would learn to
observe the forms of plant life , and become familiar with the main
facts of classificatory botany , the observing power being chiefly
called into action . BEALE-1898-2,19.246

Then the subject would be dropped , and taken up years after from the
physiological point of view , when the learners would be able to
understand the chemical changes , the process of development , etc. ,
as they could not in earlier years . BEALE-1898-2,19.247

Similarly all Herbartians know how the teaching of history proceeds from
the mythological story , through biography to history ,
BEALE-1898-2,19.248

and some of us have seen the bad results of giving little children
formularies which have no meaning for them , instead of seeking to
develop in them through the discipline of home , and Bible teaching
regarding the lives of the good , feelings of filial trust and reverence
and obedience . BEALE-1898-2,19.249

For examples of this I may refer to Miss Bremner's book on the <font>
Education of Girls . <$$font> BEALE-1898-2,19.250

In the accompanying time-table I have endeavoured <P_20> to make a
double classification in reference to the subjects taught , and the age
of the learners . BEALE-1898-2,20.251

In discussing it I shall continue to use the word faculty , in spite of
Herbartian protests , meaning thereby the power of doing certain special
acts , which vary in character . BEALE-1898-2,20.252

We have the power of directing our attention to the objects of sense ,
or of withdrawing it from these , and becoming conscious only of the
working of our own mind ; BEALE-1898-2,20.253

we have , <font> i.e. , <$$font> the faculty of observation and of
reflection ; BEALE-1898-2,20.254

by the use of the word faculty - etymologically , the power of doing -
we need not dismember the Subject , but think of the One person as
acting in different ways . BEALE-1898-2,20.255

Part I. , the humanities , should throughout the whole course be
represented in all its branches ; BEALE-1898-2,20.256

to it belong specially the <font> cultur-studien . <$$font>
BEALE-1898-2,20.257

I think of some miserable starved specimens of girls I have known , fed
upon an almost unmixed diet of either classics or mathematics ;
BEALE-1898-2,20.258

their physique had suffered , BEALE-1898-2,20.259

and they had no mental elasticity , their one idea being to win
scholarships : BEALE-1898-2,20.260

they did this , BEALE-1898-2,20.261

but never flourished at the university , for want of all-round culture .
BEALE-1898-2,20.262

Others I have known , who thought they could be high-class musicians by
practising their fingers , without cultivating their minds ;
BEALE-1898-2,20.263

the results were lamentable ; whereas those who gave half the time to
music and half to <font> cultur-studien <$$font> , did more in the
limited time . BEALE-1898-2,20.264

Is not the overwork of which many complain later , due to the too
undivided work at one subject during the undergraduate period at the
university ? BEALE-1898-2,20.265

Mathematics relieves the strain of classics ; BEALE-1898-2,20.266

specialising may be comparatively harmless to the full-grown man ,
BEALE-1898-2,20.267

but the child-specialist will grow up deformed . BEALE-1898-2,20.268

<P_21>

Shall teaching be by class teachers or by specialists ?
BEALE-1898-2,21.270

Once every teacher was expected to take all the subjects with her class
, BEALE-1898-2,21.271

now the tendency is towards specialisation . BEALE-1898-2,21.272

In junior classes the class mistress has many advantages over the
specialist , BEALE-1898-2,21.273

for she knows what the children can do , the character and difficulties
of each , BEALE-1898-2,21.274

and can adapt her teaching to her pupils . BEALE-1898-2,21.275

In any case she must exercise control over specialists , each of whom is
inclined to think her subject the most important . BEALE-1898-2,21.276

She can get hold of children , and exercise a stronger influence than an
occasional teacher , BEALE-1898-2,21.277

and the more subjects she teaches , the more intimate will be the
relation to her pupils . BEALE-1898-2,21.278

On the other hand , it is not good for children to be shut up to one
personality , though it is not well for them to be under too many , and
there ought always to be one predominant ; BEALE-1898-2,21.279

for this reason special arrangements are made in some boys' schools for
a tutor to follow the boy's career all the way up the school .
BEALE-1898-2,21.280

A class teacher too can correlate the different subjects , and make one
help the other ; BEALE-1898-2,21.281

being always at hand , she can give such help as is needed at odd times
, to bring up laggards , and generally bring the intellectual to act
upon the moral . BEALE-1898-2,21.282

On the other hand , a specialist can attain to greater excellence ,
throw more life into the subject , keep up with new discoveries and
methods ; BEALE-1898-2,21.283

the best plan is perhaps for the class teacher , at least in junior
classes , to hear and help to bring home to her pupils the teaching of
specialists ; BEALE-1898-2,21.284

this is desirable with some foreign teachers , who fail to understand
the exact difficulties of English children . BEALE-1898-2,21.285

It can , however , only be done when the staff is large .
BEALE-1898-2,21.286

The case is different with upper <P_22> classes , which should be taught
almost entirely by specialists , though there should be always some one
person responsible for each class . BEALE-1898-2,22.287

There seems to be a great difference between the kind of influence and
control exercised by a Head Master , and a Head Mistress .
BEALE-1898-2,22.288

The government of a boys' school approaches more nearly to a republic ,
of a girls' school to a constitutional monarchy ; BEALE-1898-2,22.289

whilst classes and teachers change for the child each year , the head
mistress is permanent , BEALE-1898-2,22.290

and follows each through all the classes , knowing her in all her phases
. BEALE-1898-2,22.291

She reads marks , BEALE-1898-2,22.292

gives encouragement and admonition , BEALE-1898-2,22.293

and is in immediate relation with the other controlling influences ,
parents and teachers . BEALE-1898-2,22.294

Then - owing possibly to the fact that many women have not degrees - the
head mistress permits herself to criticise and advise her teachers in a
way that no young master fresh from the Honour Schools would permit .
BEALE-1898-2,22.295

" I hear you go and listen to your teachers , " said the head of an
Oxford College to me - BEALE-1898-2,22.296

his face , on my admitting it , expressed more than his words .
BEALE-1898-2,22.297

Again , the head mistress considers herself responsible for good order
in every class , whereas in boys' schools the entire responsibility
seems to rest on the individual master ; BEALE-1898-2,22.298

this must always be the case to a certain extent ; BEALE-1898-2,22.299

head mistresses try to avoid indiscipline by insisting on the training
of teachers , and resorting to various devices , BEALE-1898-2,22.300

<font> e.g. , <$$font> a junior teacher is made assistant to a senior ,
and entrusted with a class of her own , only when she has shown herself
able ; BEALE-1898-2,22.301

or - until she has well grasped the reins - she is set to teach in a
large room in which there may be the head mistress and some other
teacher capable of overawing <P_23> the restless ; BEALE-1898-2,23.302

or if she is a specialist the class teacher may be in the room .
BEALE-1898-2,23.303

If the class is insubordinate owing to the bad teaching they get , there
is of course no alternative but to change the teacher , or to improve
her . BEALE-1898-2,23.304

Here let me touch on some of the chief perplexities of modern teachers .
BEALE-1898-2,23.305

Professor Miall <paren> <font> Thirty Years of Teaching <$$font>
<$$paren> writes : " No one can write on education without insisting on
new subjects ; BEALE-1898-2,23.306

and yet the old claims are not relaxed . BEALE-1898-2,23.307

We must have science in several branches , modern languages <paren> more
efficient than heretofore <$$paren> , drawing and gymnastics ,
BEALE-1898-2,23.308

but classics and mathematics and divinity must be kept up and improved .
BEALE-1898-2,23.309

Increased hours are not to be thought of , BEALE-1898-2,23.310

fewer lessons , shorter lessons , and not so much homework , are the cry
. BEALE-1898-2,23.311

More potatoes to carry , and a smaller basket to carry them in . ...
BEALE-1898-2,23.312

I believe the problem is not an insoluble one after all . "
BEALE-1898-2,23.313

The remedy , or perhaps I ought to say rather the mitigation of the
teacher's difficulties , is to be found in four directions .
BEALE-1898-2,23.314

<paren> 1 <$$paren> In increasing the number of school years .
BEALE-1898-2,23.315

The well-trained kindergarten child comes with an interest in lessons ,
a power of attention , a considerable amount of knowledge , and a clear
understanding of much that formerly children knew nothing about , so
that we gain time at the beginning . BEALE-1898-2,23.316

<paren> 2 <$$paren> Then if girls come earlier to school and stay later
, if we have a girl from eight to eighteen , we can give many things in
succession , which we once had to attempt simultaneously , when girls
came " to finish " in a year , or at most two years .
BEALE-1898-2,23.317

<paren> 3 <$$paren> If the hours are shorter , we can get more work done
than was the case when children were wearied out with long hours ;
BEALE-1898-2,23.318

when <P_24> I began my teaching life at Cheltenham , children came back
sleepy for two hours of afternoon lessons , BEALE-1898-2,24.319

and returned to do home work , when they should have been in bed .
BEALE-1898-2,24.320

<paren> 4 <$$paren> Better methods economise time , BEALE-1898-2,24.321

but this matter is so important that I shall insist on it at some length
. BEALE-1898-2,24.322

<paren> <font> a <$$font> <$$paren> First let me beg a teacher to think
how easy it is to waste half an hour in one minute , BEALE-1898-2,24.323

You have thirty girls before you BEALE-1898-2,24.324

and you say : " Now , girls , I am going to give you a lesson , and you
must be very attentive , " and so on for one minute .
BEALE-1898-2,24.325

Let every teacher use as few words as possible . BEALE-1898-2,24.326

Let there be no preambles , no repetitions : BEALE-1898-2,24.327

" Now , my dear child , I wonder whether , if I asked , you would be
able to tell me at once , " etc. BEALE-1898-2,24.328

Let the question be direct . BEALE-1898-2,24.329

" As I have said just now , " then do not say it again .
BEALE-1898-2,24.330

Wordiness must be avoided . BEALE-1898-2,24.331

We all know how wearisome it is to hear the same thing repeated in the
same or different words . BEALE-1898-2,24.332

If we see this in a book , we skim ; BEALE-1898-2,24.333

if it is done in lesson or lecture , we let our thoughts wander .
BEALE-1898-2,24.334

Children do the same , BEALE-1898-2,24.335

I once heard a mistress of method recommend teachers to repeat
themselves ! BEALE-1898-2,24.336

<paren> <font> b <$$font> <$$paren> Learn what not to say , <font> e.g.
, <$$font> a name that you do not want remembered . BEALE-1898-2,24.337

I knew some boys who were set to learn the names of the " Do nothing "
kings ; BEALE-1898-2,24.338

the memory must not be loaded with useless luggage .
BEALE-1898-2,24.339

<paren> <font> c <$$font> <$$paren> In giving a dictation , some
teachers will habitually repeat twice ; BEALE-1898-2,24.340

the consequence is that many do not listen the first time ,
BEALE-1898-2,24.341

and a third repetition is often asked for . BEALE-1898-2,24.342

Let it be understood that the sentence will be given distinctly , and
not repeated . BEALE-1898-2,24.343

<P_25>

<paren> <font> d <$$font> <$$paren> In English dictations do not ask
that every word should be written , BEALE-1898-2,25.345

but emphasise those required - BEALE-1898-2,25.346

" Each <font> separate <$$font> parcel was <font> received " . <$$font>
BEALE-1898-2,25.347

" I did not <font> perceive <$$font> his meaning . "
BEALE-1898-2,25.348

" He did not <font> succeed <$$font> in persuading her to <font> secede
. " <$$font> BEALE-1898-2,25.349

<paren> <font> e <$$font> <$$paren> If a lesson has been set , we must
ascertain that every one has learnt it , BEALE-1898-2,25.350

but there should be no questioning round and round a class .
BEALE-1898-2,25.351

If a question and answer take one_and_a_half minutes in a class of
thirty , the whole time is gone , BEALE-1898-2,25.352

and the teacher has no distinct impression of which pupils have answered
well ; BEALE-1898-2,25.353

but if two questions in succession are asked of each and are promptly
answered , the whole lesson may be considered to be known .
BEALE-1898-2,25.354

Suppose there is a French dialogue to be heard , or an exercise has been
learned , BEALE-1898-2,25.355

the teacher should not read the English ; BEALE-1898-2,25.356

the sentences should all be numbered , the teacher call the number , and
the child read the French from the English . BEALE-1898-2,25.357

The sentences in some books are not numbered , BEALE-1898-2,25.358

and some dialogue books are so printed , that the French can@ @not be
covered ; BEALE-1898-2,25.359

these are time-wasting books . BEALE-1898-2,25.360

A prompt reply must always be given ; BEALE-1898-2,25.361

since we speak at the rate of over a_hundred words in a minute , three
children could say two short sentences each in half a minute .
BEALE-1898-2,25.362

Thus a class of twenty could be heard in ten minutes ,
BEALE-1898-2,25.363

or if the class teacher is assisting , and takes half the class , five
minutes only would be necessary , and time saved for oral composition ,
or reading exercises at sight , or training in pronunciation , etc.
BEALE-1898-2,25.364

Some teachers , if unanswered , repeat a question . BEALE-1898-2,25.365

A girl who is not sure will often give an indistinct reply ;
BEALE-1898-2,25.366

one who does this robs her companions ; BEALE-1898-2,25.367

the time of the class can@ @not be wasted thus , BEALE-1898-2,25.368

she must come in the afternoon and say it by herself ;
BEALE-1898-2,25.369

<P_26>

it will generally be found that her vocal powers are improved by this
exercise . BEALE-1898-2,26.371

<paren> <font> f <$$font> <$$paren> In many subjects a so-called written
<font> viva_voce <$$font> may be properly substituted - say six
questions written on the blackboard with numbers , the answers promptly
written in class , the papers of different girls exchanged , the faults
underlined and the name of the corrector signed . BEALE-1898-2,26.372

The answers can be quickly marked by the class teacher at home .
BEALE-1898-2,26.373

This has been dwelt on in Miss Andrews' paper . BEALE-1898-2,26.374

If French verbs have to be heard , table should be suspended , and the
teacher point to a tense and a number . BEALE-1898-2,26.375

Here is a portion of one : - BEALE-1898-2,26.376

{COM:table_omitted}

Of course this rapid questioning is suitable only when we wish to
ascertain whether a lesson has been learned , not to such <font>
viva_voces <$$font> as are dialectic , intended to elucidate a subject
and make pupils think . BEALE-1898-2,26.378

Note-taking should never be allowed in junior classes ;
BEALE-1898-2,26.379

a syllabus may in some cases be profitably supplied ,
BEALE-1898-2,26.380

or the lesson may be an amplification of a text-book which the pupils
have read , BEALE-1898-2,26.381

or questions may be set calculated to bring out the main points of the
lesson . BEALE-1898-2,26.382

It should be an <font> invariable rule <$$font> that <font> whatever is
written <$$font> is looked over and corrected ; BEALE-1898-2,26.383

if this is not done , we shall certainly get bad writing , slovenly work
and general inaccuracy . BEALE-1898-2,26.384

Should this not be possible without over-working the staff , the <font>
written <$$font> work of the <P_27> pupils must be diminished , or the
number of teachers increased . BEALE-1898-2,27.385

The work of correcting is not mere drudgery , BEALE-1898-2,27.386

and it is essential , not for the sake of the pupil only , but of the
teacher . BEALE-1898-2,27.387

Without written exercises she may imagine she is teaching , whilst her
pupils are not learning . BEALE-1898-2,27.388

A lesson she felt to be good , she will find perhaps has been
ill-adapted to the class , and therefore relatively bad .
BEALE-1898-2,27.389

She will find she has not emphasised the important matters , she has
given a confused picture in which one fails to see the wood for the
trees . BEALE-1898-2,27.390

There are no teachers like one's own pupils if one will learn of them :
BEALE-1898-2,27.391

they convict us of disorder , inaccuracy , vagueness , etc.
BEALE-1898-2,27.392

It is important however that the teacher should be spared as much as
possible unnecessary labour and waste of time . BEALE-1898-2,27.393

It is one of the most urgent duties of the head mistress to see that the
teachers have not so much to do in the way of correcting , as to stupefy
them , and deprive them of the time required for preparing lessons .
BEALE-1898-2,27.394

The work of correcting should be reduced as far as practicable for the
teacher , and made as profitable as possible for the pupil .
BEALE-1898-2,27.395

Suppose the teachers to be free after one o'clock , BEALE-1898-2,27.396

an hour may be given in the afternoon to correcting , and one in the
evening . BEALE-1898-2,27.397

Language teachers , whose preparation is light , might do more , those
who give lectures less ; BEALE-1898-2,27.398

the work of correction must be fairly distributed , and a junior teacher
trained to correct , by taking books first , and having these revised
and given out in class , in her presence by a senior teacher .
BEALE-1898-2,27.399

Very strict rules must be made regarding the giving up of books at the
right time by the pupils , and their <P_28> being returned punctually in
class by the teacher with explanations and comments .
BEALE-1898-2,28.400

The books should always be in uniform , BEALE-1898-2,28.401

and some rules , <font> e.g. , <$$font> respecting French being red ,
German , blue , etc. , are very useful . BEALE-1898-2,28.402

Outside should be a label with the name of the pupil , the class and the
boarding-house . BEALE-1898-2,28.403

This is important in the case of derelicts . BEALE-1898-2,28.404

All corrections should be made in red ink , and the exercise signed with
the initials of the corrector . BEALE-1898-2,28.405

Suppose we have a foreign language exercise to be given out .
BEALE-1898-2,28.406

The teacher should come into class with memoranda of faults which have
commonly occurred , and mention these to the class generally .
BEALE-1898-2,28.407

Faults of mere carelessness should have a special indication in the book
of the offender , BEALE-1898-2,28.408

and need not be spoken of further to the class . BEALE-1898-2,28.409

Each pupil should , before writing the next exercise , divide the page ,
write on one side correctly the sentence in which the fault occurred ,
underlining the words that were wrong , but on no account writing the
mistakes again , and on the other explain why it was wrong .
BEALE-1898-2,28.410

When an arithmetic paper has been set the teacher may read out the
answer , and each girl write W or R , BEALE-1898-2,28.411

The papers may be then collected , BEALE-1898-2,28.412

and it will only remain for the teacher to see whether the method was
good . BEALE-1898-2,28.413

If not , she can write LW for " long way , " give explanations at the
next lesson , and have the sum done again . BEALE-1898-2,28.414

Slates should not be used , nor loose papers , for such exercises .
BEALE-1898-2,28.415

If the paper is an essay , or answers to questions , the teacher should
make notes of the subjects in which the class generally has gone wrong ,
and explain these . BEALE-1898-2,28.416

She may select specimens of broken <P_29> figures , bad grammar , etc.
, BEALE-1898-2,29.417

but it is very profitable to read out good specimens ;
BEALE-1898-2,29.418

it is a great help to us to see others succeed , when we have tried and
failed , BEALE-1898-2,29.419

and there is nothing that many need more than a word of encouragement to
make them feel able to try . BEALE-1898-2,29.420

One who has done well may be requested to enter good paragraphs in a
book <paren> what I think Dr. Kennedy called a " Golden Book "
<$$paren> for the benefit of the class , and the worst writers desired
to copy it ; BEALE-1898-2,29.421

this would have done them no good , had they not tried and failed ,
BEALE-1898-2,29.422

but afterwards it helps us much to see how well another can express what
we could not . BEALE-1898-2,29.423

The teacher may herself write in the book of the most painstaking pupil
, things which she has failed to make clear , and ask her to copy that
into the aforesaid book ; BEALE-1898-2,29.424

it will do her good and help others . BEALE-1898-2,29.425

Certain conventional marks may be agreed on , BEALE-1898-2,29.426

<font> e.g. , <$$font> L would stand for wordiness , CP for common
place , S for satisfactory , G for good , <font> Fig. <$$font> for
broken metaphors , etc. BEALE-1898-2,29.427

Diagrams and apparatus may be reckoned amongst time-saving things ,
BEALE-1898-2,29.428

but like ready-made toys these may be less profitable to children than
very simple things , which they put together themselves ,
BEALE-1898-2,29.429

and the more they make for themselves , the more they appreciate and
profit by the labours of others . BEALE-1898-2,29.430

Fergusson , lying on his back with a brown paper roll for a telescope ,
and watching the movement of the stars , learned more than many who are
provided with an elaborate orrery {TEXT:orery} , BEALE-1898-2,29.431

and the Edgworths learned more about the reason of a rainbow from their
glass of water , than many from the lens . BEALE-1898-2,29.432

As Miss Leonard has said in her paper , many things are not necessary in
teaching elementary science , BEALE-1898-2,29.433

and it is a great <P_30> pleasure to children to make anything for
themselves . BEALE-1898-2,30.434

Here the kindergarten training will tell . BEALE-1898-2,30.435

For higher work well-equipped laboratories are good ,
BEALE-1898-2,30.436

but these are an expensive luxury , especially as new things are being
constantly invented . BEALE-1898-2,30.437

Physiological models are almost indispensable for class teaching ,
BEALE-1898-2,30.438

and excellent botanical ones are obtainable . BEALE-1898-2,30.439

A museum in which lessons can be given , and specimens referred to , is
very desirable for natural science , BEALE-1898-2,30.440

but children should have their own private ones . BEALE-1898-2,30.441

Maps of physical geography should be constantly before the eye ,
BEALE-1898-2,30.442

but wall maps of political and historical geography can@ @not be so well
seen ; BEALE-1898-2,30.443

the teacher should be able to draw on the board or on paper , maps
bringing out the special features of the lesson . BEALE-1898-2,30.444

It is understood that no class on history or geography is given without
large maps both of space and time . BEALE-1898-2,30.445

Working models of pumps , archimedean screws , mechanical powers , and
steam engines are within the reach of most , and some simple forms of
orrery {TEXT:orery} . BEALE-1898-2,30.446

There is an inexpensive one with the world inside a glass globe , on
which are engraved a few circles , BEALE-1898-2,30.447

and this removes the difficulty which most children feel on seeing a
pair of globes . BEALE-1898-2,30.448

In former times when lessons were made less interesting , many ways were
employed to keep up attention . BEALE-1898-2,30.449

Place-taking , by which each child took down all above her who failed to
answer a particular question . BEALE-1898-2,30.450

This was most distracting ; BEALE-1898-2,30.451

and so much depended on accident , that <P_31> it was impossible by
means of it to arrive at any trustworthy conclusions .
BEALE-1898-2,31.452

Except for small children it has wholly gone out . BEALE-1898-2,31.453

The giving of counters has found more favour on the Continent ,
BEALE-1898-2,31.454

but this lends itself to barter , BEALE-1898-2,31.455

and anything which fosters the habit of considering what we can get by
knowledge , is destructive of that calmness , that " wise passiveness "
which is as necessary for mental , as for physical assimilation ;
BEALE-1898-2,31.456

it is equivalent to playing games , or running about during dinner-time
. BEALE-1898-2,31.457

Some record there should be of each exercise , some " stock-taking " at
intervals , BEALE-1898-2,31.458

and these intervals should for little ones be short ,
BEALE-1898-2,31.459

for time passes more slowly with them . BEALE-1898-2,31.460

If the head mistress each week looks over the mark-book in the presence
of the class and the teacher , she is kept in touch with all ,
BEALE-1898-2,31.461

comes to know if there are girls who are wasting their time ,
BEALE-1898-2,31.462

and is able to give encouragement or reproof , and strengthen the hands
of teachers . BEALE-1898-2,31.463

If there are a great number of lessons returned , she may find that a
specialist is making unreasonable demands ; BEALE-1898-2,31.464

she sees if corrections have been omitted by the teacher -
BEALE-1898-2,31.465

in fact , notices things which , if left to the end of the term , might
have resulted in considerable mischief . BEALE-1898-2,31.466

It is undesirable , however , to take up much of the teacher's time in
adding up marks , and placing pupils in order of merit ;
BEALE-1898-2,31.467

it may be left to individual class teachers to do as they think best ;
BEALE-1898-2,31.468

there is no need in this for uniformity of practice ,
BEALE-1898-2,31.469

and it is always well to give every teacher as much liberty in following
her own methods , as is consistent with the general management .
BEALE-1898-2,31.470

In language exercises the number of faults can be written at the end ,
and classified as mere careless ones , and those for which there is at
least some excuse - <P_32> the former being counted double .
BEALE-1898-2,32.471

In these and other exercises a maximum say of ten marks may be given ;
BEALE-1898-2,32.472

in many the teacher can give only a general estimate ,
BEALE-1898-2,32.473

but when returning books , she can show why she puts a higher estimate
on one than on another . BEALE-1898-2,32.474

In junior classes the marks may be added , read with comments , and
perhaps sent home each week . BEALE-1898-2,32.475

A sort of weather chart is used by us in the youngest classes - showing
for each week whether they have risen or fallen in the number of marks .
BEALE-1898-2,32.476

{COM:chart_omitted}

Prizes , in part determined by work done at home , are dangerous ,
BEALE-1898-2,32.478

the temptation to get undue help is great ; BEALE-1898-2,32.479

a conscientious child will reject such assistance as would be really
good for her , lest she should gain an unfair advantage .
BEALE-1898-2,32.480

Prizes given on the result of examinations , provided they are given not
to the best , but to all who have attained a certain standard , are less
objectionable ; BEALE-1898-2,32.481

we can@ @not make it too clear that good may be better than best , and
that the only praise we should desire is to hear : " She hath done what
she could " . BEALE-1898-2,32.482

<P_33>

Public prize-givings seem to me very undesirable . BEALE-1898-2,33.484

A terminal report parents may reasonably look for , BEALE-1898-2,33.485

and words of blame or encouragement may be made very helpful to the
child . BEALE-1898-2,33.486

Punishments in the shape of doubled lessons , lines , etc. , are
objectionable ; BEALE-1898-2,33.487

if a duty has been neglected , or badly done , it has to be done at an
inconvenient time - say in the afternoon . BEALE-1898-2,33.488

A fine may be required for untidiness and damage - in order to
compensate others for trouble and expense , BEALE-1898-2,33.489

but to inflict a fine for breaking rules is altogether wrong .
BEALE-1898-2,33.490

At a school I knew , where this was done , girls would deliberately
break rules , <font> e.g. , <$$font> talk at prohibited times , and say
they were going to have " three_pennyworth " . BEALE-1898-2,33.491

Into a matter of right and wrong , money can@ @not enter ;
BEALE-1898-2,33.492

so also conduct prizes should , I think , never be given ;
BEALE-1898-2,33.493

the proper reward for doing right is a good conscience , and the trust ,
friendship , respect of others . BEALE-1898-2,33.494

Having lived through the pre-examination period , and seen the great
evils which resulted from there being no test , I can@ @not join in the
popular condemnation . BEALE-1898-2,33.495

There is no unmixed good , BEALE-1898-2,33.496

and many mistakes , which we learn to avoid later , are made when a
system is new . BEALE-1898-2,33.497

I shall regard examinations only from the point of view of their value
educationally . BEALE-1898-2,33.498

<paren> 1 <$$paren> They are useful as a test of what we really know ;
BEALE-1898-2,33.499

preparation for them enables us to find out what are our permanent
possessions ; BEALE-1898-2,33.500

<paren> 2 <$$paren> competitive examination compels us to set these in
order , and estimate their relative importance . BEALE-1898-2,33.501

<paren> 3 <$$paren> Examinations tend to produce presence of mind ,
mental self-control , <paren> 4 <$$paren> to suppress wordiness and
abolish a florid style , and <paren> 5 <$$paren> to make us feel the
supreme importance of clearness and accuracy . BEALE-1898-2,33.502

<P_34>

Examining is a difficult art , BEALE-1898-2,34.504

and examiners have to learn their <font> métier <$$font> .
BEALE-1898-2,34.505

All are not perfect ; BEALE-1898-2,34.506

the process of reading papers is exhausting , BEALE-1898-2,34.507

and after reading ninety-nine , an examiner may fail to appreciate the
exquisite thought and philosophic insight of the hundredth .
BEALE-1898-2,34.508

It is possible he may form an erroneous opinion regarding some unusual
performance - BEALE-1898-2,34.509

there have been reviewers who failed to appreciate the early volumes of
Wordsworth , Tennyson and Browning ; BEALE-1898-2,34.510

there are examiners , however , really sympathetic , laborious , and
anxious to see what has been done <paren> which is limited <$$paren>
rather than find out what has not been done <paren> which is unlimited
<$$paren> , BEALE-1898-2,34.511

and these may give much help both by their criticisms and their
encouragement . BEALE-1898-2,34.512

It is good for all of us to have our work tested by a competent critic .
BEALE-1898-2,34.513

An internal examination , if well conducted , is most valuable , as it
can better follow the work , BEALE-1898-2,34.514

but on the other hand , many teachers feel that an internal examination
places them too much at the mercy of caprice , or personal feeling ,
BEALE-1898-2,34.515

and hence prefer a central one , such as the University Locals .
BEALE-1898-2,34.516

Schools must insist on punctuality in returning , BEALE-1898-2,34.517

and no unnecessary absences should be allowed , BEALE-1898-2,34.518

Children who are absent can@ @not follow the teaching in the next lesson
, BEALE-1898-2,34.519

and laggards demoralise the class BEALE-1898-2,34.520

and distract the teacher , who feels she is not understood .
BEALE-1898-2,34.521

In conclusion let me say the teacher must have the power of holding the
class . BEALE-1898-2,34.522

She must be sensitive to the least inattention , quick to discern
whether it is her fault or that of the pupil , and take her measures
accordingly , acting always upon the wholesome maxim <paren> which
should never be <P_35> heard outside the common room <$$paren> ,
certainly never whispered to parents , that it is always the teacher's
fault , if pupils do not learn . BEALE-1898-2,35.523

When she fails to establish the rapport between herself and her class ,
she must try to discover the cause of her failure . BEALE-1898-2,35.524

Young children , like wild animals , are tamed by the eye ,
BEALE-1898-2,35.525

and a class is controlled by a teacher who sees everything that goes on
. BEALE-1898-2,35.526

If a teacher when using the board turns away and writes in silence , a
restless child is almost sure to play some amusing trick ,
BEALE-1898-2,35.527

and it may take a considerable time to recover attention .
BEALE-1898-2,35.528

If experiments are performed , the teacher , like the conjurer , should
never cease talking or questioning . BEALE-1898-2,35.529

If she can@ @not manage to do both , she must have an assistant .
BEALE-1898-2,35.530

She must avoid awkward tricks . BEALE-1898-2,35.531

I knew two very distinguished teachers whose lectures were admirable ,
BEALE-1898-2,35.532

but one had a habit of pulling a tuft of hair , BEALE-1898-2,35.533

and another would stuff his handkerchief carefully into his folded hand
, and then draw it out again - to the great distraction of the class .
BEALE-1898-2,35.534

We have all heard of the parliamentary orator and his button .
BEALE-1898-2,35.535

