<BEGIN_beddingfield-1763-2>

<P_3>

<heading>

THE GENUINE TRIAL OF MARGERY BEDDINGFIELD AND RICHARD RINGE , FOR Petty
Treason and Murder , committed on <font> John Beddingfield , <$$font>
late of <font> Sternfield , <$$font> in the County of <font> Suffolk ,
<$$font> Farmer . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,3.4

<$$heading>

Thursday , March 24 , 1763 . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,3.6

The prisoners being set to the bar , were arraigned as follows .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,3.7

<font> Clerk of Arraigns . <$$bracket> Richard Ringe , <$$font> hold up
your hand . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,3.8

<font> Margery Beddingfield , <$$font> hold up your hand .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,3.9

<font> Richard Ringe , <$$font> you stand indicted by the name of <font>
Richard Ringe , <$$font> late of the parish of <font> Sternfield ,
<$$font> in the county of <font> Suffolk , <$$font> Labourer , late
servant of <font> John Beddingfield , <$$font> <P_4> late of the same ,
Yeoman , deceased ; and you <font> Margery Beddingfield , <$$font> by
the name of <font> Margery Beddingfield , <$$font> late of the same
place , widow , late wife of the said <font> John Beddingfield ;
<$$font> for that ye , not having God before your eyes , but being moved
and seduced by the instigation of the Devil , on the twenty-seventh day
of <font> July , <$$font> in the second year of the reign of our
sovereign lord <font> George <$$font> the third , king of <font>
Great-Britain , <$$font> and so forth , with force and arms , at the
parish aforesaid , in the county aforesaid , in and upon the said <font>
John , <$$font> in the peace of God and our said lord the king , then
and there being , feloniously , traitorously , wilfully , and of your
malice aforethought , did make an assault <paren> he the said <font>
John <$$font> then and there being the master of you the said <font>
Richard , <$$font> and also then and there being the husband of you the
said <font> Margery . <$$font> <$$paren> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,4.10

And that you the said <font> Richard , <$$font> both your hands about
the neck of the said <font> John , <$$font> then and there did fix and
fasten ; and you the said <font> Richard , <$$font> with both your hands
so as aforesaid fixed and fastened about the neck of the said <font>
John , <$$font> him the said <font> John <$$font> then and there
feloniously , traitorously , wilfully , and of your malice aforethought
, did choak and strangle , of which said choaking and strangling the
said <font> John <$$font> then and there instantly died .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,4.11

And that you the said <font> Margery , <$$font> at the time of the
felony , treason , and murder aforesaid , by the said <font> Richard ,
<$$font> in manner and form aforesaid , feloniously , traitorously ,
wilfully , and of his malice aforethought , done and committed at the
parish aforesaid , in the county aforesaid , feloniously , traitorously
, wilfully , and of your malice aforethought , was present , aiding ,
abetting , assisting , and maintaining the said <font> Richard ,
<$$font> the felony , treason , and murder aforesaid , in manner and
form aforesaid , to do and commit . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,4.12

And that ye the said <font> Richard <$$font> and <font> Margery ,
<$$font> him the said <font> John <$$font> then and there being the
master of you the said <font> Richard , <$$font> and also then and there
being the husband of you the said <font> Margery , <$$font> in manner
and form aforesaid , feloniously , traitorously , wilfully , and of your
malice <P_5> aforethought , did kill and murder , against the peace of
our said lord the king , his
{COM:comma_argues_against_construing_"his"_as_possessive_marker} crown
and dignity . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.13

How say you , <font> Richard Ringe , <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.14

are you guilty of the felony , treason , and murder , whereof you stand
indicted , or not guilty ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.15

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> <$$bracket> Not guilty .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.16

<font> Clerk of Arraigns . <$$font> <$$bracket> Culprit , how will you
be tried ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.17

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> <$$bracket> By God and my country .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.18

<font> Clerk of Arraigns . <$$font> <$$bracket> God send you a good
deliverance . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.19

How say you , <font> Margery Beddingfield , <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.20

are you guilty of the felony , treason , and murder , whereof you stand
indicted , or not guilty ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.21

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> <$$bracket> Not guilty .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.22

<font> Clerk of Arraigns . <$$font> <$$bracket> Culprit , how will you
be tried ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.23

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> <$$bracket> By God and my country .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.24

<font> Clerk of Arraigns . <$$font> <$$bracket> God send you a good
deliverance . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.25

Then Clerk of Arraigns gave them their challenges as follows :
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.26

You the prisoners at the bar , these good men whom you shall hear called
, and personally do appear , are to pass between our sovereign lord the
king and you , upon the trials of your several lives and deaths ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.27

therefore , if you will challenge them , or any of them , your time is
to speak to them as they come to the book to be sworn , and before they
are sworn , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.28

and you will be heard . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.29

<heading>

<font> Jurors . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.31

<$$heading>

George Waller William Crispe Wm. Johnson , the younger Daniel Clarke
Thomas Hendy John Goodwyn Thomas Clouting John Ralph Charles Bilney
Charles Lee Barnaby Gibson , <font> and <$$font> Jeremiah Hayward
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,5.33

<P_6>

<heading>

<font> Jurors Oath . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.36

<$$heading>

You shall well and truly try , and true deliverance make , between our
sovereign lord the king and the prisoners at the bar , whom you shall
have in charge , and a true verdict give according to the evidence .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.38

So help you GOD . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.39

<heading>

<font> Cryer made Proclamation . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.41

<$$heading>

<font> Cryer . <$$bracket> Oyez ! Oyez ! Oyez ! <$$font> If any one
can inform my lords , the king's justices , the king's serjeant , the
king's attorney , or this inquest now to be taken between our sovereign
lord the king and the prisoners at the bar , of any treasons , murders ,
felonies , or other misdemeanors , done or committed by the prisoners at
the bar , let them come forth BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.43

and they shall be heard , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.44

for now the prisoners stand at the bar upon their deliverance ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.45

and all persons bound by recognizance to prosecute , and give evidence
against the prisoners at the bar , let them come forth , prosecute , and
give their evidence , or they will forfeit their recognizance .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.46

Then Clerk of Arraigns charges the jury as follows ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.47

<font> Richard Ringe , <$$font> hold up your hand .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.48

<font> Margery Beddingfield , <$$font> hold up your hand .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.49

<font> Gentlemen of the Jury , <$$font> Look upon the prisoners ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.50

and hearken to their charge . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,6.51

They stand indicted by the names of <font> Richard Ringe , <$$font> late
of the parish of <font> Sternfield , <$$font> in the county of <font>
Suffolk , <$$font> labourer , late servant of <font> John Beddingfield ,
<$$font> late of the same place , yeoman , deceased , and <font> Margery
Beddingfield , <$$font> late of the same place , widow , late wife of
the said <font> John Beddingfield , <$$font> for that they , not having
the fear of God before their eyes , but being moved and seduced by the
instigation of the Devil , on the twenty-seventh day of <font> July ,
<$$font> in the second year of the reign of his present majesty , with
force and arms , at the parish aforesaid , in the county aforesaid , in
and upon the said <font> John , <$$font> in the peace of God and our
said lord the king , then and there being , feloniously , traitorously ,
wilfully , <P_7> and of their malice aforethought , did make an assault
<paren> he , the said <font> John , <$$font> then and there being the
master of the said <font> Richard , <$$font> and also then and there
being the husband of the said <font> Margery . <$$font> <$$paren>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,7.52

And that the said <font> Richard <$$font> both his hands about the neck
of the said <font> John <$$font> then and there did fix and fasten , and
he the said <font> Richard , <$$font> with both his hands so as
aforesaid fixed and fastened about the neck of the said <font> John ,
<$$font> him , the said <font> John , <$$font> then and there
feloniously , traitorously , wilfully , and of his malice aforethought ,
did choak and strangle , of which said choaking and strangling , the
said <font> John <$$font> then and there instantly died .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,7.53

And that she , the said <font> Margery , <$$font> at the time of the
felony , treason , and murder aforesaid , by the said <font> Richard ,
<$$font> in manner and form aforesaid , feloniously , traitorously ,
wilfully , and of his malice aforethought , done and committed at the
parish aforesaid , in the county aforesaid , feloniously , traitorously
, wilfully , and of her malice aforethought , was present , aiding ,
abetting , assisting , and maintaining the said <font> Richard ,
<$$font> the felony , treason , and murder aforesaid , in manner and
form aforesaid , to do and commit . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,7.54

And that they , the said <font> Richard <$$font> and <font> Margery ,
<$$font> him the said <font> John , <$$font> then and there being the
master of the said <font> Richard , <$$font> and also then and there
being the husband of the said <font> Margery , <$$font> in manner and
form aforesaid , feloniously , traitorously , wilfully , and of their
malice aforethought , did kill and murder , against the peace of our
said lord the king ,
{COM:comma_argues_against_construing_"his"_as_possessive_marker} his
crown and dignity . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,7.55

Upon this indictment , they have severally been arraigned ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,7.56

and , upon their arraignment , have severally pleaded they are not
guilty ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,7.57

your charge , therefore , is to enquire , whether they be guilty or not
, and hearken to the evidence . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,7.58

<P_8>

<heading>

<font> Evidence for the King . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.61

Elizabeth Cleobald , <font> Sworn . <$$font> <$$heading> Says , that
she was servant to the deceased , <font> John Beddingfield , <$$font>
and went to live with him at <font> Michaelmas <$$font> was a
twelvemonth . That on the twenty-seventh of <font> July <$$font> last ,
the time he died , there also lived with him <font> Elizabeth Riches ;
Richard Ringe , <$$font> one of the prisoners at the bar ; <font>
William Masterson , <$$font> and <font> John Nunn , <$$font> a boy of
ten years old . That <font> Ringe <$$font> came to live with the
deceased at the same time with her . That she was nurse-maid . That
the deceased had then two children living by his wife <paren> now a
prisoner at the bar <$$paren> one of them died soon after she went .
That she had seen <font> Ringe <$$font> use familiarities .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.62

Mr. <font> Serjeant Forster , <$$font> <bracket> for the Prisoner
<font> Beddingfield . <$$font> <$$bracket> <font> My Lord , <$$font> We
object to any evidence of familiarities , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.63

it is out of the question now . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.64

The objection was over-ruled , they being circumstances tending to prove
her consenting and abetting . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.65

<heading>

<font> Witness . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.67

<$$heading>

<font> Ringe <$$font> and my mistress were frequently together when my
master was out . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.69

They used to be alone in the kitchen when all the other servants were
out . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.70

It used to be after dinner , when I used to be in the back kitchen .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.71

If my master was not at home , then <font> Ringe <$$font> would be along
with my mistress till two o'clock . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,8.72

He used to come home to dinner at twelve , from the fields where <P_9>
he worked . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.73

One night I sat up to brew . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.74

My mistress sat up . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.75

I went in to see what was o'clock , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.76

and my mistress was sitting upon <font> Richard <$$font> 's lap .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.77

This was two or three months before my master's death .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.78

Another time , my master was out , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.79

and I saw my mistress writing a letter . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.80

She desired me to carry it to <font> Richard . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.81

I carried it . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.82

He was in bed . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.83

It was in the morning . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.84

This was between the time of the brewing , and my master's death .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.85

Another time I went into the kitchen-chamber , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.86

my mistress was putting her cap on . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.87

She desired me to put her ear-rings in . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.88

She said it would not be long before she would want a pair of black
ear-rings . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.89

<font> Richard <$$font> upon this said to her , are you going into
mourning for the devil ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.90

I left them two in the room . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.91

My master was gone to the next town . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.92

One day she said , somebody would die before <font> Michaelmas .
<$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.93

She thought it would be my master . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.94

I said I can@ @not tell how long my master will live .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.95

My mistress said , Why do you think he will not die before then ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.96

I said , I can@ @not tell how long my master has to live .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.97

I saw <font> Richard <$$font> kiss my mistress :
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.98

this was a little time before my master's death .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.99

My master died the twenty-seventh of <font> July , <$$font> in the night
. BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.100

I lay with my mistress in the kitchen-chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.101

She had lain two nights from my master . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.102

He lay in the parlour-chamber , which is next the kitchen-chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.103

These are at the other end of the house from where the rest lay .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.104

The parlour-chamber is over the parlour , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.105

you go through the kitchen-chamber to go into the parlour-chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.106

My mistress and I went to bed , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.107

my mistress went to bed first . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.108

My master was below with <font> Scarlet , <$$font> a butcher , drinking
some punch . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,9.109

<P_10>

I saw my master come into the kitchen-chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.111

We went to bed about ten . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.112

My master desired my mistress to lye in the parlour-chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.113

She said she would not lie there . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.114

My master desired her . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.115

Then he went into the parlour-chamber , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.116

and got his cap , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.117

and came in again , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.118

and said to my mistress , ' I did not tell you where I would lie ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.119

I said I would not lie there . ' BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.120

They wished one another good night . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.121

He went into the parlour-chamber . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.122

I never saw him again alive . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.123

<font> Betty Riches , <$$font> my partner , sat up , to light my master
up to bed . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.124

She came up with my master , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.125

lighted him up stairs . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.126

She staid in the kitchen-chamber till my master went into the
parlour-chamber , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.127

and they bid one another good night . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.128

After they had bid one another good night , my master went into the
parlour-chamber . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.129

The door of that chamber was left open . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.130

<font> Elizabeth Riches <$$font> went into the backhouse-chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.131

My master seemed to be in health ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.132

I never saw him ill but of a cold . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.133

He was twenty-four years of age . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.134

He was a thin man , not very lean , a small man .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.135

After my master was gone , I fell asleep , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.136

I was up all the night before . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.137

I was taken with sleep . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.138

My mistress waked me between eleven and twelve .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.139

My mistress <font> fared {COM:dialectal_for_"seem"} <$$font> frightened
, BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.140

and said , what is the matter . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.141

I begged her to get up . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.142

I was very much surprized at the noise I heard in the parlour-chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.143

It appeared as if somebody was in great distress in the parlour-chamber
. BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.144

It appeared as if somebody was in agony . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.145

I was frightened at the noise . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.146

It was a shrieking noise . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.147

I heard the noise the moment I waked . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.148

It did not last above a minute or two . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,10.149

I begged my mistress <P_11> to get up . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.150

- She said , we had better lay still . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.151

We both <font> laid <$$font> still . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.152

After this , I saw <font> Richard , <$$font> not above a minute or two
after I was awaked . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.153

I heard a noise . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.154

<font> Richard <$$font> came into the room . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.155

I saw him on that side of the bed where my mistress lay ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.156

there was no light in the room . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.157

I knew it was <font> Richard . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.158

I knew him by his speech . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.159

When I just saw him , I raised myself in bed ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.160

and said , Master ! BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.161

He said , hold your tongue ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.162

does any body know it but you two ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.163

I think my mistress answered No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.164

<font> Richard <$$font> said , he is dead , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.165

and now I am easy . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.166

My mistress said , is he ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.167

I said to him , how came you here ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.168

He answered , I was forced to it . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.169

<font> Richard <$$font> stayed in the room till we had got some of our
cloaths on , and we had the rest in our hands .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.170

Then <font> Richard <$$font> said , he would go to his own chamber , to
be called up , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.171

and went down stairs . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.172

Neither my mistress nor I went into the parlour-chamber before we went
down . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.173

I think the parlour-chamber door was open . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.174

The head of my master's bed was against the wall that parted the two
chambers . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.175

My master's , bed was close against the door .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.176

Our bed was about three yards from his , over the kitchen , and his over
the parlour , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.177

and it was about as big as the square in this court .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.178

My mistress and I went to the backhouse-chamber , where <font> Riches
<$$font> lay ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.179

it is across the landing-place , in coming out of the kitchen-chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.180

My mistress said , <font> Betty , <$$font> never discover .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.181

I said no . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.182

<font> Elizabeth Riches <$$font> was called up .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.183

We were almost dressed . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.184

My mistress said , <font> Betty , <$$font> go call up <font> Richard ,
<$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.185

something is the matter with your master . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.186

There was a wall between her room and <font> Richard <$$font> 's room ,
a mortar wall . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.187

<font> Elizabeth Riches <$$font> called <font> Richard . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.188

She called him again . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.189

He said , what the Devil is the matter with you now ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.190

<font> Elizabeth Riches <$$font> begged him to get up and come away .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.191

His chamber was over the backhouse . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.192

He got a tinderbox , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,11.193

<P_12>

and came into the backhouse-chamber , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.195

and struck a light . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.196

When he came into the backhouse-chamber he had his clothes on .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.197

My mistress desired him to go and look into the parlour-chamber ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.198

she believed something was the matter with his master .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.199

He did go , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.200

and in a little time , came back , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.201

and said his master was dead . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.202

My mistress seemed uneasy , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.203

and laid down on the bed with her cloaths on , till almost morning .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.204

My mistress , <font> Richard , <$$font> or somebody , sent <font>
William Masterson <$$font> to fetch my master's mother , who came before
it was light . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.205

<font> Ringe <$$font> went a second time into his master's room with
<font> Elizabeth Riches . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.206

When my master's mother came , she asked , has the doctor been sent for
? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.207

My mistress answered , if he is dead , what signifies sending for the
doctor ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.208

The next forenoon I saw my master , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.209

he was laid out , and a sheet thrown over him ; over his face .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.210

I turned it down , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.211

and looked at him . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.212

His face was black , and his throat and his neck quite round .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.213

The next day the coroner came , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.214

I was examined before him , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.215

and spoke of hearing the groans , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.216

but said nothing of <font> Ringe , <$$font> because , as I was to stay
in the place till <font> Michaelmas , <$$font> was afraid my mistress
would use me ill . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.217

I continued till a week and three days before old <font> Michaelmas
<$$font> day , when it was discovered , at the time of <font> Saxmundham
<$$font> Sessions . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.218

My mistress then said to me , <font> Betty , <$$font> have you told any
body what you saw and heard between <font> Richard <$$font> and I ,
touching your master , on account of his death ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.219

I said yes : BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.220

She said , to whom ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.221

I said , to my mother and <font> Elizabeth Riches . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.222

My mistress said to <font> Richard , <$$font> now <font> Richard ,
<$$font> you are done for , or hanged , or some such words .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.223

I then repeated to her what had passed in the chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.224

My mistress said , you need not say what chamber ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.225

a chamber is a chamber . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.226

I said , yes , madam , it was the kitchen-chamber that <font> Richard
<$$font> came into that night . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.227

Can you swear to <font> Richard ? <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.228

I said I could ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,12.229

<P_13>

<font> Richard <$$font> was by then , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.231

and did not deny what I said . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.232

My mistress said to me , did not you say you would not say any thing ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.233

I said , yes , I said as little as I could . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.234

I did not know but I should have been ill used if I had , told what I
knew . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.235

My mistress said , to make yourself easy , you will ruin two for ever .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.236

I said , if <font> Richard <$$font> never did my master any harm , he
would not be ruined in the world to come , whatever might happen in this
. BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.237

My mistress said , yes , he must be ruined for ever ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.238

for he has not had time to repent . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.239

My master and mistress lived happy together when I first went , and till
my mistress took to keeping company with <font> Richard <$$font> ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.240

after that they did not live so happy as they did before .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.241

<font> Richard <$$font> wanted me to go to <font> Saxmundham , <$$font>
to have what I could say taken down , and for me to say what he would ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.242

but I refused . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.243

<font> Richard <$$font> asked me if I would swear he murdered my master
: BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.244

I said no , I should be loth to say that , but I must speak the truth .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.245

<heading>

<font> Cross_Examined . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.247

<$$heading>

I should have mentioned , that <font> Saxmundham <$$font> sessions was
on the <font> Thursday , <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.249

I stayed till <font> Saturday : <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.250

my mistress went away on <font> Thursday , <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.251

and never returned till <font> Saturday , <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.252

and was taken up . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.253

After this I heard my mistress had taken a Vomit .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.254

<font> <paren> stopt . <$$paren> <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.255

<heading>

<font> Reply . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.257

<$$heading>

I saw <font> Richard <$$font> in the room after we got out of bed .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.259

Nothing was said before the coroner , how my master came by his death .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.260

I was asked whether my master went to bed as usual ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,13.261

<P_14>

<heading>

Elizabeth Riches <font> Sworn . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.264

<$$heading>

I lived with the decased , <font> John Beddingfield , <$$font> a year
all but a fortnight ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.266

one night <font> Richard <$$font> was sitting up for my master ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.267

my mistress was gone to bed , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.268

<font> Richard <$$font> said , he would get some poison , if I would
poison my master , by putting it into his rum and milk , which he drank
for breakfast . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.269

I told him I would not do it . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.270

He said he would be a friend to me as long as I lived , if I would do it
, and nobody would never know it , if I did not speak of it .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.271

I said , if it was hid in this world , it would not be hid in the world
to come . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.272

He said I might give it my master , he would swell , he would not die
immediately . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.273

<font> Richard <$$font> and my mistress kept company together ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.274

they met together , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.275

she has sat upon his lap when my master has been from home .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.276

One night I saw him kiss her three times in the back-house , and in the
kitchen , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.277

I have seen him in her bed-chamber . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.278

I was ordered by my mistress to watch , when they two were together ,
more than once , sometimes o'nights , and sometimes o'days .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.279

Once my mistress was writing - BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.280

She told me she was writing to <font> Richard . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.281

My master was walking in the fields , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.282

she directed me to watch . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.283

My master was coming , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.284

and she whipt up the letter , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.285

and put it into her pocket . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.286

My master was to take a vomit about two months before his death .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.287

My master had a cold . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.288

They had told him they would have him take a vomit .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.289

He took it in a china cup . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.290

My master was gone to the plough . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.291

<font> Richard <$$font> brought the water in a little pudding-cup
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.292

<font> <paren> stopt . <$$paren> <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.293

My master was a healthy man - BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.294

never heard he had any fit . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.295

On the twenty-seventh of <font> July , <$$font> my master asked to lie
with my mistress - . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.296

She said no . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,14.297

My master went <P_15> into the parlour-chamber ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.298

put on his cap , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.299

and came back again . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.300

They wished one another good night , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.301

and my master went to the parlour-chamber . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.302

Afterwards I heard a little noise , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.303

I could not tell what it was , like as if children were crying .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.304

Then my mistress and <font> Elizabeth Cleobald <$$font> came into the
room . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.305

My mistress ordered me to call <font> Richard <$$font> ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.306

he lay in the next room to me , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.307

so did <font> William Masterson <$$font> ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.308

they lay in the same room , and a young boy .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.309

I sat up in the bed , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.310

and called <font> Richard , <$$font> for God's sake get up .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.311

He said , what the devil is the matter with you now ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.312

<font> Richard <$$font> lighted a candle , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.313

and went to my master ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.314

he came back , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.315

and said he was dead BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.316

. I said , surely no . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.317

My mistress said , hold your tongue ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.318

it was enough to hurry her . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.319

I then went in with him , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.320

and found my master lying upon the floor , on the further side of the
bed , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.321

he was upon the floor . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.322

His head lay at the foot of the bed . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.323

He lay upon his stomach . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.324

His shirt was on . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.325

There were two buttons off his shirt neck , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.326

it was rent out of the gathers . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.327

I did not observe this myself , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.328

<font> Richard <$$font> told me so . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.329

There was a little scar upon his neck , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.330

it was black before , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.331

and swelled . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.332

I saw his face that night , and his neck . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.333

The bed-curtain was down , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.334

and the rod was bent . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.335

The rod was not bent before . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.336

I saw it the day before , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.337

and it was not bent . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.338

<heading>

<font> Witness . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.340

<$$heading>

<font> Richard <$$font> said , my master is dead .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.342

I said , if I had said to you , what you have said to {TEXT:to_to} me ,
I should have been afraid of going into the room alone , for fear my
master should appear again . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.343

<heading>

<font> Mr. Baron <$$font> Adams . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.345

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you observe whether the collar of the shirt was
buttoned ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,15.347

<P_16>

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not tell that . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.349

<heading>

<font> Council . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.351

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You came back into the room ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.353

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.354

<font> Q. <$$font> Had you and <font> Richard <$$font> any conversation
in coming back ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.355

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.356

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you stay in the room with your mistress till the
morning ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.357

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.358

<font> Q. <$$font> Did <font> Richard ? <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.359

<font> A. <$$font> No ; he went down , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.360

and came up again . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.361

<font> Richard <$$font> called <font> Wm. Masterson <$$font> up .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.362

<font> Q. <$$font> When you was ordered by your mistress to call <font>
Richard , <$$font> did he answer the first call ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.363

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not tell : BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.364

I believe he did not . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.365

<font> Q. <$$font> In the morning , at day_break , what did your
mistress say ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.366

<font> A. <$$font> That I must go about my work again , if my master
was dead . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.367

<font> Q. <$$font> Have you had any conversation with your mistress ,
or <font> Richard , <$$font> in relation to this affair since ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.368

<font> A. <$$font> I do@ @n't recollect any .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.369

<font> Q. <$$font> After your master was dead , had you any talk about
this poison business ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.370

<font> A. <$$font> She told me after she had spoke of it , the sessions
day she came up stairs . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.371

<font> Q. <$$font> The sessions day at <font> Saxmundham ? <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.372

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.373

<font> Q. <$$font> What did <font> Richard <$$font> say ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.374

<font> A. <$$font> He asked me what I had said about it .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.375

I told him it was about the poison . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.376

He had offered me to give poison to my master .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,16.377

I did not know that the fellow <P_17> was in the room till just before
the <font> Saxmundham <$$font> sessions , when <font> Elizabeth Cleobald
<$$font> told me of it . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.378

<font> Q. <$$font> In what manner did she tell it ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.379

<font> A. <$$font> Just as she has told it you .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.380

I told him <font> <paren> Richard <$$paren> <$$font> that I had told
<font> Elizabeth Cleobald <$$font> about the poison .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.381

He said he did not know he had said such a thing .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.382

I told him , if it came to a head he must know then .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.383

He bid me hold my tongue . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.384

He had had enough said to him about it . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.385

<font> Q. <$$font> You was in the backhouse with your partner when she
was beckoned into the shop by your mistress ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.386

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.387

<font> Q. <$$font> In what manner was it ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.388

<font> A. <$$font> The fellow beckoned her to come into the shop .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.389

<font> Q. <$$font> Was you examined before the coroner ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.390

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.391

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you mention it to the coroner ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.392

<font> A. <$$font> No ; I was afraid . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.393

<font> Q. <$$font> Of what ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.394

<font> A. <$$font> I was afraid my mistress would use me ill .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.395

<heading>

<font> Defendants Council . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.397

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> During the time you lived in this family , how did
Mr. <font> Beddingfield <$$font> and wife live together ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.399

<font> A. <$$font> They lived very well together till she got
acquainted with that fellow . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.400

<font> Q. <$$font> The room was that where you and your fellow servant
used to lie ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.401

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.402

<font> Q. <$$font> How long was that after you had left your mistress's
room , before your mistress came again ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.403

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not say ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.404

not quite an hour . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.405

<font> Q. <$$font> Better than half an hour ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.406

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,17.407

<P_18>

<font> Q. <$$font> When your mistress lay in this room , did one of
your maids lie with her ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.409

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.410

<font> Q. <$$font> You went up with your master .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.411

Did you observe any thing , with regard to your master's chamber , after
he went in ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.412

<font> A. <$$font> I went into the kitchen , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.413

and he went into the parlour-chamber . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.414

<font> Q. <$$font> The last time did you see your master go in ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.415

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.416

<font> Q. <$$font> Had he candle with him ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.417

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.418

<font> Q. <$$font> Can you tell whether the door was open ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.419

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.420

<font> Q. <$$font> Your master was a young man ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.421

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.422

<font> Q. <$$font> Of ill health ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.423

<font> A. <$$font> No ; he was out of order .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.424

<font> Q. <$$font> What age was he ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.425

<font> A. <$$font> Twenty-four . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.426

<font> Q. <$$font> How far was the room you lay in from the
kitchen-chamber ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.427

<font> A. <$$font> Some distance . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.428

<font> Q. <$$font> One end of your room comes to the partition that
divides the kitchen and the parlour-chambers ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.429

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.430

<font> Q. <$$font> If any body had called out with a loud voice there ,
should not you have heard ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.431

<font> A. <$$font> No , I did not . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.432

<font> Q. <$$font> If they had called with a loud voice , should you
have heard ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.433

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.434

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you hear any thing ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.435

<font> A. <$$font> I heard a little . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.436

<font> Q. <$$font> How long did you hear that before your mistress and
<font> Cleobald <$$font> came in ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,18.437

<P_19>

<font> A. <$$font> Not long . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.439

<font> Q. <$$font> When the coroner came , what did he come for ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.440

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not say . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.441

The coroner should come for murder . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.442

<font> Q. <$$font> To enquire whether there was a murder ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.443

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.444

<font> Q. <$$font> You understood that ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.445

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.446

<font> Q. <$$font> Was you swore ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.447

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.448

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you remember the oath ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.449

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.450

<font> Q. <$$font> Was it to speak the whole truth ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.451

<font> A. <$$font> I believe it was . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.452

<font> Q. <$$font> How came it that you did not tell every thing you
knew ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.453

<font> A. <$$font> I did tell him to the best of my knowledge it was
done that night . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.454

<font> Q. <$$font> Before this , had you communicated any thing to your
fellow servant ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.455

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.456

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you tell the jury any suspicions you had about
your master's death ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.457

<font> A. <$$font> I told them afterwards to the justice .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.458

<font> Q. <$$font> How came you not to be afraid before the justice ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.459

<font> A. <$$font> My mistress had such a spirit , I was afraid she
would use me ill . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.460

<font> Q. <$$font> Mrs. <font> Cleobald <$$font> has had no talk with
you ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.461

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.462

<font> Q. <$$font> You never had any conversation with her solely ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.463

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,19.464

<P_20>

<heading>

<font> Mr. Baron <$$font> Adams . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.467

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You say your master was lying upon his face ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.469

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.470

<font> Q. <$$font> Was he lying strait along ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.471

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.472

<font> Q. <$$font> His legs were not crumpled under him ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.473

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.474

<font> Q. <$$font> Where were his arms ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.475

<font> A. <$$font> They lay before him . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.476

One hand was about his throat , the other under him .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.477

<font> Q. <$$font> You have spoke of the curtain of the bed being down
, and of the curtain-rod being bent ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.478

in what condition were the bed cloaths ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.479

<font> A. <$$font> They were turned down . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.480

<font> Q. <$$font> The whole breadth of the bed ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.481

<font> A. <$$font> No ; part . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.482

<font> Q. <$$font> Just as if a man had got out of bed , and had turned
them down ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.483

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . The coverlid was rumpled at the feet .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.484

<font> Q. <$$font> Drawn off at the feet ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.485

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.486

<font> Q. <$$font> The rest of the cloaths were turned on one side , as
people do when they get out of bed ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.487

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.488

<heading>

William Masterson <font> Sworn . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.490

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You was servant to Mr. <font> Beddingfield ,
<$$font> the deceased ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.492

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.493

<font> Q. <$$font> When did you come to him ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.494

<font> A. <$$font> Last <font> Michaelmas <$$font> was a twelvemonth .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.495

<font> Q. <$$font> How old are you now ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.496

<font> A. <$$font> Turned of fourteen ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,20.497

<P_21>

<font> Q. <$$font> What business was you employed to do ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.499

<font> A. <$$font> I was hired for a cow boy .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.500

<font> Q. <$$font> You lay in the house , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.501

and dieted in the house ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.502

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.503

<font> Q. <$$font> You know the prisoners at the bar ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.504

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.505

<font> Q. <$$font> In the house where did you sleep ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.506

<font> A. <$$font> I lay with the fellow till the other boy came .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.507

<font> Q. <$$font> In what chamber did you lie ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.508

<font> A. <$$font> Next to the backhouse chamber .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.509

<font> Q. <$$font> There were two beds in it ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.510

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.511

<font> Q. <$$font> What is the other boy's name ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.512

<font> A. Nunn . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.513

<font> Q. <$$font> What was he ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.514

<font> A. <$$font> The cow boy after . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.515

Our bed's head stood to <font> Richard's <$$font> bed side .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.516

<font> Q. <$$font> At what time did you go to bed ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.517

<font> A. Richard , Nunn , <$$font> and I went together .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.518

<font> Q. <$$font> As soon as you came into the room , what did you do
? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.519

<font> A. <$$font> We undressed , the other boy and I .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.520

<font> Q. <$$font> What did <font> Richard <$$font> do ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.521

<font> A. <$$font> He went up with us . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.522

<font> Q. <$$font> How long had the other boy and you been in the room
before you was in bed ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.523

<font> A. <$$font> We undressed , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.524

and went to bed directly . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.525

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you lie there the whole night without
interruption ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.526

<font> A. <$$font> Between eleven and twelve I heard the maid call the
man . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.527

<font> Q. <$$font> Who did she call ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.528

<font> A. <$$font> For God's sake , <font> Richard , <$$font> get up ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.529

something is the matter with your master . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.530

<font> Richard <$$font> said , what the devil is the matter with you now
? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,21.531

<P_22>

<font> Q. <$$font> How long was he called ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.533

<font> A. <$$font> He was down directly . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.534

<font> Q. <$$font> How long after his answer , what the devil is the
matter with you now ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.535

<font> A. <$$font> She called again , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.536

and he turned out directly . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.537

<font> Q. <$$font> How long did you lie before you saw any thing of him
again ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.538

<font> A. <$$font> In a quarter of an hour he came up with a candle .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.539

<font> Q. <$$font> What did he say ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.540

<font> A. <$$font> For God's sake , <font> Will , <$$font> get up ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.541

and come down ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.542

your master has fallen out of bed , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.543

and has killed himself . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.544

I got up , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.545

and went into the parlour-chamber : BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.546

<font> Q. <$$font> Who was with you ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.547

<font> A. Richard . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.548

<font> Q. <$$font> How was he dressed ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.549

<font> A. <$$font> In a light_coloured coat , shoes and breeches on .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.550

I followed him into my master's chamber . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.551

<font> Q. <$$font> What did you see when you came into your master's
chamber ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.552

<font> A. <$$font> His face lay towards the bed .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.553

He lay with his body against the bed's feet .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.554

He lay upon his stomach . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.555

<font> Q. <$$font> How did he appear ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.556

<font> A. <$$font> With his hand in this manner .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.557

<font> <paren> Witness describes it with his hand on his throat .
<$$paren> <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.558

<font> Q. <$$font> Where was the other hand ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.559

<font> A. <$$font> Under his side . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.560

The bolster and pillows were all upon the ground , at the foot of the
bed . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.561

<font> Q. <$$font> Were the bolster and pillows on the bed ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.562

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.563

<font> Q. <$$font> And the tick and matting ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.564

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.565

<font> Q. <$$font> Where did the quilt and the sheets lay ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.566

<font> A. <$$font> Upon my master's feet . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,22.567

The end of the curtain-rod <P_23> lay upon the bedside , and the other
where it should be . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.568

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you touch your master ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.569

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.570

<font> Q. <$$font> Was he cold ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.571

<font> A. <$$font> He just began to grow cool .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.572

His legs from the ancle were pretty tidily stiff .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.573

I helped <font> Richard <$$font> to lay my master's body upon the bed .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.574

<font> Q. <$$font> Who took hold of his head ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.575

<font> A. <$$font> The fellow . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.576

<font> Q. <$$font> And who of his feet ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.577

<font> A. <$$font> I . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.578

<font> Q. <$$font> You touched his legs ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.579

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.580

<font> Q. <$$font> Were they cool or warm ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.581

<font> A. <$$font> Good tidily cool . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.582

<font> Q. <$$font> He had a shirt on , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.583

did that cover him ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.584

<font> A. <$$font> It did not cover him wholly :
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.585

it was turned up , the flap towards his head .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.586

His shirt was turned up his back . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.587

<font> Q. <$$font> How was the shirt ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.588

<font> A. <$$font> Turned up from his back on to his shoulders .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.589

<font> Q. <$$font> The lower flap was turned up to his head ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.590

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.591

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see the collar ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.592

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.593

<font> Q. <$$font> Was it unbutton'd ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.594

<font> A. <$$font> One button . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.595

It was unbuttoned : BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.596

two buttons were off . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.597

<font> Q. <$$font> Were any buttons left upon the floor ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.598

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.599

The lower button was on , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.600

the two upper were off . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.601

I did not see the buttons . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.602

<font> Q. <$$font> Did he look black ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.603

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , tidily black . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.604

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see his neck ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.605

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,23.606

<P_24>

<font> Q. <$$font> How did it look ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.608

<font> A. <$$font> Very black . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.609

<font> Q. <$$font> Where ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.610

<font> A. <$$font> All about the fore part .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.611

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see your master that day ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.612

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , with Mr. <font> Scarlet . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.613

He had been in the harvest field , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.614

and had pitched a load of wheat . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.615

He was in very good health , and cool , as ever I knew him .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.616

<heading>

<font> Cross Examination . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.618

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> Was there time enough between the first calling of
<font> Richard , <$$font> and his going out , for him to put his cloaths
on ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.620

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.621

<font> Q. <$$font> You was awake when he was first called ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.622

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.623

<font> Q. <$$font> How long was there between ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.624

<font> A. <$$font> Two or three minutes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.625

<font> Q. <$$font> How long do you take in dressing ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.626

<font> A. <$$font> I might be dressed in two or three minutes .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.627

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you hear him go down stairs , or go into the
next room ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.628

<font> A. <$$font> He could not go into any room without going down
stairs . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.629

<font> Q. <$$font> How long was it before he came back ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.630

<font> A. <$$font> A quarter of an hour . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.631

<heading>

<font> Reply . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.633

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You said , after <font> Richard <$$font> answer'd ,
<font> What is the matter now ? <$$font> he turned out directly ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.635

<font> A. <$$font> They called again , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.636

and then he turned directly out . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.637

<font> Q. <$$font> You was awake then ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.638

<font> A. <$$font> Wide awake . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,24.639

<P_25>

<font> Q. <$$font> Did he appear to dress himself ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.641

<font> A. <$$font> No . As soon as he got upon the plancher , he went
directly out of the room . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.642

<font> Q. <$$font> The moment he was out of bed , he went down directly
? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.643

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.644

<heading>

<font> Mr. Baron <$$font> Adams . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.646

<$$heading>

The facts appear , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.648

do not let us infer a circumstance of so great importance to the
prisoner . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.649

<heading>

Riches <font> called again . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.651

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> When you went into the bed-room with <font> Richard
, <$$font> you described the bed cloaths , and how they were turned down
? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.653

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.654

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see the bolster and pillow at all ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.655

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.656

<heading>

James Scarlet <font> Sworn . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.658

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You was with Mr. <font> Beddingfield <$$font> on
the night he died ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.660

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.661

<font> Q. <$$font> And bought a beast of him ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.662

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.663

<font> Q. <$$font> You drank with him that night ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.664

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.665

<font> Q. <$$font> Was he in good health ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.666

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.667

<font> Q. <$$font> What liquor did you drink with him ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.668

<font> A. <$$font> Two little bowls of punch , between two and three
pints . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.669

<font> Q. <$$font> Did he drink the best part ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,25.670

<P_26>

<font> A. <$$font> I had two glasses to his one .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.672

<font> Q. <$$font> You had kept company with him ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.673

<font> A. <$$font> Several times . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.674

<heading>

<font> Cross Examination . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.676

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> Was he as fit to defend his life and property as ,
he had been at any time ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.678

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , he was not drunk at all .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.679

<heading>

<font> Mr. <$$font> Sparham <font> Sworn . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.681

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You are a surgeon ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.683

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.684

<font> Q. <$$font> You was sent for to attend the inquisition that was
had about Mr. <font> Beddingfield ? <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.685

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , at <font> Sternfield , <$$font> in <font> July
. <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.686

<font> Q. <$$font> On what day ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.687

<font> A. <$$font> I do@ @n't remember ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.688

it was two days after he was dead . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.689

<font> Q. <$$font> Who sent for you ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.690

<font> A. <$$font> Mr. <font> Edgar <$$font> desired me to go and view
the body with him ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.691

it was then about twelve , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.692

they were in great hurry ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.693

the jury had been there a long time , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.694

particularly the coroner had been there so long he wanted to go home .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.695

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see the body ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.696

<font> A. <$$font> Mr. <font> Edgar <$$font> stood on one side of the
bed , and I on the other ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.697

I turned the covering down pretty low to the waste ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.698

I found no marks , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.699

only it was much swelled , as any dead body is .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.700

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you go higher up in his body ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.701

<font> A. <$$font> I viewed his neck ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.702

after that I was at a loss . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.703

I saw such marks as I never saw before . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.704

I have seen bodies from the hall , marked all round .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,26.705

Here were marks with fingers on the one side , and a thumb on <P_27> the
other , with scratches , as if it had been done with a person's nails .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.706

<font> Q. <$$font> You had been used at <font> London <$$font> to see
<font> subjects <$$font> with black marks , that had been hanged ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.707

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , I was at a loss then , because it was not a
round regular mark , but two . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.708

<font> Q. <$$font> What was that ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.709

<font> A. <$$font> Fingers on one side , a thumb on the other , with
proper distances between each . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.710

<font> Q. <$$font> How many fingers ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.711

<font> A. <$$font> Three and a thumb . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.712

<font> Q. <$$font> Any scratches ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.713

<font> A. <$$font> Such as are made by the nails of a person .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.714

There was a slight redness upon the windpipe , but not such as is made
by fingers . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.715

<font> Q. <$$font> If fingers were applied as you saw , to occasion
them , would a force applied to them have prevented a man from breathing
? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.716

<font> A. <$$font> A man could not do it himself ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.717

another might , by continuance , and by a perpetual squeezing .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.718

<font> Q. <$$font> Suppose no resistance is made ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.719

if a man takes another with his fingers in that manner , would it
prevent his breathing ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.720

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , if it was continued .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.721

<font> Q. <$$font> Suppose a man was asleep , and was seized in that
manner , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.722

what would be his defence ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.723

<font> A. <$$font> He could make very little .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.724

<font> Q. <$$font> If a person held his breath , could he make any ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.725

<font> A. <$$font> Very little . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.726

<font> Q. <$$font> From what you saw of that subject , do you believe
he died a natural death ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.727

<font> A. <$$font> I think they were marks of violence .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.728

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you think you saw marks enough to impute his
death to violence ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,27.729

<P_28>

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , by what I have heard since .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.731

<font> Q. <$$font> Did these marks that you saw upon the neck , appear
to be such marks as probably might occasion his death ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.732

<font> A. <$$font> I do@ @n't know by what I@ @'m to judge .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.733

<font> Q. <$$font> Now do you think the marks of violence that you saw
, were the probable cause of his death ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.734

<font> A. <$$font> I really think so ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.735

I can@ @not positively say . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.736

<heading>

<font> Cross Examination . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.738

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> Did not the coroner tell you , you was sent for to
give your opinion to the jury , how this man came by his death ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.740

<font> A. <$$font> I believe they told me ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.741

they did not swear me . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.742

<font> Q. <$$font> What opinion did you give ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.743

<font> A. <$$font> They told me his hand was under his throat , and the
marks might come from the fingers and thumb , and not sufficient to
occasion his death . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.744

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you give an opinion that he died a natural death
? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.745

<font> A. <$$font> No , I can@ @not say I gave any opinion .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.746

<heading>

<font> Mr. Baron <$$font> Adams . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.748

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You was sent for to give your opinion ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.750

<font> A. <$$font> At that time my opinion was , that as he lay with
his hand so <paren> <font> Witness shews how he lay <$$font> <$$paren>
his fingers might occasion the impression in his neck .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.751

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you think so ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.752

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not say I thought much about it .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.753

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you think so then ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.754

<font> A. <$$font> I did think so . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,28.755

<P_29>

<heading>

<font> Cross Examination . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.758

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> If you never had any suspicious circumstances to
induce you to think there were acts of violence committed , should you
have changed your opinion ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.760

<font> A. <$$font> I find I was out in my opinion .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.761

I thought so that evening . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.762

I thought I was too slender in my opinion . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.763

I thought I had been deficient in my judgment upon the report .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.764

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you think it was the act of another person ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.765

<font> A. <$$font> I did in the evening . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.766

<font> Q. <$$font> If a man falls upon the floor from a bed , would not
the fall occasion that mark ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.767

<font> A. <$$font> No , not shew itself in impressions black .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.768

<heading>

<font> Mr. Baron <$$font> Adams . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.770

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> Suppose a man is seized with an apoplexy , or any
fit that occasions his death , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.772

what appearance would the neck and face have ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.773

<font> A. <$$font> In apoplexies they have froth in the mouth .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.774

<font> Q. <$$font> Is the face ever black and swelled ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.775

<font> A. <$$font> A little livid colour . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.776

<font> Q. <$$font> Would not it be black ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.777

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.778

<font> Q. <$$font> Is there any sudden death , natural death , that
will give a man a blackness and swelling in the face ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.779

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.780

<font> Q. <$$font> Is there any kind of natural death that would
occasion the neck to appear black ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.781

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.782

<font> Q. <$$font> Suppose a vein broke in the neck ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.783

would it make the face and throat black ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,29.784

<P_30>

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.786

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you ever know an instance ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.787

<font> A. <$$font> No , I can@ @not think it .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.788

<font> Q. <$$font> Is it in the power of any man who catches another ,
a strong man in his sleep , by the throat , to hold him long enough to
throttle him ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.789

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , the fingers were on the left side .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.790

I am not clear as to that . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.791

<font> Q. <$$font> Are you clear that the marks of the fingers were
distinct ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.792

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.793

<font> Q. <$$font> Were the marks of the fingers black ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.794

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.795

<font> Q. <$$font> What colour was the other swelling between these
marks ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.796

<font> A. <$$font> Reddish . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.797

<font> Q. <$$font> How long did you view this body ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.798

<font> A. <$$font> I was not there five minutes .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.799

<font> Q. <$$font> Could not a man , thus seized , lift up his hand and
put the other's away ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.800

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.801

<font> Q. <$$font> Suppose he had given him a turn ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.802

would that loose him ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.803

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , according to the strength .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.804

<heading>

<font> Mr. <$$font> Edcar <font> Sworn . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.806

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> How long have you attended the hospital ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.808

<font> A. <$$font> About four months . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.809

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you remember a message coming to your master
<paren> <font> Mr. Cooper <$$font> <$$paren> from the coroner ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.810

<font> A. <$$font> A man servant to Mr. <font> Long <$$font> came to
my master's house <font> <paren> Mr. Cooper of Saxmundham <$$paren>
<$$font> desiring him to view the body . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.811

<font> Q. <$$font> Was Mr. <font> Sparham <$$font> there ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.812

<font> A. <$$font> I went to him . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.813

<font> Q. <$$font> Was either of you sworn ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,30.814

<P_31>

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.816

<font> Q. <$$font> Were any questions asked you by the coroner ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.817

<font> A. <$$font> I do@ @n't know that I was asked any questions .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.818

<font> Q. <$$font> You examined the body ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.819

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , his face and trunk too look'd black .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.820

<font> Q. <$$font> Did the trunk look remarkably black ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.821

<font> A. <$$font> I think it was preternatural ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.822

I never saw any thing so black . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.823

<font> Q. <$$font> What other appearance ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.824

<font> A. <$$font> Very distinct marks of a thumb and four fingers .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.825

I think the left . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.826

<font> Q. <$$font> From the marks ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.827

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.828

<font> Q. <$$font> How ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.829

<font> A. <$$font> From the left hand . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.830

<font> Q. <$$font> How was the {TEXT:th} flesh between ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.831

<font> A. <$$font> Not so deep_coloured
{TEXT:missing_first_three_letters_of_"coloured"} .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.832

<font> Q. <$$font> Were they sufficient to occasion a man's death ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.833

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , by the continuation of the gripe .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.834

<font> Q. <$$font> Upon view of the body , what is your opinion ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.835

did that person die a natural death , attended with such marks upon the
throat , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.836

or did he die a violent death ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.837

<font> A. <$$font> It is very difficult to answer that ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.838

I should be very diffident in answering that .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.839

<font> Q. <$$font> Considering that the marks were not marks of a
natural death ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.840

<font> A. <$$font> No , certainly they were not .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.841

That pressure would occasion a person's death in a very few minutes .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.842

<font> Q. <$$font> What is your opinion now ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.843

<font> A. <$$font> I am afraid those marks were of a sufficient
violence to occasion the man's death . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,31.844

<P_32>

<heading>

<font> Cross_Examination , <$$font> by William Weller , <font> of
Council for Mrs. <$$font> Beddingfield . <$$paren>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.847

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> Would a man in full health , twenty-four years old ,
continue to lie so still , having both his hands at liberty , as that
another could do this , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.849

is it probable any man could lie so still ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.850

<font> A. <$$font> If a man was taken in his sleep , and a strong man
assaulted him in that manner , I should think he had a very poor chance
for his life . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.851

<font> Q. <$$font> Could he keep his hand long enough ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.852

<font> A. <$$font> His hand would go with him ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.853

and the gripe would continue BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.854

<heading>

<font> Evidence for the King closed . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.856

<font> Mr. Serjeant <$$font> Forster . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.857

<$$heading>

<font> My Lord , <$$font> Two witnesses are necessary to convict a
person of petty treason . 1. <font> Ed. <$$font> 6 Ch: Part 22 . 3.
<font> Ed. <$$font> 6 . Ch. 11 . <font> The King against <$$font>
Swann <font> and <$$font> Jeffrys : BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.859

Not a witness has been examined in this case , that affects Mrs. <font>
Beddingfield , <$$font> but <font> Elizabeth Cleobald . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.860

The prisoners can@ @not be found guilty of the murder ; and acquitted of
the petty treason . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.861

<heading>

<font> Mr. Baron <$$font> Adams . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.863

<$$heading>

Both the witnesses <font> <paren> the women <$$paren> <$$font> have
given circumstantial evidence to affect her .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,32.865

They have both spoke <P_33> of familiarities between the prisoners .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.866

The other evidence is to be left to the Jury .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.867

<heading>

<font> <paren> To the Prisoners . <$$paren> <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.869

<$$heading>

<font> Richard Ringe , <$$font> You have heard the accusation against
you , and the proof in support of it ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.871

what have you to say in your defence ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.872

<heading>

<font> Ringe . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.874

<$$heading>

My lord , My master was found with one hand round his neck ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.876

and he was lying flat upon his face . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.877

I went back BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.878

and told my mistress . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.879

She bid me go and call the boy up . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.880

The boy came with me , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.881

and we went on to the chamber . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.882

The boy saw him the same as I did , the bed things a-top of him .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.883

I am clear of the fact . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.884

<font> <paren> Puts his hand upon his breast . <$$paren> <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.885

<heading>

<font> Mr. Baron <$$font> Adams . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.887

<$$heading>

<font> Margery Beddingfield , <$$font> You have heard the accusation
against you , and the proof in support of it ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.889

what have you to say in your defence ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.890

<heading>

<font> Prisoner <$$font> Beddingfield : BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.892

<$$heading>

<font> My Lord , <$$font> I know very little about it .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.894

My husband went to bed about ten , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.895

I waked about eleven . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.896

I heard a noise , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.897

the maid said there is a noise . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.898

I said I had been monstrously frightened in my sleep .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.899

I said , why did you not wake me before ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.900

I should have got up . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.901

I went to where the children lay , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.902

and brought the tinder-box , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.903

<font> Richard <$$font> came on to the chamber ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.904

and said , my master is dead . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.905

- I threw myself across the bed , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.906

and lay till his mother and sister came . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,33.907

<P_34>

<heading>

<font> Evidence for the Prisoners . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.910

Prisoners Council . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.911

William Alston <font> Sworn . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.912

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you know John Beddingfield ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.914

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . I helped to lay him out .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.915

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see any marks of violence about him ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.916

<font> A. <$$font> I saw marks of violence .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.917

I ca@ @n't tell how they came . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.918

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see any bruises about his head or body ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.919

<font> A. <$$font> I did not see any . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.920

<font> Q. <$$font> How long had he been dead ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.921

<font> A. <$$font> Three hours . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.922

<font> Q. <$$font> What marks did you see ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.923

<font> A. <$$font> On the side of his neck .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.924

<font> Q. <$$font> What marks ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.925

<font> A. <$$font> A kind of longish marks , about the breadth of a
straw , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.926

and looked reddish . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.927

<font> Q. <$$font> On each side ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.928

<font> A. <$$font> But on one side . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.929

<font> Q. <$$font> There were no black marks ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.930

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.931

<font> Q. <$$font> How long had you known these two people ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.932

<font> A. <$$font> I was day-man to him . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.933

<font> Q. <$$font> Did there seem to be a good understanding , between
him and his wife ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.934

Did they live happily , together ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.935

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , as far as I saw . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.936

<font> Q. <$$font> How often was you there ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.937

<font> A. <$$font> Every day . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.938

<font> Q. <$$font> You never heard them quarrel ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,34.939

<P_35>

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.941

<font> Q. <$$font> Or any uneasiness between them ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.942

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.943

<font> Q. <$$font> You did not live in the house ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.944

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.945

<font> Q. <$$font> Or victual ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.946

<font> A. <$$font> No . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.947

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you ever hear him say any thing of <font>
Richard ? <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.948

<font> A. <$$font> I heard Mr. <font> Beddingfield , <$$font> a little
before he died , give <font> Richard <$$font> a very good word .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.949

<font> Q. <$$font> How long did you know him ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.950

<font> A. <$$font> My master ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.951

From <font> Whitsuntide <$$font> to his death .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.952

<heading>

<font> Mr. Baron <$$font> Adams . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.954

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see any thing like the marks of fingers and
thumb ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.956

<font> A. <$$font> I ca@ @n't say when I laid him out .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.957

They appeared more afterwards . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.958

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see him afterwards ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.959

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , at the coroner's inquest .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.960

They appeared fairer . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.961

<font> Q. <$$font> Were they marks of fingers and thumb !
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.962

<font> A. <$$font> I did not take any observation of that .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.963

<font> Q. <$$font> How many marks were there ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.964

<font> A. <$$font> Two . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.965

<font> Q. <$$font> What did they look like ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.966

<font> A. <$$font> Just as if the blood was set in the skin .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.967

<heading>

William Starkey <font> Sworn . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.969

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You knew <font> John Beddingfield ? <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.971

<font> A. <$$font> Very {TEXT:Yery} well . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.972

I have known him six years . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.973

I never was at his house till within these two years .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,35.974

He <P_36> once offered me a chaise to go to Yarmouth ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.975

then I asked them to dine . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.976

This was in <font> July <$$font> was a twelve-month .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.977

Mrs. <font> Beddingfield <$$font> was with child .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.978

About seven or eight she was in labour , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.979

and was brought to bed at my house . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.980

All the time she was at my house , Mr. <font> Beddingfield <$$font> was
as loving a husband as ever I knew , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.981

and she was the same to him . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.982

<heading>

John Grimmer <font> Sworn . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.984

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You knew <font> John Beddingfield ? <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.986

<font> A. <$$font> I married Mr. <font> Beddingfield <$$font> 's own
aunt . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.987

<font> Q. <$$font> You was well acquainted with him ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.988

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . I was at the wedding .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.989

<font> Q. <$$font> You know how they lived together ;
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.990

did they live happily together ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.991

<font> A. <$$font> As ever I knew . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.992

I have been at their house , and they at mine .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.993

I never saw any thing to the contrary . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.994

<font> Q. <$$font> How long had you seen him before his death ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.995

<font> A. <$$font> The <font> Thursday <$$font> before at <font>
Saxmandham . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.996

<font> Q. <$$font> How long before his death was you at his house ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.997

<font> A. <$$font> Ten days or a fortnight .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.998

<font> Q. <$$font> How long did you stay the last time ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.999

<font> A. <$$font> Three or four hours . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.1000

I used to go and see them , and they to see me .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.1001

<heading>

<font> Mr. <$$font> William Toller <font> Sworn . <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.1003

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You knew <font> John Beddingfield ? <$$font>
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.1005

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . I did not know <font> her {TEXT:Her} <$$font>
till after his death . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.1006

<font> Q. <$$font> How came you to know her ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.1007

<font> A. <$$font> She came to me about taking out administration to
her husband . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.1008

It was the latter end of <font> August , <$$font> or beginning of <font>
September . <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,36.1009

<P_37>

<font> Q. <$$font> Was there any rumor in the country of there being
any suspicion touching the manner of his death ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,37.1011

<font> A. <$$font> Not at that time . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,37.1012

<font> Q. <$$font> Had you any conversation with her ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,37.1013

<font> <paren> stopt . <$$paren> <$$font> BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,37.1014

<font> Q. <$$font> Had she , or this man , any opportunity of escaping
? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,37.1015

<font> A. <$$font> She knew three or four hours before that there would
be a warrant against her . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,37.1016

I had heard it two or three days before . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,37.1017

I told her there would be a warrant . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,37.1018

I advised her to stay in the way . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,37.1019

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_38>

<heading>

<font> Clerk of Arraigns <$$font> . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1023

<$$heading>

Gentlemen of the jury , are you agreed on your verdict ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1025

Who {TEXT:who} shall say for you ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1026

<font> A. <$$font> Foreman . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1027

<font> Richard Ringe <$$font> , hold up your hand .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1028

Gentlemen , look upon the prisoner ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1029

how say you , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1030

is <font> Richard Ringe <$$font> guilty of the felony , treason , and
murder , whereof he stands indicted , or not guilty ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1031

<font> Jury <$$font> . <$$bracket> Guilty .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1032

<font> Margery Beddingfield <$$font> , hold up your hand .
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1033

Gentlemen , look upon the prisoner , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1034

how say you , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1035

is <font> Margery Beddingfield <$$font> guilty of the felony , treason ,
and murder , whereof she stands indicted , or not guilty ?
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1036

<font> Jury <$$font> . Guilty . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1037

<font> Clerk of Arraigns <$$font> . <$$bracket> Hearken to your
verdicts as the court hath recorded them . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1038

You say they are severally guilty ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1039

those are your verdicts ; BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1040

and so you say all . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1041

<font> Clerk of Arraigns <$$font> . <$$bracket> <font> Richard Ringe
<$$font> , hold up your hand . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1042

You stand convicted of felony , treason , and murder ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1043

what can you now say for yourself why the court should not give judgment
against you to die according to law , and why execution of that judgment
should not be awarded against you ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,38.1044

<P_39>

<font> Clerk of Arraigns <$$font> . <$$bracket> <font> Margery
Beddingfield <$$font> , hold up your hand . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,39.1046

You stand convicted of felony , treason , and murder ,
BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,39.1047

what can you now say for yourself why the court should not give judgment
against you to die according to law , and why execution of that judgment
should not be awarded against you ? BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,39.1048

<font> Cryer <$$font> . <$$bracket> <font> Oyez ! <$$font> My lords
the king's justices do strictly charge and command all manner of persons
to keep silence while sentence of death is passing on the prisoners at
the bar , upon pain of imprisonment . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,39.1049

<heading>

<font> Judgment <$$font> . BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,39.1051

<$$heading>

You <font> Richard Ringe <$$font> are to be taken from hence to the
place from whence you came , and from thence to be drawn to the place of
execution on <font> Saturday <$$font> next , where you are to be hanged
by the neck until you be dead , and your body is to be dissected and
anatomized , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,39.1053

and the Lord have mercy upon your soul ! BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,39.1054

You <font> Margery Beddingfield <$$font> are to be taken from hence to
the place from whence you came , and from thence to be drawn to the
place of execution on <font> Saturday <$$font> next , where you are to
be burnt until you be dead , BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,39.1055

and the Lord have mercy upon your soul ! BEDDINGFIELD-1763-2,39.1056

