<BEGIN_bell-1911-2>

<P_159>

<heading>

Chapter V BELL-1911-2,159.4

Kerbelâ to Baghdâd BELL-1911-2,159.5

<font> March <$$font> 30 - <font> April <$$font> 12 BELL-1911-2,159.6

<$$heading>

To travel in the desert is in one respect curiously akin to travelling
on the sea : BELL-1911-2,159.8

it gives you no premonition of the changed environment to which the days
of journeying are conducting you . BELL-1911-2,159.9

When you set sail from a familiar shore you enter on a course from which
the usual landmarks of daily existence have been swept away .
BELL-1911-2,159.10

What has become of the march of time ? BELL-1911-2,159.11

Dawn leads to noon , noon to sunset , sunset to the night ;
BELL-1911-2,159.12

but night breaks into a dawn indistinguishable from the last , the same
sky above , the same sea on every side , the same planks beneath your
feet . BELL-1911-2,159.13

Is it indeed another day ? BELL-1911-2,159.14

or is it yesterday lived over again ? BELL-1911-2,159.15

Then on a sudden you touch the land BELL-1911-2,159.16

and find that that recurring day has carried you round half the globe .
BELL-1911-2,159.17

So it is in the desert . BELL-1911-2,159.18

You rise BELL-1911-2,159.19

and look out upon the same landscape that greeted you before -
BELL-1911-2,159.20

the contour of the hills may have altered ever so slightly ,
BELL-1911-2,159.21

the hollow that holds your camp has deepened by a few yards since last
week , BELL-1911-2,159.22

the limitless sweep of the plain was not hidden a fortnight ago by that
little mound ; BELL-1911-2,159.23

but here are the same people about you , speaking of the same things ,
BELL-1911-2,159.24

here is the same path to be followed , BELL-1911-2,159.25

yes , even the seasons are the same , BELL-1911-2,159.26

and the dusty face of the desert is too old to flush at the advent of
spring or to be wreathed in autumn garlands of gold and scarlet .
BELL-1911-2,159.27

Yet at the end of a long interval composed of periods recurrent and
alike , you look round BELL-1911-2,159.28

and see that the whole face of the universe has changed .
BELL-1911-2,159.29

When we reached Kerbelâ we passed into a world of which the aspect and
the associations were entirely new to me . BELL-1911-2,159.30

I had set out from an Arab town in North Syria , BELL-1911-2,159.31

and I emerged in a Persian city linked historically with the Holy
<P_160> Places , with the first struggles and the only great schism of
Islâm . BELL-1911-2,160.32

At Kerbelâ was enacted the tragedy of the death of Hussein , son of 'Alî
ibn abi Tâlib ; BELL-1911-2,160.33

the place has grown up round the mosque that holds his tomb ,
BELL-1911-2,160.34

and to one half of those who profess the Mohammadan creed it is a goal
no less sacred than Mecca . BELL-1911-2,160.35

But it was not the golden dome of Hussein , though it covers the richest
treasure of offerings possessed by any known shrine <paren> unless the
treasure in 'Ali's tomb of Nejef touch a yet higher value <$$paren> ,
nor yet the presence of the green-robed Persians , narrow of soul ,
austere and stern of countenance - BELL-1911-2,160.36

it was not the wealth and fame of the Shîah sanctuary that made the
strongest assault upon the imagination . BELL-1911-2,160.37

It was the sense of having reached those regions which saw the founding
of imperial Islâm , regions which remained for many centuries the seat
of the paramount ruler , the Commander of the Faithful .
BELL-1911-2,160.38

Within the compass of a two-@ @days' journey lay the battlefield of
Kâdisîyah , where Khâlid ibn u'l Walîd overthrew at once and for ever
the Sassanian power . BELL-1911-2,160.39

Chosroes with his hosts , his satraps , his Arab allies - those princes
of the house of Mundhîr whose capital was one of the first cradles of
Arab culture - stepped back at his coming into the shadowy past ;
BELL-1911-2,160.40

their cities and palaces faded and disappeared , Hîrah , Khawarnak ,
Ctesiphon , and many another of which the very site is forgotten ;
BELL-1911-2,160.41

all the pomp and valour of an earlier time fell together like an army of
dreams at the first trumpet-blast of those armies of the Faith which
hold the field until this hour . BELL-1911-2,160.42

Then came the day of vigour ; the adding of dominion to dominion ; the
building of great Mohammadan towns , Kûfah , Wâsit , Basrah , and last
of all Baghdâd , last and greatest . And then decline , and finally the
transference of authority . BELL-1911-2,160.43

This was the story that was unfolded before me as I stood upon the roof
of a Persian house and gazed down into the gorgeously tiled courtyard of
the mosque of Hussein , in which none but the Faithful may set foot .
BELL-1911-2,160.44

When I lifted my eyes and looked westward I saw the desert across which
the soldiers of the Prophet had come to batter down the old
civilizations ; BELL-1911-2,160.45

when I looked east I saw the road to Baghdâd , where their descendants
had cultivated <P_161> with no less renown , the arts of peace .
BELL-1911-2,161.46

The low sun shone upon the golden dome ; BELL-1911-2,161.47

the nesting storks held conversation from minaret to minaret , with much
clapping of beaks and shaking out of unruffled wings ;
BELL-1911-2,161.48

the Spirit of Islâm marched out of the wilderness BELL-1911-2,161.49

and seized the fruitful earth . BELL-1911-2,161.50

There were other lesser things which aroused a more personal if not a
keener interest . BELL-1911-2,161.51

The oranges were good at Kerbelâ , as Fattûh had said .
BELL-1911-2,161.52

The shops were heaped with them and with pale sweet lemons :
BELL-1911-2,161.53

I fear I must have astonished my military escort , BELL-1911-2,161.54

for I stopped at every corner to buy more and yet more ,
BELL-1911-2,161.55

and ate them as I went along the streets , hoping to satisfy the
inextinguishable thirst born of the desert . BELL-1911-2,161.56

Side by side with the oranges lay mountains of pink roses , the flowers
cut off short and piled together ; BELL-1911-2,161.57

every one in the town carried a handful of them BELL-1911-2,161.58

and sniffed at them as he walked . BELL-1911-2,161.59

After night had fallen I was invited to a bountiful Persian dinner ,
where we feasted on lamb stuffed with pistachios , and drank sherbet out
of deep wooden spoons . BELL-1911-2,161.60

And there I heard some talk of politics . BELL-1911-2,161.61

Under the best of circumstances , said one of my informants ,
constitutional government was not likely to be popular in the province
of 'Irâk . BELL-1911-2,161.62

Men of property were all reactionary at heart . BELL-1911-2,161.63

They had got together their wealth by force and oppression ;
BELL-1911-2,161.64

their title-deeds would not bear critical examination ,
BELL-1911-2,161.65

and they resented the curiosity and the comments of the newly-fledged
local press . BELL-1911-2,161.66

Nor were the majority of the officials better inclined -
BELL-1911-2,161.67

how was it possible ? BELL-1911-2,161.68

To forbid corruption , unless the order were accompanied by a rise in
salary corresponding to the perquisites of which they were deprived
<paren> and this was forbidden by the state of the imperial exchequer
<$$paren> meant for them starvation . BELL-1911-2,161.69

A judge , for example , is appointed for two_and_a_half years
BELL-1911-2,161.70

and his salary is 15 +LT {TEXT:+LT15} {COM:presumably_Turkish_lira} a
month , not enough to keep himself and his family in circumstances which
would accord with his position . BELL-1911-2,161.71

But over and above the expenses of living he must see to the provision
of a sum sufficient to engage the sympathies of his superiors when his
appointment shall have expired ; BELL-1911-2,161.72

otherwise he might abandon the hope of further employment .
BELL-1911-2,161.73

Most probably he would <P_162> have to defray the heavy charges of a
journey to Constantinople , to enable him to push his claim , not to
speak of the fact that he might spend several unsalaried months in the
capital before his request was granted . BELL-1911-2,162.74

" And so it is that out of ten men , eleven take bribes , and , as far
as we can see , nothing has come of the constitution but the black fez "
<paren> this because of the boycott on the red fez , made in Austria
<$$paren> , " free speech and two towers , one at Kerbelâ and one at
Nejef , to commemorate the age of liberty . " BELL-1911-2,162.75

Under the new regime Kerbelâ had received a mutesarrif whose story was a
good example of the mistakes which men were apt to commit when first the
old restraints were relaxed . BELL-1911-2,162.76

He was of the Ahrar , the Liberals , BELL-1911-2,162.77

and had begun his career as secretary to the Vâlî of Baghdâd .
BELL-1911-2,162.78

The people of Baghdâd raised a complaint against him , on the ground
that in the fast month of Ramadan he had been seen to smoke a cigarette
in the bazaar between sunrise and sunset , which showed clearly that he
was an infidel , BELL-1911-2,162.79

and he was dismissed from his post ; BELL-1911-2,162.80

but since he was one of the Ahrâr and had friends in Constantinople , he
was presently appointed to Kerbelâ . BELL-1911-2,162.81

Now Kerbelâ , being a holy place inhabited mostly by Persian Shi'ahs ,
is one of the most fanatical cities in the Ottoman Empire ,
BELL-1911-2,162.82

and a mutesarrif who brought with him so unfortunate a reputation could
do nothing that was right . BELL-1911-2,162.83

Some of his reforms were in themselves reasonable , BELL-1911-2,162.84

but he was not the man to initiate them , BELL-1911-2,162.85

nor was Kerbelâ the best field for experiments . BELL-1911-2,162.86

The town , owing to blind extortion on the part of the government and to
neglect of the irrigation system , is growing rapidly poorer
BELL-1911-2,162.87

and yields an ever diminishing revenue . BELL-1911-2,162.88

This revenue is burdened by a number of pensions , BELL-1911-2,162.89

and the mutesarrif , looking for a way of retrenchment , found it by
depriving all pensioners of their means of livelihood .
BELL-1911-2,162.90

The pensioners were holy men , sayyids , whose duty it was to pray for
the welfare of the Sultan . BELL-1911-2,162.91

Some were old BELL-1911-2,162.92

and some were deserving , BELL-1911-2,162.93

some were neither , BELL-1911-2,162.94

but all were holy , BELL-1911-2,162.95

and the feelings that were aroused in Kerbelâ when they were left
destitute baffle description . BELL-1911-2,162.96

" Yet , " continued my host , " the Turks understand government .
BELL-1911-2,162.97

<P_163>

There was once in Basrah an excellent governor ; BELL-1911-2,163.99

his name was Hamdî Bey . BELL-1911-2,163.100

When he came to Basrah it was the worst city in Turkey ;
BELL-1911-2,163.101

every night there were murders , BELL-1911-2,163.102

and no one dared to leave his house after dark lest when he returned he
should find that he had been robbed of all he possessed . "
BELL-1911-2,163.103

" So it is now in Basrah , " said I , BELL-1911-2,163.104

for the town is a by-word in Mesopotamia . BELL-1911-2,163.105

" Yes , so it is now , " he returned , BELL-1911-2,163.106

" but it was different when Hamdî Bey was governor .
BELL-1911-2,163.107

For a year he sat quiet BELL-1911-2,163.108

and collected information concerning all the villains in the place ;
BELL-1911-2,163.109

but he did nothing . BELL-1911-2,163.110

Now there was at that time a harmless madman in Basrah whom the people
called Hajjî Beidâ , the White Pilgrim ; BELL-1911-2,163.111

and when they saw Hamdî Bey driving through the streets , they would
point at him and laugh , saying : ' There goes Hajjî Beidâ . '
BELL-1911-2,163.112

But at the end of a year he assembled all the chief men
BELL-1911-2,163.113

and said : ' Hitherto you have called me Hajjî Beidâ ;
BELL-1911-2,163.114

now you shall call me Hajjî Kara , the Black Pilgrim . '
BELL-1911-2,163.115

And then and there he cast most of them into prison BELL-1911-2,163.116

and produced his evidence against them . BELL-1911-2,163.117

And after a year's time the town was so peaceful that he ordered the
citizens to leave their doors open at night ; BELL-1911-2,163.118

and as long as Hamdî Bey remained at Basrah no man troubled to lock his
door . BELL-1911-2,163.119

And at another time there was a Commandant in Basrah ,
BELL-1911-2,163.120

and he too brought the place to order . BELL-1911-2,163.121

For when he knew a prisoner to be guilty , yet failed to get the
witnesses to speak against him , he would put the man to death in prison
by means of a hot iron which he drove into his stomach through a tube .
BELL-1911-2,163.122

Then it was given out that the man had died of an illness ,
BELL-1911-2,163.123

and every one rejoiced that there should be a rogue the less . "
BELL-1911-2,163.124

I made no comment , BELL-1911-2,163.125

but my expression must have betrayed me , BELL-1911-2,163.126

for my interlocutor added a justification of the commandant's methods .
BELL-1911-2,163.127

" In Persia , " said he , " they bury them alive . "
BELL-1911-2,163.128

" My soldiers have told me , " said I , not to be outdone , " that in
Persia they cut off a thief's hand , BELL-1911-2,163.129

and I think they regard it as the proper sentence , BELL-1911-2,163.130

for they generally add : ' That is hukm , justice . ' "
BELL-1911-2,163.131

<P_164>

" It is the sherî'ah , " he replied simply , " the holy law , "
BELL-1911-2,164.133

and he recited the passage from the Kuran : BELL-1911-2,164.134

" If a man or woman steal , cut off their hands in retribution for that
which they have done ; BELL-1911-2,164.135

this is an exemplary punishment appointed by God , BELL-1911-2,164.136

and God is mighty and wise . " BELL-1911-2,164.137

I had intended to go straight from Kerbelâ to Babylon ,
BELL-1911-2,164.138

but I was reckoning without full knowledge of the Hindîyeh swamp .
BELL-1911-2,164.139

The history of this swamp is both curious and instructive .
BELL-1911-2,164.140

A few miles above the village of Museiyib , north-east of Kerbelâ , the
Euphrates divides into two channels . BELL-1911-2,164.141

The eastern channel , the true bed of the river , runs past Babylon and
Hilleh BELL-1911-2,164.142

and discharges its waters into the great swamp which has existed in
southern 'Irak ever since the last days of the Sassanian kings .
BELL-1911-2,164.143

The western channel is known as the Nahr Hindîyeh ; BELL-1911-2,164.144

it waters Kûfah , now a miserable hamlet clustered about the great
mosque in which the khalif 'Alî was assassinated , BELL-1911-2,164.145

and flowing through the great swamp re-enters the Euphrates some way
above the junction of the latter with the Tigris . BELL-1911-2,164.146

The dam on the Euphrates which regulated the flowing of its waters into
the Hindîyeh canal has been allowed to fall into disrepair ;
BELL-1911-2,164.147

every year a deeper and a stronger stream flows down the Hindîyeh ,
BELL-1911-2,164.148

and matters have reached such a pass that during the season of low water
the eastern bed is dry , the palm gardens of Hilleh are dying for lack
of irrigation , and all the country along the river-bank below Hilleh
has gone out of cultivation . BELL-1911-2,164.149

The growth of the Hindîyeh has proved scarcely less disastrous .
BELL-1911-2,164.150

<P_165>

The district to the west of the canal , in which Kerbelâ lies , is lower
than the level of the stream , while the increasing torrents , bringing
with them the silt of the spring floods , yearly raise the bed of the
canal and add to the difficulty of keeping it within bounds .
BELL-1911-2,165.152

The Hindîyeh has become an ever-present danger to the town of Kerbelâ ,
BELL-1911-2,165.153

and indeed in one year , when the stream was unusually high , the water
flowed into the streets . BELL-1911-2,165.154

It was the duty of the owners of the land , a duty prescribed by
immemorial custom , to keep up the dykes , in order to save the
cultivated country , and incidentally the town , from inundation .
BELL-1911-2,165.155

Needless to say they neglected to do so . BELL-1911-2,165.156

A large part of the land - and here the story takes a very Oriental turn
- had been bought up by a rich Mohammadan who proposed to do a good
office by the holy city and to take the charge of the dykes upon himself
. BELL-1911-2,165.157

But as the canal silted up the charge became heavier , until at last the
pious benefactor wearied of his task and refused to do another hand's
turn in the matter . BELL-1911-2,165.158

Thereupon the mutesarrif sent for him BELL-1911-2,165.159

and ordered him to perform his lawful duty . BELL-1911-2,165.160

But the landowner was an Indian and a British subject
BELL-1911-2,165.161

<paren> at this point I realized that I had come once more into the net
of our vast empire <$$paren> BELL-1911-2,165.162

and he refused to be bullied by a Turkish official .
BELL-1911-2,165.163

He pointed out that the floods were largely due to the negligence of the
Arab tribes , who draw from the Hindîyeh ten times as much water as they
need and let it go to waste upon the land , where it helps to form the
redoubted swamp ; BELL-1911-2,165.164

and since , said he , the swamp was caused not by the will of God , but
by the conduct of the Sultan's subjects , the government would do well
to remedy the evil by applying to the dykes the forced labour which it
has the right to exact from every man during four days in the year .
BELL-1911-2,165.165

The mutesarrif replied that the Indian had not cultivated his land for
four years and that it was therefore forfeit to the State ;
BELL-1911-2,165.166

the Indian countered him with the rejoinder that the land had been under
pasture and had paid a regular tithe . BELL-1911-2,165.167

So the matter stood in the <P_166> spring of 1909 ; BELL-1911-2,166.168

the town of Kerbelâ might at any time be flooded if the river rose ,
BELL-1911-2,166.169

the Hindîyeh swamp was growing day by day , BELL-1911-2,166.170

and the road to Babylon was impassable . BELL-1911-2,166.171

No one seemed to regard these perils and inconveniences as otherwise
than inevitable , BELL-1911-2,166.172

and I with the rest bowed my head to the inscrutable decrees of God
BELL-1911-2,166.173

and took my way to Museiyib . BELL-1911-2,166.174

Museiyib , as I have said , lies on the Euphrates above the point where
the Hindîyeh canal branches off from the river . BELL-1911-2,166.175

For the last half of the day's journey we skirted the swamp .
BELL-1911-2,166.176

It was in reality much more than a swamp : BELL-1911-2,166.177

it was a shallow lake extending over a vast area . BELL-1911-2,166.178

It had invaded even the Museiyib road , which is the direct road from
Kerbelâ to Baghdâd , BELL-1911-2,166.179

and we , together with all other travellers , had to make a long détour
through the desert . BELL-1911-2,166.180

The other travellers were mainly Persian pilgrims , men , women and
children riding on mules in panniers . BELL-1911-2,166.181

It is the ardent wish of every pious Persian to make the pilgrimage to
Kerbelâ once during his lifetime , BELL-1911-2,166.182

and still more does he desire to make it once again after his death ,
that his body may lie in earth hallowed by the vicinity of Hussein's
grave . BELL-1911-2,166.183

Countless caravans of corpses journey yearly from Persia to Kerbelâ ,
BELL-1911-2,166.184

and the living should bear in mind that the khâns of the towns are
insalubrious , to say the least , owing to the fact that they are packed
with dead bodies awaiting their final burial . BELL-1911-2,166.185

The close connection between Kerbelâ and Persia has been during recent
years of considerable political significance . BELL-1911-2,166.186

The large Persian community , rich , influential and safely placed under
the protection of the Turkish government , has more than once tendered
advice to the struggling factions of its native country ,
BELL-1911-2,166.187

and more than once the advice has been in the nature of a command .
BELL-1911-2,166.188

The European is not accustomed to think of the Ottoman Empire as a haven
of refuge for the oppressed , BELL-1911-2,166.189

but the Persian , comparing Turkish administration with his own ,
regards it as an unattainable standard of tranquillity and equity .
BELL-1911-2,166.190

Turkey must be judged by Asiatic , not by European , possibilities of
achievement , BELL-1911-2,166.191

and I tried to keep my thoughts fixed upon the pilgrims jogging sadly
home to <P_167> their intolerable anarchy ; BELL-1911-2,167.192

but it was difficult not to notice the bands of peasants who came wading
through the shallow waters of the Hindîyeh floods , their fields
submerged , their crops devastated , their houses reduced to mud-heaps
and their possessions scattered over the swamp . BELL-1911-2,167.193

Six hours from Kerbelâ we reached the Euphrates , a river much smaller
than the one we had left at Hît , since a great part of its waters had
been drawn off into irrigation canals . BELL-1911-2,167.194

To my amazement it was provided with a practicable bridge of boats , by
which we crossed , glorifying the works of man . BELL-1911-2,167.195

It was the first , and I may add the only bridge over the Euphrates that
I was privileged to see . BELL-1911-2,167.196

We pitched camp on the further side just beyond the village of Museiyib
. BELL-1911-2,167.197

On the following day we turned southwards to Babylon .
BELL-1911-2,167.198

For two hours we continued to do battle with the waters , not , however
, with untamed floods , but with the almost equally obtrusive irrigation
canals and runnels which the industrious fellah conducts in all
directions across his fields , regardless of road and path and of the
time and temper of the wayfarer . BELL-1911-2,167.199

At length we reached the high road from Baghdâd to Hilleh , beyond the
belt of cultivation , BELL-1911-2,167.200

and made the rest of the stage dry-footed . BELL-1911-2,167.201

We crossed the Nasrîyeh canal by a bridge near a ruined khân ,
BELL-1911-2,167.202

and five hours from Museiyib we came to the village of Mahawîl on a
canal of the same name , also bridged . BELL-1911-2,167.203

There I lunched under palm-trees - BELL-1911-2,167.204

there are no other trees in these regions - BELL-1911-2,167.205

and so rode on , catching up the caravan and crossing many another canal
, now dry , now bringing water to villages far to the east of us .
BELL-1911-2,167.206

It was a very barren world , scarred with the traces of former
cultivation , and all the more poverty-stricken and desolate because it
had once been rich and peopled ; flat , too , an interminable ,
featureless expanse from which the glory had departed .
BELL-1911-2,167.207

I was almost immersed in the rather jejune reflections which must assail
every one who approaches Babylon , when , as good-luck would have it , I
turned my eyes to the south and perceived , on the edge of the arid ,
sun-drenched plain , a mighty mound . BELL-1911-2,167.208

There was no need to ask its name ; BELL-1911-2,167.209

as certainly as if temple and fortress wall still crowned its summit I
knew it to be <P_168> Bâbil , the northern mound that retains on the
lips of the Arabs the echo of its ancient title . BELL-1911-2,168.210

I left the road , hoping to find a direct path across the plain to that
great vestige of ancient splendours , BELL-1911-2,168.211

but the deep cutting of a water-course , as dry and dead as Babylon
itself , barred the way . BELL-1911-2,168.212

My mare climbed to the top of the high bank that edged it
BELL-1911-2,168.213

and we stood gazing over the site of the city . BELL-1911-2,168.214

A furtive jackal crept out along the bank , BELL-1911-2,168.215

caught sight of Fattûh BELL-1911-2,168.216

and fled back into the dry ditch . BELL-1911-2,168.217

" The son of retreat , " said Fattûh in the speech of the people .
BELL-1911-2,168.218

" Chakâl , " said I , searching dimly for some familiar swell of
sonorous phrases which the word seemed to bring with it .
BELL-1911-2,168.219

And suddenly they rolled out over the formless thought :
BELL-1911-2,168.220

" The wolves howl in their palaces and the jackals in the pleasant
places . " BELL-1911-2,168.221

For the past twelve years a little group of German excavators has lived
and worked among the mounds of Babylon . BELL-1911-2,168.222

To them I went , in full assurance of the hospitality which they extend
to all comers . BELL-1911-2,168.223

The traveller who enters their house , sheltered by palm-trees , on the
banks of the Euphrates , will find it stored with the best fruits of
civilization : studious activity , hard-won learning and that
open-handed kindness which abolishes distinctions of race and country .
BELL-1911-2,168.224

As he watches the daily task of men who are recovering the long-buried
history of the past , he will not know how to divide his admiration
between the almost incredible labour entailed by their researches and
the marvellous culture which their work has laid bare .
BELL-1911-2,168.225

" Only to the wise is wisdom given , and knowledge to them that have
understanding . " BELL-1911-2,168.226

Within the largest of the mounds , the Kasr , or castle , as the Arabs
call it , lie the remains of Nebuchadnezzar's palace .
BELL-1911-2,168.227

Another eight or ten years' work will be needed to complete the ground
plan of the whole structure , BELL-1911-2,168.228

but enough has been done to show the nature of the house wherein the
king rested . BELL-1911-2,168.229

It is built of square tiles , stamped with his name and bound together
with asphalt . BELL-1911-2,168.230

The part which has been excavated consists of an immense irregular area
enclosed by thick walls . BELL-1911-2,168.231

<P_169>

One of these <paren> it forms the quay of a canal <$$paren> is called by
the workmen " the father of twenty-two , " <font> i.e. <$$font> it is
twenty-two metres across ; BELL-1911-2,169.233

another reaches the respectable width of seventeen metres ,
BELL-1911-2,169.234

but usually the royal builder was content with five or six metres , or
even less . BELL-1911-2,169.235

Within the enclosure lies a bewildering complexity of small courts and
passages with chambers leading out of them - the more bewildering
because in many cases the bricks have disappeared , and the walls must
be traced by means of the spaces left behind . BELL-1911-2,169.236

For more than a_thousand years after the fall of Babylon no man building
in its neighbourhood was at the pains to construct brick-kilns ,
BELL-1911-2,169.237

but when he needed material he sought it in Nebuchadnezzar's city .
BELL-1911-2,169.238

Greek , Persian and Arab used it as a quarry , BELL-1911-2,169.239

and as you climb the stairs of the German house you will become aware of
the characters that spell the king's name upon the steps beneath your
feet . BELL-1911-2,169.240

The small courts and chambers , which were no doubt occupied by retinues
of officials and servants of the palace , formed a bulwark of defence
for the king . BELL-1911-2,169.241

His apartments lay behind a wide paved court . BELL-1911-2,169.242

From the court a doorway leads into a large oblong chamber , in the back
wall of which is a niche for the throne . BELL-1911-2,169.243

This is believed to be the banqueting hall where Belshazzar made his
feast , BELL-1911-2,169.244

and on a fragment of wall facing the throne you may see , if you please
, the fingers of a man's hand writing the fatal message .
BELL-1911-2,169.245

How this hall was roofed is an unsolved problem . BELL-1911-2,169.246

No traces of vaulting have been found , BELL-1911-2,169.247

yet the width from wall to wall is so great that it is doubtful whether
it could have been covered by a roof of beams . BELL-1911-2,169.248

If there were indeed a vault it would be the earliest example of such
construction on so big a scale . BELL-1911-2,169.249

Behind the banqueting hall are the private chambers , and behind all a
narrow passage leading to an emergency exit , by means of which the king
could escape to his boat on the Euphrates in the last extremity of
danger . BELL-1911-2,169.250

Nebuchadnezzar's father , Nabopolassar , had built himself a smaller ,
but still very considerable , dwelling which occupied the western side
of the mound . BELL-1911-2,169.251

This Nebuchadnezzar destroyed ; BELL-1911-2,169.252

he filled up the walls and chambers with rubble <P_170> and masonry
BELL-1911-2,170.253

and laid out an extension of his own palace above it .
BELL-1911-2,170.254

The plan both of the upper and of the lower palace has now been
ascertained . BELL-1911-2,170.255

Above the Babylonian walls are the remains of Greek and Parthian
settlements , each of which has to be carefully planned before it can be
swept away and the lower strata studied . BELL-1911-2,170.256

I saw work being carried on in a mound which formed one of the most
ancient parts of the city ; BELL-1911-2,170.257

the excavation pits had been sunk twelve or fifteen metres deep to
dwelling-houses of the first Babylonian Empire . BELL-1911-2,170.258

They passed through the periods of the Parthian and of the Greek ,
through the age of Nebuchadnezzar and that of the Assyrians ,
BELL-1911-2,170.259

and each stratum was levelled and planned before the next could be
revealed . BELL-1911-2,170.260

Add to this that the most ancient walls were constructed of sun-dried
brick , scarcely distinguishable from the closely-packed earth ,
BELL-1911-2,170.261

and some idea can be obtained of the extreme difficulty of the work .
BELL-1911-2,170.262

The oldest Babylonian houses which have been uncovered rest themselves
on rubbish-heaps and ruins , BELL-1911-2,170.263

but deeper digging is impossible owing to the fact that water-level has
been reached . BELL-1911-2,170.264

The Euphrates channel has silted up several metres during the last
six_thousand years BELL-1911-2,170.265

and the primaeval dwellings are now below it . BELL-1911-2,170.266

While we were standing at the bottom of a deep pit , a workman struck
out with his pick a little heap of ornaments , a couple of copper
bracelets and the beads of a necklace which had been worn by some
Babylonian woman in the third millennium before Christ and were restored
at last to the light of the sun . BELL-1911-2,170.267

The northern part of the palace mound is as yet almost untouched .
BELL-1911-2,170.268

Here can be seen a sculptured block which used to lie among the
earth-heaps until a French engineer built a pedestal for it and set it
up above the ruins <paren> Fig. 104 <$$paren> . BELL-1911-2,170.269

It is carved in the shape of a colossal lion standing above the body of
a man who lies with arms uplifted . BELL-1911-2,170.270

The man's head is broken away BELL-1911-2,170.271

and the whole group is only half finished , BELL-1911-2,170.272

but the huge beast with the helpless human figure beneath his feet could
not have been given an aspect more sinister . BELL-1911-2,170.273

It is as though the workmen of the Great King had fashioned an image of
Destiny , treading relentlessly over the generations <P_171> of mankind
, before they too passed into its clutches . BELL-1911-2,171.274

All along the east side of the palace stretches the Via Sacra ,
contracting at one point only its splendid width that it may pass
through the gate that stands midway between the house of Nebuchadnezzar
and the temple of the goddess Ishtar . BELL-1911-2,171.275

The Ishtar gate - its name is attested by a cuneiform inscription - is
the most magnificent fragment that remains of all Nebuchadnezzar's
constructions . BELL-1911-2,171.276

Four or five times did he fill up the Via Sacra and raise its level ,
BELL-1911-2,171.277

and each time he built up the brick towers of the double gateway to
correspond . BELL-1911-2,171.278

The various levels of the pavements can now be seen on the sides of the
excavation trench , while the towers , completely disclosed , rear their
unbroken height in stupendous masses of solid masonry .
BELL-1911-2,171.279

They are decorated on every side with alternate rows of bulls and
dragons cast in relief on the brick ; BELL-1911-2,171.280

the noble strength of the bulls , stepping out firmly with arched neck ,
contrasts with the slender ferocious grace of the dragons ,
BELL-1911-2,171.281

and the two companies form a bodyguard worthy of the gate of kings and
of gods <paren> Figs. 105 and 106 <$$paren> . BELL-1911-2,171.282

Along the walls of the Via Sacra marched a procession of lions ,
fragments of which have been found and pieced together .
BELL-1911-2,171.283

They , too , were in relief , but covered with a fine enamel in which
the colours were laid side by side without the intermission of cloissons
. BELL-1911-2,171.284

This art of enamelling is lost , BELL-1911-2,171.285

and no modern workman has been able to imitate the lion frieze .
BELL-1911-2,171.286

On the east side of the gate stands the little temple of Ishtar raised
on a high platform and commanding the city below . BELL-1911-2,171.287

The temple is built of sun-baked brick , probably in accordance with
hieratic tradition , which held to the ancient building material used in
an age when the architects were unacquainted with the finer and more
durable burnt brick . BELL-1911-2,171.288

Small courts with side chambers lead into an inner holy of holies ,
where in a niche stood the symbol or effigy of the goddess .
BELL-1911-2,171.289

Behind the sanctuary there is a narrow blind passage where the priests
could lurk behind the cult image and confound the common folk with
mysterious sounds and hidden voices . BELL-1911-2,171.290

The Via Sacra pursues from the gate its stately way , skirting along the
edge of an immense open court <P_172> that lay between the palace and
the temple of the god Marduk , the patron divinity of Babylon .
BELL-1911-2,172.291

The mound in which the temple lies has not as yet been completely
excavated , BELL-1911-2,172.292

but a pit sunk in its centre has laid bare the walls of the entrance
court . BELL-1911-2,172.293

It will be no easy matter to continue the work here .
BELL-1911-2,172.294

The mound was thickly inhabited during the Greek and Parthian periods ,
BELL-1911-2,172.295

and its upper levels consist chiefly of refuse-heaps .
BELL-1911-2,172.296

When the workmen cut down through them to reach the temple gate , the
stench of the old rubbish-heaps , combined with the stifling heat of the
pit , was so intolerable that their labours had to be interrupted for
several days until a breeze arose and made it possible to continue them
. BELL-1911-2,172.297

The excavations are carried on all through the summer heats ,
BELL-1911-2,172.298

but the director , Professor Koldewey , was at the time of my visit
paying a penalty for his tireless energy . BELL-1911-2,172.299

He had been ill for some months owing to his exertions during the
previous summer , BELL-1911-2,172.300

and to my permanent loss I was unable to see him . BELL-1911-2,172.301

I retain notwithstanding the most delightful memory of the days at
Babylon , of the peace and the dignified simplicity of life in the house
by the river , of the little garden in the courtyard where Badri Bey ,
the delegate from the Constantinople museum , coaxed his roses into
flower and his radishes into red and succulent root ; of long and
pleasant conversations with Mr. Buddensieg and Mr. Wetzel , wherein
they poured out for me their knowledge of the forgotten things of the
past ; of quiet hours with books which they brought for me out of their
library - BELL-1911-2,172.302

and books were a luxury from which I had been cut off since I left
Aleppo . BELL-1911-2,172.303

When I rode out of an afternoon one of the zaptiehs of Babylon was
detailed to accompany me . BELL-1911-2,172.304

He knew the ruin-field well , having been the fortunate occupier of a
post at the Expeditionshaus for several years . BELL-1911-2,172.305

I would find him waiting in the palm-grove where my horses were stabled
, alert , respectful and less ragged than his brothers in arms whose pay
does not come to them through the hands of European excavators .
BELL-1911-2,172.306

One day I asked him to take me to the Greek theatre , wondering a little
whether he would understand the request . BELL-1911-2,172.307

" Effendim , " he said , " you mean the place of Alexander . "
BELL-1911-2,172.308

<P_173>

The great name fell strangely among the palm-trees , BELL-1911-2,173.310

and from out of the horde of ghosts that people Babylon strode the
Conqueror at the end of his course . BELL-1911-2,173.311

So we rode to the place of Alexander , the theatre near the city wall ,
ruined almost beyond recognition , but preserving in the popular
nomenclature the memory of the most brilliant figure in the history of
the world . BELL-1911-2,173.312

And once the clouds gathered as we were riding through the palm-groves
by the river . BELL-1911-2,173.313

" Praise God ! " said the zaptieh , BELL-1911-2,173.314

" maybe we shall have rain . " BELL-1911-2,173.315

He shouted the good tidings to a peasant who drove the oxen of a
water-wheel : BELL-1911-2,173.316

" Oh brother , rain , please God ! " BELL-1911-2,173.317

But it was dust that was heralded by the darkness , BELL-1911-2,173.318

and as we hastened to the great mound of Bâbil the wind bore down upon
us BELL-1911-2,173.319

and the parched earth rose BELL-1911-2,173.320

and enveloped us . BELL-1911-2,173.321

We left our horses standing with downcast heads under the lee of the
mound BELL-1911-2,173.322

and picked our way up the sides between the trial trenches of the
excavators . BELL-1911-2,173.323

In a few moments the dust-storm swept past , BELL-1911-2,173.324

and we saw the wide expanse that was Babylon , embraced by gleaming
reaches of river and the circuit of mound and ditch which marks the line
of the city wall . BELL-1911-2,173.325

" Effendim , " said the zaptieh , " yonder is Birs Nimrûd , "
BELL-1911-2,173.326

and he pointed to the south-west , where , in the heart of the desert ,
rose the huge outline of a temple pyramid , a zigurrat .
BELL-1911-2,173.327

Legend has given it a notable place in the story of our first
forefathers : BELL-1911-2,173.328

it was believed to be no other than the impious tower that witnessed the
confusion of speech . BELL-1911-2,173.329

I heard at Babylon some hint of the state of unrest , bordering on
revolution , into which the province of 'Irak had fallen .
BELL-1911-2,173.330

The German excavators had been sucked into the outer edges of the
whirlpool . BELL-1911-2,173.331

Their workpeople , drawn from different tribes <paren> they had
relinquished nomad life , but the tribal system still held good among
them <$$paren> , had caught the infection of hatred and turned from the
excavation pits to the settling of ancient scores - so effectually that
many a score had been settled for ever , and the debtor came back to his
place in the trench no more . BELL-1911-2,173.332

Most of the survivors had been clapped into gaol by a justly incensed
civil authority , BELL-1911-2,173.333

and what with death and the <P_174> serving out of sentences , Professor
Koldewey and his colleagues had suffered from a scarcity of labour .
BELL-1911-2,174.334

This was nothing , as I was to learn at Baghdâd , to the confusion that
reigned in other parts of 'Irak , BELL-1911-2,174.335

and it was fortunate that I had no intention of going south from Babylon
; BELL-1911-2,174.336

at that time it would have been impossible . BELL-1911-2,174.337

On the way to Baghdâd I was resolved to visit Ctesiphon ,
BELL-1911-2,174.338

but we were obliged to follow , during the first day's journey , the
Baghdâd road , re-traversing for some hours the line of our march from
Museiyib . BELL-1911-2,174.339

Ever since we had left Kebeisah the temperature had been exceedingly
high , BELL-1911-2,174.340

and from Babylon to Baghdâd we travelled through a heat wave very
unusual at the beginning of April . BELL-1911-2,174.341

The early morning was cool and pleasant , BELL-1911-2,174.342

but by about ten o'clock the scorching sun became almost unbearable ,
even for people so well inured to heat as my servants and I .
BELL-1911-2,174.343

As long as we were moving , it was tempered by the breath of our
progress , BELL-1911-2,174.344

but if we stood still it burnt through our clothes like a flame .
BELL-1911-2,174.345

There was not a leaf or any green thing upon the plain ,
BELL-1911-2,174.346

and the only diversion in a monotonous ride was caused by a peasant who
caught us up with lamentations and laid hold of my stirrup .
BELL-1911-2,174.347

" Effendim ! " he cried , " you have soldiers with you ;
BELL-1911-2,174.348

bid them do justice on the man who stole my cow . " BELL-1911-2,174.349

" Where is the man ? " said I in bewilderment . BELL-1911-2,174.350

" He is here , " he answered , weeping more loudly than before , " but a
quarter of an hour back upon the road . BELL-1911-2,174.351

An Arab he is ; BELL-1911-2,174.352

and while I was driving my cow to Museiyib , he came out of the waste
BELL-1911-2,174.353

and took her from me , threatening me with his rifle . "
BELL-1911-2,174.354

" The effendi has nought to do with your cow , " said one of the
zaptiehs impatiently - BELL-1911-2,174.355

and indeed the sun withered us as we stood . BELL-1911-2,174.356

" Go tell the Kâdî at Museiyib . " BELL-1911-2,174.357

" How shall I get justice from the Kâdî ? " wailed the peasant .
BELL-1911-2,174.358

" I have no money . " BELL-1911-2,174.359

The rejoinder struck me as correct , BELL-1911-2,174.360

and I sent one of the zaptiehs back with the lawful owner of the cow ,
telling him to catch the thief if he were still upon the road and I
would give a reward . BELL-1911-2,174.361

The zaptieh re-joined us while we were lunching <P_175> at the khân of
Hasua , BELL-1911-2,175.362

but he had not seen the cow , nor yet the thief , BELL-1911-2,175.363

and perhaps it was unreasonable to expect that the latter should keep to
the high road with stolen goods trotting before him .
BELL-1911-2,175.364

The khân at Hasua is large and built on the Persian plan for Persian
pilgrims . BELL-1911-2,175.365

We ate our lunch in the shadow of its gateway , BELL-1911-2,175.366

and when we came out the sun struck us in the face like a sword .
BELL-1911-2,175.367

There was nothing to be done but to try and forget it ;
BELL-1911-2,175.368

I summoned Fattûh BELL-1911-2,175.369

and drew him into conversation . BELL-1911-2,175.370

" Oh Fattûh , " said I , " is there any justice in the land of the
Ottomans ? " BELL-1911-2,175.371

" Effendim , " replied Fattûh cautiously , " there is justice
BELL-1911-2,175.372

and there is injustice , as in other lands . BELL-1911-2,175.373

Have I not told you of Rejef Pasha and the thief who stole from me 28
+LT {TEXT:+LT28} ? " BELL-1911-2,175.374

" No , " said I , settling myself expectantly in the saddle .
BELL-1911-2,175.375

" It happened one year that I was in Baghdâd , " Fattûh began ,
BELL-1911-2,175.376

" for your Excellency knows that I drive the gentry back and forth
between Aleppo and Baghdad in my carriage , BELL-1911-2,175.377

and so it is that I am often in Baghdâd . " BELL-1911-2,175.378

" I know , " said I . BELL-1911-2,175.379

" Once you sent me some blue and red belts embroidered with gold that
you had bought in the bazaars . " BELL-1911-2,175.380

" It is true , " said Fattûh . BELL-1911-2,175.381

" One I gave to Zekîyeh , BELL-1911-2,175.382

and the others I sent by the post for you and for their Excellencies
your sisters . BELL-1911-2,175.383

Please God they rejoiced to have them ? " he inquired anxiously .
BELL-1911-2,175.384

" They rejoiced exceedingly , " I assured him for the fiftieth time ;
BELL-1911-2,175.385

a present that has to be sent by the post is no small thing ,
BELL-1911-2,175.386

and it would be matter for consternation if it did not please .
BELL-1911-2,175.387

" But what of Rejef Pasha ? " BELL-1911-2,175.388

" Rejef Pasha was Mushîr of Baghdad , " BELL-1911-2,175.389

Fattuh picked up his tale . BELL-1911-2,175.390

" And God knows he was a just man . BELL-1911-2,175.391

Now I had sold my carriage to one who needed it and gave me 28 +LT
{TEXT:+LT28} for it , which was a good price , BELL-1911-2,175.392

for it was old . BELL-1911-2,175.393

And as I was walking in the bazaars a thief stole the money from me ,
BELL-1911-2,175.394

and when I put my hand into my pocket , lo , it was empty . "
BELL-1911-2,175.395

" Wah , wah ! " commiserated the zaptieh . BELL-1911-2,175.396

" Eh yes , " said Fattûh . BELL-1911-2,175.397

" Twenty-eight Ottoman pounds . BELL-1911-2,175.398

<P_176>

Now I had heard men speak of Rejef Pasha that he was famed for justice ,
BELL-1911-2,176.400

and I went to him where he sat in the serâyah BELL-1911-2,176.401

and said : Effendim , I am a man of Aleppo , a stranger in Baghdad ;
BELL-1911-2,176.402

and a thief has stolen from me 28 +LT {TEXT:+LT28} .
BELL-1911-2,176.403

And there are many here who can speak for me . ' BELL-1911-2,176.404

Then Rejef Pasha sent into the bazaars BELL-1911-2,176.405

and all the thieves he arrested . " BELL-1911-2,176.406

" Did he know them all ? " I asked . BELL-1911-2,176.407

" Without doubt , " replied Fattuh . BELL-1911-2,176.408

" He was Mushîr . BELL-1911-2,176.409

And some he questioned BELL-1911-2,176.410

and let them go , BELL-1911-2,176.411

and others he caused to be beaten upon the soles of their feet with rods
, BELL-1911-2,176.412

and them too he released , until only three men remained , and then only
one . BELL-1911-2,176.413

And Rejef Pasha said : ' This is the thief . ' BELL-1911-2,176.414

Then they cast him upon the ground BELL-1911-2,176.415

and beat him many times , BELL-1911-2,176.416

and every time when they had beaten him till he could bear no more , he
cried out : ' Cease the beating , and I will give back the money . '
BELL-1911-2,176.417

But when they ceased he said he had not so much as a mejîdeh .
BELL-1911-2,176.418

Then one of the soldiers caught him by the leg to throw him to the
ground , BELL-1911-2,176.419

and the man's garment tore in his hand , BELL-1911-2,176.420

and out of it fell 26 +LT {TEXT:+LT26} BELL-1911-2,176.421

and rolled upon the floor . BELL-1911-2,176.422

But two pounds he had eaten , " explained Fattuh . BELL-1911-2,176.423

" And Rejef Pasha cast him into prison . BELL-1911-2,176.424

And when I was next in Baghdad he was still in prison ,
BELL-1911-2,176.425

and I visited him BELL-1911-2,176.426

and lent him 1 +LT {TEXT:+LT1} BELL-1911-2,176.427

for he was very poor . BELL-1911-2,176.428

And we ate together . " BELL-1911-2,176.429

" Did you see him again ? " said I , deeply interested in this simple
history . BELL-1911-2,176.430

" Eh , wallah ! " replied Fattûh . BELL-1911-2,176.431

" I met him in Deir , BELL-1911-2,176.432

and there I feasted him in the bazaar . BELL-1911-2,176.433

And now he lives in Deir , BELL-1911-2,176.434

and I go to his house whenever I pass through the town ,
BELL-1911-2,176.435

for we are like brothers . BELL-1911-2,176.436

But he has not returned me the pound I lent him while he was in prison ,
" added Fattûh regretfully . BELL-1911-2,176.437

" Mâshallah ! " said the zaptieh . BELL-1911-2,176.438

" Rejef Pasha was a good man . " BELL-1911-2,176.439

" But I will tell you another tale of Rejef Pasha , better than the last
, " pursued Fattûh , drawing , with the perfect art of the narrator ,
upon yet choicer stores of his memory - BELL-1911-2,176.440

or was it of his imagination ? BELL-1911-2,176.441

" Effendim , I had a friend , BELL-1911-2,176.442

and he hired from me one of my carriages that he might drive a certain
daftardâr from Aleppo to Baghdâd . BELL-1911-2,176.443

Now at Ramâdî <P_177> the daftardâr spent two nights in the house of the
son of his uncle , BELL-1911-2,177.444

and when they reached Baghdâd the daftardâr searched in his box for the
gold ornaments of his wife , BELL-1911-2,177.445

and , look you , they were missing . BELL-1911-2,177.446

And they cost 60 +LT {TEXT:+LT60} . BELL-1911-2,177.447

Then the daftardâr said that the carriage driver had stolen them ,
BELL-1911-2,177.448

and he caused him to be imprisoned for a period of three years .
BELL-1911-2,177.449

And soon after , I came to Baghdâd BELL-1911-2,177.450

and inquired concerning my carriage ; BELL-1911-2,177.451

and a man in the bazaar told me that which had befallen ,
BELL-1911-2,177.452

but I did not believe that my friend had stolen the gold ornaments of
the daftardâr's wife . BELL-1911-2,177.453

And the man in the bazaar said : ' You are his friend ,
BELL-1911-2,177.454

and moreover you are a walad melih , a good lad , BELL-1911-2,177.455

and he has a wife and two little children in Aleppo .
BELL-1911-2,177.456

You will not let him starve in prison . ' BELL-1911-2,177.457

And when I heard him call me a walad melîh and thought upon the children
in Aleppo , I went away BELL-1911-2,177.458

and sold my two carriages for 60 +LT {TEXT:+LT60} , BELL-1911-2,177.459

and set my friend free . BELL-1911-2,177.460

And then , " Fattûh continued his gratifying reminiscences , " I went to
a scribe in the bazaar BELL-1911-2,177.461

and gave him half a mejîdeh . BELL-1911-2,177.462

And your Excellency knows that a scribe charges one piastre .
BELL-1911-2,177.463

And I said : ' Take this half mejîdeh BELL-1911-2,177.464

and write a letter to Rejef Pasha that shall be worthy to be sent to the
Sultan BELL-1911-2,177.465

and explain to him the whole matter . ' BELL-1911-2,177.466

So the scribe wrote the letter , BELL-1911-2,177.467

and I took it to the serayah . BELL-1911-2,177.468

Then Rejef Pasha called me before him , BELL-1911-2,177.469

for he had not forgotten me , nor the 28 +LT {TEXT:+LT28} that were
stolen by the thief . BELL-1911-2,177.470

And he said : ' My son , do not fear . BELL-1911-2,177.471

I will get back your money if I have to pay from the treasury of our
Lord the Sultan . ' BELL-1911-2,177.472

And he sent for the daftardâr BELL-1911-2,177.473

and rebuked him for committing a man to prison without evidence ,
BELL-1911-2,177.474

for he said that without doubt the gold ornaments had been stolen at
Ramâdî . BELL-1911-2,177.475

And the daftardâr paid me back 60 +LT {TEXT:+LT60} .
BELL-1911-2,177.476

Never was there a pasha like Rejef Pasha , " concluded Fattûh .
BELL-1911-2,177.477

" He feared none but God . BELL-1911-2,177.478

God give him peace - BELL-1911-2,177.479

he died a year ago . " BELL-1911-2,177.480

Late in the afternoon we came to Mahmûdîyeh . BELL-1911-2,177.481

The baggage got in half an hour {TEXT:half-an-hour} afterwards ,
BELL-1911-2,177.482

and found me established in the upper room of a khân which Jûsef had
noted down as he passed through on his way to Kerbelâ as " the very
place for our effendi . " BELL-1911-2,177.483

The room was cooler than a <P_178> tent , BELL-1911-2,178.484

and to sit in the shade and drink tea seemed to me to be the
consummation of earthly happiness . BELL-1911-2,178.485

My lodging opened on to a flat roof on which I dined , and realized that
the more intolerably blasting the day , the more perfect was the soft
and delicate night . BELL-1911-2,178.486

The khânjî , when he heard that we were bound for Ctesiphon , declared
that the Tigris was in flood and the road under water .
BELL-1911-2,178.487

We stood aghast , seeing a second enemy flow into the field just as we
had circumvented the first , BELL-1911-2,178.488

but a Kurdish zaptieh <paren> his name was 'Abdu'l Kadir <$$paren>
stepped up with a smart salute BELL-1911-2,178.489

and bade us take courage , BELL-1911-2,178.490

for he would lead us to Ctesiphon . BELL-1911-2,178.491

He was as good as his word ; BELL-1911-2,178.492

there was , in fact , no water on the road . BELL-1911-2,178.493

We reached the mounds of Seleucia in three hours , BELL-1911-2,178.494

and in another half-hour camped by the Tigris under the ruined wall of
the Greek city . BELL-1911-2,178.495

The Tigris , where we came to it , was a mighty stream and a
well-conducted . BELL-1911-2,178.496

It flowed solemnly between its low banks , which it did not attempt to
overstep , in spite of the fact that the snows were beginning to melt in
the Kurdish hills and the river was in flood . BELL-1911-2,178.497

A belt of cultivation ran like a narrow green ribbon beside it ,
intersected by a network of irrigation canals which were fed by a
regiment of jirds along the bank . BELL-1911-2,178.498

The whole area of Seleucia was covered with corn , BELL-1911-2,178.499

but half-@ @a-@ @mile inland the relentless desert resumed its rule ,
BELL-1911-2,178.500

for the crops that had been sown beyond the irrigation streams , in
expectation of the usual sprinkling of winter rain , had never sprouted
. BELL-1911-2,178.501

Out of the cornfields rose the mounds of Seleucia , the capital of the
Seleucid empire , which for two_hundred years after the death of
Alexander embraced Mesopotamia , North Syria and a varying part of Asia
Minor . BELL-1911-2,178.502

Of all cities in Turkey , Seleucia is perhaps the one which would yield
most to the spade of the excavator . BELL-1911-2,178.503

The Greek civilization of the Diadochi has given up few of its secrets
in any of the regions where the generals of Alexander cut their empires
out of the fruits of his victories , BELL-1911-2,178.504

but in Mesopotamia we are completely ignorant of what the Greek conquest
may have meant in the history of architecture and the lesser arts .
BELL-1911-2,178.505

We know only that at the end of the period of Greek rule the arts
emerged profoundly <P_179> modified , and thus modified governed the
late antique and the early Christian world . BELL-1911-2,179.506

I had no sooner appointed a camping-ground than I embarked on the broad
waters of the Tigris in a basket . BELL-1911-2,179.507

The craft that navigate that river are known in Arabic as guffahs ,
BELL-1911-2,179.508

but I have applied to them the correct English word <paren> Fig. 110
<$$paren> . BELL-1911-2,179.509

They are round with an incurving lip , like any other basket , made of
plaited withes and pitched without and within to keep them water-tight .
BELL-1911-2,179.510

Their size and the pitch alone differentiate them from their fellows in
the European market , BELL-1911-2,179.511

and I readily admit that when first you are invited to cross a deep and
rapid stream in a guffah you feel a shadow of reluctance .
BELL-1911-2,179.512

But for all their unpromising appearance they are stout and trustworthy
vessels , BELL-1911-2,179.513

and when you have crossed once , you and your zaptieh and your mares all
in the same guffah , and accustomed yourself to its peculiar mode of
progression , you come to feel a justifiable confidence in it .
BELL-1911-2,179.514

The guffah can@ @not make headway against stream ; BELL-1911-2,179.515

it must be pulled up the river to a distance considerably above the
point you design to touch on the opposite bank - BELL-1911-2,179.516

the two guffahjîs push off , BELL-1911-2,179.517

the basket spins upon its axis , BELL-1911-2,179.518

and so spinning advances , on the principle of the moon's advance across
space , or , for that matter , of the earth's ; BELL-1911-2,179.519

the guffahjîs paddle with a genteel nonchalance , first on one side and
then on the other , BELL-1911-2,179.520

and at the end of all you reach your goal . BELL-1911-2,179.521

My goal was Ctesiphon <paren> Fig. 107 <$$paren> . BELL-1911-2,179.522

The huge fragment of the palace , which is all that remains of the
Sassanian capital , successor and heir to Seleucia , lies about half-@
@a-@ @mile from the river on the edge of a reed-grown marsh .
BELL-1911-2,179.523

No more of it is standing than the central vaulted hall <paren> and here
half the vault has fallen <$$paren> and the east wall of one of the
wings <paren> Fig. 108 <$$paren> . BELL-1911-2,179.524

The second wing has disappeared , BELL-1911-2,179.525

and nothing is left of the rooms on either side of the hall <paren> Fig.
109 <$$paren> . BELL-1911-2,179.526

Even in this condition Ctesiphon is the most remarkable of all known
<P_180> Sassanian buildings and one of the most imposing ruins in the
world . BELL-1911-2,180.527

The great curtain of wall , the face of the right wing , rises stark and
gaunt out of the desert , bearing upon its surface a shallow decoration
of niches and engaged columns which is the final word in the Asiatic
treatment of wall spaces , the end of the long history of artistic
endeavour which began with the Babylonians and was quickened into fresh
vigour by the Greeks . BELL-1911-2,180.528

Tradition has it that the whole wall was covered with precious metals .
BELL-1911-2,180.529

The gigantic vault , built over empty space without the use of centering
beams , is one of the most stupendous creations of any age .
BELL-1911-2,180.530

It spans 25.80 metres : BELL-1911-2,180.531

the barrel vaults of the basilica of Maxentius in the Roman Forum span
23.50 metres ; BELL-1911-2,180.532

the barrel vault that covered the aula of Domitian's palace on the
Palatine spanned 30.40 metres , BELL-1911-2,180.533

but it has fallen . BELL-1911-2,180.534

The Roman vaults were built over centering beams , not over space on the
Mesopotamian system , BELL-1911-2,180.535

and the latter , what with the appeal which it makes to the imagination
and the high ovoid curve which it involves , gives a result incomparably
more impressive . BELL-1911-2,180.536

In this hall Chosroes held his court . BELL-1911-2,180.537

It must have lain open to the rising sun , BELL-1911-2,180.538

or perhaps the entrance was sheltered by a curtain which hung from the
top of the vault down to the floor . BELL-1911-2,180.539

The Arab historian , Tabarî , gives an account of a carpet seventy
cubits long and sixty cubits broad which formed part of the booty when
the Mohammadans sacked the city . BELL-1911-2,180.540

It was woven into the likeness of a garden ; BELL-1911-2,180.541

the ground was worked in gold and the paths in silver ;
BELL-1911-2,180.542

the meadows were of emeralds and the streams of pearls ; the trees ,
flowers and fruits of diamonds and other precious stones .
BELL-1911-2,180.543

Such a texture as this may have been drawn aside to reveal the Great
King seated in state in his hall of audience , with the light of
a_thousand lamps , suspended from the roof , catching his jewelled tiara
, his sword and girdle , illuminating the hangings on the walls and the
robes and trappings of the army of courtiers who stood round the throne
. BELL-1911-2,180.544

The pages of the historian who relates the Mohammadan conquest of
Ctesiphon ring still with the triumph of that victory .
BELL-1911-2,180.545

The Sassanian capital comprised both the old Greek <P_181> foundation on
the west bank of the river and the later Persian town with its palaces
on the east bank . BELL-1911-2,181.546

Sa'd ibn abi Wakkâs , the leader of the army of Islâm , had little to
fear from the last of the Sassanian kings , Yazdegird , a boy of
twenty-one , BELL-1911-2,181.547

and having entered the western city <paren> known to the Arabs as
Bahurasîr <$$paren> without striking a blow , he assembled his troops
BELL-1911-2,181.548

and , Kurân in hand , pointed to the fulfilment of prophecy :
BELL-1911-2,181.549

" Did ye not swear aforetime that ye would never pass away ?
BELL-1911-2,181.550

Yet ye inhabited the dwellings of a people that had dealt unjustly by
their own souls , BELL-1911-2,181.551

and ye saw how we dealt with them . BELL-1911-2,181.552

We made them a warning and an example to you . " BELL-1911-2,181.553

" And when the Moslems entered Bahurasîr , and that was in the middle of
the night , the White Palace flashed upon them . BELL-1911-2,181.554

Then said Dirâr ibn u'l Khattâb : ' God is great ! BELL-1911-2,181.555

the White Palace of Chosroes ! BELL-1911-2,181.556

This is what God and his Prophet promised . ' " BELL-1911-2,181.557

But the fording of the Tigris was a serious matter , BELL-1911-2,181.558

and some days passed before Sa'd announced to the army that he had
resolved to make the venture . BELL-1911-2,181.559

" And all of them cried : ' God has resolved on the right path for us
and for thee ; BELL-1911-2,181.560

act thou . ' BELL-1911-2,181.561

And Sa'd urged the people to the ford BELL-1911-2,181.562

and said : Who will lead , and guard for us the head of the ford that
the people may follow him ? BELL-1911-2,181.563

And 'Âsim ibn 'Amr came forward and after him six_hundred men .
BELL-1911-2,181.564

And he said : ' Who will go with me and guard the head of the passage
<P_182> that the people may ford ? ' BELL-1911-2,182.565

And there came forward sixty . BELL-1911-2,182.566

And when the Persians saw what they did , they plunged into the Tigris
against them BELL-1911-2,182.567

and swam their horses towards them . BELL-1911-2,182.568

And 'Âsim they met in the forefront , BELL-1911-2,182.569

for he had neared the head of the ford . BELL-1911-2,182.570

Then said 'Âsim : ' The spears ! the spears ! BELL-1911-2,182.571

aim them at their eyes . ' BELL-1911-2,182.572

And they joined in contest BELL-1911-2,182.573

and the Moslems aimed at their eyes BELL-1911-2,182.574

and they turned back towards the bank . BELL-1911-2,182.575

And the Moslems urged on their horses against them BELL-1911-2,182.576

and caught them on the bank BELL-1911-2,182.577

and killed the greater part of them ; BELL-1911-2,182.578

and he who escaped , escaped one_eyed . BELL-1911-2,182.579

And their horses trembled under them until they broke from the ford .
BELL-1911-2,182.580

And when Sa'd saw 'Asim at the head of the ford he said : ' Say : We
call upon the Lord BELL-1911-2,182.581

and in Him we put our trust BELL-1911-2,182.582

and excellent is the Entrusted ; BELL-1911-2,182.583

there is no power nor strength but in God , the Exalted , the Almighty .
' BELL-1911-2,182.584

And when Sa'd entered Madâin and saw it deserted , he came to the hall
of Chosroes BELL-1911-2,182.585

and began to read : ' How many gardens and fountains have they left
behind , cornfields and fair dwellings and delights which were theirs ;
BELL-1911-2,182.586

thus we dispossessed them thereof BELL-1911-2,182.587

and gave their possession for an inheritance unto another people . '
BELL-1911-2,182.588

And he repeated the opening prayer BELL-1911-2,182.589

and made eight prostrations . BELL-1911-2,182.590

And he chose the hall for a mosque ; BELL-1911-2,182.591

and in it were effigies in plaster of men and horses BELL-1911-2,182.592

and they heeded them not BELL-1911-2,182.593

but left them as they were , though the Mohammadans do not so .
BELL-1911-2,182.594

And we entered Madâin BELL-1911-2,182.595

and came to domed chambers filled with baskets ; BELL-1911-2,182.596

and we thought them to be food , BELL-1911-2,182.597

and lo , they were overflowing with gold and silver .
BELL-1911-2,182.598

And they were divided among the people . BELL-1911-2,182.599

And we found much camphor BELL-1911-2,182.600

and thought it to be salt , BELL-1911-2,182.601

and kneaded it into the bread , until we perceived the bitterness of it
in the bread . BELL-1911-2,182.602

And Zuhrah ibn u'l Hawiyeh went out with the vanguard
BELL-1911-2,182.603

and pursued the fugitives till he reached the bridge of Nahrwân ;
BELL-1911-2,182.604

and the fugitives crowded upon it BELL-1911-2,182.605

and a mule fell into the water , BELL-1911-2,182.606

and they struggled round it greedily . BELL-1911-2,182.607

And Zuhrah said : ' Verily , I believe , billah , that the mule bears
something precious . ' BELL-1911-2,182.608

And that which it bore was the regalia of Chosroes , his robes and his
strings of pearls , his girdle and his armour covered <P_183> with
jewels , in which he was wont to sit , vaingloriously attired . "
{COM:ellipsis} BELL-1911-2,183.609

In the grey dawn I returned to Ctesiphon . BELL-1911-2,183.610

The moon was setting in the west BELL-1911-2,183.611

and as we floated down the river the sun rose out of the east
BELL-1911-2,183.612

and struck the ruined hall of the palace . BELL-1911-2,183.613

" Allah , Allah " murmured ' Abdu'l Kâdir , moved to wonder as he
watched the vast walls , in their unmatched desolation , take on the
glory of another day . BELL-1911-2,183.614

We rode up to Baghdâd along the edge of the Tigris , BELL-1911-2,183.615

and as we went , Fattûh , who thought little of ruins except as a
divertisement for the gentry , dilated upon the splendours that we were
to witness . BELL-1911-2,183.616

Especially was he anxious that I should not fail to see the famous
cannon which stands near the arsenal , chained to the ground lest it
should fly away . BELL-1911-2,183.617

" For , " said Fattûh , " the people of Baghdad relate that in a certain
year there was a great battle at a distance of many days' journey .
BELL-1911-2,183.618

Now the soldiers of Baghdâd were giving way before the enemy when one
looked up and saw the cannon flying through the air to their help .
BELL-1911-2,183.619

And without the aid of hands it fired at the army of the foe
BELL-1911-2,183.620

and drove them back . BELL-1911-2,183.621

Then they brought the cannon back with them BELL-1911-2,183.622

and chained it by the arsenal , BELL-1911-2,183.623

for they prized it mightily . BELL-1911-2,183.624

So I have heard in Baghdâd . " BELL-1911-2,183.625

" And what do you think of the story ? " I asked . BELL-1911-2,183.626

" My lady , " said Fattûh with a fine show of contempt , " the people of
Baghdâd are very ignorant . BELL-1911-2,183.627

They will believe anything . BELL-1911-2,183.628

But we in Aleppo would laugh if we were told that a cannon had flown
through the air . " BELL-1911-2,183.629

Every few hundred yards we came upon the deep cutting of an irrigation
canal BELL-1911-2,183.630

and our road passed over it airily , borne on the most fragile of
bridges . BELL-1911-2,183.631

At first I could scarcely control my alarm as I saw rider and baggage
animals suspended above the gulf , BELL-1911-2,183.632

but the horses made light of it BELL-1911-2,183.633

and no one can keep up a fear that is unshared by his comrades .
BELL-1911-2,183.634

We were fortunate in finding all the bridges intact ,
BELL-1911-2,183.635

but our good luck deserted us in the middle of the day ,
BELL-1911-2,183.636

and when we came to Garârah , where we hoped to cross the Tigris by a
<P_184> bridge of boats , we found that the bridge had been swept away
and the keeper of the toll-house seemed surprised to learn that we had
expected it to stand firm in time of flood . BELL-1911-2,184.637

So we turned wearily round an immense bend of the Tigris
BELL-1911-2,184.638

and entered Baghdâd by the Hilleh road <paren> Fig. 111 <$$paren> .
BELL-1911-2,184.639

Here the pontoon bridge had been mercifully spared ; BELL-1911-2,184.640

it was crowded with folk , BELL-1911-2,184.641

and as we pushed our way slowly across it I had time to offer up a short
thanksgiving for the first stage of a journey successfully accomplished
, new roads traversed , unvisited sites explored , another web of
delightful experiences woven and laid by . BELL-1911-2,184.642

At the end of the bridge we found ourselves in the bazaars
BELL-1911-2,184.643

and made our way to the British Residency . BELL-1911-2,184.644

It is a pleasant thing to be English and to see the Sikh guard leap to
the salute at the gateway of that place by the Tigris which is our
much-@ @envied Consulate_General . BELL-1911-2,184.645

My thanksgiving must certainly have broken into a hymn of praise when I
found that the hospitable Resident and his wife were expecting my
arrival and had prepared for me a room almost as spacious as the hall of
Chosroes . BELL-1911-2,184.646

At Baghdâd I learnt that the rumours of a revolt which had reached
Babylon fell far short of the truth . BELL-1911-2,184.647

Two of the Tigris tribes were up in arms BELL-1911-2,184.648

and had effectually blocked all communication with Basra and the Persian
Gulf . BELL-1911-2,184.649

They were holding up five steamers at Amârah , together with a couple of
gunboats , which had been sent down to clear the channel , and over
two_thousand soldiers . BELL-1911-2,184.650

Among the passengers was Sir William Willcocks , who was at that time
engaged on the irrigation survey , BELL-1911-2,184.651

and the disturbance had therefore become a matter of grave concern to
the Resident and to all others who had the interests of Turkey at heart
. BELL-1911-2,184.652

During the few days which I spent in Baghdâd , I saw many people
BELL-1911-2,184.653

and heard much talk concerning the state of affairs that prevailed in
the delta , BELL-1911-2,184.654

and I came to the conclusion that the government were garnering the ripe
fruit both of their inaction and of their action . BELL-1911-2,184.655

On the one hand , the Arab tribes had been allowed to reach an alarming
excess of insubordination . BELL-1911-2,184.656

For three years the boats of the Turkish and the Lynch Company had been
exposed to perpetual danger of attack , BELL-1911-2,184.657

and in 1908 one of the steamers of the Lynch <P_185> Company had been
fired upon BELL-1911-2,185.658

and several persons had been killed or wounded . BELL-1911-2,185.659

Nevertheless no attempt has been made to bring the sheikhs to justice .
BELL-1911-2,185.660

In remoter districts , even where the land was under cultivation , the
fiction of established government had been for all practical purposes
abandoned . BELL-1911-2,185.661

Where the tax-gatherers still ventured to put in an appearance they were
bribed by the Arabs , BELL-1911-2,185.662

and little money flowed through their hands into the imperial treasury ,
while not infrequently they did not dare to breathe the name of taxes .
BELL-1911-2,185.663

" The very shepherds are armed with rifles , " said one ,
BELL-1911-2,185.664

" and if I were to ask them to pay the aghnâm , the sheep tax , they
would raise their guns to their shoulders , saying : ' Take the aghnâm .
' " BELL-1911-2,185.665

On the other hand , the authorities had sought to cover their weakness
by setting one sheikh against another and thus fostering disorder .
BELL-1911-2,185.666

