<BEGIN_benson-1908-1>

<P_32>

<heading>

IV Teaching BENSON-1908-1,32.4

<$$heading>

As regards the art of teaching it is difficult to lay down rules ,
because every man must find out his own method . BENSON-1908-1,32.6

It is easy to say that the first requisite is patience ,
BENSON-1908-1,32.7

but the statement requires considerable modification .
BENSON-1908-1,32.8

A master must , of course , realise that a great many things are
perfectly clear to him which are not at all clear to the boys ,
BENSON-1908-1,32.9

but it is easy for a man of tranquil temperament to drift into a kind of
indulgent easiness , which ends in the boys making no effort whatever to
overcome difficulties for themselves . BENSON-1908-1,32.10

If a master accepts the statement too readily , " I could not make it
out , " and considers that a list of words written out is ample evidence
of the preparation of a lesson , there are a great many boys <P_33> who
will prepare a list of likely-looking words and take no further trouble
about a lesson . BENSON-1908-1,33.11

It is much better for a master to insist briskly that some kind of sense
should be made , though he must tactfully discriminate between the
industrious , muddled boy and the boy who is simply indolent .
BENSON-1908-1,33.12

Then , too , teaching should be crisp and clear and decided .
BENSON-1908-1,33.13

The greatest compliment ever paid to a teacher by a dull boy was when
the latter said that the books muddled him , because Hermann said that a
passage meant one thing , and Schneidewin said that it meant another ,
but that So-and-so told you what it really did mean .
BENSON-1908-1,33.14

I have known of excellent scholars who deprived their teaching of much
of its value by being too tentative , or even by having recourse to a
dictionary in public . BENSON-1908-1,33.15

It is better to be perfectly decisive , even if you may be occasionally
wrong . BENSON-1908-1,33.16

This principle would not , of course , apply to older or abler boys ,
BENSON-1908-1,33.17

nor <P_34> would it apply to private tuition with a smaller class .
BENSON-1908-1,34.18

But for boys of small capacity it is necessary , by some means or other
, to disabuse them of a not unnatural delusion , much encouraged by
commentators , that a writer in a foreign language might have meant
anything , and may be made to mean anything , by juggling with words .
BENSON-1908-1,34.19

It is certain that many boys , under our system of education , do not
understand that a writer has had a definite thought in his mind which he
is expressing in a natural way ; and that our difficulty in
understanding it arises from an absence of complete and instinctive
familiarity with the medium of expression . BENSON-1908-1,34.20

For such boys decisiveness is a pure gain . BENSON-1908-1,34.21

Moreover , in young and sharp boys there is often a strong vein of a
certain maliciousness ; BENSON-1908-1,34.22

and if they imagine that a teacher is imperfectly acquainted with his
subject , they are quite capable of expending their dexterity and energy
in framing apparently innocent questions , <P_35> with a view to
exposing , if possible , gaps in a teacher's knowledge .
BENSON-1908-1,35.23

With such boys decisiveness is a necessity . BENSON-1908-1,35.24

A school lesson should be of the nature , of a dramatic performance ,
from which some interest and amusement may be expected ; while at the
same time there must be solid and business-like work done .
BENSON-1908-1,35.25

Variety of every kind should be attempted ; BENSON-1908-1,35.26

the blackboard should be used , BENSON-1908-1,35.27

there should be some simple jesting , BENSON-1908-1,35.28

there should be some anecdote , some disquisition , and some allusion if
possible to current events , BENSON-1908-1,35.29

and the result should be that the boys should not only feel that they
have put away some definite knowledge under lock and key , but also that
they have been in contact with a lively and more mature mind .
BENSON-1908-1,35.30

Exactly in what proportion the cauldron should be mingled , and what its
precise ingredients should be , must be left to the taste and tact of
the teacher . BENSON-1908-1,35.31

A man must be quick to discern if the boys by apparently innocent
questions can <P_36> set him off in a discursive talk on things in
general , BENSON-1908-1,36.32

and he must also be quick to see when to unbend the bow .
BENSON-1908-1,36.33

The shield which is within the reach of every boy against the too
insistent demands of a teacher is absolute inattention , combined , by
practice , with a demure look and downcast eye , capable of deceiving
the most alert . BENSON-1908-1,36.34

I believe that there is a certain commercial instinct in most boys ,
which leads them to like to get good value for their money ;
BENSON-1908-1,36.35

and I have heard boys complain about an interesting teacher that they
never seemed to know the lesson after school was over .
BENSON-1908-1,36.36

It is hardly necessary here to go into all the various little dodges for
securing variety which will be useful to a teacher , BENSON-1908-1,36.37

but an instance or two may be given . BENSON-1908-1,36.38

The Greek irregular verbs are not a particularly refreshing form of
study , BENSON-1908-1,36.39

but by asking the various forms in quick succession , making the boys
score a mark if they get one right , and reading out the marks obtained
, a certain emulation is arrived at which at <P_37> all events makes a
boy anxious to get as many right as he can . BENSON-1908-1,37.40

Again , if it is desired that boys should master a difficult thing like
the Greek conditional sentence , after a lucid explanation various
illustrative sentences may be dictated , supplying the Greek words to be
used , and the boys required to do them then and there on paper , it
being stipulated that as soon as the whole division can do them rightly
you will turn to some less strenuous work , and not till then .
BENSON-1908-1,37.41

It is rewarding to see the intense zeal which the very slowest boys will
take under such circumstances to get the thing correct .
BENSON-1908-1,37.42

Some teachers deal largely in questions , BENSON-1908-1,37.43

but if the class is large it needs almost genius to keep question and
answer going with sufficient rapidity to ensure universal attention .
BENSON-1908-1,37.44

Moreover , if the requisite enthusiasm is invoked , it requires a good
deal of masterfulness to keep it within decorous bounds .
BENSON-1908-1,37.45

I myself believe that questioning should be more used in small <P_38>
classes , and that with a large class a form of lecturing , interspersed
with questions , is the more effective . BENSON-1908-1,38.46

But here again the idiosyncrasy of the man comes in ;
BENSON-1908-1,38.47

if a teacher has the gift of asking questions of a kind that stimulate
curiosity by their form , and make the answering them into a brisk
species of intellectual lawn-tennis , he is probably a very good teacher
. BENSON-1908-1,38.48

But few men will probably have sufficient mental agility - and what is
more , still fewer boys - BENSON-1908-1,38.49

and the result will be apt to be that the game will be played between
the master and a few boys of some mental rapidity , BENSON-1908-1,38.50

and the majority of the class will have but a faint idea of what is
going on . BENSON-1908-1,38.51

Some masters certainly attach an extravagant value to questions and
answers . BENSON-1908-1,38.52

It is recorded of an eminent headmaster that he insisted so strongly on
a general and simultaneous response being made to his questions that the
more torpid intellects used under cover of the intelligent replies of
the better informed boys to shout " Borrioboola-Gha ! " with an
appearance <P_39> of lively zeal . BENSON-1908-1,39.53

The system was exposed by the fact that a worthy boy , of some athletic
prominence , happened to fall asleep on a summer's day , and on waking
heard the headmaster's voice pause for a moment , and anxious to make up
for his brief period of unconsciousness , indulged in his usual cry with
very good will . BENSON-1908-1,39.54

But the headmaster had asked no question , BENSON-1908-1,39.55

and the lamentable syllables fell with appalling effect upon the quiet
air . BENSON-1908-1,39.56

He was instantly ordered from the room for gross insubordination ,
BENSON-1908-1,39.57

and was obliged in order to save the situation to give the happy
practice away . BENSON-1908-1,39.58

Of course it goes without saying that the liveliest teaching is spoiled
by any want of naturalness . BENSON-1908-1,39.59

The master should be , and should not be ashamed of showing himself to
be , generally interested in what is going on , and not be merely
bursting with superfluous information . BENSON-1908-1,39.60

To sit and be pumped into , as Carlyle said , speaking of Coleridge's
conversation , is never an exhilarating process . BENSON-1908-1,39.61

But naturalness , <P_40> like humility , is a virtue difficult of
cultivation , because the absence of self-consciousness is a necessary
condition of effectiveness . BENSON-1908-1,40.62

One form of affectation has I believe very bad results .
BENSON-1908-1,40.63

It is the custom of many teachers to speak as if all the authors whom
they were expounding were equally valuable and equally attractive .
BENSON-1908-1,40.64

I do not think that anything destroys the critical and appreciative
faculties in boys so quickly as this . BENSON-1908-1,40.65

I believe myself that it is good for a teacher to have strong prejudices
, just as Dr. Arnold's feeling for Livy partook , as his pupils said ,
of an almost personal animosity . BENSON-1908-1,40.66

I think that a master should be ready to say frankly what his candid
opinion of an author is , giving his reasons , and saying at the same
time that it is purely a matter of opinion . BENSON-1908-1,40.67

He should not be afraid of pointing out the extraordinary and vicious
coagulations to be found in Thucydides , the feeble fluencies of Ovid ,
the lapses from good taste in Horace , the sententiousness <P_41> of
Euripides ; BENSON-1908-1,41.68

and then when he freely and generously praises an heroic passage of
Homer , a pathetic line of Virgil , a piece of lively narrative by
Xenophon , the ringing crispness of Horace's stanzas , his words have
weight . BENSON-1908-1,41.69

Boys will see that there is such a thing as good style and bad style ,
BENSON-1908-1,41.70

will begin moreover , however feebly , to have preferences and to have a
reason for a preference . BENSON-1908-1,41.71

Of course it is of little use to get the boys to take hasty opinions on
trust , BENSON-1908-1,41.72

but if a master can get a boy into the habit of forming an opinion at
all , he has done valuable work . BENSON-1908-1,41.73

A conscientious master may say that everyone ought to admire Virgil ,
and not arouse any very definite enthusiasm . BENSON-1908-1,41.74

But a man who has delivered a brisk diatribe against the faults of style
perceptible in Thucydides on the previous day , will be heard with
attention and respect if he says of Virgil that he is accepted as one of
the great writers of the earth , and that if anyone finds that he can
see nothing to admire and <P_42> love in Virgil , it is probably he and
not Virgil that needs to be changed . BENSON-1908-1,42.75

" Like it , or dislike it , " said a vigorous teacher once to a class of
boys in my presence , BENSON-1908-1,42.76

" it does n't {COM:sic} matter twopence which you do ;
BENSON-1908-1,42.77

only do@ @n't say that you do@ @n't <font> care <$$font> . "
BENSON-1908-1,42.78

<P_43>

<heading>

V Work BENSON-1908-1,43.81

<$$heading>

The question of work is twofold . BENSON-1908-1,43.83

It must be considered <paren> 1 <$$paren> from the point of view of the
boy ; <paren> 2 <$$paren> from the point of view of the master .
BENSON-1908-1,43.84

<paren> 1 <$$paren> I believe very strongly in giving boys plain and
sensible reasons for the work that is required of them .
BENSON-1908-1,43.85

Idleness is not a vice of little boys as a rule . BENSON-1908-1,43.86

They have not begun to question the usefulness of particular kinds of
work , BENSON-1908-1,43.87

and they do not dislike occupation . BENSON-1908-1,43.88

If they are disposed to neglect their work , it will be generally found
that there is some strong counter-attraction ; BENSON-1908-1,43.89

and thus , among young boys , idleness is more likely to occur with boys
of a certain ability , with natural tastes of some kind to which they
sacrifice routine work . BENSON-1908-1,43.90

<P_44>

Therefore with small boys , when idleness occurs , it is better to make
work simply a matter of obedience . BENSON-1908-1,44.92

But as boys get older and begin to question the usefulness of certain
kinds of work , I have found it wise to tell them plainly that every boy
can@ @not be interested in all the work that he does , but that every
boy ought to be interested in doing his plain duty .
BENSON-1908-1,44.93

It can be pointed out that they will probably have work to do in the
world , and that the work will probably be to a great extent
uninteresting , and that it is advisable for everyone to cultivate the
habit of doing well and conscientiously whatever is demanded of him .
BENSON-1908-1,44.94

It is as well , I think , to say to a boy that this is the reason why
honest work is expected of him , and that this is a good reason for
doing it ; but that if it is not a sufficient reason , it will be
necessary to fall back on the simple though not so intelligent reason ,
that it is at all events a master's business to require it .
BENSON-1908-1,44.95

A master ought , moreover , <P_45> to spare the boys as far as possible
all unnecessary trouble , and to say that he intends to do so , and that
he expects in return that the boys will do conscientiously whatever
common sense demands . BENSON-1908-1,45.96

I can only say that I have found these reasons appreciated by boys and
the results satisfactory . BENSON-1908-1,45.97

On the other hand a good many boys are not at all averse to real mental
effort ; BENSON-1908-1,45.98

and a master's business is to try and see that there <font> is <$$font>
mental effort , and not to be contented with mere mechanical copying .
BENSON-1908-1,45.99

One detail which may be mentioned here is the question of repetition
lessons . BENSON-1908-1,45.100

It presents a great difficulty - because it is work which gives little
trouble to some boys who have a good verbal memory , and is an infinite
and weary labour to others . BENSON-1908-1,45.101

I am inclined to think that classical repetition lessons are a mistake
except for boys of definite classical ability ; BENSON-1908-1,45.102

if they are an inevitable part of the curriculum , then the trouble
should <P_46> be lightened as far as possible by allowing slower boys to
say their lesson from a written translation ; BENSON-1908-1,46.103

but better still , I think , is the use of English poetry , which
develops the memory easily . BENSON-1908-1,46.104

Very few boys dislike learning English , BENSON-1908-1,46.105

and it is a great advantage to give boys a good repertory of English
poetry . BENSON-1908-1,46.106

The classical repetition lessons do not remain in the mind ,
BENSON-1908-1,46.107

and thus do not , I think , justify the reason which is often given for
their retention - that the practice increases a boy's vocabulary .
BENSON-1908-1,46.108

<paren> 2 <$$paren> Then comes the question of the work from the
master's point of view . BENSON-1908-1,46.109

There is a wise saying that nine-tenths of the noble work done in the
world is drudgery , which is often misused as if it meant that
nine-tenths of the drudgery done in the world is noble work .
BENSON-1908-1,46.110

This has no semblance of truth in it . BENSON-1908-1,46.111

It is of course a question for headmasters , BENSON-1908-1,46.112

but I believe myself that the absolute drudgery inseparable from
teaching should be reduced to a minimum . BENSON-1908-1,46.113

Indeed I will go <P_47> further and say that I believe that it is the
positive duty of a master to save himself as far as possible from
unnecessary drudgery . BENSON-1908-1,47.114

Of course the principle could be used sophistically ,
BENSON-1908-1,47.115

but I am writing for conscientious men , BENSON-1908-1,47.116

and I believe that there is a great deal of Pharisaism in the matter .
BENSON-1908-1,47.117

I have known masters who have so immersed themselves in the laborious
correction of exercises that they have not only lost all freshness of
mind and spirit , but have sacrificed all possibility of reading and
enlarging their own minds to a kind of dull self-satisfaction in the
amount of hours spent over correction of exercises which really was of
no benefit to the boys . BENSON-1908-1,47.118

The boy must of course have his mistakes pointed out to him ,
BENSON-1908-1,47.119

he must feel that his work is vigilantly reviewed ; BENSON-1908-1,47.120

but the moment that a master , from a sense of duty , luxuriates in
corrections which do not benefit the boy , that moment the master is
ceasing to do his duty . BENSON-1908-1,47.121

Of <P_48> course one does not mean that a master should gain time for
amusement or physical exercise by neglecting his duty .
BENSON-1908-1,48.122

But no system which tends to bring a master in mountains of unproductive
work is a good system . BENSON-1908-1,48.123

For instance , it is the way in many schools to let the boys do a
written exercise in school , for the master to take it away , and then
perhaps some days after to return the exercise underlined and to go
through it . BENSON-1908-1,48.124

Now this is deliberately sacrificing one of the most active intellectual
processes of the boyish mind . BENSON-1908-1,48.125

Almost all boys who have been doing a piece of work , say Latin prose or
translation , have a kind of anxiety at the time as to what their
mistakes have been , how the passage should be turned , and so forth .
BENSON-1908-1,48.126

While the thing is hot in their minds they would really like to know how
it should be done ; BENSON-1908-1,48.127

but the lapse of a few hours entirely chills their interest
BENSON-1908-1,48.128

and obliterates their memory of what they have found difficult .
BENSON-1908-1,48.129

<P_49>

I believe that a few minutes should always be spent at the end of such a
lesson by the master in going through the piece and requiring the boys
as far as possible to understand their own mistakes .
BENSON-1908-1,49.131

He should even say that the mark a boy gets will depend to a certain
extent upon how far they have detected their own mistakes .
BENSON-1908-1,49.132

Then he should review the exercise , if possible , with the boy beside
him . BENSON-1908-1,49.133

It is not a gain of time upon the other system , BENSON-1908-1,49.134

but it is immensely more valuable , BENSON-1908-1,49.135

and a master moreover who cares about his art has the knowledge that the
boys are personally interested in the work - BENSON-1908-1,49.136

and one never grudges time spent in work where the boy is actively
interested ; BENSON-1908-1,49.137

what one does grudge is the work which is weariness to the master and
unprofitable for the boy . BENSON-1908-1,49.138

Of course there must be drudgery , BENSON-1908-1,49.139

and the drudgery is bound to be great . BENSON-1908-1,49.140

Many masters know that a little bit of writing work is of infinite
relief in the middle of a construing lesson ; BENSON-1908-1,49.141

to have a few <P_50> lines written out by the boys is like requiring all
of them to construe a passage , BENSON-1908-1,50.142

but a hard-worked master will often avoid it because of the labour
involved in looking over the passage afterwards . BENSON-1908-1,50.143

My own belief is that such a passage need only be cursorily inspected ,
just to see that no boy has shirked the task . BENSON-1908-1,50.144

And I believe that we should be content to do a good deal more written
work in this rough way , and that we should find the results very
valuable . BENSON-1908-1,50.145

The other practice , that of being obliged to scrutinise all the boys'
written work with minute care , is , I believe , a survival from the
time when the boys in public schools did one or two written exercises in
a week , which were made as perfect as possible ; BENSON-1908-1,50.146

and I believe that still one exercise should be treated in that way , in
as literary a fashion as possible , to give boys what Dr. Hawtrey used
to call " the sweet pride of authorship , " but that a great deal more
should be done roughly and easily . BENSON-1908-1,50.147

<P_51>

A very great headmaster , who produced more good scholars than , perhaps
, any other teacher , used , I believe , to be singularly careless in
looking over his exercises . BENSON-1908-1,51.149

Huge bundles used to accumulate on his study table ;
BENSON-1908-1,51.150

he would send for a boy , take out an exercise at random , and give him
half an hour of splendid teaching . BENSON-1908-1,51.151

Many exercises were not looked over at all , BENSON-1908-1,51.152

but the boy had had the practice in doing them , whereas if the
headmaster had felt obliged to scrutinise every exercise conscientiously
he could only have given the boy a minute or two at the most of rapid
indication of mistakes . BENSON-1908-1,51.153

After all , the improvement of the mental capacity of the boys is the
object , an object which many conscientious teachers are apt to forget
in the dreary satisfaction of performing mechanical duties , as they
would say , " in the great Taskmaster's eye . " BENSON-1908-1,51.154

Again , I am a great believer in the value of note-taking for boys .
BENSON-1908-1,51.155

It helps <P_52> them to see the point , to record it rapidly ,
BENSON-1908-1,52.156

and moreover it acts as a little anchor to the restless mind , which
otherwise voyages about in very different waters ; BENSON-1908-1,52.157

and finally it just relieves that slight physical restlessness which is
apt to beset boys when sitting for an hour or so without anything
particular to do but to listen . BENSON-1908-1,52.158

Yet many masters are deterred from encouraging the practice simply
because of the enormous toil it imposes upon them if they make any
attempt to look over the notes . BENSON-1908-1,52.159

But it is quite possible to take a few note-books at a time , dip for
specimens , and write a little criticism of an encouraging nature , if
possible , for the boys' satisfaction . BENSON-1908-1,52.160

Moreover , it is much more interesting work than most exercises ,
because the master really gets a peep into a boy's mind .
BENSON-1908-1,52.161

The conclusion is that it is not a self-indulgence , but a plain duty ,
for masters to keep themselves fresh and active-minded ;
BENSON-1908-1,52.162

and the spirit in which a man <P_53> allows himself to be carried
helplessly down in a stream of mechanical duties is not only not
praiseworthy , but highly reprehensible . BENSON-1908-1,53.163

<P_54>

<heading>

VI Intellect BENSON-1908-1,54.166

<$$heading>

It must be frankly admitted that the intellectual standard maintained at
the English public schools is low ; BENSON-1908-1,54.168

and what is more serious , I do not see any evidence that it is tending
to become higher . BENSON-1908-1,54.169

The subject of athletics will be treated separately ,
BENSON-1908-1,54.170

but I will here say that I have no desire to attack the system of
organised athletics . BENSON-1908-1,54.171

Indeed , the system has great and obvious merits ; BENSON-1908-1,54.172

but what I plead for is the co-ordination of interests .
BENSON-1908-1,54.173

I honestly believe that the masters of public schools have two strong
ambitions - to make the boys good and to make them healthy ;
BENSON-1908-1,54.174

but I do not think that they care about making them intellectual ;
BENSON-1908-1,54.175

intellectual life is left to take care of itself . BENSON-1908-1,54.176

My belief is that a great many <P_55> masters look upon the boys' work
as a question of duty - BENSON-1908-1,55.177

that is , they consider it from the moral standpoint , and not from the
intellectual . BENSON-1908-1,55.178

Of course , the public schools must reflect to a certain extent the
tendencies of the nation ; BENSON-1908-1,55.179

and the nation is certainly not preoccupied with intellectual interests
. BENSON-1908-1,55.180

The nation appears to me to be mainly preoccupied with two ambitions :
success , which in many cases is identical with wealth ; and manly
conduct , which is a combination of aptitude for outdoor exercises with
the practice of wholesome virtues . BENSON-1908-1,55.181

To put it in academical terms , the national ideal seems to be a mixture
of the Hebraistic and the Spartan systems - national prosperity , with a
certain standard of right conduct , and physical prowess .
BENSON-1908-1,55.182

It seems to me that the Athenian ideal - that of strong intellectual
capacity - is left out of sight altogether . BENSON-1908-1,55.183

I do not deny that right conduct , national prosperity , and physical
well-being are great conveniences , BENSON-1908-1,55.184

but I do not see why intellectual <P_56> strength should not take its
place side by side with the others ; BENSON-1908-1,56.185

and if anywhere , it is in the public schools of the country that the
standard ought to be maintained . BENSON-1908-1,56.186

I believe that we have condescended far too much to the boy's ideal of
life . BENSON-1908-1,56.187

The boy's ideal is to be successful and to be strong ,
BENSON-1908-1,56.188

and accordingly that is what he is primarily encouraged to be , so long
as he is virtuous . BENSON-1908-1,56.189

So far removed is the intellectual ideal from the mind of the ordinary
man that it is difficult even to write of it without being misunderstood
. BENSON-1908-1,56.190

It is understood to be a kind of mixture of priggishness and pedantry ;
BENSON-1908-1,56.191

it is confused with learning ; BENSON-1908-1,56.192

it is supposed that the intellectual man is the kind of man who always
wants to talk about books . BENSON-1908-1,56.193

The current view about intellectual powers was admirably summed up by a
friend of mine , who said , speaking of a clever woman , " What I like
about her is that though she is such a clever woman , she does not allow
it to make her disagreeable . " BENSON-1908-1,56.194

The truth is <P_57> that where an atmosphere is not intellectual , it
needs a certain priggishness , or a certain consciousness of high aim
and worth , to talk resolutely on subjects in which others are frankly
not interested . BENSON-1908-1,57.195

The aim ought not to be to turn every one into a literary personage .
BENSON-1908-1,57.196

Literature is only one province of the intellectual life .
BENSON-1908-1,57.197

But what should be aimed at is that people should have interests , views
, subjects ; that indoor life should not be a series of tedious hours to
be beguiled with billiards or bridge , or with anticipations or
recollections of open-air amusements . BENSON-1908-1,57.198

My idea of an intellectual person is one whose mind is alive to ideas ;
who is interested in politics , religion , science , history ,
literature ; who knows enough to wish to know more , and to listen if he
can@ @not talk ; a person who is not at the mercy of a new book , a
leading article , or the chatter of an irresponsible outsider ; a person
who is not insular , provincial , narrow-minded , contemptuous .
BENSON-1908-1,57.199

My own belief is that a good many <P_58> young boys have the germ of
intellectual life in them , but that in many cases it dies a natural
death from mere inanition . BENSON-1908-1,58.200

They find themselves in a society like a public school , where their
path in life is clearly indicated and where public feeling is very
urgent and very precise . BENSON-1908-1,58.201

They find that they have a good deal of work to do , to which no
particular intellectual interest attaches . BENSON-1908-1,58.202

Out of school there are games and talk about games ;
BENSON-1908-1,58.203

and unless a boy is very keenly interested in intellectual things , his
interest is not likely to survive in an atmosphere which is all alive ,
indeed , but where intellectual things are , to put it frankly ,
unfashionable . BENSON-1908-1,58.204

If his home is one where intellect is valued , he has a fair chance of
keeping interest up in a timid and secluded way . BENSON-1908-1,58.205

The question of how to alter this is a difficult one .
BENSON-1908-1,58.206

It can hardly be done by definite organisations such as societies ,
because the boys have already so many engagements that a new one is apt
to degenerate into a bore . BENSON-1908-1,58.207

Good lectures can <P_59> do a little ; BENSON-1908-1,59.208

a good library can do a little ; BENSON-1908-1,59.209

but , so far as schools can influence national tendency at all , I
believe that the only way is for the masters to be interested themselves
. BENSON-1908-1,59.210

If a man is really alive to what is going on , if he reads the papers ,
if he reads books , if he uses his holidays wisely in travel , reading ,
and the society of interesting people , it is impossible that the boys
who come under his influence , considering how extraordinarily imitative
boys are , should not be affected by this in some degree .
BENSON-1908-1,59.211

I remember well being decidedly influenced as a boy by a man of the kind
that I have described . BENSON-1908-1,59.212

He had a certain magnetic gift , I imagine ; BENSON-1908-1,59.213

but his allusions to literature and history seemed to open doors into
all sorts of roomy and spacious corridors . BENSON-1908-1,59.214

It used to seem to me , and it was so with others , that he lived
habitually in a world that was bigger , brighter , more entertaining
than the ordinary world . BENSON-1908-1,59.215

The man was no prig - BENSON-1908-1,59.216

he never hinted contempt for people who did not <P_60> care about his
own subjects ; BENSON-1908-1,60.217

he merely brought , like the wise householder , out of his treasure
things new and old ; BENSON-1908-1,60.218

and many boys felt that they would like to have similar treasures in the
background too . BENSON-1908-1,60.219

Therefore I maintain that it is not an advisable thing so much as a
positive duty for teachers to contrive some intellectual life for
themselves ; to live in the company of good books and big ideas .
BENSON-1908-1,60.220

Everyone can@ @not be interested in everything , BENSON-1908-1,60.221

but everyone is capable of being interested in something ;
BENSON-1908-1,60.222

and I do not very much care what the subject is provided only that there
is a little glow , a little enthusiasm about it . BENSON-1908-1,60.223

Let me mention a little educational experiment which I have tried with
considerable effect , both as evidence that the intellectual interest is
stronger than is often imagined , and also that it is possible to
stimulate it without travelling beyond the bounds of normal work .
BENSON-1908-1,60.224

I have added , as a rule , to a written exercise called <P_61> History
Questions a voluntary question connected with the history we are doing
in school . BENSON-1908-1,61.225

I have taken , for instance , the conspiracy of Catiline ,
BENSON-1908-1,61.226

and I have told any boys who care to attempt it , to treat it exactly as
they like - as a letter from a conspirator describing a meeting , as a
fragment from a narrative poem , as a dramatic scene - whatever they
prefer . BENSON-1908-1,61.227

The result has been that in a very normal class of thirty boys I have
found week after week some eight or ten of these answers attempted .
BENSON-1908-1,61.228

One boy has treated it comically <paren> not always humorously <$$paren>
in the style of the Bab Ballads ; BENSON-1908-1,61.229

another has written a fragment of a play ; BENSON-1908-1,61.230

another has attempted a passage in the style of Sir Walter Scott ;
BENSON-1908-1,61.231

another has written a letter ; BENSON-1908-1,61.232

others have attempted to describe the scene of a meeting of conspirators
in the style of Harrison Ainsworth . BENSON-1908-1,61.233

I contrive to read these attempts through with the boys , criticise them
seriously , make respectful suggestions ; BENSON-1908-1,61.234

and I have no sort of doubt that they are keenly <P_62> interested in
and think more of this than perhaps of any other school exercise .
BENSON-1908-1,62.235

It leads to no neglect of work ; BENSON-1908-1,62.236

but neither is it only the successful workers who are the best
performers . BENSON-1908-1,62.237

My best lyrical poet once was a boy who could scarcely get through a
piece of Latin prose without a huge crop of blunders , but who wrote
flowing and spirited English lyrics with lively satisfaction .
BENSON-1908-1,62.238

It is ridiculous to pretend that this is not good for the boys ;
BENSON-1908-1,62.239

it only shows how starved a curriculum it is that does not provide some
pabulum for the literary interest that is latent in far more minds than
is generally supposed . BENSON-1908-1,62.240

The classicists who argue strenuously for the retention of Greek in
schools use as one of their strongest claims that the Greek is so august
a literature . BENSON-1908-1,62.241

I agree , with reservations . BENSON-1908-1,62.242

But I also maintain that a very small percentage of the boys who do
Greek ever get within measurable distance of appreciating it as
literature , and that yet among those very boys there are many who are
capable of appreciating <P_63> style and treatment in their own language
. BENSON-1908-1,63.243

I am not a great advocate of using English literature in school for
textbooks . BENSON-1908-1,63.244

The treatment of literature by commentators is , as a rule , so
profoundly unintelligent that I should be sorry to see it reduced to a
subject . BENSON-1908-1,63.245

Neither do I at all desire that intellectual stimulus should be the only
thing aimed at . BENSON-1908-1,63.246

It tends to make a mind loose , flabby , and dilettante .
BENSON-1908-1,63.247

The mind should be exercised on work which requires grip and assiduity ,
BENSON-1908-1,63.248

but deliberately to omit intellectual enjoyment from our programme , to
pass over one of the strongest of boyish faculties , seems to me the
kind of mistake that will be regarded some years hence as both pitiable
and ludicrous . BENSON-1908-1,63.249

We should never expect a boy to become a good player at any game unless
he enjoyed it , BENSON-1908-1,63.250

and how we dare to exclude enjoyment so rigorously from our system of
education is one of those mysteries that it is difficult to fathom .
BENSON-1908-1,63.251

The result is that we send out from our public schools year after year
many boys who <P_64> hate knowledge and think books dreary , who are
perfectly self-satisfied and entirely ignorant , and , what is worse ,
not ignorant in a wholesome and humble manner , but arrogantly and
contemptuously ignorant - not only satisfied to be so , but thinking it
ridiculous and almost unmanly that a young man should be anything else .
BENSON-1908-1,64.252

<P_65>

<heading>

VII Originality BENSON-1908-1,65.255

<$$heading>

It has been said that the public school system is built upon conventions
, and that it is a foe to all originality . BENSON-1908-1,65.257

I must respectfully claim to disagree . BENSON-1908-1,65.258

Such originality as is extinguished by conventions is not of a very high
order . BENSON-1908-1,65.259

The only originality that is worth having is that of the mind and heart
, BENSON-1908-1,65.260

and I doubt whether that is ever extinguished by superficial
conventionalities . BENSON-1908-1,65.261

I agree that the public school tends to develop a certain type of
character , BENSON-1908-1,65.262

but it is a type above the average , BENSON-1908-1,65.263

and I believe it raises more characters to its level than it depresses
characters down to it . BENSON-1908-1,65.264

Public opinion in schools is apt to be very tyrannical in small details
such as dress and deportment , BENSON-1908-1,65.265

and this , I think , is a distinct <P_66> advantage , because the
standard it demands of dress is decent , and of deportment is manly .
BENSON-1908-1,66.266

And no one is the worse , however original his mind may be , for
dressing and behaving like a gentleman . BENSON-1908-1,66.267

Anyone whose originality is confined to eccentricity in dress and
demeanour is simply a foolish <font> poseur <$$font> ,
BENSON-1908-1,66.268

and I should look upon the public school standard in this respect as an
excellent discipline . BENSON-1908-1,66.269

In such matters conventionality is a mere relief , because questions of
dress and deportment become simply mechanical and habitual , and leave
the mind free to concern itself with other matters .
BENSON-1908-1,66.270

The question whether athletics , as practised at public schools , have a
cramping effect on development will be considered more in detail under
the head of athletics , BENSON-1908-1,66.271

and so I will merely say here that though athletic ambitions are
temporarily apt to be rather absorbing , and tend to assume exaggerated
proportions in the case of boys whose intellectual outfit is small and
whose minds are naturally rather narrow , <P_67> I do not believe that
they disturb the equilibrium of minds which are at all above the average
; BENSON-1908-1,67.272

indeed , I would go further and say that they tend to have a wholesome
effect on boys whose minds are highly developed , and , if anything ,
maintain the balance of physical sanity rather than destroy it .
BENSON-1908-1,67.273

Boys whose minds are precocious or prematurely developed are apt to look
upon exercise as a tiresome interference with their own pursuits ,
BENSON-1908-1,67.274

and I believe that it does distinct good in enabling them to give due
weight to the necessity of keeping the body in good condition , a lesson
which is apt to be taught those who slight it in early life by premature
infirmities . BENSON-1908-1,67.275

There remains then the question as to whether the view of intellectual
and ethical things which prevails in schools has a cramping effect on
the original minds that come within its influence , BENSON-1908-1,67.276

and I am inclined to think that it has very little , simply because it
is mostly negative . BENSON-1908-1,67.277

I am not at all sure that a very <P_68> strong intellectual or spiritual
influence exerted upon immature minds is not in itself more cramping
than none at all , because the mind is run into a certain mould at a
time when impressions are very permanent , and before sufficient
independence of character has been arrived at for the mind to exert its
critical faculties at all . BENSON-1908-1,68.278

I do not think that a boy at a public school gets much sympathy in his
intellectual ambition or his spiritual emotions ; BENSON-1908-1,68.279

but I do not think it very desirable that he should , because the time
has not really come for their development . BENSON-1908-1,68.280

Such sympathy as is useful to him should be secret and occasional rather
than open and constant ; BENSON-1908-1,68.281

and I should look with great anxiety on the future of the boys of a
school who lived at high pressure intellectually and emotionally .
BENSON-1908-1,68.282

The independence allowed to a boy of any originality is considerable ,
BENSON-1908-1,68.283

and other boys trouble themselves very little what a boy thinks of or
dreams about so long as in his appearance and behaviour he shows <P_69>
a decent compliance with conventional things . BENSON-1908-1,69.284

The question here is rather what a master's attitude should be in the
matter ; BENSON-1908-1,69.285

and here I confess that schools are rather at fault .
BENSON-1908-1,69.286

A master must , of course , show a similarly decent compliance with
conventional standards ; BENSON-1908-1,69.287

he must be interested and express interest in games ,
BENSON-1908-1,69.288

and he must not despise the day of small things , the homely interests
and events of school life , BENSON-1908-1,69.289

otherwise he will simply forfeit sympathy . BENSON-1908-1,69.290

But I think that it is a great misfortune and mistake if the boys think
that a master's horizon of thought is exactly the same as their own , if
they imagine that he is preoccupied with the Question of who is to be in
the school Eleven , or the precise nuances in the play of the school
Forwards . BENSON-1908-1,69.291

Again , a master should be very quick to notice any originality of
tastes of interest among his boys , and be ready to sympathise or help .
BENSON-1908-1,69.292

He should be able to take an interest in what a boy <P_70> reads or
dreams or thinks about ; BENSON-1908-1,70.293

he should be able to speak on occasion of spiritual things without
affectation , and at the same time without embarrassment .
BENSON-1908-1,70.294

I do not mean that any good can be done by a man pretending to have felt
or thought deeply on matters in which he is indifferent ,
BENSON-1908-1,70.295

but I would contend that a professed teacher has no business to be
indifferent , and that a master without some intellectual and spiritual
ideal is as much out of place as a doctor without sympathy , or a
clergyman who despised religion . BENSON-1908-1,70.296

And here comes the difficulty . BENSON-1908-1,70.297

A man may conscientiously take a mastership in order to teach a certain
subject , if he knows his subject and is a competent disciplinarian .
BENSON-1908-1,70.298

But I do not think that anyone has any business to enter upon tutorial
relations unless he has got some definite intellectual views , and is
living an intellectual life of his own ; or a boarding-house , unless he
has some intention of exerting influence in the right direction .
BENSON-1908-1,70.299

I shall propose to discuss the question of <P_71> religion later ,
BENSON-1908-1,71.300

but I am quite sure it is no more right to take a boarding-house for the
sake of the profits and the position than it is for a clergyman to
accept a living on the same grounds . BENSON-1908-1,71.301

Here I am convinced that some sense of vocation is an absolute necessity
. BENSON-1908-1,71.302

A master then who holds the position of tutor or housemaster shold be
carefully on the look_out for signs of originality and definite bias
among the boys , and do his best , like the man in the <font> Pilgrim's
Progress <$$font> , secretly to cast oil upon the fire .
BENSON-1908-1,71.303

He should try to see that every boy has some subject at least in which
he is interested , BENSON-1908-1,71.304

and he shold try to make it easy for every boy to pursue that subject ,
rather than to try to conform all his boys to the usual type , or to
bring them under the subject in which he himself happens to be
interested . BENSON-1908-1,71.305

The curriculum nowadays of a public school is a varied one ,
BENSON-1908-1,71.306

and where classics , science , history , mathematics , and modern
languages are taught it is hard to say that <P_72> any boy's powers are
doomed to starvation . BENSON-1908-1,72.307

At the same time it is certain that a great many of these subjects are
not taught in a stimulating way , and that a good many teachers do their
duty conscientiously , but without any particular enthusiasm .
BENSON-1908-1,72.308

Nevertheless , in a staff of masters there are sure to be enthusiasts in
every branch , BENSON-1908-1,72.309

and a tutor should endeavour to encourage relations between his boys who
are interested in the subjects and the men who are interested in them
too . BENSON-1908-1,72.310

Of course time is the perennial difficulty . BENSON-1908-1,72.311

The system must be all-embracing , BENSON-1908-1,72.312

and my own experience of a public school master's life is that there is
practically very little time when relations with boys other than those
with whom some official connection exists can be cultivated at all .
BENSON-1908-1,72.313

I believe that if a man does his work thoroughly at a public school ,
sees a certain amount of his colleagues socially - which is absolutely
essential to general harmony - and does a little independent
intellectual work <P_73> of his own , the residue of time that is left
is very small indeed ; BENSON-1908-1,73.314

and this I think is an almost inevitable evil , and can only be met by
those in authority resolutely diminishing all work that is unprofitable
from the master's point of view . BENSON-1908-1,73.315

The great lack in a schoolmaster's life is time for recollection and
repose . BENSON-1908-1,73.316

He spins along like a busy top from morning to night ,
BENSON-1908-1,73.317

and it is easy to think that if you have spun and buzzed through the
hours you have done your duty in a weary way ; BENSON-1908-1,73.318

but there is very little of the feeding in green pastures and leading
forth beside the waters of comfort , BENSON-1908-1,73.319

and the result is that we consider our problems hastily and scantily ;
BENSON-1908-1,73.320

we consider prompt action invariably better than quiet reflection .
BENSON-1908-1,73.321

And indeed we have most of us time to do the one and no time at all to
do the other . BENSON-1908-1,73.322

<P_74>

<heading>

VIII Praise BENSON-1908-1,74.325

<$$heading>

There is one potent educational force which is often neglected by our
educators - the power of praise . BENSON-1908-1,74.327

As a rule , it goes against the grain in Englishmen to praise ,
generously and outspokenly . BENSON-1908-1,74.328

They call it " paying compliments , " BENSON-1908-1,74.329

and mix it up with insincerity . BENSON-1908-1,74.330

There is a foolish old proverb , which represents the surliness of grim
generations of Englishmen , that " Fine words butter no parsnips . "
BENSON-1908-1,74.331

It is entirely untrue ; BENSON-1908-1,74.332

just as love can give a savour to a dinner of herbs , so praise ,
judicious and sincere praise , can make boys contented with simple and
Spartan fare . BENSON-1908-1,74.333

Of course , it must not be all praise ; BENSON-1908-1,74.334

but a schoolmaster who can find fault sharply and seriously , and can at
the same time <P_75> praise frankly , has a great power in his hands .
BENSON-1908-1,75.335

And I think that schoolmasters shold resolutely overcome their British
dislike to express appreciation . BENSON-1908-1,75.336

To tell a division of boys who have been working briskly and
good-humouredly that they have done so , is far more likely to keep them
brisk and good-humoured than to grumble at the first and natural signs
of inattention . BENSON-1908-1,75.337

To praise diligence , to find words of appreciation for a thoughtful
piece of work , is far more likely to produce further diligence than to
be critical and cold . BENSON-1908-1,75.338

A lady of my acquaintance once kept a party of Rural Deans happy and
amused for an hour by the simple expedient of asking them what was the
greatest compliment they had ever been paid . BENSON-1908-1,75.339

Most of the party , it is true , said that it was when their wives did
them the honour to accept them , BENSON-1908-1,75.340

but this sacrifice paid to marital duty they expanded in easy egotism .
BENSON-1908-1,75.341

Is it not the experience of everyone that compliments live far longer in
the memory <P_76> than criticism ? BENSON-1908-1,76.342

The normal human being explains criticism away by reflecting that the
critic is only imperfectly acquainted with the conditions ;
BENSON-1908-1,76.343

but with compliments one instinctively feels that the speaker has true
insight into the situation . BENSON-1908-1,76.344

This leads me to a very important part of the schoolmaster's duty - that
of writing reports . BENSON-1908-1,76.345

I declare I have often been ashamed to see how these hasty and
ill-considered documents are stored in family treasuries , and become
part of the archives of a house . BENSON-1908-1,76.346

I believe that the greatest possible care is well repaid in this
somewhat distasteful duty . BENSON-1908-1,76.347

It is the schoolmaster's business to do the boy full justice , not
merely to indulge in criticism . BENSON-1908-1,76.348

If a due proportion of credit , where credit is due , is intermingled ,
the arrows , tipped with honey , are gratefully received .
BENSON-1908-1,76.349

Most parents do not want elaborate details of the work .
BENSON-1908-1,76.350

They want to be assured that the boy has tried to do his duty ,
BENSON-1908-1,76.351

they want the impression that the boy has made upon the master .
BENSON-1908-1,76.352

<P_77>

Still more important is the letter that the housemaster should write to
the parents at the end of each half . BENSON-1908-1,77.354

I grudge no time and labour spent over this . BENSON-1908-1,77.355

Of course it seems tiresome to say the same kind of things over and over
again . BENSON-1908-1,77.356

But if the master knows the boy and cares for him , his view will
insensibly alter year by year , BENSON-1908-1,77.357

and a master should try to put a graphic picture of the boy on paper
each half . BENSON-1908-1,77.358

Of course this comes easier to some men than others .
BENSON-1908-1,77.359

But I believe that the seed thus sown is apt to be very fruitful indeed
. BENSON-1908-1,77.360

All attempt at literary smartness should be avoided , and especially all
sarcasm . BENSON-1908-1,77.361

Parents are apt to feel such things acutely , and to resent any summary
criticism of a boy . BENSON-1908-1,77.362

Thus a parent once wrote to a friend of mine about a report to which
several masters had contributed : " The gentleman who writes in red ink
and signs himself G. F. seems to have lost his temper . "
BENSON-1908-1,77.363

Again , a report from a master which said , " I can teach the boy
nothing , " drew from <P_78> an indignant parent a letter to the
headmaster remonstrating with him for retaining on the staff a man " who
by his own confession is incapable of communicating the simplest
knowledge to the boys . " BENSON-1908-1,78.364

Parents are naturally partial , BENSON-1908-1,78.365

but they do not resent criticism if it is part of a sincere attempt to
understand and to describe the boy . BENSON-1908-1,78.366

Indeed , they are often very grateful for it . BENSON-1908-1,78.367

<P_79>

<heading>

IX The boarding-house BENSON-1908-1,79.370

<$$heading>

It has always seemed to me that as far as possible the school should be
constructed on the basis of the home , and that there should be , if
possible , a home side to school life ; BENSON-1908-1,79.372

and therefore I am inclined to think that schoolmasters should be
celibates , or rather that housemasters should be , though this may
appear at first sight paradoxical . BENSON-1908-1,79.373

It is , however , in any case , a counsel of perfection ,
BENSON-1908-1,79.374

and can@ @not be seriously urged , though it is only too sadly plain
what havoc the suspension of the celibate rule has worked in the
Universities . BENSON-1908-1,79.375

The celibate housemaster has several obvious advantages .
BENSON-1908-1,79.376

In the first place , he is free from domestic cares to a great extet ;
BENSON-1908-1,79.377

he is not obliged to regard his <P_80> profession primarily as a
money-making concern . BENSON-1908-1,80.378

Then , too , he has no domestic ties BENSON-1908-1,80.379

and can bestow his time and his interests wholly on his boys .
BENSON-1908-1,80.380

The paternal instinct is strongly developed in many men who have no
experience of paternity ; BENSON-1908-1,80.381

and the married man with a wife and children is bound both by instinct
and necessity to give the best of his heart to his family .
BENSON-1908-1,80.382

Most men have only a limited capacity for affection ,
BENSON-1908-1,80.383

and if this is absorbed by the nearer domestic circle it can@ @not
overflow among the boys . BENSON-1908-1,80.384

The golden rule for the housemaster is to have unlimited affection and
no sentimentality . BENSON-1908-1,80.385

Of course , some boys will inevitably be more interesting than others ,
BENSON-1908-1,80.386

and it is a difficult matter to proffer interest constantly to boys who
reply in monosyllables , who never ask a question or originate a remark
, and who are obviously bored by any relations with a master apart from
official duties . BENSON-1908-1,80.387

But there are very few boys of this type ; BENSON-1908-1,80.388

and <P_81> I can only say that I have very seldom found a boy who is not
in some way interesting if you can get on the right side of him .
BENSON-1908-1,81.389

Most boys are interested in themselves , BENSON-1908-1,81.390

and very few boys can resist the charm of finding themselves interesting
to another . BENSON-1908-1,81.391

The root of the matter is to let a boy understand from the very first
that friendship is intended and offered ; BENSON-1908-1,81.392

and it is not enough to be vaguely friendly ; BENSON-1908-1,81.393

it is better to tell a new boy when he comes that you desire that he
will not merely look upon you as a master , but will really believe that
you are a friend . BENSON-1908-1,81.394

This is to most new boys , coming timidly to a new place , peopled by
vague ogres , an immense relief ; BENSON-1908-1,81.395

and it is interesting to compare the change in the glance of a new boy
from the time when he enters your study in the charge of a parent , and
gazes with wonder and dismay at the man who is to rule his life for
several years , with the glance of shy friendliness wth which he meets
you when you have <P_82> indicated that friendship is to be the basis of
your relations . BENSON-1908-1,82.396

After that time it is mainly a matter of idiosyncrasy ;
BENSON-1908-1,82.397

the thing is made comparatively easy at my own school , where the boys
have separate rooms and where it is the custom for the housemaster to go
round after prayers to see the boys until the lights are out .
BENSON-1908-1,82.398

This is a duty I never curtail , probably because it is a pleasure ,
though it is a time that is apt to be chosen for meetings , and though
it is sometimes a temptation to return to other work .
BENSON-1908-1,82.399

But I attach the greatest importance to these visits .
BENSON-1908-1,82.400

You see the boy at his best and cheerfullest . BENSON-1908-1,82.401

The day is over , BENSON-1908-1,82.402

and he is generally in his most expansive mood . BENSON-1908-1,82.403

Conversation is never difficult - BENSON-1908-1,82.404

a book , a picture , an event of the day provide an opening -
BENSON-1908-1,82.405

and most boys are ready to talk freely when they are not in the critical
presence of their equals . BENSON-1908-1,82.406

I try too to make the talk as unofficial as possible , and never to
scold or talk about work ; BENSON-1908-1,82.407

but on the other hand , <P_83> if any serious thing has occurred , it is
easy then to say a few friendly words about it . BENSON-1908-1,83.408

Of course the time is limited , BENSON-1908-1,83.409

and it is a temptation to stay longer with boys who are bursting with
questions and information . BENSON-1908-1,83.410

But to contrive to see all the boys alone for a minute or two is
possible , BENSON-1908-1,83.411

and it is , I believe , one of the most valuable pieces of work that one
can do . BENSON-1908-1,83.412

How this can be done in the schools with the dormitory system it is hard
to say , BENSON-1908-1,83.413

but it ought to be schemed for . BENSON-1908-1,83.414

It is not at all the same thing to send for a succession of boys to the
study , however easy may be the talk when they get there , because a boy
is apt to feel that there must be trouble brewing .
BENSON-1908-1,83.415

I suppose that having boys in quietly to meals would be a substitute ;
BENSON-1908-1,83.416

but the brief morning meal with letters and the paper is not very
sociable . BENSON-1908-1,83.417

Besides , the essence of the situation is that the boy is in his own
stronghold , and has not to assume company manners .
BENSON-1908-1,83.418

I generally stroll into the house in the <P_84> course of the long
evenings for a few minutes ; BENSON-1908-1,84.419

but that is a different kind of thing , because then boys are apt to be
congregated together , and the conversation has to be general and of a
supposed humorous nature . BENSON-1908-1,84.420

In any case the relations shold be paternal and not sentimental .
BENSON-1908-1,84.421

It is the temptation of some men , and especially of celibates , to feel
a kind of tenderness for what is young and bright and attractive ;
BENSON-1908-1,84.422

but boys are quick to notice and resent any favouritism ,
BENSON-1908-1,84.423

and one of the first resolves a master must make is to be scrupulously
just . BENSON-1908-1,84.424

No boy resents a master seeing rather more of brisk and lively boys , if
they are certain that their brisk companions will not gain any official
advantages by private friendship . BENSON-1908-1,84.425

Affection of an elderly and sensible kind is intensely appreciated ,
BENSON-1908-1,84.426

and very few boys will risk a collision with a master if it means a
rupture of pleasant relations . BENSON-1908-1,84.427

As the boys get older it is important to remember that there should be
an <P_85> increase of respectfulness imported into the manner of a
schoolmaster , and that they should be addressed as equals .
BENSON-1908-1,85.428

A course of action , the exercise of discipline should be carefully
explained to upper boys , BENSON-1908-1,85.429

and it is as well if anything serious has occurred to take the elder
boys entirely into your confidence and talk about your desires and
difficulties as you would discuss them with elder sons .
BENSON-1908-1,85.430

Nothing is so valued by the young as respect ; BENSON-1908-1,85.431

and any approach to confidence on the part of a master in matters where
he feels and thinks seriously is deeply valued and respected .
BENSON-1908-1,85.432

Of course discretion must be used as to what is told to boys ;
BENSON-1908-1,85.433

they can@ @not as a rule keep secrets , even when it is to their own
disadvantage that they should be known , BENSON-1908-1,85.434

but about any matter that it is wise to tell them the utmost frankness
of speech is advisable . BENSON-1908-1,85.435

I do not think it is wise to put too much active responsibility into
their hands , BENSON-1908-1,85.436

but that they should feel some responsibility is entirely <P_86> good .
BENSON-1908-1,86.437

Of course in intercourse with boys a good deal of tact is necessary ;
BENSON-1908-1,86.438

any approach to a liberty must be checked , BENSON-1908-1,86.439

and can easily be checked by telling a boy that his attitude is no doubt
meant for friendliness , but that familiarity is no compliment , and
that you do not desire that goodwill should take that form of easiness .
BENSON-1908-1,86.440

Let me give a very minute instance of an incident where frankness on the
part of a master was entirely successful . BENSON-1908-1,86.441

A friend of mine was accustomed to give the boys a cup of tea and a
biscuit before early school . BENSON-1908-1,86.442

One day another species of biscuit was substituted ,
BENSON-1908-1,86.443

and was received with disfavour and rejected ; BENSON-1908-1,86.444

the unhappy biscuits were thrown about , BENSON-1908-1,86.445

and the boys loudly complained to the servants and each other that they
had nothing fit to eat . BENSON-1908-1,86.446

A rigid man would have made a fuss , punished the offenders , and
probably insisted on the unpopular biscuits being eaten .
BENSON-1908-1,86.447

But my friend sent for the majority of the boys , BENSON-1908-1,86.448

and told them <P_87> plainly that the particular meal was not in the
school dietary , but entirely of his own providing .
BENSON-1908-1,87.449

He said that it was paid for entirely out of his own pocket , and that
it was as bad taste to behave as they had done as if they had been
invited to a meal by a friend and had done the same thing .
BENSON-1908-1,87.450

He then said that he had ordered the original biscuit to be restored .
BENSON-1908-1,87.451

All this was said good-humouredly , but plainly . BENSON-1908-1,87.452

The result was that not only was there no diminution of friendliness ,
but that two upper boys came to him as a deputation and said that it was
the general wish that the despised biscuit should be retained .
BENSON-1908-1,87.453

Another requisite is courtesy in dealing with boys .
BENSON-1908-1,87.454

That is to a great extent a question of manner , BENSON-1908-1,87.455

but it can be sedulously practised BENSON-1908-1,87.456

and is never thrown away . BENSON-1908-1,87.457

Of course it should be natural and not elaborate . BENSON-1908-1,87.458

But the real secret of satifsfactory relations with boys is after all to
study the individual , and to adapt yourself accordingly .
BENSON-1908-1,87.459

