<BEGIN_benson-190x-1>

<P_104>

<font> Magdalene , BENSON-190X-1,104.3

Ash Wednesday , March <$$font> 8 . BENSON-190X-1,104.4

- A memorable day for me . BENSON-190X-1,104.5

Cornish writes to say that he deeply <P_105> regrets the turn events
have taken ; which means that my letter to the Provost is taken as final
, and that I am released . For which relief I humbly thank God .
BENSON-190X-1,105.6

Indeed my spirits have gone up with a bound , BENSON-190X-1,105.7

and I feel like a schoolboy . BENSON-190X-1,105.8

I do not for one instant regret my action , BENSON-190X-1,105.9

and I am quite sure I never shall regret it . BENSON-190X-1,105.10

What I feared , at the bottom of my heart , was that I should be <font>
cornered ; <$$font> that the Governing Body would offer me the post in
such a way that it would have been cowardly and unpatriotic to refuse .
BENSON-190X-1,105.11

I should have done it with fear and trembling , knowing it was not
really my line . BENSON-190X-1,105.12

{ED:...}

Well , I am honestly very glad indeed ; BENSON-190X-1,105.14

I feel like the man in the psalms , whose {TEXT:whose'} soul had escaped
even as a bird , etc. ' BENSON-190X-1,105.15

I feel as if I had recovered my liberty which had been menaced .
BENSON-190X-1,105.16

Providence , I think , has brought me into this anxiety , in order to
show me how dear and precious a thing Liberty is . BENSON-190X-1,105.17

<font> Libertate me involvo ! <$$font> BENSON-190X-1,105.18

Is this a low , selfish , egotistical view ? BENSON-190X-1,105.19

No , because I do honestly mistrust my strength , my patience , my
capacity . BENSON-190X-1,105.20

I think it quite possible that I should have made a fiasco of it .
BENSON-190X-1,105.21

I think that there is a <font> sad <$$font> lack of good candidates ,
and that this alone has forced me into prominence ; BENSON-190X-1,105.22

but my true life is not there . BENSON-190X-1,105.23

Of course I feel that Eton is in rather a bad way , intellectually and
morally . BENSON-190X-1,105.24

I should like to have helped it out . BENSON-190X-1,105.25

But could I have done it ? BENSON-190X-1,105.26

And after all I gave nineteen years , my best of life , to the place .
BENSON-190X-1,105.27

It is a beautiful bright cool spring morning . BENSON-190X-1,105.28

Two big pigeons have alighted in the grass just outside my window ,
seeking their meat from God . BENSON-190X-1,105.29

I went to the Commination service at 10 - a very husky affair ; three
men , chaplain , Master , Lady Alba , me . BENSON-190X-1,105.30

The only thing that I carried away , except the sense of the splendour
of the great rhetorical address , was the verse , ' thou shalt make me
to understand wisdom secretly . ' BENSON-190X-1,105.31

Now I sit writing , in great thankfulness and contentment .
BENSON-190X-1,105.32

I had not realised what a burden these <P_106> anxieties had been till
they were lifted from my mind , BENSON-190X-1,106.33

and I feel like Christian in the Pilgrim's Progress , when the burden
fell off his back and rolled into a pit that lay in the bottom , <font>
and he saw it no more <$$font> . BENSON-190X-1,106.34

{ED:...}

I lunched with Donald and Lady Alba alone ; BENSON-190X-1,106.36

a pleasant talk about the College , etc. - BENSON-190X-1,106.37

then a walk with Donald to the top of Madingley Hill .
BENSON-190X-1,106.38

Such a sweet day - cold and fresh , but with a real spring wind .
BENSON-190X-1,106.39

{ED:...}

Came down to Coton . BENSON-190X-1,106.41

We talked out everything , Eton , the Provostship of King's , etc. ,
etc. BENSON-190X-1,106.42

I was glad to find that my contentment only increased , now that these
stately beckoning hands - ' Come up hither ! ' - have withdrawn .
BENSON-190X-1,106.43

I felt no shadow of envy , rather of compassion , for the man who should
be called to Eton . BENSON-190X-1,106.44

It is a very strange position . BENSON-190X-1,106.45

{ED:...}

Well , I could , to use an Eton metaphor , <font> run in <$$font> at the
head of a rouge , well pushed by strong men ; BENSON-190X-1,106.47

but I ca@ @n't drag the rouge with me , if they are reluctant and
retrograde . BENSON-190X-1,106.48

{ED:...}

<font> Magdalene , BENSON-190X-1,106.50

March <$$font> 9 . BENSON-190X-1,106.51

- This morning spent in endless letters , etc. BENSON-190X-1,106.52

It is hopeless work - not a <P_107> line of my proofs .
BENSON-190X-1,107.53

I am again being bombarded about Eton . BENSON-190X-1,107.54

I am going on quietly with my undergraduates at luncheon ;
BENSON-190X-1,107.55

and really I think it rather amuses me . BENSON-190X-1,107.56

If one could only take things quietly and simply , they would never be
worse than tiresome - never agitating . BENSON-190X-1,107.57

I am a little bored by always having them ; BENSON-190X-1,107.58

but now the instinct of the <font> collector <$$font> comes to my aid ,
the desire to <font> complete <$$font> the collection , to tick them all
off ! BENSON-190X-1,107.59

What feeble creatures we are ; BENSON-190X-1,107.60

but we ought to use these primeval instincts more .
BENSON-190X-1,107.61

{ED:...}

Then Monty and I walked to Grantchester , BENSON-190X-1,107.63

and <font> daffed <$$font> about many things . BENSON-190X-1,107.64

Then I contrived to write a passage about religion , which is very
careful and sincere - but too outspoken ? BENSON-190X-1,107.65

Then I dressed BENSON-190X-1,107.66

and went off to Trinity , to the Lodge . BENSON-190X-1,107.67

What a noble house it is - BENSON-190X-1,107.68

such dignity , amplitude and wealth of pictures and memorials .
BENSON-190X-1,107.69

Mrs. Butler came and talked ; BENSON-190X-1,107.70

then came the Master from chapel , very noble to look at , his pale ,
waxen face , his kind , tired eyes , his odd beard ; in gown and scarf ,
cassock , decanal coat and silk stockings . BENSON-190X-1,107.71

We went into hall by an odd little staircase BENSON-190X-1,107.72

and came out on the dais . BENSON-190X-1,107.73

He and Aldis Wright read grace , somewhat marred by a crash of falling
trays . BENSON-190X-1,107.74

{ED:...}

The Master talked suavely , interestingly , continuously .
BENSON-190X-1,107.76

{ED:...}

It is difficult to retain any impression of the stream of his talk .
BENSON-190X-1,107.78

It is remarkable for its range , its knowledge of people , its finish ,
its blandness . BENSON-190X-1,107.79

He has an exaggerated idea of academical success , I think .
BENSON-190X-1,107.80

{ED:...}

Then we stalked out together , very fine ; the Master and I leading the
way . BENSON-190X-1,107.82

Another little thing he said amused me . BENSON-190X-1,107.83

' Do you know , ' he said , ' Percy Thornton's <font> very <$$font>
inferior book - BENSON-190X-1,107.84

dear Percy Thornton ! - a dear , a very dear and intimate friend of
mine . ' BENSON-190X-1,107.85

In the combination room he spoke very feelingly of his mistakes as a
headmaster , principally of severity - BENSON-190X-1,107.86

his eyes filled with tears . BENSON-190X-1,107.87

{ED:...}

He is a very beautiful and striking figure , a gracious personality .
BENSON-190X-1,107.89

I felt that I was with a great man , and a man of condescending
greatness . BENSON-190X-1,107.90

<P_108>

Then we went to the Lodge , where he showed us the big judge's bedroom -
on the ground floor , full of interesting pictures of judges . Then in
the drawing-room a miniature of Byron <paren> <font> not <$$font> very
good <$$paren> . Then many other pictures : holding a candle aloft with
a tremulous hand with white pointed fingers : BENSON-190X-1,108.92

Mrs. Butler and a shy red-faced girl with a great mop of hair -
BENSON-190X-1,108.93

I never heard her name . BENSON-190X-1,108.94

Then I went to Henry Jackson ; BENSON-190X-1,108.95

a parliament of smokers . A most dismal business .
BENSON-190X-1,108.96

The great man stood , like a comic mask in a wig , BENSON-190X-1,108.97

and read in a book , which he sometimes showed his neighbour with a
screeching laugh . BENSON-190X-1,108.98

Ugly and perspiring men , faint with conviviality , stood about .
BENSON-190X-1,108.99

Then I drifted up to Lapsley who paid me compliments -
BENSON-190X-1,108.100

and then went off , after a talk with Cunningham , to Lapsley's rooms ,
where I found the old set , Barnes , Laurence , Foakes-Jackson , with
whom I have somehow got included , though they are not at all my sort .
BENSON-190X-1,108.101

How odd these juxtapositions are ! BENSON-190X-1,108.102

Before I knew what I was doing , I was enrolled in a dining-club , to
have free religious discussion . BENSON-190X-1,108.103

Good God ! - as if that did any good ! BENSON-190X-1,108.104

Then , finding it 12.15 , I fled howling , with Foakes-Jackson , whose
little feet , after he left me , I heard pattering down the stony
passage by the Round Church . BENSON-190X-1,108.105

He said that he dreaded to interview the porter . BENSON-190X-1,108.106

{ED:...}

I enjoyed the evening very much , BENSON-190X-1,108.108

and ate and drank so moderately that I had a singular lightness of mind
. BENSON-190X-1,108.109

<P_109>

<font> April <$$font> 1 . BENSON-190X-1,109.111

- I plunged early into the fray BENSON-190X-1,109.112

and wrote about thirty letters to all concerned - mostly short notes
just to say what I was doing . BENSON-190X-1,109.113

The only long letter to Anson . BENSON-190X-1,109.114

{ED:...}

I must say that , <font> as an omen <$$font> , I had a good encounter .
BENSON-190X-1,109.116

As I came out of my house , having packed off all my letters , I met J.
W. Clark , very red in the face and sleepy-looking , but with the old
nice smile . BENSON-190X-1,109.117

He said to me , ' I suppose I shall soon have to congratulate you on new
honours . ' BENSON-190X-1,109.118

I said , ' No , I have just refused to have anything to do with it . '
BENSON-190X-1,109.119

' Then I congratulate you with all my heart , ' he said .
BENSON-190X-1,109.120

' You are a man of letters and not an administrator - do@ @n't forget
that . {ED:...} ' BENSON-190X-1,109.121

Well , the spirit in which a man takes up a post heavily , nervously ,
anxiously , in a spirit of shuddering and sacrifice , hating all the
machinery , etc. , is not the proper spirit . BENSON-190X-1,109.122

I could make a sudden great sacrifice , I believe ;
BENSON-190X-1,109.123

but the daily self-immolation ? BENSON-190X-1,109.124

I could make it perhaps ; BENSON-190X-1,109.125

but all the qualities in me that are worth anything only grow in the
sunshine . BENSON-190X-1,109.126

I am not one of the people who are effective when they are depressed ;
BENSON-190X-1,109.127

I am only really any good when I am blessedly content .
BENSON-190X-1,109.128

I <font> know <$$font> this - BENSON-190X-1,109.129

and this is why I have felt disqualified . BENSON-190X-1,109.130

If all the staff had been with me , set on the same objects as myself ,
ready to make concessions and compromises , and valuing the principle
above the detail ; if the Governing Body had <font> summoned <$$font> me
cogently and <P_110> constrainingly , I would have gone , not gladly ,
but willingly . BENSON-190X-1,110.131

But with a G. B. who do@ @n't know their own mind , and with a staff
who distrust me , and with a hopeless dislike of the whole business of
administration , how <font> could <$$font> I go ? BENSON-190X-1,110.132

My work is meant to be done in a corner . BENSON-190X-1,110.133

I have no doubts <font> really <$$font> about this ;
BENSON-190X-1,110.134

and such as I had seem to melt out of my mind like clouds on a bright
summer morning . BENSON-190X-1,110.135

Just a little soreness remains - BENSON-190X-1,110.136

' these are the wounds with which I have been wounded in the house of my
friends . ' BENSON-190X-1,110.137

I was anxious to help on the G. B. - BENSON-190X-1,110.138

I was <font> prepared <$$font> to help now ; BENSON-190X-1,110.139

but they wo@ @n't have me . BENSON-190X-1,110.140

But I do@ @n't want to make myself out <font> both <$$font> as happy in
my refusal <font> and <$$font> pathetic . BENSON-190X-1,110.141

I <font> am <$$font> happy , unreasonably and absurdly happy .
BENSON-190X-1,110.142

I feel , as I think I said , like a mouse who hears the trap snap just
behind him . BENSON-190X-1,110.143

The pathos lies further away , the pathos of being somehow , in spite of
certain gifts and powers , a failure ; just not effective .
BENSON-190X-1,110.144

It is the secret core of weakness , selfishness , softness in me coming
out . BENSON-190X-1,110.145

But after all , it is He that hath made me . BENSON-190X-1,110.146

And one fine and beautiful lesson I have lately learnt ,
BENSON-190X-1,110.147

and that is the hollowness of personal ambition . BENSON-190X-1,110.148

I feel as if I should like never to see Eton again , except in dreams .
BENSON-190X-1,110.149

I gave her my money's worth , I think ; BENSON-190X-1,110.150

but I could not <font> go up higher . <$$font> BENSON-190X-1,110.151

<font> Dorchester , BENSON-190X-1,110.152

April <$$font> 18 . BENSON-190X-1,110.153

- A mass of letters - BENSON-190X-1,110.154

but we went off early by train . BENSON-190X-1,110.155

Corfe Castle , sitting on a lonely hill , between two black downs , with
a misty valley behind , looked astonishingly romantic and dim .
BENSON-190X-1,110.156

I liked Poole harbour ; BENSON-190X-1,110.157

but there was an old boring talking man in the carriage .
BENSON-190X-1,110.158

{ED:...}

We were at Wimborne by 11.0 . BENSON-190X-1,110.160

The Minster interesting , but rather disappointing .
BENSON-190X-1,110.161

It has a central Norman tower and a western one . BENSON-190X-1,110.162

But it is a low church , BENSON-190X-1,110.163

<P_111>

and the brown stone with which it is restored is ugly .
BENSON-190X-1,111.165

The town very uninteresting . BENSON-190X-1,111.166

Found service going on BENSON-190X-1,111.167

and sat {TEXT:sate} it out . BENSON-190X-1,111.168

Three clergy , and about 30 women ! BENSON-190X-1,111.169

It seemed very false and weak and sentimental . BENSON-190X-1,111.170

One old parson read aloud in a feeble voice from the choir steps a very
intimate and strained meditation <paren> by Thomas à Kempis ? <$$paren>
- the sort of thing one might read , in a morbid mood , in one's bedroom
, but not fit to be publicly recited . BENSON-190X-1,111.171

Then came a hymn ; BENSON-190X-1,111.172

the women squeaked feebly , BENSON-190X-1,111.173

but a fine strong bass sang with much feeling - one of the clergy .
BENSON-190X-1,111.174

Then the ante-communion , long Gospel . BENSON-190X-1,111.175

The whole thing seemed to me dilettante and silly .
BENSON-190X-1,111.176

One felt that the clergy had no business to be sitting there dressed up
, feebly wishing things were otherwise , and bending in prayer , I dare@
@say quite sincerely . BENSON-190X-1,111.177

It seemed unmanly , antiquarian . BENSON-190X-1,111.178

They ought to have been trying to <font> mend <$$font> the World , if
they felt like that , not engaged in sleepy mooning orisons .
BENSON-190X-1,111.179

I felt a hatred of all priestly persons , eating the bread of
superstition and sentiment . BENSON-190X-1,111.180

I am full of sentiment myself , BENSON-190X-1,111.181

but it ought not to be organised . BENSON-190X-1,111.182

Then , with two silly women , we were taken all round by an intolerable
, stupid , deaf , vain old clerk , who could not understand one's
questions , and repeated his lesson . BENSON-190X-1,111.183

{ED:...}

He said that there was an enlarged photo of himself in the town , in
robes . BENSON-190X-1,111.185

' I am known to thousands of people , ' he said . BENSON-190X-1,111.186

Horrid old wretch ! BENSON-190X-1,111.187

I remembered that it was here that Cornish wooed and won Mrs. C.
BENSON-190X-1,111.188

I liked to remember that . BENSON-190X-1,111.189

{ED:...}

Then we found in a little village called <font> Anderson <$$font> a
simply enchanting manor-house with a big farmyard attached . A house of
brick , with gables and oriels , in a wild garden , with a stream
running through big laurels . BENSON-190X-1,111.191

How I should like to live there ! BENSON-190X-1,111.192

A little church close by . BENSON-190X-1,111.193

Here we lunched , with a friendly spaniel who shared our sandwiches .
BENSON-190X-1,111.194

A big black dog made demonstrations of displeasure ;
BENSON-190X-1,111.195

but the peace of the whole place , in this quiet green valley , among
water-meadows , BENSON-190X-1,111.196

the old gables of the manor above the trees ! BENSON-190X-1,111.197

<P_112>

It is to be sold next week . BENSON-190X-1,112.199

One could live there very happily , I think . BENSON-190X-1,112.200

But <font> coelum non animum . <$$font> BENSON-190X-1,112.201

{ED:...}

Then we rode on , BENSON-190X-1,112.203

but took different turns BENSON-190X-1,112.204

and missed ; BENSON-190X-1,112.205

but rejoined again at a big pine-clad hill-top . BENSON-190X-1,112.206

Then by Kingston , a house like Addington in a green park ;
BENSON-190X-1,112.207

and into Dorchester by the water-meadows , giving a fine view of the
town . BENSON-190X-1,112.208

Another quite delightful day , full of the sweetest impressions of this
beloved earth . BENSON-190X-1,112.209

A lot more letters . BENSON-190X-1,112.210

A <font> fine <$$font> letter , full of sense and courage from Herbert
Winton , approving my decision . BENSON-190X-1,112.211

An interesting letter about books from E. Horner , a moan or two from
the Vice-Provost . BENSON-190X-1,112.212

A sensible letter from the Master of Peterhouse about Le Bas prize -
BENSON-190X-1,112.213

from Lady St. Germans , President of Magdalen , Willie Strutt , North
S. Hamilton , and others - BENSON-190X-1,112.214

a very interesting batch . BENSON-190X-1,112.215

I sat {TEXT:sate} down at once BENSON-190X-1,112.216

and wrote fifty , or to be accurate , 25 ; BENSON-190X-1,112.217

and did not dislike it . BENSON-190X-1,112.218

Then a peaceful dinner ; and letters and diary . BENSON-190X-1,112.219

<font> Magdalene , BENSON-190X-1,112.220

May <$$font> 5 . BENSON-190X-1,112.221

- I dabbled about with letters all morning . BENSON-190X-1,112.222

Young paid me a long visit , BENSON-190X-1,112.223

and we talked Eton out ; BENSON-190X-1,112.224

but I protest before heaven I will not speak more of it unless I am
obliged . BENSON-190X-1,112.225

He was very affectionate and blithe . BENSON-190X-1,112.226

{ED:...}

Then I got a bike out . BENSON-190X-1,112.228

I had slept indifferently BENSON-190X-1,112.229

and was a little heavy . BENSON-190X-1,112.230

But the day was simply enchanting - BENSON-190X-1,112.231

a cool north wind , BENSON-190X-1,112.232

the air exquisitely clean and clear . BENSON-190X-1,112.233

{ED:...}

There is a wold , perhaps sixty feet high , above Swaffham ;
BENSON-190X-1,112.235

and Swaffham is just on the edge of the huge fen that stretches to Ely
and Soham , and of which one bit , Wicken , is still <paren> undrained
<$$paren> fen . BENSON-190X-1,112.236

Well , by the mill up there the view was gigantic and glorious :
BENSON-190X-1,112.237

the long , pure lines of fen and dykes from verge to verge :
BENSON-190X-1,112.238

and on the edge was Ely , in a dim , blue majesty , the sun shining on
the leads as FitzGerald saw it from Newmarket heath sixty years ago !
BENSON-190X-1,112.239

{ED:...}

<P_113>

Then I rode back ; BENSON-190X-1,113.242

and by the Devil's Dyke a cuckoo flew beside me , moving his grey ,
shimmering wings slowly , and when he perched manoeuvring his ribbed
tail . BENSON-190X-1,113.243

He seemed loath to leave me . BENSON-190X-1,113.244

I wonder what gift he will bring , false and pretty bird ?
BENSON-190X-1,113.245

Do I , like him , want others to hatch my eggs , content with flute-like
notes of pleasure ? BENSON-190X-1,113.246

I wrote a passage on returning : BENSON-190X-1,113.247

dined in hall . BENSON-190X-1,113.248

{ED:...}

Then H. W. paid me a call : a nice boy , full of anxiety and good
feeling : in the midst of <font> Sturm und Drang <$$font> , finding what
he calls his " dearest convictions " failing him : very pathetic in one
way , and rather sadly amusing in the other . His admiration of and
confidence in my literary powers and oracularity of speech rather
embarrassing . BENSON-190X-1,113.250

We had a long mixed vague talk ; BENSON-190X-1,113.251

but I knocked a few nails in , I think . BENSON-190X-1,113.252

I can@ @not help feeling that if this boy finds the art of expression he
may be a good writer ; BENSON-190X-1,113.253

at least he seems to me to have ten times the <font> fire <$$font> I
ever possessed . BENSON-190X-1,113.254

When I realise the intense vehemence and impulsiveness of a boy like
this , his " exultations , agonies , " I feel what a very <font> mild
<$$font> person I was ; BENSON-190X-1,113.255

I fell into depression as a young man , BENSON-190X-1,113.256

but even that I bore with angelic meekness ; BENSON-190X-1,113.257

I never had the least vestige of a <font> kick <$$font> in me !
BENSON-190X-1,113.258

He discoursed of the dons at Emmanuel , BENSON-190X-1,113.259

and opened my eyes somewhat to the light in which we harmless persons
are regarded . BENSON-190X-1,113.260

If a don is crusty and silent he is held to be arrogant ;
BENSON-190X-1,113.261

if he talks he is a bore . BENSON-190X-1,113.262

What the devil then <font> is <$$font> he to do ? BENSON-190X-1,113.263

My young friend smiled : BENSON-190X-1,113.264

' Oh , it is in the nature of things , ' he said .
BENSON-190X-1,113.265

<font> Monday . BENSON-190X-1,113.266

May <$$font> 8 . BENSON-190X-1,113.267

- A letter from Edward Lyttelton summoned me to town :
BENSON-190X-1,113.268

I went up , after writing many letters . BENSON-190X-1,113.269

Found Shipley going up to the Grouse Disease <P_114> Commission .
BENSON-190X-1,114.270

He is amused to find that it is almost entirely in the hands of crack
shots , responsible for the death of many more grouse than even the
disease itself . BENSON-190X-1,114.271

It is a humorous idea , people trying to stamp out the disease that they
may have the fun of killing the grouse themselves .
BENSON-190X-1,114.272

I drove to the House of Lords . BENSON-190X-1,114.273

I found Gosse in the library , BENSON-190X-1,114.274

and had a pleasant talk . BENSON-190X-1,114.275

{ED:...}

Then I went to National Club . BENSON-190X-1,114.277

Found Edward , brown as a berry , full of tranquillity , good spirits
and confidence . BENSON-190X-1,114.278

He unfolded to me his schemes . BENSON-190X-1,114.279

{ED:...}

I thought that this interview might have tried my philosophy and
fortitude ; that I might find myself wishing myself in his place , with
a free hand to carry out ideas . BENSON-190X-1,114.281

But I did not for a single instant . BENSON-190X-1,114.282

Indeed it was very much the other way . BENSON-190X-1,114.283

Again and again I said to myself , ' Can it be that I do@ @n't really
wish to have the carrying out of these things , and to hold this great
position ? ' BENSON-190X-1,114.284

And not the slightest echo of desire or envy or chagrin came back .
BENSON-190X-1,114.285

That is worth something , I think : worth the long and wearing anxiety
of the candidature . BENSON-190X-1,114.286

We sat {TEXT:sate} BENSON-190X-1,114.287

and walked up and down in the little garden at the back of the National
Club ; BENSON-190X-1,114.288

it was sunny , BENSON-190X-1,114.289

and a fresh wind blew BENSON-190X-1,114.290

and stirred the bushes , which were all green . BENSON-190X-1,114.291

I liked Edward's candid gaze , the smile which broke out all over his
face , his splendid laugh . BENSON-190X-1,114.292

He is a mere brown skeleton ; but his hands still red and stumpy as of
old . BENSON-190X-1,114.293

I felt an odd mixture of confidence in his strength , and entire
mistrust in his judgment . BENSON-190X-1,114.294

We finished our talk looking over the little wall above the embankment .
BENSON-190X-1,114.295

Sir A. Bateman passed BENSON-190X-1,114.296

and regarded us with grave surprise . BENSON-190X-1,114.297

Then Edward biked off to a doctor in Harley Street , about his throat ;
and I back to King's Cross ; and through a sunny calm evening to
Cambridge , revolving schemes for Eton , and heartily glad that the
burden was not on my back . BENSON-190X-1,114.298

{ED:...}

<font> May <$$font> 15 . BENSON-190X-1,114.300

- I seem never to have a moment to write in this book now .
BENSON-190X-1,114.301

I am really as much <paren> or more <$$paren> hustled <P_115> as I was
in old days at Eton . BENSON-190X-1,115.302

I struggled desperately with letters ; BENSON-190X-1,115.303

but had to go off at 11.15 to Pembroke Lodge to see the Bishop of St.
Andrew's by appointment . BENSON-190X-1,115.304

I found him at the door , pacing about in the sun : looking very tired ;
but with just the kind and wistful look of old ; the only sign of age a
certain heaviness and slowness . BENSON-190X-1,115.305

I took him to the Granary BENSON-190X-1,115.306

and he asked me about everyone and everything , looking very long at E.
W. B.'s pictures , especially at the Vanity Fair , which he liked .
BENSON-190X-1,115.307

Then to Magdalene ; where he asked me about myself and my soul , and
spoke very beautifully and simply , like a wise and tired child , half
on the verge of tears , of walking in the Will of God , holding to His
hand . BENSON-190X-1,115.308

Then I took him to the chapel ; BENSON-190X-1,115.309

and he knelt down on the step in front of the altar
BENSON-190X-1,115.310

and motioned me to kneel by him . BENSON-190X-1,115.311

He prayed <font> very <$$font> tenderly and wistfully about me and my
dear ones , alive and dead , himself , my work and his .
BENSON-190X-1,115.312

And then he rose BENSON-190X-1,115.313

and with great dignity and simplicity laid his hands on my head
BENSON-190X-1,115.314

and blessed me , with a beautiful form of words of which the music
remains with me , though I can@ @not remember the words themselves - to
be guided , led , helped , comforted . BENSON-190X-1,115.315

I drew very near to him in that moment ; BENSON-190X-1,115.316

and I felt , too , a strange solemnity , a consecration about it ,
coming just at the time when I have refused and missed great
opportunities ; BENSON-190X-1,115.317

perhaps it was a kind of consecration of my life to Magdalene -
BENSON-190X-1,115.318

who knows ? BENSON-190X-1,115.319

- and yet I do not feel as if Magdalene was to be my home for long .
BENSON-190X-1,115.320

But anyhow , it was just the peaceful patriarchal blessing I wanted and
needed . BENSON-190X-1,115.321

{ED:...}

And so we walked out in the sun BENSON-190X-1,115.323

and I tried to thank him , BENSON-190X-1,115.324

but could not ; BENSON-190X-1,115.325

and he got into the cab BENSON-190X-1,115.326

and drove away with a smile and a wave of the hand , carrying my love
with him . BENSON-190X-1,115.327

His pale face , the dark circles under the closed eyes , the wistful ,
smiling , tearful lips , the black hair , will long live with me .
BENSON-190X-1,115.328

{ED:...}

Of course I am not in line with him in the superficial tones of belief ;
BENSON-190X-1,115.330

but I am with him below <P_116> and within , though we do@ @n't call
things by the same names . BENSON-190X-1,116.331

{ED:...}

Then I rode off alone , Monty having thrown me over ;
BENSON-190X-1,116.333

and again I had one of the most curiously beautiful rides of my life .
BENSON-190X-1,116.334

I got to Milton : BENSON-190X-1,116.335

saw the church , in its green shade , with its elaborately written
monuments , its glorious little window of Jacob , with hands like
parsnips : BENSON-190X-1,116.336

then crossed the line , among the green pastures , so full of great
thorn-thickets : BENSON-190X-1,116.337

and then along the tow-path , riding slowly down the Cam .
BENSON-190X-1,116.338

Such a sweet clear , fresh day . BENSON-190X-1,116.339

I wound slowly along past Baitsbite and the Waterbeach bridge , into the
heart of the fen . BENSON-190X-1,116.340

The space below the tow-path full of masses of cow-parsley :
BENSON-190X-1,116.341

the river sapphire_blue between the green banks - BENSON-190X-1,116.342

the huge fields running for miles to the right , with the long lines of
dyke and lode ; BENSON-190X-1,116.343

far away the blue tower of Ely , the brown roofs of Reach , and the low
wolds of Newmarket . BENSON-190X-1,116.344

It was simply <font> enchanting ! <$$font> BENSON-190X-1,116.345

Such a sense of peace , and happy loneliness , and space and silence .
BENSON-190X-1,116.346

I found a trench full for a mile of the sweet water-violet ;
BENSON-190X-1,116.347

pale lilac flowers , with a heavenly scent , on green slim stalks ;
leaves like hair : this flower an old friend of mine from Eton days .
BENSON-190X-1,116.348

So I wound on and on , full of peace and content ; BENSON-190X-1,116.349

I declare that the <font> absolutely <$$font> flat country , golden with
buttercups , and the blue tree-clumps far away backed by hills , and
over all the vast sky-perspective , is the most beautiful thing <font>
of all . <$$font> BENSON-190X-1,116.350

I got to Upware ; BENSON-190X-1,116.351

was ferried across in an old boat ; BENSON-190X-1,116.352

spun before the wind to Cambridge . BENSON-190X-1,116.353

Then Monty came in to tea , very solemn and well-dressed , blue suit and
black tie ; BENSON-190X-1,116.354

the <font> Provost ! <$$font> BENSON-190X-1,116.355

How strange it all seems , BENSON-190X-1,116.356

and yet how natural ; BENSON-190X-1,116.357

that mouth-filling word , with such dim and awful associations .
BENSON-190X-1,116.358

{ED:...}

We talked away , BENSON-190X-1,116.360

and he told me how he was sent for after the first scrutiny and asked if
he would accept . BENSON-190X-1,116.361

There was a green table set out by the choir door inside , and fellows
in nearly all the stalls . BENSON-190X-1,116.362

He accepted , BENSON-190X-1,116.363

and they filed out shaking hands . BENSON-190X-1,116.364

He told me too how the choir-boys asked to see him , and did him a
simple homage in their vestry . BENSON-190X-1,116.365

Very nice ! BENSON-190X-1,116.366

<P_117>

Then Hall with Jones ; BENSON-190X-1,117.368

and a Concert Committee in Sawday's rooms . BENSON-190X-1,117.369

S. seems resourceful and energetic ; BENSON-190X-1,117.370

then a little work ; BENSON-190X-1,117.371

but I was tired . BENSON-190X-1,117.372

<font> Tremans , BENSON-190X-1,117.373

June 2 . <$$font> BENSON-190X-1,117.374

- It is very sweet to be here , though a hot soft wind this morning
roars in the pines , and the laburnums are all dishevelled .
BENSON-190X-1,117.375

I wrote , read , talked all morning . BENSON-190X-1,117.376

I ca@ @n't find courage to attack the Q. V. bundle .
BENSON-190X-1,117.377

Then walked with Hugh , in sweet woods and lanes ; down by the lake , by
Danehurst ; and back by the green lane that comes out by Townplace and
Freshfield . BENSON-190X-1,117.378

He is a strange nature . BENSON-190X-1,117.379

He is entirely unworldly ; BENSON-190X-1,117.380

hates cruelty , rudeness , lack of consideration above everything .
BENSON-190X-1,117.381

Yet he is himself in a way very inconsiderate . BENSON-190X-1,117.382

Table and ledge , all over this house , are heaped with books he has
torn out of shelves and thrown down . BENSON-190X-1,117.383

The litter in the little smoking-room is fearful .
BENSON-190X-1,117.384

Last night he would not leave dear Beth in peace till she had found him
a box , BENSON-190X-1,117.385

and she trotted about far more than was good for her .
BENSON-190X-1,117.386

He has a great charm ; though I often feel that in my absence he thinks
little of me . BENSON-190X-1,117.387

He has , indeed , all the charm , the <font> bonhomie <$$font> , the
attractiveness , the hardness of the artistic nature .
BENSON-190X-1,117.388

I wrote away about Pater and Cuckoos . BENSON-190X-1,117.389

Then found M. at dinner , looking well and strong .
BENSON-190X-1,117.390

We rather lapsed into vague scrappiness about the Mission , etc.
BENSON-190X-1,117.391

Then I read a little paper which aroused some discussion .
BENSON-190X-1,117.392

Then prayers , cutting short the thread , with a hymn which I can only
call damnable ; bearing the same relation to poetry and music that
onions and toasted_cheese do to claret and peaches ; strong , coarsely
flavoured , ugly , untrue <font> nonsense . <$$font>
BENSON-190X-1,117.393

It is odd to me that the dear ladies who are so refinedly critical in
<P_118> other regions do@ @n't see that this is vulgar .
BENSON-190X-1,118.394

I do@ @n't myself believe that vulgarity is a sin at all ,
BENSON-190X-1,118.395

but I happen to dislike it ; BENSON-190X-1,118.396

and in this short life , that is enough . BENSON-190X-1,118.397

{ED:...}

<font> Saturday , June <$$font> 3 . BENSON-190X-1,118.399

- They are celebrating the Fourth of June at Eton ,
BENSON-190X-1,118.400

and thank God I am not there in any capacity whatever .
BENSON-190X-1,118.401

I wrote letters all the morning . BENSON-190X-1,118.402

{ED:...}

Then I took a bicycle BENSON-190X-1,118.404

and rode by Chailey and Plumpton , on to Wivelsfield , and back by
Hayward's Heath . BENSON-190X-1,118.405

It was a perfect day ; BENSON-190X-1,118.406

and this great undulating plain , full of oak-woods , with the pure
austere line of the downs , so dark and dusky , coming out at every turn
over the bright and fretted green of the uncrumpling oak leaves , was a
perpetual joy . BENSON-190X-1,118.407

The view from North Common is one of the most beautiful in England , I
think . BENSON-190X-1,118.408

I pondered many things , not unhappily , though my thoughts had a
melancholy tinge to-day . BENSON-190X-1,118.409

Life races past so swiftly ; BENSON-190X-1,118.410

there is so much to see , to enjoy , to feel ; such endless beauty , so
many dear and interesting relations with others to experience .
BENSON-190X-1,118.411

I feel like a man at a huge banquet , lamenting his slender appetite .
BENSON-190X-1,118.412

The white heads of daisies , floating on the top of deep meadow grass ,
affected me tyrannously . BENSON-190X-1,118.413

I felt as if I could have ridden for ever in that quiet joy , feasting
my eyes and heart on quiet beauty and grace , until the evening .
BENSON-190X-1,118.414

Yes , and what then ? BENSON-190X-1,118.415

Since then I have written a little at Pater , and my book , really
finishing the latter , I think . BENSON-190X-1,118.416

The proofs arrive . BENSON-190X-1,118.417

Every now and then a gun is fired in a field near ;
BENSON-190X-1,118.418

a fierce twitter of sparrows and starlings rises in the ivy ,
BENSON-190X-1,118.419

and the peacock blows his harsh trumpet . BENSON-190X-1,118.420

{ED:...}

The evening falls slowly ; BENSON-190X-1,118.422

a warm air steals in . BENSON-190X-1,118.423

The laburnums hang heavily , BENSON-190X-1,118.424

and the birds sing faintly . BENSON-190X-1,118.425

All is breathlessly still . BENSON-190X-1,118.426

Dear old Beth comes trotting up with a rose which she has tied for me .
BENSON-190X-1,118.427

Well , I have had another very happy day , BENSON-190X-1,118.428

and am grateful . BENSON-190X-1,118.429

<P_119>

<font> The Old Granary , BENSON-190X-1,119.431

June <$$font> 12 . BENSON-190X-1,119.432

- Having next to no letters and no paper I began work immediately after
breakfast on the Q. V. letters , BENSON-190X-1,119.433

and did a great batch . BENSON-190X-1,119.434

But it is too hot for comfort . BENSON-190X-1,119.435

{ED:...}

After lunch I went off in a calm and leisurely spirit on a bicycle .
BENSON-190X-1,119.437

It was a peculiar pleasure to get out of Cambridge , which was crammed
with Whit-Monday folk , as well as the bevies of sisters and friends ,
led about by excited undergraduates . BENSON-190X-1,119.438

I do@ @n't at all wish to depreciate this background .
BENSON-190X-1,119.439

It is rather pleasant when one is living independent and secure , to
feel this gaiety going on , which would be unendurable if one had to
take part in it . BENSON-190X-1,119.440

I rather like the perpetual swish of waves beneath my window , the
creaking of oars , the cheerful chatter of irresponsible persons ;
BENSON-190X-1,119.441

it sets the slow melody of my own thoughts to a cheerful descant .
BENSON-190X-1,119.442

{ED:...}

I saw a goldfinch , and a large finch unknown to me , I imagine a
hawfinch . BENSON-190X-1,119.444

Then on by Babraham , over the Gogs , with a splendid view , richly
coloured and tranquil ; BENSON-190X-1,119.445

and so home , BENSON-190X-1,119.446

a good ride and very happy . BENSON-190X-1,119.447

Tea . BENSON-190X-1,119.448

Then wrote a fantasy for my <font> House of Neville <$$font> book .
BENSON-190X-1,119.449

Then O. B. came to dinner . BENSON-190X-1,119.450

This was a severe trial . BENSON-190X-1,119.451

But I got an odd , pathetic interest out of it . BENSON-190X-1,119.452

He talked for two hours without a moment's cessation of his influence ,
the ambitions he had had , his services to education , his services to
King's , the malignity and jealousy of everyone in the world .
BENSON-190X-1,119.453

He said that his habitual feeling here was that of a whipped hound ,
that everyone was in a conspiracy to belittle and insult him .
BENSON-190X-1,119.454

And yet it was all full of fine flashes of insight , of purpose , of
wisdom . BENSON-190X-1,119.455

{ED:...}

He indulged in many acute characterisations of people .
BENSON-190X-1,119.457

He described his farewell to Uncle Henry , which he said was very
affecting . BENSON-190X-1,119.458

It <P_120> appears that O. B. talked , according to his own confession
, entirely about himself , in the same vein ; his ambitions , his
services , his disappointments . BENSON-190X-1,120.459

It never enters the man's head that he is in the <font> least <$$font>
to blame ; BENSON-190X-1,120.460

I wo@ @n't say it makes me miserable , BENSON-190X-1,120.461

for there is a lurid interest about it all ; BENSON-190X-1,120.462

but it is really the saddest thing ; because the man is a genius , and
because he <font> has <$$font> done a great work , in his odd , selfish
way ; BENSON-190X-1,120.463

but he is all coated and scaled with egotism , and covered with prickles
. BENSON-190X-1,120.464

He had brought a lot of documents with him , BENSON-190X-1,120.465

and the evening ended by his reading to me in his fat utterance the
testimonials he had received when he stood for a Professorship at
Glasgow . BENSON-190X-1,120.466

He never said a word about anyone except to malign them ;
BENSON-190X-1,120.467

he never asked for an opinion ; BENSON-190X-1,120.468

he did not attend to anything that I said , BENSON-190X-1,120.469

and interrupted me again and again . BENSON-190X-1,120.470

The only remarks which he listened to were those that were couched in
flattering terms . BENSON-190X-1,120.471

The effect is indescribable . BENSON-190X-1,120.472

I felt , when he waddled off , as if I had been turned over and over in
somewhat ill-smelling waves ; BENSON-190X-1,120.473

and yet I could@ @n't help realising his force , his brilliancy and his
genius . BENSON-190X-1,120.474

He set me thinking somehow ; BENSON-190X-1,120.475

and gave one an inspiration to try and keep up an intellectual standard
. BENSON-190X-1,120.476

He made one ill jest about - and his wife , which is really incomparably
humorous , but rather too broad to reproduce . BENSON-190X-1,120.477

<font> Je m'y perds ! <$$font> BENSON-190X-1,120.478

The strangeness of the creation of such a man , so fine , so gross , so
public-spirited , so mean , so intellectual , so dull , so great , so
little , is a perfect mystery . BENSON-190X-1,120.479

The tares and the wheat grow together in rich luxuriance , inextricably
intertwined . BENSON-190X-1,120.480

His ruling passion seemed to be to make King's a great college , and to
make all the money and credit out of it that he could .
BENSON-190X-1,120.481

He has done a great work and covered himself with discredit , and
deserved discredit . BENSON-190X-1,120.482

He has created a school here , BENSON-190X-1,120.483

and he is detested . BENSON-190X-1,120.484

He has fought the battle of intellectual things , BENSON-190X-1,120.485

and he is a holy terror . BENSON-190X-1,120.486

He is a genius and a bore , a man of light and darkness ; Hyperion and a
satyr , Jekyll and Hyde . BENSON-190X-1,120.487

I can@ @not defend him BENSON-190X-1,120.488

and yet I admire him ; BENSON-190X-1,120.489

I can@ @not respect him BENSON-190X-1,120.490

and yet I like him ; BENSON-190X-1,120.491

I pity him with <P_121> all my heart , BENSON-190X-1,121.492

and yet the one thing he does not desire is pity .
BENSON-190X-1,121.493

He is half baker and half devil ; BENSON-190X-1,121.494

and the odd thing is that he is not now one , now another , but both at
once . BENSON-190X-1,121.495

There is no theory of God which will explain the existence of a man like
O. B. BENSON-190X-1,121.496

And the result of my talk has been that the mystery of the Universe
presses fiercely on my mind . BENSON-190X-1,121.497

<font> Skelwithfold , BENSON-190X-1,121.498

July <$$font> 20 . BENSON-190X-1,121.499

- I wrote a long letter to the Duke of Saxe-Coburg , congratulating him
on his accession , and bidding him rule well . BENSON-190X-1,121.500

Odd to find oneself advising a little Monarch how to rule .
BENSON-190X-1,121.501

I do wish him well with all my heart . BENSON-190X-1,121.502

{ED:...}

A cloudy morning , rather close and grey . BENSON-190X-1,121.504

{ED:...}

The afternoon was <font> most <$$font> interesting .
BENSON-190X-1,121.506

We drove through Ambleside , BENSON-190X-1,121.507

and I recognised the house where the pert girl was in 1870 -
BENSON-190X-1,121.508

it was just below Belle Vue , BENSON-190X-1,121.509

and belonged to a cousin of Wordsworth's - BENSON-190X-1,121.510

now a training college . BENSON-190X-1,121.511

We went to Fox Howe . BENSON-190X-1,121.512

This place was built and planted by Arnold , just sixty years ago ;
BENSON-190X-1,121.513

yet it has all the look of an old , settled , peaceful place .
BENSON-190X-1,121.514

It is odd that the time required is <font> just <$$font> too long for a
man to enjoy it himself . BENSON-190X-1,121.515

If he built at forty , and few people can do it before , he would <font>
begin <$$font> to have it right at eighty . BENSON-190X-1,121.516

The house is bigger and more stately than I had thought ; in the
semi-ecclesiastical taste of the 'forties . BENSON-190X-1,121.517

The garden beautiful - BENSON-190X-1,121.518

it is embowered in tall trees and lawns - one with the oddest curved
flower-bed I have ever seen ; BENSON-190X-1,121.519

all this planned by Wordsworth . BENSON-190X-1,121.520

From the windows you see green water-meadows , leafy hillsides ,
may-trees , and great green mountains ; BENSON-190X-1,121.521

but it is rather a hothouse ; BENSON-190X-1,121.522

and the ceaseless cries of trippers in their char-à-bancs on <P_122> the
road hard by are horrible . BENSON-190X-1,122.523

Miss Arnold received us - a dear old lady - BENSON-190X-1,122.524

rich complexion , big smiling mouth , full of teeth , long nose ,
rippled hair , slight cast of eye ; but with such a sweet , courteous
manner , so that one hangs on the simplest words that come from her lips
as seeming to have a flavour and a quality denied to others .
BENSON-190X-1,122.525

We talked of her relations and mine - BENSON-190X-1,122.526

I wish I had a beautiful , dignified , courteous manner !
BENSON-190X-1,122.527

It comes from those qualities in the mind , joined with a certain timbre
of voice and distinctness of utterance . BENSON-190X-1,122.528

{ED:...}

We walked about the garden a little ; BENSON-190X-1,122.530

and then drove away ; BENSON-190X-1,122.531

I valued this sight of an interesting house and a gracious lady very
deeply . BENSON-190X-1,122.532

Then we drove on to Rydal Mount ; BENSON-190X-1,122.533

and were fortunate again - BENSON-190X-1,122.534

Mrs. Fisher-Wordsworth at home ; BENSON-190X-1,122.535

we passed by the way houses inhabited by all sorts of familiar names ,
Quillinan , Rawnsley , Wordsworth . BENSON-190X-1,122.536

Rydal Mount is invisible from the lower road . BENSON-190X-1,122.537

You walk up past the church . BENSON-190X-1,122.538

It is a very tiny place - like a farmhouse - BENSON-190X-1,122.539

but the gardens with trees and terraces , and the odd Mount of Meeting ,
which gives its name to the place , are all impressive .
BENSON-190X-1,122.540

I remembered seeing it in '70 - the slate steps leading up to the front
of the house , through rhododendrons , BENSON-190X-1,122.541

recalled it . BENSON-190X-1,122.542

Papa gave me a Wordsworth , bought at Lincoln Station , in honour of the
visit . BENSON-190X-1,122.543

The rooms tiny - and a <font> fearful <$$font> smell of dry-rot - but
deeply moving and interesting . BENSON-190X-1,122.544

Portraits and busts everywhere - such as Haydon's .
BENSON-190X-1,122.545

But it must have looked very different in the Poet's time - much newer ,
much more <font> raw ; <$$font> he was making the garden then , and
adding to the house - and of course <font> much <$$font> simpler in
furniture , etc. BENSON-190X-1,122.546

The garden struck me greatly - the view of Windermere , the beautiful
fall of the ground , the trees , the almost tropical luxuriance of
everything . BENSON-190X-1,122.547

I felt a good deal of emotion about the whole thing - much more than at
Fox Howe . BENSON-190X-1,122.548

The stiff , self-absorbed , commonplace-looking man <paren> Wordsworth ,
I mean <$$paren> was , after all , a high priest of mysteries -
BENSON-190X-1,122.549

and the house stands for much high and beautiful <font> joy . <$$font>
BENSON-190X-1,122.550

He lived here thirty-five years . BENSON-190X-1,122.551

<P_123>

They are terribly harried by trippers . BENSON-190X-1,123.553

But Mrs. F. W. , rather a pretty woman , showed us everything , the
chests , the little old parlour , etc. , with great zest .
BENSON-190X-1,123.554

I wish I could copy the dignity of Wordsworth , in refusing to do <font>
anything <$$font> but what he loved . BENSON-190X-1,123.555

I will aim at that . BENSON-190X-1,123.556

The lines of Milton kept running in my head as we walked about , with a
deep thrill : BENSON-190X-1,123.557

On this mount he appeared ; BENSON-190X-1,123.558

under this tree Stood visible ; BENSON-190X-1,123.559

among these pines his voice I heard ; BENSON-190X-1,123.560

here with him at this fountain talked . BENSON-190X-1,123.561

P. L. , xi , 320 . BENSON-190X-1,123.562

The two places together filled me with interest . BENSON-190X-1,123.563

School-mastering and poetry ! BENSON-190X-1,123.564

To see the abodes of two of the prophets , masters in these two arts ,
both of which I have practised , and in both of which I have meekly and
humbly failed , was a kind of humiliating inspiration .
BENSON-190X-1,123.565

After this I decided to walk over the Fell . BENSON-190X-1,123.566

Not a breath stirring , BENSON-190X-1,123.567

and a close , unutterable heat . BENSON-190X-1,123.568

I went slowly up among the ferns , dripping , buzzed about by flies ;
but with fine backward glances at Nab Scar and the dark lake below .
BENSON-190X-1,123.569

As I rose , the great mountains rose to look at me , behind the nearer
hills . BENSON-190X-1,123.570

{ED:...}

<font> Tremans , BENSON-190X-1,123.572

August <$$font> 16 . BENSON-190X-1,123.573

- I read Wm. Johnson's journal in bed - his views of chivalry , etc. -
BENSON-190X-1,123.574

and felt truly ashamed of my paltry , weak , trivial , sentimental ,
ignorant mind . BENSON-190X-1,123.575

I know nothing , BENSON-190X-1,123.576

am miserably biased - BENSON-190X-1,123.577

but it is of no use bemoaning it ; BENSON-190X-1,123.578

I remember what interests me . BENSON-190X-1,123.579

I expect I read as many books as he did ! BENSON-190X-1,123.580

It is like music ; BENSON-190X-1,123.581

no amount of <font> study <$$font> of it reveals the inner soul , the
appreciation which a child may have , to the unmusical .
BENSON-190X-1,123.582

W. J. writes in one of his letters respectfully , yet incredulously ,
about music to A. Coleridge . BENSON-190X-1,123.583

<font> Melodies <$$font> affected W. J. - BENSON-190X-1,123.584

he tied on to them something of the romance and melancholy of the world
; BENSON-190X-1,123.585

but he did@ @n't really believe that a change of key could affect people
as they said it did . BENSON-190X-1,123.586

Yet even to me , with my paltry musical gift , a change of key is like
magic . BENSON-190X-1,123.587

<P_124>

Well , one must go on and do the best one can with one's powers .
BENSON-190X-1,124.589

{ED:...}

I lunched off cold fragments - very nice . BENSON-190X-1,124.591

Took a train to Hayward's Heath , and then by Burgess Hill right out to
the west . BENSON-190X-1,124.592

{ED:...}

I found at last such a pretty out-of-the-world place , Twineham , with a
little brick Jacobean church , at the end of a lane - small , dark and
comfortable ; BENSON-190X-1,124.594

an old Italian picture <paren> a bad copy , I expect <$$paren> , of a
holy family , which might have some appeal to imagination , poked away
over the chancel arch , without misgivings , in order to make room for
Mr. Kempe at his worst . BENSON-190X-1,124.595

A sly , ferret-faced angel , incredibly involved in raiment , as though
the celestial temperature were arctic , making his announcement to a
Virgin , who looks as if she were being photographed , very demure .
BENSON-190X-1,124.596

The colours inoffensive , BENSON-190X-1,124.597

but a poor work of art . BENSON-190X-1,124.598

From the pretty little lonely churchyard , over a wheatfield , the
outline of the down rose and fell , like a green and shadowy wave .
BENSON-190X-1,124.599

A school feast at the vicarage . BENSON-190X-1,124.600

I read epitaphs , BENSON-190X-1,124.601

and sat {TEXT:sate} long on the broad , low slab of a grave , wondering
who and what my host , that lay below , had been .
BENSON-190X-1,124.602

It was very sweet in that little secluded churchyard ,
BENSON-190X-1,124.603

and for once I had no sense of hurry . BENSON-190X-1,124.604

Twineham Place , an old farm-house , held up its timbered gables and
rusty chimneys very pleasantly over a grove of oaks .
BENSON-190X-1,124.605

{ED:...}

What an odd thing one's mind is . BENSON-190X-1,124.607

I have no great desire to be loved by other people ;
BENSON-190X-1,124.608

yet I should like to think that in the days to come , when I am gone ,
someone should care to retrace my rambles , and even wish me back .
BENSON-190X-1,124.609

{ED:...}

<font> August <$$font> 17 . BENSON-190X-1,124.611

- Letters and business all morning . BENSON-190X-1,124.612

I forgot to say that on my return yesterday I visited Cuckfield church ,
which is rich and dim , like a cathedral , full of villainous , yet
joyful , glass . BENSON-190X-1,124.613

It has an incomparable view from the churchyard ; BENSON-190X-1,124.614

yet I suppose that man ca@ @n't live on views alone .
BENSON-190X-1,124.615

I spent rather a feeble morning ; BENSON-190X-1,124.616

a hot , damp southwest wind was blowing , BENSON-190X-1,124.617

and the mind was unstrung . BENSON-190X-1,124.618

I <P_125> went out bicycling , BENSON-190X-1,125.619

and worked down against the wind to Burgess Hill , returning to
Wivelsfield , BENSON-190X-1,125.620

and I saw many beautiful vignettes ; a deserted byre , with a big
stone-tiled barn , doors open , BENSON-190X-1,125.621

and a water-wagtail , with head on one side , looked curiously in to the
raftered dark ; BENSON-190X-1,125.622

a little timbered , ancient house , the front walls all scored with pale
half-circles , where the roses swung to and fro ; BENSON-190X-1,125.623

a deep , silent lane , overhung with close hazels , up which I went in
gratified silence . BENSON-190X-1,125.624

{ED:...}

It has been a happy day , at least a contented one , in spite of a few
sombre shadows which lie in the background of the mind , like big clouds
, and from which a few scattered rain-drops seem at times to fall .
BENSON-190X-1,125.626

What odd tricks the mind plays . BENSON-190X-1,125.627

At Stanmore I saw in the church the grave of some good woman , who died
on August 17 , aged forty-three . BENSON-190X-1,125.628

I was seized with a mild presentiment that August 17 would bring me some
fateful crisis . BENSON-190X-1,125.629

But it has passed without event , BENSON-190X-1,125.630

and I am still here , though yesterday the thought was about me all day
, not sadly , but with a grave solemnity . BENSON-190X-1,125.631

I reflect that since I have left Eton , in addition to all my work on
the Queen's Letters , I have written the following books : 1. <font>
Cambridge Revisited <$$font> <paren> not published <$$paren> . 2.
<font> FitzGerald <$$font> <paren> 62,000 words <$$paren> . 3. <font>
Upton Letters <$$font> <paren> 80,000 <$$paren> . 4. <font> College
Window <$$font> <paren> 40,000 <$$paren> . 5. <font> Pater <$$font>
<paren> 60,000 <$$paren> . 6. <font> Leonard <$$font> <paren> 60,000
<$$paren> . 7. My poetry lectures - quite a book <paren> 50,000
<$$paren> . 8. <font> The Thread of Gold <$$font> <paren> 80,000
<$$paren> . 9. Enough essays and articles to form a small volume by
themselves <paren> 40,000 <$$paren> . BENSON-190X-1,125.632

10. I have published a volume of poems . BENSON-190X-1,125.633

It is a long list ; BENSON-190X-1,125.634

yet I am not at all a hard worker - only a very regular one .
BENSON-190X-1,125.635

{ED:...}

<P_126>

I do@ @n't quote this for the sake of credit ; BENSON-190X-1,126.638

no one can be more aware than I am of indolence and laziness ;
BENSON-190X-1,126.639

but I quote it to defend my manner of working - to show that even an
indolent person who cares about his work , <font> can <$$font> produce a
very fair amount of moderate work in a short time .
BENSON-190X-1,126.640

The point is to care . BENSON-190X-1,126.641

<font> Magdalene , BENSON-190X-1,126.642

October <$$font> 1 . BENSON-190X-1,126.643

- To King's Chapel BENSON-190X-1,126.644

- met the Bakers - BENSON-190X-1,126.645

Monty went in in state - BENSON-190X-1,126.646

I did not care for the service , somehow , BENSON-190X-1,126.647

no unction . BENSON-190X-1,126.648

Came out BENSON-190X-1,126.649

and saw several friends - Sir R. Ball , Lady Albinia , Vice-Provost ,
etc. BENSON-190X-1,126.650

Monty carried me off to his rooms , BENSON-190X-1,126.651

but found them sported , BENSON-190X-1,126.652

and I regret to say stamped BENSON-190X-1,126.653

and positively <font> swore <$$font> . BENSON-190X-1,126.654

' D-n ! ' he said , standing there in surplice and Doctor's hood .
BENSON-190X-1,126.655

This was picturesque . BENSON-190X-1,126.656

We went up the back way . BENSON-190X-1,126.657

He told me he returned with bewilderment and shrinking to his new work .
BENSON-190X-1,126.658

So does the Dean of Christchurch , from whom I heard to-day - ' my usual
bewilderment at the beginning of a new academical year . '
BENSON-190X-1,126.659

We were going to have had a talk , when J. W. Clark came in , looking
very well ; and discoursed about himself , his foreign tours , his
library schemes , his books , his articles , for nearly an hour -
expressing the most unbounded and acrid contempt for everyone else in
the world . BENSON-190X-1,126.660

{ED:...}

He walked away with me , BENSON-190X-1,126.662

and told me more of his plans - the <font> restaurant <$$font> system
for College Halls , full of sense ; BENSON-190X-1,126.663

and one ca@ @n't help loving J. , though he does despise the human race
, for his own geniality and affection , which are entirely sincere .
BENSON-190X-1,126.664

{ED:...}

Then back BENSON-190X-1,126.666

and wrote . BENSON-190X-1,126.667

I had noticed in King's in the morning a fine-looking boy , evidently a
freshman , just in front of me - BENSON-190X-1,126.668

lo and behold the same came to call on me , BENSON-190X-1,126.669

and turns out to be Mallory , from Winchester , one of our new
exhibitioners at Magdalene . BENSON-190X-1,126.670

He sat {TEXT:sate} some time ; BENSON-190X-1,126.671

and a simpler , more ingenuous , more unaffected , more genuinely
interested boy , I never saw . BENSON-190X-1,126.672

He is to be under me , BENSON-190X-1,126.673

and I <P_127> rejoice in the thought . BENSON-190X-1,127.674

He seemed full of admiration for all good things , and yet with no touch
of priggishness . BENSON-190X-1,127.675

I wrote feverishly after that - BENSON-190X-1,127.676

dined alone - BENSON-190X-1,127.677

wrote again . BENSON-190X-1,127.678

{ED:...}

<font> November <$$font> 11 . BENSON-190X-1,127.680

- Slept rather ill - BENSON-190X-1,127.681

wonderfully elaborate dreams ; BENSON-190X-1,127.682

Papa showing me a MS. book of his early poems , written in shorthand .
BENSON-190X-1,127.683

On the bottom of one was written , in <font> his <$$font> father's hand
, ' A similarly approving opinion of the advantages of conjugal love was
expressed by the late Mr. W. Cobden . ' BENSON-190X-1,127.684

The words ' W. Cobden ' were impressed on the page with a kind of stamp
, an oval line round them . BENSON-190X-1,127.685

The old , rather yellow pages , with the blue ink in which the poems
were written , the blunt capitals of the stamp - I can see this all now
with absolute fidelity . BENSON-190X-1,127.686

The human mind is a <font> very <$$font> odd thing .
BENSON-190X-1,127.687

{ED:...}

Then to my dining-club - Foakes-Jackson , Barnes , Lapsley , Laurence ;
the guests , Adam Sedgwick , the Vice-Chancellor , Wedd .
BENSON-190X-1,127.689

I sat {TEXT:sate} between Wedd and Lapsley , opposite the V.C. , who
was in high good-humour . BENSON-190X-1,127.690

His big , queer , ruddy face , all puckered and creased with geniality ,
his stiff mop of hair , his slight stammer , give him a <font> cachet .
<$$font> BENSON-190X-1,127.691

{ED:...}

I ca@ @n't reproduce his sallies . BENSON-190X-1,127.693

Their humour depends upon their sense of zest , combined with a certain
quaintness of expression , and a very infectious laugh - together with a
sense of personal kindness and interest . BENSON-190X-1,127.694

One ca@ @n't help liking the man and respecting him ,
BENSON-190X-1,127.695

and though he is in a way undignified , he has the dignity of vigour and
good sense and real simplicity . BENSON-190X-1,127.696

<P_128>

The dinner was excellent - a little too good . The wine extravagantly
so - an old Marcobrunner , a '93 champagne , and a Léoville '70 claret
afterwards ; also audit . BENSON-190X-1,128.698

I thought that everyone drank a great deal too much <paren> except
myself , of course - BENSON-190X-1,128.699

but that is taste , not principle <$$paren> ; BENSON-190X-1,128.700

after dinner the decanters went round and round , BENSON-190X-1,128.701

and people drank both port and claret freely . BENSON-190X-1,128.702

I put a spoonful of claret in my glass BENSON-190X-1,128.703

and sipped it for the sake of geniality ! BENSON-190X-1,128.704

{ED:...}

Afterwards things were not so merry . BENSON-190X-1,128.706

We smoked in a little slip of a room , in which people could not
circulate or gather in groups . BENSON-190X-1,128.707

I got stuck on a sofa with Sedgwick , BENSON-190X-1,128.708

and enjoyed the talk of this positive , brusque , pleasant scientist ,
interlarded with oaths . BENSON-190X-1,128.709

He has a curious admiration for literature , BENSON-190X-1,128.710

and talked books hard - with a half-regretful air , as a man might talk
about vintages , without being able to tell them apart .
BENSON-190X-1,128.711

I grew weary , not of him , but of myself . BENSON-190X-1,128.712

I did not want to sit in one place , boring one man to death ;
BENSON-190X-1,128.713

why ca@ @n't there be more ease and simplicity about these things ?
BENSON-190X-1,128.714

Meanwhile a group scintillated at the fire , BENSON-190X-1,128.715

talked BENSON-190X-1,128.716

and laughed shrilly . BENSON-190X-1,128.717

How well I know that kind of false convivial excitement , which is not
even pleasant . BENSON-190X-1,128.718

At midnight the V.C. rose , BENSON-190X-1,128.719

and crept downstairs , BENSON-190X-1,128.720

and so we parted . BENSON-190X-1,128.721

Let me note that the funny little yellow coach or sedan , which draws a
lady from the great gate to the Master's Lodge , was standing out ,
there being a party at the Lodge . BENSON-190X-1,128.722

No one knows where it is kept . BENSON-190X-1,128.723

It must be quite an ancient relic . BENSON-190X-1,128.724

Finally to bed late , BENSON-190X-1,128.725

and dreamt horrible and elaborate dreams . BENSON-190X-1,128.726

So much for conviviality - an overrated thing . BENSON-190X-1,128.727

{ED:...}

<font> Sunday , December <$$font> 10 . BENSON-190X-1,128.729

- I was much grieved last night to hear of Jebb's death .
BENSON-190X-1,128.730

He had a great attraction for me - both the thought of his delicate and
beautiful mind , as {COM:sic} well as of the secluded scholarly
character of the man . BENSON-190X-1,128.731

Of late , it seemed as if I had <P_129> come nearer to him .
BENSON-190X-1,129.732

He was always very cordial when we met . BENSON-190X-1,129.733

The last time I saw him was at the Board of Education , when he sat
{TEXT:sate} opposite me , and slept all the afternoon - he was obviously
unwell . BENSON-190X-1,129.734

His wide blue eye , his veined and almost scarred face , thin whiskers ,
much brushed up hair and great stoop , gave him an odd distinguished
look - half common , half refined . BENSON-190X-1,129.735

His sonorous , clear , poetical , resonant voice , always very beautiful
. BENSON-190X-1,129.736

It was strange to see him <font> oar <$$font> himself along with his
hand , as with a paddle , beating the air . BENSON-190X-1,129.737

He used to speak warmly of my English style . BENSON-190X-1,129.738

I felt somehow that he liked me . BENSON-190X-1,129.739

{ED:...}

Gosse in good spirits - BENSON-190X-1,129.741

we went to King's Chapel together BENSON-190X-1,129.742

and sat {TEXT:sate} in the antechapel . BENSON-190X-1,129.743

The service very sweet : BENSON-190X-1,129.744

<font> Hark ! a thrilling , <$$font> etc. , made me want to be up and
doing , though not necessarily on clerical lines .
BENSON-190X-1,129.745

Then I talked to W. D. , etc. , in the court ; BENSON-190X-1,129.746

wrote ; BENSON-190X-1,129.747

lunched ; BENSON-190X-1,129.748

walked with Gosse round Coton . BENSON-190X-1,129.749

A sunset of quite extraordinary beauty - the leafless trees , seen over
bare fields , the hamlet roofs , the world beyond , and the sun sinking
orange into smoky wisps of cloud , which he seemed to draw with him .
BENSON-190X-1,129.750

We watched the crimson orb slip behind the hill . BENSON-190X-1,129.751

Horace Darwin and his daughter watched it too . BENSON-190X-1,129.752

We talked of many things . BENSON-190X-1,129.753

{ED:...}

He told me of a little autobiographical book he meant to write - his
early days with his calvinistic father - the contest of paganism with
rigid faith . BENSON-190X-1,129.755

{ED:...}

He seemed glad to be here , and to feel better after his quiet day .
BENSON-190X-1,129.757

<font> The Old Granary , BENSON-190X-1,129.758

December <$$font> 16 . BENSON-190X-1,129.759

- Such a beautiful day of calm , golden , chilly sun ;
BENSON-190X-1,129.760

everything sparkling and subdued , too . BENSON-190X-1,129.761

Letters and business in much mass all morning . BENSON-190X-1,129.762

A welcome letter from Esher to say that the King will now be able to
look at proofs , etc. , now that the crisis is over .
BENSON-190X-1,129.763

A nice letter from the new Postmaster-General . BENSON-190X-1,129.764

{ED:...}

In the afternoon Monty came for me just as I was going to bike - so we
walked together by Coe Fen , the <P_130> avenue , and out to Cherry
Hinton . BENSON-190X-1,130.766

We went into the church , BENSON-190X-1,130.767

and looked at the delightful monument to a young Serocold , with the
extract from Lord Hood's despatch , which begins , ' I have to regret ,
and which I do most sincerely , ' etc. BENSON-190X-1,130.768

We also admired the beautiful Early English chancel , so light and clean
and ascetic in air , with its slender shafts and rich mouldings .
BENSON-190X-1,130.769

Monty , this great academical dignitary , in loose grey suit , white
Homburg hat , small , ill-tied shoes , shuffling along merrily , pleased
me . BENSON-190X-1,130.770

We rambled along inconsequently in talk as we are wont to do - always
quite delightful . BENSON-190X-1,130.771

He is one of the few people to whom I can and do say exactly what I
think and as I think it . BENSON-190X-1,130.772

He never misunderstands , BENSON-190X-1,130.773

is always amused , always appreciative . BENSON-190X-1,130.774

And yet I ca@ @n't recollect what we talked about .
BENSON-190X-1,130.775

We came back by an abandoned road by the huge cement works , which
contrived to look sombre and solemn in the gathering dusk , with their
huge chimneys belching smoke , their powdered roofs , their odd retorts
and towers : the lights beginning to be lighted within , and giant
shapes of moving beams and rods to move shadowily before the windows .
BENSON-190X-1,130.776

It is all very well to think these huge places unromantic and ugly ,
BENSON-190X-1,130.777

but what would a mediaeval knight have said if he had seen one at the
end of a forest avenue ? BENSON-190X-1,130.778

We came back in the dark by a long lighted road , the shops wearing a
Christmas air . BENSON-190X-1,130.779

Then by Parker's Piece , the R._C. Cathedral standing up very beautiful
over dark houses against a sunset sky . BENSON-190X-1,130.780

Then to a book-shop where he bought books - BENSON-190X-1,130.781

and so back to tea . BENSON-190X-1,130.782

Then I worked hard , BENSON-190X-1,130.783

a review of <font> In Memoriam <$$font> with Tennyson's own notes , a
series of gruff growls and snorts of disdain - and other pieces .
BENSON-190X-1,130.784

{ED:...}

Then dined alone ; afterwards reading and writing till late .
BENSON-190X-1,130.786

I like these solitary evenings now , BENSON-190X-1,130.787

and need no companion . BENSON-190X-1,130.788

I am reading the life of William Morris again . BENSON-190X-1,130.789

The frank and beautiful youth , so unconscious , so vivid , of these
interesting creatures - he , Burne-Jones , Dixon , C. Price and the
rest - pleases me by its fragrance and affection .
BENSON-190X-1,130.790

And I regard it , too , as one of the best written biographies of the
century , <P_131> if not of all English biographies .
BENSON-190X-1,131.791

It is so perfectly balanced and proportioned - so just , so beautiful .
BENSON-190X-1,131.792

But it makes one sad , too , to think that all these lives have faded
into dust ! BENSON-190X-1,131.793

If I could but get hold of a belief that would bring the death of sweet
things into line with hope , what a difference would be there !
BENSON-190X-1,131.794

I slept very ill , BENSON-190X-1,131.795

and read W. M. in the quiet hours between 3.0 and 5.0 , the weir
rushing outside , the night still and cold . BENSON-190X-1,131.796

<P_132_containing_editorial_material_omitted>

<P_133_containing_editorial_material_omitted>

<P_134_containing_editorial_material_omitted>

<P_135>

<font> Magdalene , BENSON-190X-1,135.801

February <$$font> 8 , 1906 . BENSON-190X-1,135.802

- After Hall I looked over the Prize Poems for the Chancellor's English
Medal - ten in all . BENSON-190X-1,135.803

Two were <font> good <$$font> , one in blank verse the best , I think -
but one in pretty triplets , decidedly poetical . BENSON-190X-1,135.804

Another had some fine stanzas : BENSON-190X-1,135.805

' The cheerless-whirling wheel ' struck me as a Tennysonian touch of
high merit . BENSON-190X-1,135.806

The rest worthless . BENSON-190X-1,135.807

<font> Friday , February <$$font> 9 . BENSON-190X-1,135.808

- A disgusting morning of letters - BENSON-190X-1,135.809

I wrote about 30 . BENSON-190X-1,135.810

{ED:...}

Then I had a great pleasure - BENSON-190X-1,135.812

it was bitterly cold , BENSON-190X-1,135.813

but I bicycled alone , on frozen roads , out to Boxworth by Huntingdon
Road . BENSON-190X-1,135.814

I had not realised how <font> thirsty <$$font> I was becoming for the
country . BENSON-190X-1,135.815

Never did a sun-baked man drain a cup of well-water more greedily than I
took in the impression of the fields wrinkled with cold , the low hills
, the black pinfold-lighted tower of Lolworth , the partridges calling
in the grass , the broad misty fen . BENSON-190X-1,135.816

I came back the same way ; and then by invitation to tea with the
charming Mallory , in his rooms in the corner of the court , over the
road . BENSON-190X-1,135.817

We talked like old friends , mostly of mountaineering ,
BENSON-190X-1,135.818

and I was pleased at my entertainment . BENSON-190X-1,135.819

Then worked hard at various things . BENSON-190X-1,135.820

To Hall , which was cheerful and pleasant ; BENSON-190X-1,135.821

and then I had to rush to St. John's to read a paper before the
Theological Society . BENSON-190X-1,135.822

It met in rooms in the top of the furthermost corner of the New Court .
BENSON-190X-1,135.823

I had never been here before . BENSON-190X-1,135.824

The stone corridors and iron-railed staircases are <font> horrible
<$$font> - BENSON-190X-1,135.825

but the rooms have a certain dignity and style . BENSON-190X-1,135.826

In a long room , with green Gothic doorways , quite small , I found more
men assembled than I could have believed <P_136> could have got in -
forty , I should think . BENSON-190X-1,136.827

We began with prayer , very solemn . BENSON-190X-1,136.828

Then I read my elaborate and inappropriate paper on Personality in Art ,
sitting in a low chair in the corner with a glaring lamp .
BENSON-190X-1,136.829

Then a few questions were asked , BENSON-190X-1,136.830

and I discoursed fluently but not well about Ruskin , Carlyle , etc. ,
etc. BENSON-190X-1,136.831

Then it was brought to an end , BENSON-190X-1,136.832

coffee came in , BENSON-190X-1,136.833

and a group of very nice boys came round BENSON-190X-1,136.834

and asked me all sorts of questions . BENSON-190X-1,136.835

I only wish I did not feel so big and stupid , and so little like the
celebrity they seem to regard me as . BENSON-190X-1,136.836

One , whose questions had struck me , with a very odd crop of black
tangled hair , strangely parted , was most attentive ;
BENSON-190X-1,136.837

and finally walked with me to the gate , discoursing softly .
BENSON-190X-1,136.838

The great tower looked very fine in the moonlight , as we passed through
the great splendid courts . BENSON-190X-1,136.839

{ED:...}

I like my young friend - BENSON-190X-1,136.841

asked him to lunch ; BENSON-190X-1,136.842

came back , BENSON-190X-1,136.843

smoked , BENSON-190X-1,136.844

worked fitfully at trifles , BENSON-190X-1,136.845

and eventually to bed , though dreading my cold room ;
BENSON-190X-1,136.846

and dreamed horribly - a confused dream of being back at Eton as a boy ,
of swinging by a rope from the ceiling of a great hall , my aim being to
swing myself into a balcony at the side . BENSON-190X-1,136.847

{ED:...}

I forgot to say that on Thursday afternoon , about 2.0 , one of the
strangest storms I have ever seen came on . BENSON-190X-1,136.849

The air became dim and black - BENSON-190X-1,136.850

there were furious flashes of a sort of purple lightning , heavy peals
of thunder , and then a furious shower of hail , so that the garden was
whitened with it . BENSON-190X-1,136.851

They have not only felled the pretty alder , but pruned the plane , so
that the houses of the Chesterton Road look in as by a window into the
garden . BENSON-190X-1,136.852

It is rather pathetic that my original offer of trees to the College was
just to fill this ugly increasing gap ; BENSON-190X-1,136.853

and now , as long as I hold my fellowship , the scar will gape , and
show the brick and slated houses through . BENSON-190X-1,136.854

The little slated turret which I see <font> hurts <$$font> my mind as
often as I think of it . BENSON-190X-1,136.855

The garden is now full of mounds of earth , pits , trees and branches
piled in heaps , tree-roots , ladders , <P_137> etc.
BENSON-190X-1,137.856

Such a routing it has not had for a_hundred years .
BENSON-190X-1,137.857

I suppose it is right , BENSON-190X-1,137.858

but it is sad at the time , somehow . BENSON-190X-1,137.859

The very thing I want to do with the public schools !
BENSON-190X-1,137.860

In rather a sad and fretted hour before the dawn to-day the following
came into my head , BENSON-190X-1,137.861

I do@ @n't know why - BENSON-190X-1,137.862

I seem to have taken leave of poetry . BENSON-190X-1,137.863

{COM:poem_omitted}

<font> Magdalene , BENSON-190X-1,137.865

February <$$font> 19 . BENSON-190X-1,137.866

- Woke early , much vexed at having to go away again .
BENSON-190X-1,137.867

No letters ! BENSON-190X-1,137.868

{ED:...}

Went pleasantly through to town , through a rain-soaked landscape , much
flood-water out . BENSON-190X-1,137.870

Sent my things to club ; BENSON-190X-1,137.871

and then off to Paddington BENSON-190X-1,137.872

and ran down the familiar line . BENSON-190X-1,137.873

We were soon at Slough ; BENSON-190X-1,137.874

and then the well-known scene , which I have not seen for a year , began
to unfold itself ; BENSON-190X-1,137.875

Eton , in its rain-splashed meadows , under a bleared and hurrying sky ,
with a hoarse , muddy river plucking at the osiers ;
BENSON-190X-1,137.876

every window and chimney and tree and hedgerow known to me like my own
body - BENSON-190X-1,137.877

and yet there was I , looking out upon it absolutely without emotion ;
rather pleased to know it all so well , as a bird might fly over
well-known fields , but neither desiring to be back , nor regretting the
past , nor wishing <P_138> anything otherwise - with no feeling of
tenderness or sorrow , only glad to be out of it all .
BENSON-190X-1,138.878

It was rather degrading and discreditable ; BENSON-190X-1,138.879

but still it is absolutely true . BENSON-190X-1,138.880

Then I got to the Castle , BENSON-190X-1,138.881

was greeted smilingly by the familiar police and flunkies ;
BENSON-190X-1,138.882

found Childers upstairs , everything all exactly the same - the rooms
very comfortable , and Miss Williams working away next door .
BENSON-190X-1,138.883

We did a lot of work , BENSON-190X-1,138.884

went right through all the strong-room papers , BENSON-190X-1,138.885

looked at everything , BENSON-190X-1,138.886

and I went through a whole batch of typewritten papers which had not
been gone through before . BENSON-190X-1,138.887

Then we lunched BENSON-190X-1,138.888

and worked away quietly ; BENSON-190X-1,138.889

then caught 4.25 . BENSON-190X-1,138.890

The Dean in the train . BENSON-190X-1,138.891

The panorama rolled past me again , with the same insensibility on my
part . BENSON-190X-1,138.892

Then up to London ; BENSON-190X-1,138.893

and I had a little talk with the Dean ; BENSON-190X-1,138.894

drove off with Childers BENSON-190X-1,138.895

and left him in Trafalgar Square . BENSON-190X-1,138.896

Then to the National Club - BENSON-190X-1,138.897

read and wrote ; BENSON-190X-1,138.898

and then found Gosse , tired and excited , from a long day at House of
Lords . BENSON-190X-1,138.899

He told me that he had been praising my educational views to Haldane .
BENSON-190X-1,138.900

P. Lubbock to dine . BENSON-190X-1,138.901

{ED:...}

Then we went BENSON-190X-1,138.903

and talked to Gosse in the smoking-room ; BENSON-190X-1,138.904

he was very brilliant and full of finished , amusing , polished
reminiscences of his father and the Plymouth Brethren .
BENSON-190X-1,138.905

Then Gosse fled ; BENSON-190X-1,138.906

and Percy and I had some more talk . BENSON-190X-1,138.907

{ED:...}

I read over what I have written about Eton - BENSON-190X-1,138.909

perhaps I ought not even to put it down - BENSON-190X-1,138.910

' Cast no least thing thou lovedst once away ' - BENSON-190X-1,138.911

but I do@ @n't put it down as to my credit , BENSON-190X-1,138.912

only record it as a fact that I do@ @n't , and can@ @not , in thinking
it over , feel the <font> least <$$font> emotion about the place .
BENSON-190X-1,138.913

I am simply glad my time there is over ; BENSON-190X-1,138.914

and I saw it as a man might see the galley where he had rowed .
BENSON-190X-1,138.915

<P_139>

<font> Sunday , February <$$font> 25 . BENSON-190X-1,139.917

- Sleepy and stupid . BENSON-190X-1,139.918

I preached in chapel ; BENSON-190X-1,139.919

but the boat had gone to Hunstanton , so the congregation was very small
. BENSON-190X-1,139.920

But I had a pleasure , BENSON-190X-1,139.921

for Rogers came in to my rooms afterwards , to thank me for my sermon .
BENSON-190X-1,139.922

He is an interesting boy . BENSON-190X-1,139.923

{ED:...}

Then I went for a walk with P. L. BENSON-190X-1,139.925

We found Warre in the garden , in high spirits , trampling among the
flower-beds . BENSON-190X-1,139.926

{ED:...}

Then P. L. and I walked on , BENSON-190X-1,139.928

and had a long talk about relations with other people - very interesting
. BENSON-190X-1,139.929

I have a sort of feeling , in discussing this subject with him , that he
has a kind of secret , hidden from me , a secret which others share , in
the matter . BENSON-190X-1,139.930

