<BEGIN_boethri-1785-1>

<P_104>

I have been hitherto employed in giving you a view of <font> false
happiness . <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-1,104.3

As I am persuaded you have considered it attentively , I shall now
proceed to shew wherein real and genuine felicity consists .
BOETHRI-1785-1,104.4

- I see very clearly , said I , that there is no sufficiency , nothing
fully satisfactory in riches , nothing powerful in royalty nothing
respectable in dignities , nothing shining in glory , nothing delightful
in pleasures . BOETHRI-1785-1,104.5

- But do you perceive , said she , the cause of all this ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,104.6

- A glimmering of it only strikes me , BOETHRI-1785-1,104.7

but I shall be happy to know the reason of it more distinctly from you .
BOETHRI-1785-1,104.8

The cause , said she , is obvious ; BOETHRI-1785-1,104.9

for that which is one and indivisible in Nature , human ignorance
separates ; BOETHRI-1785-1,104.10

and hence men are misled from what is true and perfect , to that which
is imperfect and counterfeit . BOETHRI-1785-1,104.11

This truth I shall now endeavour to explain . BOETHRI-1785-1,104.12

Tell me then , does that state which stands in need of nothing , <P_105>
want power ? BOETHRI-1785-1,105.13

- No . - You are in the right , said she , BOETHRI-1785-1,105.14

for if any thing wants power , it must want also external aid .
BOETHRI-1785-1,105.15

- That is true . BOETHRI-1785-1,105.16

- Therefore you must confess that sufficiency and power are of one and
the same nature . BOETHRI-1785-1,105.17

- This I acknowledge . BOETHRI-1785-1,105.18

- And do you think , added she , that advantages of such a nature , as
power and sufficiency , are to be condemned ? BOETHRI-1785-1,105.19

On the contrary , are they not worthy of universal respect ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,105.20

- Unquestionably they are . BOETHRI-1785-1,105.21

- Let us add therefore , said she , respect to sufficiency and power ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,105.22

and let us consider all <font> three <$$font> as one and the same thing
. BOETHRI-1785-1,105.23

- I see no objection to their being considered in that view .
BOETHRI-1785-1,105.24

- But can that be an obscure and ignoble state , continued she , which
possesses such extraordinary advantages ? BOETHRI-1785-1,105.25

or rather , is it not brightened by a shining reputation ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,105.26

For reflect but a little : Have you not already granted that the state
we now speak of is powerful and respectable , and that it wants nothing
? BOETHRI-1785-1,105.27

but if it wants a shining reputation , which it can@ @not of itself
supply , is it not by this defect , in some degree , insufficient ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,105.28

- Surely it is , answered I ; BOETHRI-1785-1,105.29

and I must confess that reputation is inseparable from the advantages
you have mentioned . BOETHRI-1785-1,105.30

- You must agree therefore , said she , that the latter differs in
nothing from the <font> three <$$font> before mentioned .
BOETHRI-1785-1,105.31

- The consequence is just . BOETHRI-1785-1,105.32

- If any one then , continued she , is in such a state that he needs no
external assistance , but by himself can <P_106> procure all he wants ,
and besides , is illustrious and respectable ; is it not evident that
such a person's condition must be very agreeable and pleasant ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,106.33

- I can@ @not , indeed conceive , I replied , how any thing disagreeable
or unpleasant can accompany such a state . BOETHRI-1785-1,106.34

- It must undoubtedly , said she , be a state of happiness if what we
have before established holds good . BOETHRI-1785-1,106.35

And from this , it plainly follows , that sufficiency , power ,
reputation , respect , pleasure , are all one and the same ; differing
only in name , but not in substance . BOETHRI-1785-1,106.36

- This , said I , is a necessary consequence . BOETHRI-1785-1,106.37

- All these things , added she , which are by nature the same and
indivisible , mankind , by an effect of their depravity , divide :
BOETHRI-1785-1,106.38

but while they labour to acquire a part of a thing , which has no parts
, they neither obtain what they seek , as it does not exist , nor the
thing itself , which they have not directly in their view .
BOETHRI-1785-1,106.39

- But how does this happen ? said I . BOETHRI-1785-1,106.40

- He that desires riches , to preserve himself from want , replied she ,
is not solicitous about power : BOETHRI-1785-1,106.41

he prefers meanness and obscurity , BOETHRI-1785-1,106.42

and denies himself pleasures the most natural , that he may not lessen
the heaps he strives to accumulate . BOETHRI-1785-1,106.43

But you must surely confess that a state of sufficiency can@ @not be
<font> his , <$$font> who is destitute of power , barred from pleasures
, corroded with chagrin , despicable , and buried in obscurity .
BOETHRI-1785-1,106.44

But he again whose ambition is power alone , sacrifices to this pursuit
<P_107> wealth , BOETHRI-1785-1,107.45

despises pleasures , BOETHRI-1785-1,107.46

slights glory , BOETHRI-1785-1,107.47

nor does he hold dignity in estimation , unless when accompanied with
power . BOETHRI-1785-1,107.48

The many advantages wanting to such a person are palpable .
BOETHRI-1785-1,107.49

He must often want things essentially necessary , and be tormented with
anxiety : BOETHRI-1785-1,107.50

and as he will find it impossible to guard against those evils , he will
soon be convinced that he is far from being powerful .
BOETHRI-1785-1,107.51

In the same way may we reason with regard to honours , glory , and
pleasure . BOETHRI-1785-1,107.52

For as all these things are by nature one and the same , he that pursues
any one of them separately from the others , will never obtain what he
desires . BOETHRI-1785-1,107.53

- But what , said I , if a man desires <font> them all <$$font> at once
? BOETHRI-1785-1,107.54

- He would then indeed desire perfect felicity . BOETHRI-1785-1,107.55

But can he ever expect to find it in the acquisitions above-mentioned ,
which , as we have shewn , do not perform what they promise ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,107.56

- No surely , said I . BOETHRI-1785-1,107.57

- In these acquisitions therefore , which are falsely supposed capable
of supplying every human desire , happiness you acknowledge is by no
means to be sought for ? BOETHRI-1785-1,107.58

- Of the truth of this , I am perfectly convinced .
BOETHRI-1785-1,107.59

- Thus then , continued she , I have given you a compleat view of false
happiness , and of its causes : BOETHRI-1785-1,107.60

you have now nothing more to do , than to turn the eye of your mind upon
the reverse of all this , BOETHRI-1785-1,107.61

and you will instantly perceive <font> the true happiness <$$font> which
I promised to shew you . BOETHRI-1785-1,107.62

- There is none so blind , said I , that may not clearly perceive
<P_108> <font> that inestimable good . <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-1,108.63

I had a complete view of it when you just now explained to me the
characteristics of its opponent : BOETHRI-1785-1,108.64

for , if I am not deceived , true felicity consists in a state of
sufficiency , of power , and honour , in conjunction with a shining
reputation , and every desirable pleasure . BOETHRI-1785-1,108.65

And , to satisfy you how much your lessons have enlightened my
understanding , I declare to you , I am perfectly convinced , that
genuine felicity is what is bestowed by these advantages , as they are ,
in reality , all one and the same . BOETHRI-1785-1,108.66

- O my dear pupil , exclaimed she , how happy are you in such a
conviction ! BOETHRI-1785-1,108.67

But you must add to it one limitation . BOETHRI-1785-1,108.68

- What is that ? BOETHRI-1785-1,108.69

- Do you believe that the frail and perishing enjoyments of earth have
this state of happiness in their disposal ? BOETHRI-1785-1,108.70

- No ; by no means , answered I : BOETHRI-1785-1,108.71

you have proved the contrary so clearly , that I have no doubt remaining
upon this point . BOETHRI-1785-1,108.72

- These perishing enjoyments , added she , furnish mankind only with the
shadow of the supreme good , or at most with goods that are extremely
imperfect ; BOETHRI-1785-1,108.73

but as for true consummate Felicity , this they have not in their power
to bestow . BOETHRI-1785-1,108.74

- I told her , I was entirely of her opinion . BOETHRI-1785-1,108.75

<P_109>

- But as you have now , continued she , discovered what the true
felicity is , and know how to distinguish it from the false ; what now
remains , is to teach you where you are to seek for this supreme good .
BOETHRI-1785-1,109.77

- This is what I have long wished for . BOETHRI-1785-1,109.78

- But if it be necessary , added she , as Plato observes in his Timaeus
, to implore the Divine assistance even in the smallest enterprises ;
what think you ought we to do , to render us worthy of so important a
discovery as that of the sovereign good ? BOETHRI-1785-1,109.79

- Let us invoke , replied I , the Parent of Nature :
BOETHRI-1785-1,109.80

without first addressing him , no work is well begun ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,109.81

nor can be rightly conducted . BOETHRI-1785-1,109.82

- You are in the right , said she ; BOETHRI-1785-1,109.83

and immediately warbled forth , with delightful melody , the following
hymn : {COM:verse_omitted} BOETHRI-1785-1,109.84

<P_110>

{COM:verse_omitted}

As a faithful representation of false happiness , and of the true
Felicity , has been represented to you , I shall now proceed to explain
, wherein the <P_111> perfection of Felicity consists .
BOETHRI-1785-1,111.87

In view to this , we ought first to examine , whether there exists in
nature such a good as you have lately defined ; that our imagination may
not deceive us , in taking a mere chimera for a thing that is real , and
has a being . BOETHRI-1785-1,111.88

But that the sovereign good does exist , and that it is the source and
center of every other good , can@ @not be denied .
BOETHRI-1785-1,111.89

In fact , when we call a thing imperfect , it is only to distinguish it
from some other thing that is perfect . BOETHRI-1785-1,111.90

Hence , if any thing , of whatever particular class or kind of existence
it be , appears to be imperfect ; there must of necessity be also some
other thing that is perfect in this very class : BOETHRI-1785-1,111.91

for if you take away perfection , imperfection ceases to exist ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,111.92

and becomes a term quite unintelligible . BOETHRI-1785-1,111.93

Nature also doth not commence her operations by rude and unfinished
productions : BOETHRI-1785-1,111.94

she forms , at first , the best works , the purest and most complete ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,111.95

but afterwards gives birth to things less perfect and efficacious . So
that , if , as we have before shewn , there is an imperfect felicity in
this world , there must be also in it a solid and a perfect one .
BOETHRI-1785-1,111.96

- Your conclusion , is most just and true . BOETHRI-1785-1,111.97

- It will not now be difficult to discover , continued she , where this
true Felicity resides . BOETHRI-1785-1,111.98

Every mind endowed with apprehension and judgment , finds in itself a
proof that God , the author of all things , is good .
BOETHRI-1785-1,111.99

For , as we can conceive nothing better than God can we <P_112> have any
doubt but that he , who has no equal in goodness , is good ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,112.100

And Reason , while it thus demonstrates so clearly that God is good ,
evinces at the same time , that the sovereign good resides in him .
BOETHRI-1785-1,112.101

For if this were not so , God could not possibly be , as he really is ,
the author of all things ; BOETHRI-1785-1,112.102

for there would be some other Being more excellent than he is , who
possesses the supreme good , and who must have existed before him ;
because all perfect things plainly precede things that are less complete
. BOETHRI-1785-1,112.103

That our reasonings may not therefore run on into infinity , we must
confess that the Supreme God comprehends in his nature a plenitude of
perfect and consummate good : BOETHRI-1785-1,112.104

but perfect good we have proved to be true felicity .
BOETHRI-1785-1,112.105

It necessarily follows , then , that true felicity resides in the
Supreme Divinity . BOETHRI-1785-1,112.106

- This must be admitted , said I , as I can see nothing that can be
objected against it . BOETHRI-1785-1,112.107

- But I pray you , continued she , let us see how you can firmly and
irrefragably prove what I have advanced , that the Supreme God contains
in his nature a plenitude of perfect and consummate good .
BOETHRI-1785-1,112.108

- How shall I prove that ? replied I . BOETHRI-1785-1,112.109

- Do you suppose , said she , that the Author and Parent of all things
hath received the supreme good , with which , as we have shown , he
abounds , from any thing extraneous or without ? BOETHRI-1785-1,112.110

or , do you imagine , that the substance of this <font> felicity ,
<$$font> which resides in God , is in any respect different from <font>
that <$$font> of the Deity himself ? BOETHRI-1785-1,112.111

If you <P_113> suppose that Deity hath received this good from without ,
you must likewise believe , that what bestows a thing , is more
excellent than what receives it . BOETHRI-1785-1,113.112

But we have already admitted , what can@ @not be denied , there is
nothing more excellent than God : BOETHRI-1785-1,113.113

it is therefore manifest that he can@ @not derive this felicity from any
thing without . BOETHRI-1785-1,113.114

But if this good is supposed to dwell in God , and to be of a different
substance , it is inconceivable , allowing God to be the author of all
things , what could have united these two substances that thus differ
from one another . BOETHRI-1785-1,113.115

Besides , a thing which differs from another , can@ @not be the same
with that from which it is supposed to differ ; BOETHRI-1785-1,113.116

consequently , what differs in essence from the supreme good , can@ @not
be the supreme good : BOETHRI-1785-1,113.117

but it would be blasphemy thus to conceive of God ; as it is manifest
nothing can be more pure and perfect than that sovereign and independent
Being . BOETHRI-1785-1,113.118

In fact , nothing can exist whose nature is better than its origin .
BOETHRI-1785-1,113.119

We may therefore conclude , with absolute certainty , that the origin of
all things is really and substantially the supreme good .
BOETHRI-1785-1,113.120

- Undoubtedly we may . BOETHRI-1785-1,113.121

- But did not you own , said she , that true felicity was the sovereign
good ? BOETHRI-1785-1,113.122

- I confess I did . BOETHRI-1785-1,113.123

- You must therefore also grant that God is that very felicity .
BOETHRI-1785-1,113.124

- I can neither call in question , answered I , your principles , nor
the consequence which you draw from them . BOETHRI-1785-1,113.125

- Let us now try , continued she , whether we can@ @not prove <P_114>
the same thing more convincingly by considering it in this view , that
two sovereign goods , different from one another , can@ @not exist .
BOETHRI-1785-1,114.126

For of the good that differs , it is apparent one can@ @not be what the
other is : BOETHRI-1785-1,114.127

therefore neither of them can be perfect , as the one wants the other .
BOETHRI-1785-1,114.128

But if neither of them are perfect , it is evident that neither the one
or the other is the sovereign good . BOETHRI-1785-1,114.129

As such goods can@ @not differ from one another ; and we have before
proved , that God and Happiness are the sovereign good ; it necessarily
follows that the Sovereign Felicity , and Supreme Divinity , are one and
the same . BOETHRI-1785-1,114.130

- There is nothing , said I , more confident with reason and truth , and
nothing more suitable to the perfections of the Deity , than the
consequence which you have at present drawn . BOETHRI-1785-1,114.131

- But I shall now , added she , following the example of the
geometricians , who commonly deduce from their demonstrations , what
they call corollaries , infer , from what has been advanced , a most
honourable one for man . BOETHRI-1785-1,114.132

I say then , since men become happy by the enjoyment of Felicity , and
as Felicity is the same with the Divinity himself , it is manifest ,
that they become happy by the enjoyment of the Divinity .
BOETHRI-1785-1,114.133

But as by the participation of justice , or of wisdom , men become just
or wise ; so , by the participating of Divinity , they must necessarily
, and for the very same reason , become Gods . BOETHRI-1785-1,114.134

Consequently every happy man <P_115> is a God ; BOETHRI-1785-1,115.135

for tho' there is but one in essence , there is nothing to hinder but
there may be many , by a participation of the Divine Nature .
BOETHRI-1785-1,115.136

- I allow , said I , that this corollary is admirable , and of infinite
value . BOETHRI-1785-1,115.137

- But what I am just going to add , said she , is still more worthy of
your admiration . BOETHRI-1785-1,115.138

- What is that ? BOETHRI-1785-1,115.139

- As happiness appears to be an assemblage of many things , ought we not
to consider whether these several things constitute , conjunctly , the
body of happiness ? if I may so express myself ; or whether there is
not some one of these particular things that composes its essence , and
to which all the rest have a relation ? BOETHRI-1785-1,115.140

- I wish , said I , you would illustrate this matter by examples .
BOETHRI-1785-1,115.141

- Do you not believe , added she , that happiness is a good ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,115.142

- Yes certainly , answered I BOETHRI-1785-1,115.143

and the supreme good . BOETHRI-1785-1,115.144

- You may say the <P_116> same , continued she , of all the other goods
; BOETHRI-1785-1,116.145

for perfect sufficiency is reckoned supreme felicity ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,116.146

so is supreme power ; BOETHRI-1785-1,116.147

so likewise is an honourable rank , a shining reputation , and a life of
pleasure , BOETHRI-1785-1,116.148

What do you conclude from all this ? BOETHRI-1785-1,116.149

- Are all these things , answered she , sufficiency , power , reputation
, and the rest , to be considered as <font> constituent members ,
<$$font> so to speak , of felicity ? BOETHRI-1785-1,116.150

or , do they bear a relation to a <font> good <$$font> as their <font>
principal part ? <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-1,116.151

- I understand , said I , what you propose to investigate ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,116.152

and I am desirous to hear it made out . BOETHRI-1785-1,116.153

- Attend , said she , and I will elucidate this matter .
BOETHRI-1785-1,116.154

If all these things were members of felicity , they would differ from
one another ; BOETHRI-1785-1,116.155

for it is the property of members , or parts that differ from one
another , conjunctly taken , to compose one body .
BOETHRI-1785-1,116.156

But I have proved to you that these things are all the same , and do in
no respect differ . BOETHRI-1785-1,116.157

They can by no means , therefore , be members of happiness ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,116.158

for if they were , happiness might be said to be made up of one member ,
which is absurd and can@ @not possibly be . BOETHRI-1785-1,116.159

- All this is undoubtedly true , said I ; BOETHRI-1785-1,116.160

but I wish to hear the sequel . BOETHRI-1785-1,116.161

- We know , replied she , the things we have so often mentioned , do all
of them bear a relation to <font> a good . <$$font>
BOETHRI-1785-1,116.162

For if sufficiency is desired , it is desired because it is esteemed a
good : BOETHRI-1785-1,116.163

if power is sought after , it is for the same reason ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,116.164

and upon this account likewise it is , that we desire to obtain respect
, glory , and pleasure . BOETHRI-1785-1,116.165

Good then is the motive <P_117> and the end of all these wishes :
BOETHRI-1785-1,117.166

for that which contains no good , either in reality or appearance , can
never be desired . BOETHRI-1785-1,117.167

On the contrary , things that are not in their nature good , are wished
for , because they have the appearance of being real goods .
BOETHRI-1785-1,117.168

Hence , good is justly esteemed the motive , the foundation , and the
end of all the desires of mankind : BOETHRI-1785-1,117.169

but , that which is the cause of our desiring any thing , is itself what
we principally want . BOETHRI-1785-1,117.170

For example ; if a man mounts his horse on account of health , it is not
so much the exercise of riding that he seeks , as its salutary effects .
BOETHRI-1785-1,117.171

And as we have proved that these latter things are pursued from no other
intention than to obtain happiness , it is happiness therefore only that
is sought after . BOETHRI-1785-1,117.172

Hence it clearly follows , that the good we have been reasoning upon ,
and happiness , differ in no respect , but are of one and the same
substance . BOETHRI-1785-1,117.173

- I see no cause , said I , to dissent from your opinion .
BOETHRI-1785-1,117.174

- But it has been proved , added she , that God and true happiness are
one and the same thing . BOETHRI-1785-1,117.175

- It has so . BOETHRI-1785-1,117.176

- We may therefore certainly conclude , said she , that the substance of
God is also the same with that of the supreme good .
BOETHRI-1785-1,117.177

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_118>

{COM:verse_omitted}

I am entirely of your opinion , said I ; BOETHRI-1785-1,118.181

for all this has been proved by insuperable arguments .
BOETHRI-1785-1,118.182

- But how greatly would you value it , said she , did you fully know
what this good is ? BOETHRI-1785-1,118.183

- I should value it infinitely , if I could at the same time attain to
the knowledge of God , who is the sovereign good .
BOETHRI-1785-1,118.184

- I shall elucidate this matter , replied she , by reasons that are
uncontrovertible , on condition that you allow me <P_119> to make use of
the principles formerly established . BOETHRI-1785-1,119.185

- To this I willingly consent . BOETHRI-1785-1,119.186

- Have I not made it evident , continued she , that the things which the
majority of mankind so eagerly pursue , are not true and perfect goods ;
because they differ from one another , and because when one or more of
them are wanting , the others can@ @not confer a complete and absolute
good ? BOETHRI-1785-1,119.187

Have I not likewise shewn you , that the true sovereign good is composed
of an assemblage of all the goods , in such a manner , that if entire
sufficiency is a property of this good , it must at the same time be
endowed with power , and it must be also respectable , glorious , and
abound with pleasure ? BOETHRI-1785-1,119.188

Without this union , unless they are all considered as one and the same
thing ; is there any ground for ranking them among things desirable ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,119.189

- You explained this matter so well to me formerly , that I have no
doubt about it . BOETHRI-1785-1,119.190

- Whilst these things differ from one another , added she , they are not
goods ; BOETHRI-1785-1,119.191

but as soon as they become <font> one , <$$font> they commence <font>
goods : <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-1,119.192

that they are goods then , is it not owing to their participation of
unity ? BOETHRI-1785-1,119.193

- So it appears to be . BOETHRI-1785-1,119.194

- But will you grant , that every thing which is good , becomes such by
the participation of what is good ? BOETHRI-1785-1,119.195

Do you find in this any difficulty ? BOETHRI-1785-1,119.196

- None . BOETHRI-1785-1,119.197

- For the same reason you must own , that unity and good are the same ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,119.198

for things that do not naturally differ in their effects , must
necessarily <P_120> have the same substance . BOETHRI-1785-1,120.199

- This can@ @not be denied . BOETHRI-1785-1,120.200

- Do you not perceive , continued she , that every thing which exists is
permanent , so long as it preserves its unity ; but in the instant it
loses this , it is dissolved and annihilated ? BOETHRI-1785-1,120.201

- How do you draw this conclusion ? BOETHRI-1785-1,120.202

- In the animal creation , replied she , as long as the soul and body
are strictly united and conjoined in one , this being is called <font>
an animal ; <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-1,120.203

but when this union is dissolved by the separation of the one from the
other , the animal perishes , BOETHRI-1785-1,120.204

and no longer exists . BOETHRI-1785-1,120.205

The human body furnishes us with an instance of this ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,120.206

for whilst the unity of its form subsists by the conjunction of its
members , it retains <P_121> the human figure ; BOETHRI-1785-1,121.207

but when these parts are separated , this unity is destroyed ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,121.208

and the body ceases to be what it was before . BOETHRI-1785-1,121.209

In like manner , were we to examine other things , we should find that
every thing subsists so long as its unity is preserved ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,121.210

but when that is destroyed , the thing itself loses its existence .
BOETHRI-1785-1,121.211

- I am persuaded , replied I , that in every case we should find this to
be true . BOETHRI-1785-1,121.212

Is there any being , added she , while it acts according to nature ,
that foregoes this desire of existence , and wishes corruption and
dissolution ? BOETHRI-1785-1,121.213

- In contemplating the various tribes of animals , answered I , which
are all of them endowed by nature with a power of willing and not
willing , I can@ @not discover an individual among them , which of
itself , and without constraint , renounces its desire of
self-preservation , and voluntarily hastens to destruction ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,121.214

for every animal endeavours to preserve itself , BOETHRI-1785-1,121.215

shuns death , BOETHRI-1785-1,121.216

and avoids every thing that is hurtful to it . BOETHRI-1785-1,121.217

But with regard to plants and trees , to all the vegetable kingdom , and
to things totally inanimate , I am doubtful whether I ought to have the
same opinion of them . BOETHRI-1785-1,121.218

- There is no cause , replied she , why , in relation to these , you
ought to entertain any doubt . BOETHRI-1785-1,121.219

Do you not always behold plants and trees spring up in soils most
agreeable to their respective natures , where they are sure to thrive ,
and are in no danger of perishing soon ? BOETHRI-1785-1,121.220

Some of them grow on plains , some on <P_122> hills , others in marshes
; BOETHRI-1785-1,122.221

some are found sprouting forth among rocks ; BOETHRI-1785-1,122.222

barren sands are congenial to others ; BOETHRI-1785-1,122.223

and if you attempt to transplant any of them to a different soil , they
quickly fade and die . BOETHRI-1785-1,122.224

To every thing that vegetates , nature gives what is proper for its
subsistence , BOETHRI-1785-1,122.225

and takes care that it should not perish before its ordinary period .
BOETHRI-1785-1,122.226

Need I tell you , that plants draw all their nourishment by their roots
, which are as so many mouths hid in the earth , through which the sap
ascending by the heart and bark , communicates vigour to the whole
vegetable . BOETHRI-1785-1,122.227

And farther , is it not admirably contrived , that the safest and most
tender part of plants , the pith , as it is called , is shut up in the
middle of the trunk , and surrounded with hard and solid wood , which is
covered with a coat of bark formed to endure the inclemencies of the
weather , and to resist all external injury ? BOETHRI-1785-1,122.228

What care has not nature also taken to multiply plants , by multiplying
their seeds ! BOETHRI-1785-1,122.229

Who does not know that they are a kind of machines , which do not
preserve their existence for a time only , but immortalize themselves ,
as it were , by a successive and perpetual generation ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,122.230

Things likewise totally inanimate , do not they also , for the same
reason , incline to what is most suitable to them ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,122.231

Why does flame mount upwards by its levity , and the earth gravitate to
the center by its weight , if it is not because <P_123> these motions
and tendencies are agreeable to their respective natures ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.232

Besides , it is manifest , that as what is agreeable to the nature of a
thing preserves it ; so what is contrary to its nature destroys it .
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.233

Now , dense bodies , such as stones whole particles strongly cohere ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.234

resist an easy separation of parts ; whereas the particles of fluids ,
such as air and water , are easily separated , and as easily reunited .
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.235

But with regard to fire , it avoids all separation of its parts , as is
plain by the rapidity with which it every where spreads .
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.236

You must observe , that I am not here speaking of the voluntary motions
of a rational soul , but only of the necessary operations of nature .
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.237

Thus , for example , we digest our food without thinking of it ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.238

and draw our breath in sleep , without our perception :
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.239

for the desire of existence peculiar to animals , is not derived from an
intellectual will , but from natural principles implanted in them .
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.240

Hence it is , that the will , induced by powerful reasons , sometimes
chuses and embraces death , altho' nature dreads and abhors it ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,123.241

and , on the contrary , the same will frequently restrains men from
immoderate indulgence in those pleasures , to which nature always
strongly impels them , as the only means of perpetuating the human race
. BOETHRI-1785-1,123.242

The love therefore which every creature bears to itself , does not
appear to be so much an effect of a volition of the mind , as of a
natural impression . BOETHRI-1785-1,123.243

For Providence hath implanted , in all things she <P_124> hath created ,
an instinct for the purpose of self-preservation , which powerfully
excites them to retain their beings , as long as by the course of nature
they can : so that you can@ @not entertain the smallest doubt , but that
every thing which exists , naturally desires existence , and avoids
dissolution . BOETHRI-1785-1,124.244

- I confess , said I , that I now clearly perceive , what to me formerly
appeared uncertain . BOETHRI-1785-1,124.245

- To proceed , continued she ; what desires to subsist desires also to
retain its unity ; BOETHRI-1785-1,124.246

for , if its unity is destroyed , it can@ @not continue to exist .
BOETHRI-1785-1,124.247

- That , said I , is very true . BOETHRI-1785-1,124.248

- All things then , added she , desire unity . BOETHRI-1785-1,124.249

- I agree with you they do . BOETHRI-1785-1,124.250

- But I proved before , that unity is the same thing as good .
BOETHRI-1785-1,124.251

- You did so . BOETHRI-1785-1,124.252

- Thus all things , she further added , desire good ; whence you may
also conclude , that it is one and the same good which all creatures
desire . BOETHRI-1785-1,124.253

- It is impossible , said I , to conceive any thing more true :
BOETHRI-1785-1,124.254

for all things in the universe are either fixed by no relation ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,124.255

and finding themselves destitute , if I may so express myself , of unity
as their principle , rove and float at random without direction ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,124.256

or , if there is any thing to which they have a tendency and impulse ,
it must be to the supreme and all-sufficient good .
BOETHRI-1785-1,124.257

- O my dearest pupil , said she , how greatly do I rejoice that your
mind clearly apprehends the truth I was so desirous to teach you !
BOETHRI-1785-1,124.258

You must likewise now distinctly perceive , what you said you were
ignorant of before . BOETHRI-1785-1,124.259

<P_125>

- What was that ? BOETHRI-1785-1,125.261

- The end , added she , of all things ; BOETHRI-1785-1,125.262

for the end of all things is what they pursue , BOETHRI-1785-1,125.263

and because , as we have before shewn , this is good , we must
necessarily hold it as an established truth , that good is the end of
every thing that exists . BOETHRI-1785-1,125.264

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_152>

I agree with you , said I , BOETHRI-1785-1,152.267

and acknowledge that the vicious are not unjustly called beasts ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,152.268

for though they preserve the human form , with regard to the faculties
of the soul they are really metamorphosed into brutes .
BOETHRI-1785-1,152.269

But I heartily wish that their wicked and ferocious minds , which burn
with rage to annoy the good , had not the power of hurting them .
BOETHRI-1785-1,152.270

- The wicked have no such power , replied she , as I shall show you in a
little time . BOETHRI-1785-1,152.271

But if this power , which they are supposed to have , and of which you
so heavily complain , were taken from them , they would be relieved of
the greatest part of their punishment : BOETHRI-1785-1,152.272

<P_153>

for certain it is , though it may appear incredible to many , that the
wicked are more unhappy when they can accomplish their evil designs ,
than when they want the power to perpetrate them ; because , if it is an
unhappiness to will evil , it is still a greater to have the power to
execute it ; BOETHRI-1785-1,153.274

for , if bad men were divested of this power , their wicked desires
would languish without effect . BOETHRI-1785-1,153.275

Since misery , then , is annexed to the will , and to the power of doing
evil , and also to the accomplishment of it , it necessarily follows ,
that they who have the will and the power to do evil , and who actually
commit it , are trebly miserable . BOETHRI-1785-1,153.276

- This I must confess , said I ; BOETHRI-1785-1,153.277

but at the same time I earnestly wish that the wicked were speedily
delivered from this misery ; BOETHRI-1785-1,153.278

I mean , that they were deprived of the power of doing hurt .
BOETHRI-1785-1,153.279

- They shall be stript of this power , added she ; sooner perhaps than
you would wish , or than they themselves imagine :
BOETHRI-1785-1,153.280

for there is nothing that glides away in the narrow bounds of human life
, however slow and imperceptible its progress may be , which to an
immortal soul can appear to have a very long duration .
BOETHRI-1785-1,153.281

The most flattering hopes of the wicked , the lofty edifices of their
criminal projects , are often overturned by unforeseen accidents .
BOETHRI-1785-1,153.282

But the subversion of these puts a stop to the progress of their misery
; for this good reason , that if wickedness renders a man miserable ; he
must become more and more so the <P_154> longer he continues wicked ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,154.283

and such persons I should believe to be infinitely miserable , if death
did not come and put a period to their wickedness :
BOETHRI-1785-1,154.284

for if the consequence I have drawn from the unhappiness of the wicked
is true , it is evident , that a misery which is eternal , is nothing
less than an infinite misery . BOETHRI-1785-1,154.285

- This consequence , said I , appears to me wonderful , and difficult to
be assented to ; BOETHRI-1785-1,154.286

nevertheless I must own that it is perfectly conformable to what has
been established . BOETHRI-1785-1,154.287

You think justly , replied she ; because he who esteems it difficult to
assent to a conclusion , ought either to show that the premises are
false , or that the consequence is unfairly drawn ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,154.288

for if the premises are established , and the conclusion fairly deduced
, he can have no reason to reject it . BOETHRI-1785-1,154.289

- But what I am now going to communicate to you is not less surprizing ,
though it necessarily flows from the same premises .
BOETHRI-1785-1,154.290

- What is that I pray ? BOETHRI-1785-1,154.291

- That the wicked , who suffer the chastisement which they merit , are
happier than they would have been , if justice had allowed their crimes
to have escaped unpunished . BOETHRI-1785-1,154.292

To convince you of this , I will not confine myself to common and
popular arguments ; that punishment corrects bad morals ; that the fear
of chastisement leads back to the right way ; and that the sufferings of
the wicked deter from vice : BOETHRI-1785-1,154.293

but , leaving these things entirely out of the question , I am persuaded
that the wicked , whose crimes remain <P_155> unpunished , become much
more unhappy in another way . BOETHRI-1785-1,155.294

- In what way do you mean ? BOETHRI-1785-1,155.295

- Have we not agreed , added she , that the good are happy , and the
wicked miserable ? BOETHRI-1785-1,155.296

- We have . BOETHRI-1785-1,155.297

- But if you mix some good with the misery of a man , will not he be
more happy than another whose misery is pure , entire , and without any
mixture of good ? BOETHRI-1785-1,155.298

- Certainly he will . BOETHRI-1785-1,155.299

- Again - If the unhappiness of the latter , who is deprived of every
good , is increased by additional misery , does he not become much more
wretched than he whose distress is allayed by the participation of some
good ? BOETHRI-1785-1,155.300

- Unquestionably he does . BOETHRI-1785-1,155.301

- The wicked , then , continued she , even when they are punished , have
a degree of good annexed to their condition , to wit , the punishment
itself , which can@ @not be an evil , because it is just ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,155.302

and , on the contrary , when they escape punishment , their misery is
increased by another evil , which is this very exemption from punishment
: BOETHRI-1785-1,155.303

for did not you yourself confess , that this exemption was an evil ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,155.304

- I own I did . BOETHRI-1785-1,155.305

- The wicked , then , said she , are much more unhappy when they enjoy
an unmerited impunity , than when they suffer a chastisement which they
deserve : BOETHRI-1785-1,155.306

but that it is just to punish the wicked , and unjust that they should
escape with impunity , is a truth which can@ @not be denied .
BOETHRI-1785-1,155.307

- Nobody , said I , denies it . BOETHRI-1785-1,155.308

- Nor can any man deny , added she , but that every thing which is just
, is good ; and that , on the <P_156> contrary , every thing which is
unjust , is evil . BOETHRI-1785-1,156.309

- This , said I , necessarily follows , from the conclusions formerly
deduced . BOETHRI-1785-1,156.310

But tell me , I beseech you ; BOETHRI-1785-1,156.311

Is there any punishment for souls after death ? BOETHRI-1785-1,156.312

- Undoubtedly , replied she ; BOETHRI-1785-1,156.313

and great ones too . BOETHRI-1785-1,156.314

I am of opinion , however , that they are inflicted for different
purposes ; some with rigour to punish , and others with clemency to
purify and meliorate . BOETHRI-1785-1,156.315

But it is not my design at present to enlarge upon this subject .
BOETHRI-1785-1,156.316

I have been employed hitherto in proving that the power of the wicked ,
which appeared to you the most shameful thing in the universe , is , in
reality , nothing ; that their wickedness never escapes unpunished ,
<P_157> punished , notwithstanding the disagreeable idea you entertained
to the contrary : that their liberty to do evil , which you wished might
soon come to an end , is not of long duration : that the longer it
continues , they are so much the more miserable ; and that if it were to
continue for ever , their misery would be infinite : that , in fine , if
the wicked escaped by an unjust exemption from punishment , they would
be more unhappy than if they were chastised according to their demerits
; and consequently , that they are never more rigorously punished , than
when they are supposed not to suffer for their crimes ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,157.317

- I have attended carefully to your reasoning , said I ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,157.318

and it appears to me convincing and conclusive : BOETHRI-1785-1,157.319

but if I were to take the opinions of mankind upon these subjects , your
arguments would be so far from gaining their assent , that it would be
difficult to find a person that would listen to them .
BOETHRI-1785-1,157.320

- I am of your opinion , replied she ; BOETHRI-1785-1,157.321

for mankind are so accustomed to darkness , that they can@ @not fix
their <P_158> eyes upon the light of a truth which dazzles them .
BOETHRI-1785-1,158.322

They are like those birds that see clearly by night , but whose weak
sight can@ @not bear the splendor of day : whilst they pay no regard to
the established order of things , but consider only the gratification of
their own passions ; BOETHRI-1785-1,158.323

it is not wonderful , that they should think there is a happiness in the
liberty of doing evil , and in exemption from punishment .
BOETHRI-1785-1,158.324

- But as to you , my pupil , do you attend to the law , which is
engraved upon your own heart . BOETHRI-1785-1,158.325

If you conform your mind to what is good , you need not be anxious about
a reward from the hand of a judge ; BOETHRI-1785-1,158.326

- you have by your behaviour become one of the most excellent of human
kind . BOETHRI-1785-1,158.327

But if you pursue evil , you <P_159> need no other chastisement ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,159.328

- you have degraded yourself into a lower order of beings .
BOETHRI-1785-1,159.329

Thus ; if with a fixed attention , and banished every thought besides ,
you contemplate alternately the radiant heaven , and sordid earth ; by
the very nature of vision , you will now suppose yourself exalted to the
stars , and anon involved in the clay . BOETHRI-1785-1,159.330

- I know that the vulgar , continued she , do not reflect upon these
things . BOETHRI-1785-1,159.331

What then ? BOETHRI-1785-1,159.332

shall we take them as models , whom before we affirmed to resemble the
beasts ? BOETHRI-1785-1,159.333

If a person deprived of sight , and who had even forgot that he ever had
it , should assert that he has every human faculty in perfection ;
should we be so weak as to believe , that such as retain the use of
their eyes were become blind ? BOETHRI-1785-1,159.334

But as the vulgar reject all the foregoing reasoning , they will also
refuse their assent to what I am now going to propose , tho' it is
supported by arguments equally strong and conclusive ; to wit , that
persons who commit an injury are more unhappy than those who suffer one
. BOETHRI-1785-1,159.335

- I am extremely desirous , said I , to hear you prove this point .
BOETHRI-1785-1,159.336

- Do you deny , replied she , that every wicked man deserves punishment
? BOETHRI-1785-1,159.337

- No , I do not . BOETHRI-1785-1,159.338

- And you are satisfied , from a great variety of proofs , that the
wicked are miserable ? BOETHRI-1785-1,159.339

- Unquestionably they are . BOETHRI-1785-1,159.340

- Again : - You have no doubt but that every man who merits punishment
is miserable ? BOETHRI-1785-1,159.341

- To this I agree . BOETHRI-1785-1,159.342

- But if you were <P_160> <font> appointed <$$font> a judge on which of
the two would you inflict punishment ; on him who hath committed , or on
him who hath suffered the injury ? BOETHRI-1785-1,160.343

- I would not hesitate a moment in punishing the offender , in
reparation of the injury done to the party offended .
BOETHRI-1785-1,160.344

- But still you would reckon the injuring person more unhappy than he
who had suffered the wrong ? BOETHRI-1785-1,160.345

- I certainly would . BOETHRI-1785-1,160.346

- Thus then , added she , for these reasons , and for others which flow
from the same principle , that vice , from the baseness of its nature ,
renders men miserable ; it is evident , that when an injury is done to
any man , it is the cause of misery to the doer , but not to the
sufferer . BOETHRI-1785-1,160.347

But our pleaders at the bar , continued she , are of a different opinion
, as they strive to excite the compassion of the judges in favour of
those who have suffered cruelty and oppression , whereas pity is more
justly due to the oppressors ; who ought therefore to be conducted to
judgment , as the sick are to the physicians , not by angry , but by
friendly and compassionate accusers , that they may be cured of <P_161>
their vices by the physick of chastisement . BOETHRI-1785-1,161.348

I am , therefore , of opinion , that no pleaders ought to be employed to
defend the guilty . BOETHRI-1785-1,161.349

I either wish them to relinquish it altogether , or to join the party of
the accusers ; BOETHRI-1785-1,161.350

for I can@ @not discover how they may be useful in any other way .
BOETHRI-1785-1,161.351

Were it possible for the wicked to obtain a slight view of the charms of
that virtue which they have forsaken ; and could they but persuade
themselves , that , by passing through the discipline of chastisement ,
they should be purified from the stains of vice , and restored to virtue
; they surely would not consider the discipline as an evil ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,161.352

neither would they implore the assistance of an advocate to defend them
; BOETHRI-1785-1,161.353

but , without hesitation , they would submit themselves to the will of
their judges and their accusers . BOETHRI-1785-1,161.354

Hence it is the wise are not susceptible of hatred :
BOETHRI-1785-1,161.355

for none but a madman hates the good ; BOETHRI-1785-1,161.356

and to hate the wicked is fully as irrational ; BOETHRI-1785-1,161.357

for their propensity to vice is really as much a disease of the mind ,
as any of the ordinary human distempers is of the body .
BOETHRI-1785-1,161.358

Now as a person suffering under a disease is not an object of resentment
, but claims our compassion ; we have still more reason to pity , and
not to hate those unhappy persons over whom vice , the most deplorable
of all distempers has gained the dominion . BOETHRI-1785-1,161.359

<P_165>

We ought undoubtedly , said I , to banish sloth , and strive to increase
in knowledge . BOETHRI-1785-1,165.361

But as it belongs to you to discover the most secret causes , and to
unveil things wrapt up in darkness , I beseech you to deliver me from my
present perplexity , and to explain the mystery I mentioned to you .
BOETHRI-1785-1,165.362

- You propose to me , replied she with a smile , the most intricate of
all questions , which I am afraid all our arguments will not be
sufficient to solve : BOETHRI-1785-1,165.363

for the subject is of such a nature , that when we have lopped off one
difficulty , like the heads of the hydra , innumerable others
immediately spring up ; so that there would be no end of them , did we
not seize and quell these growing doubts by a quick and vigorous effort
of the mind . BOETHRI-1785-1,165.364

The question then , whereof you want a solution , is involved in the
five following points , which it will be necessary to illustrate : 1.
The simplicity or unity of Providence . 2. The order and chain of
Destiny . 3. Unexpected events attributed to chance . 4. The <P_166>
prescience of God and divine predestination . 5. The liberty of the
human will . BOETHRI-1785-1,166.365

- You are undoubtedly sensible that these are very arduous and
perplexing subjects : BOETHRI-1785-1,166.366

but as a knowledge of them is a part of the medicine I proposed for your
cure , and will contribute much to it ; I shall employ the short time
that remains to me , in giving you some light and information of these
particulars . BOETHRI-1785-1,166.367

Whilst I pursue , in a connected chain , that train of reasoning which
the subject suggests , I shall deprive you of the pleasure you receive
from the harmony of my verses . BOETHRI-1785-1,166.368

- Do as you please , with regard to that . BOETHRI-1785-1,166.369

- She then resumed her discourse , as it were , from a new source of
topicks , BOETHRI-1785-1,166.370

and argued as follows . BOETHRI-1785-1,166.371

The production of all things , the renewal and gradual progression of
whatever is liable to change ; every thing , in a word , that is moved ,
derives its causes , order , and forms , from the immutability of the
divine understanding . BOETHRI-1785-1,166.372

Now , the divine understanding , tho' single , and in itself
uncompounded , employs a variety of means or instruments for conducing
the affairs of the universe . BOETHRI-1785-1,166.373

These means , when we consider them only as they exist in the divine
Intelligence , are what we call Providence ; BOETHRI-1785-1,166.374

but when contemplated , <P_167> in relation to the things which receive
motion and order from them , this is what the antients called Destiny .
So that if we reflect with attention on the efficacy of the one and the
other , their difference will easily appear . BOETHRI-1785-1,167.375

For Providence is that intelligence , or divine reason , which resides
in the sovereign master of the universe , and directs all things ;
whilst Destiny is that inherent state or condition of movable things ,
by means whereof Providence retains them in the order and arrangement in
which she has placed them . BOETHRI-1785-1,167.376

Providence , therefore , at one and the same time , comprehends all
things , however different , however multiplied they be ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,167.377

but Destiny gives motion to every particular thing , in the mean time
appointed and in the place and under the form appropriated to it . So
that the model of this order of things , when we consider it , as wrapt
up in the divine Intelligence , is Providence ; whereas the
accomplishment of the same order , drawn forth and executed in the
course of time , is Destiny . BOETHRI-1785-1,167.378

<P_168>

Tho' the difference betwixt <font> these <$$font> be apparent , the one
nevertheless depends on the other ; since the order of Destiny is but an
emanation from the simplicity or unity of Providence .
BOETHRI-1785-1,168.380

For as a workman , who has formed in his head the plan of a work which
he is desirous to finish , executes it afterwards , and produces in
process of time all the different parts of the model which he has
conceived ; so God , in the plan of his Providence , disposes every
thing to be brought about , in a certain order and in a proper time ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,168.381

and afterwards , by the ministry of Destiny , he accomplishes what he
has thus planned , in conformity to that order and that time .
BOETHRI-1785-1,168.382

Whether it be by the agency of spirits , attendants upon <P_169>
providence , that Destiny operates , or by a soul , or by the ministry
of the whole frame of nature , or by the influence of the stars , or by
the power of angels , or the unwearied industry of demons ; or whether
it be by any one of these things , or by all of them together , that the
chain of Destiny is formed ; it is evident Providence is the invariable
, the simple , and uncompounded train of conducting every thing ; and
that Destiny is the fluctuating contexture and temporal arrangement of
those things which Providence has ordained to be done .
BOETHRI-1785-1,169.383

Hence it appears , that the things subordinate to Destiny , are also
under the dominion of Providence , which controls and rules Destiny
itself : whereas there are some things placed under the immediate
direction of Providence , which are exempted from the jurisdiction of
Fate ; BOETHRI-1785-1,169.384

and these are such as are placed near to the Divinity himself ; the
stability of which , upon that account , is so great , that they are not
affected with the movements of Destiny . BOETHRI-1785-1,169.385

- To <P_170> comprehend my idea , figure to yourself several globes
revolving round one common centre . BOETHRI-1785-1,170.386

Now , that which is innermost , as it approaches nearest to the <font>
simplicity of the middle point , <$$font> or centre , becomes itself as
it were a centre to the globes placed without it , round which they roll
; whilst the outermost of them , revolving in a wider circumference the
farther it is from the centre , describes a larger space ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,170.387

but if this outermost sphere , or any thing whatever , should be joined
, and annexed to the middle point , you must allow it will partake of
its simplicity and liability , and will lose that tendency to motion and
change , which all things more remote from the centre are condemned to .
BOETHRI-1785-1,170.388

- By a like manner of reasoning , we conclude , that the further any
thing is removed from the first Intelligence , it is so much the more
under the control of Destiny ; whereas on the contrary , the nearer any
thing approaches to that Intelligence , which is the centre of all
things , it becomes more liable , and less dependent upon Destiny .
BOETHRI-1785-1,170.389

And if we suppose that the thing in question is joined to the
immutability of the Supreme Intelligence , it then becomes immoveable
BOETHRI-1785-1,170.390

and does not at all depend upon the necessity of fate .
BOETHRI-1785-1,170.391

Therefore , as reasoning is to the understanding ; as that which is
produced is to that which exists of itself ; as time is to eternity ;
and as the circumference to the center ; so is the moveable order of
<P_171> Destiny to the stable simplicity of Providence .
BOETHRI-1785-1,171.392

It is this chain of destiny which moves the heavens and the stars ,
which preserves the harmony that reigns among the elements , and causes
them to assume forms infinitely varied . BOETHRI-1785-1,171.393

It is this which renews every thing that is once produced , by
preserving the fecundity of sexes and of seeds . BOETHRI-1785-1,171.394

It is this likewise that constrains the actions and fortunes of men , by
causes , the connection whereof can@ @not be broken ; which , as they
derive their origin from an immovable Providence , must , like it , be
also immovable . BOETHRI-1785-1,171.395

In this manner are all things well conducted , as the simplicity
residing in the divine understanding produces that invariable order of
causes ; BOETHRI-1785-1,171.396

and this order , by its own inherent immutability , restrains things in
their nature mutable , BOETHRI-1785-1,171.397

and preserves them from all irregular wandering and fluctuation .
BOETHRI-1785-1,171.398

- Hence , to ignorant mortals , who can@ @not comprehend this order ,
things appear irregular and confused ; BOETHRI-1785-1,171.399

the condition of all things nevertheless is such , that they are
directed and impelled by it to their good : BOETHRI-1785-1,171.400

for there is nothing done merely for the sake of evil , even by the
wicked themselves , who in their researches after good , as I have
clearly proved to you , are led astray from it by delusive error ; but
in no wise by that pure order which flows from the centre of the Supreme
Goodness , which can@ @not possibly mislead any creature from its origin
. BOETHRI-1785-1,171.401

But you may perhaps say , How can there be a <P_172> more unequal
distribution of events , than that prosperous and calamitous things
should be alternately dealed to the virtuous ; whilst the wicked are ,
in like manner , delighted with the enjoyment of what they wish , and
anon distressed with the evils which they abhor ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,172.402

But what then ? BOETHRI-1785-1,172.403

Can you affirm that men's understandings are so infallible as to
discover whether those whom they believe virtuous or wicked , are so in
reality ? BOETHRI-1785-1,172.404

You know well that their judgments differ widely upon this point ; and
that persons , who by some are thought worthy of a reward , are by
others deemed deserving of punishment . BOETHRI-1785-1,172.405

But let us suppose that a man could with certainty distinguish the good
from the bad ; BOETHRI-1785-1,172.406

we must suppose him in this case able to explore the frame and
contexture of the human mind , with the same accuracy as anatomists do
that of the body : BOETHRI-1785-1,172.407

for without this knowledge , it would be as impossible for him to
distinguish men of worth from their opposites , as it would be for one
ignorant of the art of physic to say why bitter aliments agree with some
men's constitutions , and sweet with those of others ; or why certain
maladies are relieved by lenitives , and others by powerful remedies .
BOETHRI-1785-1,172.408

Though these effects be surprizing to the ignorant , they are not so to
the physician who knows the constitution of the human body , the causes
of diseases , and their cures . BOETHRI-1785-1,172.409

But what , I <P_173> pray you , constitutes the health of the mind , but
virtue ? BOETHRI-1785-1,173.410

and whence are its maladies derived , but from vice ?
BOETHRI-1785-1,173.411

Who is it that diffuses blessings upon mankind and saves them from evil
, but God alone , who is the guide and physician of souls ? who , from
the exalted observatory of his Providence , beholds all the wants of his
creation , sees what is necessary to every individual , and bestows it
upon them . BOETHRI-1785-1,173.412

From this source is derived that wonderful miracle , <font> the order of
destiny , <$$font> a miracle wrought by the wisdom of God , which
astonishes ignorant mortals . BOETHRI-1785-1,173.413

But let us now discourse a little upon the few things which our feeble
reason permits us to know of the profound abyss of the Divinity .
BOETHRI-1785-1,173.414

The man whom you esteem the most just , and the strictest observer of
equity , appears otherwise to the eye of that Providence who knoweth
every thing . BOETHRI-1785-1,173.415

Lucan , our pupil , in his Pharsalia , says , Tho' Heav'n declar'd on
the victorious side , The vanquish'd cause by Cato was embrac'd .
BOETHRI-1785-1,173.416

Be persuaded then , that whatever you see done here contrary to your
expectations and wishes , is in consequence of a good order established
over all nature , although to your apprehension it may appear the effect
of irregular confusion . BOETHRI-1785-1,173.417

Let us suppose a man of such pure and exemplary morals , that he is
equally agreeable to God and <P_174> men but not endued with a
sufficient strength of mind ; so that upon a small reverse of fortune ,
he might perhaps forego his probity , finding that it can@ @not preserve
him in a state of prosperity . BOETHRI-1785-1,174.418

The wisdom of God , therefore , knowing that adversity might destroy
this man's integrity , graciously averts from him calamities which he is
not able to sustain . BOETHRI-1785-1,174.419

Another , again , is so thoroughly virtuous , that in the sanctity of
his life he approaches in some measure to the purity of the Deity ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,174.420

Providence is so far from distressing such a person with the evils of
life , that it even exempts him from its diseases :
BOETHRI-1785-1,174.421

for , as one more excellent than I am , has observed , <font> the
Virtues build up the body of the holy man . <$$font>
BOETHRI-1785-1,174.422

But to return ; Providence often entrusts the direction of public
affairs to men of worth , that the outrageous malice of the wicked may
be curbed and restrained . BOETHRI-1785-1,174.423

To some she distributes a mixture of good and evil , as what is best
adapted to the disposition of their minds . BOETHRI-1785-1,174.424

To some again she gives a check by moderate afflictions , lest they grow
wanton and unruly by a continued flow of prosperity ; whilst she
involves others in the most perplexing distresses and difficulties ,
that their virtues may <P_175> be exercised and strengthened by the
practice of patience . BOETHRI-1785-1,175.425

Many are intimidated without cause , at the prospect of what they can
easily sustain . BOETHRI-1785-1,175.426

Others rashly despise what they are altogether unable to bear ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,175.427

and to render such sensible of their ill-grounded presumption , God
often punishes them with calamities . BOETHRI-1785-1,175.428

Some have acquired immortal renown by a glorious death .
BOETHRI-1785-1,175.429

Others , by their unshaken constancy in torments , have exhibited
examples that virtue can@ @not be vanquished . BOETHRI-1785-1,175.430

Now , that all these events are the effects of a just and well-regulated
order of things , and that they promote the good of the persons to whom
they befall , will not admit of a doubt . BOETHRI-1785-1,175.431

For the same reasons it happens , that adversity is at one time the lot
of the wicked , and prosperity at another . BOETHRI-1785-1,175.432

That bad men are distressed with evils is a surprize to none , because
all are of opinion , they justly merit punishment ;
BOETHRI-1785-1,175.433

besides , what they suffer is of use to amend themselves , and to deter
others from wickedness : BOETHRI-1785-1,175.434

that good things , on the other hand , fall to their share , is a lesson
to the virtuous ; teaching them how little these external advantages
ought to be prized , which are often bestowed upon the most profligate
of mortals . BOETHRI-1785-1,175.435

Another reason for dispensing worldly advantages to the wicked , is ,
that perhaps the dispositions of some of them are naturally so violent
and rapacious , that indigence would prompt them to commit the greatest
enormities : BOETHRI-1785-1,175.436

Providence therefore <P_176> makes use of abundance , as a remedy , to
prevent them from falling into such misery . BOETHRI-1785-1,176.437

Further ; such a person is stung with the reproach of a guilty
conscience , BOETHRI-1785-1,176.438

and perceiving that he can@ @not persist in his iniquitous courses , and
retain his riches ; he is therefore under dismal apprehensions at the
prospect of losing what he enjoys with so much pleasure ,
BOETHRI-1785-1,176.439

and is upon that account led to a change of manners ; the fear of
forfeiting his fortune , engaging him to relinquish his wickedness .
BOETHRI-1785-1,176.440

Another , again , by managing his prosperous fortune unworthily ,
precipitates himself into deserved misery . BOETHRI-1785-1,176.441

To some bad men in fine , Providence imparts the power of inflicting
punishments , with a view both to chastise other wicked persons , and to
exercise the fortitude of the good : BOETHRI-1785-1,176.442

for as there is no concord betwixt the virtuous and the wicked ; so
neither can the vicious agree with one another . BOETHRI-1785-1,176.443

And how should they ? as they are at perpetual war with themselves ;
their crimes sitting so heavy upon their consciences , that there is
scarce any thing they do but they afterwards disapprove .
BOETHRI-1785-1,176.444

Hence arises a signal miracle brought about by Divine Providence , that
the wicked often reform their brethren in iniquity , and render them
good ; BOETHRI-1785-1,176.445

for these latter having suffered injuries from the former , their
resentment excites them to become virtuous themselves , that they may no
more bear any resemblance to persons whom they so thoroughly detest .
BOETHRI-1785-1,176.446

Thus we see , <P_177> that it is the power of Deity alone that can draw
good out of evil , over-rule it for his own purposes , and deduce from
it beneficial consequences . BOETHRI-1785-1,177.447

For in all God's works , we may plainly perceive that there is a fixed
order which comprehends every thing that exists : so that if any thing
departs from the particular arrangement wherein it is placed , it must
necessarily fall under another establishment ; BOETHRI-1785-1,177.448

as in the realms of Providence , the caprice and irregularity of chance
has no dominion . BOETHRI-1785-1,177.449

But after all , as the poet observes , it is difficult to unfold what
relates to the Divinity . BOETHRI-1785-1,177.450

In fact , it is presumptuous in man to attempt to comprehend the whole
economy of the sovereign of the universe ; and still more so , to
endeavour to explain it in words . BOETHRI-1785-1,177.451

Let it satisfy us to know , that God , who formed all beings , disposes
and directs them to good ; and that , while he retains every thing he
has created , in an order worthy of his unerring wisdom , he makes use
of that chain of destiny which he hath established , to banish every
evil from the immense circuit of his empire . BOETHRI-1785-1,177.452

If you will therefore contemplate with attention the conduct of
Providence , you will be convinced that the evils which seem to overflow
the universe , exist only in your own imagination .
BOETHRI-1785-1,177.453

But I now perceive that you are confounded and exhausted with the length
of my reasoning , and with the intricacy <P_178> and obscurity of these
disquisitions ; and that you are impatiently expecting relief from the
harmony of my numbers . BOETHRI-1785-1,178.454

Let us therefore interrupt the course of our arguments , and strive to
sooth and refresh your mind with pleasing and melodious strains ; that
it may be brought into a proper frame to comprehend what still remains
to be discussed . BOETHRI-1785-1,178.455

{COM:verse_omitted}

