<BEGIN_boethri-1785-2>

<P_15>

Do these strains affect you ? BOETHRI-1785-2,15.3

Do they reach your heart ? BOETHRI-1785-2,15.4

Or are you as insensible to them as the ass is to the sound of the lyre
? BOETHRI-1785-2,15.5

You weep ; BOETHRI-1785-2,15.6

- why this profusion of tears ? BOETHRI-1785-2,15.7

Speak , BOETHRI-1785-2,15.8

- conceal nothing - BOETHRI-1785-2,15.9

you can expect no assistance from a physician , unless you discover to
him your malady . BOETHRI-1785-2,15.10

Struck with these words , I recollected somewhat of my long-lost vigour
, BOETHRI-1785-2,15.11

and thus addressed her . BOETHRI-1785-2,15.12

Alas ! why need I enter into a recital of my woes ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,15.13

With regard to me , is not fortune's unrelenting rage but too apparent ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,15.14

Are not you struck with the horror of this place ? BOETHRI-1785-2,15.15

Do you find here the library , which , in my house , you chose for your
residence ? that library , where , blest with your converse , I was
taught every science human and divine . BOETHRI-1785-2,15.16

Was such my apparel ? BOETHRI-1785-2,15.17

Was my countenance such , when with you I was wont to explore the
secrets of nature ? when with your compass you described to me the
courses of the stars , and taught me , by that order and harmony <P_16>
so conspicuous in the heavens , to form my manners and the whole tenour
of my life ? BOETHRI-1785-2,16.18

Is this then all the reward you confer upon your faithful follower ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,16.19

- From the mouth of your Plato , you pronounced this fine saying , "
That happy were the states , whose princes were philosophers , or ,
whose magistrates applied themselves to the study of wisdom .
BOETHRI-1785-2,16.20

" Inspired by thee , the same illustrious person recommends it as the
indispensable duty of philosophers , to take upon them the management of
public affairs , lest the reins of government should fall into the hands
of unprincipled profligates , who would thereby become the plague and
ruin of every worthy citizen . BOETHRI-1785-2,16.21

Relying upon this authority , I had nothing so much at heart , during my
public administration , as to reduce to practice the instructions which
I learned from you in our studious retirement . BOETHRI-1785-2,16.22

God , who infuses your lessons into the hearts of the truly wise , and
you yourself , are conscious , that I brought along with me into the
magistracy no other principle , but a generous and impartial Zeal for
the welfare of the virtuous . BOETHRI-1785-2,16.23

Hence I was involved in perpetual and irreconcileable discord with the
wicked ; BOETHRI-1785-2,16.24

but the consciousness of my integrity inspired me with an invariable
contempt <P_17> of the resentment of the great , BOETHRI-1785-2,17.25

and prompted me resolutely to persevere in supporting the rights of
equity . BOETHRI-1785-2,17.26

How often have I opposed myself to Conigastus , when he was oppressing
the weak , and bereaving them of their possessions ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,17.27

How often have I put a stop to the iniquitous proceedings of Triquilla ,
the superintendent of the king's household , and disconcerted his
schemes when almost ripe for execution ? BOETHRI-1785-2,17.28

How frequently have I risked my authority in protecting those unhappy
citizens , whom the lawless barbarians had charged with innumerable
slanders , in hopes , of sharing the plunder of their fortunes ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,17.29

There is no man that can reproach me with deviating from the paths of
justice , into those of fraud and oppression . BOETHRI-1785-2,17.30

While the provinces were oppressed with private rapine and the weight of
public taxes , I beheld their fate with concern , BOETHRI-1785-2,17.31

and grieved no less than the unhappy sufferers themselves .
BOETHRI-1785-2,17.32

In the time of a severe famine , when the province of Campania was
ordered to supply the city of Rome with such a vast quantity of corn as
would have entirely ruined it , I entered into a very warm expostulation
with the prefect of the palace , in the presence of the king ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,17.33

and got <P_18> that fine country relieved of the unreasonable burthen .
BOETHRI-1785-2,18.34

I delivered Paulinus , a worthy consular , from the jaws of the
courtiers , who , impelled by avarice and ambition , were like greedy
dogs , already devouring him and his great wealth , in their wicked
imaginations . BOETHRI-1785-2,18.35

In defence of Albinus , another of the consulars , I exposed myself to
the resentment of Cyprian , an infamous informer , who had laid a plot
to destroy that respectable senator by a false accusation .
BOETHRI-1785-2,18.36

Is it not then sufficiently manifest , what a load of enmity and bitter
resentment I must have incurred ? BOETHRI-1785-2,18.37

But after all , I thought I had the more reason to expect friendship and
support from the rest of mankind ; as from my love of justice , I had
forfeited all favour at court , and thrown myself out of its protection
. BOETHRI-1785-2,18.38

But let us see who were my accusers : BOETHRI-1785-2,18.39

one Basilius , who was formerly dismissed with infamy from the king's
service , and who turned informer against me in hopes of relieving his
necessities with my spoils ; one Opilio , and one Gaudentius , who , for
their innumerable frauds and extortions , were banished by a royal
mandate , and who , refusing to submit to this sentence , fled for
sanctuary <P_19> to one of the sacred edifices ; whereof , when the king
was informed , he commanded them , if before a certain day they departed
not from Ravenna , to be seized , stigmatized in the forehead , and
driven out of the city . BOETHRI-1785-2,19.40

What could be more disgraceful than this intended chastisement ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,19.41

But on the very day it was to be executed , they accused me ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,19.42

and obtained credit enough to get their accusations received and
attended to . BOETHRI-1785-2,19.43

Wherein , may I ask you , has my conduct deserved this injustice ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,19.44

Was there any shadow of equity in listening to the testimony of three
profligates already condemned ? BOETHRI-1785-2,19.45

If Fortune is not ashamed of the accusation of injured innocence , one
would think she might at least blush at the baseness and infamy of its
accusers . BOETHRI-1785-2,19.46

But you want to be informed of the crime laid to my charge :
BOETHRI-1785-2,19.47

- I am accused with endeavouring to preserve the senate .
BOETHRI-1785-2,19.48

But you ask me how ? BOETHRI-1785-2,19.49

It is said , that I hindered an informer from producing proofs , which
would have convicted that assembly of treason . BOETHRI-1785-2,19.50

What do you think of this , my dear mistress ? BOETHRI-1785-2,19.51

Shall I deny the crime , that <P_20> you may not be ashamed of me ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,20.52

No , I freely acknowledge that I had the preservation of the senate
always at heart , and that I shall never cease to promote its interest .
BOETHRI-1785-2,20.53

Shall I therefore confess the charge ? BOETHRI-1785-2,20.54

But it certainly ought to be my business to embarrass my informers and
not to yield up to them my cause . BOETHRI-1785-2,20.55

Shall I own it a crime to wish the safety of that assembly ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,20.56

Its iniquitous decisions with regard to me , gives it indeed the
appearance of one . BOETHRI-1785-2,20.57

Although , for want of reflection , mankind deceive and impose upon
themselves , this does not alter the nature of things .
BOETHRI-1785-2,20.58

Besides , I do not think it lawful , and I have Socrates's authority for
it , either to conceal the truth , or acknowledge a falsehood .
BOETHRI-1785-2,20.59

With regard to this , however , I submit myself to your judgment , and
to the opinions of the wise . BOETHRI-1785-2,20.60

At all events , I shall take particular care to transmit a faithful
account of the circumstances of my prosecution to posterity , having
them rivetted in my memory , and preserved in writing .
BOETHRI-1785-2,20.61

But why should I spend time , in speaking to you of the forged letters ,
wherein I am charged with wishing the restoration of Roman liberty ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,20.62

The villainy of this contrivance I could have easily detected , if I had
been allowed to have made use of the consessions of my accusers ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,20.63

but this privilege was denied to me , though of the greatest importance
to my justification . BOETHRI-1785-2,20.64

But alas ! are there the smallest <P_21> remains of liberty to be hoped
for ? BOETHRI-1785-2,21.65

Would to heaven there were ! BOETHRI-1785-2,21.66

Then , I would have answered as Canius did , when he was accused by the
emperor Caligula , of being acquainted with a conspiracy against his
life ; " If I had been privy to any such thing , " said he to the tyrant
, " you should never have known it . " BOETHRI-1785-2,21.67

But after all , my sorrow and vexation have not deprived me so much of
the use of my faculties , as to make me think it strange , that the
impious should form attempts against virtue ; BOETHRI-1785-2,21.68

but what surprizes me above measure , is to behold their attempts
crowned with success . BOETHRI-1785-2,21.69

To will evil is an effect of our corruption ; BOETHRI-1785-2,21.70

but to commit it , to oppress innocence with impunity , under the eye of
a Deity who sees every thing - to me appears a prodigy .
BOETHRI-1785-2,21.71

Hence it was , that one of your disciples , not improperly , put this
question : If there is a God , whence proceeds <font> evil ? <$$font>
BOETHRI-1785-2,21.72

If there is none , whence arises <font> good ? <$$font>
BOETHRI-1785-2,21.73

But though wicked men , who thirst after the blood of the senate , and
of all the virtuous citizens whose interests I always vigorously
supported , might very naturally with my destruction ; did I deserve
such usage from the venerable fathers themselves ? BOETHRI-1785-2,21.74

You will undoubtedly remember , you who were always present with me ,
and directed me in all my words and actions ; you will remember , I say
, with what entire inattention to my own safety I defended the innocence
of the senate at <P_22> Verona ; when the king , desirous of their
destruction , endeavoured to transfer the crime of high treason ,
whereof Albinus was accused , upon the whole of that assembly .
BOETHRI-1785-2,22.75

You know what I now say to be true , and that I take no delight in
extolling myself . BOETHRI-1785-2,22.76

For in my opinion , a man who seeks to raise his reputation by vaunting
his good deeds , lessens , in some measure , the secret satisfaction
that springs from a self-approving conscience . BOETHRI-1785-2,22.77

But what have I gained by my integrity ? BOETHRI-1785-2,22.78

Instead of receiving the recompense of disinterested virtue , I suffer
the punishments due to the blackest crime . BOETHRI-1785-2,22.79

Was there ever a criminal condemned by judges so unanimously severe ,
but that in some of their breasts a sense , either of human frailty , or
the instability of fortune , to which all are subjected , did not awake
sentiments of compassion , and cause them to vary in their verdicts ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,22.80

If I had been accused of meditating to set the sacred temples in flames
, of designing to sheathe my impious poignard in the bosoms of the
priests , of attempting the lives of all the virtuous and the good ; yet
I ought to have been present at my trial , BOETHRI-1785-2,22.81

nor should any sentence have past upon me , 'till I had made a
confession of my crime , or had been fairly convicted of it .
BOETHRI-1785-2,22.82

But now , for my zealous affection and attachment to the senate ,
unheard and undefended , I am , at the distance of five_hundred miles ,
proscribed and condemned to death . BOETHRI-1785-2,22.83

O , my judges ! well do you deserve that no future patriot should arise
<P_23> to be convicted of the like offence . BOETHRI-1785-2,23.84

My accusers themselves , perceiving the splendor of my merit ,
endeavoured to blacken it , by imputing to me one of the most atrocious
crimes , BOETHRI-1785-2,23.85

and therefore seigned that I had polluted my conscience with sorcery ,
in briguing for the consulate . BOETHRI-1785-2,23.86

But , my sovereign directress ! you can attest the falsehood of this
reproach ; BOETHRI-1785-2,23.87

you , who have reigned so long mistress of my breast , and rooted out
thence every ignoble sentiment ; you know , that it was impossible for
me to commit such a crime under your inspection . BOETHRI-1785-2,23.88

Daily are you sounding in my ears , and insinuating into my heart , that
<font> golden sentence <$$font> of Pythagoras , <font> Take God for your
model . <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-2,23.89

Should I not then have acted very inconsistently , in seeking assistance
from wicked and unlawful arts , when you had exalted my mind to the
height of excellence , by forming it into a resemblance of the Deity ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,23.90

Besides , my house , which was as it were the sanctuary of innocence ;
the society of my friends , all people of the greatest worth ; the
alliance of my father-in-law Symachus , a man of consummate virtue , and
for whom I have a reverence equal almost to that which I bear to
yourself - all these considerations ought to have <P_24> raised me far
above the suspicion of such a crime . BOETHRI-1785-2,24.91

But , O horrid impiety ! they impute my crime to you ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,24.92

and I am looked upon as a guilty person because I have been educated
under your discipline , and imbibed your morals . BOETHRI-1785-2,24.93

Thus , it is not enough , that the reverence due to you has been of no
advantage to me ; BOETHRI-1785-2,24.94

but you must besides suffer reproach on my account .
BOETHRI-1785-2,24.95

But my miseries are compleat , when I reflect that the majority of
mankind attend less to the merit of things , than to their fortuitous
event ; and believe that no undertakings are crowned with success , but
such as are formed with a prudent foresight . BOETHRI-1785-2,24.96

Hence it is , that the unprosperous immediately lose the good opinion of
mankind . BOETHRI-1785-2,24.97

It would give me pain to relate to you , the rumours that are flying
among the people , and the variety of discordant and inconsistent
opinions entertained concerning me . BOETHRI-1785-2,24.98

This only will I say , that the severest stroke the unfortunate can
receive , is the persuasion that they suffer no more than what they
deserve . BOETHRI-1785-2,24.99

As to what regards myself , as I am now deprived of my possessions , my
employments , and my reputation , I look upon the death which awaits me
, as a favour . BOETHRI-1785-2,24.100

But ah ! me@ @thinks I see the numerous band of the wicked , drunk and
overflowing with joy , the abandoned race of informers contriving
unheard-of villainies , the good dejected and filled with terror at my
fate . BOETHRI-1785-2,24.101

I figure to myself the <P_25> flagitious , daring every crime with
impunity ; nay , encouraged to perpetrate their abominable deeds by
rewards ; while the innocent are abandoned , deprived of their security
, without protection , and without defence . Wherefore with reason may
I thus exclaim : BOETHRI-1785-2,25.102

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_26>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_27>

When I had vented my grief in these melancholy strains , she , with a
countenance serene and unruffled with my complaints , thus addressed me
: BOETHRI-1785-2,27.107

When I saw you sorrowful and in tears , I immediately knew you were
miserable and in exile ; BOETHRI-1785-2,27.108

but I should not have known how far you were banished from your home ,
unless I had learned it from yourself . BOETHRI-1785-2,27.109

You have not , however , been driven from your country ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,27.110

but you have unhappily wandered from it : BOETHRI-1785-2,27.111

or , if you will have it that you have been banished , you have banished
yourself ; BOETHRI-1785-2,27.112

for it was not in the power of any mortal to do you such an injury .
BOETHRI-1785-2,27.113

Call to your remembrance of what country you are ; BOETHRI-1785-2,27.114

it is not governed by a multitude as Athens was formerly ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,27.115

but it is ruled by one king , one lord , who , far from banishing his
citizens , delights to see them increase and flourish ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,27.116

it is ruled by a sovereign who is possessed of true liberty , as from
the perfection <P_28> of his nature he is incapable of doing evil , and
abhors all unrighteousness . BOETHRI-1785-2,28.117

Are you ignorant of that antient law of Rome , by which it is decreed to
be unjust to banish any person thence that takes up his residence in it
? BOETHRI-1785-2,28.118

A law founded upon this principle , that whoever hath obtained the
happiness of being settled within the bounds of so noble a city , can
never be presumed to deserve the punishment of exile ; but if he ceases
to desire to be an inhabitant of it , he then ceases to merit that
privilege . BOETHRI-1785-2,28.119

This place , gloomy as it is , does not therefore move me so much as
your melancholy aspect , BOETHRI-1785-2,28.120

I am in no pain from the want of your library , whose walls were so
richly adorned with glass and ivory ; BOETHRI-1785-2,28.121

but it is the loss of the composure and tranquillity of your mind that
affects me . BOETHRI-1785-2,28.122

'T@ @was there , 't@ @was in that precious repository that I stored up ,
not books , but what gives books their value , the spirit and
quintessence of my meditations and writings . BOETHRI-1785-2,28.123

As to what you have done for the public advantage , you have told me
nothing but the truth ; BOETHRI-1785-2,28.124

and you have mentioned few particulars in comparison of what you might .
BOETHRI-1785-2,28.125

With regard to the accusations that have been brought against you , it
is universally acknowledged that part of them tend greatly to your
honour , while the rest are palpable and malicious falshoods .
BOETHRI-1785-2,28.126

You judged right in recounting but slightly , the villainy and base
artifices of the informers ; as the public , who are sensible <P_29> of
their wickedness , in all its extent , will say much more upon this
subject than it becomes you . BOETHRI-1785-2,29.127

You have inveighed severely against the unjust decree of the senate .
BOETHRI-1785-2,29.128

You have vented your affliction because I am involved in your accusation
BOETHRI-1785-2,29.129

and you have lamented the prejudice that is thereby done to my doctrines
and instructions . BOETHRI-1785-2,29.130

You broke forth afterwards in a torrent of grief against fortune ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,29.131

and complained that mankind were not rewarded according to their merits
. BOETHRI-1785-2,29.132

And at last , hurried away by your distempered muse , you dared to wish
that the spirit of peace , which rules in heaven , might rule the earth
. BOETHRI-1785-2,29.133

But as I behold a crowd of various passions attacking you all at once ;
as I see you distracted by grief , rage , and melancholy , as this is
the state of your mind , it is not now a time to employ violent remedies
; BOETHRI-1785-2,29.134

we shall at present therefore only apply some agreeable lenitives ,
whose gentle touch may in some measure mitigate the deep wound that
rankles in your heart , and dispose you to receive afterwards medicines
stonger and more efficacious . BOETHRI-1785-2,29.135

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_30>

{COM:verse_omitted}

First then , allow me , continues she , to ask you a few questions upon
the present state of your mind , that I may know in what manner I ought
to proceed in your cure . BOETHRI-1785-2,30.139

Ask me what you please , replied I , BOETHRI-1785-2,30.140

I shall most willingly answer you . BOETHRI-1785-2,30.141

Tell me then , says she , do you believe that the affairs of this world
are under the direction of blind fortune , or conducted by a wise and
rational intelligence ? BOETHRI-1785-2,30.142

I can by no means believe , answered I , that the beautiful order we
every where observe in nature , could proceed from the <P_31> caprice
and irregularity of chance . BOETHRI-1785-2,31.143

I know certainly that God , the creator of the universe , presides over
his work . BOETHRI-1785-2,31.144

There never was a day of my life , in which I hesitated a moment with
regard to the certainty of this comfortable truth .
BOETHRI-1785-2,31.145

I believe you , says she ; BOETHRI-1785-2,31.146

for a little while since you declared you were of this opinion , when
deploring in your moving verses the unfortunate state of the human race
, as alone destitute of the divine care , you allowed that all other
things were guided by a rational intelligence . BOETHRI-1785-2,31.147

Ah ! continued she , I am above measure surprized , that you should
despond , when upheld by so comfortable a sentiment !
BOETHRI-1785-2,31.148

But we must search farther ; BOETHRI-1785-2,31.149

I am afraid there is some imperfection , some defect in this conviction
. BOETHRI-1785-2,31.150

Tell me , then , since you have no doubt but that God governs the world
, do you know by what economy or secret springs he governs it ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,31.151

The meaning of your question , said I , I do not thoroughly comprehend ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,31.152

and therefore can@ @not return the proper answer .
BOETHRI-1785-2,31.153

Was I mistaken then , added she , when I told you there was some defect
in your sentiment upon this subject ? BOETHRI-1785-2,31.154

it is by this weak place that these gloomy perturbations , as through a
breach , have made way into your breast . BOETHRI-1785-2,31.155

But inform me , do you recollect for what end all things were created ?
or what is the purpose of this amazing frame of nature ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,31.156

I once knew , answered I , BOETHRI-1785-2,31.157

but grief has blotted every thing out of my memory .
BOETHRI-1785-2,31.158

<P_32> Do you know , added she , whence all things derive their
existence ? BOETHRI-1785-2,32.159

This I know perfectly , replied I - BOETHRI-1785-2,32.160

from God . BOETHRI-1785-2,32.161

And how happens it , continued she , that knowing the cause of all
things , you should be ignorant of their end ? BOETHRI-1785-2,32.162

But the nature of these perturbations has ever been such , as to shake
and unsettle the minds of men ; although not totally to oppress and
overpower them . BOETHRI-1785-2,32.163

But pray answer me this question : Do you remember you are a man ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,32.164

I am not so distempered , said I , as to forget that .
BOETHRI-1785-2,32.165

Can you tell me then , says she , what man is ? BOETHRI-1785-2,32.166

If you ask me whether I know myself to be a rational and mortal creature
, I know , replied I , BOETHRI-1785-2,32.167

and confess that I am . BOETHRI-1785-2,32.168

And , do not you perceive , says she , that you are something more ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,32.169

I do not know , answered I , what more I am . BOETHRI-1785-2,32.170

I discover now another , added she , and indeed the principal cause of
your distemper . BOETHRI-1785-2,32.171

You no longer remember what you yourself are . BOETHRI-1785-2,32.172

Thus then have I , at the same time , found out the source of your
malady , and the method of restoring you to health .
BOETHRI-1785-2,32.173

For as you have forgotten what you are , you complain of your being
banished and stripped of your possessions ; BOETHRI-1785-2,32.174

as you know not the end and purpose of things , you believe wicked and
lawless men are powerful and happy ; BOETHRI-1785-2,32.175

and as you are ignorant of the economy or secret springs by which the
world is governed , you imagine that the vicissitudes of life are the
work of fortune , and that all human affairs float <P_33> at random ,
without the interposition of a supreme Ruler . BOETHRI-1785-2,33.176

Imaginations such as these do not only generate diseases of the soul ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,33.177

but if they are indulged , they will utterly ruin it .
BOETHRI-1785-2,33.178

Give thanks , then , to the preserver of your being , that nature has
not totally failed in you . BOETHRI-1785-2,33.179

The encouragement I have to expect your cure , is derived from the just
notions you entertain in relation to the government of the universe ;
that it is not left to chance , but is under the direction of God and
his providence . BOETHRI-1785-2,33.180

Do not despair : BOETHRI-1785-2,33.181

this small spark will soon produce heat enough to restore you to life .
BOETHRI-1785-2,33.182

But as it is not now a proper time to make use of strong remedies , and
because such is the nature of the human soul , that no sooner does it
throw aside true opinions , but it embraces false : and as hence there
arises a mist of gloomy emotions , which darkens the understanding , and
gives it a fallacious view of objects ; I shall therefore endeavour to
dissipate these vapours , by applying soft and gentle fomentations , so
that the dark and deceitful illusions of the passions being thus removed
, you will rejoice when you behold the splendors of the true light
shining in upon your mind . BOETHRI-1785-2,33.183

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_34>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_35>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_36>

<heading>

BOOK II. BOETHRI-1785-2,36.191

<$$heading>

<font> Philosophy exhorts Boethius not to torment himself upon account
of his losses . BOETHRI-1785-2,36.193

- She describes the inconstancy and caprice of Fortune .
BOETHRI-1785-2,36.194

- Expostulates with him in the name of Fortune . BOETHRI-1785-2,36.195

- Shows him that he is not miserable , but possessed of much felicity .
BOETHRI-1785-2,36.196

- Assures him that felicity doth not consist in the gifts of Fortune .
- That it is not to be found in riches . - Nor in power and honours .
- Nor in glory and fame . BOETHRI-1785-2,36.197

- Philosophy concludes this Book teaching Boethius that adverse fortune
is often profitable . <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-2,36.198

After this , the goddess paused a while , BOETHRI-1785-2,36.199

and having engaged my attention by her silence and composure , she thus
proceeded : BOETHRI-1785-2,36.200

- If I have rightly discovered the causes and nature of your distemper ,
you regret the loss of your former fortune , BOETHRI-1785-2,36.201

and languish with the desire of its return ; BOETHRI-1785-2,36.202

't@ @is this change of condition , which you are always revolving in
your distempered imagination , that has overwhelmed your spirit .
BOETHRI-1785-2,36.203

I know perfectly the innumerable tricks of Fortune , <P_37> how she
flatters , with the most alluring prospects , those whom she designs to
deceive ; and , when they are not in the least apprehensive of her
inconstancy , leaves them on a sudden , and plunges them in despair .
BOETHRI-1785-2,37.204

If you will but recall to your memory , the nature , the character , and
manners of this <font> idol , <$$font> you will readily acknowledge ,
that she never gave nor hath she deprived you of any thing so really
estimable as to make you desire the possession of it again , or regret
its loss . BOETHRI-1785-2,37.205

But I flatter myself , I shall not have much difficulty to bring these
things to your remembrance . BOETHRI-1785-2,37.206

You were wont to treat with a noble and manly disdain , this deceitful
Fortune , when she approached you with the most flattering caresses :
BOETHRI-1785-2,37.207

you had constantly in your mouth , sentences drawn from my magazines ,
with which you battled and repulsed her . BOETHRI-1785-2,37.208

But such is the condition of humanity , that every sudden change excites
violent emotions in the breast , and bereaves it of tranquillity ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,37.209

and hence it is that your present distress arises .
BOETHRI-1785-2,37.210

I shall now give you , as I before proposed , some gentle and agreeable
emollients , by which you may be prepared to receive with greater
advantage , the more powerful cordials I have in reserve .
BOETHRI-1785-2,37.211

Approach then , Rhetorick , with all thy persuasive charms ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,37.212

whilst under my guidance , thy captivating art is most salutary and
beneficial . BOETHRI-1785-2,37.213

Come also , Musick , another of my train , BOETHRI-1785-2,37.214

and pour forth thy melodious <P_38> strains , at times cheerful and airy
, and anon of a graver and more solemn tone . BOETHRI-1785-2,38.215

What is it then , my friend , that has plunged you into such an abyss of
sorrow and misery ? BOETHRI-1785-2,38.216

You have undoubtedly beheld something new and extraordinary .
BOETHRI-1785-2,38.217

If you think Fortune has changed her behaviour towards you , you are in
a mistake . BOETHRI-1785-2,38.218

This is the character of the dame ; BOETHRI-1785-2,38.219

it is her very nature . BOETHRI-1785-2,38.220

With respect to you , she has preserved her wonted consistency , being
constant in nothing but mutability : BOETHRI-1785-2,38.221

such she was , when she caressed you , when she dazzled your eyes with
false shews of felicity . BOETHRI-1785-2,38.222

You have seen the double face of this blind divinity ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,38.223

and she who veils herself from others , has displayed herself wholly to
you . BOETHRI-1785-2,38.224

If you approve her manners , conform to them , BOETHRI-1785-2,38.225

and do not complain . BOETHRI-1785-2,38.226

If you abhor her perfidy , despise it ; BOETHRI-1785-2,38.227

and treat her with disdain when she is courting you with her dangerous
flatteries . BOETHRI-1785-2,38.228

What occasions your present melancholy , ought to have been a cause of
tranquillity : BOETHRI-1785-2,38.229

the wanton has deserted you , of whose continuance no person is secure ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,38.230

and it is now in your power to enjoy a repose that is altogether
incompatible with her . BOETHRI-1785-2,38.231

Can you then esteem so transient a felicity precious ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,38.232

Is the attendance of Fortune so extremely dear to you , whose stay is so
uncertain , and whose removal is followed with such a piercing grief ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,38.233

If it is neither in your power to <font> detain <$$font> her , nor to
behold her slight without regret you ought to <P_39> look upon the
presence of this wanderer , in no other view than as a presage of some
approaching calamity : BOETHRI-1785-2,39.234

for it is not sufficient to consider only the present .
BOETHRI-1785-2,39.235

Wisdom weighs future events : BOETHRI-1785-2,39.236

and the mutability of Fortune , with regard to prosperous and adverse
circumstances , is such , that we ought neither to be terrified by her
threats , nor delighted with her blandishments . BOETHRI-1785-2,39.237

In fine , when you have submitted your neck to her yoke , you ought to
bear with patience and equanimity whatever she thinks proper to inflict
. BOETHRI-1785-2,39.238

Is it not injustice in you , to prescribe the time of stay or removal to
a mistress , to whose sovereignty you have voluntarily submitted ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,39.239

and by your impatience , do you not embitter that lot which you can@
@not possibly change ? BOETHRI-1785-2,39.240

If you leave your vessel to the winds , you go not as you intend , but
where their impulse drives you . BOETHRI-1785-2,39.241

If you cultivate a field , you compensate years that are barren with
those that are fruitful . BOETHRI-1785-2,39.242

You have subjected yourself to the dominion of Fortune ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,39.243

it becomes you , then , as an humble subject , to obey her laws .
BOETHRI-1785-2,39.244

What ! would you stop the rolling of her wheel ? BOETHRI-1785-2,39.245

Ah ! foolish mortal ! do you not see , that if Fortune were permanent
she would cease to exist ? BOETHRI-1785-2,39.246

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_40>

{COM:verse_omitted}

But allow me to personate Fortune for a few moments , and to expostulate
with you in her name ; BOETHRI-1785-2,40.250

in the mean_while attend , and you@ @'ll acknowledge the justice of
these expostulations . BOETHRI-1785-2,40.251

- Why , my friend , do you thus daily accuse me , and pour forth such
bitter complaints against me ? BOETHRI-1785-2,40.252

What injury have I done you ? BOETHRI-1785-2,40.253

Of what possessions that were really yours , have I deprived you ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,40.254

Contend with me before what judge you please , upon your title to
possess wealth and honours ; BOETHRI-1785-2,40.255

and if you can prove that any person ever had a fixed property in these
things , I shall most willingly grant , what you so earnestly desire to
recover , did formerly belong to you . BOETHRI-1785-2,40.256

When nature brought you into the world , from the womb of your mother ,
I received you naked and in want of every thing ; BOETHRI-1785-2,40.257

I cherished you , BOETHRI-1785-2,40.258

I supported you ; BOETHRI-1785-2,40.259

and what is now the cause of your animosity against me ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,40.260

I educated you with too much favour and indulgence ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,40.261

I bestowed upon you affluence , BOETHRI-1785-2,40.262

I surrounded you with splendor , BOETHRI-1785-2,40.263

and heaped <P_41> upon you all my blessings . BOETHRI-1785-2,41.264

It is now my will to resume what I lent : BOETHRI-1785-2,41.265

be thankful then for the enjoyment you have had , of what was not your
own . BOETHRI-1785-2,41.266

You have no cause to complain , BOETHRI-1785-2,41.267

for you have lost nothing to which you had a just title .
BOETHRI-1785-2,41.268

Why then do you mourn ? BOETHRI-1785-2,41.269

I have done you no wrong : BOETHRI-1785-2,41.270

riches , honours , and all other things of that nature , are subject to
me , and in my power : BOETHRI-1785-2,41.271

they acknowledge me as their mistress ; BOETHRI-1785-2,41.272

with me they come ; BOETHRI-1785-2,41.273

and when I depart , they follow . BOETHRI-1785-2,41.274

Boldly may I venture to affirm , that if the things , the want whereof
you so feelingly lament , had been your own , you could by no means have
lost them . BOETHRI-1785-2,41.275

Shall I alone be denied the liberty of exercising my rights ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,41.276

Doth not heaven gild the face of nature with the brightest days , and
obscure it with the most gloomy nights ? BOETHRI-1785-2,41.277

Do not the seasons adorn the earth with a profusion of fruits and
flowers , and in their progress ravage and deform it by rains , and
snows , and tempests ? BOETHRI-1785-2,41.278

Doth not the sea now entice us with its placid and flattering aspect ,
and anon terrify us with the rage of its vast and tumultuous billows ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,41.279

And shall I , shall I alone , to gratify the insatiable desires of men ,
preserve a constancy opposite to my character ? BOETHRI-1785-2,41.280

Behold my powers ! BOETHRI-1785-2,41.281

observe my perpetual amusement ! BOETHRI-1785-2,41.282

I turn my rolling wheel with rapidity ; BOETHRI-1785-2,41.283

and please myself with exalting what was low , and with bringing down
what was high . BOETHRI-1785-2,41.284

Mount up upon it then ; but upon this condition , that you <P_42> do not
complain , if I pull you down whenever my sportive humour shall prompt
me to do it . BOETHRI-1785-2,42.285

Are you still unacquainted with my frolicksome genius , and with the
strange vicissitudes of which I am the cause ? BOETHRI-1785-2,42.286

Do you not know , that Croesus king of Lydia , formerly so rich , and so
formidable to Cyrus , was dragged to the funeral pile , and must have
perished miserably in the flames , had he not been preserved by an
abundant shower from heaven ? BOETHRI-1785-2,42.287

Do you not remember that Paulus Aemilius shed generous tears over the
misfortunes of king Perseus , whom he had defeated and taken prisoner ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,42.288

And what else doth the weeping muse of Tragedy deplore , but the
flourishing state of <P_43> kingdoms overwhelmed by the indiscriminating
strokes of Fortune ? BOETHRI-1785-2,43.289

Did you not learn whilst a youth , that at the gates of Jupiter's palace
stand two large vessels , one full of blessings , the other of woes .
BOETHRI-1785-2,43.290

What if you have drunk too deep of the first vessel ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,43.291

What if I have not totally forsaken you ? BOETHRI-1785-2,43.292

Is there not in the mutability of my temper a just foundation for your
hoping a more prosperous lot ? BOETHRI-1785-2,43.293

- For all these reasons , you ought not to sink under affliction .
BOETHRI-1785-2,43.294

But , as you are placed in a state in common with mankind , you should
not desire to be exempted from the laws of humanity , and to live as you
list . BOETHRI-1785-2,43.295

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_44>

{COM:verse_omitted}

If Fortune should interrogate you in this manner , you would certainly
have nothing to answer . BOETHRI-1785-2,44.299

But if you have any thing to offer in defence of your complaints , speak
out ; BOETHRI-1785-2,44.300

you have full liberty . BOETHRI-1785-2,44.301

- What you have been saying , replied I , is indeed very specious ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,44.302

and is adorned with all the sweet and captivating charms of Rhetorick
and Music ; BOETHRI-1785-2,44.303

but alas ! such discourses affect , no longer than they strike the ear
; BOETHRI-1785-2,44.304

they can@ @not reach the heart , and efface the deep impressions that
misery there has made . BOETHRI-1785-2,44.305

For in that moment when your delightful words shall cease to sound in my
ears , my deep-rooted melancholy will recur , and afflict me as much as
it did formerly . BOETHRI-1785-2,44.306

- I believe so , said she ; BOETHRI-1785-2,44.307

for the arguments I have been using , are not designed as remedies , but
as lenitives only , to allay in some measure that obstinate grief which
refuses to be cured ; BOETHRI-1785-2,44.308

but when I judge it proper , I shall administer medicines more effectual
, which will reach to the seat of your distemper .
BOETHRI-1785-2,44.309

<P_45> In the mean_while , that you may not consider yourself the most
miserable of men , tell me , have you forgotten your former incomparable
felicity ? BOETHRI-1785-2,45.310

I shall not speak of your happiness , when deprived of your parents , in
falling under the care of the chief and most respectable men of the city
; nor of your engaging the affections and esteem of those worthy
personages ; nor of your being afterwards honoured with their affinity ;
though there were none who did not then consider you the happiest of men
, blest as you were with the splendid alliance of such fathers-in-law ,
with such an amiable and virtuous consort , and with sons of the most
distinguished merit . BOETHRI-1785-2,45.311

I shall forbear also to mention <paren> for to what purpose is it to
speak of things that ordinarily happen ? <$$paren> those honourable
employments which were denied to age , and conferred upon you in your
youth ; BOETHRI-1785-2,45.312

for I am impatient to recall to your remembrance that singular event ,
which exalted you to the height of human felicity , to the very summit
of bliss , if there is such a thing as bliss below .
BOETHRI-1785-2,45.313

Is there any succession of calamities capable of obliterating the <font>
memory of that day , <$$font> when you saw your two sons , invested with
the dignity of consuls , issue from your <P_46> own house in a chariot ,
attended by a venerable body of senators and followed with the
acclamations of a numerous populace ? <font> of that day , <$$font>
when you beheld them seated on high in their curule chairs in the
senate-house , where you displayed your genius in delivering a fine
panegyrick upon the king , and deserved the crown of eloquence ? <font>
of that day , <$$font> when , to crown the glories of it , you placed
yourself in the circus betwixt your consul-sons , and dispensed to a
crowded , and joyful assembly of the people , a triumphal largess ,
equal to their most enlarged expectations ? BOETHRI-1785-2,46.314

Then it was , while Fortune was caressing and fondling you as her
darling , you , in my opinion , fairly over-reached and got the better
of her , by wresting from her a felicity which never before fell to the
share of any private person . BOETHRI-1785-2,46.315

Have you the assurance then to call Fortune to an account ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,46.316

She now begins , I own , to throw an unkind eye upon you ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,46.317

but if you impartially <P_46> weigh your comforts and afflictions , you
can@ @not deny but you are still happy . BOETHRI-1785-2,46.318

If you think yourself miserable , because the blessings you formerly
enjoyed have taken their flight , you ought to consider , that the evils
you suffer are also transitory and upon the wing .
BOETHRI-1785-2,46.319

Are you still so inexperienced , and like a stranger newly introduced
upon the theatre of the world ? BOETHRI-1785-2,46.320

Can you suppose that there is any stability in human affairs , when the
life of man is exposed to dissolution every hour ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,46.321

Though the constancy of Fortune is not to be relied upon , yet , if it
were , the last day of life puts a period to all sublunary enjoyments .
BOETHRI-1785-2,46.322

What then is the mighty matter whether you die away from them , or they
fly away from you ? BOETHRI-1785-2,46.323

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_48>

{COM:verse_omitted}

O parent of every virtue ! replied I , you recall to my memory nothing
but what is true , BOETHRI-1785-2,48.327

nor can I deny but that the gales of prosperity blew early upon me .
BOETHRI-1785-2,48.328

But this is the very thing that consumes me with vexation ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,48.329

for , in every reverse of fortune , it is the remembrance of former
happiness , that gives the most distressing wound .
BOETHRI-1785-2,48.330

- But as your present sufferings , said she , arise wholly from your
false opinion of things , they ought not to be imputed to the evil state
of your affairs . BOETHRI-1785-2,48.331

For if the empty name of a fluctuating happiness still captivates you ;
do but recollect what a large portion of the gifts of Fortune is still
yours . BOETHRI-1785-2,48.332

If I can make it appear , that what you esteemed as most precious in
your happy days , is still , by the particular indulgence of Heaven ,
preserved inviolable ; how can you , enjoying such <P_49> inestimable
blessings , complain with justice of the injuries of Fortune ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,49.333

Symmachus , your father-in-law , that ornament of human nature , whose
welfare you would purchase at the expense of life , is safe and in
health ; BOETHRI-1785-2,49.334

and that incomparable man , whom Wisdom and Virtue call their own , is
so much moved with your misfortunes , that he is regardless of himself ,
and the dangers that surround him . BOETHRI-1785-2,49.335

Your spouse is also alive , a woman equally amiable for the sweetness of
her dispositions and the purity of her manners , and , to say all in a
word , a true resemblance of her father ; BOETHRI-1785-2,49.336

she , I would have you to remember , still lives ; BOETHRI-1785-2,49.337

but what even I must allow is an allay to your happiness , her
separation from you dissolves her in tears , BOETHRI-1785-2,49.338

and consumes her with grief , insomuch , that she is weary of life , and
preserves it <P_50> only for your sake . BOETHRI-1785-2,50.339

Why need I mention your consular sons , who display in their youth the
most eminent talents , and promise to be in every respect worthy of
their sire and grandsire ? BOETHRI-1785-2,50.340

- The principal care of man is to preserve his life ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,50.341

and if you but know your felicity , you are still happy in the
possession of blessings which all men esteem dearer than life .
BOETHRI-1785-2,50.342

Wipe away therefore your tears . BOETHRI-1785-2,50.343

Fortune has not wreaked all her malice against you ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,50.344

the tempest you have suffered is inconsiderable , whilst your anchors
hold firm , which afford both present consolation and future hope .
BOETHRI-1785-2,50.345

- It shall be my constant prayer , replied I , that these anchors may
never fail me ; BOETHRI-1785-2,50.346

for so long as they remain , however things go , I shall escape
shipwreck . BOETHRI-1785-2,50.347

But do you not perceive that I am divested of my honours and plunged in
disgrace ? BOETHRI-1785-2,50.348

- I should have imagined , said my kind instructress , that I had made
some progress in your cure , if I did not see you repining at your fate
; BOETHRI-1785-2,50.349

but it grieves me to behold you in possession of such comforts , and to
hear you lament so bitterly that something is wanting to your felicity ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,50.350

for is there any mortal so completely happy , that he has not cause , in
<P_51> some respect , to complain of his condition ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,51.351

The enjoyments of life have this uneasiness ever accompanying them ,
that they neither equal our desires , nor is our possession of them
secure . BOETHRI-1785-2,51.352

One man has riches in abundance , BOETHRI-1785-2,51.353

but his birth is obscure : BOETHRI-1785-2,51.354

another is conspicuous for the nobility of his descent ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,51.355

but as he is surrounded with indigence , he wishes to be unknown :
BOETHRI-1785-2,51.356

a third is blest with both advantages , BOETHRI-1785-2,51.357

but laments his living unmarried : BOETHRI-1785-2,51.358

this man again is happy in a wife , BOETHRI-1785-2,51.359

but bewails the loss of children , and the necessity he is under of
leaving his fortune to distant heirs ; whilst that other man rejoices
that he is the parent of a numerous family , but is soon overwhelmed
with shame , upon account of their profligate behaviour .
BOETHRI-1785-2,51.360

Hence it is , that there is scarce any man who is completely satisfied
with his condition ; BOETHRI-1785-2,51.361

for in every situation of life there is something disgusting , which a
person does not feel till he has had experience of it , but which he
soon discovers upon a trial . BOETHRI-1785-2,51.362

Add to this , that a man flowing in prosperity has a most delicate
sensibility ; and that , unless all things succeed to <P_52> his wish ,
as he is unacquainted with adversity he is overturned by the smallest
reverse of fortune ; the slightest accident being sufficient to damp his
enjoyments , and involve him in misery . BOETHRI-1785-2,52.363

Do not you perceive that numbers of the human race would think
themselves almost exalted to heaven , were they but possessed of a small
portion of the wrecks of your fortune ? BOETHRI-1785-2,52.364

This place , which you call a banishment , is to its inhabitants their
beloved country . BOETHRI-1785-2,52.365

Nothing is the cause of misery , but what is considered as such ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,52.366

and every lot is happy to a person who bears it with tranquillity .
BOETHRI-1785-2,52.367

Who , I pray you , is so blest , but , if he gives reins to impatience ,
desires to change his condition ? BOETHRI-1785-2,52.368

With what bitter ingredients is human happiness allayed !
BOETHRI-1785-2,52.369

for when it is such as men are delighted with , it can@ @not be retained
, BOETHRI-1785-2,52.370

but takes its flight at pleasure . BOETHRI-1785-2,52.371

Hence therefore appears the uncomfortable nature of all worldly
prosperity ; since with regard to those that enjoy it with equanimity ,
it has no permanency ; and with respect to a person of delicate feelings
, it is always defective and incompleat . BOETHRI-1785-2,52.372

Why , therefore , O mortals ! do ye search abroad for happiness ? when
it is only to be found at home in your own breasts .
BOETHRI-1785-2,52.373

You are the dupes of error and of ignorance . BOETHRI-1785-2,52.374

I will shew you in a few words in <P_53> what the chief happiness
consists . BOETHRI-1785-2,53.375

- Is there anything more precious to you than yourself ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,53.376

Nothing , you will say . BOETHRI-1785-2,53.377

Assume then the government of yourself , and you will possess what you
can never lose , and what Fortune can@ @not take from you .
BOETHRI-1785-2,53.378

But to be fully convinced that happiness conssists not in things which
are in the power of Fortune , attend to the following reasoning :
BOETHRI-1785-2,53.379

- If happiness is the chief good of a reasonable being , that can@ @not
be his chief good , which is in its nature fluctuating , and of which he
may be deprived ; BOETHRI-1785-2,53.380

for there is some good more excellent than this transitory felicity ,
namely , what is permanent , and which can@ @not be taken away ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,53.381

it is therefore evident , that Fortune , the most variable thing in the
world , can@ @not bestow the sovereign good upon mankind ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,53.382

Besides , whoever is captivated with the favours of the capricious dame
, either knows , or does not know her inconstancy .
BOETHRI-1785-2,53.383

If he does not know it , what happiness can a person enjoy , who is
immersed in the grossest ignorance ? BOETHRI-1785-2,53.384

If he knows it , he must be afraid of losing her gifts , as he is sure
they may be lost ; BOETHRI-1785-2,53.385

and the fear of this will keep him in constant terror , and bereave him
of repose . BOETHRI-1785-2,53.386

But perhaps he may think the favours of Fortune despicable , and if he
should be deprived of them , unworthy of his concern :
BOETHRI-1785-2,53.387

if this is the case , it must be a very inconsiderable good , the loss
whereof can be supported without <P_54> regret . BOETHRI-1785-2,54.388

But as I am satisfied that you are convinced of the soul's immortality ,
by a number of incontestable proofs ; and since it is evident that the
felicity of the body ends with life , it unquestionably follows , that
when men lose this felicity , they must be plunged in misery .
BOETHRI-1785-2,54.389

Nevertheless , as we know that many of the human race have sought the
enjoyment of happiness , not only by death , but by sufferings and
torments ; how can this present life make men happy , since , when
finished , it does not make them miserable ? BOETHRI-1785-2,54.390

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_55>

{COM:verse_omitted}

But as I perceive , continued she , that the lenitive and palliating
reasonings I have employed , have begun to insinuate themselves into
your heart , I think you are now prepared to receive comfort from
arguments more powerful and effectual ; BOETHRI-1785-2,55.394

let me therefore beg your attention : BOETHRI-1785-2,55.395

- Were the gifts of Fortune not even so fading and momentary as they are
, what is there in them , I pray you , to constitute your happiness ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,55.396

Do they contain any thing , when closely examined , but what ought to
render them despicable in your sight ? BOETHRI-1785-2,55.397

Are riches precious in themselves , or only in the estimation of men ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,55.398

Which is most precious in them ? the quantity or the quality ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,55.399

But does not a man acquire more lustre by spending than by hoarding them
? as avarice is always odious , and liberality praiseworthy :
BOETHRI-1785-2,55.400

and if that which is transferred to another , can@ @not remain in our
hands , then certainly money never can be precious and estimable , but
when , by spending it , we transfer it to others , and it ceases to be
ours . BOETHRI-1785-2,55.401

But if all the money in the world were accumulated into the coffers of
one man , would not every one else be <P_56> in want of it ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.402

The sound of a voice , without suffering any alteration fills the ears
of many at the same time ; BOETHRI-1785-2,56.403

but this is not the case with riches , which can@ @not be dispersed
among multitudes without being diminished , and rendering indigent those
to whom it formerly belonged . BOETHRI-1785-2,56.404

O riches ! how limited and deficient is your boasted value !
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.405

You can@ @not be enjoyed by many at the same time ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.406

nor can you be heaped up by one without impoverishing others .
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.407

But say , doth the splendor of jewels dazzle your eyes ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.408

If there is any thing valuable in their lustre , it is the property of
the stones themselves , and not of their admirers :
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.409

I am therefore greatly surprized that mankind are so very much
captivated with them . BOETHRI-1785-2,56.410

For what can there be in any thing destitute of motion , life , and
reason , that can justly attract the regard of creatures endowed with
life and reason ? BOETHRI-1785-2,56.411

Precious stones are indeed , the workmanship of the Creator ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.412

and amid the variety of his works they are deservedly distinguished for
their beauty ; BOETHRI-1785-2,56.413

but as their beauty is infinitely below the excellence of your nature ,
they are by no means worthy of your supreme admiration and desire .
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.414

- Does not the prospect of a fine country delight you ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.415

Why should it not ? BOETHRI-1785-2,56.416

for it is really a beautiful part of a most beautiful whole .
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.417

Hence we contemplate with pleasure , a calm and serene sea ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.418

hence we admire the heavens , the stars , the sun and the moon .
BOETHRI-1785-2,56.419

- But have you any property <P_57> in these magnificent existences ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,57.420

Have you the presumption to glorify yourself in their splendor ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,57.421

Do the vernal flowers adorn you with their variety ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,57.422

or , doth your fruitfulness burst forth in the profusion of summer
fruits ? BOETHRI-1785-2,57.423

Why do you suffer yourself to be hurried away by empty delusions ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,57.424

Why do you place your happiness in things external ? as Fortune can
never make those enjoyments yours , where , in the nature of things ,
you have no property . BOETHRI-1785-2,57.425

- The fruits of the earth are undoubtedly designed for the support of
animals : BOETHRI-1785-2,57.426

but if you want only to supply the necessities of nature , the affluence
which Fortune bestows will be useless ; BOETHRI-1785-2,57.427

for Nature contents herself with little , BOETHRI-1785-2,57.428

and if you heap upon her more than she demands , the superfluity will be
both disagreeable and hurtful . BOETHRI-1785-2,57.429

- Again , do you imagine it adds any thing to a man's worth to shine in
magnificent robes ? BOETHRI-1785-2,57.430

If there are in these any thing to be admired , it is only the beauty of
the stuff , or the ingenuity of the workman . BOETHRI-1785-2,57.431

- Once more - Can you think it happiness to be followed by a numerous
train of domestics ? BOETHRI-1785-2,57.432

They are a set of profligates , BOETHRI-1785-2,57.433

they are dangerous furniture in a house , and extremely hurtful to the
master : BOETHRI-1785-2,57.434

but if they are men of worth , what title have you to reckon the probity
of others a part of your riches ? BOETHRI-1785-2,57.435

Upon the whole , then , it plainly appears , that none of the enjoyments
which you considered as your own , did ever properly belong to you :
BOETHRI-1785-2,57.436

but <P_58> if there is no intrinsic worth in these matters to render
them desirable , why do you rejoice in the possession of them , or
afflict yourself for their loss ? BOETHRI-1785-2,58.437

If they derive a beauty from nature , what relation has that to you ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,58.438

For in that case , from their own beauty , they would be equally
agreeable whether they were yours or not . BOETHRI-1785-2,58.439

It is not , therefore because they are a part of your property , that
they are precious ; BOETHRI-1785-2,58.440

it is only because they appeared precious to you , that you desired to
number them among your possessions . BOETHRI-1785-2,58.441

- Why then are you so clamorous in your demands upon Fortune ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,58.442

You want , you say , to drive away indigence by abundance ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,58.443

but the very reverse of this happens , BOETHRI-1785-2,58.444

for great care and much assistance is requisite to preserve a variety of
valuable goods : BOETHRI-1785-2,58.445

and it is a certain truth , that none have a greater number of wants
than those who have the largest possessions ; whilst , on the contrary ,
none are less indigent than such as measure their abundance by the
necessities of nature , and not by the superfluity of their desires .
BOETHRI-1785-2,58.446

Is there then no real happiness to be found within your breast , which
you may justly call your own , that you are obliged to search for it in
things foreign and external ? BOETHRI-1785-2,58.447

How strangely is the order of nature inverted , that a being , who from
the faculty of reason resembles the Divinity , should , in his own
estimation , have no other worth or excellence but what he derives from
the possession of inanimate objects ! BOETHRI-1785-2,58.448

- Inferior <P_59> animals are content with their endowments ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,59.449

you only , whom intelligence renders like to the Deity , vainly seek to
adorn your exalted nature with things that are infinitely below you ,
not perceiving by such a behaviour , how much you dishonour your Creator
. BOETHRI-1785-2,59.450

His will it was , that mankind should excel all terrestrial creatures ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,59.451

but so greatly do you debase your dignity , that you degrade yourselves
below the most contemptible of them : BOETHRI-1785-2,59.452

for if the glittering vanities , reckoned precious by men , are esteemed
of more value than the persons to whom they belong ; when therefore you
place your happiness upon such despicable trifles , do you not thereby
acknowledge yourself of less worth than these trifles ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,59.453

and well do you merit to be so esteemed . BOETHRI-1785-2,59.454

Such , I would have you to remember , is the nature of man , that he
then only excels all other beings , when he knows himself ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,59.455

but when he ceases to do this , he sinks below beasts :
BOETHRI-1785-2,59.456

for ignorance of themselves is natural to brutes , BOETHRI-1785-2,59.457

but in men it is unnatural and criminal . BOETHRI-1785-2,59.458

How great then , and how apparent is your mistake , in believing that
any thing which is so foreign to your nature , can be an ornament to it
? BOETHRI-1785-2,59.459

I again assure you , that this can@ @not be true ; BOETHRI-1785-2,59.460

for if a thing appears beautiful from its external artificial
embellishments , we admire and commend those embellishments alone ,
whilst we still look upon the thing itself as deformed <P_60> or
insignificant . BOETHRI-1785-2,60.461

Moreover , I deny that to be a good , which is hurtful to him that
possesses it . BOETHRI-1785-2,60.462

Is not this true ? BOETHRI-1785-2,60.463

Undoubtedly , you will answer me . BOETHRI-1785-2,60.464

But riches are often hurtful to those who have acquired them ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,60.465

for every wicked man is desirous of another's wealth ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,60.466

and thinks that he alone ought to engross all the gold and jewels in the
world . BOETHRI-1785-2,60.467

You , therefore , who so much dread the instruments of assassination ,
if you had entered upon the stage of life , as a poor way-faring man ,
you might have carelessly pursued your journey , and boldly sung in the
face of robbers . BOETHRI-1785-2,60.468

Justly therefore may I exclaim , O the transcendent felicity of riches !
BOETHRI-1785-2,60.469

No sooner have you acquired them , but you cease to be secure , and bid
farewel to tranquillity ! BOETHRI-1785-2,60.470

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_61>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_62>

{COM:verse_omitted}

Why should I discourse of power and of honours , which , though you are
ignorant of true honour and of real power , you extol to the skies ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,62.476

When these favours of Fortune fall to the share of an abandon'd
profligate , what flaming eruptions of Etna , what impetuous deluge did
ever produce greater calamities ? BOETHRI-1785-2,62.477

No doubt you have heard that your ancestors formed a design to abolish
the consular government <paren> tho ' with the consulship their liberty
commenced <$$paren> , on account of the insolence of these magistrates ;
as they formerly suppressed the title and office of king , because of
the tyranny of their monarchs . BOETHRI-1785-2,62.478

But if sometimes , though seldom , it happens , that honours are
conferred upon men of worth ; is there any thing <P_63> estimable in
them , but the probity of the persons invested with them ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,63.479

Hence it is , that virtue is not embellished by dignities ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,63.480

but on the contrary , dignities derive all their lustre from virtue .
BOETHRI-1785-2,63.481

But in what respects , I pray you , is power so excellent and so
desirable ? BOETHRI-1785-2,63.482

Do but consider , O ye weak and despicable animals ! what they are ,
over whom you appear to exercise authority , and what you are , who thus
seem to govern ? BOETHRI-1785-2,63.483

If you observed a mouse assuming command over her equals , would not you
be ready to burst with laughter ? BOETHRI-1785-2,63.484

But what is there in nature so weak as the human frame ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,63.485

The bite of an insect , the most inconsiderable reptile insinuating
itself into the human pores , may be the cause of death .
BOETHRI-1785-2,63.486

But how can any man obtain dominion over another , unless it be over his
body or what is inferior to his body , I mean , his possessions ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,63.487

Can you ever command a freeborn soul ? BOETHRI-1785-2,63.488

Can you ever disturb the tranquillity of a mind collected in itself ,
and resolutely exerting its powers ? BOETHRI-1785-2,63.489

An imperious prince imagining he might , by tortures , extort a
confession of his accomplices in a conspiracy , from a person of
determined spirit , the undaunted man bit off his tongue ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,63.490

and spit it in the face of his enraged enemy : BOETHRI-1785-2,63.491

thus did he at once disappoint the views of the tyrant , and render the
cruelties prepared for him , <P_64> matter of triumph to his own heroic
virtue . BOETHRI-1785-2,64.492

Besides , what is it that one man can do to another , which may not be
retaliated upon the aggressor ? BOETHRI-1785-2,64.493

Busiris , who we are told was wont to kill his guests , was himself
slaughtered by Hercules his guest . BOETHRI-1785-2,64.494

Regulus put in chains many prisoners of war , whom he took from the
Carthaginians ; BOETHRI-1785-2,64.495

but he was soon after obliged to submit to the chains of his victorious
enemies . BOETHRI-1785-2,64.496

Is the power then of that man , do you think , of any importance , who
dares not inflict what he intends upon another , lest his intended
severities may be requited upon himself ? BOETHRI-1785-2,64.497

Besides , I would have you to reflect , that if there were any thing
really and intrinsically good in power and honours , they could never
devolve upon the wicked ; BOETHRI-1785-2,64.498

for an union of things that are opposite , is repugnant to nature .
BOETHRI-1785-2,64.499

But as we frequently see the worst men obtaining the highest honours ;
it is evident that honours are not in themselves good ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,64.500

otherwise they would not fall to the share of the unworthy .
BOETHRI-1785-2,64.501

The same holds true , with regard to all the gifts of Fortune , which
are commonly showered down in profusion upon the least deserving .
BOETHRI-1785-2,64.502

We ought here also to consider , that as none doubts of the <P_65>
strength of a man , who has given instances of his strength , nor of his
swiftness who runs well ; in like manner it is admitted that the
knowledge of music makes a musician , of medicine a physician , and of
rhetorick a rhetorician . BOETHRI-1785-2,65.503

For the nature of a thing consists in doing what is peculiar to itself ,
in not mixing its effects with things of opposite qualities , and in
voluntarily repelling what is repugnant or hurtful to it .
BOETHRI-1785-2,65.504

Now , we never see riches satisfy the restless cravings of avarice , nor
power render master of himself the man whose opprobrious vices keep him
bound in indissoluble chains , BOETHRI-1785-2,65.505

neither do we perceive that when honours are confered on the unworthy ,
they are thereby rendered men of worth : BOETHRI-1785-2,65.506

on the contrary , dignities serve only to betray them , and to expose
their want of merit . BOETHRI-1785-2,65.507

But for what reason does all this happen ? BOETHRI-1785-2,65.508

'T@ @is because you take a pleasure in giving false names to things ;
names contrary to their natures , and inconsistent with their effects :
BOETHRI-1785-2,65.509

thus you dignify riches , power , and honours with names they have no
title to . BOETHRI-1785-2,65.510

In fine , we may say the same of all the favours of Fortune :
BOETHRI-1785-2,65.511

we may truly conclude , that she has nothing to bestow that is really
desirable , nothing that is naturally good ; that she is not inseparably
attached to men of merit , and that she does not render virtuous those
to whom she adheres . BOETHRI-1785-2,65.512

<P_66>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_67>

{COM:verse_omitted}

I here interposed , BOETHRI-1785-2,67.517

and said , My dear mistress , you are thoroughly sensible that a passion
for those fluctuating things never had dominion over me .
BOETHRI-1785-2,67.518

I wished indeed for some share in publick concerns to exercise my virtue
, lest it should grow feeble by inactivity , and die away uncelebrated .
BOETHRI-1785-2,67.519

- I confess , replied she , that there is one thing which may captivate
souls that are naturally great , but by a habitude of virtue , not
arrived to the height of perfection , BOETHRI-1785-2,67.520

and that is , a love of glory , and the fame of performing illustrious
services to their country . BOETHRI-1785-2,67.521

But consider with me in the following detail , how limited this glory is
! how frivolous and how contemptible ! BOETHRI-1785-2,67.522

You have learned from astronomy , that this globe of earth is but as a
point , in respect to the vast extent of the heavens ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,67.523

that is , the immensity of the celestial sphere is such , that ours ,
when compared with it , is as nothing , and vanishes .
BOETHRI-1785-2,67.524

You know likewise from the proofs that Ptolemy adduces , there is only
one fourth part of this earth , which is of <P_68> itself so small a
portion of the universe , inhabited by creatures known to us .
BOETHRI-1785-2,68.525

If from this fourth you deduct the space occupied by the seas and lakes
, and the vast sandy regions which extreme heat and want of water render
uninhabitable , there remains but a very small proportion of the
terrestrial sphere for the habitation of men . BOETHRI-1785-2,68.526

Enclosed then and locked up as you are , in an unperceiveable point of a
point , do you think of nothing , but of blazing far and wide your name
and reputation ? BOETHRI-1785-2,68.527

What can there be great or pompous in a glory circumscribed in so narrow
a circuit ? BOETHRI-1785-2,68.528

To this let me add , that even in this contracted circuit , there is a
great variety of nations differing from one another in their languages ,
manners and customs , to whom , whether from the difficulty of
travelling , or the diversity of tongues , or the want of commerce , the
fame not only of particular persons , but even of great cities , can@
@not extend . BOETHRI-1785-2,68.529

In Cicero's time , as he tells us somewhere in his works , the renown of
Rome herself , which she imagined was diffused every where , did not
reach beyond Mount Caucasus , though the republick was then in her
{TEXT:he} glory , and had rendered herself formidable to the Parthians ,
and to all the nations in their neighbourhood . BOETHRI-1785-2,68.530

Do you not hence discover , how strait and circumscribed that glory
necessarily is , which you take such mighty pains to propagate ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,68.531

Shall the praises of a Roman citizen , do you think , resound <P_69> in
countries , where the name even of Rome herself was never heard ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,69.532

Do you not perceive that the manners and customs of different nations
widely vary ; insomuch , that what is thought to deserve praise in one
country , is in another deemed worthy of punishment ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,69.533

For this reason , it is not the interest of a man who thirsts after
glory , to propagate his reputation every where . BOETHRI-1785-2,69.534

He ought to rest satisfied with the renown which he has acquired among
his countrymen , BOETHRI-1785-2,69.535

and should not strive to diffuse this dazzling immortality of fame , so
flattering to his pride , any further . BOETHRI-1785-2,69.536

But of how many personages , illustrious in their times , have the
memorials been lost , for want or by the forgetfulness of writers ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,69.537

But do writings preserve the remembrance of men for ever ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,69.538

Are not <P_70> the best compositions , along with the names of their
authors , obliterated by time , and wrapt in oblivion ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,70.539

But you suppose , perhaps , you shall secure to yourselves immortality ,
if you can transmit your names to future ages . BOETHRI-1785-2,70.540

But if you contemplate the unbounded ocean of eternity , you will have
no reason to rejoice in this supposition . BOETHRI-1785-2,70.541

For if the lapse of an instant is compared with that of ten_thousand
years , as the extent of both is definite , there is a proportion
betwixt them , though a very small one ; BOETHRI-1785-2,70.542

but this same number of years , multiplied by whatever sum you please ,
vanishes , when compared with the infinite extent of eternal duration .
BOETHRI-1785-2,70.543

For there can be no proportion betwixt infinite and finite , though
there is always a relation , greater or less , betwixt finite and finite
. BOETHRI-1785-2,70.544

Hence it is , that if the longest duration of renown in future ages is
estimated with an unlimited eternity , there is not even a small
proportion betwixt them ; BOETHRI-1785-2,70.545

there is absolutely none . BOETHRI-1785-2,70.546

- But you , O deluded mortals ! do good from no other view than to
exalt your name and to receive popular applause . BOETHRI-1785-2,70.547

Insensible to the pleasures resulting from a good conscience and from
the practice of virtue , you seek no other reward but the insignificant
praises of a giddy multitude . BOETHRI-1785-2,70.548

- This silly vanity was once thus agreeably rallied :
BOETHRI-1785-2,70.549

A solemn fellow who had assumed the name of a Philosopher , not from the
love of virtue , but of vain-glory , was attacked with the <P_71>
bitterest reproaches by a man of humour , and told , that he had it now
in his power to show that he was truly the Philosopher he professed
himself to be , by bearing with patience the abuse heaped upon him .
BOETHRI-1785-2,71.550

The conceited sophist assuming calmness for a while , seemed to despise
all the insults with which he was provoked . BOETHRI-1785-2,71.551

But at length he burst forth , BOETHRI-1785-2,71.552

and exclaimed , You must surely now confess that I am a Philosopher !
BOETHRI-1785-2,71.553

Not at all , replied the rallier slily ; BOETHRI-1785-2,71.554

I might indeed have believed you one , if you had continued to hold your
peace . BOETHRI-1785-2,71.555

But after all , of what importance is it to illustrious men , <paren>
for it is of such only that I speak , <$$paren> of what importance is it
, I say , to them who pursue glory by a course of meritorious actions ,
that their names resound with applause , after their bodies are resolved
into dust ? BOETHRI-1785-2,71.556

For if men die entirely , which our principles forbid us to believe ,
<P_72> glory is only an imaginary thing ; as the person to whom it was
appropriated no more exists . BOETHRI-1785-2,72.557

But if , on the other hand , the soul is immortal , the righteous sprit
, conscious that she is now at liberty , and disengaged from her bounds
of clay , takes her flight to the upper regions , BOETHRI-1785-2,72.558

and looks down with contempt upon every object below ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,72.559

and happy in the enjoyments of heaven , rejoices that she is exempted
from all sublunary concerns . BOETHRI-1785-2,72.560

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_73>

{COM:verse_omitted}

But do not however believe , continued she , that I am an implacable
enemy to Fortune , and delight to wage perpetual war with her .
BOETHRI-1785-2,73.564

I grant you , that this inconstant dame sometimes deserves well of
mankind ; I mean when she discovers herself to them when she unveils her
countenance and displays her manners . BOETHRI-1785-2,73.565

Perhaps you do not understand me . BOETHRI-1785-2,73.566

What I want to teach you is indeed so surprising , that I am at a loss
to find words to express myself . BOETHRI-1785-2,73.567

I say that adverse Fortune is in reality more beneficial to mankind than
prosperous Fortune . BOETHRI-1785-2,73.568

The latter , while she fondly throws forth her caresses , and would fain
persuade us that happiness resides only with her , is quite the reverse
of what she appears : BOETHRI-1785-2,73.569

the former appears what she really is , displaying by her vicissitudes
<P_74> her natural inconstancy . BOETHRI-1785-2,74.570

The one deceives ; BOETHRI-1785-2,74.571

the other instructs . BOETHRI-1785-2,74.572

This , by a fallacious shew of good , deludes and enslaves the mind
BOETHRI-1785-2,74.573

that , by discovering the fluctuating nature of human happiness ,
enlarges and restores it to its native freedom . BOETHRI-1785-2,74.574

The one we behold blown up with vanity , light , wavering , and
Incapable of reflection ; whilst the aspect of the other is humble ,
patient , and wise with her experience in the school of affliction .
BOETHRI-1785-2,74.575

In fine , prosperous Fortune by her blandishments leads men astray from
the true good ; BOETHRI-1785-2,74.576

but on the other hand , adverse Fortune by her rigours teaches them
wherein real happiness consists , BOETHRI-1785-2,74.577

and conducts them to it . BOETHRI-1785-2,74.578

Let me now ask you this one question : BOETHRI-1785-2,74.579

Is it an inconsiderable service that this latter has done you ,
vexatious and odious as you think her , in putting the fidelity of your
friends to a trial ? BOETHRI-1785-2,74.580

She has separated the true from the false : BOETHRI-1785-2,74.581

by her departure she has carried off hers , and left yours .
BOETHRI-1785-2,74.582

At what price would not you have purchased such a service , when you
were at the height of your imaginary felicity ! BOETHRI-1785-2,74.583

Forbear then to deplore the wealth you have lost , as you have found ,
riches of infinitely greater value , - <font> your friends . <$$font>
BOETHRI-1785-2,74.584

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_75>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_76>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_77>

<heading>

BOOK III . BOETHRI-1785-2,77.592

<$$heading>

<font> Philosophy teaches Boethius that all men are in search of
happiness , or the sovereign good . - That some falsely place it in the
acquisition of riches - Others , in the obtaining of power and honours -
Others in the glory of great achievements , - or in nobility of birth ,
- or in the pleasures of the body . BOETHRI-1785-2,77.594

- Philosophy clearly demonstrates that the sovereign good is not to be
found in any of these externals . BOETHRI-1785-2,77.595

- She afterwards explains the true characteristicks of this happiness .
BOETHRI-1785-2,77.596

- She shews that it resides in the Deity , who is the sovereign and the
only good , - and that God governs the universe by his goodness , as a
helm or rudder . <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-2,77.597

Philosophy now ended her song ; the harmony of which had so charmed my
ears , that for some time I thought her still speaking , and remained
attentive . BOETHRI-1785-2,77.598

But after a short <P_78> pause , I thus began : - O thou sovereign
comforter of dejected minds ! what vigour hast thou infused into me by
the powerful energy of thy discourse , and the melody of thy numbers !
so that I now almost think myself equal to Fortune , and able to
withstand her blows . BOETHRI-1785-2,78.599

So far am I therefore from having an aversion to the powerful remedies
you formerly mentioned , that I earnestly desire you will administer
them . BOETHRI-1785-2,78.600

- When I saw you listen to me , replied she , with so fixed an attention
, I expected the disposition of your mind would be such as you say it is
: BOETHRI-1785-2,78.601

to speak the truth , I inspired you with this disposition .
BOETHRI-1785-2,78.602

The consolations that I am now to apply are of the nature of those
medicines that are bitter in the mouth , but grateful and strengthening
to , the stomach . BOETHRI-1785-2,78.603

But as you say you , are most desirous to hear them ; with what ardour
would you be fired , if you knew where I am about to conduct you !
BOETHRI-1785-2,78.604

- Whither is that , I pray you ? BOETHRI-1785-2,78.605

- To that genuine Felicity , replied she , of whose features you have at
present a very imperfect view , as if it were in a dream ; but whose
supreme beauty and excellence , occupied as you are in the contemplation
of deceitful phantoms , you can@ @not now perceive .
BOETHRI-1785-2,78.606

- I entreat you then , without delay , said I , to shew me this true
Felicity . BOETHRI-1785-2,78.607

- Induced by my regard to you , replied she , I shall comply most
willingly with your request ; BOETHRI-1785-2,78.608

but I will first give you a description of false Happiness , with whom
<P_79> you are better acquainted than with the true ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,79.609

and after we have surveyed that deceitful dame , I shall turn your eyes
upon her opposite , and charm you with a compleat view of the true
Felicity . BOETHRI-1785-2,79.610

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_80>

Then with a serious air , and seeming to recollect herself , and to
rouse up every faculty of her mind , she thus continued her discourse .
BOETHRI-1785-2,80.613

- All the cares , all the desires of mankind terminate in happiness ,
which , though they pursue by a variety of different roads , is still
the ultimate end of their endeavours . BOETHRI-1785-2,80.614

But true happiness is a good , which , after it is obtained , there is
nothing more to be desired . BOETHRI-1785-2,80.615

It is indeed the supreme good , a good that contains in it all others ;
to which if any thing were wanting , it could not be the blessing we
speak of ; as there would be something besides itself , some extraneous
or foreign advantage still to be wished . BOETHRI-1785-2,80.616

Happiness then is manifestly that state of perfection , wherein every
good centers and is accumulated ; BOETHRI-1785-2,80.617

and is the object , as we just now observed , which all the human race
strive to possess . BOETHRI-1785-2,80.618

For there is implanted in the hearts of all men propensity to the true
good ; though error misleads them , and engages them in the pursuit of
joys that are false and delusive . BOETHRI-1785-2,80.619

- Some , imagining that the supreme good consists in being sheltered
from wants , exert all their industry in heaping up a superabundances of
wealth . BOETHRI-1785-2,80.620

<P_81>

Others , supposing that this good lies in attracting attention and
respect , are incessant in their endeavours to acquire honourable
employments , that they may appear venerable in the eyes of their
fellow-citizens . BOETHRI-1785-2,81.622

There are some , again , who place the supreme good in supreme power ;
and are therefore inflamed with a desire either to rule themselves , or
to become the favourites of those who rule . BOETHRI-1785-2,81.623

Others there are , who esteem a wide resounding fame the height of
happiness ; BOETHRI-1785-2,81.624

such exert all their efforts to render their names illustrious , either
by war , or by promoting the arts of peace , and the internal felicity
of countries : whilst there are many who , as they estimate things in
proportion to the joy that redounds to them , believe no state more
delightful than to swim in the midst of pleasures .
BOETHRI-1785-2,81.625

And there are also those , who desire to obtain the possession of things
, not so much upon account of the things themselves , as from other
motives : BOETHRI-1785-2,81.626

for example ; they desire riches , to procure power and pleasures ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,81.627

or they desire power , with a view to heap up wealth or to make their
names famous . BOETHRI-1785-2,81.628

In these cases , and in others of a like nature , in all that mankind do
, in all they wish , they have a particular end in view .
BOETHRI-1785-2,81.629

Thus they seek to be ennobled , and <P_82> to acquire the favour of the
multitude , that they may be considered as men of importance :
BOETHRI-1785-2,82.630

thus they wish to have a wife and children , because they promise
themselves much comfort in a family . BOETHRI-1785-2,82.631

With regard to friendship , we ought to consider it as having no place
in this arrangement of things : BOETHRI-1785-2,82.632

friendship is a gift from Heaven , a kind of sacred felicity ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,82.633

and ought not to be numbered among the goods of Fortune , but among
those of Virtue . BOETHRI-1785-2,82.634

In the pursuit of every thing else , men have no view but to procure
either power or pleasure . BOETHRI-1785-2,82.635

As to the advantages of the body , they fall under the same predicament
. BOETHRI-1785-2,82.636

Thus strength , and a large stature , seem to be attended with power ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,82.637

beauty , and a fine shape , distinguish a man agreeably ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,82.638

and a firm constitution qualifies him for the enjoyment of pleasures :
BOETHRI-1785-2,82.639

for in all these matters it appears , that happiness alone is what is
sought after . BOETHRI-1785-2,82.640

Now what a man wishes for , in preference to all other things , this he
must esteem the supreme good ; which , as we have defined above , is
happiness : BOETHRI-1785-2,82.641

hence the happiest state is that which is judged desirable above every
other . BOETHRI-1785-2,82.642

- Here you have a view of those enjoyments ; which mistaken mortals call
Happiness ; <P_83> wealth , honours , power , glory , pleasure .
BOETHRI-1785-2,83.643

In the last of these Epicurus placed felicity . BOETHRI-1785-2,83.644

He considered pleasure alone as the chief good ; believing that the
pursuit of every thing else , instead of rejoicing the mind , tended to
discompose it . BOETHRI-1785-2,83.645

But let us return to the inclinations of mankind .
BOETHRI-1785-2,83.646

Tho' they forget in what the supreme good consists , yet the desire of
it remains unextinguished in their hearts : BOETHRI-1785-2,83.647

and they may not improperly be compared to a man intoxicated with liquor
, who strives to regain his home , but can@ @not discover the way that
leads to it . BOETHRI-1785-2,83.648

Do they wander , do you suppose , from the supreme good , who endeavour
to preserve themselves from want ? BOETHRI-1785-2,83.649

No , by no means ; BOETHRI-1785-2,83.650

for surely there is no state happier than that which abounds in every
thing , and wherein a man is independent , and needs no assistance .
BOETHRI-1785-2,83.651

Or do you think they are in a mistake , who believe no felicity greater
than to attract notice , and procure respect ? BOETHRI-1785-2,83.652

Certainly they are not ; BOETHRI-1785-2,83.653

for that can never be a contemptible acquisition , which mankind strive
with so much earnestness to obtain . BOETHRI-1785-2,83.654

Again - Is not power to be numbered among the <P_84> goods that are
desirable ? BOETHRI-1785-2,84.655

Why not ? BOETHRI-1785-2,84.656

for how can that be reckoned an insignificant good , which invests a man
with authority and command , and seems therefore to be of greater
importance than any other advantage ? BOETHRI-1785-2,84.657

- And is fame to be considered as of no value ? BOETHRI-1785-2,84.658

Quite the reverse ; BOETHRI-1785-2,84.659

for it can@ @not be denied , but that every thing excellent is also
shining and renowned . BOETHRI-1785-2,84.660

To conclude - I need scarce observe to you that happiness is not an
unjoyous and melancholy state , disturbed with care and sorrow ; because
, even in the pursuit of the smallest matters , men are desirous of
nothing but what gives them pleasure and satisfaction .
BOETHRI-1785-2,84.661

- Behold , then , the acquisitions mankind strive to possess .
BOETHRI-1785-2,84.662

Hence it is , that they are so eager in the pursuit of honour , command
, glory , riches , and pleasures ; as they believe , by obtaining <font>
these , <$$font> they shall secure to themselves independence , respect
, power , fame , and delight . BOETHRI-1785-2,84.663

Upon the whole , it is plain , however varied their inclinations , that
happiness is the sole pursuit of all the human race :
BOETHRI-1785-2,84.664

and here the wonderful force of nature appears ; that , although men's
opinions with regard to happiness widely vary , they nevertheless concur
in pursuing <font> it , <$$font> as the end of all their actions and
desires . BOETHRI-1785-2,84.665

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_85>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_86>

{COM:verse_omitted}

O deluded mortals ! it must be confest , immersed as you are in
terrestrial objects , that you have nevertheless an indistinct
perception of your beginning ; that you behold a shadow of it , as
through a dream ; and that you have also an obscure and imperfect idea
of your true end , which is Felicity . BOETHRI-1785-2,86.671

Hence it is , that whilst a natural instinct leads you to the true good
, a train of phantoms at the same time deludes you , and draws you
astray from it . BOETHRI-1785-2,86.672

- Come , then , BOETHRI-1785-2,86.673

and consider with me , if it is possible for men to obtain the end they
have in view , by the means they usually employ in the pursuit of
happiness . BOETHRI-1785-2,86.674

For if riches , honours , and other advantages of the like nature ,
crown mortals with felicity , and place them in a state where nothing is
wanted or desired - we must acknowledge that happiness may be procured
by these acquisitions . BOETHRI-1785-2,86.675

But , on the other hand , if they can@ @not make good what they promise
- if they can@ @not <P_87> supply every human want - they are but
delusions , that impose upon mankind with a counterfeit face of
happiness . BOETHRI-1785-2,87.676

Let me therefore ask you , who but lately abounded in riches , if , in
the midst of your opulence , you were never discomposed with receiving
an injury ? BOETHRI-1785-2,87.677

- I must confess , answered I , that I can@ @not remember I ever was in
so tranquil a state , as to be totally free from disquietude .
BOETHRI-1785-2,87.678

- And did not your anxiety , added she , arise either from your wanting
something which you desired to have , or your having something which you
wished to be without ? BOETHRI-1785-2,87.679

- That is certainly true . BOETHRI-1785-2,87.680

- Did not you therefore , said she , desire the possession of the one ,
and the privation of the other ? BOETHRI-1785-2,87.681

- I acknowledged I did . BOETHRI-1785-2,87.682

- But a man wants what he desires . BOETHRI-1785-2,87.683

- Undoubtedly he does . BOETHRI-1785-2,87.684

- And if a man wants any thing , can that man be said to be completely
happy ? BOETHRI-1785-2,87.685

- No . BOETHRI-1785-2,87.686

- Were not you then in this state of insufficiency , whilst you were in
the midst of your opulence ? BOETHRI-1785-2,87.687

- What then ? BOETHRI-1785-2,87.688

- It follows , added she , that riches can@ @not make a man so rich as
to want nothing : BOETHRI-1785-2,87.689

this , however , is what they seemed to promise . BOETHRI-1785-2,87.690

But , besides , I think we ought always to remember , that riches are by
no means a sure and permanent good ; as a man may undoubtedly be
stripped of his wealth by violence , however unwilling he is to part
with it . BOETHRI-1785-2,87.691

- He may so . BOETHRI-1785-2,87.692

- How can it be otherwise , said she , when you behold every day the
<P_88> stronger depriving the weaker of his property ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,88.693

For do not all complaints to courts of justice hence arise , one party
reclaiming the goods of {COM:sic} he has been dispossessed by the
oppression and fraud of the other ? BOETHRI-1785-2,88.694

- Nothing is more true . BOETHRI-1785-2,88.695

- There is not any one person , added she , that does not stand in need
of the assistance of others , to preserve his riches .
BOETHRI-1785-2,88.696

But he would not surely need this help , did he not possess what he is
in danger of losing . BOETHRI-1785-2,88.697

- That is certain . BOETHRI-1785-2,88.698

- You see , then , continued she , the very reverse of what was expected
from riches takes place : BOETHRI-1785-2,88.699

so far are they from being sufficient to a man's wants , that they are
the cause of his having more occasion for the assistance of others .
BOETHRI-1785-2,88.700

But tell me , How is it that men's wants are supplied by riches ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,88.701

Is it because the rich never feel hunger , are not liable to thirst , or
that their bodies are insensible to the winter's cold ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,88.702

But the wealthy , you@ @'ll say , have supplies in abundance to answer
all necessities , to relieve hunger and thirst , and to repel cold .
BOETHRI-1785-2,88.703

In these matters , it must be acknowledged that riches aid and comfort
indigence , BOETHRI-1785-2,88.704

but they can by no means satisfy every want . BOETHRI-1785-2,88.705

For as we know , with respect to riches , the desires of mankind are
unbounded , ever gaping and clamouring for more , in the midst of the
greatest abundance ; BOETHRI-1785-2,88.706

it of course follows , that there are cravings remaining in the human
breast , which still want supply , and which will never cease to torment
<P_89> it . BOETHRI-1785-2,89.707

I need scarcely add , that a little suffices Nature , whilst Avarice
exclaims she never has enough . BOETHRI-1785-2,89.708

Upon the whole , since riches , instead of exempting from wants , create
new ones ; how can mortals suppose that a sufficiency is obtained by
them for all their necessities ? BOETHRI-1785-2,89.709

{COM:verse_omitted}

But dignities , you@ @'ll say , render the persons invested with them
eminent and respectable . BOETHRI-1785-2,89.711

What ! have they the power to destroy vice , and implant virtue in the
heart ? BOETHRI-1785-2,89.712

Surely not ; BOETHRI-1785-2,89.713

for we learn from experience , that places of dignity , instead of
eradicating vicious habits , for the most part serve only to strengthen
them , and make them more conspicuous . BOETHRI-1785-2,89.714

Hence we are always filled with indignation , when we behold honours
conferred on the wicked . BOETHRI-1785-2,89.715

Hence arose the poet Catullus's resentment against Nonius the senator ,
whom he calls the bile or imposthume of the state .
BOETHRI-1785-2,89.716

Is not the disgrace , that honours devolve upon the worthless , very
apparent ? BOETHRI-1785-2,89.717

Their baseness surely would have been less glaring , if they had not
been exhalted to such dignified stations . BOETHRI-1785-2,89.718

Would you redeem <P_90> yourself from the danger that at present hangs
over you , by accepting a magistracy in conjunction with Decoratus ,
that infamous buffoon and informer ? BOETHRI-1785-2,90.719

Can we persuade ourselves that honours render persons respectable whom
we know to be unworthy of them ? BOETHRI-1785-2,90.720

If you find a man endowed with wisdom , you deem him worthy of respect ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,90.721

for there is a worth peculiar to virtue , which she never fails to
communicate to her votaries . BOETHRI-1785-2,90.722

But as honours conferred by the populace do not convey this worth , it
is manifest they have it not to bestow , and that they are void of all
intrinsick merit . BOETHRI-1785-2,90.723

Here it ought to be particularly considered - as a person , the more his
unworthiness is exposed , becomes thereby the more contemptible ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,90.724

and as eminent dignities can@ @not make men , who are abandoned ,
respectable ; they must , therefore , as they place the vices of these
profligates in a more conspicuous point of view , render them more
universally the objects of contempt and hatred . BOETHRI-1785-2,90.725

Neither do the dignities themselves escape without injury ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,90.726

men of worthless characters take their revenge upon them , whilst they
sully and disgrace them by the contagion of their guilt .
BOETHRI-1785-2,90.727

But it is very easy to show you , these shadowy honours have nothing in
their nature to engage and procure respect ; BOETHRI-1785-2,90.728

for if a person , though he had been honoured several times with the
Consulate , should by accident go among a barbarous people , would this
honour render him <P_91> more respectable in their eyes ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,91.729

Certainly it would not . BOETHRI-1785-2,91.730

But this it would infallibly do every where , if respect was an
attribute of honours , as heat is to fire , which is hot in every
country on earth . BOETHRI-1785-2,91.731

Thus , because respect is not inseparably attached to dignified stations
, but is only attributed to them by men's false opinions , honours must
therefore appear vain and frivolous to people who see them in their true
light ; BOETHRI-1785-2,91.732

and as such , they assuredly appear to all distant nations .
BOETHRI-1785-2,91.733

- But let me now ask you , Whether , in the very countries that gave
birth to them , places of dignity always continue equally respectable ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,91.734

The praetorate , the dignity and authority whereof was formerly so great
, you know is nothing now but an empty title , and in point of expense a
heavy burthen to the senators . BOETHRI-1785-2,91.735

The superintendency of provisions , which was heretofore an honourable
office , is now considered as a very despicable employment .
BOETHRI-1785-2,91.736

But whence doth this arise ? BOETHRI-1785-2,91.737

Why it proceeds from what we just now observed , that those things ,
which have nothing intrinsically good and meritorious , lose their
splendour and value , as popular opinion varies concerning them .
BOETHRI-1785-2,91.738

Thus , if dignities can@ @not render respectable those who are invested
with them ; if they are themselves sullied by the dishonour which bad
men reflect upon them ; if they lose their splendour by a change of
times ; if , in fine , they are of no value among nations who justly
consider them ; <P_92> what beauty , what inherent worth have they to
render them the supreme objects of desire ? BOETHRI-1785-2,92.739

and how is it possible that they can ever communicate worth to those
upon whom they devolve ? BOETHRI-1785-2,92.740

{COM:verse_omitted}

But do kingdoms , and a familiarity with princes , render men powerful
and happy ? BOETHRI-1785-2,92.742

- Why should they not , if they are durable ? BOETHRI-1785-2,92.743

Past ages however , and the present , furnish us with too many examples
of the dismal reverses of fortune to which crowned heads are liable .
BOETHRI-1785-2,92.744

O then , may I exclaim , the wonderful efficacy of power , which is not
able to preserve itself ! BOETHRI-1785-2,92.745

But if happiness is measured by the extent of regal dominion , where
ever this ends , will not happiness also there end , and misery take
place ? BOETHRI-1785-2,92.746

Now , though several empires be far extended , it must still be
acknowledged their limits are bounded by other nations over whom they
have no reign . BOETHRI-1785-2,92.747

But where-ever <P_93> power , which constitutes happiness , ceases ,
there impotence , which creates misery , must prevail :
BOETHRI-1785-2,93.748

and hence it necessarily follows , that kings must have a larger portion
of misery than of happiness . BOETHRI-1785-2,93.749

Dionysius , the tyrant of Syracuse , conscious <P_94> of the danger of
his condition , exhibited very strikingly the alarms of royalty , by the
terror of a naked sword suspended by a single hair , and hanging over
the head . BOETHRI-1785-2,94.750

How insignificant a thing then is power , which can@ @not protect from
the tormenting stings of fear , and the restless gnawings of anxiety !
BOETHRI-1785-2,94.751

Kings are desirous of living in a state of security ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,94.752

but this state , alas ! they can@ @not obtain : an illustrious mark ,
surely , of that <P_95> power which they plume themselves so much upon !
BOETHRI-1785-2,95.753

But do you believe that man powerful , whom you see eagerly wishing what
he can@ @not accomplish ? BOETHRI-1785-2,95.754

Esteem you him powerful , who goes surrounded with an armed guard , and
who terrifies those of whom he himself is more afraid ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,95.755

And is he , in fine , to be reckoned powerful , whose power depends
solely upon his numerous attendants ? BOETHRI-1785-2,95.756

- After having thus displayed the imbecillity of kings , why need I
enlarge upon that of their favourites , whose fortune is liable to be
overturned , not only by the inconstancy of a capricious master in
prosperity , but also by the adversity to which he is incident , whereof
his minions must necessarily partake ? BOETHRI-1785-2,95.757

Nero would grant no other favour to Seneca , his friend and preceptor ,
than to make choice of the death he was to suffer .
BOETHRI-1785-2,95.758

Caracalla commanded Papinian , who had been long powerful at court to be
slaughtered by his soldiers . BOETHRI-1785-2,95.759

Such was the fate of these great men , though before their disgrace they
were willing to resign their authority , and to retreat from court :
BOETHRI-1785-2,95.760

nay , Seneca offered to put Nero in possession of all his wealth ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,95.761

and begged <P_96> of him only liberty to retire , and enjoy ease and
tranquillity . BOETHRI-1785-2,96.762

But relentless Fortune precipitated both of these favourites to
destruction , BOETHRI-1785-2,96.763

and would not permit them to obtain what they wished .
BOETHRI-1785-2,96.764

Of what value then is this power , which fills men with perpetual dread
, and which can neither be retained with safety nor laid down at
pleasure ? BOETHRI-1785-2,96.765

- But perhaps you value power because it procures you friends .
BOETHRI-1785-2,96.766

What advantage , tell me , can you derive from those friends , whom your
prosperity , but not your virtue , attaches to you ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,96.767

Be assured of this , that if prosperity hath made you a friend ,
adversity will make him your enemy . BOETHRI-1785-2,96.768

And what plague will be more efficacious in hurting you , than an enemy
in whom you reposed all your confidence ? BOETHRI-1785-2,96.769

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_97>

{COM:verse_omitted}

But how unsatisfactory and fallacious is what you mortals call fame or
glory ! BOETHRI-1785-2,97.773

And as it may be unworthily acquired , is it not often ignominious ? So
that the tragic poet very justly exclaims , How oft have erring mortals
crown'd the base With glory and unmerited renown !
BOETHRI-1785-2,97.774

For it must be acknowledged that multitudes have obtained a shining
reputation from nothing else but the prejudices of a misjudging populace
. BOETHRI-1785-2,97.775

Now what can be more infamous than renown built upon such a foundation ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,97.776

For unmerited praises ought surely to overwhelm with shame <P_98> those
to whom they are addressed , as they must be conscious they have no
title to them . BOETHRI-1785-2,98.777

But when just and well-merited praises are given to a wise and good man
, do they add any thing to his felicity ? BOETHRI-1785-2,98.778

Do they encrease the inward satisfaction and complacency of him , who
places his happiness , not in the applauses of a giddy multitude , but
in the testimony of an upright conscience ? BOETHRI-1785-2,98.779

It is also manifest , that if a man esteems it glorious to propagate his
fame , he must of course think it dishonourable not to do it .
BOETHRI-1785-2,98.780

But , as we formerly remarked , there are a great many nations to whom
the fame of even the most illustrious characters can@ @not reach ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,98.781

it follows therefore , that he whom you look upon as exalted to the very
pinnacle of glory , must be totally unknown to far the greatest part of
the earth . BOETHRI-1785-2,98.782

The more I consider this matter , I am the more confirmed in my opinion
, that the favour of the multitude is unworthy of attention , as it is
very seldom judicious , and never permanent . BOETHRI-1785-2,98.783

But who is there that does not perceive the emptiness and futility of
what men dignify with the name of high extraction , or nobility of birth
? BOETHRI-1785-2,98.784

The splendor you attribute to this , is quite foreign to you :
BOETHRI-1785-2,98.785

for nobility of descent is nothing else but the credit derived from the
merit of your ancestors . BOETHRI-1785-2,98.786

If it is the applause of mankind , and nothing besides , that
illustrates and confers fame upon a person ; no others can be celebrated
<P_99> and famous , but such as are universally applauded .
BOETHRI-1785-2,99.787

If you are not therefore esteemed illustrious from your own worth , you
can derive no real splendor from the merits of others : so that in my
opinion , nobility is in no other respect good , than as it imposes an
obligation upon its possessors , not to degenerate from the merit of
their ancestors . BOETHRI-1785-2,99.788

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_100>

But what shall I say , with respect to sensual pleasures ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,100.791

Is not the appetite , that prompts to the enjoyment of these , always
attended with anxiety , and the fruition itself with repentance ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,100.792

What diseases , what intolerable pains <paren> the merited fruits of
vice <$$paren> , do they not bring upon those who are abandoned to them
? BOETHRI-1785-2,100.793

The delight that flows from their gratification , I am unacquainted with
; BOETHRI-1785-2,100.794

but this I know , the reflection upon these criminal indulgences is
always accompanied with bitter remorse . BOETHRI-1785-2,100.795

If happiness consists in the enjoyment of these gratifications , I see
no reason why the brutes may not attain to it ; as they are wholly
employed in satisfying the cravings of sensuality .
BOETHRI-1785-2,100.796

It might be reasonably expected , that much comfort would be found in a
wife and children : BOETHRI-1785-2,100.797

but this does not always happen . BOETHRI-1785-2,100.798

I have heard of a person who bitterly exclaimed , that he had found
tormentors in his own offspring - an unhappy state for a parent .
BOETHRI-1785-2,100.799

But as you have not experienced any miseries arising from this source ,
neither are under the apprehension of distress from such painful
feelings , I shall not stop to describe them to you .
BOETHRI-1785-2,100.800

I will only add to this a sentiment of my disciples Euripides ; who
observes , that he who has no children is happy in his misfortune .
BOETHRI-1785-2,100.801

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_101>

{COM:verse_omitted}

It appears then unquestionably evident , that happiness can never be
obtained , by pursuing the ways we have mentioned ; that they are all
false and erroneous ; and tho' they promise to lead men to the sovereign
good , they do by no means perform what they undertake .
BOETHRI-1785-2,101.805

But without entering into a long detail , I shall now explain the evils
with which these pretended ways to happiness are perplexed .
BOETHRI-1785-2,101.806

To proceed then - Do you desire to accumulate stores of wealth ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,101.807

to accomplish this , you strip your neighbours of their possessions .
BOETHRI-1785-2,101.808

Do you thirst after the splendor of dignities ? BOETHRI-1785-2,101.809

you must supplicate those that bestow them : BOETHRI-1785-2,101.810

and thus , instead of exalting yourself , and becoming respectable , you
incur disgrace by the most humiliating condescension .
BOETHRI-1785-2,101.811

Is power your ambition ? BOETHRI-1785-2,101.812

in pursuing it , you expose yourself to the snares of inferiors ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,101.813

and lay yourself open to danger from every quarter .
BOETHRI-1785-2,101.814

Do you contend for glory ? BOETHRI-1785-2,101.815

you will encounter a_thousand vexatious obstructions ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,101.816

and must give up your tranquillity for it . BOETHRI-1785-2,101.817

Do you prefer a voluptuous life ? BOETHRI-1785-2,101.818

in <P_102> what sovereign contempt is he not held , who becomes a slave
to such a wretched and contemptible thing as his body ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,102.819

Farther , you must surely confess that they raise their pride upon a
slight and fallacious foundation , who felicitate themselves upon their
bodily advantages . BOETHRI-1785-2,102.820

Say - do you surpass the elephant in bulk , the bull in strength , or
can you outstrip the tyger in the race ? BOETHRI-1785-2,102.821

Go , BOETHRI-1785-2,102.822

and contemplate the immense extent of the heavens ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,102.823

go BOETHRI-1785-2,102.824

and examine , what is still more admirable , that consummate wisdom
which governs them ; BOETHRI-1785-2,102.825

and no longer consider , as objects of admiration , things worthless and
contemptible . BOETHRI-1785-2,102.826

As to beauty , how transient ! and of how short a duration ! fading
sooner than the vernal flower . BOETHRI-1785-2,102.827

- If men , as Aristotle says , had the eyes of a lynx , which could
pierce through all preventing obstacles ; in taking a view of the
interior of a body , as lovely as that of Alcibiades ; would not they
find it foul and disgusting ? BOETHRI-1785-2,102.828

It is not therefore to the qualities inherent in their bodies , that
mortals are indebted for their beauty ; but to the limited and imperfect
view of those who behold them . BOETHRI-1785-2,102.829

But prize as highly as you please the perfections of the body , still
you must confess , that it may be brought to a period in three days , by
the raging flames of a fever . BOETHRI-1785-2,102.830

From the whole , we may draw this conclusion - BOETHRI-1785-2,102.831

As the things above mentioned do not comprize every good , and do not
bestow the advantages which they promise , <P_103> they can@ @not of
themselves either render men happy , or become the means of procuring
happiness . BOETHRI-1785-2,103.832

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_104>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_104_to_125_belong_to_stage_1>

<P_126>

I am entirely , said I , of Plato's opinion . BOETHRI-1785-2,126.838

You have now a second time made me recollect truths that had wholly
escaped me ; the remembrance of which was obliterated , first , by the
contagious union of the body with the soul , and afterwards by the
pressure of affliction under which I laboured . BOETHRI-1785-2,126.839

- If , said she , you will reflect upon the concessions you have already
made , you will soon bring to your remembrance a very important truth ,
of which you lately acknowledged your ignorance .
BOETHRI-1785-2,126.840

- What , I beseech you , is that ? BOETHRI-1785-2,126.841

- The oeconomy , replied she , or secret springs , by which the universe
is conducted . BOETHRI-1785-2,126.842

- With regard , to that I own I confessed my ignorance ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,126.843

and although I have some idea of what you can say upon the subject , I
wish to be more fully instructed in it from your own mouth .
BOETHRI-1785-2,126.844

- Did you not acknowledge , a little while ago , added she , that there
was not the smallest reason to doubt , but that the world <P_127> was
directed by the wisdom of God ? BOETHRI-1785-2,127.845

I think so still , said I ; BOETHRI-1785-2,127.846

and I shall never have any doubt of it ; BOETHRI-1785-2,127.847

and , with your permission , I will explain to you the reasons that
induce me to be of this opinion . BOETHRI-1785-2,127.848

A world , such as this , consisting of different and discordant elements
, would never have assumed its present form , unless there had been a
wise Intelligence to unite and reduce them to order :
BOETHRI-1785-2,127.849

and even after such a conjunction , the jarring of such opposite
materials would have disunited and ruined the beautiful fabrick made up
of them , had not the same Intelligence upheld what he had so admirably
connected . BOETHRI-1785-2,127.850

For undoubtedly , the order that reigns through Nature could not proceed
in such an established course ; BOETHRI-1785-2,127.851

could not display such regular and uniform motions , with regard to
places , times , the production of effects , their duration and
qualities , if there were not a Being to over-rule and direct this
infinite variety of changes , without being liable to change himself ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,127.852

and <paren> whatever he is , for he is above my comprehension <$$paren>
this Being , by whom all things are created , I call <font> God ;
<$$font> a name given him by all nations . BOETHRI-1785-2,127.853

- As your sentiments upon these matters , said she , are now so just ,
there remains little more for me to do , than to leave you to the
enjoyment of your felicity , and to dismiss you sound and healthful into
your own country . BOETHRI-1785-2,127.854

But let us first examine a little further <P_128> the principles we have
established . BOETHRI-1785-2,128.855

- Did we not place sufficiency among the articles that constitute
happiness ? BOETHRI-1785-2,128.856

And have we not agreed that true Felicity is no other thing than God
himself ? BOETHRI-1785-2,128.857

- We have so , said I . BOETHRI-1785-2,128.858

- And does God , added she , want no assistance from without , no
foreign aid , in the government , of the universe ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,128.859

Assuredly he does not ; BOETHRI-1785-2,128.860

otherwise he would not be fully sufficient in himself .
BOETHRI-1785-2,128.861

- That , said I , necessarily follows . BOETHRI-1785-2,128.862

- He directs therefore all things by himself alone :
BOETHRI-1785-2,128.863

- It must be acknowledged he does . BOETHRI-1785-2,128.864

- But I have shown you that God is the supreme good .
BOETHRI-1785-2,128.865

- I remember very well , you did . BOETHRI-1785-2,128.866

- He must therefore , continued she , direct all things by good , since
he governs them by himself , whom we have proved to be the supreme good
. BOETHRI-1785-2,128.867

This then is the helm or rudder by which the great machine of this world
is steadily and securely conducted . BOETHRI-1785-2,128.868

- I am thoroughly satisfied , answered I , that it is ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,128.869

and I had some surmise , tho' but a slight one , of what you have now
made clear to me . BOETHRI-1785-2,128.870

- I believe it , said she , BOETHRI-1785-2,128.871

for your faculties are much quicker in apprehending truth than they were
. BOETHRI-1785-2,128.872

But what I am going to add will contribute not a little to your
discovering it more perfectly . BOETHRI-1785-2,128.873

- What is that ? BOETHRI-1785-2,128.874

- As we believe , said she , that God makes use of his goodness as a
rudder to conduct this wonderful machine of Nature , and as I have
taught you , that all things which exist have a natural tendency to good
can there be any doubt , <P_129> then , but that they all voluntarily
submit to his pleasure , obey his nod , and give themselves up without
constraint to the rule of his all-directing hand ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,129.875

This is necessary , I answered ; BOETHRI-1785-2,129.876

for otherwise , things , instead of being established in concord and
security , would be in a state of discord and confusion .
BOETHRI-1785-2,129.877

- Is there any thing , which follows the dictates of Nature , that
endeavours to counteract the will of God ? BOETHRI-1785-2,129.878

- Nothing certainly . BOETHRI-1785-2,129.879

- But was any thing to attempt this , what could it do against him ,
whom we have proved to be supremely happy , and consequently endowed
with Almighty power ? BOETHRI-1785-2,129.880

- Assuredly it could do nothing . BOETHRI-1785-2,129.881

- There is nothing then that has either inclination or power to resist
this supreme good ? BOETHRI-1785-2,129.882

- I am persuaded there is not . BOETHRI-1785-2,129.883

- It is this supreme good then , said she , that alone rules all things
by unbounded power , and conducts them with amazing benignity .
BOETHRI-1785-2,129.884

The solidity of your arguments , said I , and the force and beauty with
which they are expressed , delight me so much , and carry such strong
conviction with them , that I am overwhelmed with shame , that I ever
objected to them . BOETHRI-1785-2,129.885

- You have read in the fable , added she , of the giants storming heaven
; of the repulse they met with ; and how they were punished as they
deserved . BOETHRI-1785-2,129.886

But may we not now try to strike our arguments for a little while
against one another ? BOETHRI-1785-2,129.887

perhaps , from their collision , some useful spark of truth may <P_130>
break forth . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.888

- Do as you please . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.889

- No person , you own , can doubt of the power of God extending over all
things . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.890

- No man in his senses has any doubt of it . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.891

- There is nothing then which God can@ @not do , as his power is
unlimited . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.892

- Nothing , BOETHRI-1785-2,130.893

- Can God then do evil ? BOETHRI-1785-2,130.894

- No ; by no means . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.895

- Then evil must be nothing , since God can@ @not do it , who can do
every thing . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.896

- Whilst you give me , said I , such a wonderful idea of the mysterious
circle of the Divine Felicity , you seem to sport with me , and to
bewilder me in a perplexing maze . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.897

For you first began with happiness , BOETHRI-1785-2,130.898

and said it was the sovereign good ; and that it resided in the Supreme
God , who was himself the sovereign good , and the perfect Felicity ;
whence , you inferred that no person could be happy unless he became
likewise a God . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.899

You added , that good was made up of the same substance whereof God and
happiness were composed and that it was the object and the desire of
every thing in nature . BOETHRI-1785-2,130.900

You have also demonstrated that God governs the world by his goodness ,
as by a helm that all things voluntarily obey him , and that evil has no
<P_131> existence . BOETHRI-1785-2,131.901

These truths you have established , not by strained and far-fetched
arguments , but by strong and natural reasons ; one proof constantly
leading to , and confirming another . BOETHRI-1785-2,131.902

- It was never my intention , replied she , to entertain you with
delusions . BOETHRI-1785-2,131.903

We have now , by the favour of God , executed the important work we
proposed , when we invoked his assistance : BOETHRI-1785-2,131.904

and I have made it clear to you , that it is a property essential to the
Divine Nature , not to go out of itself , nor to admit any thing
extraneous to its nature . BOETHRI-1785-2,131.905

Parmenides says of the Deity , he is like to <font> the round of a
well-polished sphere . <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-2,131.906

It is this Supreme Intelligence , that moves the vast frame of the
universe to its remotest circumference whilst he himself remains in the
center , fixed , and immovable . BOETHRI-1785-2,131.907

If in reasoning upon these matters I have rather chosen to draw my
arguments from the subjects themselves , than to borrow them elsewhere ,
this ought not to surprize you , as you have learned from Plato , that
there ought always to be a correspondence or to use his expression , a
kind of alliance , betwixt the words , and the things expressed by them
. BOETHRI-1785-2,131.908

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_132>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_133>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_134>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_135>

<heading>

BOOK IV . BOETHRI-1785-2,135.918

<$$heading>

<font> Boethius wonders why evil things happen to the good , and good
things to the evil . BOETHRI-1785-2,135.920

- Philosophy shows him that the good only are powerful , and the evil
impotent . - That rewards are appointed for the former , and
punishments for the latter . - That the wicked who suffer chastisement
, are happier than if they had been exempted from punishment . - That
it is better to suffer an injury , than to commit one .
BOETHRI-1785-2,135.921

- Philosophy afterwards defines what Providence is , and what Fate or
Destiny . BOETHRI-1785-2,135.922

- She demonstrates that all fortune , whether prosperous or adverse , is
good . <$$font> BOETHRI-1785-2,135.923

Philosophy , with ineffable grace and dignity , having poured forth
these soft and enchanting , strains ; I , not entirely disburthened of
the load of grief which had so miserably oppressed me , interrupted her
, as she was continuing her discourse . BOETHRI-1785-2,135.924

How shall I express my gratitude to you , my only guide to the true
light ? BOETHRI-1785-2,135.925

All your discourses have been full of comfort ; not only from the divine
<P_136> testimony they carry along with them , but from the irresistible
arguments you have employed , in establishing the truths which they
convey . BOETHRI-1785-2,136.926

From the oppression of grief , these truths had escaped my remembrance ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,136.927

yet , as you observed , I was not wholly ignorant of them .
BOETHRI-1785-2,136.928

Would you have me declare to you the principal cause of my trouble ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,136.929

It is to behold evil prevail , and pass unpunished in a world , which is
under the absolute {TEXT:absosolute} direction of a Being who is
goodness itself . BOETHRI-1785-2,136.930

This , you must own , is astonishing . BOETHRI-1785-2,136.931

But what still strikes me more is , that while Wickedness flourishes and
prescribes the law , Virtue is not only deprived of the reward she
merits , but is also trampled under foot by the base and profligate ,
and suffers the punishment due to impiety . BOETHRI-1785-2,136.932

You will surely agree with me , that it furnishes matter for exhaustless
wonder and complaint , that such things should happen in a system
conducted by a Being all-knowing and all-powerful , and who certainly
wills nothing but what is <font> the best . <$$font>
BOETHRI-1785-2,136.933

- Undoubtedly , replied she , it would be a matter not only of infinite
wonder , BOETHRI-1785-2,136.934

but it would be altogether absurd and monstrous , if in the
well-regulated family of so great a master , contemptible vessels , as
you suppose , should be esteemed precious , and precious vessels deemed
contemptible . BOETHRI-1785-2,136.935

But this is not so : BOETHRI-1785-2,136.936

for if the consequences we have drawn , from the principles laid down ,
are indisputable , you will be obliged to confess , <P_137> that under
the government of God of whose reign I now speak , the good are always
powerful , and the evil , on the contrary , weak and contemptible ; that
vice is always punished , and virtue constantly rewarded ; that
prosperity is ever the lot of the good , and adversity inseparable from
the wicked . BOETHRI-1785-2,137.937

These , and other comfortable truths of the like nature , which shall be
farther illustrated , will remove the cause of your complaints , and
restore your courage and magnanimity . BOETHRI-1785-2,137.938

- Having formerly , my dearest pupil , exhibited to you a <font> picture
<$$font> of true happiness , and having shown you where she resides ,
and having premised every thing necessary for you to know , I shall now
trace out the way that will lead you to your home .
BOETHRI-1785-2,137.939

I will give your soul wings to soar aloft to the mansions on high ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,137.940

and , eased of every earthly oppression , you shall , under my direction
, by my road , and with my vehicles , return safe and healthful to your
native country : BOETHRI-1785-2,137.941

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_138>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_139>

{COM:verse_omitted}

Ah ! said I , your promises are great and delightful ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,139.947

and I make no doubt but you will fulfil them . BOETHRI-1785-2,139.948

Let me therefore intreat you , without delay , to satisfy the
expectations you have raised . BOETHRI-1785-2,139.949

- You must first be convinced , replied she , that the good are always
possessed of power ; whilst the wicked are entirely destitute of it .
BOETHRI-1785-2,139.950

By proving to you the one assertion , the other will appear plain :
BOETHRI-1785-2,139.951

for since good and evil are contrary , if good is powerful , evil must
be impotent ; BOETHRI-1785-2,139.952

and if the impotence of evil is perspicuous , the strength and liability
of good must be confessed . BOETHRI-1785-2,139.953

But that your conviction of the proposition I have now asserted , may be
the more complete , I shall proceed to prove it , from both these
principles ; establishing the important truth , by arguments drawn
sometimes from one of these topicks , and sometimes from the other .
BOETHRI-1785-2,139.954

In men , two things must concur to produce an action ; the will , and
the power . BOETHRI-1785-2,139.955

Both the one and the other are so necessary , that if either of them
fail , no effect can be produced . BOETHRI-1785-2,139.956

A man can@ @not do any thing without the concurrence of his will ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,139.957

and the concurrence of his will is useless , if he is destitute of the
power of accomplishing his purpose . BOETHRI-1785-2,139.958

Hence it is , that if you see any person desirous of obtaining what he
can@ @not procure , <P_140> you need not doubt but that he wants the
power of obtaining it . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.959

- This is a matter so clear , said I , that it is impossible to be
denied . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.960

- And if you see another person do what he wills , can you doubt that he
had the power to do it ? BOETHRI-1785-2,140.961

- By no means . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.962

- But a man is esteemed powerful , in respect of what he is able to do ;
and weak , in relation to what he is unable to perform .
BOETHRI-1785-2,140.963

- That I acknowledge , is true . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.964

- Do you remember , said she , what I formerly proved , that the will of
man , however different the objects are which it pursues , hath no other
end in view but happiness . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.965

- I remember distinctly this has been demonstrated .
BOETHRI-1785-2,140.966

- But do you recollect , it has been shown , that happiness is the
supreme good of man , and that there is not one who is not desirous of
this good , since all pursue happiness ? BOETHRI-1785-2,140.967

- No , I can@ @not be said to recollect it ; BOETHRI-1785-2,140.968

for it has been so firmly rivetted in my memory , that it is always
present . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.969

- All men , therefore , said she , the good as well as the bad , without
distinction , endeavour to acquire good . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.970

- Undoubtedly they do . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.971

- But is it not true likewise , that men by obtaining good become good ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,140.972

- It is an unquestionable truth . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.973

- Do good men then obtain what they desire ? BOETHRI-1785-2,140.974

- I think they do . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.975

- But if evil men obtain the good , which they pursue , they can no
longer be evil . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.976

- They can@ @not , surely . BOETHRI-1785-2,140.977

- Since then both the one and the other pursue good , which the good
only acquire , it appears incontestable , that the good <P_141> are
powerful , and that the wicked are impotent . BOETHRI-1785-2,141.978

- None can doubt the truth of this , but such as either know not the
differences of things , or are incapable of comprehending the force of
any reasoning . BOETHRI-1785-2,141.979

- Again , said she , If there be two Beings , who have the same end in
view , and one of them accomplishes his purpose by making use of natural
means , whilst the other has it not in his power to pursue that method ,
but follows a course not indicated by nature , and does not therefore
attain his end , but only imitates him who has attained it ; which of
these two , in your opinion , is the most powerful ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,141.980

- Altho' I have some idea of your meaning , said I , I beg you would
make it clear by an example . BOETHRI-1785-2,141.981

- You can@ @not deny , then , that the motion of walking is natural to
man ? BOETHRI-1785-2,141.982

- I can@ @not . BOETHRI-1785-2,141.983

- Neither can you have any doubt , but that walking is the natural
office of the feet ? BOETHRI-1785-2,141.984

- I can have no doubt about that . BOETHRI-1785-2,141.985

- If therefore a person who is able to use his feet , walks with them ,
whilst another , who is deprived of this power , creeps upon his hands ,
and endeavours to imitate him who walks ; which of these persons do you
think has the most power ? BOETHRI-1785-2,141.986

- Go on , if you please , said I ; BOETHRI-1785-2,141.987

for no man can doubt , but that he who is in possession of his natural
faculties , is more powerful than the person who is deprived of them .
BOETHRI-1785-2,141.988

- But the supreme good , continued she , is the end which the good and
bad have equally in view : BOETHRI-1785-2,141.989

now the good pursue this end in <P_142> the way pointed out by nature ,
by a course of virtue ; whilst the bad strive to acquire this
inestimable prize , by gratifying a variety of corrupt desires , which
surely is not the natural way to procure it . BOETHRI-1785-2,142.990

Do you differ from me in opinion ? BOETHRI-1785-2,142.991

- No , answered I ; BOETHRI-1785-2,142.992

the conclusion you have drawn is just . BOETHRI-1785-2,142.993

But from what I formerly granted , the good must necessarily be endowed
with power , and the bad , on the contrary , destitute of it .
BOETHRI-1785-2,142.994

- You go before me , said she , BOETHRI-1785-2,142.995

and have prevented me in the consequence I was about to draw ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,142.996

and it is a good sign , BOETHRI-1785-2,142.997

and gives hope to the physicians , when Nature assists , when she exerts
herself , and resists the malady . BOETHRI-1785-2,142.998

But as I see you so quick in apprehending my arguments I shall not
spread and unfold them so much , BOETHRI-1785-2,142.999

but shall draw them up in a closer form , in what is to follow .
BOETHRI-1785-2,142.1000

- Behold then the great imbecility of the wicked , who can@ @not even
compass the end to which their natural disposition leads them , and to
which they are in a great measure , as it were , compelled !
BOETHRI-1785-2,142.1001

But how much greater would it have been , if Nature , which enlightens
them , had refused an aid which is so powerful , and almost irresistible
. BOETHRI-1785-2,142.1002

Consider attentively , I pray you , to what extremity the impotence of
such men is reduced . BOETHRI-1785-2,142.1003

For they are not trifles ; BOETHRI-1785-2,142.1004

they are not frivolous prizes which they desire , and in vain pursue ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,142.1005

but it is for the chief good , the most essential of all things , that
they languish ; BOETHRI-1785-2,142.1006

and though to obtain this , they labour night and <P_143> day , yet they
miserably fail of success ; whilst the power of the virtuous , in
acquiring this desirable object is eminent and indisputable .
BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1007

But to return to our former illustration : If a person who walks on foot
, has gone so far that he has no more country to traverse , you esteem
him very powerful in walking : BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1008

you must therefore certainly allow that man to be extremely powerful ,
who has obtained the end of his wishes , the possession of that good
beyond which nothing is to be desired . BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1009

As this is the case , it plainly follows , that the wicked are totally
destitute of power . BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1010

For why do they forsake virtue , and pursue vice ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1011

Doth this behaviour proceed from their ignorance of good ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1012

But is there a greater mark of weakness than to be involved in the
wretched darkness of ignorance ? BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1013

Or , do they know the road they ought to pursue , but are led astray
from it by their passions <paren> as the luxurious , for instance , by
intemperance <$$paren> , because they have not firmness enough to resist
the temptation of vice ? BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1014

Does not this also exhibit the highest degree of weakness ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1015

Or , finally , do they knowingly and willingly give up with virtue , and
rush into wickedness ? BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1016

If they behave thus , they not only cease to be powerful ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1017

but they even cease to exist : BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1018

for Beings who neglect to pursue the end common to all things that exist
, cease in reality to be . BOETHRI-1785-2,143.1019

You are surprized , perhaps , to hear me assert , that the wicked , who
are the majority of the human race , have no <P_144> existence :
BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1020

nothing however is more true . BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1021

That the wicked are bad , I do not deny : BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1022

but that they can with propriety be said to exist , is what I will not
admit . BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1023

You may call a carcase a dead man , BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1024

but you can@ @not call it properly a man ; BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1025

so I grant , that the vicious are profligate men ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1026

but that they have a real existence , I can@ @not acknowledge :
BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1027

for a thing exists only so long as it preserves its rank , its nature ,
and constitution ; BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1028

but , when it loses these , it ceases then to be , as it is deprived of
what is essential to its being . BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1029

But you may alledge , that the wicked have certainly a power to act .
BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1030

This is what I will not contest . BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1031

But this power is an effect of weakness , not of strength .
BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1032

They can do evil , BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1033

that is true ; BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1034

but this they could not do , if they had retained the power of doing
good ; BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1035

and their capacity to do evil , demonstrates still more evidently that
they can do nothing . BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1036

For since evil , as we have before proved , is nothing ; it is therefore
clear , that while the wicked can do evil only , they can do nothing .
BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1037

- This , said I , is abundantly perspicuous . BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1038

- That you may comprehend wherein consists the excellence of this power
with which the virtuous are endowed , you ought to recollect , what was
so lately made evident , that nothing is more powerful than the
sovereign good . BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1039

- This , I told her , I remembered . BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1040

- But can the sovereign good , said she , do evil ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,144.1041

- No surely , <P_145> it can@ @not . BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1042

- And can any person think that men can do all things ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1043

- No man in his senses can think so . BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1044

- But men may do evil . BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1045

- Devoutly do I wish they could not . BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1046

- Since then , continued she , he who can do good , can do every thing ;
but he who can do evil only , has not this desirable power ; it is
manifest , that such as can do evil , have less power than they that can
do good . BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1047

To this let me add , what has been formerly proved , that power is of
the number of the things to be desired ; and that all things desirable
have a relation to that good , which constitutes the perfection of our
nature . BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1048

But the power of committing wickedness can have no relation to that good
, BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1049

therefore it is not to be desired ; BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1050

but as all power is desirable , it is evident that the liberty to do
evil is not real power . BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1051

From the whole of this reasoning , it clearly follows , that the good
only are endowed with power ; whilst weakness , nay entire impotence ,
is what alone falls to the share of the wicked .
BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1052

The opinion of Plato is hereby also verified , that the wise only have
the power to do what they desire : BOETHRI-1785-2,145.1053

the wicked may indeed do what <P_146> their wayward fancies dictate ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,146.1054

but can by no means accomplish their desires . BOETHRI-1785-2,146.1055

They may strive to gratify their passions , in view to procure to
themselves the good which they wish ; BOETHRI-1785-2,146.1056

but this good they can@ @not possibly acquire , because impiety and vice
can never conduct to happiness . BOETHRI-1785-2,146.1057

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_147>

{COM:verse_omitted}

Do you not then perceive , continued she , with what infamy vice is
disgraced and sullied ; and with what a lustre virtue beams forth ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,147.1061

This is a certain proof that the good never go unrewarded , and that the
bad never escape without punishment : BOETHRI-1785-2,147.1062

for in whatever a person does , he proposes to himself an end ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,147.1063

and that end is in reality the reward he pursues .
BOETHRI-1785-2,147.1064

Thus they who enter the lists , and engage in the race , have for their
end the crown , which is the prize contended for .
BOETHRI-1785-2,147.1065

But we have already shown that happiness is the good sought after , as
the end of all that a man does . BOETHRI-1785-2,147.1066

All the human race therefore propose to themselves the same good , as
the reward of their actions . BOETHRI-1785-2,147.1067

Now this good <P_148> is inseparable from the virtuous , since no person
can properly be called virtuous who is destitute of it ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1068

consequently , virtue can never want its reward .
BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1069

Let the wicked then rage as much as they please against the wise man ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1070

they shall never be able to deprive him of his crown , nor to blast it
upon his head ; BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1071

for the wickedness of another can never tarnish that inherent lustre
which is natural to virtue . BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1072

If a man hugs himself in the possession of any advantage which he has
received from another , he may be stript of it , either by the person
who bestowed it upon him , or by others . BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1073

But as the reward of the virtuous is derived from virtue alone , a man
can@ @not lose this reward , unless he ceases to be virtuous .
BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1074

Finally ; since a reward is desired , because it is supposed to be a
good , can we suppose , that he who possesses the good itself is
deprived of the recompence ? BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1075

But what reward does he enjoy ? BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1076

The fairest , certainly , and the richest of all recompences .
BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1077

Recall to your memory the excellent corollary which I formerly deduced ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1078

and attend to what flows from it . BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1079

As the supreme good is happiness , it follows , that all good men , for
the very reason that they are good , become happy ;
BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1080

but if they are happy , they must of necessity also become Gods .
BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1081

Thus divinity is the recompence of the good ; a reward which no time can
impair , no power can diminish , no wickedness can obscure .
BOETHRI-1785-2,148.1082

As matters are thus <P_149> constituted , no wise man can entertain a
doubt , but that punishment likewise is inseparable from the wicked :
BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1083

for good being as opposite to evil , as punishment is to reward ; it is
apparent , that if there be a recompence for good , there must , on the
contrary , be a chastisement for evil : BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1084

and as the reward of the virtuous is virtue herself , so vice is the
punishment of the vicious . BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1085

But whoever is chastised with a punishment , acknowledges that he is
afflicted with an evil . BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1086

If therefore the wicked did rightly understand themselves , they would
never suppose that they are exempted from punishment , when vice , the
worst of all evils , not only afflicts them , but pollutes and entirely
depraves them . BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1087

But let us contemplate the punishment of the wicked , as it stands in
opposition to the reward of the good . BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1088

You have been taught lately by me , that every thing which exists
preserves the unity which constitutes its being , and that every thing
which preserves this , is good ; BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1089

consequently , every thing which exists must also appear to be good .
BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1090

Hence it again follows , that every thing which strays from what is good
, ceases to be : BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1091

the wicked therefore must cease to be what they were :
BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1092

but that they were formerly men , their human shape , which still
remains , testifies . BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1093

By degenerating into wickedness , then , they must cease to be men .
BOETHRI-1785-2,149.1094

But as virtue alone <P_150> can exalt a man above what is human ; so it
is on the contrary evident , that vice , as it divests him of his nature
, must sink him below humanity : BOETHRI-1785-2,150.1095

you ought therefore by no means to consider him as a man whom vice has
rendered vicious . BOETHRI-1785-2,150.1096

Tell me - What difference is there betwixt a wolf who lives by rapine ,
and a robber , whom the desire of another's wealth simulates to commit
all manner of violence ? BOETHRI-1785-2,150.1097

Is there any thing that bears a stronger resemblance to a wrathful dog
who barks at passengers , than a man whose dangerous tongue attacks all
the world ? BOETHRI-1785-2,150.1098

What is liker to a fox , than a cheat , who spreads his snares in secret
to undermine and ruin you ? to a lion , than a furious man , who is
always ready to devour you ? to a deer , than a coward , who is afraid
of his own shadow ? to an ass , than a mortal , who is slow , dull ,
and indolent ? to the birds of the air , than a man volatile and
inconstant ? BOETHRI-1785-2,150.1099

and what , in fine , is a debauchee , who is immersed in the lowest
sensual gratifications , but a hog who wallows in the mire ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,150.1100

Upon the whole , it is an unquestionable <P_151> truth , that a man who
forsakes virtue , ceases to be a man ; BOETHRI-1785-2,151.1101

and as it is impossible that he can ascend in the scale of beings , he
must of necessity degenerate and sink into a beast .
BOETHRI-1785-2,151.1102

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_152>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_152_to_162_belong_to_stage_1>

<P_162>

Here I interposed , BOETHRI-1785-2,162.1108

and said , I now plainly perceive the nature of that happiness and of
that misery which are essentially and inseparably annexed to the virtues
and the vices of the deserving and the base . BOETHRI-1785-2,162.1109

But in this fortune , in which the vulgar put such a value , I clearly
discover a mixture of good and evil : BOETHRI-1785-2,162.1110

for no wise man ever preferred exile , indigence , and ignominy , to the
possession of riches , honour , and power , and <P_163> to the happiness
of living with esteem in the bosom of his own country :
BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1111

and wisdom really shines with a greater lustre when her votaries are at
the head of a state , and communicate their happy influence to the
people under their direction ; and particularly , when imprisonment ,
tortures , and the other punishments ordained by the laws , are employed
only for the chastisement of bad citizens , for whom they were at first
instituted . BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1112

Why then should things undergo so unnatural a change ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1113

Why should the worthy suffer the punishment due to crimes , and the
profligate rob the virtuous of their rewards ? BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1114

I am greatly amazed at these irregularities , BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1115

and I am extremely desirous to learn from you the reason of so unjust a
distribution . BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1116

I should be indeed less surprized , if I could persuade myself that
chance had the direction , and was the cause of all this confusion in
the universe . BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1117

But I am overwhelmed with astonishment when I reflect , it is God that
directs all events ; BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1118

and though he often bestows , desirable things upon the good , and
inflicts things grievous upon the wicked ; yet , on the contrary , he
frequently afflicts the good , BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1119

and dispenses to the wicked all that they wish . So that I can@ @not
comprehend , unless you explain it to me , what difference there is
betwixt the effects of his providence , and the operations of blind
Fortune . BOETHRI-1785-2,163.1120

- It is not at all surprizing , replied she , as you do not know wherein
the order established <P_164> in the universe consists , that you should
imagine you see irregularities in it , and things done without design :
BOETHRI-1785-2,164.1121

but though you be ignorant of the reason of so excellent an order ,
never entertain a doubt , whilst a good governor presides over the world
, but every thing is rightly conducted , and as it ought to be .
BOETHRI-1785-2,164.1122

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_165>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_165_to_181_belong_to_stage_1>

<P_181>

Do you now perceive , continued she , the consequence that flows from
all that we have been reasoning upon ? BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1128

- What is it ? BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1129

- That all fortune is absolutely good . BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1130

- How is that possible ? BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1131

- Since all fortune , said she , whether agreeable or vexatious , is
employed , either to reward or exercise the good , or to punish and
correct the bad : every event therefore which can befal a man must be
good , as it is clearly either just or useful . BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1132

- What you say is true ; BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1133

and if I consider Providence and Destiny as you have represented them to
me , I shall find your reasoning well founded . BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1134

But let us , notwithstanding , put this opinion , if you please , among
the number of those positions , which you formerly supposed were
incredible . BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1135

But why should we do that ? BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1136

- Because there is no phrase , said I , more common and frequent among
men , than that the fortune of such a Person is bad .
BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1137

- Would you then wish , added she , that we should conform for a moment
to the language of the vulgar , lest we seem to depart too much from the
manner of conceiving and expressing things familiar among men ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1138

- Do as you please . BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1139

- Do you think , said she , that every thing that is useful is good ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1140

- Certainly . BOETHRI-1785-2,181.1141

- Every fortune , then , or condition <P_182> of life , which either
exercises or corrects , is useful . BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1142

- To this I agree . BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1143

- Consequently , every fortune which exercises and corrects , is good .
BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1144

- Unquestionably it is . BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1145

- But this is evidently the fortune of all , who , by adhering to virtue
, have adversity to combat with ; or by relinquishing vice , pursue the
road of virtue . BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1146

- I must allow that it is . BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1147

- But with regard to that prosperous fortune , which is dispensed to the
worthy as a reward ; do the vulgar think it bad ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1148

- Not at all ; BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1149

they believe it very good , as it is in reality .
BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1150

- Once more ; Do they believe the calamities good , that punish the
wicked , and restrain the course of their malice ?
BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1151

- On the contrary , answered I , they look upon them as the most
miserable events that can possibly be imagined .
BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1152

- But let us take care , added she , lest by adhering to the opinion of
the vulgar , we have not involved ourselves in a new consequence that is
incredible . BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1153

- What consequence is that ? BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1154

- Does it not clearly follow , from the concessions formerly made , that
the fortune of all , who have either acquired virtue or are striving to
acquire it , and to make a progress in it , must necessarily be good ;
but that , the fortune of such as persist in vice must be wretched in
the highest degree ? BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1155

- The consequence is just , answered I , though there are none who have
the , courage to confess it . BOETHRI-1785-2,182.1156

- But why , added she , do they not ? since the wise man ought surely
to be as undejected , when he is brought . <P_183> into the field to
wage war with fortune , as the brave man is undismayed with the din of
arms , and the tumultuous uproar of the battle : BOETHRI-1785-2,183.1157

as the dangers of war open to the one a field to acquire glory ; so the
difficulties which he has to encounter , present the other with an
opportunity of exercising and displaying his wisdom .
BOETHRI-1785-2,183.1158

Thus Virtue , as we learn from the etymology of the word , is no other
thing than a power relying upon its own proper strength , which
surmounts and conquers every opposing obstacle .
BOETHRI-1785-2,183.1159

Let it be your business , then , my pupil , who have made such a
progress in virtue ; BOETHRI-1785-2,183.1160

let it be your particular care not to place your happiness in luxury ,
nor to suffer yourself to be enervated with pleasure
BOETHRI-1785-2,183.1161

You have a perpetual war to carry on against both fortunes ; with the
bad lest it dismay you , with the good lest it corrupt you .
BOETHRI-1785-2,183.1162

Seize then the <font> golden mean , <$$font> so essential to happiness ,
BOETHRI-1785-2,183.1163

<P_184> and retain it with all your might . BOETHRI-1785-2,184.1164

Whoever soars above , or descends below this line , acquires nothing but
a contemptible felicity , and unworthy of his labour .
BOETHRI-1785-2,184.1165

To conclude , it depends upon yourself to choose what fortune you please
: BOETHRI-1785-2,184.1166

but let this maxim be remembered , that every fortune which is called
adverse , unless it exercises or amends , always punishes .
BOETHRI-1785-2,184.1167

<P_185>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_186>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_187>

{COM:verse_omitted}

