<BEGIN_boethja-1897-2>

<P_24>

When I had poured out my griefs in this long and unbroken strain of
lamentation , she , with calm countenance , and in no wise disturbed at
my complainings , thus spake : ' When I saw thee sorrowful , in tears ,
I straightway knew thee wretched and an exile . BOETHJA-1897-2,24.3

But how far distant that exile I should not know , had not thine own
speech revealed it . BOETHJA-1897-2,24.4

Yet how far indeed from thy country hast thou , not been banished , but
rather hast strayed ; or , if thou wilt have it banishment , hast
banished thyself ! BOETHJA-1897-2,24.5

For no one else could ever lawfully have had this power over thee .
BOETHJA-1897-2,24.6

Now , if thou wilt call to mind from what country thou art sprung , it
is not ruled , as once was the Athenian polity , by the sovereignty of
the multitude , BOETHJA-1897-2,24.7

but " one is its Ruler , one its King " , who takes delight in the
number of His citizens , not in their banishment ; to submit to whose
governance and to obey whose ordinances is perfect freedom .
BOETHJA-1897-2,24.8

Art thou ignorant of that most ancient law of this thy country , whereby
it is decreed that no one whatsoever , who hath chosen to fix there his
dwelling , may be sent into exile ? BOETHJA-1897-2,24.9

For truly there is no fear that one who is encompassed by its ramparts
and defences should deserve to be exiled . BOETHJA-1897-2,24.10

But he who hath ceased to wish to dwell therein . He likewise ceases to
deserve to do so . BOETHJA-1897-2,24.11

And so it is not so much the aspect of this place which moves me , as
thy aspect ; not so much the <P_25> library walls set off with glass and
ivory which I miss , as the chamber of thy mind , wherein I once placed
, not books , but that which gives books their value , the doctrines
which my books contain . BOETHJA-1897-2,25.12

Now , what thou hast said of thy services to the commonweal is true ,
only too little compared with the greatness of thy deservings .
BOETHJA-1897-2,25.13

The things laid to thy charge whereof thou hast spoken , whether such as
redound to thy credit , or mere false accusations , are publicly known .
BOETHJA-1897-2,25.14

As for the crimes and deceits of the informers , thou hast rightly
deemed it fitting to pass them over lightly , because the popular voice
hath better and more fully pronounced upon them . BOETHJA-1897-2,25.15

Thou hast bitterly complained of the injustice of the senate .
BOETHJA-1897-2,25.16

Thou hast grieved over my calumniation , BOETHJA-1897-2,25.17

and likewise hast lamented the damage to my good name .
BOETHJA-1897-2,25.18

Finally , thine indignation ' blazed forth against Fortune ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,25.19

thou hast complained of the unfairness with which thy merits have been
recompensed . BOETHJA-1897-2,25.20

Last of all , thy frantic muse framed a prayer that the peace which
reigns in heaven might rule earth also . BOETHJA-1897-2,25.21

But since a throng of tumultuous passions hath assailed thy soul , since
thou art distraught with anger , pain , and grief , strong remedies are
not proper for thee in this thy present mood . BOETHJA-1897-2,25.22

And so for a time I will use milder methods , that the tumours which
have grown hard through the influx of disturbing passion may be softened
by gentle treatment , till they can bear the force of sharper remedies .
' BOETHJA-1897-2,25.23

<P_26>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_27>

' First , then , wilt thou suffer me by a few questions to make some
attempt to test the state of thy mind , that I may learn in what way to
set about thy cure ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,27.27

' Ask what thou wilt ' , said I , BOETHJA-1897-2,27.28

' for I will answer whatever questions thou choosest to put ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,27.29

Then said she : ' This world of ours - thinkest thou it is governed
haphazard and fortuitously , BOETHJA-1897-2,27.30

or believest thou that there is in it any rational guidance ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,27.31

' Nay ' , said I , ' in no wise may I deem that such fixed motions can
be determined by random hazard , BOETHJA-1897-2,27.32

but I Know that God , the Creator , presideth over His work ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,27.33

nor will the day ever come that shall drive me from holding fast the
truth of this belief ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,27.34

' Yes ' , said she ; ' thou didst even but now affirm it in song ,
lamenting that men alone had no portion in the divine care .
BOETHJA-1897-2,27.35

As to the rest , thou wert unshaken in the belief that they were ruled
by reason . BOETHJA-1897-2,27.36

Yet I marvel exceedingly how , in spite of thy firm hold on this opinion
, thou art fallen into sickness . BOETHJA-1897-2,27.37

But let us probe more deeply : BOETHJA-1897-2,27.38

something or other is missing , I think . BOETHJA-1897-2,27.39

Now , tell me , since thou doubtest not that God governs the world ,
dost thou perceive by what means He rules it ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,27.40

' I scarcely understand what thou meanest ' , I said ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,27.41

' much less can I answer thy question ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,27.42

<P_28> ' Did I not say truly that something is missing , whereby , as
through a breach in the ramparts , disease hath crept in to disturb thy
mind ? BOETHJA-1897-2,28.43

But tell me , dost thou remember the universal end towards which the aim
of all nature is directed ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,28.44

' I once heard ' , said I , ' BOETHJA-1897-2,28.45

but sorrow hath dulled my recollection ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,28.46

' And yet thou knowest whence all things have proceeded ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,28.47

' Yes , that I know ' , said I , BOETHJA-1897-2,28.48

' and have answered that it is from God ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,28.49

' Yet how is it possible that thou knowest not what is the end of
existence , when thou dost understand its source and origin ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,28.50

However , these disturbances of mind have force to shake a man's
position , BOETHJA-1897-2,28.51

but can@ @not pluck him up and root him altogether out of himself .
BOETHJA-1897-2,28.52

But answer this also , I pray thee : BOETHJA-1897-2,28.53

rememberest thou that thou art a man ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,28.54

' How should I not ? ' , said I . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,28.55

Then , canst thou say what man is ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,28.56

' Is this thy question : Whether I know myself for a being endowed with
reason and subject to death ? BOETHJA-1897-2,28.57

Surely I do acknowledge myself such ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,28.58

Then she : ' Dost know nothing else that thou art ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,28.59

' Nothing ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,28.60

' Now ' , said she , ' I know another cause of thy disease , one , too ,
of grave moment . BOETHJA-1897-2,28.61

Thou hast ceased to know thy own nature . BOETHJA-1897-2,28.62

So , then , I have made full discovery both of the <P_29> causes of thy
sickness and the means of restoring thy health . BOETHJA-1897-2,29.63

It is because forgetfulness of thyself hath bewildered thy mind that
thou hast bewailed thee as an exile , as one stripped of the blessings
that were his ; BOETHJA-1897-2,29.64

it is because thou knowest not the end of existence that thou deemest
abominable and wicked men to be happy and powerful ; while , because
thou hast forgotten by what means the earth is governed , thou deemest
that Fortune's changes ebb and flow without the restraint of a guiding
hand . BOETHJA-1897-2,29.65

These are serious enough to cause not sickness only , but even death ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,29.66

but , thanks be to the Author of our health , BOETHJA-1897-2,29.67

the light of nature hath not yet left thee utterly .
BOETHJA-1897-2,29.68

In thy true judgment concerning the world's government , in that thou
believest it subject , not to the random drift of chance , but to divine
reason we have the divine spark from which thy recovery may be hoped .
BOETHJA-1897-2,29.69

Have , then , no fear ; BOETHJA-1897-2,29.70

from these weak embers the vital heat shall once more be kindled within
thee . BOETHJA-1897-2,29.71

But seeing that it is not yet time for strong remedies , and that the
mind is manifestly so constituted that when it casts off true opinions
it straightway puts on false , wherefrom arises a cloud of confusion
that disturbs its true vision , I will now dry and disperse these mists
by mild and soothing application , that so the darkness of misleading
passion may be scattered , and thou mayst come to discern the splendour
of the true light ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,29.72

<P_30>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_31_omitted>

<P_32_omitted>

<P_33>

Thereafter for a@ @while she remained silent ; BOETHJA-1897-2,33.78

and when she had restored my flagging attention by a moderate pause in
her discourse , she thus began : ' If I have thoroughly ascertained the
character and causes of thy sickness , thou art pining with regretful
longing for thy former fortune . BOETHJA-1897-2,33.79

It is the change , as thou deemest , of this fortune that hath so
wrought upon thy mind . BOETHJA-1897-2,33.80

Well do I understand that Siren's manifold wiles , the fatal charm of
the friendship she pretends for her victims , so long as she is scheming
to entrap them - how she unexpectedly abandons them and leaves them
overwhelmed with insupportable grief . BOETHJA-1897-2,33.81

Bethink thee of her nature , character , and deserts , and thou wilt
soon acknowledge that in her thou hast neither possessed , nor hast thou
lost , aught of any worth . BOETHJA-1897-2,33.82

Me@ @thinks I need not spend much pains in bringing this to thy mind ,
since , even when she was still with thee , even while she was caressing
thee , thou usedst to assail her in manly terms , to rebuke her , with
maxims drawn from my holy treasure-house . BOETHJA-1897-2,33.83

But all sudden changes of circumstances bring inevitably a certain
commotion of spirit . BOETHJA-1897-2,33.84

Thus it hath come to pass that thou also for a@ @while hast been parted
from thy mind's tranquillity . BOETHJA-1897-2,33.85

<P_34> But it is time for thee to take and drain a draught , soft and
pleasant to the taste , which , as it penetrates within , may prepare
the way for stronger potions . Wherefore I call to my aid the sweet
persuasiveness of Rhetoric , who then only walketh in the right way when
she forsakes not my instructions , and Music , my handmaid , I bid to
join with her singing , now in lighter , now in graver strain .
BOETHJA-1897-2,34.86

' What is it , then , poor mortal , that hath cast thee into lamentation
and mourning ? BOETHJA-1897-2,34.87

' Some strange , unwonted sight , me@ @thinks , have thine eyes seen .
BOETHJA-1897-2,34.88

Thou deemest Fortune to have changed towards thee ; BOETHJA-1897-2,34.89

thou mistakest . BOETHJA-1897-2,34.90

Such ever were her ways , ever such her nature . BOETHJA-1897-2,34.91

Rather in her very mutability hath she preserved towards thee her true
constancy . BOETHJA-1897-2,34.92

Such was she when she loaded thee with caresses , when she deluded thee
with the allurements of a false happiness . BOETHJA-1897-2,34.93

Thou hast found out how changeful is face of thy blind goddess .
BOETHJA-1897-2,34.94

She who still veils herself from others hath fully discovered to thee
her whole character . BOETHJA-1897-2,34.95

If thou likest her , take her as she is , BOETHJA-1897-2,34.96

and do not complain . BOETHJA-1897-2,34.97

If thou abhorrest her perfidy , turn from her in disdain ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,34.98

renounce her , BOETHJA-1897-2,34.99

for baneful are her delusions . BOETHJA-1897-2,34.100

The very thing which is now the cause of thy great grief ought to have
brought thee tranquillity . BOETHJA-1897-2,34.101

Thou hast been forsaken by one of whom no one can be sure that she will
not forsake him . BOETHJA-1897-2,34.102

Or dost thou indeed set value on a happiness that is certain to depart ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,34.103

Again I ask . Is Fortune's presence <P_35> dear to thee if she can@
@not be trusted to stay , and though she will bring sorrow when she is
gone ? BOETHJA-1897-2,35.104

Why , if she can@ @not be kept at pleasure , and if her flight
overwhelms with calamity , what is this fleeting visitant but a token of
coming trouble ? BOETHJA-1897-2,35.105

Truly it is not enough to look only at what lies before the eyes ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,35.106

wisdom gauges the issues of things , BOETHJA-1897-2,35.107

and this same immutability , with its two aspects , makes the threats of
Fortune void of terror , and her caresses little to be desired .
BOETHJA-1897-2,35.108

Finally , thou oughtest to bear with whatever takes place within the
boundaries of Fortune's demesne , when thou hast placed thy head beneath
her yoke . BOETHJA-1897-2,35.109

But if thou wishest to impose a law of staying and departing on her whom
thou hast of thine own accord chosen for thy mistress , art thou not
acting wrongfully , BOETHJA-1897-2,35.110

art thou not embittering by impatience a lot which thou canst not alter
? BOETHJA-1897-2,35.111

Didst thou commit thy sails to the winds , thou wouldst vogage not
whither thy intention was to go , but whither the winds drave thee ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,35.112

didst thou entrust thy seed to the fields , thou wouldst set off the
fruitful years against the barren . BOETHJA-1897-2,35.113

Thou hast resigned thyself to the sway of Fortune ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,35.114

thou must submit to thy mistress's caprices . BOETHJA-1897-2,35.115

What ! art thou verily striving to stay the swing of the revolving
wheel ? BOETHJA-1897-2,35.116

Oh , stupidest of mortals , if {TEXT:it} it takes to standing still , it
ceases to be the wheel of Fortune ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,35.117

<P_36>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_37>

' Now I would fain also reason with thee a little in Fortune's own words
. BOETHJA-1897-2,37.121

Do thou observe whether her contentions be just . BOETHJA-1897-2,37.122

" Man " she might say , " why dost thou pursue me with thy daily
complainings ? BOETHJA-1897-2,37.123

What wrong have I done thee ? BOETHJA-1897-2,37.124

What goods of thine have I taken from thee ? BOETHJA-1897-2,37.125

Choose an thou wilt a judge , BOETHJA-1897-2,37.126

and let us dispute before him concerning the rightful ownership of
wealth and rank . BOETHJA-1897-2,37.127

If thou succeedest in showing that any one of these things is the true
property of mortal man , I freely grant those things to be thine which
thou claimest . BOETHJA-1897-2,37.128

When nature brought thee forth out of thy mother's womb , I took thee ,
naked and destitute as thou wast , BOETHJA-1897-2,37.129

I cherished thee with my substance , BOETHJA-1897-2,37.130

and , in the partiality of my favour for thee , I brought thee up
somewhat too indulgently , BOETHJA-1897-2,37.131

and this it is which now makes thee rebellious against me .
BOETHJA-1897-2,37.132

I surrounded thee with a royal abundance of all those things that are in
my power . BOETHJA-1897-2,37.133

Now it is my pleasure to draw back my hand . BOETHJA-1897-2,37.134

Thou hast reason to thank me for the use of what was not thine own ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,37.135

thou hast no right to complain , as if thou hadst lost what was wholly
thine . BOETHJA-1897-2,37.136

Why , then , dost bemoan thyself ? BOETHJA-1897-2,37.137

I have done thee no violence . BOETHJA-1897-2,37.138

Wealth , honour , and all such things are placed under my control .
BOETHJA-1897-2,37.139

My handmaidens know their mistress ; BOETHJA-1897-2,37.140

with me they come , BOETHJA-1897-2,37.141

and at my going they <P_38> depart . BOETHJA-1897-2,38.142

I might boldly affirm that if those things the loss of which thou
lamentest had been thine , thou couldst never have lost them .
BOETHJA-1897-2,38.143

Am I alone to be forbidden to do what I will with my own ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,38.144

Unrebuked , the skies now reveal the brightness of day ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,38.145

now shroud the daylight in the darkness of night ; BOETHJA-1897-2,38.146

the year may now engarland the face of the earth with flowers and fruits
, now disfigure it with storms and cold . BOETHJA-1897-2,38.147

The sea is permitted to invite with smooth and tranquil surface to-day ,
to-morrow to roughen with wave and storm . BOETHJA-1897-2,38.148

Shall man's insatiate greed bind <font> me <$$font> to a constancy
foreign to my character ? BOETHJA-1897-2,38.149

This is my art , this the game I never cease to play .
BOETHJA-1897-2,38.150

I turn the wheel that spins . BOETHJA-1897-2,38.151

I delight to see the high come down and the low ascend .
BOETHJA-1897-2,38.152

Mount up , if thou wilt , but only on condition that thou wilt not think
it a hardship to come down when the rules of my game require it .
BOETHJA-1897-2,38.153

Wert thou ignorant of my character ? BOETHJA-1897-2,38.154

Didst not know how Croesus , King of the Lydians , erstwhile the dreaded
rival of Cyrus , was afterwards pitiably consigned to the flame of the
pyre , and only saved by a shower sent from heaven ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,38.155

Has it 'scaped thee how Paullus paid a meed of pious tears to the
misfortunes of King Perseus , his prisoner ? BOETHJA-1897-2,38.156

What else do tragedies make such woeful outcry over save the overthrow
of kingdoms by the indiscriminate strokes of Fortune ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,38.157

Didst thou not learn in thy childhood how there stand at the threshold
of Zeus " two jars " , " the one full of blessings , the other of <P_39>
calamities " ? BOETHJA-1897-2,39.158

How if thou hast drawn over-liberally from the good jar ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,39.159

What if not even now have I departed wholly from thee ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,39.160

What if this very mutability of mine is a just ground for hoping better
things ? BOETHJA-1897-2,39.161

But listen now , BOETHJA-1897-2,39.162

and cease to let thy heart consume away with fretfulness , nor expect to
live on thine own terms in a realm that is common to all ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,39.163

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_40>

' If Fortune should plead thus against thee , assuredly thou wouldst not
have one word to offer in reply ; BOETHJA-1897-2,40.166

or , if thou canst find any justification of thy complainings , thou
must show what it is . BOETHJA-1897-2,40.167

I will give thee space to speak ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,40.168

Then said I: Verily , thy pleas are plausible - yea , steeped in the
honeyed sweetness of music and rhetoric . BOETHJA-1897-2,40.169

But their charm lasts only while they are sounding in the ear ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,40.170

the sense of his misfortune lies deeper in the heart of the wretched .
BOETHJA-1897-2,40.171

So , when the sound ceases to vibrate upon the air , the heart's
indwelling ' sorrow is felt with renewed bitterness ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,40.172

Then said she : ' It is indeed as thou sayest , BOETHJA-1897-2,40.173

for we have not yet come to the curing of thy sickness ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,40.174

as yet these are but lenitives conducing to the treatment of a malady
hitherto obstinate . BOETHJA-1897-2,40.175

The remedies which go deep I will apply in due season .
BOETHJA-1897-2,40.176

Nevertheless , to deprecate thy determination to be thought wretched , I
ask thee , Hast thou forgotten the extent and bounds of thy felicity ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,40.177

I say nothing of how , when orphaned and desolate , thou wast taken into
the care of illustrious men ; how thou wast chosen for alliance with the
highest in the state - and even before thou wert bound to their house by
marriage , wert already dear to their love - which is the most precious
of all ties . BOETHJA-1897-2,40.178

Did not all pronounce thee most happy in the virtues of thy wife , the
splendid honours <P_41> of her father , and the blessing of male issue ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,41.179

I pass over - for I care not to speak of blessings in which others also
have shared - the distinctions often denied to age which thou enjoyedst
in thy youth . BOETHJA-1897-2,41.180

I choose rather to come to the unparalleled culmination of thy good
fortune . BOETHJA-1897-2,41.181

If the fruition of any earthly success has weight in the scale of
happiness , can the memory of that splendour be swept away by any rising
flood of troubles ? BOETHJA-1897-2,41.182

That day when thou didst see thy two sons ride forth from home joint
consuls , followed by a train of senators , and welcomed by the
good-will of the people ; when these two sat in curule chairs in the
Senate-house , and thou by thy panegyric on the king didst earn the fame
of eloquence and ability ; when in the Circus , seated between the two
consuls , thou didst glut the multitude thronging around with the
triumphal largesses for which they looked - me@ @thinks thou didst cozen
Fortune while she caressed thee , and made thee her darling .
BOETHJA-1897-2,41.183

Thou didst bear off a boon which she has never before granted to any
private person . BOETHJA-1897-2,41.184

Art thou , then , minded to cast up a reckoning with Fortune ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,41.185

Now for the first time she has turned a jealous glance upon thee .
BOETHJA-1897-2,41.186

If thou compare the extent and bounds of thy blessings and misfortunes ,
thou canst not deny that thou art still fortunate .
BOETHJA-1897-2,41.187

Or if thou esteem not thyself favoured by Fortune in that thy then
seeming prosperity hath departed , deem not thyself wretched , since
what thou now believest to be calamitous <P_42> passeth also .
BOETHJA-1897-2,42.188

What ! art thou but now come suddenly and a stranger to the scene of
this life ? BOETHJA-1897-2,42.189

Thinkest thou there is any stability in human affairs , when man himself
vanishes away in the swift course of time ? BOETHJA-1897-2,42.190

It is true that there is little trust that the gifts of chance will
abide ; BOETHJA-1897-2,42.191

yet the last day of life is in a manner the death of all remaining
Fortune . BOETHJA-1897-2,42.192

What difference , then , thinkest thou , is there , whether thou leavest
her by dying , or she leave thee by fleeing away ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,42.193

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_43>

Then said I : ' True are thine admonishings , thou nurse of all
excellence ; BOETHJA-1897-2,43.196

nor can I deny the wonder of my fortune's swift career .
BOETHJA-1897-2,43.197

Yet it is this which chafes me the more cruelly in the recalling .
BOETHJA-1897-2,43.198

For truly in adverse fortune the worst sting of misery is to <font> have
been <$$font> happy ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,43.199

' Well ' , said she , ' if thou art paying the penalty of a mistaken
belief , thou canst not rightly impute the fault to circumstances .
BOETHJA-1897-2,43.200

If it is the Felicity which Fortune gives that moves thee - mere name
though it be - come reckon up with me how rich thou art in the number
and weightiness of thy blessings . BOETHJA-1897-2,43.201

Then if , by the blessing of Providence , thou hast still preserved unto
thee safe and inviolate that which , howsoever thou mightest reckon thy
fortune , thou wouldst have thought thy most precious possession , what
right hast thou to talk of ill-fortune whilst keeping all Fortune's
better gifts ? BOETHJA-1897-2,43.202

Yet Symmachus , thy wife's father - a man whose splendid character does
honour to the human race - is safe and unharmed ; BOETHJA-1897-2,43.203

and while he bewails thy wrongs , this rare nature , in whom wisdom and
virtue are so nobly blended , is himself out of danger - a boon thou
wouldst have been quick to purchase at the price of life itself .
BOETHJA-1897-2,43.204

Thy wife yet lives , with her gentle disposition , her peerless modesty
and virtue - this the epitome of all her graces , that she is the true
daughter of her sire - BOETHJA-1897-2,43.205

she <P_44> lives , I say , BOETHJA-1897-2,44.206

and for thy sake only preserves the breath of life , though she loathes
it , and pines away in grief and tears for thy absence , wherein , if in
naught else , I would allow some marring of thy felicity .
BOETHJA-1897-2,44.207

What shall I say of thy sons and their consular dignity - how in them ,
so far as may be in youths of their age , the example of their father's
and grandfather's character shines out ? BOETHJA-1897-2,44.208

Since , then , the chief care of mortal man is to preserve his life ,
how happy art thou , couldst thou but recognize thy blessings , who
possessest even now what no one doubts to be dearer than life !
Wherefore , now dry thy tears , BOETHJA-1897-2,44.209

Fortune's hate hath not involved all thy dear ones ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,44.210

the stress of the storm that has assailed thee is not beyond measure
intolerable , since there are anchors still holding firm which suffer
thee not to lack either consolation in the present or hope for the
future ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,44.211

' I pray that they still may hold . BOETHJA-1897-2,44.212

For while they still remain , however things may go , I shall ride out
the storm . BOETHJA-1897-2,44.213

Yet thou seest how much is shorn of the splendour of my fortunes ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,44.214

' We are gaining a little ground ' , said she , ' if there is something
in thy lot wherewith thou art not yet altogether discontented .
BOETHJA-1897-2,44.215

But I can@ @not stomach thy daintiness when thou complainest with such
violence of grief and anxiety because thy happiness falls short of
completeness . BOETHJA-1897-2,44.216

Why , who enjoys such settled felicity as not to have some quarrel with
the circumstances of his lot ? BOETHJA-1897-2,44.217

A troublous matter are the conditions of human bliss ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,44.218

either they <P_45> are never realized in full , BOETHJA-1897-2,45.219

or never stay permanently . BOETHJA-1897-2,45.220

One has abundant riches , BOETHJA-1897-2,45.221

but is shamed , by his ignoble birth . BOETHJA-1897-2,45.222

Another is conspicuous for his nobility , BOETHJA-1897-2,45.223

but through the embarrassments of poverty would prefer to be obscure .
BOETHJA-1897-2,45.224

A third , richly endowed with both , laments the loneliness of an
unwedded life . BOETHJA-1897-2,45.225

Another , though happily married , is doomed to childlessness ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,45.226

and nurses his wealth for a stranger to inherit . BOETHJA-1897-2,45.227

Yet another , blest with children , mournfully bewails the misdeeds of
son or daughter . BOETHJA-1897-2,45.228

Wherefore , it is not easy for anyone to be at perfect peace with the
circumstances of his lot . BOETHJA-1897-2,45.229

There lurks in each several portion something which they who experience
it not know nothing of , but which makes the sufferer wince .
BOETHJA-1897-2,45.230

Besides , the more favoured a man is by Fortune , the more fastidiously
sensitive is he ; BOETHJA-1897-2,45.231

and ' , unless all things answer to his whim , he is overwhelmed by the
most trifling misfortunes , because utterly unschooled in adversity .
BOETHJA-1897-2,45.232

So petty are the trifles Which rob the most fortunate of perfect
happiness ! BOETHJA-1897-2,45.233

How many are there , dost thou imagine , who would think themselves nigh
heaven , if but a small portion from the wreck of thy fortune should
fall to them ? BOETHJA-1897-2,45.234

This very place which thou callest exile is to them that dwell therein
their native land . BOETHJA-1897-2,45.235

So true is it that nothing is wretched , but thinking makes it so ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,45.236

and conversely every lot is happy if borne with equanimity .
BOETHJA-1897-2,45.237

Who is so blest by Fortune as not to wish to change his state , if once
he gives <P_46> rein to a rebellious spirit ? BOETHJA-1897-2,46.238

With how many bitternesses is the sweetness of human felicity blent !
BOETHJA-1897-2,46.239

And even if that sweetness seem to him to bring delight in the enjoying
, yet he can@ @not keep it from departing when it will .
BOETHJA-1897-2,46.240

How manifestly wretched , then , is the bliss of earthly fortune , which
lasts not for ever with those whose temper is equable , and can give no
perfect satisfaction to the anxious-minded ! BOETHJA-1897-2,46.241

' Why , then , ye children of mortality , seek ye from without that
happiness whose seat is only within us ? BOETHJA-1897-2,46.242

Error and ignorance bewilder you . BOETHJA-1897-2,46.243

I will show thee , in brief , the hinge on which perfect happiness turns
. BOETHJA-1897-2,46.244

Is there anything more precious to thee than thyself ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,46.245

Nothing , thou wilt say . BOETHJA-1897-2,46.246

If , then , thou art master of thyself , thou wilt possess that which
thou wilt never be willing to lose , and which Fortune can@ @not take
from thee , BOETHJA-1897-2,46.247

And that thou mayst see that happiness can@ @not possibly consist in
these things which are the sport of chance , reflect that , if happiness
is the highest good of a creature living in accordance with reason , and
if a thing which can in any wise be rest away is not the highest good ,
since that which can@ @not be taken away is better than it , it is plain
that Fortune can@ @not aspire to bestow happiness by reason of its
instability . BOETHJA-1897-2,46.248

And , besides , a man borne along by this transitory felicity must
either know or not know its unstability . BOETHJA-1897-2,46.249

If he knows not , how poor is a happiness which depends on the blindness
of <P_47> ignorance ! BOETHJA-1897-2,47.250

If he knows it , he needs must fear to lose a happiness whose loss he
believes to be possible . Wherefore , a never-ceasing fear suffers him
not to be happy . BOETHJA-1897-2,47.251

Or does he count the possibility of this loss a trifling matter ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,47.252

Insignificant , then , must be the good whose loss can be borne so
equably . BOETHJA-1897-2,47.253

And , further , I know thee to be one settled in the belief that the
souls of men certainly die not with them , and convinced thereof by
numerous proofs ; BOETHJA-1897-2,47.254

it is clear also that the felicity which Fortune bestows is brought to
an end with the death of the body ; BOETHJA-1897-2,47.255

therefore , it can@ @not be doubted but that , if happiness is conferred
in this way , the whole human race sinks into misery when death brings
the close of all . BOETHJA-1897-2,47.256

But if we know that many have sought the joy of happiness not through
death only , but also through pain and suffering , how can life make men
happy by its presence when it makes them not wretched by its loss ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,47.257

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_48>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_49>

' But since my reasonings begin to work a soothing effect within thy
mind , me@ @thinks I may resort to remedies somewhat stronger .
BOETHJA-1897-2,49.262

Come , BOETHJA-1897-2,49.263

suppose , now , the gifts of Fortune were not fleeting and transitory ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,49.264

what is there in them capable of ever becoming truly thine , or which
does not lose value when looked at steadily and fairly weighed in the
balance ? BOETHJA-1897-2,49.265

Are riches , I pray thee , precious either through thy nature or in
their own ? BOETHJA-1897-2,49.266

What are they but mere gold and heaps of money ? BOETHJA-1897-2,49.267

Yet these fine things show their quality better in the spending than in
the hoarding ; BOETHJA-1897-2,49.268

for I suppose 't@ @is plain that greed always makes men hateful , while
liberality brings fame . BOETHJA-1897-2,49.269

But that which is transferred to another can@ @not remain in one's own
possession ; BOETHJA-1897-2,49.270

and if that be so , then money is only precious when it is given away ,
and , by being transferred to others , ceases to be one's own .
BOETHJA-1897-2,49.271

Again , if all the money in the world were heaped up in one man's
possession , all others would be made poor . BOETHJA-1897-2,49.272

Sound fills the ears of many at the same time without being broken into
parts , BOETHJA-1897-2,49.273

but your riches can@ @not pass to many without being lessened in the
process . BOETHJA-1897-2,49.274

And when this happens , they must needs impoverish those whom they leave
. BOETHJA-1897-2,49.275

How poor and cramped a thing , then , is riches , which more than one
can@ @not possess as an unbroken whole , which falls not to any one
man's lot <P_50> without the impoverishment of everyone else !
BOETHJA-1897-2,50.276

Or is it the glitter of gems that allures the eye ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,50.277

Yet , how rarely excellent soever may be their splendour , remember the
flashing light is in the jewels , not in the man .
BOETHJA-1897-2,50.278

Indeed , I greatly marvel at men's admiration of them ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,50.279

for what can rightly seem beautiful to a being endowed with life and
reason , if it lack the movement and structure of life ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,50.280

And although such things do in the end take on them more beauty from
their Maker's care and their own brilliancy , still they in no wise
merit your admiration since their excellence is set at a lower grade
than your own . BOETHJA-1897-2,50.281

' Does the beauty of the fields delight you ? BOETHJA-1897-2,50.282

Surely , yes ; it is a beautiful part of a right beautiful whole .
BOETHJA-1897-2,50.283

Fitly indeed do we at times enjoy the serene calm of the sea , admire
the sky , the stars , the moon , the sun . BOETHJA-1897-2,50.284

Yet is any of these thy concern ? BOETHJA-1897-2,50.285

Dost thou venture to boast thyself of the beauty of any one of them ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,50.286

Art <font> thou <$$font> decked with spring's flowers ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,50.287

is it <font> thy <$$font> fertility that swelleth in the fruits of
autumn ? BOETHJA-1897-2,50.288

Why art thou moved with empty transports ? BOETHJA-1897-2,50.289

why embracest thou an alien excellence as thine own ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,50.290

Never will fortune make thine that which the nature of things has
excluded from thy ownership . BOETHJA-1897-2,50.291

Doubtless the fruits of the earth are given for the sustenance of living
creatures . BOETHJA-1897-2,50.292

But if thou art content to supply thy wants so far as suffices nature ,
there is no need to resort to Fortune's bounty . BOETHJA-1897-2,50.293

Nature is content with few things , <P_51> and with a very little of
these . BOETHJA-1897-2,51.294

If thou art minded to force superfluities upon her when she is satisfied
, that which thou addest will prove either unpleasant or harmful .
BOETHJA-1897-2,51.295

But , now , thou thinkest it fine to shine in raiment of divers colours
; BOETHJA-1897-2,51.296

yet - if , indeed , there is any pleasure in the sight of such things -
it is the texture or the artist's skill which I shall admire .
BOETHJA-1897-2,51.297

' Or perhaps it is a long train of servants that makes thee happy ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,51.298

Why , if they behave viciously , they are a ruinous burden to thy house
, and exceeding dangerous to their own master ; BOETHJA-1897-2,51.299

while if they are honest , how canst thou count other men's virtue in
the sum of thy possessions ? From all which 't@ @is plainly proved that
not one of these things which thou reckonest in the number of thy
possessions is really thine . BOETHJA-1897-2,51.300

And if there is in them no beauty to be desired , why shouldst thou
either grieve for their loss or find joy in their continued possession ?
While if they are beautiful in their own nature , what is that to thee ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,51.301

They would have been not less pleasing in themselves , though never
included among thy possessions . BOETHJA-1897-2,51.302

For they derive not their preciousness from being counted in thy riches
, BOETHJA-1897-2,51.303

but rather thou hast chosen to count them in thy riches because they
seemed to thee precious . BOETHJA-1897-2,51.304

' Then , what seek ye by all this noisy outcry about fortune ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,51.305

To chase away poverty , I ween , by means of abundance .
BOETHJA-1897-2,51.306

And yet ye find the result just contrary . BOETHJA-1897-2,51.307

Why , this varied array of precious furniture needs more accessories
<P_52> for its protection ; BOETHJA-1897-2,52.308

it is a true saying that they want most who possess most , and ,
conversely , they want very little who measure their abundance by
nature's requirements , not by the superfluity of vain display .
BOETHJA-1897-2,52.309

Have ye no good of your own implanted within you , that ye seek your
good in things external and separate ? BOETHJA-1897-2,52.310

Is the nature of things so reversed that a creature divine by right of
reason can in no other way be splendid in his own eyes save by the
possession of lifeless chattels ? BOETHJA-1897-2,52.311

Yet , while other things are content with their own , ye who in your
intellect are God-like seek from the lowest of things adornment for a
nature of supreme excellence , BOETHJA-1897-2,52.312

and perceive not how great a wrong ye do your Maker .
BOETHJA-1897-2,52.313

His will was that mankind should excel all things on earth .
BOETHJA-1897-2,52.314

Ye thrust down your worth beneath the lowest of things .
BOETHJA-1897-2,52.315

For if that in which each thing finds its good is plainly more precious
than that whose good it is , by your own estimation , ye put yourselves
below the vilest of things , when ye deem these vile things to be your
good : BOETHJA-1897-2,52.316

nor does this fall out undeservedly . BOETHJA-1897-2,52.317

Indeed , man is so constituted that he then only excels other things
when he knows himself ; BOETHJA-1897-2,52.318

but he is brought lower than the beasts if he lose this self-knowledge .
BOETHJA-1897-2,52.319

For that other creatures should be ignorant of themselves is natural ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,52.320

in man it shows as a defect . BOETHJA-1897-2,52.321

How extravagant , then , is this error of yours , in thinking that
anything can be embellished by adornments not its own .
BOETHJA-1897-2,52.322

It can@ @not be . BOETHJA-1897-2,52.323

For <P_53> if such accessories add any lustre , it is the accessories
that get the praise , while that which they veil and cover remains in
its pristine ugliness . BOETHJA-1897-2,53.324

And again I say , That is no <font> good , <$$font> which injures its
possessor . BOETHJA-1897-2,53.325

Is this untrue ? BOETHJA-1897-2,53.326

No , quite true , thou sayest . BOETHJA-1897-2,53.327

And yet riches have often hurt those that possessed them , since the
worst of men , who are all the more covetous by reason of their
wickedness , think none but themselves worthy to possess all the gold
and gems the world contains . BOETHJA-1897-2,53.328

So thou , who now dreadest pike and sword , mightest have trolled a
carol " in the robber's face " , hadst thou entered the road of life
with empty pockets . BOETHJA-1897-2,53.329

Oh , wondrous blessedness of perishable wealth , whose acquisition robs
thee of security ! ' BOETHJA-1897-2,53.330

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_54>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_55>

' What now shall I say of rank and power , whereby , because you know
not true power and dignity , ye hope to reach the sky ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,55.335

Yet , when rank and power have fallen to the worst of men , did ever an
Etna , belching forth flame and fiery deluge , work such mischief ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,55.336

Verily , as I think , thou dost remember how thine ancestors sought to
abolish the consular power , which had been the foundation of their
liberties , on account of the overweening pride of the consuls , and how
for that self-same pride they had already abolished the kingly title !
BOETHJA-1897-2,55.337

And if , as happens but rarely , these prerogatives are conferred on
virtuous men , it is only the virtue of those who exercise them that
pleases . BOETHJA-1897-2,55.338

So it appears that honour cometh not to virtue from rank , but to rank
from virtue . BOETHJA-1897-2,55.339

Look , too , at the nature of that power which ye find so attractive and
glorious ! BOETHJA-1897-2,55.340

Do ye never consider , ye creatures of earth , what ye are , and over
whom ye exercise your fancied lordship ? BOETHJA-1897-2,55.341

Suppose , now , that in the mouse tribe there should rise up one
claiming rights and powers for himself above the rest ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,55.342

would ye not laugh consumedly ? BOETHJA-1897-2,55.343

Yet if thou lookest to his body alone , what creature canst thou find
more feeble than man , who oftentimes is killed by the bite of a fly ,
or by some insect creeping into the inner passage of his system !
BOETHJA-1897-2,55.344

Yet what rights can one exercise over another , <P_56> save only as
regards the body , and that which is lower than the body - I mean
fortune ? BOETHJA-1897-2,56.345

What ! wilt thou bind with thy mandates the free spirit ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,56.346

Canst thou force from its due tranquillity the mind that is firmly
composed by reason ? BOETHJA-1897-2,56.347

A tyrant thought to drive a man of free birth to reveal his accomplices
in a conspiracy , BOETHJA-1897-2,56.348

but the prisoner bit off his tongue BOETHJA-1897-2,56.349

and threw it into the furious tyrant's face ; BOETHJA-1897-2,56.350

thus , the tortures which the tyrant thought the instrument of his
cruelty the sage made an opportunity for heroism .
BOETHJA-1897-2,56.351

Moreover , what is there that one man can do to another which he himself
may not have to undergo in his turn ? BOETHJA-1897-2,56.352

We are told that Busiris , who used to kill his guests , was himself
slain by his guest , Hercules . BOETHJA-1897-2,56.353

Regulus had thrown into bonds many of the Carthaginians whom he had
taken in war ; BOETHJA-1897-2,56.354

soon after he himself submitted his hands to the chains of the
vanquished . BOETHJA-1897-2,56.355

Then , thinkest thou that man hath any power who can@ @not prevent
another's being able to do to him what he himself can do to others ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,56.356

Besides , if there were any element of natural and proper good in rank
and power , they would never come to the utterly bad , since opposites
are not wont to be associated . BOETHJA-1897-2,56.357

Nature brooks not the union of contraries . BOETHJA-1897-2,56.358

So , seeing there is no doubt that wicked wretches are oftentimes set in
high places , it is also clear that things which suffer association with
the worst of men can@ @not be good in their own nature .
BOETHJA-1897-2,56.359

Indeed , this judgment may with some reason <P_57> be passed concerning
all the gifts of fortune which fall so plentifully to all the most
wicked . BOETHJA-1897-2,57.360

This ought also to be considered here , I think : BOETHJA-1897-2,57.361

No one doubts a man to be brave in whom he has observed a brave spirit
residing . BOETHJA-1897-2,57.362

It is plain that one who is endowed with speed is swift-footed .
BOETHJA-1897-2,57.363

So also music makes men musical , the healing art physicians , rhetoric
public speakers . BOETHJA-1897-2,57.364

For each of these has naturally its own proper working ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,57.365

there is no confusion with the effects of contrary things -
BOETHJA-1897-2,57.366

nay , even of itself it rejects what is incompatible .
BOETHJA-1897-2,57.367

And yet wealth can@ @not extinguish insatiable greed ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,57.368

nor has power ever made him master of himself whom vicious lusts kept
bound in indissoluble fetters ; BOETHJA-1897-2,57.369

dignity conferred on the wicked not only fails to make them worthy ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,57.370

but contrarily reveals and displays their unworthiness .
BOETHJA-1897-2,57.371

Why does it so happen ? BOETHJA-1897-2,57.372

Because ye take pleasure in calling by false names things whose nature
is quite incongruous thereto - by names which are easily proved false by
the very effects of the things themselves ; even so it is ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,57.373

these riches , that power , this dignity , are none of them rightly so
called . BOETHJA-1897-2,57.374

Finally , we may draw the same conclusion concerning the whole sphere of
Fortune , within which there is plainly nothing to be truly desired ,
nothing of intrinsic excellence ; BOETHJA-1897-2,57.375

for she neither always joins herself to the good , BOETHJA-1897-2,57.376

nor does she make good men of those to whom she is united ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,57.377

<P_58>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_59>

Then said I : ' Thou knowest thyself that ambition for worldly success
hath but little swayed me . BOETHJA-1897-2,59.381

Yet I have desired opportunity for action , lest virtue , in default of
exercise , should languish away ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,59.382

Then she : ' This is that " last infirmity " which is able to allure ,
minds which , though of noble quality , have not yet been moulded to any
exquisite refinement by the perfecting of the virtues -
BOETHJA-1897-2,59.383

I mean , the love of glory - and fame for high services rendered to the
commonweal . BOETHJA-1897-2,59.384

And yet consider with me how poor and unsubstantial a thing this glory
is ! BOETHJA-1897-2,59.385

The whole of this earth's globe , as thou hast learnt from the
demonstration of astronomy , compared with the expanse of heaven , is
found no bigger than a point ; BOETHJA-1897-2,59.386

that is to say , if measured by the vastness of heaven's sphere , it is
held to occupy absolutely no space at all . BOETHJA-1897-2,59.387

Now , of this so insignificant portion of the universe , it is about a
fourth part , as Ptolemy's proofs have taught us , which is inhabited by
living creatures known to us . BOETHJA-1897-2,59.388

If from this fourth part you take away in thought all that is usurped by
seas and marshes , or lies a vast waste of waterless desert , barely is
an exceeding narrow area left for human habitation .
BOETHJA-1897-2,59.389

You , then , who are shut in and prisoned in this merest fraction of a
point's space , do ye take thought for the blazoning of your fame , for
the spreading <P_60> abroad of your renown ? BOETHJA-1897-2,60.390

Why , what amplitude or magnificence has glory when confined to such
narrow and petty limits ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,60.391

Besides , the straitened bounds of this scant dwelling-place are
inhabited by many nations differing widely in speech , in usages , in
modes of life ; BOETHJA-1897-2,60.392

to many of these , from the difficulty of travel , from diversities of
speech , from want of commercial intercourse , the fame not only of
individual men , but even of cities , is unable to reach .
BOETHJA-1897-2,60.393

Why , in Cicero's days , as he himself somewhere points out , the fame
of the Roman Republic had not yet crossed the Caucasus ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,60.394

and yet by that time her name had grown formidable to the Parthians and
other nations of those parts . BOETHJA-1897-2,60.395

Seest thou , then , how narrow , how confined , is the glory ye take
pains to spread abroad and extend ! BOETHJA-1897-2,60.396

Can the fame of a single Roman penetrate where the glory of the Roman
name fails to pass ? BOETHJA-1897-2,60.397

Moreover , the customs and institutions of different races agree not
together , so that what is deemed praiseworthy in one country is thought
punishable in another . Wherefore , if any love the applause of fame ,
it shall not profit him to publish his name among many peoples .
BOETHJA-1897-2,60.398

Then , each must be content to have the range of his glory limited to
his own people ; BOETHJA-1897-2,60.399

the splendid immortality of fame must be confined within the bounds of a
single race . BOETHJA-1897-2,60.400

' Once more , how many of high renown in their own times have been lost
in oblivion for want of a record ! BOETHJA-1897-2,60.401

Indeed , of what avail are <P_61> written records even , which , with
their authors , are overtaken by the dimness of age after a somewhat
longer time ? BOETHJA-1897-2,61.402

But ye , when ye think on future fame , fancy it an immortality that ye
are begetting for yourselves . BOETHJA-1897-2,61.403

Why , if thou scannest the infinite spaces of eternity , what room hast
thou left for rejoicing in the durability of thy name ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,61.404

Verily , if a single moment's space be compared with ten_thousand years
, it has a certain relative duration , however little , since each
period is definite . BOETHJA-1897-2,61.405

But this same number of years - ay , and a number many times as great -
can@ @not even be compared with endless duration ; BOETHJA-1897-2,61.406

for , indeed , finite periods may in a sort be compared one with another
, but a finite and an infinite never . BOETHJA-1897-2,61.407

So it comes to pass that fame , though it extend to ever so wide a space
of years , if it be compared to never-@ @lessening eternity , seems not
short-lived merely , but altogether nothing . BOETHJA-1897-2,61.408

But as for you , ye know not how to act aright , unless it be to court
the popular breeze , and win the empty applause of the multitude -
BOETHJA-1897-2,61.409

nay , ye abandon the superlative worth of conscience and virtue ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,61.410

and ask ; a recompense from the poor words of others .
BOETHJA-1897-2,61.411

Let me tell thee how wittily one did mock the shallowness of this sort
of arrogance . BOETHJA-1897-2,61.412

A certain ; man assailed one who had put on the name of philosopher as a
cloak to pride and vain-glory , not for the practice of real virtue ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,61.413

and added : " Now shall I know if thou art a philosopher if thou bearest
reproaches calmly and patiently " . BOETHJA-1897-2,61.414

The other for a@ @while affected to be patient , BOETHJA-1897-2,61.415

<P_62> and , having endured to be abused , cried out derisively : "
<font> Now , <$$font> do you see that I am a philosopher ? "
BOETHJA-1897-2,62.416

The other , with biting sarcasm , retorted : " I should have hadst thou
held thy peace " . BOETHJA-1897-2,62.417

Moreover , what concern have choice spirits - for it is of such men we
speak , men who seek glory by virtue - what concern , I say , have these
with fame after the dissolution of the body in death's last hour ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,62.418

For if men die wholly - which our reasonings forbid us to believe -
there is no such thing as glory at all , since he to whom the glory is
said to belong is altogether non-existent . BOETHJA-1897-2,62.419

But if the mind , conscious of its own rectitude , is released from its
earthly prison , and seeks heaven in free flight , doth it not despise
all earthly things when it rejoices in its deliverance from earthly
bonds , and enters upon the joys of heaven ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,62.420

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_63>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_64>

' But that thou mayst not think that I wage implacable warfare against
Fortune , I own there is a time when the deceitful goddess serves men
well - I mean when she reveals herself , uncovers her face , and
confesses her true character . BOETHJA-1897-2,64.425

Perhaps thou dost not yet grasp my meaning , BOETHJA-1897-2,64.426

Strange is the thing I am trying to express , BOETHJA-1897-2,64.427

and for this cause I can scarce find words to make clear my thought .
BOETHJA-1897-2,64.428

For truly I believe that Ill Fortune is of more use to men than Good
Fortune . BOETHJA-1897-2,64.429

For Good Fortune , when she wears the guise of happiness , and most
seems to caress , is always lying ; BOETHJA-1897-2,64.430

Ill Fortune is always truthful , since , in changing she shows her
inconstancy . BOETHJA-1897-2,64.431

The one deceives , BOETHJA-1897-2,64.432

the other teaches ; BOETHJA-1897-2,64.433

the one enchains the minds of those who enjoy her favour by the
semblance of delusive good , BOETHJA-1897-2,64.434

the other delivers them by the knowledge of the frail nature of
happiness . BOETHJA-1897-2,64.435

Accordingly , thou mayst see the one fickle , shifting as the breeze ,
and ever self-deceived ; the other sober-minded , alert , and wary , by
reason of the very discipline of adversity . BOETHJA-1897-2,64.436

Finally , Good Fortune , by her allurements , draws men far from the
true good ; BOETHJA-1897-2,64.437

Ill Fortune ofttimes draws men back to true good with grappling irons .
BOETHJA-1897-2,64.438

Again , should it be esteemed a trifling boon , thinkest thou , that
this cruel , this odious Fortune hath discovered to thee the hearts of
thy faithful friends - BOETHJA-1897-2,64.439

that other hid from thee alike the <P_65> faces of the true friends and
of the false , BOETHJA-1897-2,65.440

but in departing she hath taken away <font> her <$$font> friends , and
left thee <font> thine <$$font> ? BOETHJA-1897-2,65.441

What price wouldst thou not have given for this service in the fulness
of thy prosperity when thou seemedst to thyself fortunate ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,65.442

Cease , then , to seek the wealth thou hast lost , since in true friends
thou hast found the most precious of all riches ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,65.443

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_66>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_67>

{COM:introduction_omitted}

<P_68_omitted>

<P_69_omitted>

<P_70_omitted>

<P_71>

She ceased , BOETHJA-1897-2,71.453

but I stood fixed by the sweetness of the song in wonderment and eager
expectation , my ears still strained to listen . BOETHJA-1897-2,71.454

And then after a little I said : ' Thou sovereign solace of the stricken
soul , what refreshment hast thou brought me , no less by the sweetness
of thy singing than by the weightiness of thy discourse !
BOETHJA-1897-2,71.455

Verily , I think not that I shall hereafter be unequal to the blows of
Fortune . Wherefore , I no longer dread the remedies which thou saidst
were something too severe for my strength ; BOETHJA-1897-2,71.456

nay , rather , I am eager to hear of them BOETHJA-1897-2,71.457

and call for them with all vehemence ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,71.458

Then said she : ' I marked thee fastening upon my words silently and
intently , BOETHJA-1897-2,71.459

and I expected , or - to speak more truly - I myself brought about in
thee , this state of mind . BOETHJA-1897-2,71.460

What now remains is of such sort that to the taste indeed it is biting ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,71.461

but when received within it turns to sweetness . BOETHJA-1897-2,71.462

But whereas thou dost profess thyself desirous of hearing , with what
ardour wouldst thou not burn didst thou but perceive whither it is my
task to lead thee ! ' BOETHJA-1897-2,71.463

' Whither ? ' said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,71.464

' To true felicity ' , said she , ' which even now thy spirit sees in
dreams , but can@ @not <P_72> behold in very truth , while thine eyes
are engrossed with semblances ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,72.465

Then said I : ' I beseech thee , do thou show to me her true shape
without a moment's loss ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,72.466

' Gladly will I , for thy sake ' , said she . BOETHJA-1897-2,72.467

' But first I will try to sketch in words , and describe a cause which
is more familiar to thee , that , when thou hast viewed this carefully ,
thou mayst turn thy eyes the other way , and recognize the beauty of
true happiness ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,72.468

<P_73> For a little space she remained in a fixed gaze , withdrawn , as
it were , into the august chamber of her mind ; BOETHJA-1897-2,73.469

then she thus began : ' All mortal creatures in those anxious aims which
find employment in so many varied pursuits , though they take many paths
, yet strive to reach one goal - the goal of happiness .
BOETHJA-1897-2,73.470

Now , <font> the good <$$font> is that which , when a man hath got , he
can lack nothing further . BOETHJA-1897-2,73.471

This it is which is the supreme good of all , containing within itself
all particular good ; so that if anything is still wanting thereto ,
this can@ @not be the supreme good , since something would be left
outside which might be desired . BOETHJA-1897-2,73.472

'T@ @is clear , then , that happiness is a state perfected by the
assembling together of all good things . BOETHJA-1897-2,73.473

To this state , as we have said , all men try to attain , but by
different paths . BOETHJA-1897-2,73.474

For the desire of the true good is naturally implanted in the minds of
men ; BOETHJA-1897-2,73.475

only error leads them aside out of the way in pursuit of the false .
BOETHJA-1897-2,73.476

Some , deeming it the highest good to want for nothing , spare no pains
to attain affluence ; BOETHJA-1897-2,73.477

others , judging the good to be that to which respect is most worthily
paid , strive to win the reverence of their fellow-citizens by the
attainment of official dignity . BOETHJA-1897-2,73.478

Some there are who fix the chief good in supreme power ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,73.479

these either wish themselves to enjoy sovereignty ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,73.480

or try to attach themselves to those who have it .
BOETHJA-1897-2,73.481

Those , <P_74> again , who think renown to be something of supreme
excellence are in haste to spread abroad the glory of their name either
through the arts of war or of peace . BOETHJA-1897-2,74.482

A great many measure the attainment of good by joy and gladness of heart
; BOETHJA-1897-2,74.483

these think it the height of happiness to give themselves over to
pleasure . BOETHJA-1897-2,74.484

Others there are , again , who interchange the ends and means one with
the other in their aims ; BOETHJA-1897-2,74.485

for instance , some want riches for the sake of pleasure and power ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,74.486

some covet power either for the sake of money or in order to bring
renown to their name . BOETHJA-1897-2,74.487

So it is on these ends . then , that the aim of human acts and wishes
is centred , and on others like to these - for instance , noble birth
and popularity , which seem to compass a certain renown ; wife and
children , which are sought for the sweetness of their possession ;
while as for friendship , the most sacred kind indeed is counted in the
category of virtue , not of fortune ; BOETHJA-1897-2,74.488

but other kinds are entered upon for the sake of power or of enjoyment .
BOETHJA-1897-2,74.489

And as for bodily excellences , it is obvious that they are to be ranged
with the above . BOETHJA-1897-2,74.490

For strength and stature surely manifest power ; BOETHJA-1897-2,74.491

beauty and fleetness of foot bring celebrity ; BOETHJA-1897-2,74.492

health brings pleasure . BOETHJA-1897-2,74.493

It is plain , then , that the only object sought for in all these ways
is <font> happiness . <$$font> BOETHJA-1897-2,74.494

For that which each seeks in preference to all else , that is in his
judgment the supreme good . BOETHJA-1897-2,74.495

And we have defined the supreme good to be happiness .
BOETHJA-1897-2,74.496

Therefore , that state which each wishes in <P_75> preference to all
others is in his judgment happy . BOETHJA-1897-2,75.497

' Thou hast , then , set before thine eyes something like a scheme of
human happiness - wealth , rank , power , glory , pleasure .
BOETHJA-1897-2,75.498

Now Epicurus , from a sole regard to these considerations , with some
consistency concluded the highest good to be pleasure , because all the
other objects seem to bring some delight to the soul .
BOETHJA-1897-2,75.499

But to return to human pursuits and aims : man's mind seeks to recover
its proper good , in spite of the mistiness of its recollection ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,75.500

but , like a drunken man , knows not by what path to return home .
BOETHJA-1897-2,75.501

Think you they are wrong who strive to escape want ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,75.502

Nay , truly there is nothing which can so well complete happiness as a
state abounding in all good things , needing nothing from outside , but
wholly self-sufficing . BOETHJA-1897-2,75.503

Do they fall into error who deem that which is best to be also best
deserving to receive the homage of reverence ? BOETHJA-1897-2,75.504

Not at all . BOETHJA-1897-2,75.505

That can@ @not possibly be vile and contemptible , to attain which the
endeavours of nearly all mankind are directed . BOETHJA-1897-2,75.506

Then , is power not to be reckoned in the category of good ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,75.507

Why , can that which is plainly more efficacious than anything else be
esteemed a thing feeble and void of strength ? BOETHJA-1897-2,75.508

Or is renown to be thought of no account ? BOETHJA-1897-2,75.509

Nay , it can@ @not be ignored that the highest renown is constantly
associated with the highest excellence . BOETHJA-1897-2,75.510

And what need is there to say that happiness is not haunted by care and
gloom , nor exposed to trouble and <P_76> vexation , since that is a
condition we ask of the very least of things , from the possession and
enjoyment of which we expect delight ? BOETHJA-1897-2,76.511

So , then , these are the blessings men wish to win ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,76.512

they want riches , rank , sovereignty , glory , pleasure , because they
believe that by these means they will secure independence , reverence ,
power , renown , and joy of heart . BOETHJA-1897-2,76.513

Therefore , it is <font> the good <$$font> which men seek by such divers
courses ; BOETHJA-1897-2,76.514

and herein is easily shown the might of Nature's power , since ,
although opinions are so various and discordant , yet they agree in
cherishing <font> good <$$font> as the end ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,76.515

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_77>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_78>

' Ye , too , creatures of earth , have some glimmering of your origin ,
however faint , BOETHJA-1897-2,78.520

and though in a vision dim and clouded , yet in some wise ,
notwithstanding , ye discern the true end of happiness ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,78.521

and so the aim of nature leads you thither - to that true good - while
error in many forms leads you astray therefrom . BOETHJA-1897-2,78.522

For reflect whether men are able to win happiness by those means through
which they think to reach the proposed end , BOETHJA-1897-2,78.523

Truly , if either wealth , rank , or any of the rest , bring with them
anything of such sort as seems to have nothing wanting to it that is
good , we , too , acknowledge that some are made happy by the
acquisition of these things . BOETHJA-1897-2,78.524

But if they are not able to fulfil their promises , and , moreover ,
lack many good things , is not the happiness men seek in them clearly
discovered to be a false show ? BOETHJA-1897-2,78.525

Therefore do I first ask thee myself , who but lately wert living in
affluence , amid all that abundance of wealth , was thy mind never
troubled in consequence of some wrong done to thee ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,78.526

' Nay ' , said I , ' I can@ @not ever remember a time when my mind was
so completely at peace as not to feel the pang of some uneasiness ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,78.527

' Was it not because either something was absent which thou wouldst not
have absent , or present which thou wouldst have away ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,78.528

' Yes ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,78.529

<P_79>

' Then , thou didst want the presence of the one , the absence of the
other ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,79.531

' Admitted ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.532

' But a man lacks that of which he is in want ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,79.533

' He does ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.534

' And he who lacks something is not in all points self-sufficing ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,79.535

' No ; certainly not ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.536

' So wert thou , then , in the plenitude of thy wealth , supporting this
insufficiency ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,79.537

' I must have been ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.538

' Wealth , then , can@ @not make its possessor independent and free from
all want , BOETHJA-1897-2,79.539

yet this was what it seemed to promise . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.540

Moreover , I think this also well deserves to be considered - that there
is nothing in the special nature of money to hinder its being taken away
from those who possess it against their will ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.541

' I admit it ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.542

' Why , of course , when every day the stronger wrests it from the
weaker without his consent . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.543

Else , whence come lawsuits , except in seeking to recover moneys which
have been taken away against their owner's will by force or fraud ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,79.544

' True ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.545

' Then , everyone will need some extraneous means of protection to keep
his money safe ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.546

' Who can venture to deny it ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,79.547

' Yet he would not , unless he possessed the money which it is possible
to lose ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.548

' No ; he certainly would not ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,79.549

<P_80> ' Then , we have worked round to an opposite conclusion :
BOETHJA-1897-2,80.550

the wealth which was thought to make a man independent rather puts him
in need of further protection . BOETHJA-1897-2,80.551

How in the world , then , can want be driven away by riches ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,80.552

Can@ @not the rich feel hunger ? BOETHJA-1897-2,80.553

Can@ @not they thirst ? BOETHJA-1897-2,80.554

Are not the limbs of the wealthy sensitive to the winter's cold ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,80.555

" But " , thou wilt say , " the rich have the wherewithal to sate their
hunger , the means to get rid of thirst and cold " .
BOETHJA-1897-2,80.556

True enough ; want can thus be soothed by riches , BOETHJA-1897-2,80.557

wholly removed it can@ @not be . BOETHJA-1897-2,80.558

For if this ever-@ @gaping , ever-@ @craving want is glutted by wealth ,
it needs must be that the want itself which can be so glutted still
remains , BOETHJA-1897-2,80.559

I do not speak of how very little suffices for nature , and how for
avarice nothing is enough . Wherefore , if wealth can@ @not get rid of
want , and makes new wants of its own , how can ye believe that it
bestows independence ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,80.560

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_81>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_82>

' Well , but official dignity clothes him to whom it comes with honour
and reverence ! BOETHJA-1897-2,82.565

Have , then , offices of state such power as to plant virtue in the
minds of their possessors , and drive out vice ? BOETHJA-1897-2,82.566

Nay , they are rather wont to signalize iniquity than to chase it away ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,82.567

and hence arises our indignation that honours so often fall to the most
iniquitous of men . BOETHJA-1897-2,82.568

Accordingly , Catullus calls Nonius an " ulcer-spot " , though " sitting
in the curule chair " . BOETHJA-1897-2,82.569

Dost not see what infamy high position brings upon the bad ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,82.570

Surely their unworthiness will be less conspicuous if their rank does
not draw upon them the public notice ! BOETHJA-1897-2,82.571

In thy own case , wouldst thou ever have been induced by all these
perils to think of sharing office with Decoratus , since thou hast
discerned in him the spirit of a rascally parasite and informer ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,82.572

No ; we can@ @not deem men worthy of reverence on account of their
office , whom we deem unworthy of the office itself .
BOETHJA-1897-2,82.573

But didst thou see a man endued with wisdom , couldst thou suppose him
not worthy of reverence , nor of that wisdom with which he was endued ?
' BOETHJA-1897-2,82.574

' No ; certainly not ' . BOETHJA-1897-2,82.575

' There is in Virtue a dignity of her own which she forthwith passes
over to those to whom she is united . BOETHJA-1897-2,82.576

And since public honours can@ @not do this , it is clear that they do
not <P_83> possess the true beauty of dignity . BOETHJA-1897-2,83.577

And here this well deserves to be noticed - that if a man is the more
scorned in proportion as he is despised by a greater number , high
position not only fails to win reverence for the wicked , but even loads
them the more with contempt by drawing more attention to them . But not
without retribution ; BOETHJA-1897-2,83.578

for the wicked pay back a return in kind to the dignities they put on by
the pollution of their touch . BOETHJA-1897-2,83.579

Perhaps , too , another consideration may teach thee to confess that
true reverence can@ @not come through these counterfeit dignities .
BOETHJA-1897-2,83.580

It is this : BOETHJA-1897-2,83.581

If one who had been many times consul chanced to visit barbaric lands ,
would his office win him the reverence of the barbarians ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,83.582

And yet if reverence were the natural effect of dignities , they would
not forgo their proper function in any part of the world , even as fire
never anywhere fails to give forth heat . BOETHJA-1897-2,83.583

But since this effect is not due to their own efficacy , but is attached
to them by the mistaken opinion of mankind , they disappear straightway
when they are set before those who do not esteem them dignities .
BOETHJA-1897-2,83.584

Thus the case stands with foreign peoples . BOETHJA-1897-2,83.585

But does their repute last for ever , even in the land of their origin ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,83.586

Why , the prefecture , which was once a great power , is now an empty
name - a burden merely on the senator's fortune ; BOETHJA-1897-2,83.587

the commissioner of the public corn supply was once a personage -
BOETHJA-1897-2,83.588

now what is more contemptible than this office ? BOETHJA-1897-2,83.589

For , as we said just now , that which hath no true comeliness of its
<P_84> own now receives , now loses , lustre at the caprice of those who
have to do with it . BOETHJA-1897-2,84.590

So , then , if dignities can@ @not win men reverence , if they are
actually sullied by the contamination of the wicked , if they lose their
splendour through time's changes , if they come into contempt merely for
lack of public estimation , what precious beauty have they in themselves
, much less to give to others ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,84.591

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_85>

' Well , then , does sovereignty and the intimacy of kings prove able to
confer power ? BOETHJA-1897-2,85.594

Why , surely does not the happiness of kings endure for ever ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,85.595

And yet antiquity is full of examples , and these days also , of kings
whose happiness has turned into calamity . BOETHJA-1897-2,85.596

How glorious a power , which is not even found effectual for its own
preservation ! BOETHJA-1897-2,85.597

But if happiness has its source in sovereign power , is not happiness
diminished , and misery inflicted in its stead , in so far as that power
falls short of completeness ? BOETHJA-1897-2,85.598

Yet , however widely human sovereignty be extended , there must still be
more peoples left , over whom each several king holds no sway .
BOETHJA-1897-2,85.599

Now , at whatever point the power on which happiness depends ceases ,
here powerlessness steals in BOETHJA-1897-2,85.600

and makes wretchedness ; BOETHJA-1897-2,85.601

so , by this way of reckoning , there must needs be a balance of
wretchedness in the lot of the king . BOETHJA-1897-2,85.602

The tyrant who had made trial of the perils of his condition figured the
fears that haunt a throne under the image of a sword hanging over a
man's head . BOETHJA-1897-2,85.603

What sort of power , then , is this which can@ @not drive away the
gnawings of anxiety , or shun the stings of terror ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,85.604

Fain would they themselves have lived secure , BOETHJA-1897-2,85.605

but they can@ @not ; BOETHJA-1897-2,85.606

then they boast about their power ! BOETHJA-1897-2,85.607

Dost thou count him to <P_86> possess power whom thou seest to wish what
he can@ @not bring to pass ? BOETHJA-1897-2,86.608

Dost thou count him to possess power who encompasses himself with a
body-guard , who fears those he terrifies more than they fear him , who
, to keep up the semblance of power , is himself at the mercy of his
slaves ? BOETHJA-1897-2,86.609

Need I say anything of the friends of kings , when I show royal dominion
itself so utterly and miserably weak - BOETHJA-1897-2,86.610

why ofttimes the royal power in its plenitude brings them low ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,86.611

ofttimes involves them in its fall ? BOETHJA-1897-2,86.612

Nero drove his friend and preceptor , Seneca , to the choice of the
manner of his death , BOETHJA-1897-2,86.613

Antoninus exposed Papinianus , who was long powerful at court , to the
swords of the soldiery . BOETHJA-1897-2,86.614

Yet each of these was willing to renounce his power .
BOETHJA-1897-2,86.615

Seneca tried to surrender his wealth also to Nero , and go into
retirement ; BOETHJA-1897-2,86.616

but neither achieved his purpose . BOETHJA-1897-2,86.617

When they tottered , their very greatness dragged them down .
BOETHJA-1897-2,86.618

What manner of thing , then , is this power which keeps men in fear
while they possess it - which when thou art fain to keep , thou art not
safe , and when thou desirest to lay it aside , thou canst not rid
thyself of ? BOETHJA-1897-2,86.619

Are friends any protection who have been attached by fortune , not by
virtue ? BOETHJA-1897-2,86.620

Nay ; him whom good fortune has made a friend , ill fortune will make an
enemy . BOETHJA-1897-2,86.621

And what plague is more effectual to do hurt than a foe of one's own
household ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,86.622

<P_87>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_88>

' Again , how misleading , how base , a thing ofttimes is glory !
BOETHJA-1897-2,88.626

Well does the tragic poet exclaim : Oh , fond Repute , how many a time
and oft Hast thou raised high in pride the baseborn churl !
BOETHJA-1897-2,88.627

For many have won a great name through the mistaken beliefs of the
multitude - BOETHJA-1897-2,88.628

and what can be imagined more shameful than that ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,88.629

Nay , they who are praised falsely must needs themselves blush at their
own praises ! BOETHJA-1897-2,88.630

And even when praise is won by merit , still , how does it add to the
good conscience of the wise man who measures his good not by popular
repute , but by the truth of inner conviction ? BOETHJA-1897-2,88.631

And if at all it does seem a fair thing to get this same renown spread
abroad , it follows that any failure so to spread it is held foul .
BOETHJA-1897-2,88.632

But if , as I set forth but now , there must needs be many tribes and
peoples whom the fame of any single man can@ @not reach , it follows
that he whom thou esteemest glorious seems all inglorious in a
neighbouring quarter of the globe . BOETHJA-1897-2,88.633

As to popular favour , I do not think it even worthy of mention in this
place , since it never cometh of judgment , and never lasteth steadily .
BOETHJA-1897-2,88.634

' Then , again , who does not see how empty , how foolish , is the fame
of noble birth ? BOETHJA-1897-2,88.635

Why , if the nobility is based on renown , the renown is another's !
BOETHJA-1897-2,88.636

For , truly , nobility seems to be a sort of reputation coming from the
merits <P_89> of ancestors . BOETHJA-1897-2,89.637

But if it is the praise which brings renown , of necessity it is they
who are praised that are famous . Wherefore , the fame of another
clothes thee not with splendour if thou hast none of thine own .
BOETHJA-1897-2,89.638

So , if there is any excellence in nobility of birth , me@ @thinks it is
this alone - that it would seem to impose upon the nobly born the
obligation not to degenerate from the virtue of their ancestors ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,89.639

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_90>

' Then , what shall I say of the pleasures of the body ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,90.642

The lust thereof is full of uneasiness ; the sating , of repentance .
BOETHJA-1897-2,90.643

What sicknesses , what intolerable pains , are they wont to bring on the
bodies of those who enjoy them - the fruits of iniquity , as it were !
BOETHJA-1897-2,90.644

Now , what sweetness the stimulus of pleasure may have I do not know .
BOETHJA-1897-2,90.645

But that the issues of pleasure are painful everyone may understand who
chooses to recall the memory of his own fleshly lusts .
BOETHJA-1897-2,90.646

Nay , if these can make happiness , there is no reason why the beasts
also should not be happy , since all their efforts are eagerly set upon
satisfying the bodily wants . BOETHJA-1897-2,90.647

I know , indeed , that the sweetness of wife and children should be
right comely , BOETHJA-1897-2,90.648

yet only too true to nature is what was said of one - that he found in
his sons his tormentors . BOETHJA-1897-2,90.649

And how galling such a contingency would be , I must needs put thee in
mind , since thou hast never in any wise suffered such experiences , nor
art thou now under any uneasiness . BOETHJA-1897-2,90.650

In such a case , I agree with my servant Euripides , who said that a man
without children was fortunate in his misfortune . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,90.651

<P_91>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_92>

' It is beyond doubt , then , that these paths do not lead to happiness
; BOETHJA-1897-2,92.655

they can@ @not guide anyone to the promised goal .
BOETHJA-1897-2,92.656

Now , I will very briefly show what serious evils are involved in
following them . BOETHJA-1897-2,92.657

Just consider . BOETHJA-1897-2,92.658

Is it thy endeavour to heap up money ? BOETHJA-1897-2,92.659

Why , thou must wrest it from its present possessor !
BOETHJA-1897-2,92.660

Art thou minded to put on the splendour of official dignity ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,92.661

Thou must beg from those who have the giving of it ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,92.662

thou who covetest to outvie others in honour must lower thyself to the
humble posture of petition . BOETHJA-1897-2,92.663

Dost thou long for power ? BOETHJA-1897-2,92.664

Thou must face perils , BOETHJA-1897-2,92.665

for thou wilt be at the mercy of thy subjects' plots .
BOETHJA-1897-2,92.666

Is glory thy aim ? BOETHJA-1897-2,92.667

Thou art lured on through all manner of hardships ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,92.668

and there is an end to thy peace of mind . BOETHJA-1897-2,92.669

Art fain to lead a life of pleasure ? BOETHJA-1897-2,92.670

Yet who does not scorn and contemn one who is the slave of the weakest
and vilest of things - the body ? BOETHJA-1897-2,92.671

Again , on how slight and perishable a possession do they rely who set
before themselves bodily excellences ! BOETHJA-1897-2,92.672

Can ye ever surpass the elephant in bulk or the bull in strength ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,92.673

Can ye excel the tiger in swiftness ? BOETHJA-1897-2,92.674

Look upon the infinitude , the solidity , the swift motion , of the
heavens , BOETHJA-1897-2,92.675

and for once cease to admire things mean and worthless ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,92.676

And yet the heavens are not so much to be admired on this account as for
the reason which guides them . BOETHJA-1897-2,92.677

Then , how transient <P_93> is the lustre of beauty ! how soon gone !
- more fleeting than the fading bloom of spring flowers .
BOETHJA-1897-2,93.678

And yet if , as Aristotle says , men should see with the eyes of Lynceus
, so that their sight might pierce through obstructions , would not that
body of Alcibiades , so gloriously fair in outward seeming , appear
altogether loathsome when all its inward parts lay open to the view ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,93.679

Therefore , it is not thy own nature that makes thee seem beautiful ,
but the weakness of the eyes that see thee . BOETHJA-1897-2,93.680

Yet prize as unduly as ye will that body's excellences ; so long as ye
know that this that ye admire , whatever its worth , can be dissolved
away by the feeble flame of a three days' fever . From all which
considerations we may conclude as a whole , that these things which can@
@not make good the advantages they promise , which are never made
perfect by the assemblage of all good things - these neither lead us
byways to happiness , nor themselves make men completely happy ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,93.681

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_94>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_95_to_115_belongs_to_stage_1>

<P_116>

Then said I : ' With all my heart I agree with Plato ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,116.687

indeed , this is now the second time that these things have been brought
back to my mind - BOETHJA-1897-2,116.688

first I lose them through the clogging contact of the body ; then after
through the stress of heavy grief . BOETHJA-1897-2,116.689

' Then she continued : ' If thou wilt reflect upon thy former admissions
, it will not be long before thou dost also recollect that of which
erstwhile thou didst confess thyself ignorant , ' BOETHJA-1897-2,116.690

' What is that ? ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,116.691

' The principles of the world's government ' , said she .
BOETHJA-1897-2,116.692

' Yes ; I remember my confession , BOETHJA-1897-2,116.693

and , although I now anticipate what thou intendest , I have a desire to
hear the argument plainly set forth . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,116.694

' A@ @while ago thou deemedst it beyond all doubt that God doth govern
the world . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,116.695

' I do not think it doubtful now , BOETHJA-1897-2,116.696

nor shall I ever ; BOETHJA-1897-2,116.697

and by what reasons I am brought to this assurance I will briefly set
forth . BOETHJA-1897-2,116.698

This world could never have taken shape as a single system out of parts
so diverse and opposite were it not that there is One who joins together
these so diverse things . BOETHJA-1897-2,116.699

And when it had once come together , the very diversity of natures would
have dissevered it and torn it asunder in universal discord were there
not One who keeps together what He has joined . BOETHJA-1897-2,116.700

Nor would <P_117> the order of nature proceed so regularly ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,117.701

nor could its course exhibit motions so fixed in respect of position ,
time , range , efficacy , and character , unless there were One who ,
Himself abiding , disposed these various vicissitudes of change .
BOETHJA-1897-2,117.702

This power , whatsoever it be , whereby they remain as they were created
, and are kept in motion , I call by the name which all recognize - God
. ' BOETHJA-1897-2,117.703

Then said she : ' Seeing that such is thy belief , it will cost me
little trouble , I think , to enable thee to win happiness , and return
in safety to thy own country , BOETHJA-1897-2,117.704

But let us give our attention to the task that we have set before
ourselves . BOETHJA-1897-2,117.705

Have we not counted independence in the category of happiness , and
agreed that God is absolute happiness ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,117.706

' Truly , we have . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,117.707

' Then , He will need no external assistance for the ruling of the world
. BOETHJA-1897-2,117.708

Otherwise , if He stands in need of aught , He will not possess complete
independence . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,117.709

' That is necessarily so ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,117.710

' Then , by His own power alone He disposes all things ' .
BOETHJA-1897-2,117.711

' It can@ @not be denied . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,117.712

' Now , God was proved to be absolute good . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,117.713

' Yes ; I remember . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,117.714

' Then , He disposes all things by the agency of Good , if it be true
that <font> He <$$font> rules all things by His own power whom we have
agreed to be good ; BOETHJA-1897-2,117.715

and He is , as it were , the rudder and <P_118> helm by which the
world's mechanism is kept steady and in order . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,118.716

' Heartily do I agree ; BOETHJA-1897-2,118.717

and , indeed , I anticipated what thou wouldst say , though it may be in
feeble surmise only . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,118.718

' I well believe it ' , said she ; BOETHJA-1897-2,118.719

' for , as I think , thou now bringest to the search eyes quicker in
discerning truth ; BOETHJA-1897-2,118.720

but what I shall say next is no less plain and easy to see . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,118.721

' What is it ? ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,118.722

' Why ' , said she , ' since God is rightly believed to govern all
things with the rudder of goodness , and since all things do likewise ,
as I have taught , haste towards good by the very aim of nature , can it
be doubted that His governance is willingly accepted , and that all
submit themselves to the sway of the Disposer as conformed and
attempered to His rule ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,118.723

' Necessarily so ' , said I ; BOETHJA-1897-2,118.724

' no rule would seem happy if it were a yoke imposed on reluctant wills
, and not the safe-keeping of obedient subjects . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,118.725

' There is nothing , then , which , while it follows nature , endeavours
to resist good . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,118.726

' No ; nothing . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,118.727

' But if anything should , will it have the least success against Him
whom we rightly agreed to be supreme Lord of happiness ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,118.728

' It would be utterly impotent . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,118.729

' There is nothing , then , which has either the will or the power to
oppose this supreme good . BOETHJA-1897-2,118.730

' No ; I think not . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,118.731

' So , then ' , said she , ' it is the supreme good <P_119> which rules
in strength , and graciously disposes all things .
BOETHJA-1897-2,119.732

' Then said I : ' How delighted am I at thy reasonings , and the
conclusion to which thou hast brought them , but most of all at these
very words which thou usest ! BOETHJA-1897-2,119.733

I am now at last ashamed of the folly that so sorely vexed me . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,119.734

' Thou hast heard the story of the giants assailing heaven ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,119.735

but a beneficent strength disposed of them also , as they deserved .
BOETHJA-1897-2,119.736

But shall we submit our arguments to the shock of mutual collision ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,119.737

- it may be from the impact some fair spark of truth may be struck out .
' BOETHJA-1897-2,119.738

' If it be thy good pleasure ' , said I . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,119.739

No one can doubt that God is all-powerful . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,119.740

' No one at all can question it who thinks consistently . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,119.741

' Now , there is nothing which One who is all-powerful can@ @not do . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,119.742

' Nothing . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,119.743

' But can God do evil , then ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,119.744

' Nay ; by no means . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,119.745

' Then , evil is nothing ' , said she , ' since He to whom nothing is
impossible is unable to do evil . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,119.746

' Art thou mocking me ' , said I , ' weaving a labyrinth of tangled
arguments , now seeming to begin where thou didst end , and now to end
where thou didst begin , BOETHJA-1897-2,119.747

or dost thou build up some wondrous circle of Divine simplicity ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,119.748

For , truly , a little before thou didst begin <P_120> with happiness ,
and say it was the supreme good , BOETHJA-1897-2,120.749

and didst declare it to be seated in the supreme Godhead .
BOETHJA-1897-2,120.750

God Himself , too , thou didst affirm to be supreme good and
all-complete happiness ; BOETHJA-1897-2,120.751

and from this thou didst go on to add , as by the way , the proof that
no one would be happy unless he were likewise God .
BOETHJA-1897-2,120.752

Again , thou didst say that the very form of good was the essence both
of God and of happiness , BOETHJA-1897-2,120.753

and didst teach that the absolute One was the absolute good which was
sought by universal nature , BOETHJA-1897-2,120.754

Thou didst maintain , also , that God rules the universe by the
governance of goodness , that all things obey Him willingly , and that
evil has no existence in nature . BOETHJA-1897-2,120.755

And all this thou didst unfold without the help of assumptions from
without , but by inherent and proper proofs , drawing credence one from
the other . BOETHJA-1897-2,120.756

' Then answered she : ' Far is it from me to mock thee ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,120.757

nay , by the blessing of God , whom we lately addressed in prayer , we
have achieved the most important of all objects .
BOETHJA-1897-2,120.758

For such is the form of the Divine essence , that neither can it pass
into things external , nor take up anything external into itself ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,120.759

but , as Parmenides says of it , In body like to a sphere on all sides
perfectly rounded , it rolls the restless orb of the universe , keeping
itself motionless the while . BOETHJA-1897-2,120.760

And if I have also employed reasonings not drawn from without , <P_121>
but lying within the compass of our subject , there is no cause for thee
to marvel , since thou hast learnt on Plato's authority that words ought
to be akin to the matter of which they treat . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,121.761

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_122>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_123>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_124_blank>

<P_125>

{COM:introduction_omitted}

<P_126_blank>

<P_127>

<heading>

BOOK IV BOETHJA-1897-2,127.773

I

<$$heading>

Softly and sweetly Philosophy sang these verses to the end without
losing aught of the dignity of her expression or the seriousness of her
tones ; BOETHJA-1897-2,127.776

then , forasmuch as I was as yet unable to forget my deeply-seated
sorrow , just as she was about to say something further , I broke in
BOETHJA-1897-2,127.777

and cried : ' O thou guide into the way of true light , all that thy
voice hath uttered from the beginning even unto now has manifestly
seemed to me at once divine contemplated in itself , and by the force of
thy arguments placed beyond the possibility of Overthrow .
BOETHJA-1897-2,127.778

Moreover , these truths have not been altogether unfamiliar to me
heretofore , though because of indignation at my wrongs they have for a
time been forgotten . BOETHJA-1897-2,127.779

But , lo ! herein is the very chiefest cause of my grief - that , while
there exists a good ruler of the universe , it is possible that evil
should be at all , still more that it should go unpunished .
BOETHJA-1897-2,127.780

Surely thou must see how deservedly this of itself provokes astonishment
. BOETHJA-1897-2,127.781

But a yet greater marvel follows : BOETHJA-1897-2,127.782

While wickedness reigns and flourishes , virtue not only lacks its
reward , BOETHJA-1897-2,127.783

but is even thrust down and trampled under the feet of the wicked ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,127.784

and suffers punishment in the place of crime . BOETHJA-1897-2,127.785

That this should happen <P_128> under the rule of a God who knows all
thing and can do all things , but wills only the good can@ @not be
sufficiently wondered at nor sufficiently lamented .
BOETHJA-1897-2,128.786

' Then said she : ' It would indeed be infinitely astounding , and of
all monstrous things most horrible , if , as thou esteemest , in the
well ordered home of so great a householder , the bare vessels should be
held in honour , the precious left to neglect . BOETHJA-1897-2,128.787

But it is not so . BOETHJA-1897-2,128.788

For if we hold unshaken those conclusions which we lately reached , thou
shalt learn that , by the will of Him of whose realm we are speaking ,
the good are always strong , the bad always weak and impotent ; that
vices never go unpunished , nor virtues unrewarded ; that good fortune
ever befalls the good , and ill fortune the bad , and much more of the
sort , which shall hush thy murmurings , and stablish thee in the strong
assurance of conviction . BOETHJA-1897-2,128.789

And since by my late instructions thou hast seen the form of happiness ,
hast learnt , too , the seat where it is to be found , all due
preliminaries being discharged , I will now show thee the road which
will lead thee home . BOETHJA-1897-2,128.790

Wings , also , will I fasten to thy mind wherewith thou mayst soar aloft
that so , all disturbing doubts removed , thou mayst return safe to thy
country , under my guidance , in the path I will show thee , and by the
means which I furnish . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,128.791

<P_129>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_130>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_131>

<heading>

GOOD AND ILL FORTUNE BOETHJA-1897-2,131.798

II

<$$heading>

Then said I : ' Verily , wondrous great are thy promises ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,131.801

yet I do not doubt but thou canst make them good :
BOETHJA-1897-2,131.802

only keep me not in suspense after raising such hopes . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,131.803

' Learn , then , first ' , said she , ' how that power ever waits upon
the good , while the bad are left wholly destitute of strength .
BOETHJA-1897-2,131.804

Of these truths the one proves the other ; BOETHJA-1897-2,131.805

for since good and evil are contraries , if it is made plain that good
is power , the feebleness of evil is dearly seen ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,131.806

and , conversely , if the frail nature of evil is made manifest , the
strength of good is thereby known . BOETHJA-1897-2,131.807

However , to win ampler credence for my conclusion , I will pursue both
paths , and draw confirmation for my statements first in one way and
then in the other . BOETHJA-1897-2,131.808

' The carrying out of any human action depends upon two things - to wit
, will and power ; BOETHJA-1897-2,131.809

if either be wanting , nothing can be accomplished .
BOETHJA-1897-2,131.810

For if the will be lacking , no attempt at all is made to do what is not
willed ; whereas if there be no power , the will is all in vain .
BOETHJA-1897-2,131.811

And so , if thou seest any man wishing ; to attain some end , yet
utterly failing to attain it , thou canst not doubt that he lacked the
power of getting what he wished for . BOETHJA-1897-2,131.812

' <P_132> ' Why , certainly not ; BOETHJA-1897-2,132.813

there is no denying it . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.814

' Canst thou , then , doubt that he whom thou seest to have accomplished
what he willed had also the power to accomplish it ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,132.815

' Of course not . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.816

' Then , in respect of what he can accomplish a man is to be reckoned
strong , in respect of what he can@ @not accomplish weak ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,132.817

' Granted ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,132.818

' Then , dost thou remember that , by our former reasonings , it was
concluded that the whole aim of man's will , though the means of pursuit
vary , is set intently upon happiness ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.819

' I do remember that this , too , was proved . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.820

' Dost thou also call to mind how happiness is absolute good , and
therefore that , when happiness is sought , it is good which is in all ;
cases the object of desire ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.821

' Nay , I do not so much call to mind as keep it fixed in my memory . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,132.822

' Then , all men , good and bad alike , with one indistinguishable
purpose strive to reach good ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.823

' Yes , that follows . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.824

' But it is certain that by the attainment of good men become good ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,132.825

' It is . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.826

' Then , do the good attain their object ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.827

' It seems so . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.828

' But if the bad were to attain the good which is <font> their <$$font>
object , they could not be bad ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,132.829

' No . BOETHJA-1897-2,132.830

' Then , since both seek good , but while the one sort attain it , the
other attain it not , is <P_133> there any doubt that the good are
endued with power , while they who are bad are weak ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,133.831

" If any doubt it , he is incapable of reflecting on the nature of
things , or the consequences involved in reasoning . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,133.832

' Again , supposing there are two things to which the same function is
prescribed in the course of nature , and one of these successfully
accomplishes the function by natural action , the other is altogether
incapable of that natural action , instead of which , in a way other
than is agreeable to its nature , it - {COM:amalgam?} I will not say
fulfils its function , but feigns to fulfil it : which of these two
would in thy view be the stronger ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,133.833

' I guess thy meaning , BOETHJA-1897-2,133.834

but I pray thee let me hear thee more at large . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,133.835

' Walking is man's natural motion , is it not ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,133.836

' Certainly . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,133.837

' Thou dost not doubt , I suppose , that it is natural for the feet to
discharge this function ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,133.838

' No ; surely I do not . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,133.839

' Now , if one man who is able to use his feet walks , and another to
whom the natural use of his feet is wanting tries to walk on his hands ,
which of the two wouldst thou rightly esteem the stronger ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,133.840

' Go on ' , said I ; BOETHJA-1897-2,133.841

' no one can question but that he who has the natural capacity has more
strength than he who has it not . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,133.842

' Now , the supreme good is set up as the end alike for the bad and for
the good ; BOETHJA-1897-2,133.843

but the good seeks it through the natural action of the virtues ,
whereas the bad try to attain this <P_134> same good through all manner
of concupiscence , which is not the natural way of attaining good .
BOETHJA-1897-2,134.844

Or dost thou think otherwise ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,134.845

' Nay ; rather , one further consequence is clear to me :
BOETHJA-1897-2,134.846

for from my admissions it must needs follow that the good have power ,
and the bad are impotent . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,134.847

' Thou anticipatest rightly , BOETHJA-1897-2,134.848

and that as physicians reckon is a sign that nature is set working , and
is throwing off the disease . BOETHJA-1897-2,134.849

But , since I see thee so ready at understanding , I will heap proof on
proof . BOETHJA-1897-2,134.850

Look how manifest is the extremity of vicious men's weakness ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,134.851

they can@ @not even reach that goal to which the aim of nature leads and
almost constrains them . BOETHJA-1897-2,134.852

What if they were left without this mighty , this well-nigh irresistible
help of nature's guidance ! BOETHJA-1897-2,134.853

Consider also how momentous is the powerlessness which incapacitates the
wicked . BOETHJA-1897-2,134.854

Not light or trivial are the prizes which they contend for , but which
they can@ @not win or hold ; BOETHJA-1897-2,134.855

nay , their failure concerns the very sum and crown of things .
BOETHJA-1897-2,134.856

Poor wretches ! they fail to compass even that for which they toil day
and night . BOETHJA-1897-2,134.857

Herein also the strength of the good conspicuously appears .
BOETHJA-1897-2,134.858

For just as thou wouldst judge him to be the strongest walker whose legs
could carry him to a point {COM:verse_omitted} <P_135> beyond which no
further advance was possible , so must thou needs account him strong in
power who so attains the end of his desires that nothing further to be
desired lies beyond . Whence follows the obvious conclusion that they
who are wicked are seen likewise to be wholly destitute of strength .
BOETHJA-1897-2,135.859

For why do they forsake virtue and follow vice ? BOETHJA-1897-2,135.860

Is it from ignorance of what is good ? BOETHJA-1897-2,135.861

Well , what is more weak and feeble than the blindness of ignorance ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,135.862

Do they know what they ought to follow , but lust drives them aside out
of the way ? BOETHJA-1897-2,135.863

If it be so , they are still frail by reason of their incontinence ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,135.864

for they can@ @not fight against vice . BOETHJA-1897-2,135.865

Or do they knowingly and wilfully forsake the good and turn aside to
vice ? BOETHJA-1897-2,135.866

Why , at this rate , they not only cease to have power ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,135.867

but cease to be at all . BOETHJA-1897-2,135.868

For they who forsake the common end of all things that are , they
likewise also cease to be at all . BOETHJA-1897-2,135.869

Now , to some it may seem strange that we should assert that the bad who
form the greater part of mankind , do not exist .
BOETHJA-1897-2,135.870

But the fact is so . BOETHJA-1897-2,135.871

I do not , indeed , deny that they who are bad are bad ,
BOETHJA-1897-2,135.872

but that they <font> are <$$font> in an unqualified and absolute sense I
deny . BOETHJA-1897-2,135.873

Just as we call a corpse a dead man , but can@ @not call it simply " man
" , so I would allow the vicious to be bad , BOETHJA-1897-2,135.874

but that they <font> are <$$font> in an absolute sense I can@ @not allow
. BOETHJA-1897-2,135.875

That only <font> is <$$font> which maintains its place and keeps its
nature ; BOETHJA-1897-2,135.876

whatever falls away from this forsakes the existence which is essential
to its nature . BOETHJA-1897-2,135.877

" But " , thou wilt say , " the <P_136> bad have an ability " .
BOETHJA-1897-2,136.878

Nor do I wish to deny it ; BOETHJA-1897-2,136.879

only this ability of theirs comes not from strength , but from impotence
. BOETHJA-1897-2,136.880

For their ability is to do evil , which would have had no efficacy at
all if they could have continued in the performance of good .
BOETHJA-1897-2,136.881

So this ability of theirs proves them still more plainly to have no
power . BOETHJA-1897-2,136.882

For if , as we concluded just now , evil is nothing , 't@ @is clear that
the wicked can effect nothing , since they are only able to do evil . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,136.883

' 'T@ @is evident . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,136.884

' And that thou mayst understand what is the precise force of this power
, we determined , did we not , a while back , that nothing has more
power than supreme good ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,136.885

' We did ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,136.886

' But that same highest good can@ @not do evil ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,136.887

' Certainly not . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,136.888

' Is there anyone , then , who thinks that men are able to do all things
? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,136.889

' None but a madman . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,136.890

' Yet they are able to do evil ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,136.891

' Ay ; would they could not ! ' BOETHJA-1897-2,136.892

' Since , then , he who can do only good is omnipotent , while they who
can do evil also are not omnipotent , it is manifest that they who can
do evil have less power . BOETHJA-1897-2,136.893

There is this also : BOETHJA-1897-2,136.894

we have shown that all power is to be reckoned among things desirable ,
and that all desirable things are referred to good as to a kind of
consummation of their nature . BOETHJA-1897-2,136.895

But the ability to commit crime can@ @not be referred <P_137> to the
good ; BOETHJA-1897-2,137.896

therefore it is not a thing to be desired . BOETHJA-1897-2,137.897

And yet all power is desirable ; BOETHJA-1897-2,137.898

it is clear , then , that ability to do evil is not power . From all
which considerations appeareth the power of the good , and the
indubitable weakness of the bad , BOETHJA-1897-2,137.899

and it is clear that Plato's judgment was true ; BOETHJA-1897-2,137.900

the wise alone are able to do what they would , while the wicked follow
their own hearts' lust , but <font> can <$$font> not accomplish what
they would . BOETHJA-1897-2,137.901

For they go on in their wilfulness fancying they will attain what they
wish for in the paths of delight ; BOETHJA-1897-2,137.902

but they are very far from its attainment , since shameful deeds lead
not to happiness . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,137.903

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_138>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_139>

' Thou seest , then , in what foulness unrighteous deeds are sunk , with
what splendour righteousness shines . Whereby it is manifest that
goodness never lacks its reward , nor crime its punishment .
BOETHJA-1897-2,139.908

For , verily , in all manner of transactions that for the sake of which
the particular action is done may justly be accounted the reward of that
action , even as the wreath for the sake of which the race is run is the
reward offered for running . BOETHJA-1897-2,139.909

Now , we have shown happiness to be that very good for the sake of which
all things are done . BOETHJA-1897-2,139.910

Absolute good , then , is offered as the common prize , as it were , of
all human actions . BOETHJA-1897-2,139.911

But , truly , this is a reward from which it is impossible to separate
the good man , BOETHJA-1897-2,139.912

for one who is without good can@ @not properly be called good at all ;
wherefore righteous dealing never misses its reward .
BOETHJA-1897-2,139.913

Rage the wicked , then , never so violently , the crown shall not fall
from the head of the wise , nor wither . BOETHJA-1897-2,139.914

Verily , other men's unrighteousness can@ @not pluck from righteous
souls their proper glory . BOETHJA-1897-2,139.915

Were the reward in which the soul of the righteous delighteth received
from without , then might it be taken away by him who gave it , or some
other ; BOETHJA-1897-2,139.916

but since it is conferred by his own righteousness , then only will he
lose his prize when he has ceased to be righteous .
BOETHJA-1897-2,139.917

Lastly , since every prize is desired because it is believed <P_140> to
be good , who can account him who possess good to be without reward ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,140.918

And what prize , the fairest and grandest of all !
BOETHJA-1897-2,140.919

For remember the corollary which I chiefly insisted on a little while
back , BOETHJA-1897-2,140.920

and reason thus : BOETHJA-1897-2,140.921

Since absolute good is happiness , 't@ @is clear that all the good must
be happy for the very reason that they are good .
BOETHJA-1897-2,140.922

But it was agreed that those who are happy are gods .
BOETHJA-1897-2,140.923

So , then , the prize of the good is one which no time may impair , no
man's power lessen {TEXT:lesson} , no man's unrighteousness tarnish ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,140.924

't@ @is very Godship . BOETHJA-1897-2,140.925

And this being so , the wise man can@ @not doubt that punishment is
inseparable from the bad . BOETHJA-1897-2,140.926

For since good and bad , and likewise reward and punishment , are
contraries , it necessarily follows that , corresponding to all that we
see accrue as reward of the good , there is some penalty attached as
punishment of evil . BOETHJA-1897-2,140.927

As then , righteousness itself is the reward of the righteous , so
wickedness itself is the punishment of the unrighteous .
BOETHJA-1897-2,140.928

Now , no one who is visited with punishment doubts that he is visited
with evil . BOETHJA-1897-2,140.929

Accordingly , if they were but willing to weigh their own case , could
<font> they <$$font> think themselves free from punishment whom
wickedness , worst of all evils , has not only touched , but deeply
tainted ? BOETHJA-1897-2,140.930

' See , also , from the opposite standpoint - the standpoint of the good
- what a penalty attends upon the wicked , BOETHJA-1897-2,140.931

Thou didst learnt a little since that whatever is is one , and that
unity itself is good . BOETHJA-1897-2,140.932

Accordingly , by this way <P_141> of reckoning , whatever falls away
from goodness ceases to be ; whence it comes to pass that bad cease to
be what they are , while only the outward aspect is still left to show
they have been men . Wherefore , by their perversion to badness , they
have lost their true human nature . BOETHJA-1897-2,141.933

Further , since righteousness alone can raise men above the level of
humanity , it must needs be that unrighteousness degrades below man's
level those whom it has cast out of man's estate .
BOETHJA-1897-2,141.934

It results , then , that thou canst not consider him human whom thou
seest transformed by vice . BOETHJA-1897-2,141.935

The violent despoiler of other men's goods , enflamed with covetousness
, surely resembles a wolf . BOETHJA-1897-2,141.936

A bold and restless spirit , ever wrangling in law-courts , is like some
yelping cur . BOETHJA-1897-2,141.937

The secret schemer , taking pleasure in fraud and stealth , is own
brother to the fox . BOETHJA-1897-2,141.938

The passionate man , phrenzied with rage , we might believe to be
animated with the soul of a lion . BOETHJA-1897-2,141.939

The coward and runaway , afraid where no fear is , may be likened to the
timid deer . BOETHJA-1897-2,141.940

He who is sunk in ignorance and stupidity lives like a dull ass .
BOETHJA-1897-2,141.941

He who is light and inconstant , never holding long to one thing , is
for all the world like a bird . BOETHJA-1897-2,141.942

He who wallows in foul and unclean lusts is sunk in the pleasures of a
filthy hog . BOETHJA-1897-2,141.943

So it comes to pass that he who by forsaking righteousness ceases to be
a man can@ @not pass into a Godlike condition , but actually turns into
a brute beast . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,141.944

<P_142>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_143>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_144_to_151_belongs_to_stage_1>

<P_152>

On this I said : ' I see how there is a happiness and misery founded on
the actual deserts of the righteous and the wicked .
BOETHJA-1897-2,152.951

Nevertheless , I wonder in myself whether there is not some good and
evil in fortune as the vulgar understand it BOETHJA-1897-2,152.952

Surely , no sensible man would rather be exiled , poor and disgraced ,
than dwell prosperously in his own country , powerful , wealthy , and
high in honour . BOETHJA-1897-2,152.953

Indeed , the work of wisdom is more clear and manifest in its operation
when the happiness of rulers is somehow passed on to the people around
them , especially considering that the prison , the law , and the other
pains of legal punishment are properly due only to mischievous citizens
on whose account they were originally instituted .
BOETHJA-1897-2,152.954

Accordingly , I do exceedingly marvel why all this is completely
reversed - why the good are harassed with the penalties due to crime ,
and the bad carry off the rewards of virtue ; BOETHJA-1897-2,152.955

and I long to hear from thee what reason may be found for so unjust a
state of disorder . BOETHJA-1897-2,152.956

For assuredly I should wonder less if I could believe that all things
are the confused result of chance . BOETHJA-1897-2,152.957

But now my belief in God's governance doth add amazement to amazement .
BOETHJA-1897-2,152.958

For , seeing that He sometimes assigns fair fortune to the good and
harsh fortune to the bad , and then again deals harshly with the good ,
and grants to the bad their hearts' desire , how does this differ
<P_153> from chance , unless some reason is discovered for it all ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,153.959

' Nay ; it is not wonderful ' , said she , ' if all should be thought
random and confused when the principle of order is not known .
BOETHJA-1897-2,153.960

And though thou knowest not the causes on which this great system
depends , yet forasmuch as a good ruler governs the world , doubt not
for thy part that all is rightly done . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,153.961

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_154>

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_155_to_166_belongs_to_stage_1>

<P_167>

' Dost thou , then , see the consequence of all that we have said ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,167.967

' Nay ; what consequence ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,167.968

' That absolutely every fortune is good fortune . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,167.969

' And how can that be ? ' said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,167.970

' Attend ' , said she . BOETHJA-1897-2,167.971

' Since every fortune , welcome and unwelcome alike , has for its object
the reward or trial of the good , and the punishing or amending of the
bad , every fortune must be good , since it is either just or useful .
' BOETHJA-1897-2,167.972

' The reasoning is exceeding true , ' said I , ' the conclusion , so
long as I reflect upon the providence and fate of which thou hast taught
me , based on a strong foundation . BOETHJA-1897-2,167.973

Yet , with thy leave , we will count it among those which , just now
thou didst set down as paradoxical . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,167.974

' And why so ? ' , said she . BOETHJA-1897-2,167.975

' Because ordinary speech is apt to assert , and that frequently , that
some men's fortune is bad . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,167.976

' Shall we , then , for a@ @while approach more nearly to the language
of the vulgar , that we may not seem to have departed too far from the
usages of men ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,167.977

' At thy good pleasure ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,167.978

' That which advantageth thou callest good , dost thou not ? '
BOETHJA-1897-2,167.979

' Certainly . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,167.980

' And that which either tries or amends advantageth ?
BOETHJA-1897-2,167.981

' <P_168> ' Granted . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.982

' Is good , then ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.983

' Of course . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.984

' Well , this is <font> their <$$font> case who have attained virtue and
wage war with adversity , or turn from vice and lay hold on the path of
virtue . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.985

' I can@ @not deny it . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.986

' What of the good fortune which is given as reward of the good -
BOETHJA-1897-2,168.987

do the vulgar adjudge it bad ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.988

' Anything but that ; BOETHJA-1897-2,168.989

they deem it to be the best , as indeed it is . '
BOETHJA-1897-2,168.990

' What , then , of that which remains , which , though it is harsh ,
puts the restraint of just punishment on the bad -
BOETHJA-1897-2,168.991

does popular opinion deem it good ? ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.992

' Nay ; of all that can be imagined , it is accounted the most miserable
. ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.993

' Observe , then , if , in following popular opinion , we have not ended
in a conclusion quite paradoxical , ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.994

' How so ? ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-2,168.995

' Why , it results from our admissions that of all who have attained ,
or are advancing in , or are aiming at virtue , the fortune is in every
case good , while for those who remain in their wickedness fortune is
always utterly bad . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.996

' It is true ' , said I ; BOETHJA-1897-2,168.997

' yet no one dare acknowledge it . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,168.998

' Wherefore ' , said she , ' the wise man ought not to take it ill , if
ever he is involved in one of fortune's conflicts , any more than it
becomes a brave soldier to be offended when at any <P_169> time the
trumpet sounds for battle . BOETHJA-1897-2,169.999

The time of trial is the express opportunity for the one to win glory ,
for the other to perfect his wisdom . BOETHJA-1897-2,169.1000

Hence , indeed , virtue gets its name , because , relying on its own
efficacy , it yieldeth not to adversity . BOETHJA-1897-2,169.1001

And ye who have taken your stand on virtue's steep ascent , it is not
for you to be dissolved in delights or enfeebled by pleasure ;
BOETHJA-1897-2,169.1002

ye close in conflict - yea , in conflict most sharp - with all fortune's
vicissitudes , lest ye suffer foul fortune to overwhelm or fair fortune
to corrupt you . BOETHJA-1897-2,169.1003

Hold the mean with all your strength . BOETHJA-1897-2,169.1004

Whatever falls short of this , or goes beyond , is fraught with scorn of
happiness , BOETHJA-1897-2,169.1005

and misses the reward of toil . BOETHJA-1897-2,169.1006

It rests with you to make your fortune what you will .
BOETHJA-1897-2,169.1007

Verily , every harsh-seeming fortune , unless it either disciplines or
amends , is punishment . ' BOETHJA-1897-2,169.1008

{COM:verse_omitted}

