<BEGIN_boethja-1897-1>

<P_95>

<heading>

IX

<$$heading>

' This much may well suffice to set forth the form of false happiness ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,95.6

if this is now clear to thine eyes , the next step is to show what true
happiness is ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,95.7

' Indeed ' , said I , ' I see clearly enough that neither is
independence to be found in wealth , nor power in sovereignty , nor
reverence in dignities , nor fame in glory , nor true joy in pleasures '
. BOETHJA-1897-1,95.8

' Hast thou discerned also the causes why this is so ? '
BOETHJA-1897-1,95.9

' I seem to have some inkling , BOETHJA-1897-1,95.10

but I should like to learn more at large from thee ' .
BOETHJA-1897-1,95.11

' Why , truly the reason is hard at hand . BOETHJA-1897-1,95.12

<font> That which is simple and indivisible by nature human error
separates , <$$font> and transforms from the true and perfect to the
false and imperfect . BOETHJA-1897-1,95.13

Dost thou imagine that which lacketh nothing can want power ? '
BOETHJA-1897-1,95.14

' Certainly not ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,95.15

' Right ; for if there is any feebleness of strength in anything , in
this there must necessarily be need of external protection ' .
BOETHJA-1897-1,95.16

' That is so ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,95.17

' Accordingly , the nature of independence and power is one and the same
' . BOETHJA-1897-1,95.18

' It seems so ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,95.19

' Well , but dost {COM:sic} think that anything of such a nature as this
can be looked upon with contempt , BOETHJA-1897-1,95.20

or is it rather of all things most worthy of veneration ? '
BOETHJA-1897-1,95.21

<P_96>

' Nay ; there can be no doubt as to that ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,96.23

' Let us , then , add reverence to independence and power , and conclude
these three to be one ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,96.24

' We must if we will acknowledge the truth ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,96.25

' Thinkest thou , then , this combination of qualities to be obscure and
without distinction , or rather famous in all renown ?
BOETHJA-1897-1,96.26

Just consider : can that want renown which has been agreed to be lacking
in nothing , to be supreme in power , and right worthy of honour , for
the reason that it can@ @not bestow this upon itself , and so comes to
appear somewhat poor in esteem ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,96.27

' I can@ @not but acknowledge that , being what it is , this union of
qualities is also right famous ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,96.28

' It follows , then , that we must admit that renown is not different
from the other three ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,96.29

' It does ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,96.30

' That , then , which needs nothing outside itself , which can
accomplish all things in its own strength , which enjoys fame and
compels reverence , must not this evidently be also fully crowned with
joy ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,96.31

' In sooth , I can@ @not conceive ' , said I , ' how any sadness can
find entrance into such a state ; wherefore I must needs acknowledge it
full of joy - at least , if our former conclusions are to hold ' .
BOETHJA-1897-1,96.32

' Then , for the same reasons , this also is necessary - that
independence , power , renown , reverence , and sweetness of delight ,
are different only in name , but in substance differ no wise one from
the other ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,96.33

' It is ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,96.34

<P_97>

' This , then , which is one , and simple by nature , human perversity
separates , BOETHJA-1897-1,97.36

and , in trying to win a part of that which has no parts , fails to
attain not only that portion <paren> since there are no portions
<$$paren> , but also the whole , to which it does not dream of aspiring
. ' BOETHJA-1897-1,97.37

' How so ? ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,97.38

' He who , to escape want , seeks riches , gives himself no concern
about power ; BOETHJA-1897-1,97.39

he prefers a mean and low estate , BOETHJA-1897-1,97.40

and also denies himself many pleasures dear to nature to avoid losing
the money which he has gained . BOETHJA-1897-1,97.41

But at this rate he does not even attain to independence - a weakling
void of strength , vexed by distresses , mean and despised , and buried
in obscurity . BOETHJA-1897-1,97.42

He , again , who thirsts alone for power squanders his wealth ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,97.43

despises pleasure , BOETHJA-1897-1,97.44

and thinks fame and rank alike worthless without power .
BOETHJA-1897-1,97.45

But thou seest in how many ways his state also is defective .
BOETHJA-1897-1,97.46

Sometimes it happens that he lacks necessaries , that he is gnawed by
anxieties , and , since he can@ @not rid himself of these inconveniences
, even ceases to have that power which was his whole end and aim .
BOETHJA-1897-1,97.47

In like manner may we cast up the reckoning in case of rank , of glory ,
or of pleasure . BOETHJA-1897-1,97.48

For since each one of these severally is identical with the rest ,
whosoever seeks any one of them without the others does not even lay
hold of that one which he makes his aim . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,97.49

' Well ' , said I , ' what then ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,97.50

' Suppose anyone desire to obtain them together , BOETHJA-1897-1,97.51

he does indeed wish for happiness as a <P_98> whole ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,98.52

but will he find it in these things which , as we have proved , are
unable to bestow what they promise ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,98.53

' Nay ; by no means ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,98.54

' Then , happiness must certainly not be sought in these things which
severally are believed to afford some one of the blessings most to be
desired . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,98.55

' They must not , I admit . BOETHJA-1897-1,98.56

No conclusion could be more true . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,98.57

' So , then , the form and the causes of false happiness are set before
thine eyes . BOETHJA-1897-1,98.58

Now turn thy gaze to the other side ; there thou wilt straightway see
the true happiness I promised . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,98.59

' Yea , indeed , 't@ @is plain to the blind ' , said I .
BOETHJA-1897-1,98.60

' Thou didst point it out even now in seeking to unfold the causes of
the false . BOETHJA-1897-1,98.61

For , unless I am mistaken , that is true and perfect happiness which
crowns one with the union of independence , power , reverence , renown ,
and joy . BOETHJA-1897-1,98.62

And to prove to thee with how deep an insight I have listened - since
all these are the same - that which can truly bestow one of them I know
to be without doubt full and complete happiness . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,98.63

' Happy art thou , my scholar , in this thy conviction ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,98.64

only one thing shouldst thou add . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,98.65

' What is that ? ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,98.66

' Is there aught , thinkest thou , amid these mortal and perishable
things which can produce a state such as this ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,98.67

' Nay , surely not ; BOETHJA-1897-1,98.68

and this thou hast so <P_99> amply demonstrated that no word more is
needed . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,99.69

' Well , then , these things seem to give to mortals shadows of the true
good , or some kind of imperfect good ; BOETHJA-1897-1,99.70

but the true and perfect good they can@ @not bestow . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,99.71

' Even so ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,99.72

' Since , then , thou hast learnt what that true happiness is , and what
men falsely call happiness , it now remains that thou shouldst learn
from what source to seek this . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,99.73

' Yes ; to this I have long been eagerly looking forward . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,99.74

' Well , since , as Plato maintains in the <font> Timaeus , <$$font> we
ought even in the most trivial matters to implore the Divine protection
, what thinkest thou should we now do in order to deserve to find the
seat of that highest good ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,99.75

' We must invoke the Father of all things ' , said I ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,99.76

' for without this no enterprise sets out from a right beginning . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,99.77

' Thou sayest well ' , said she ; BOETHJA-1897-1,99.78

and forthwith lifted up her voice BOETHJA-1897-1,99.79

and sang : {COM:verse_omitted} BOETHJA-1897-1,99.80

<P_100_contains_only_verse>

<P_101_contains_only_verse>

<P_102>

<heading>

X

<$$heading>

' Since now thou hast seen what is the form of the imperfect good , and
what the form of the perfect also , me@ @thinks I should next show in
what manner this perfection of felicity is built up .
BOETHJA-1897-1,102.87

And here I conceive it proper to inquire , first , whether any
excellence , such as thou hast lately defined , can exist in the nature
of things , lest we be deceived by an empty fiction of thought to which
no true reality answers . BOETHJA-1897-1,102.88

But it can@ @not be denied that such does exist , and is , as it were ,
the source of all things good . BOETHJA-1897-1,102.89

For everything which is called imperfect is spoken of as imperfect by
reason of the privation of some perfection ; BOETHJA-1897-1,102.90

so it comes to pass that , whenever imperfection is found in any
particular , there must necessarily be a perfection in respect of that
particular also . BOETHJA-1897-1,102.91

For were there no such perfection , it is utterly inconceivable how that
so-called imperfection {COM:font_change_around_"im"} should come into
existence . BOETHJA-1897-1,102.92

Nature does not make a beginning with things mutilated and imperfect ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,102.93

she starts with what is whole and perfect , BOETHJA-1897-1,102.94

and falls away later to these feeble and inferior productions .
BOETHJA-1897-1,102.95

So if there is , as we showed before , a happiness of a frail and
imperfect kind , it can@ @not be doubted but there is also a happiness
substantial and perfect . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,102.96

' Most true is thy conclusion , and most sure ' , said I .
BOETHJA-1897-1,102.97

' Next to consider where the dwelling-place <P_103> of this happiness
may be . BOETHJA-1897-1,103.98

The common belief of all mankind agrees that God , the supreme of all
things , is good . BOETHJA-1897-1,103.99

For since nothing can be imagined better than God , how can we doubt Him
to be good than whom there is nothing better ? BOETHJA-1897-1,103.100

Now , reason shows God to be good in such wise as to prove that in Him
is perfect good . BOETHJA-1897-1,103.101

For were it not so , He would not be supreme of all things ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,103.102

for there would be something else more excellent , possessed of perfect
good , which would seem to have the advantage in priority and dignity ,
since it has clearly appeared that all perfect things are prior to those
less complete . Wherefore , lest we fall into an infinite regression ,
we must acknowledge the supreme God to be full of supreme and perfect
good . BOETHJA-1897-1,103.103

But we have determined that true happiness is the perfect good ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,103.104

therefore true happiness must dwell in the supreme Deity . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,103.105

' I accept thy reasonings ' , said I ; BOETHJA-1897-1,103.106

' they can@ @not in any wise be disputed . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,103.107

' But , come , see how strictly and incontrovertibly thou mayst prove
this our assertion that the supreme Godhead hath fullest possession of
the highest good . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,103.108

' In what way , pray ? ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,103.109

' Do not rashly suppose that He who is the Father of all things hath
received that highest good of which He is said to be possessed either
from some external source , or hath it as a natural endowment in such
sort that thou mightest consider the essence of the happiness <P_104>
possessed , and of the God who possesses it , distinct and different .
BOETHJA-1897-1,104.110

For if thou deemest it received from without , thou mayst esteem that
which gives more excellent than that which has received .
BOETHJA-1897-1,104.111

But Him we most worthily acknowledge to be the most supremely excellent
of all things . BOETHJA-1897-1,104.112

If , however , it is in Him by nature , yet is logically distinct , the
thought is inconceivable , since we are speaking of God , who is supreme
of all things . BOETHJA-1897-1,104.113

Who was there to join these distinct essences ? BOETHJA-1897-1,104.114

Finally , when one thing is different from another , the things so
conceived as distinct can@ @not be identical . BOETHJA-1897-1,104.115

Therefore that which of its own nature is distinct from the highest good
is not itself the highest good - an impious thought of Him than whom ,
't@ @is plain , nothing can be more excellent . BOETHJA-1897-1,104.116

For universally nothing can be better in nature than the source from
which it has come ; BOETHJA-1897-1,104.117

therefore on most true grounds of reason would I conclude that which is
the source of all things to be in its own essence the highest good . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,104.118

' And most justly ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,104.119

' But the highest good has been admitted to be happiness . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,104.120

' Yes . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,104.121

' Then ' , said she , ' it is necessary to acknowledge that God is very
happiness . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,104.122

' Yes ' , said I ; BOETHJA-1897-1,104.123

' I can@ @not gainsay my former admissions , BOETHJA-1897-1,104.124

and I see clearly that this is a necessary inference therefrom . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,104.125

' Reflect , also ' , said she , ' whether the same conclusion is not
further confirmed by considering <P_105> that there can@ @not be two
supreme goods distinct one from the other . BOETHJA-1897-1,105.126

For the goods which are different clearly can@ @not be severally each
what the other is : wherefore neither of the two can be perfect , since
to either the other is wanting ; BOETHJA-1897-1,105.127

but since it is not perfect , it can@ @not manifestly be the supreme
good . BOETHJA-1897-1,105.128

By no means , then , can goods which are supreme be different one from
the other . BOETHJA-1897-1,105.129

But we have concluded that both happiness and God are the supreme good ;
wherefore that which is the highest Divinity must also itself
necessarily be supreme happiness ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,105.130

' No conclusion ' , said I , ' could be truer to fact , nor more soundly
reasoned out , nor more worthy of God . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,105.131

' Then further ' , said she , ' just as geometricians are wont to draw
inferences from their demonstrations to which they give the name "
deductions " , so will I add here a sort of corollary .
BOETHJA-1897-1,105.132

For since men become happy by the acquisition of happiness , while
happiness is very Godship , it is manifest that they become happy by the
acquisition of Godship . BOETHJA-1897-1,105.133

But as by the acquisition of justice men become just , and wise by the
acquisition of wisdom , so by parity of reasoning by acquiring Godship
they must of necessity become gods . BOETHJA-1897-1,105.134

So every man who is happy is a god ; BOETHJA-1897-1,105.135

and though in nature God is One only , yet there is nothing to hinder
that very many should be gods by participation in that nature . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,105.136

' A fair conclusion , and a precious ' , said I , <P_106> ' deduction or
corollary , by whichever name thou wilt call it . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,106.137

' And yet ' , said she , ' not one whit fairer than this which reason
persuades us to add . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,106.138

' Why , what ? ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,106.139

' Why , seeing happiness has many particulars included under it , should
all these be regarded as forming one body of happiness , as it were ,
made up of various parts , BOETHJA-1897-1,106.140

or is there some one of them which forms the full essence of happiness ,
while all the rest are relative to this ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,106.141

' I would thou wouldst unfold the whole matter to me at large . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,106.142

' We judge happiness to be good , do we not ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,106.143

' Yea , the supreme good . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,106.144

' And this superlative applies to all ; BOETHJA-1897-1,106.145

for this same happiness is adjudged to be the completest independence ,
the highest power , reverence , renown , and pleasure . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,106.146

' What then ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,106.147

' Are all these goods - independence , power , and the rest - to be
deemed members of happiness , as it were , BOETHJA-1897-1,106.148

or are they all relative to good as to their summit and crown ? '
BOETHJA-1897-1,106.149

' I understand the problem , BOETHJA-1897-1,106.150

but I desire to hear how thou wouldst solve it . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,106.151

' Well , then , listen to the determination of the matter .
BOETHJA-1897-1,106.152

Were all these members composing happiness , they would differ severally
one from the other . BOETHJA-1897-1,106.153

For this is the nature of parts - that by their difference they compose
one body . BOETHJA-1897-1,106.154

All these , however , have been proved to be the same ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,106.155

therefore they can@ @not possibly be <P_107> members ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,107.156

otherwise happiness will seem to be built up out of one member , which
can@ @not be . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,107.157

' There can be no doubt as to that ' , said I ; BOETHJA-1897-1,107.158

' but I am impatient to hear what remains . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,107.159

' Why , it is manifest that all the others are relative to the good .
BOETHJA-1897-1,107.160

For the very reason why independence is sought is that it is judged good
, and so power also , because it is believed to be good .
BOETHJA-1897-1,107.161

The same , too , may be supposed of reverence , of renown , and of
pleasant delight . BOETHJA-1897-1,107.162

Good , then , is the sum and source of all desirable things .
BOETHJA-1897-1,107.163

That which has not in itself any good , either in reality or in
semblance , can in no wise be desired . BOETHJA-1897-1,107.164

Contrariwise , even things which by nature are not good are desired as
if they were truly good , if they seem to be so . Whereby it comes to
pass that goodness is rightly believed to be the sum and hinge and cause
of all things desirable . BOETHJA-1897-1,107.165

Now , that for the sake of which anything is desired itself seems to be
most wished for . BOETHJA-1897-1,107.166

For instance , if anyone wishes to ride for the sake of health , he does
not so much wish for the exercise of riding as the benefit of his health
. BOETHJA-1897-1,107.167

Since , then , all things are sought for the sake of the good , it is
not these so much as good itself that is sought by all .
BOETHJA-1897-1,107.168

But that on account of which all other things are wished for was , we
agreed , happiness ; wherefore thus also it appears that it is happiness
alone which is sought . From all which it is transparently clear that
the essence of absolute good and of happiness is one and the same . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,107.169

<P_108>

' I can@ @not see how anyone can dissent from these conclusions . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,108.171

' But we have also proved that God and true happiness are one and the
same . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,108.172

' Yes ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,108.173

' Then we can safely conclude , also , that God's essence is seated in
absolute good , and nowhere else . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,108.174

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_109_contains_only_verse>

<P_110>

<heading>

XI

<$$heading>

' I quite agree ' , said I , BOETHJA-1897-1,110.181

' truly all thy reasonings hold admirably together . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,110.182

Then said she : ' What value wouldst thou put upon the boon shouldst
thou come to the knowledge of the absolute good ? '
BOETHJA-1897-1,110.183

' Oh , an infinite ' , said I , ' if only I were so blest as to learn to
know God also who is the good . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,110.184

' Yet this will I make clear to thee on truest grounds of reason , if
only our recent conclusions stand fast . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,110.185

' They will . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,110.186

' Have we not shown that those things which most men desire are not true
and perfect good precisely for this cause - that they differ severally
one from another , and , seeing that one is wanting to another , they
can@ @not bestow full and absolute good ; but that they become the true
good when they are gathered , as it were , into one form and agency , so
that that which is independence is likewise power , reverence , renown ,
and pleasant delight , and unless they are all one and the same , they
have no claim to be counted among things desirable ? '
BOETHJA-1897-1,110.187

' Yes ; this was clearly proved , BOETHJA-1897-1,110.188

and can@ @not in any wise be doubted . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,110.189

' Now , when things are far from being good while they are different ,
but become good as soon as they are one , is it not true that these
become good by acquiring unity ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,110.190

<P_111>

' It seems so ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,111.192

' But dost not thou allow that all which is good is good by
participation in goodness ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,111.193

' It is . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,111.194

' Then , thou must on similar grounds admit that unity and goodness are
the same ; BOETHJA-1897-1,111.195

for when the effects of things in their natural working differ not ,
their essence is one and the same . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,111.196

' There is no denying it . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,111.197

' Now , dost thou know , ' said she , ' that all which is abides and
subsists so long as it continues one , but so soon as it ceases to be
one it perishes and falls to pieces ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,111.198

' In what way ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,111.199

' Why , take animals , for example . BOETHJA-1897-1,111.200

When soul and body come together , and continue in one , this is , we
say , a living creature ; BOETHJA-1897-1,111.201

but when this unity is broken by the separation of these two , the
creature dies , BOETHJA-1897-1,111.202

and is clearly no longer living . BOETHJA-1897-1,111.203

The body also , while it remains in one form by the joining together of
its members , presents a human appearance ; BOETHJA-1897-1,111.204

but if the separation and dispersal of the parts break up the body's
unity , it ceases to be what it was . BOETHJA-1897-1,111.205

And if we extend our survey to all other things , without doubt it will
manifestly appear that each several thing subsists while it is one , but
when it ceases to be one perishes . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,111.206

' Yes ; when I consider further , I see it to be even as thou sayest .
' BOETHJA-1897-1,111.207

' Well , is there aught ' , said she , ' which , in so far as it acts
conformably to nature , abandons <P_112> the wish for life , and desires
to come to death and corruption ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,112.208

' Looking to living creatures , which have some faults of choice , I
find none that , without external compulsion , forgo the will to live ,
and of their own accord hasten to destruction . BOETHJA-1897-1,112.209

For every creature diligently pursues the end of self-preservation ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,112.210

and shuns death and destruction . BOETHJA-1897-1,112.211

As to herbs and trees , and inanimate things generally , I am altogether
in doubt what to think . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,112.212

' And yet there is no possibility of question about this either , since
thou seest how herbs and trees grow in places suitable for them where ,
as far as their nature admits , they can@ @not quickly wither and die .
BOETHJA-1897-1,112.213

Some spring up in the plains , others in the mountains ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,112.214

some grow in marshes , BOETHJA-1897-1,112.215

others cling to rocks BOETHJA-1897-1,112.216

and others , again , find a fertile soil in the barren sands ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,112.217

and if you try to transplant these elsewhere , they wither away .
BOETHJA-1897-1,112.218

Nature gives to each the soil that suits it , BOETHJA-1897-1,112.219

and uses her diligence to prevent any of them dying , so long as it is
possible for them to continue alive . BOETHJA-1897-1,112.220

Why do they all draw their nourishment from roots as from a mouth dipped
into the earth , and distribute the strong bark over the pith ?
BOETHJA-1897-1,112.221

Why are all the softer parts like the pith deeply encased within , while
the external parts have the strong texture of wood , and outside of all
is the bark to resist the weather's inclemency like a champion stout in
endurance ? BOETHJA-1897-1,112.222

Again how great is nature's diligence to secure <P_113> universal
propagation by multiplying seed ! BOETHJA-1897-1,113.223

Who does not know all these to be contrivances , not only for the
present maintenance of a species , but for its lasting continuance ,
generation after generation , for ever ? BOETHJA-1897-1,113.224

And do not also the things believed inanimate on like grounds of reason
seek each what is proper to itself ? BOETHJA-1897-1,113.225

Why do the flames shoot lightly upward , while the earth presses
downward with its weight , if it is not that these motions and
situations are suitable to their respective natures ?
BOETHJA-1897-1,113.226

Moreover , each several thing is preserved by that which is agreeable to
its nature , even as it is destroyed by things inimical .
BOETHJA-1897-1,113.227

Things solid like stones resist disintegration by the close adhesion of
their parts . BOETHJA-1897-1,113.228

Things fluid like air and water yield easily to what divides them ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,113.229

but swiftly flow back BOETHJA-1897-1,113.230

and mingle with those parts from which they have been severed , while
fire , again , refuses to be cut at all . BOETHJA-1897-1,113.231

And we are not now treating of the voluntary motions of an intelligent
soul , but of the drift of nature . BOETHJA-1897-1,113.232

Even so is it that we digest our food without thinking about it , and
draw our breath unconsciously in sleep ; BOETHJA-1897-1,113.233

nay , even in living creatures the love of life cometh not of conscious
will , but from the principles of nature . BOETHJA-1897-1,113.234

For oftentimes in the stress of circumstances will chooses the death
which nature shrinks from ; BOETHJA-1897-1,113.235

and contrarily , in spite of natural appetite , will restrains that work
of reproduction by which alone the persistence of perishable creatures
is maintained . So entirely does this love <P_114> of self come from
drift of nature , not from animal impulse . BOETHJA-1897-1,114.236

Providence has furnished things with this most cogent reason for
continuance : BOETHJA-1897-1,114.237

they must desire life , so long as it is naturally possible for them to
continue living . Wherefore in no way mayst thou doubt but that things
naturally aim at continuance of existence , and shun destruction . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,114.238

' I confess ' , said I , ' that what I lately thought uncertain , I now
perceive to be indubitably clear . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,114.239

' Now , that which seeks to subsist and continue desires to be one ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,114.240

for if its oneness be gone , its very existence can@ @not continue . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,114.241

' True ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,114.242

' All things , then , desire to be one . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,114.243

' I agree ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,114.244

' But we have proved that one is the very same thing as good . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,114.245

' We have . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,114.246

' All things , then , seek the good ; BOETHJA-1897-1,114.247

indeed , you may express the fact by defining good as that which all
desire . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,114.248

' Nothing could be more truly thought out . BOETHJA-1897-1,114.249

Either there is no single end to which all things are relative ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,114.250

or else the end to which all things universally hasten must be the
highest good of all . BOETHJA-1897-1,114.251

' Then she : ' Exceedingly do I rejoice , dear pupil ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,114.252

thine eye is now fixed on the very central mark of truth .
BOETHJA-1897-1,114.253

Moreover , herein is revealed that of which thou didst erstwhile profess
thyself ignorant . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,114.254

<P_115>

' What is that ? ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,115.256

' The end and aim of the whole universe . BOETHJA-1897-1,115.257

Surely it is that which is desired of all : BOETHJA-1897-1,115.258

and , since we have concluded the good to be such , we ought to
acknowledge the end and aim of the whole universe to be " the good " .
' {COM:verse_omitted} BOETHJA-1897-1,115.259

<P_144>

<heading>

IV

<$$heading>

Then said I : ' This is very true . BOETHJA-1897-1,144.264

I see that the vicious , though they keep the outward form of man , are
rightly said to be changed into beasts in respect of their spiritual
nature ; BOETHJA-1897-1,144.265

but , inasmuch as their cruel and polluted minds vent their rage in the
destruction of the good , I would this licence were not permitted to
them . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,144.266

' Nor is it ' , said she , ' as shall be shown in the fitting place .
BOETHJA-1897-1,144.267

Yet if that licence which thou believest to be permitted to them were
taken away , the punishment of the wicked would be in great part
remitted . BOETHJA-1897-1,144.268

For verily incredible as it may seem to some , it needs must be that the
bad are more unfortunate when they have accomplished their desire than
if they are unable to get them fulfilled . BOETHJA-1897-1,144.269

If it is wretched to will evil , to have been able to accomplish evil is
more wretched ; BOETHJA-1897-1,144.270

for without the power the wretched will would fail of effect .
BOETHJA-1897-1,144.271

Accordingly , those whom thou seest to will , to be able to accomplish ,
and to accomplish crime , must needs be the victims of a threefold
wretchedness , since each one of these states has its own measure of
wretchedness . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,144.272

' Yes ' , said I ; ' yet I earnestly wish they might speedily be quit of
this misfortune by losing the ability to accomplish crime . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,144.273

' They will lose it ' , said she , ' sooner than perchance thou wishest
, or they themselves <P_145> think likely ; since , verily , within the
narrow bounds of our brief life there is nothing so late in coming that
anyone , least of all an immortal spirit , should deem it long to wait
for . BOETHJA-1897-1,145.274

Their great expectations , the lofty fabric of their crimes , is oft
overthrown by a sudden and unlooked-for ending , BOETHJA-1897-1,145.275

and this but sets a limit to their misery . BOETHJA-1897-1,145.276

For if wickedness makes men wretched , he is necessarily more wretched
who is wicked for a longer time ; BOETHJA-1897-1,145.277

and were it not that death , at all events , puts an end to the evil
doings of the wicked , I should account them wretched to the last degree
. BOETHJA-1897-1,145.278

Indeed , if we have formed true conclusions about the ill fortune of
wickedness , that wretchedness is plainly infinite which is doomed to be
eternal . BOETHJA-1897-1,145.279

' Then said I : ' A wonderful inference , and difficult to grant ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,145.280

but I see that it agrees entirely with our previous conclusions . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,145.281

' Thou art right ' , said she ; BOETHJA-1897-1,145.282

' but if anyone finds it hard to admit the conclusion , he ought in
fairness either to prove some falsity in the premises , or to show that
the combination of propositions does not adequately enforce the
necessity of the conclusion ; BOETHJA-1897-1,145.283

otherwise , if the premises be granted , nothing whatever can be said
against the inference of the conclusion . BOETHJA-1897-1,145.284

And here is another statement which seems not less wonderful , but on
the premises assumed is equally necessary . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,145.285

' What is that ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,145.286

' The wicked are happier in undergoing punishment than if no penalty of
justice chasten them . BOETHJA-1897-1,145.287

<P_146>

And I am not now meaning what might occur to anyone - that bad character
is amended by retribution , and is brought into the right path by the
terror of punishment , or that it serves as an example to warn others to
avoid transgression ; BOETHJA-1897-1,146.289

but I believe that in another way the wicked are more unfortunate when
they go unpunished , even though no account be taken of amendment , and
no regard be paid to example . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,146.290

' Why , what other way is there beside these ? ' , said I .
BOETHJA-1897-1,146.291

Then said she : ' Have we not agreed that the good are happy , and the
evil wretched ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,146.292

' Yes ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,146.293

' Now , if ' , said she , ' to one in affliction there be given along
with his misery some good thing is he not happier than one whose misery
is misery pure and simple without admixture of any good ? '
BOETHJA-1897-1,146.294

' It would seem so . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,146.295

' But if to one thus wretched , one destitute of all good , some further
evil be added beside those which make him wretched , is he not to be
judged far more unhappy than he whose ill fortune is alleviated by some
share of good ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,146.296

' It could scarcely be otherwise . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,146.297

' Surely , then , the wicked , when they are punished , have a good
thing added to them to wit , the punishment which by the law of justice
is good ; BOETHJA-1897-1,146.298

and likewise , when they escape punishment , a new evil attaches to them
in the very freedom from punishment which thou hast rightly acknowledged
to be an evil in the case of the unrighteous . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,146.299

<P_147>

' I can@ @not deny it ' . BOETHJA-1897-1,147.301

' Then , the wicked are far more unhappy when indulged with an unjust
freedom from punishment than when punished by a just retribution .
BOETHJA-1897-1,147.302

Now , it is manifest that it is just for the wicked to be punished , and
for them to escape unpunished is unjust . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,147.303

' Why , who would venture to deny it ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,147.304

' This , too , no one can possibly deny - that all which is just is good
, and , conversely , all which is unjust is bad . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,147.305

Then I answered : ' These inferences do indeed follow from what we
lately concluded ; BOETHJA-1897-1,147.306

but tell me ' , said I , ' dost thou take no account of the punishment
of the soul after the death of the body ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,147.307

' Nay , truly ' , said she , ' great are these penalties , some of them
inflicted , I imagine , in the severity of retribution , others in the
mercy of purification . BOETHJA-1897-1,147.308

But it is not my present purpose to speak of these .
BOETHJA-1897-1,147.309

So far , my aim hath been to make thee recognize that the power of the
bad which shocked thee so exceedingly is no power ; to make thee see
that those of whose freedom from punishment thou didst complain are
never without the proper penalties of their unrighteousness ; to teach
thee that the licence which thou prayedst might soon come to an end is
not long-enduring ; that it would be more unhappy if it lasted longer ,
most unhappy of all if it lasted for ever ; thereafter that the
unrighteous are more wretched if unjustly let go without punishment than
if <P_148> punished by a just retribution - from which point of view it
follows that the wicked are afflicted with more severe penalties just
when they are supposed to escape punishment . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,148.310

Then said I : ' While I follow thy reasonings , I am deeply impressed
with their truth ; BOETHJA-1897-1,148.311

but if I turn to the common convictions of men , I find few who will
even listen to such arguments ; let alone admit them to be credible . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,148.312

' True ' , said she ; BOETHJA-1897-1,148.313

' they can@ @not lift eyes accustomed to darkness to the light of clear
truth , BOETHJA-1897-1,148.314

and are like those birds whose vision night illumines and day blinds ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,148.315

for while they regard , not the order of the universe , but their own
dispositions of mind , they think the licence to commit crime , and the
escape from punishment , to be fortunate . BOETHJA-1897-1,148.316

But mark the ordinance of eternal law . BOETHJA-1897-1,148.317

Hast thou fashioned thy soul to the likeness of the better , thou hast
no need of a judge to award the prize - BOETHJA-1897-1,148.318

by thine own act hast thou raised thyself in the scale of excellence ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,148.319

hast thou perverted thy affections to baser things ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,148.320

look not for punishment from one without thee - BOETHJA-1897-1,148.321

thine own act hath degraded thee , and thrust thee down .
BOETHJA-1897-1,148.322

Even so , if alternately thou turn thy gaze upon the vile earth and upon
the heavens , though all without thee stand still , by the mere laws of
sight thou seemest now sunk in the mire , now soaring among the stars .
BOETHJA-1897-1,148.323

But the common herd regards not these things . BOETHJA-1897-1,148.324

What , then ? BOETHJA-1897-1,148.325

Shall we go over to those whom we have shown to be like brute beasts ?
BOETHJA-1897-1,148.326

Why , suppose , now , one who <P_149> had quite lost his sight should
likewise forget that he had ever possessed the faculty of vision , and
should imagine that nothing was wanting in him to human perfection ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,149.327

should we deem those who saw as well as ever blind ?
BOETHJA-1897-1,149.328

Why , they will not even assent to this , either - that they who do
wrong are more wretched than those who suffer wrong , though the proof
of this rests on grounds of reason no less strong . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,149.329

' Let me hear these same reasons ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,149.330

' Wouldst thou deny that every wicked man deserves punishment ? '
BOETHJA-1897-1,149.331

' I would not , certainly . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,149.332

' And that those who are wicked are unhappy is clear in manifold ways ?
' BOETHJA-1897-1,149.333

' Yes ' , I replied . BOETHJA-1897-1,149.334

' Thou dost not doubt , then , that those who deserve punishment are
wretched ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,149.335

' Agreed ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,149.336

' So , then , if thou wert sitting in judgment , on whom wouldst thou
decree the infliction of punishment - on him who had done the wrong , or
on him who had suffered it ? ' BOETHJA-1897-1,149.337

' Without doubt , I would compensate the sufferer at the cost of the
doer of the wrong . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,149.338

' Then , the injurer would seem more wretched than the injured ? '
BOETHJA-1897-1,149.339

' Yes ; it follows . BOETHJA-1897-1,149.340

And so for this and other reasons resting on the same ground , inasmuch
as baseness of its own nature makes men wretched , it is plain that a
wrong involves the misery of the doer , not of the sufferer . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,149.341

' And yet ' , says she , ' the practice of the <P_150> law-courts is
just the opposite : BOETHJA-1897-1,150.342

advocates try to arouse the commiseration of the judges for those who
have endured some grievous and cruel wrong ; whereas pity is rather due
to the criminal , who ought to be brought to the judgment-seat by his
accusers in a spirit not of anger , but of compassion and kindness , as
a sick man to the physician , to have the ulcer of his fault cut away by
punishment . Whereby , the business of the advocate would either wholly
come to a standstill , or , did men prefer to make it serviceable to
mankind , would be restricted to the practice of accusation .
BOETHJA-1897-1,150.343

The wicked themselves also , if through some chink or cranny they were
permitted to behold the virtue they have forsaken , and were to see that
by the pains of punishment they would rid themselves of the uncleanness
of their vices , and win in exchange the recompense of righteousness ,
they would no longer think these sufferings pains ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,150.344

they would refuse the help of advocates , BOETHJA-1897-1,150.345

and would commit themselves wholly into the hands of their accusers and
judges . Whence it comes to pass that for the wise no place is left for
hatred ; BOETHJA-1897-1,150.346

only the most foolish would hate the good , BOETHJA-1897-1,150.347

and to hate the bad is unreasonable . BOETHJA-1897-1,150.348

For if vicious propensity is , as it were , a disease of the soul like
bodily sickness , even as we account the sick in body by no means
deserving of hate , but rather of pity , so , and much more , should
they be pitied whose minds are assailed by wickedness , which is more
frightful than any sickness . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,150.349

<P_155>

<heading>

VI

<$$heading>

' True ' , said I ; BOETHJA-1897-1,155.354

' but , since it is thy office to unfold the hidden cause of things ,
and explain principles veiled in darkness , inform me , I pray thee , of
thine own conclusions in this matter , since the marvel of it is what
more than aught else disturbs my mind . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,155.355

A smile played one moment upon her lips as she replied : ' Thou callest
me to the greatest of all subjects of inquiry , a task for which the
most exhaustive treatment barely suffices . BOETHJA-1897-1,155.356

Such is its nature that , as fast as one doubt is cut away , innumerable
others spring up like Hydra's heads , BOETHJA-1897-1,155.357

nor could we set any limit to their renewal did we not apply the mind's
living fire to suppress them . BOETHJA-1897-1,155.358

For there come within its scope the questions of the essential
simplicity of providence , of the order of fate , of unforeseen chance ,
of the Divine knowledge and predestination , and of the freedom of the
will . BOETHJA-1897-1,155.359

How heavy is the weight of all this thou canst judge for thyself .
BOETHJA-1897-1,155.360

But , inasmuch as to know these things also is part of the treatment of
thy malady , we will try to give them some consideration , despite the
restrictions of the narrow limits of our time . BOETHJA-1897-1,155.361

Moreover , thou must for a time dispense with the pleasures of music and
song , if so be that thou findest any delight therein , whilst I weave
together the connected train of reasons in proper order . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,155.362

' As thou wilt ' , said I . BOETHJA-1897-1,155.363

<P_156>

Then , as if making a new beginning , she thus discoursed : ' The coming
into being of all things , the whole course of development in things
that change , every sort of thing that moves in any wise , receives its
due cause , order and form from the steadfastness of the Divine mind .
BOETHJA-1897-1,156.365

This mind , calm in the citadel of its own essential simplicity , has
decreed that the method of its rule shall be manifold .
BOETHJA-1897-1,156.366

Viewed in the very purity of the Divine intelligence this method is
called <font> providence <$$font> BOETHJA-1897-1,156.367

but viewed in regard to those things which it moves and disposes , it is
what the ancients called <font> fate . <$$font> BOETHJA-1897-1,156.368

That these two are different will easily be clear to anyone who passes
in review their respective efficacies . BOETHJA-1897-1,156.369

Providence is the Divine reason itself , seated in the Supreme Being ,
which disposes all things ; BOETHJA-1897-1,156.370

fate is the disposition inherent on all things which move , through
which providence joins all things in their proper order .
BOETHJA-1897-1,156.371

Providence embraces all things , however different , however infinite ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,156.372

fate sets in motion separately individual things ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,156.373

and assigns to them severally their position , form , and time .
BOETHJA-1897-1,156.374

' So the unfolding of this temporal order unified into the foreview of
the Divine mind is providence , while the same unity broken up and
unfolded in time is fate . BOETHJA-1897-1,156.375

And although these are different , yet is there a dependence between
them ; BOETHJA-1897-1,156.376

for the order of destiny issues from the essential simplicity of
providence . BOETHJA-1897-1,156.377

For as the artificer , forming in his mind before hand the idea of the
thing to be made , carries <P_157> out his design , and develops from
moment to moment what he had before seen in a single instant as a whole
, so God in His providence ordains all things as parts of a single
unchanging whole , BOETHJA-1897-1,157.378

but carries out these very ordinances by fate in a time of manifold
unity . BOETHJA-1897-1,157.379

So whether fate is accomplished by Divine spirits as the ministers of
providence , or by a soul , or by the service of all nature - whether by
the celestial motion of the stars , by the efficacy of angels , or by
the many-sided cunning of demons - whether by all or by some of these
the destined series is woven , this , at least , is manifest : that
providence is the fixed and simple form of destined events , fate their
shifting series in order of time , as by the disposal of the Divine
simplicity they are to take place . Whereby it is that all things which
are under fate are subjected also to providence , on which fate itself
is dependent ; whereas certain things which are set under providence are
above the chain of fate - viz , those things which by their nearness to
the primal Divinity are steadfastly fixed , and lie outside the order of
fate's movements . BOETHJA-1897-1,157.380

For as the innermost of several circles revolving round the same centre
approaches the simplicity of the midmost point , and is , as it were , a
pivot round which the exterior circles turn , while the outermost ,
whirled in ampler orbit , takes in a wider and wider sweep of space in
proportion to its departure from the indivisible unity of the center -
while , further , whatever joins and <P_158> allies itself to the centre
is narrowed to a like simplicity , and no longer expands vaguely into
space - even so whatsoever departs widely from primal mind is involved
more deeply in the meshes of fate , BOETHJA-1897-1,158.381

and things are free from fate in proportion as they seek to come nearer
to that central pivot ; while if aught cleaves close to supreme mind in
its absolute fixity , this , too , being free from movement , rises
above fate's necessity . BOETHJA-1897-1,158.382

Therefore , as is reasoning to pure intelligence , as that which is
generated to that which is , time to eternity , a circle to its centre ,
so is the shifting series of fate to the steadfastness and simplicity of
providence . BOETHJA-1897-1,158.383

It is this causal series which moves heaven and the stars , attempers
the elements to mutual accord , and again in turn transforms them into
new combinations ; <font> this <$$font> which renews the series of all
things that are born and die through like successions of germ and birth
; BOETHJA-1897-1,158.384

it is <font> its <$$font> operation which binds the destinies of men by
an indissoluble nexus of causality , BOETHJA-1897-1,158.385

and , since it issues in the beginning from unalterable providence ,
these destinies also must of necessity be immutable .
BOETHJA-1897-1,158.386

Accordingly , the world is ruled for the best if this unity abiding in
the Divine mind puts forth an inflexible order of causes .
BOETHJA-1897-1,158.387

And this order , by its intrinsic immutability , restricts things
mutable which otherwise would ebb and flow at random .
BOETHJA-1897-1,158.388

And so it happens that , although to you , who are not altogether
capable of understanding this order , all things seem confused and
disordered , <P_159> nevertheless there is everywhere an appointed limit
which guides all things to good . BOETHJA-1897-1,159.389

Verily , nothing can be done for the sake of evil even by the wicked
themselves ; BOETHJA-1897-1,159.390

for , as we abundantly proved , they seek good , BOETHJA-1897-1,159.391

but are drawn out of the way by perverse error ; BOETHJA-1897-1,159.392

far less can this order which sets out from the supreme centre of good
turn aside anywhither from the way in which it began . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,159.393

" Yet what confusion " , thou wilt say , " can be more unrighteous than
{COM:it_is_unrighteous} that prosperity and adversity should
indifferently befall the good , what they like and what they loathe come
alternately to the bad ! " BOETHJA-1897-1,159.394

Yes ; but have men in real life such soundness of mind that their
judgments of righteousness and wickedness must necessarily correspond
with facts ? BOETHJA-1897-1,159.395

Why , on this very point their verdicts conflict ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,159.396

and those whom some deem worthy of reward , others deem worthy of
punishment . BOETHJA-1897-1,159.397

Yet granted there were one who could rightly distinguish the good and
bad , yet would he be able to look into the soul's inmost constitution ,
as it were , if we may borrow an expression used of the body ?
BOETHJA-1897-1,159.398

The marvel here is not unlike that which astonishes one who does not
know why in health sweet things suit some constitutions , and bitter
others , or why some sick men are best alleviated by mild remedies ,
others by severe . BOETHJA-1897-1,159.399

But the physician who distinguishes the precise conditions and
characteristics of health and sickness does not marvel .
BOETHJA-1897-1,159.400

Now , the health of the soul is nothing but righteousness ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,159.401

<P_160>

and vice is its sickness . BOETHJA-1897-1,160.403

God , the guide and physician of the mind , it is who preserves the good
and banishes the bad . BOETHJA-1897-1,160.404

And He looks forth from the lofty watch-tower of His providence ,
BOETHJA-1897-1,160.405

perceives what is suited to each BOETHJA-1897-1,160.406

and assigns what He knows to be suitable . BOETHJA-1897-1,160.407

' This , then , is what that extraordinary mystery of the order of
destiny comes to - - that something is done by one who knows , whereat
the ignorant are astonished . BOETHJA-1897-1,160.408

But let us consider a few instances whereby appears what is the
competency of human reason to fathom the Divine unsearchableness .
BOETHJA-1897-1,160.409

Here is one whom thou deemest the perfection of justice and scrupulous
integrity ; BOETHJA-1897-1,160.410

to all-knowing Providence it seems far otherwise .
BOETHJA-1897-1,160.411

We all know our Lucan's admonition that it was the winning cause that
found favour with the gods , the beaten cause with Cato .
BOETHJA-1897-1,160.412

So , shouldst thou see anything in this world happening differently from
thy expectation , doubt not but events are rightly ordered ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,160.413

it is in thy judgment that there is perverse confusion .
BOETHJA-1897-1,160.414

' Grant , however , there be somewhere found one of so happy a character
that God and man alike agree in their judgments about him ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,160.415

yet is he somewhat infirm in strength of mind . BOETHJA-1897-1,160.416

It may be , if he fall into adversity , he will cease to practise that
innocency which has failed to secure his fortune .
BOETHJA-1897-1,160.417

Therefore , God's wise dispensation spares him whom adversity might make
worse , BOETHJA-1897-1,160.418

will not let him suffer who is ill fitted for endurance .
BOETHJA-1897-1,160.419

Another there is perfect <P_161> in all virtue , so holy and nigh to God
that providence judges it unlawful that aught untoward should befall him
; nay , doth not even permit him to be afflicted with bodily disease .
BOETHJA-1897-1,161.420

As one more excellent than I hath said : The very body of the holy saint
Is built of purest ether . BOETHJA-1897-1,161.421

Often it happens that the governance is given to the good that a
restraint may be put upon superfluity of wickedness .
BOETHJA-1897-1,161.422

To others providence assigns some mixed lot suited to their spiritual
nature ; BOETHJA-1897-1,161.423

some it will plague lest they grow rank through long prosperity ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,161.424

others it will suffer to be vexed with sore afflictions to confirm their
virtues by the exercise and practice of patience .
BOETHJA-1897-1,161.425

Some fear overmuch what they have strength to bear ;
BOETHJA-1897-1,161.426

others despise overmuch that to which their strength is unequal .
BOETHJA-1897-1,161.427

All these it brings to the test of their true self through misfortune .
BOETHJA-1897-1,161.428

Some also have bought a name revered to future ages at the price of a
glorious death ; BOETHJA-1897-1,161.429

some by invincible constancy under their sufferings have afforded an
example to others that virtue can@ @not be overcome by calamity - all
which things , without doubt , come to pass rightly and in due order ,
and to the benefit of those to whom they are seen to happen . '
BOETHJA-1897-1,161.430

As to the other side of the marvel , that the bad now meet with
affliction , now get their <P_162> hearts' desire , this , too , springs
from the same causes . BOETHJA-1897-1,162.431

As to the afflictions , of course no one marvels , because all hold the
wicked to be ill deserving . BOETHJA-1897-1,162.432

The truth is , their punishments both frighten others from crime , and
amend those on whom they are inflicted ; while their prosperity is a
powerful sermon to the good , what judgments they ought to pass on good
fortune of this kind , which often attends the wicked so assiduously .
BOETHJA-1897-1,162.433

' There is another object which may , I believe , be attained in such
cases : BOETHJA-1897-1,162.434

there is one perhaps , whose nature is so reckless and violent that
poverty would drive him more desperately into crime .
BOETHJA-1897-1,162.435

<font> His <$$font> disorder providence relieves by allowing him to
amass money . BOETHJA-1897-1,162.436

Such a one in the uneasiness of a conscience stained with guilt , while
he contrasts his character with his fortune , perchance grows alarmed
lest he should come to mourn the loss of that whose possession is so
pleasant to him . BOETHJA-1897-1,162.437

He will , then , reform his ways , BOETHJA-1897-1,162.438

and through the fear of losing his fortune he forsakes his iniquity .
BOETHJA-1897-1,162.439

Some , through a prosperity unworthily borne , have been hurled headlong
to ruin ; BOETHJA-1897-1,162.440

to some the power of the sword has been committed , to the end that the
good may be tried by discipline , and the bad punished .
BOETHJA-1897-1,162.441

For while there can be no peace between the righteous and the wicked
neither can the wicked agree among them selves . BOETHJA-1897-1,162.442

How should they , when each is at variance with himself , because his
vices rent his conscience , BOETHJA-1897-1,162.443

and ofttimes they do things <P_163> which , when they are done , they
judge ought not to have been done . BOETHJA-1897-1,163.444

Hence it is that this supreme providence brings to pass this notable
marvel - that the bad make the bad good . BOETHJA-1897-1,163.445

For some , when they see the injustice which they themselves suffer at
the hands of evil-doers , are inflamed with detestation of the offenders
, BOETHJA-1897-1,163.446

and , in the endeavour to be unlike those whom they hate , return to the
ways of virtue . BOETHJA-1897-1,163.447

It is the Divine power alone to which things evil are also good , in
that , by putting them to suitable use , it bringeth them in the end to
some good issue . BOETHJA-1897-1,163.448

For order in some way or other embraceth all things , so that even that
which has departed from the appointed laws of the order , nevertheless
falleth within <font> an <$$font> order , though <font> another <$$font>
order , that nothing in the realm of providence may be left to haphazard
. BOETHJA-1897-1,163.449

But Hard were the task , as a god , to recount all , nothing omitting .
BOETHJA-1897-1,163.450

Nor , truly , is it lawful for man to compass in thought all the
mechanism of the Divine work , or set it forth in speech .
BOETHJA-1897-1,163.451

Let us be content to have apprehended this only - that God , the creator
of universal nature , likewise {TEXT:likewiseth} disposeth all things ,
and guides them to good ; BOETHJA-1897-1,163.452

and while He studies to preserve in likeness to Himself all that He has
created , He banishes all evil from the borders of His commonweal
through the links of fatal necessity . Whereby it comes to pass that ,
if thou look to disposing providence <P_164> thou wilt nowhere find the
evils which are believed so to abound on earth . BOETHJA-1897-1,164.453

' But I see thou hast long been burdened with the weight of the subject
, and fatigued with the prolixity of the argument , and now lookest for
some refreshment of sweet poesy . BOETHJA-1897-1,164.454

Listen , then , BOETHJA-1897-1,164.455

and may the draught so restore thee that thou wilt bend thy mind more
resolutely to what remains . ' BOETHJA-1897-1,164.456

{COM:verse_omitted}

