<BEGIN_boswell-1768-2>

<P_55>

<heading>

CHAPTER II . BOSWELL-1768-2,55.4

<font> A concise View of the <$$font> Revolutions <font> which <$$font>
Corsica <font> has undergone from the earliest times . <$$font>
BOSWELL-1768-2,55.5

<$$heading>

Although many distinguished authours have , in conformity with the taste
of the age , rejected every inquiry into the origin of nations , and
presented their readers with nothing but what can be clearly attested ;
I confess , I am not for humouring an inordinate avidity for positive
evidence . BOSWELL-1768-2,55.7

By being accustomed to demonstration , or what approaches near to it ,
and at no time giving any credit to what we do not fully comprehend , we
are apt to form a pride and insolence of understanding ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,55.8

the mind acquires a hardness and obstinacy , inconsistent with the true
intention of our faculties in this imperfect state , BOSWELL-1768-2,55.9

and is rendered unfit for the reception of many important truths .
BOSWELL-1768-2,55.10

But not to deviate into metaphysical speculation , I have always thought
, that even the dark and fabulous periods are worthy of some attention .
BOSWELL-1768-2,55.11

<P_56>

The soundest heads among the ancients thought so ; BOSWELL-1768-2,56.13

and their works are therefore more agreeable , than if they had confined
themselves to strict authenticity . BOSWELL-1768-2,56.14

The origin of every nation is , as Livy says , ' Poeticis decora fabulis
{COM:footnote_omitted} , Adorned with poetical fables . '
BOSWELL-1768-2,56.15

These are always amusing to the imagination , when neither tedious , nor
too extravagant . BOSWELL-1768-2,56.16

We love to be led on in a gradual progress , and to behold truth
emerging from obscurity , like the sun breaking through the clouds .
BOSWELL-1768-2,56.17

Such a progress makes a part of our own nature , which advances from the
dawnings of being in our infancy , to greater and greater intelligence .
BOSWELL-1768-2,56.18

They , whose genius is directed to the study of antiquities , besides
the immediate delight which such traditions afford them , are often able
, from hints seemingly detached and unimportant , to trace the
fundamental truth , and extend the bounds of reality .
BOSWELL-1768-2,56.19

Few indeed have that peculiar turn for inquiry , to deserve the name of
antiquarians . BOSWELL-1768-2,56.20

But there is an universal principle of curiosity , with respect to times
past , which makes even conjectures be received with a kind of pleasing
veneration ; BOSWELL-1768-2,56.21

and although the great end of history is instruction , <P_57> I think it
is also valuable , when it serves to gratify this curiosity .
BOSWELL-1768-2,57.22

I shall therefore , in treating of the revolutions of Corsica , go as
far back as books will serve me ; though at the same time , I intend to
give no more than a concise recital , and am rather to shew my readers
what is to be seen , than to detain them till I exhibit a full view of
it . BOSWELL-1768-2,57.23

The earliest accounts that we have of Corsica , are to be found in
Herodotus . BOSWELL-1768-2,57.24

He tells us , that its first inhabitants were Phenicians ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,57.25

for , that Cadmus , the son of Agenor , when wandering in quest of
Europa , fell upon this island , which was named Callista ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,57.26

and left there some of his countrymen , with his own cousin Membleareus
{COM:footnote_omitted} . BOSWELL-1768-2,57.27

He tells us , that eight generations after this , Theras brought a
colony to the island , from Lacedaemon . BOSWELL-1768-2,57.28

This Theras {COM:footnote_omitted} was originally of the race of Cadmus
, BOSWELL-1768-2,57.29

<P_58>

but , being uncle by the motherside to Eurysthenes and Procles , the two
sons of Aristodemus and , on that account , having governed the kingdom
as their tutor ; when they grew up , and became kings of Sparta , Theras
scorning to live a private life , and to be under the government of his
pupils , determined not to remain at Lacedaemon , but to go and join his
kindred in the island of Corsica , then called Callista .
BOSWELL-1768-2,58.31

Accordingly , {COM:footnote_omitted} he went thither with some chosen
companions , not with any intention to drive out the former inhabitants
, <P_59> but , on the contrary , with most friendly dispositions towards
them . BOSWELL-1768-2,59.32

Sometime after this , the Minyae , a wandering tribe , who had taken
refuge among the Lacedaemonians , having become obnoxious , on account
of their aspiring views , were thrown into prison , and condemned to die
; BOSWELL-1768-2,59.33

but Theras persuaded the Spartans to spare them , promising , that he
would carry them out of the country ; BOSWELL-1768-2,59.34

and accordingly , he carried them to the island of Callista , to join
the new colony which he had settled there ; BOSWELL-1768-2,59.35

and from him , the island was called Thera . BOSWELL-1768-2,59.36

These Minyae , though but a wandering tribe among the Lacedaemonians ,
were , in reality , of illustrious descent , being the posterity of the
heroick Argonauts {COM:footnote_omitted} . BOSWELL-1768-2,59.37

<P_60>

This account of the first peopling of Corsica , is a very curious piece
of ancient history . BOSWELL-1768-2,60.39

It is indeed very probable , that the Phenicians or the Phoceans , were
its original inhabitants seeing they were the first great navigatours in
the western part of the world , and sent out colonies to many distant
countries . BOSWELL-1768-2,60.40

It afterwards got the name of {COM:greek_omitted} , Cyrnus , from the
number of its promontories ; BOSWELL-1768-2,60.41

and Isidorus {COM:footnote_omitted} relates the manner in which it got
the name of Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,60.42

According to him , Corsica , a Ligurian woman , having often observed a
bull swim over to the island , and return much fatter , she had the
curiosity to follow him in a little vessel ; BOSWELL-1768-2,60.43

and so discovered the island , with all its beauty and fertility . Upon
which the Ligurians sent thither a colony ; BOSWELL-1768-2,60.44

and from Corsa , who had made the discovery , they called the island
Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,60.45

This is ludicrous enough ; BOSWELL-1768-2,60.46

but we may trace what has given rise to so extraordinary a fiction ,
when we consider , that very probably , a people from the opposite coast
of Italy , either <P_61> the Ligurians , or the Etruscans , have taken
possession of Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,61.47

Whatever may be in this conjecture , it is certain , that its next
masters were the Carthaginians , who extended their conquests over all
the islands of the Mediterranean . BOSWELL-1768-2,61.48

Aristotle relates a most extraordinary piece of Punick policy , with
respect to Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,61.49

Finding that it was difficult to keep the inhabitants in subjection ,
they ordered the whole of the vines and olives in the island to be
pulled up , BOSWELL-1768-2,61.50

and forbid the Corsicans , under the pain of death , to sow their fields
with any kind of grain , so that they might be kept in the most absolute
dependance ; and , though possessed of a very fertile territory , be
obliged to resort to Africa , to seek the bare necessaries of life .
BOSWELL-1768-2,61.51

So early was the cowardly and barbarous policy of a trading republick
exercised against this people . BOSWELL-1768-2,61.52

Corsica next passed under the dominion of Rome . BOSWELL-1768-2,61.53

In the first Punick war , and about the 493 year from the building of
the city , Lucius Cornelius Scipio conquered the island
{COM:footnote_omitted} , <P_62> being opposed by an army of Sardinians
and Corsicans , headed by Hanno , a Carthaginian general .
BOSWELL-1768-2,62.54

It appears however , that the Corsicans could not bear subjection with
patience , BOSWELL-1768-2,62.55

for they were continually attempting to get free . BOSWELL-1768-2,62.56

Of this , we have an instance in the epitome of the twentieth book of
Livy . BOSWELL-1768-2,62.57

We next find them engaged against M. Pinarius the praetor , who slew
2000 of them , obliged them to give hostages , and took them bound to
pay a tribute of 100000 lib. of wax , every year {COM:footnote_omitted}
. BOSWELL-1768-2,62.58

Afterwards C. Cicereius the praetor , was obliged to give them battle ,
when 1700 of them were killed , and upwards of 1070 taken prisoners ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,62.59

and upon this occasion , their annual tribute was increased to 200000
lib. weight of wax {COM:footnote_omitted} . BOSWELL-1768-2,62.60

From these instances , we may see that Corsica was formerly much more
populous than it is now , and that it hath been able to furnish amazing
quantities of honey . BOSWELL-1768-2,62.61

We are told by Pliny , that Papyrius Naso first triumphed over the
Corsicans , on the Alban mount {COM:footnote_omitted} .
BOSWELL-1768-2,62.62

<P_63>

It has already been said , that the Romans founded two colonies in
Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,63.64

The island was , like their other provinces , governed by a praetor .
BOSWELL-1768-2,63.65

It was also made to serve for a place of exile ; BOSWELL-1768-2,63.66

and was very proper for what they called ' Relegatio in insulam ,
banishment to an island . ' BOSWELL-1768-2,63.67

But the Romans never had a firm hold of this country , where that spirit
of liberty , which tyrants call rebellion , was ever breaking forth .
BOSWELL-1768-2,63.68

On the irruption of the barbarous nations , Corsica shared the same fate
with the other dominions of the ruined empire . BOSWELL-1768-2,63.69

It fell a prey to the Goths , who established there the feudal system ,
as they did in every other country to which their arms penetrated .
BOSWELL-1768-2,63.70

Some authours say , that Corsica was conquered by Alarick , the first
king of the Goths ; BOSWELL-1768-2,63.71

but according to Procopius , it was conquered by a detachment sent out
by Totilas {COM:footnote_omitted} . BOSWELL-1768-2,63.72

From this period , the history of Corsica is for many ages a continued
series of wars , ravage and destruction , by a variety of contending
powers . BOSWELL-1768-2,63.73

We are here very much in the dark , without any sufficient clew to guide
us . BOSWELL-1768-2,63.74

We find in many authours detached remarks concerning the island ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,63.75

<P_64>

but it is difficult to arrange them in tolerable order , since the dates
are almost always uncertain . BOSWELL-1768-2,64.77

I shall however give a short view of what seems to have been the
progress of events . BOSWELL-1768-2,64.78

When the power of the Saracens rose to that height , of which we read
with amazement , they drove the Goths from Corsica ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,64.79

and maintained the dominion there for a considerable time .
BOSWELL-1768-2,64.80

It is believed , that they first gave the title of kingdom to Corsica ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,64.81

and , to this day , the coat armorial of the island bears a Moor's head
on its shield . BOSWELL-1768-2,64.82

There are Moorish coins frequently dug up in Corsica ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,64.83

and near to Ajaccio , are Saracen , tombs , which appear to have had
some magnificence . BOSWELL-1768-2,64.84

They are subterraneous vaults , supported by stone pillars ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,64.85

and in them are found sepulchral urns of an earthen composition ,
similar to brick . BOSWELL-1768-2,64.86

It would appear , that the Pope has always had a view towards the
annexation of Corsica to his territories . And , that he at different
times instigated the kings of Arragon , as well as the sovereigns of
France , to make against it , what in the stile of those times was
called a holy war , which <P_65> kind of wars were always calculated to
serve the political views of the holy father . BOSWELL-1768-2,65.87

At last , Corsica was actually conquered by one of the kings of France ;
some say , by Pepin , and others , by Charles Martel .
BOSWELL-1768-2,65.88

The Corsicans shew to this day , a fountain , called by the name of
Charles , in the pieve of Alesani , and , as they say , on the spot
where this gallant prince vanquished the Moors . BOSWELL-1768-2,65.89

By the kings of France , Corsica was resigned , in a perpetual gift , to
the holy see . BOSWELL-1768-2,65.90

The Saracens however , from time to time returned ; so that the pope had
but a very feeble and uncertain sway . BOSWELL-1768-2,65.91

The Genoese availing themselves of the distracted state of the island ,
had very early contrived to settle a colony at Bonisaccio ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,65.92

and emboldened by degrees , they landed troops on other parts of the
country , BOSWELL-1768-2,65.93

and began to bear a formidable appearance . BOSWELL-1768-2,65.94

This could not fail to incense the court of Rome , and to draw down upon
them the thunders of the Vatican , from whence the holy father used , in
those ages , to fulminate with serious effect against the greatest
powers in Europe . BOSWELL-1768-2,65.95

Accordingly , <P_66> the Genoese were excommunicated by pope Gregory the
seventh , which made them at that time desist from their project .
BOSWELL-1768-2,66.96

In this {TEXT:his} fluctuating situation Corsica continued , till one of
the popes , but which of them , historians are not agreed , sent thither
Hugo Colonna , a nobleman of Rome , accompanied by several others of the
Roman nobility , with a good force under his command , in order to expel
the infidels from the island . BOSWELL-1768-2,66.97

When Colonna landed , he was joined by many of the inhabitants , who ,
during the struggle which had been subsisting so long , and with such
violence , had again and again endeavoured to maintain themselves in a
state of freedom , and had elected a certain number of chiefs , to whom
they gave the title of caporali . BOSWELL-1768-2,66.98

These caporali gave all the aid in their power to Colonna ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,66.99

and , by their influence over the people , they soon brought together
such a body of men , that Colonna was enabled totally to rout the
Saracens and to dispossess them for ever . BOSWELL-1768-2,66.100

The Moors being rendered desperate by this unexpected blow , were forced
to quit the island ; BOSWELL-1768-2,66.101

but before they went , they burnt all that they possibly could ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,66.102

and to this we must greatly impute <P_67> the desolation which is yet to
be seen in Corsica , and the destruction of their ancient monuments and
publick archives . BOSWELL-1768-2,67.103

Hugo Colonna settled in Corsica , having obtained from the Pope ,
distinguished honours and extensive grants . BOSWELL-1768-2,67.104

The family of Colonna is one of the most illustrious , and most ancient
in the world . BOSWELL-1768-2,67.105

So early as the 1200 , mention is made of Pietro Colonna , the eight of
the name . BOSWELL-1768-2,67.106

The branch which settled in Corsica , continued long in great splendour
, enjoying the noble fief of Istria ; BOSWELL-1768-2,67.107

but , by the confusions and troubles which the island has been thrown
into , by the bloody contests between the Genoese and the patriotick
Corsicans , that family hath suffered prodigiously ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,67.108

and its possessions are reduced to a very narrow compass .
BOSWELL-1768-2,67.109

The present head of the family , is a worthy , sensible man , and very
zealous in the great cause . BOSWELL-1768-2,67.110

I was lodged in his house at Sollacarò , where I found Pascal Paoli .
BOSWELL-1768-2,67.111

It is probable , that the Corsican counts , marquisses and barons ,
derive their origin from this period ; BOSWELL-1768-2,67.112

for I can see no time so proper for their first taking place here .
BOSWELL-1768-2,67.113

The island remained for some time in tolerable <P_68> quiet .
BOSWELL-1768-2,68.114

But partly from the dissensions of different parties among themselves ,
ever impatient of contradiction , and partly from the repeated attacks
of the Genoese , whose hankering after this little kingdom still
continued , there were such disorders , and such a defect of good
government , that the Pope thought proper to make it over to the Pisans
, who were then in great power . BOSWELL-1768-2,68.115

This grant was upon advantageous terms for the holy father , like the
many grants of fiefs which he was in use to give to various princes , to
be held of the see of Rome . BOSWELL-1768-2,68.116

A learned Professour of the university of Pisa , has composed a very
curious dissertation concerning the ancient dominion of his countrymen
over Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,68.117

It is to be found in the VII. volume of the Essays of the Academy of
Cortona . BOSWELL-1768-2,68.118

The Pisans , while their republick flourished , and their force was
considerable , maintained their authority over Corsica to very good
purpose ; BOSWELL-1768-2,68.119

and , as far as we can gather from different authours , the island
enjoyed more repose and tranquillity during this period , than it has
ever been known to enjoy . BOSWELL-1768-2,68.120

But this calm was of short endurance ; BOSWELL-1768-2,68.121

for the <P_69> Genoese , irritated to find themselves now effectually
excluded from an island on which they had long set their hearts ; and
being , over and above , the determined rivals of Pisa , a keen and
obstinate war was carried on between these states ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,69.122

at last , the Genoese prevailed , in the famous sea-fight at Malora ,
near the mouth of the Arno ; after which , they got entirely the mastery
of Pisa , BOSWELL-1768-2,69.123

and so were at length enabled to seize upon Corsica , about the
beginning of the fourteenth century . BOSWELL-1768-2,69.124

Thus were the Corsicans , for the first time , brought under the power
of the Genoese ; with whom they have since had such struggles for that
freedom , which they appear to have at all times attempted to recover .
BOSWELL-1768-2,69.125

If I have erred in any part of this recital , I am sure it is without
any intention . BOSWELL-1768-2,69.126

I know some Genoese writers have maintained , that a signor Ademar , of
their nation , was employed in the first conquest of the island by the
kings of France . BOSWELL-1768-2,69.127

I confess I do not see sufficient authority for this .
BOSWELL-1768-2,69.128

But supposing it had been so , Ademar could only be an officer under the
French king . BOSWELL-1768-2,69.129

We are certain , that the French king made the conquest , <P_70> because
he afterwards gave a gift of the island to the pope .
BOSWELL-1768-2,70.130

But I would not dwell long upon such disquisitions .
BOSWELL-1768-2,70.131

There are many pieces lately published , both by the Corsicans and the
Genoese ; in which the authours , with great labour , endeavour to
refute each others hypotheses with regard to many ancient facts in the
history of Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,70.132

Here indeed , there is full scope for all parties ; since those periods
are so obscure , that every writer may fill them up according to the
turn of his imagination . Just as people who are around in a dark night
, may with equal keenness , and equal appearance of reason affirm , that
they see objects totally different . BOSWELL-1768-2,70.133

But Corsica have been the property of the Phenicians , the Peruseans ,
the Carthaginians , the Romans , the Goths , the Saracens :
BOSWELL-1768-2,70.134

let it have been a conquest of France ; a gift from that kingdom to the
pope ; a gift again from the pope to the Pisans , and at length a
conquest of Genoa ; BOSWELL-1768-2,70.135

still we must have recourse to the plain and fundamental principle ,
that the Corsicans are men , and have a right to liberty ; which , if
usurped by any power whatever , they have at all times a just title to
vindicate . BOSWELL-1768-2,70.136

<P_71>

In reviewing these strange and rapid revolutions , which this island has
undergone , we may join with Seneca {COM:footnote_omitted} in reflecting
on the mutability of human affairs , and be silent on the changes which
happen to individuals , when we contemplate the vicissitudes of a whole
nation . BOSWELL-1768-2,71.138

The Genoese having obtained the undoubted possession of Corsica , they
were eager to enjoy their power , BOSWELL-1768-2,71.139

and thought they could not fully enjoy it , but by exercising the most
severe dominion . BOSWELL-1768-2,71.140

What we have long anxiously desired , acquires in our minds an imaginary
and extravagant value ; BOSWELL-1768-2,71.141

and when we actually become possessed of it , a moderate and reasonable
fruition , seems insipid and unsatisfactory to our heightened
expectations . BOSWELL-1768-2,71.142

We are even , as it were , uncertain if we really have it .
BOSWELL-1768-2,71.143

And generally , we never rest , till by abusing our powers , we destroy
what we esteemed so highly . BOSWELL-1768-2,71.144

An individual , who acquires a large fortune , and a state , which
acquires an increase of dominion , may be very properly compared .
BOSWELL-1768-2,71.145

He who gets a large fortune , thinks he can@ @not shew his <P_72>
command of riches , but by such acts of profusion as must quickly
dissipate them . BOSWELL-1768-2,72.146

And a spite , which has acquired an increase of dominion thinks its
sovereignty is not sufficiently magnified , but by such acts of
arbitrary oppression , as must tend to force its subjects to throw off
their allegiance . BOSWELL-1768-2,72.147

For however a people may from indolence , from timidity , or from other
drives , submit for a season to a certain degree of tyranny ; if it is
long continued , and pushed to an exorbitant length , nature will revolt
, BOSWELL-1768-2,72.148

and the original rights of men will call for a dress .
BOSWELL-1768-2,72.149

The Genoese were the worst nation to whom Corsica could have fallen .
BOSWELL-1768-2,72.150

The Corsicans were a people , impetuous , violent and brave ; who had
weathered many a storm ; and who could not have been governed , but by a
state of which they stood somewhat in awe , and which by humanity and
proper encouragement , might have conciliated their affections .
Whereas , the Genoese were a nation of republicks just in the
neighbourhood of the islanders ; who had long been their enemies ; who
had made so many cunning , and impotent attempts <P_73> to seize upon
the island ; that although , by the unexpected course of events , they
were now masters of it , the Corsicans could not look upon them with any
respect . BOSWELL-1768-2,73.151

And as it has been always remarked that the foreign subjects of a little
republick , are much worse used , than those of a great kingdom ; they
had reason to expect nothing but avowed tyranny from Genoa .
BOSWELL-1768-2,73.152

Accordingly the Genoese , who were themselves in an unstable , and
perilous condition , seeking the protection sometimes of one powerful
state , and sometimes of another ; did not treat the Corsicans with that
gentleness and confidence , which alone could have secured their
attachment and obedience ; by insensibly leading them to a participation
of the culture and felicity of civil life , and accustoming them to
consider the Genoese as their fellow subjects , and friends .
BOSWELL-1768-2,73.153

They took a direct contrary course ; BOSWELL-1768-2,73.154

and , although they did not use so desperate a measure , as that of the
Carthaginians , their oppression was heavy ; BOSWELL-1768-2,73.155

their system was not to render the Corsicans happier and better , but by
<P_74> keeping them in ignorance , and under the most abject submission
, to prevent their endeavouring to get free ; while Genoa drained the
island of all she could possibly get , choosing rather even to have less
advantage by tyranny , than to have a much greater advantage , and
risque the consequences of permitting to the inhabitants the blessings
of freedom . BOSWELL-1768-2,74.156

In this unhappy situation was Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,74.157

Often did the natives rise in arms ; BOSWELL-1768-2,74.158

but having no head to direct them , they were immediately quelled .
BOSWELL-1768-2,74.159

So apprehensive however were the Genoese , that , according to their own
historian Pilippini , they burnt 120 of the best villages in Corsica ,
while 4000 people left the island . BOSWELL-1768-2,74.160

What shewed the Genoese policy in the worst light , and could not but be
very galling to the Corsicans who remained at home , was , that many of
these islanders , who had gone over to the continent , made a
distinguished figure in most of the European states , both in learning ,
and in arms . BOSWELL-1768-2,74.161

About the 1550 , Corsica revived under the conduct of a great hero , who
arose for the deliverance of his country . BOSWELL-1768-2,74.162

This was Sampiero of Bastelica . BOSWELL-1768-2,74.163

He early discovered extraordinary parts <P_75> and spirit ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,75.164

and had the advantage of being educated in the house of cardinal
Hypolitus de Medicis , the nephew of pope Clement the seventh .
BOSWELL-1768-2,75.165

He was created colonel of the Corsicans in France ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,75.166

and distinguished himself in almost every one of the great actions of
that nation in his time . BOSWELL-1768-2,75.167

After the death of Francis the first , he went home to his native
country ; where he married Vannina , heiress of the house of Ornano , of
the most ancient and rich of the Corsican nobility ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,75.168

and from this time , he was generally called Sampiero di Ornano .
BOSWELL-1768-2,75.169

Being moved with the miserable state of his countrymen , he resolved to
procure them relief ; BOSWELL-1768-2,75.170

and for this , a very favourable opportunity then presented itself .
BOSWELL-1768-2,75.171

Here history begins again to open upon us . BOSWELL-1768-2,75.172

The clouds of antiquity , and barbarism are dispersed ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,75.173

and we proceed clearly , under the guidance of the illustrious Thuanus
{COM:footnote_omitted} . BOSWELL-1768-2,75.174

France had of a long time claimed a right over Genoa ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,75.175

but after the battle of Pavia , when the French were forced entirely to
abandon Italy , that claim had become of no effect BOSWELL-1768-2,75.176

Henry the second however , having commenced a new war in Italy , <P_76>
against the emperour Charles the fifth , resolved to assert his power in
Corsica ; BOSWELL-1768-2,76.177

Sampiero di Ornano encouraged this disposition , that he might avail
himself of it , to free the island from a yoke which galled it so much .
BOSWELL-1768-2,76.178

He represented to Henry , that as the Genoese had taken part with the
emperour , his majesty was debarred from all entrance to Italy by sea ;
whereas , by putting himself in possession of Corsica , he might have a
free passage through the Mediterranean , and might , at the same time ,
employ that island as a commodious garrison , where troops and warlike
stores might be lodged , to be from thence thrown in upon Naples or
Tuscany , as the situation of affairs should require .
BOSWELL-1768-2,76.179

An expedition was therefore ordered to Corsica , in the year 1553 ,
under the command of general Paul de Thermes , accompanied by Sampiero
di Ornano , Jourdain des Ursins , and several other able commanders .
BOSWELL-1768-2,76.180

Henry had also the Turks joined with him in this expedition , having
prevailed with their fourth Emperour , Solyman , styled the magnificent
, to send out a large fleet to the Tuscan sea {COM:footnote_omitted} .
BOSWELL-1768-2,76.181

This expedition was powerfully opposed by <P_77> the Genoese ; who had
given Corsica in charge to their celebrated bank of St. George .
BOSWELL-1768-2,77.182

The great Andrew Doria , though then in his eighty_seventh year , bid
defiance to age and infirmities , BOSWELL-1768-2,77.183

and , since Corsica was an object of importance to his country , the
gallant Veteran embarked with all the spirit of his glorious youth ,
having a formidable armament under his command . BOSWELL-1768-2,77.184

The war was carried on with vigour on both sides .
BOSWELL-1768-2,77.185

At first however , several of the best towns were taken by the French
and Turks , particularly Ajaccio , where were a number of merchants ,
whose riches afforded good pillage to the enemy , and helped to make the
enterprise go on with more spirit . BOSWELL-1768-2,77.186

The Corsicans joined in the common cause , BOSWELL-1768-2,77.187

and the greatest part of the island was once fairly delivered from the
tyrant . BOSWELL-1768-2,77.188

But the Genoese were so well commanded by the intrepid Doria ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,77.189

and had besides such assistance from Charles the fifth , who sent strong
reinforcements , both of Spanish and German troops , that the expedition
was not entirely effectual . BOSWELL-1768-2,77.190

In the course of this war , so many valourous actions were performed ,
that , fired with the contemplation of them , I am almost tempted to
forget <P_78> the limited bounds of my plan , and of my abilities , and
to assume the province of an historian ; BOSWELL-1768-2,78.191

I hope a Livy , or a Clarendon , shall one day arise , and display to
succeeding ages , the Corsican bravery , with the lustre which it
deserves . BOSWELL-1768-2,78.192

The Corsicans were now so violent against the Genoese , that they
resolved with one accord , that rather than return under the dominion of
the republick , they would throw themselves into the arms of the great
Turk . BOSWELL-1768-2,78.193

At length however , a treaty was concluded between the Corsicans and
Genoese advantageous and honourable for the former , having for
guarantee , his most Christian Majesty . BOSWELL-1768-2,78.194

But as there was an inveterate , and implacable hatred between those two
nations , this treaty did not long subsist ; BOSWELL-1768-2,78.195

and upon Henry's death , the same oppression as formerly , became
flagrant in Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,78.196

Sampiero di Ornano , who had been again for sometime in France , having
lost his royal master , went himself to the Ottoman Porte ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,78.197

and earnestly solicited fresh assistance to his unhappy nation .
BOSWELL-1768-2,78.198

But the face of affairs was changed . BOSWELL-1768-2,78.199

The same political views no longer existed ; BOSWELL-1768-2,78.200

and it must be a miracle indeed , when states are moved by virtuous
<P_79> principles of generosity . BOSWELL-1768-2,79.201

This brave man , being unsuccessful at Constantinople , returned to
Corsica , where his presence inspired the islanders with fortitude , and
occasioned a very general revolt . BOSWELL-1768-2,79.202

He carried on his glorious enterprise with considerable effect ; and the
more so , that , as he had now no foreign assistance , he was not looked
upon as very formidable , and the republick made little preparation
against him . BOSWELL-1768-2,79.203

But he was stopped in his career by the treachery of the Genoese , who
had him basely assassinated , by a wretch of the name of Vitolli
{COM:footnote_omitted} , in the year 1567 . BOSWELL-1768-2,79.204

Thus fell Sampiero di Bastelica di Ornano , a Corsican worthy of being
ranked with the most distinguished heroes . BOSWELL-1768-2,79.205

He displayed great bravery and fidelity in foreign service ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,79.206

and with unremitting constancy endeavoured to restore the liberties
<P_80> of his country . BOSWELL-1768-2,80.207

Thuanus calls him ' Vir bello impiger et animo invictus
{COM:footnote_omitted} . A man active in war , and of a spirit
invincible . ' BOSWELL-1768-2,80.208

The shade which were in his private conduct , are to be forgotten in the
admiration of his publick virtues . BOSWELL-1768-2,80.209

His son Alphonso , and his grandson John Baptist , both arrived at the
dignity of mareschal of France , after which his posterity failed .
BOSWELL-1768-2,80.210

Alphonso di Ornano , who had been brought up in the court of Henry the
second , kept alive the patriotick struggle for a short while ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,80.211

but unable to make head against the republick , he retired from the
island BOSWELL-1768-2,80.212

and settled in France . BOSWELL-1768-2,80.213

The Genoese were thus again put in possession of Corsica .
BOSWELL-1768-2,80.214

Enraged at what they had suffered from a daring rebellion , as they
termed it : and still dreading a new insurrection , they thought only of
avenging themselves on the Corsicans ; and plunging that people still
lower than ever , in ignorance and slavery . BOSWELL-1768-2,80.215

Their oppression became now , if possible , worse than before .
BOSWELL-1768-2,80.216

They were inflamed with hotter resentment , BOSWELL-1768-2,80.217

and their tyranny formed itself into something of a regular system .
BOSWELL-1768-2,80.218

Forgetful of <P_81> every equitable convention that France had
established , they exercised , without controul , the utmost rigours of
arbitrary power . BOSWELL-1768-2,81.219

They permitted nothing to be exported from the island , but to Genoa ,
where , of necessity , the Corsicans were obliged to sell their
merchandise at a very low rate ; BOSWELL-1768-2,81.220

and in years of scarcity , the island was drained of provisions by a
sort of legal plunder . BOSWELL-1768-2,81.221

For the inhabitants were forced to bring them to Genoa , so that actual
famine was often occasioned in Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,81.222

The Genoese did every thing in their power to foment internal
dissensions in Corsica , to which the people were naturally too much
inclined . BOSWELL-1768-2,81.223

These dissentions occasioned the most horrid bloodshed .
BOSWELL-1768-2,81.224

They reckon that no less than 1700 Corsicans were assassinated in the
space of two years . BOSWELL-1768-2,81.225

Assassinations were , in the first place , a certain cause of hatred
among the Corsicans , and often between the best families , so that they
would not unite in any scheme for the general liberty .
BOSWELL-1768-2,81.226

And in the second place , they could be turned to very good account ,
either by confiscating the estates of the assassins , or by making the
criminals pay heavy compensations to the judge . BOSWELL-1768-2,81.227

<P_82>

The judge could wave the pursuit of justice by saying , ' Non procedatur
, Let there be no process ; ' which could easily be cloaked under the
pretence of some defect in point of form ; BOSWELL-1768-2,82.229

or could even acquit the deepest offenders from his own will alone , by
what was called ' Ex informata conscientia . The information of his own
conscience ; ' of which he was not obliged to give any account .
BOSWELL-1768-2,82.230

It was not till the year 1738 , that Genoa made an edict against this
most dreadful abuse . BOSWELL-1768-2,82.231

M. De Montesquieu thus writes concerning it , with that calm dignity
which becomes so great a master ; ' Une république d'Italie tenoit des
insulaires sous son obéissance ; mais son droit politique et civil a
leur égard étoit vicieux . On se souvient de cet acte d'amnistie , qui
porte qu'on ne les condamnoroit plus a des peines afflictives sur la
conscience informée du gouverneur . On a vu souvent des peuples
demander des privileges ; ici le souverain accorde le droit de toutes
les nations {COM:footnote_omitted} . BOSWELL-1768-2,82.232

A republick in Italy held a nation of islanders under her obedience .
BOSWELL-1768-2,82.233

But her political , and civil constitution among them , was bad .
BOSWELL-1768-2,82.234

We remember that act of amnesty , which bears , that <P_83> they should
no more be condemned to afflictive pains , upon the informed conscience
of the governour . BOSWELL-1768-2,83.235

We have often seen people asking privileges . BOSWELL-1768-2,83.236

Here , the sovereign is pleased to grant the common right of all nations
. ' BOSWELL-1768-2,83.237

During this oppression , it was common to condemn multitudes to the
galleys , for frivolous offences , that they might purchase their
liberty at a high price ; BOSWELL-1768-2,83.238

and it is hardly possible to conceive greater barbarity , than what
these islanders now endured . BOSWELL-1768-2,83.239

The Genoese sent to Corsica a commissary_general , or governour over the
whole island ; whose office continued for two years .
BOSWELL-1768-2,83.240

He was generally a nobleman of desperate fortune , who by shameful
extortions , returned home in opulence ; and by his interest in the
senate , prevented any inquiry being made into his conduct .
BOSWELL-1768-2,83.241

For although the unhappy Corsicans offered many complaints to the
republick , they were instantly stifled ; which was not difficult to do
, as the Corsicans were considered to be so turbulent and mutinous ,
that no administration could please them ; and as every senatour who was
to give his vote , did not know , but by extravagance , he himself might
one day be obliged to have recourse to the same expedient .
BOSWELL-1768-2,83.242

<P_84>

The commissary_general had his residence at Bastia .
BOSWELL-1768-2,84.244

There were also other commissaries at Calvi , Ajaccio and Bonifaccio ;
and Lieutenants , and inferiour officers , dispersed over the island ;
who all in their several stations , contributed to rob , and to ruin the
country ; while they triumphed in a mean security , that as Corsica was
overlooked , and , as it were , hid in a corner of Europe , their
injurious proceedings were not known to the world .
BOSWELL-1768-2,84.245

During this period of secret , and cruel oppression , there happened a
curious enough event , which was the establishment of a colony of Greeks
in Corsica ; of which I shall now give an account .
BOSWELL-1768-2,84.246

After Mahomet and his successours {TEXT:successuors} , had subdued
almost the whole of ancient Greece , and Scanderbeg , who so gloriously
defended his country , was dead ; there still remained a few brave souls
who inhabited a part of Peloponnesus of old , now the kingdom of Morea .
BOSWELL-1768-2,84.247

This part was , what is called a branch of the Maina , the very spot
where Lacedemon stood . BOSWELL-1768-2,84.248

Here , covered by impassable mountains , with only a small entrance ,
they resisted the Ottoman empire , as Leonidas formerly resisted the
millions of Xerxes . BOSWELL-1768-2,84.249

<P_85>

But when the Turks got possession of the isle of Candia , in 1669 , they
came by sea , BOSWELL-1768-2,85.251

and made a descent upon Maina , BOSWELL-1768-2,85.252

penetrated into the heart of the territory , BOSWELL-1768-2,85.253

and soon became masters of it ; BOSWELL-1768-2,85.254

and then , the unfortunate posterity of the Spartans , were reduced to a
state , little better than slavery . BOSWELL-1768-2,85.255

Exorbitant taxes were imposed upon them ; BOSWELL-1768-2,85.256

their finest women were forced away to the seraglios ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,85.257

and towers were built in different parts of the country , where troops
were garrisoned , to keep them in awe ; so that they had no hope of
deliverance . BOSWELL-1768-2,85.258

Their spirits gradually sunk , BOSWELL-1768-2,85.259

and many of them embraced the faith of the Koran .
BOSWELL-1768-2,85.260

Still , however , a spark of the ancient fire was preserved amongst
those , who dwelt at Porto Vitilo ; who , despairing to see any change
in their dejected country , came to the resolution of abandoning it
altogether , and of seeking an establishment somewhere else .
BOSWELL-1768-2,85.261

With this view , they sent to Italy , deputies who had some acquaintance
with the different states , and who were intrusted by the community to
look out for a convenient settlement , and to conclude the terms of a
convention . BOSWELL-1768-2,85.262

The Genoese sent them over to Corsica , where <P_86> they were shewn a
tract of ground , belonging to the chamber of the state , on the western
side of the island , about three miles from the sea .
BOSWELL-1768-2,86.263

The deputies were very well pleased with it ; BOSWELL-1768-2,86.264

and , on their return to Genoa , they entered into an agreement with the
republick . BOSWELL-1768-2,86.265

They then went home to Greece , BOSWELL-1768-2,86.266

and having made a report to their countrymen , the plan was approved of
; BOSWELL-1768-2,86.267

and , in the month of October , 1676 , these ' Tristes reliquiae Danaûm
, Sad remains {TEXT:re-remains} of the Greeks , ' embarked , in all
about 1000 souls . BOSWELL-1768-2,86.268

The family of Stefanopoli was the most distinguished among them ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,86.269

and conducted the whole enterprise . BOSWELL-1768-2,86.270

They arrived at Genoa , in the month of January , 1677 where they
remained , till the month of March . BOSWELL-1768-2,86.271

The republick paid all the expence of their freight ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,86.272

and afforded them lodging and subsistence , till they were safely landed
in Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,86.273

The conventions entered into , were , that the Genoese granted to the
Greeks , the territories of Paemia , Ruvida and Salogna , in perpetual
fief . BOSWELL-1768-2,86.274

They furnished them with houses , with grain , and with cattle ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,86.275

and engaged to maintain a body of Genoese soldiers to defend them
against all insults , <P_87> for the first years of their residence .
BOSWELL-1768-2,87.276

They also appointed a Genoese gentleman , with the title of Directour ,
as judge over them , whose office was to be biennial , so that it should
go by rotation , among the Genoese nobility ; BOSWELL-1768-2,87.277

and they agreed to support , at the expence of the republick , a vicar ,
skilled in the Greek language , who should instruct their children in
different studies ; and , at the same time , celebrate mass , and preach
in the chapel of the directour . BOSWELL-1768-2,87.278

On the other hand , the Greeks obliged themselves to labour the lands ,
and with all expedition , to discharge the debts they should incur to
the republick , for supplying them with every necessary , in the infancy
of their colony . BOSWELL-1768-2,87.279

They also obliged themselves , to pay to the republick , a tax of five
livres , for every family , besides a tenth of all their productions ,
and to be ready to serve the republick , either by sea , or land ,
whenever their service should be required . BOSWELL-1768-2,87.280

Thus , was this colony settled . BOSWELL-1768-2,87.281

They enjoyed the free exercise of their own rites of religion ,
according to the Greek church , having brought with them the bishop of
Porto Vitilo . BOSWELL-1768-2,87.282

They had also brought with them , some religious <P_88> of the order of
St. Basil , the only order in their church ; who established a convent
in a wild and romantick valley . BOSWELL-1768-2,88.283

But the Genoese did not approve of these fathers ; BOSWELL-1768-2,88.284

and , in a short time , their convent was shut up .
BOSWELL-1768-2,88.285

The Greeks found themselves very easy and happy , for a good many years
. BOSWELL-1768-2,88.286

By their industry and activity , they beautified and enriched their
possessions , BOSWELL-1768-2,88.287

and built very good houses , doing every thing with a taste , altogether
new in Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,88.288

But their neighbours , the natives of the island , did not live in great
harmony with them . BOSWELL-1768-2,88.289

Perhaps , in this , envy may have had some share ; BOSWELL-1768-2,88.290

for their vines and their olives , their herds and their stocks , were ,
by care and skill , much superiour to those of the Corsicans .
BOSWELL-1768-2,88.291

But besides , the islanders looked upon the Greeks as auxiliaries of the
Genoese , to whom they , from time to time , swore fidelity ; and were
ever ready to give their assistance . BOSWELL-1768-2,88.292

They also knew , that the Greeks were well supplied with arms ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,88.293

and therefore , there were frequent skirmishes between them and the
peasants of the province of Vico , of which their territories had
formerly made a part ; BOSWELL-1768-2,88.294

and in the <P_89> year 1729 , when the nation rose against the
{TEXT:the_the} Genoese , the Greeks were seriously attacked ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,89.295

and many a desperate action they fought with great bravery .
BOSWELL-1768-2,89.296

The Genoese formed three regular companies of them , to whom they gave
pay ; BOSWELL-1768-2,89.297

and they were always employed in the most difficult enterprises .
BOSWELL-1768-2,89.298

In particular , they were detached to attempt taking the castle of Corte
from the patriots , on which occasion , they were sorely defeated , and
a great number of them were killed . BOSWELL-1768-2,89.299

After various struggles , which the plan of this work does not allow me
to relate , the Greeks were forced to leave their possessions , and
retire to Ajaccio , where they now support themselves tolerably by their
labour : and being convinced of the tyranny of the Genoese , wait with
impatience for their total expulsion from the island ; and hope from the
generosity of Paoli and the Corsicans , that protection and
encouragement which they deserve . BOSWELL-1768-2,89.300

This colony has been sober , virtuous and industrious ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,89.301

and if they have acted in a hostile manner against the nation , it was
from a good principle ; from the fidelity which they owed to the <P_90>
republick that had granted them an asylum ; which fidelity they would
ever have preserved , had not the republick included them in the general
oppression . BOSWELL-1768-2,90.302

I must observe of this colony , that {TEXT:that_that} it hath had the
honour of producing an excellent physician , Signor Giovanni Stefanopoli
, the first who hath had the wisdom and the spirit to bring inoculation
into practice in Corsica , by which he preserves multitudes of lives ;
and may therefore be justly reckoned a distinguished benefactor to the
state . BOSWELL-1768-2,90.303

Long despised , plundered and oppressed , the Corsicans again revived in
1729 , when the war commenced , which , with some intervals , has
continued till now ; and after so many changes , misfortunes and
struggles , will probably fix on a solid basis the Corsican liberty .
BOSWELL-1768-2,90.304

It is wonderful to see how great events are produced by little causes .
BOSWELL-1768-2,90.305

A late authour {COM:footnote_omitted} hath given us an entertaining
selection of such instances , from the histories of different nations .
BOSWELL-1768-2,90.306

The rise of the Corsicans in 1729 , was occasioned by a single paolo , a
piece worth about five pence English . BOSWELL-1768-2,90.307

A Genoese collector , went to the house <P_91> of a poor old woman ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,91.308

and demanded this trifling sum , as the money for which she was assessed
. BOSWELL-1768-2,91.309

Being in extreme penury , she had not wherewithal to satisfy the demand
. Upon which , the collector began to abuse her , and to seize some of
her furniture . BOSWELL-1768-2,91.310

She begged him to have patience , BOSWELL-1768-2,91.311

and said , she hoped in a few days to be able to pay him .
BOSWELL-1768-2,91.312

He persisted in his severity , BOSWELL-1768-2,91.313

and the poor woman made a great lamentation . BOSWELL-1768-2,91.314

Two or three people hearing the noise , entered the house ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,91.315

took the part of the woman , BOSWELL-1768-2,91.316

and exclaimed against the barbarity of the collector .
BOSWELL-1768-2,91.317

He threatened them with punishment , for having hindered him in the
execution of his office . BOSWELL-1768-2,91.318

This provoked the villagers , BOSWELL-1768-2,91.319

and they drove him away with stones . BOSWELL-1768-2,91.320

The Genoese sent troops to support their collector ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,91.321

and the Corsicans assembled in large bodies to defend themselves .
BOSWELL-1768-2,91.322

The tumult encreased . BOSWELL-1768-2,91.323

A spark was sufficient to kindle the generous flame , in a people , who
had so often glowed with the enthusiasm of liberty ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,91.324

and in a very short time , the whole island was in motion .
BOSWELL-1768-2,91.325

The Corsicans immediately rushed upon the capital , which they took
almost without resistance ; BOSWELL-1768-2,91.326

and they would have been masters of the castle <P_92> of Corte , had
they been a little better regulated . BOSWELL-1768-2,92.327

They saw it was necessary to put themselves under the direction of
certain chiefs . BOSWELL-1768-2,92.328

They therefore chose Signor Andrea Ceccaldi , one of the highest
nobility in the kingdom , and Signor Luiggi Giafferi , not indeed of the
first rank , but who had a numerous parentage ; a spirit , warm to a
degree of fanaticism , against the republick ; and the most steady and
undaunted resolution . BOSWELL-1768-2,92.329

To these was joined , Signor Domenico Raffalli , a worthy and learned
ecclesiastick , as a sort of president of justice , whose wisdom might
preserve order in their administration , and whose religion might temper
the violence of their measures , by principles of conscience .
BOSWELL-1768-2,92.330

The Genoese at first endeavoured to overcome the Corsicans by the sole
force of the republick ; BOSWELL-1768-2,92.331

but finding themselves altogether unable for it , while the Corsicans
were every day growing strong , cutting to pieces the poor
reinforcements of Genoese troops , and thereby supplying themselves with
more arms ; the republick was under the necessity of seeking foreign
assistance . BOSWELL-1768-2,92.332

They applied to the emperour , Charles the sixth , who sent to Corsica ,
a body of auxiliaries , <P_93> under the command of General Wachtendonck
. BOSWELL-1768-2,93.333

These harrassed the island , without being powerful enough to overawe it
. BOSWELL-1768-2,93.334

They had continual rencounters with the Corsicans , who , in one action
, killed 1200 of them . BOSWELL-1768-2,93.335

The emperour then sent a strong army of Germans , with the prince of
Wirtemberg at their head . BOSWELL-1768-2,93.336

The Corsicans were not in condition to resist such a force .
BOSWELL-1768-2,93.337

They laid down their arms upon condition , that a treaty should be made
between them and the Genoese , having for guarantee the emperour .
BOSWELL-1768-2,93.338

To this the republick having acceded , the Corsicans consented that
their three chiefs , together with Signor Aitelli , a pievano of great
influence , should go to Genoa as hostages . BOSWELL-1768-2,93.339

These were accordingly conducted thither , dreading no violation of the
promise of safety which had been made to them . BOSWELL-1768-2,93.340

The Ligurians however , inclined to put them to death ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,93.341

and their minister at Vienna , had almost obtained the emperour's
consent ; BOSWELL-1768-2,93.342

but the prince of Wirtemberg , who was afterwards killed at the battle
of Guastalla , a prince of a brave and gallant spirit , sent an express
to the emperour , with a very strong letter , representing how much the
honour of <P_94> Caesar would suffer , should he consent to the death of
those who had surrendered themselves upon the faith of his sacred
protection . BOSWELL-1768-2,94.343

This was seconded by the generous interposition of the great prince
Eugene of Savoy ; BOSWELL-1768-2,94.344

and instructions were sent to Genoa , that the hostages should be
released . BOSWELL-1768-2,94.345

Giafferi and Aitelli went home to Corsica . BOSWELL-1768-2,94.346

Ceccaldi went to Spain , where he died with the rank of colonel ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,94.347

and Raffalli went to Rome , where he remained till he became very old .
BOSWELL-1768-2,94.348

He then returned to end his days in his native country , where he still
lives , regarded with veneration . BOSWELL-1768-2,94.349

The treaty which had been formally concluded between the Corsicans and
the Genoese , having been broken by the latter , there was a very short
suspension of hostilities ; BOSWELL-1768-2,94.350

and in 1734 , the Corsicans rose anew . BOSWELL-1768-2,94.351

Giafferi was again elected a general , BOSWELL-1768-2,94.352

and got for his colleague {TEXT:collegue} Signor Giacinto Paoli , father
of the present general . BOSWELL-1768-2,94.353

Giacinto Paoli was a Corsican gentleman of a good family .
BOSWELL-1768-2,94.354

But his merit distinguished him more than his rank .
BOSWELL-1768-2,94.355

He was a man of learning , religion and bravery ; well qualified to
serve <P_95> his country , either in politicks , or in war .
BOSWELL-1768-2,95.356

These chiefs were assisted by a variety of presidents of justice ,
elected one after another . BOSWELL-1768-2,95.357

The Genoese had paid very dear for their victory , in the former
struggles . BOSWELL-1768-2,95.358

It was computed , that it had cost them above thirty millions of livres
, besides costly presents to the prince of Wirtemberg , and to the other
general officers . BOSWELL-1768-2,95.359

The Marquis d'Argens very pleasantly applies to the Genoese , the French
fable of a gardener , who complained to a gentleman in the neighbourhood
, that a hare came every day into his garden , and eat his cabbages ;
and begged the gentleman would be so good , as drive her out for him .
BOSWELL-1768-2,95.360

The Gentleman comes with a pack of hounds , and half-a-dozen huntsmen ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,95.361

and does more mischief in five minutes , than the hare could have done
in seven years . BOSWELL-1768-2,95.362

After a prodigious chace , the hare made her escape through a hole in
the wall . Upon which the gentleman congratulated the gardener on
getting rid of his enemy , and advised him to stop up the hole
{COM:footnote_omitted} . BOSWELL-1768-2,95.363

So the Genoese , after having <P_96> expended a great deal more upon
foreign auxiliaries , than any advantage they can ever derive from
Corsica ; upon the departure of these auxiliaries , have the
mortification to find themselves just as they were .
BOSWELL-1768-2,96.364

Genoa again tried her force against Corsica BOSWELL-1768-2,96.365

but she only shewed her weakness , and bad politicks .
BOSWELL-1768-2,96.366

So much fallen was she from that adventurous state , which had formerly
extended her influence so far . BOSWELL-1768-2,96.367

Genoa indeed , was unhappily administrated . BOSWELL-1768-2,96.368

They relate , that the city of Savona having rebelled several times , it
was deliberated in the senate , whether thy ought not to destroy it
altogether . When a witty senator of the Doria family , rose , and said
, ' If that be your intention , gentlemen , you need only send them such
another governour , as the two last were : BOSWELL-1768-2,96.369

you can@ @not fall on a better expedient . ' BOSWELL-1768-2,96.370

The Corsicans on this occasion , displayed their resolution afresh , in
the cause of liberty . BOSWELL-1768-2,96.371

They were well conducted , BOSWELL-1768-2,96.372

and had many successful engagements with the Genoese .
BOSWELL-1768-2,96.373

Their noble enthusiasm always continued , BOSWELL-1768-2,96.374

and , notwithstanding many unlucky divisions among themselves , there
were still , in different <P_97> parts of the island , intrepid bands ,
animated by the example of distinguished leaders .
BOSWELL-1768-2,97.375

I must here take notice of count Domenico Rivarola .
BOSWELL-1768-2,97.376

His family was a branch of the house of Rossi , at Parma , one of the
most ancient and conspicuous of Italian nobility .
BOSWELL-1768-2,97.377

His ancestor had left his fief of Rivarola , in the territory of Mantua
, on account of the wars between the emperour , and the countess Matilda
, BOSWELL-1768-2,97.378

and had settled in the Genoese state , where he quitted the name of
Rossi , and took that of Rivarola . BOSWELL-1768-2,97.379

This family of Rivarola {TEXT:Rivalora} greatly increased .
BOSWELL-1768-2,97.380

In the fifteenth century , Francis Rivarola was , on account of long
services , raised to the dignity of a count Palatine , by the emperour
Maximilian ; from which period , the title has since been in the family
. BOSWELL-1768-2,97.381

Several descendants of Rivarola were established in Spain , Sicily , and
the dominions of Sardinia , BOSWELL-1768-2,97.382

and three were established in Corsica , one in Calvi , one in Ajaccio ,
and one in Bastia ; of which last , count Domenico Rivarola was the
representative . BOSWELL-1768-2,97.383

This gentleman had the lands of Chiaveri , on the river of Genoa ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,97.384

was considered as a friend of the republick , BOSWELL-1768-2,97.385

and was instructed by <P_98> her , with the office of commissary in
Bologna {TEXT:Balagna} ; a singular honour for a Corsican .
BOSWELL-1768-2,98.386

He endeavoured , at this time , to make a reasonable accommodation
between the Corsicans and Genoese , which having proved ineffectual , he
was convinced , that the republick was determined to persevere in
tyranny ; BOSWELL-1768-2,98.387

he therefore embraced the patriotick party , BOSWELL-1768-2,98.388

and was ever after , most firm and zealous , in the great cause of
liberty . BOSWELL-1768-2,98.389

He quitted the island , BOSWELL-1768-2,98.390

and went over to Leghorn , that he might be at full liberty to negotiate
upon the continent , in behalf of his country . BOSWELL-1768-2,98.391

The Genoese immediately confiscated his lands of Chiaveri .
BOSWELL-1768-2,98.392

He had still the lands of Oletta , in Corsica ; to which , he made his
family remove from Bastia . BOSWELL-1768-2,98.393

But , he had soon a very severe trial of his constancy .
BOSWELL-1768-2,98.394

For , the same year , his son Antonio , who was studying at the academy
of Siena , went home , to bring with him his brother Nicholas ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,98.395

and , as they were crossing over to Leghorn , in a little Tuscan vessel
, with a British passport , they were taken by the Republick , and
carried to Genoa , where they were thrown into prison .
BOSWELL-1768-2,98.396

The republick thought this would certainly <P_99> prevent count Domenico
, the father , from continuing with the patriots .
BOSWELL-1768-2,99.397

They offered to restore him his possessions , to release his sons , and
to make him general of the Corsican troops in their service , if he
would return to their side . BOSWELL-1768-2,99.398

But he answered with resolution and magnanimity , ' I miei figliuoli me
li daranno a lor dispetto ; e tutte le altre offerte le stimo un nulla
paragone del guisto impegno che ho preso e che seguitero fin che ho vita
. BOSWELL-1768-2,99.399

My sons they shall be obliged to give me , whether they will or no ;
BOSWELL-1768-2,99.400

and all their other offers I consider as nothing , in comparison of the
just enterprise in which I am engaged , and in which I will persevere
while I have life . ' BOSWELL-1768-2,99.401

Such instances of patriotick spirit deserve to be recorded .
BOSWELL-1768-2,99.402

The annals of Corsica will furnish many of them . BOSWELL-1768-2,99.403

When the Austrian troops entered Genoa , the young counts Rivarola were
set at liberty . BOSWELL-1768-2,99.404

Count Antonio , the eldest , my very good friend , is a major , in the
service of the king of Sardinia , and consul_general for that sovereign
in Tuscany . BOSWELL-1768-2,99.405

Count Nicholas , the other , lives at Oletta in Corsica ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,99.406

but is so delicate a constitution , <P_100> that he can@ @not serve his
country as he would wish to do . BOSWELL-1768-2,100.407

Both the brothers have the spirit of their father .
BOSWELL-1768-2,100.408

Count Domenico Rivarola obtained a Regiment in the Sardinian service ,
BOSWELL-1768-2,100.409

and by his influence at Turin , procured such assistance , that he would
have been able to free his country , had it not been for the house of
Matra in Corsica , which stood by the republick , and had interest
enough to make a strong party in the island . BOSWELL-1768-2,100.410

In the mean time , the Corsican war went on with spirit .
BOSWELL-1768-2,100.411

Sometimes it was expected , that the king of Spain would strike in on
one side or other . BOSWELL-1768-2,100.412

But that prince did not choose to interfere . BOSWELL-1768-2,100.413

Probably he foresaw , that it would involve him in a quarrel with France
. BOSWELL-1768-2,100.414

While the Genoese and the Corsicans were thus keenly engaged , and the
politicians of Europe were forming various conjectures , a most
extraordinary circumstance occurred , to the amazement of every body .
BOSWELL-1768-2,100.415

This was the appearance of Theodore , whose singular story has made so
much noise . BOSWELL-1768-2,100.416

As many inconsistent reports have been circulated , with regard to this
man , I have been <P_101> at great pains to obtain authentick accounts
concerning him , which , I am persuaded , will be very acceptable to my
readers . BOSWELL-1768-2,101.417

Theodore Baron Newhoff , in the county of La Marc in Westphalia , was
the personage who aspired to the sovereignty of Corsica .
BOSWELL-1768-2,101.418

He had his education in the French service . BOSWELL-1768-2,101.419

He afterwards went to Spain , where he received some marks of regard
from the duke of Riperda and cardinal Alberoni . BOSWELL-1768-2,101.420

But being of a strange unsettled projecting disposition , he quitted
Spain , BOSWELL-1768-2,101.421

and went BOSWELL-1768-2,101.422

and travelled into Italy , England and Holland ; ever in search of some
new adventure . BOSWELL-1768-2,101.423

He at last fixed his attention on Corsica , BOSWELL-1768-2,101.424

and formed a scheme of making himself a king . BOSWELL-1768-2,101.425

He was a man of abilities and address ; BOSWELL-1768-2,101.426

and , after having fully informed himself of every thing relating to the
island , he went to Tunis , where he fell upon means to procure some
money and arms ; BOSWELL-1768-2,101.427

and then came to Leghorn , from whence he wrote a letter to the Corsican
chiefs , Giafferi and Paoli , offering considerable assistance to the
nation , if they would elect him as their sovereign .
BOSWELL-1768-2,101.428

This letter was consigned to count Domenico Rivarola , who acted as
Corsican plenipotentiary , <P_102> in Tuscany ; BOSWELL-1768-2,102.429

and he gave for answer , that if Theodore brought the assistance he
promised to the Corsicans , they would very willingly make him king .
BOSWELL-1768-2,102.430

Upon this he , without loss of time set sail , BOSWELL-1768-2,102.431

and landed at Tavagna in spring , 1736 . BOSWELL-1768-2,102.432

He was a man of a very stately appearance ; BOSWELL-1768-2,102.433

and the Turkish dress which he wore , added to the dignity of his mien .
BOSWELL-1768-2,102.434

He had a few attendants with him . BOSWELL-1768-2,102.435

His manners were so engaging , and his offers so plausible , that he was
proclaimed king of Corsica , before count Rivarola's dispatches arrived
to inform the chiefs of the terms upon which he had agreed .
BOSWELL-1768-2,102.436

He brought with him about a_thousand zechins of Tunis , besides some
arms and ammunition , BOSWELL-1768-2,102.437

and made magnificent promises of foreign assistance ; so that the
Corsicans , who were glad of any support , willingly gave in@ @to his
schemes ; BOSWELL-1768-2,102.438

and it must be considered , that there could be no great harm in
allowing a man the name of king , since they had always the power of
restraining his authority . BOSWELL-1768-2,102.439

