<BEGIN_boswell-1776-1>

<P_36>

Tuesday 1 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,36.3

<paren> Writing from <font> notes , <$$font> as I always do , 17 October
. <$$paren> BOSWELL-1776-1,36.4

Set out after breakfast , preceded by David Shaw . BOSWELL-1776-1,36.5

At <font> Cadgershole , <$$font> about the march of the shire , found
John Shaw of Dunaskin , who was to go with us . BOSWELL-1776-1,36.6

Passed by the ruins of the house of Lagwine , where I had been kindly
entertained in 1762 . BOSWELL-1776-1,36.7

Felt a " warm remembrance " of Waterhead's hospitality .
BOSWELL-1776-1,36.8

Was pleased with the hilly prospects . BOSWELL-1776-1,36.9

Approached Glenhowl , Mackilston's habitation . BOSWELL-1776-1,36.10

Saw crowd of horses in a fold which the Laird had made some years ago to
hold them on this occasion that they might not spoil his grass .
BOSWELL-1776-1,36.11

David Shaw hastened on before us , BOSWELL-1776-1,36.12

and announced that here was <font> Affleck . <$$font>
BOSWELL-1776-1,36.13

The Laird had lived in a wretched hut . BOSWELL-1776-1,36.14

I found here my good acquaintance , Mr. Newall of Barskeoch , at whose
house I intended to live comfortably at night . BOSWELL-1776-1,36.15

Drank some wine with the company , BOSWELL-1776-1,36.16

then settled with the relations that we should return that night from
the churchyard , <P_37> and open the repositories in presence of Mr.
Newall , who was a Justice . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.17

I need not be minute . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.18

This was done , BOSWELL-1776-1,37.19

and a curious scene it was to see all the relations <paren> the <font>
concerned <$$font> as they called themselves <$$paren> , eagerly
attending while I read the settlements ; and all of them , especially an
Irish cousin , sadly disappointed , all except David Shaw's family ,
whose son was left heir and executor . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.20

I to my surprise found thirty pounds left as a legacy to myself .
BOSWELL-1776-1,37.21

I went through the operation with perfect composure ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,37.22

and all seemed satisfied with my behaviour . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.23

Knockroon made an inventory of everything valuable that we found ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,37.24

and put disposition , testament , bonds , bills , and bank notes into
his pocket , to be accountable . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.25

It was curious to consider how , when a man is dead , all that has
belonged to him is rummaged , as if he never had existed .
BOSWELL-1776-1,37.26

Barskeoch conducted me with Knockroon and Mr. Hugh Rorison , his
brother-in-law , to his house at Earlston . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.27

We had dined at Glenhowl . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.28

It was now near twelve at night . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.29

We drank a little brandy punch , BOSWELL-1776-1,37.30

eat a bit of dry toast , BOSWELL-1776-1,37.31

and went to bed . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.32

Wednesday 2 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.33

Breakfasted with Mrs. Newall ; BOSWELL-1776-1,37.34

then rode again to Glenhowl , accompanied as last night from it .
BOSWELL-1776-1,37.35

Gave directions as to what was proper to be done . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.36

Dined there . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.37

Returned to Earlston at night . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.38

Thursday 3 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.39

Was pleased , BOSWELL-1776-1,37.40

and wondered somewhat to find that however gloomy , listless , and
desponding I had been last Summer Session , I had now acted as a lawyer
upon an occasion which required skill and address , and had no reason to
be dissatisfied with my conduct . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.41

Earlston is said to have been a hunting-seat of our Queen Mary's Earl
Bothwell . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.42

There is a remarkably fine old oak at it . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.43

Rode to Craigengillan's to dinner ; BOSWELL-1776-1,37.44

found there Mr. Blane of Blanefield , who had stayed on purpose to see
me . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.45

Was hearty and well , BOSWELL-1776-1,37.46

and liked much to observe the shrewd sense and thorough knowledge of
country business which Craigengillan possessed , who has certainly made
the greatest fortune that any inland man ever did .
BOSWELL-1776-1,37.47

<paren> I mean without trading beyond seas . <$$paren>
BOSWELL-1776-1,37.48

I talked of going home next day . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.49

" What , " said he , " are you to make an inn of my house , take a night
for your conveniency as you go to Galloway , and another as you return ?
BOSWELL-1776-1,37.50

Did you not write to me that you was to pay me a visit ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,37.51

and is this the way you do it ? " BOSWELL-1776-1,37.52

This jocular rebuke was enough . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.53

I agreed to stay next day . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.54

He went to bed before supper , BOSWELL-1776-1,37.55

and I contrived to rise from table soon after it . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.56

Friday 4 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.57

Rose in admirable health and spirits . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.58

Liked this house much . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.59

Thought I would come to it with my wife and children in summer and stay
a month . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.60

Was glad to be intimate with a man so eminent in his way as
Craigengillan , in whom I saw an unabating attention and activity
directed to the objects of his business . BOSWELL-1776-1,37.61

I was convinced that he must be originally endowed with faculties
peculiarly vigorous , and that I myself , <P_38> and most other men ,
could no more exist as he does than as a lion . BOSWELL-1776-1,38.62

Metaphysical niceties in the study of human nature appeared to me so
slender that I could not attend to them . BOSWELL-1776-1,38.63

I viewed Craigengillan , as a man accustomed to examine lilies and
tulips and slight plants would view an oak . BOSWELL-1776-1,38.64

His cheerfulness too was extraordinary ; BOSWELL-1776-1,38.65

and I traced in him the humorous style of the <font> Cochrane School ,
<$$font> he having been much with Charles and Basil .
BOSWELL-1776-1,38.66

His daughters , the eldest only - , were fine natural girls ; and
Quintin , his only son , now - , as good-looking a boy as I ever saw ,
with fine health and rural vivacity . BOSWELL-1776-1,38.67

Blanefield , Mr. McMyne , Knockroon , and I walked up to Loch Doon
BOSWELL-1776-1,38.68

and saw two great drains from it worked by powder through the hard
whin-rock , at the expense of Craigengillan and the other proprietors of
the ground about it . BOSWELL-1776-1,38.69

I must have a particular account of this to insert in my history of
Ayrshire . BOSWELL-1776-1,38.70

I this autumn looked into Crawfurd's history of Renfrew , which , though
confusedly arranged and ill expressed , raised agreeable ideas in my
mind , I suppose by some association of ideas with it and the family of
Lainshaw . BOSWELL-1776-1,38.71

Before dinner , had a private conference with Craigengillan on the
subject of getting my father to pay my debt to Dalblair's creditors .
BOSWELL-1776-1,38.72

He in a <P_39> most friendly way engaged to come to Auchinleck this
autumn and be present at the payment , and use his influence with my
father to take a simple discharge and not an assignation , so that I
should be free . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.73

He said he had been very much obliged to my father , and that he would
serve a dog of our family . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.74

Major Hunter , an old companion , and Ross of Kerse , a young gentleman
with a handsome fortune in our county , whom I had not seen before ,
came to dinner . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.75

My spirits were high . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.76

I was made landlord , BOSWELL-1776-1,39.77

and I promoted drinking till we were too much intoxicated , at least
Ross and I , who drank port . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.78

A wild thought seized me . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.79

I would try if I was sober ; BOSWELL-1776-1,39.80

and the experiment was if I could walk across a narrow wooden bridge
without rails , over the water of Doon , running rapid and pretty deep .
BOSWELL-1776-1,39.81

If I did this and returned , it was to be a proof I was sober .
BOSWELL-1776-1,39.82

I did not consider what would be my fate if I failed .
BOSWELL-1776-1,39.83

Joseph followed me as I staggered down . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.84

I ordered him back . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.85

He could not apprehend what I was going to try . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.86

I accomplished my perilous exploit . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.87

I shudder to think of it . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.88

What an unhappy wife and helpless children might I in this drunken
delirium have made ! BOSWELL-1776-1,39.89

I surely should of all men guard against intoxication .
BOSWELL-1776-1,39.90

Let this be the last instance . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.91

I sat a little with the company at cards . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.92

Felt myself very uneasy . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.93

Went to my room , BOSWELL-1776-1,39.94

got rid of the wine , BOSWELL-1776-1,39.95

and went into bed between seven and eight . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.96

I say <font> into <$$font> because it was truly a <font> refuge .
<$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,39.97

Saturday 5 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.98

<paren> Writing on Sunday 20 October . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1776-1,39.99

Awaked very well . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.100

Drank buttermilk , BOSWELL-1776-1,39.101

and was not a bit the worse of my riot . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.102

But I resolved that my danger on the bridge should be a memento to me .
BOSWELL-1776-1,39.103

Knockroon conducted me round Ben Beoch , the hill which is a conspicuous
object from Auchinleck , and through the moors of New Cumnock .
BOSWELL-1776-1,39.104

All this week the weather was delightful . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.105

There was a short shower this morning . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.106

Then the day was fine . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.107

On Corsegelloch Hill we had an exceeding extensive prospect of Kyle ,
Cunninghame , the sea , and Arran ; BOSWELL-1776-1,39.108

and the estate of Auchinleck from the Place up to Boghead was clear
before us , BOSWELL-1776-1,39.109

and looked admirably . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.110

We dined at Swan's , the new inn at Cumnock , as I wished to see it .
BOSWELL-1776-1,39.111

I was pleased to see everything in our county so much improved .
BOSWELL-1776-1,39.112

Old John Boswell dined with me , BOSWELL-1776-1,39.113

and after dinner I had James Johnston , Thomas Wallace , and Laird
Sutherland to drink a glass with me . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.114

I checked an inclination to be very hearty , recollecting that this is
being no better than the Laird of Logan . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.115

Knockroon and I drank tea at his mother's in Cumnock ;
BOSWELL-1776-1,39.116

stopped at Knockroon BOSWELL-1776-1,39.117

and saw his estate in high improvement . BOSWELL-1776-1,39.118

<P_40>

He went with me to Auchinleck at night . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.120

Had a letter from my dear wife that Sandy was quite well .
BOSWELL-1776-1,40.121

Sunday 6 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.122

At Auchinleck Church with the family ; BOSWELL-1776-1,40.123

was calm . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.124

In the evening walked at the Old House with James Bruce .
BOSWELL-1776-1,40.125

Knockroon went away in the morning . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.126

Monday 7 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.127

A very wet day . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.128

Read , along with my father and the ladies , letters between my
great-grandfather and my grandfather when he was in Holland and London .
BOSWELL-1776-1,40.129

Was much pleased with old ideas . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.130

Tuesday 8 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.131

Rainy . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.132

Was out awhile with my father assisting in tying up crooked oaks to
poles to make them grow straight . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.133

In the evening to our surprise Commissioner Cochrane arrived from
Edinburgh . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.134

I liked to see my father and him together . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.135

Wednesday 9 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.136

My father was not very well . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.137

The Commissioner and I walked down by the old <font> mains roading
<$$font> to the Old House , BOSWELL-1776-1,40.138

and were , I thought , cordial enough . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.139

He said to me that my father was much fallen off , BOSWELL-1776-1,40.140

and indeed one sign of it was that he flagged in conversation even with
Basil Cochrane , his intimate friend , and seemed to like rather to get
away to his library to amuse himself alone . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.141

It was curious to observe the Commissioner himself at the age of
seventy-five , more than five years older than my father , quite brisk .
BOSWELL-1776-1,40.142

But he never was harassed with severe application as my father was .
BOSWELL-1776-1,40.143

Mr. Chalmers in Braehead dined . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.144

Thursday 10 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.145

A showery day . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.146

My father and Lady Auchinleck and the Commissioner and I took an airing
in the coach up the road to the church and home again .
BOSWELL-1776-1,40.147

James Johnston of Cumnock dined . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.148

Friday 11 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.149

The Commissioner and I went over in his chaise to Braehead
BOSWELL-1776-1,40.150

and paid a visit to Mr. and Mrs. Chalmers . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.151

A wet day . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.152

My mind was now very sound , BOSWELL-1776-1,40.153

for I felt no weariness or fretfulness , though without any gay
sensations . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.154

I read aloud in the dining-room some of a history of the war in Flanders
from 1701 to 1709 inclusive , in rhyme , by John Scott , a common
soldier born in Ayrshire , a curious manuscript which belonged to Mr.
Charles Cochrane , BOSWELL-1776-1,40.155

and I also read some of Crawfurd's <font> Peerage ; <$$font>
BOSWELL-1776-1,40.156

and thus time went on very well . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.157

I was , to be sure , not advancing much in any capital line ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,40.158

but I was soothing my father by insensible attentions , which are as
effectual for the good of the temper as insensible perspiration for the
good of the corporeal frame . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.159

Saturday 12 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.160

Rode to Treesbank to breakfast . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.161

Found Mr. Campbell much weaker and in a mild state of resignation , in
so much that really the horror of his affliction , which I formerly
could hardly bear , seemed now to be gone . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.162

I proposed to him to leave ten guineas to his sister-in-law , Miss
Macredie , as a token of his regard . BOSWELL-1776-1,40.163

He agreed to it , BOSWELL-1776-1,40.164

and I wrote <P_41> a short paper for it , which he signed , as he also
did a paper leaving his old smith his possession for his life and five
pounds to buy a horse . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.165

This I wrote at his own desire . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.166

It was agreeable to observe so much humanity in his mind when so much
distressed . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.167

The pain of his distemper was somewhat abated while I was with him .
BOSWELL-1776-1,41.168

I repeated the first part of that beautiful consolatory chapter , " Let
not your heart be troubled , " BOSWELL-1776-1,41.169

and I knelt upon the bed , BOSWELL-1776-1,41.170

and offered up a short fervent prayer for my poor distressed friend .
BOSWELL-1776-1,41.171

He did not hear it , BOSWELL-1776-1,41.172

but observed me in devotion . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.173

I asked him if he felt any uneasiness at the thought {TEXT:thoughts} of
death . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.174

He said nature could not but shrink , BOSWELL-1776-1,41.175

but he appeared quite submissive to the will of God , and in full hope
of happiness in a future state . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.176

He said his greatest uneasiness was that the violence of the pain
disturbed him so that he could not fix his heart so steadily on God as
he wished to do . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.177

I said God , who knew his affliction , would make allowance for that .
BOSWELL-1776-1,41.178

I assured him that both from duty as tutor and curator and from regard
to him , with whom I had always lived in great friendship , I should be
most attentive to his sons . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.179

I could perceive at one time a black cloud passing through his mind , or
perhaps the natural effect of the near view of death when one is
weakened with sickness ; BOSWELL-1776-1,41.180

for when I was asking him very particularly as to the future management
of some of his affairs , he said , in a kind of hasty tone , " Say no
more of it . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.181

Leave all to the providence of God . " BOSWELL-1776-1,41.182

While I sat by him and was sincerely serious , I could not however
prevent imaginations of scepticism from springing out in my mind at
times . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.183

But I checked them , BOSWELL-1776-1,41.184

and considered that there is a rational preponderation both for a future
state and for Christianity . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.185

Besides , one would surely cherish hope on a deathbed , were it only as
studying immediate happiness . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.186

I am of opinion that the <font> savoir mourir <$$font> should be a
considerable article in the <font> savoir vivre . <$$font>
BOSWELL-1776-1,41.187

I regretted secretly that the Presbyterian persuasion affords not such
aids to a dying man as the Catholic Church , or the Church of England ;
BOSWELL-1776-1,41.188

for poor Treesbank might have been greatly supported in his present
state by the pious ceremonies devised by masters of human nature .
BOSWELL-1776-1,41.189

Mrs. Campbell was complaining much today . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.190

I thought her dying , though slowly . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.191

I left Treesbank before two , as I wished to show all due attention to
my old grand-uncle , Mr. Cochrane , and not dine from home while his
visit lasted . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.192

Dinner was over when I got home . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.193

I had some by myself in the dining-room beside the company ;
BOSWELL-1776-1,41.194

then put on dry clothes , my French green suit , BOSWELL-1776-1,41.195

and played at catch-honours to divert the Commissioner , my father and I
against him and Lady Auchinleck . BOSWELL-1776-1,41.196

I borrowed halfpence from <P_42> my father that I might have it to say
both that I played at cards with him , and that he lent me money to game
with . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.197

I received tonight a short letter from my dear wife , dated on Wednesday
the 9th , in great uneasiness that she had not heard from me for a week
. BOSWELL-1776-1,42.198

It gave me pain that she should suffer at all . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.199

But I had written to her from Ayr that while in Galloway I should
probably not have an opportunity to write to her ; BOSWELL-1776-1,42.200

and I was satisfied now by considering that she would have received good
accounts from me in the course of this week . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.201

Sunday 13 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.202

The family and the Commissioner stayed at home . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.203

I rode to church , BOSWELL-1776-1,42.204

and attended all day . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.205

Had Wallacetown alone with me between sermons . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.206

In the morning when the Commissioner and I were talking by ourselves of
my father's settlements , he said , " James , it will soon be all your
own . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.207

Your father is drooping . " BOSWELL-1776-1,42.208

I assured him I did not wish it , for that I saw it to be a very
difficult matter to succeed such a man as my father .
BOSWELL-1776-1,42.209

The Commissioner did not seem to believe me . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.210

But upon my honour I was sincere . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.211

In the evening I walked down to the Old House , as I have done every
Sunday that I have been at Auchinleck this autumn .
BOSWELL-1776-1,42.212

James Bruce as usual convoyed me almost to the House .
BOSWELL-1776-1,42.213

Monday 14 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.214

The Commissioner was to set out early . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.215

I made tea for him . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.216

My father attended him too . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.217

The good practical sense and cheerful vivacity of the Commissioner at
seventy-five was pleasingly wonderful to me . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.218

If I speculated on human life , I felt melancholy .
BOSWELL-1776-1,42.219

But if I looked at him , there was no such thing .
BOSWELL-1776-1,42.220

At the same time he seemed to talk as if he had no religion , and little
or no expectation of a future state . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.221

I really have a notion that it is possible for a man to have such a hard
mind as to be happy with present enjoyments , and to think , without
dismal feelings , of dissolution : <font> " And there@ @'s an end on@
@'t . " <$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,42.222

But he can@ @not have delicacy of sensation and an extending fancy .
BOSWELL-1776-1,42.223

Lord Hailes arrived this day to dinner . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.224

I had in the forenoon a very good conversation with Lady Auchinleck ,
whose steady mind instructed me by showing me an example of what I often
doubted the existence of . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.225

She said to me , very justly , " You talk as if men were mere machines ,
and had not a power of governing their conduct by reason . "
BOSWELL-1776-1,42.226

Indeed nothing is more dangerous than to lay the bridle on the neck of
inclination , and acquiesce in its leading us along without any fixed
rule . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.227

The Laird of Logan and Hallglenmuir dined BOSWELL-1776-1,42.228

and went away after dinner . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.229

Matthew Dickie also dined BOSWELL-1776-1,42.230

and stayed after dinner . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.231

My father was much better today . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.232

While the Commissioner was here , his memory seemed to be much decayed
and his spirits dull . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.233

Today I could observe no such defects . BOSWELL-1776-1,42.234

We had a classical evening with Lord Hailes , looking at books in the
library , and talking of editions and of learned men .
BOSWELL-1776-1,42.235

<P_43>

Tuesday 15 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.237

Mr. George Fergusson came to breakfast . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.238

His keenness pleased me . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.239

Lord Hailes and he went to Ballochmyle . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.240

My father and I and Matthew Dickie walked in the Broomholm .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.241

In the evening I wrote to Lord Mountstuart , which ennobled me somewhat
. BOSWELL-1776-1,43.242

Wednesday 16 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.243

Matthew Dickie went away before breakfast . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.244

I went to dine at Coilsfield . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.245

At Mauchline met with Lord Hailes going to Barskimming .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.246

He informed me of General Howe's having defeated the Americans , and
that Sir Alexander Murray of Balmanno and Captain George Logan were
killed . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.247

I was sorry that the <font> Ministerial <$$font> Army had prevailed .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.248

But my youthful military ardour revived , BOSWELL-1776-1,43.249

and I was quite a soldier in idea as I rode briskly along .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.250

At Coilsfield found Lady Balcarres and several more ladies , and Captain
Jock Miller . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.251

I had not been here for eight years . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.252

Walked a little , BOSWELL-1776-1,43.253

played at cards , BOSWELL-1776-1,43.254

was quite easy , BOSWELL-1776-1,43.255

and after dinner had the command of myself , BOSWELL-1776-1,43.256

and would not drink much , though pressed to it . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.257

At night my father was rather cold in his behaviour to me .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.258

While he appeared to be failed , he was milder and more affectionate .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.259

It however always hurt me that he appeared not to have the least thought
of my wife and children . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.260

I was disappointed at getting no letter tonight . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.261

Thursday 17 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.262

My best times with my father this autumn , my most <font> mollia tempora
, <$$font> have been in the library before breakfast .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.263

This morning I asked him to tell me what he wished to have done , or not
done , BOSWELL-1776-1,43.264

for it was my sincere wish to please him . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.265

He seemed to take this kindly . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.266

After breakfast had another good conversation with Lady Auchinleck .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.267

She said she never allowed people to have sense who did not act sensibly
. BOSWELL-1776-1,43.268

Speaking sense was nothing in proof of a character ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.269

for you may as well read it in a book . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.270

There is something in this . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.271

Said I: " You think the sense is contained in a man who only speaks
sensibly , but is not incorporated in his composition .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.272

He has a dial plate , but not a spring . " BOSWELL-1776-1,43.273

I found from her conversation that my debt was to be paid by my father ,
and my allowance of 300 +L {TEXT:+L300} a year continued .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.274

I really had a satisfaction in talking with her , BOSWELL-1776-1,43.275

and my prejudice against her was almost clean gone .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.276

She told me she had never found time heavy all her life .
BOSWELL-1776-1,43.277

I get more and more instances to confirm me in my notion that human
beings differ as much one from another as if they were not of the same
species . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.278

I mean some differ so from others . BOSWELL-1776-1,43.279

I thought of Dr. <P_44> Johnson's beginning of his Prologue to
Goldsmith's comedy , <font> The Good_Natur'd Man : <$$font>
BOSWELL-1776-1,44.280

Press'd with <font> the load of life , <$$font> the weary mind Surveys
the general toil of human kind , BOSWELL-1776-1,44.281

and I wondered if the <font> load <$$font> was <font> peculiar <$$font>
and not <font> general . <$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,44.282

I had had little or no intercourse with Sir John Whitefoord for many
years . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.283

I know not how , BOSWELL-1776-1,44.284

for we never had any quarrel or difference to set us at variance .
BOSWELL-1776-1,44.285

He had lost his eldest son . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.286

I was softened by sympathy , as I love my own children very
affectionately . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.287

I rode over to pay him a forenoon visit . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.288

Found him out riding . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.289

<paren> Writing from notes , as always to be understood when not
otherwise expressed , on Thursday 31 October . <$$paren>
BOSWELL-1776-1,44.290

Was politely received , having rode to where he was and found him .
BOSWELL-1776-1,44.291

He seemed much depressed by his misfortune , BOSWELL-1776-1,44.292

and talked of it . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.293

I was pleased with part of his improvements , BOSWELL-1776-1,44.294

but some seemed to me like a child's figures with pins on a pincushion :
trees in groups of <font> intended <$$font> irregular shapes , and those
trees like maypoles , without leafy branches ; BOSWELL-1776-1,44.295

and I confess I did not like grounds laid out in no known figures , so
as to be one half of the chaos - <font> " without form , " <$$font>
though not altogether <font> " void . " <$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,44.296

There was an air of elegance about the place which pleased me .
BOSWELL-1776-1,44.297

But I checked any instantaneous inclinations for being on an easy social
footing with neighbours , BOSWELL-1776-1,44.298

for I considered that the Family of Auchinleck , by preserving a certain
peculiar abstraction , has been more respected . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.299

I inquired for my old companion , the Honourable Andrew Erskine , who
was now living with Sir John , BOSWELL-1776-1,44.300

but he had walked out BOSWELL-1776-1,44.301

and could not be found . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.302

Mr. Brown , writer in Kilmarnock , dined at Auchinleck , having come
there to talk with me on Sir Walter's affairs . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.303

I received today a kind letter from Douglas , to whom I had written to
know when he would be at Douglas Castle . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.304

I resolved to go thither next Monday . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.305

I was in good , steady , and cheerful spirits . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.306

Friday 18 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.307

I breakfasted with Mr. Dun at his manse . BOSWELL-1776-1,44.308

This <P_45> day Craigengillan and Robert Miller , writer in Ayr , came
to dinner , that my debt due to Dalblair's trustees might be settled .
BOSWELL-1776-1,45.309

Craigengillan had from friendship to me made a point of being present
himself , in case my father should have made any difficulty about it .
BOSWELL-1776-1,45.310

Before dinner I showed my father a scroll of the discharge of the bond
granted by me and him as my cautioner . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.311

It bore , " The remainder of the sum to be paid <font> by the said James
Boswell . " <$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,45.312

My father said , " That is not the fact " ; BOSWELL-1776-1,45.313

and therefore he chose to have it mentioned that it was paid by <font>
him . <$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,45.314

I acquiesced , BOSWELL-1776-1,45.315

and after dinner he without a grudge put his name to a promissory note
for the sum of 12 +L {TEXT:+L12} - , all of which , except 200 +L
{TEXT:+L200} which had been retained out of my establishment during
these two last years , was actually paying for my extravagance .
BOSWELL-1776-1,45.316

He did it very handsomely . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.317

I said to him with affectionate and grateful warmth , " I am much
obliged to you . " BOSWELL-1776-1,45.318

He just said with good humour , " Sin no more . " BOSWELL-1776-1,45.319

I felt a most agreeable regard for him . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.320

How happy a circumstance was it to be thus on such cordial terms with a
father ; as cordial as a kind of coldness in his temper could allow .
BOSWELL-1776-1,45.321

I hoped to show my sincere thankfulness . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.322

Knockroon came at tea-time . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.323

The evening passed very well . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.324

Saturday 19 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.325

Craigengillan and Miller and Knockroon went away .
BOSWELL-1776-1,45.326

I read a cause to my father : whether an heritor could prescribe a right
to a seat in a church beyond the proportion of his valuation , Colonel
St. Clair against Miss Alexander . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.327

His judgement was clear and decisive . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.328

Fingland dined . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.329

He walked out with me and James Bruce to view a piece of land , then
possessed by George Paton in Townhead , which I had thoughts of taking
as a small farm to oblige me to learn something of country business .
BOSWELL-1776-1,45.330

I had sent John Black to Ayr today , BOSWELL-1776-1,45.331

but he returned without any letter to me , which gave me much uneasiness
, though I had good reason to conclude that if there was anything wrong
at home , a letter would have been written to me ; BOSWELL-1776-1,45.332

and I also recollected that I had mentioned to my wife my intending to
be home this week . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.333

I however resolved to send Black again next day . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.334

Mr. Stobie came this afternoon . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.335

Sunday 20 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.336

<paren> Writing Sunday 3 November . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1776-1,45.337

Last night I had a letter from Bruce Campbell informing me that
Treesbank was thought to be just a-dying . BOSWELL-1776-1,45.338

This made me waver a little whether I should leave Ayrshire <P_46> on
Monday , as it was decent and friendly for me to be at his burial .
BOSWELL-1776-1,46.339

I sent to Bruce this morning to be informed particularly how our poor
friend was . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.340

I stayed quietly at home BOSWELL-1776-1,46.341

and wrote journal . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.342

I felt a kind of weakness in the short space today while I was the
highest person in the House of Auchinleck ; BOSWELL-1776-1,46.343

and I looked forward with a real concern to the time when my worthy
father would be removed , and I at the head of the Family .
BOSWELL-1776-1,46.344

I should have mentioned that when Lady Auchinleck and I talked agreeably
together , I said she should have a gown out of the first thousand
pounds that I saved . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.345

She consented to accept of it , though I saw she doubted of seeing me so
rich , BOSWELL-1776-1,46.346

and she said she would be very happy to see it , and would present me
with the finest coat in Edinburgh . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.347

I prayed BOSWELL-1776-1,46.348

and read in the Bible this forenoon , BOSWELL-1776-1,46.349

and was in a very good frame . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.350

I got an answer from Bruce Campbell , from which I saw that Treesbank
might wear some time yet ; BOSWELL-1776-1,46.351

so I resolved not to wait , but to leave a letter for Miss Macredie to
send an express to me to Douglas Castle if a change should happen on or
before Tuesday , and if not , to write to me at Edinburgh .
BOSWELL-1776-1,46.352

Time went on this day in a calm , agreeable way . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.353

In a little I believe I shall be fully convinced that happiness is
rather in a sedate than in a flashy life , and shall never think it
necessary for the entertainment of company , as I now habitually do , to
have high merriment or brisk vivacity . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.354

I had really been very happy here for about seven weeks this autumn .
BOSWELL-1776-1,46.355

Indeed the consideration of doing my duty in attending my worthy father
had a kindly influence . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.356

<font> Duty <$$font> in every department is a cordial to the mind .
BOSWELL-1776-1,46.357

Let a man then always have it in his thoughts . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.358

My father bid me farewell with affection . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.359

He had now quite forgotten his displeasure for my going to London in the
spring without acquainting him . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.360

He is really a good-natured man . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.361

I parted in good terms with the ladies . BOSWELL-1776-1,46.362

I sat up rather late tonight from a kind of whim , or local attention ,
that I would write to Dr. Johnson and General Oglethorpe from <font>
Auchinleck . <$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,46.363

<P_47>

Monday 21 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.365

Got up early BOSWELL-1776-1,47.366

and breakfasted in the dining-room , John Stobie attending me .
BOSWELL-1776-1,47.367

It was a rainy day . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.368

Set out about seven with Joseph in the Mauchline chaise kept by Allan
Fisher , newly set up . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.369

Was pleased to think how much Ayrshire was now improved , when there
were many post-chaises at Ayr and at Kilmarnock , one at John Dykes's by
Galston , two at Swan's at Cumnock , and one at Mauchline .
BOSWELL-1776-1,47.370

It was agreeable to drive all the way to Boghead upon or close by our
own lands all the way . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.371

There is something peculiarly good for the spirits in driving in a
post-chaise . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.372

This I know is Dr. Johnson's notion . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.373

But I have it also myself from experience . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.374

When a man has fairly set out in a post-chaise , he is somehow flying ,
separated from the world and its cares , BOSWELL-1776-1,47.375

and everything appears to him in a better light than usual .
BOSWELL-1776-1,47.376

There is a snugness and a cheerfulness together which delight me .
BOSWELL-1776-1,47.377

Hallglenmuir was to accompany me to Douglas Castle .
BOSWELL-1776-1,47.378

He came out from Wellwood BOSWELL-1776-1,47.379

and I took him into the chaise BOSWELL-1776-1,47.380

and Joseph rode his horse . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.381

We took a second breakfast at Muirkirk , BOSWELL-1776-1,47.382

and got to Douglas Castle in good time to dinner .
BOSWELL-1776-1,47.383

I had not been here before . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.384

I was highly satisfied with what of the Castle was built - only a third
, but truly grand . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.385

I looked into a strange book : <font> Memoirs <$$font> of a Dr.
Houstoun , a light-headed physician , who attacks the character of my
excellent great-grand-uncle , Sir David Hamilton , because he would not
recommend him to employment , when in truth it was plain from Houstoun's
own account of himself that one of Sir David's skill and grave
conscientiousness could not recommend him . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.386

As I may some time or other write a few memoirs of Sir David , I liked
to find anything concerning him . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.387

Lady Lucy and Miss Howe , sister to the illustrious brothers commanding
in America , were all the ladies . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.388

Randolph , an Englishman who had been with Douglas all the season , sung
excellently . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.389

Maconochie , who conducted the Douglas Cause so well , was here , and
Forrest , the baron-bailie . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.390

We had a good dinner , a bottle apiece of admirable claret , tea , whist
and brag and supper , after which I drank only wine and water .
BOSWELL-1776-1,47.391

I must really journalize more concisely . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.392

Tuesday 22 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,47.393

After breakfast Douglas mounted me on a good , stout , quiet hunter ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,47.394

and away we went to the field with fifteen couple of hounds .
BOSWELL-1776-1,47.395

I was happy to find myself a keen sportsman after an interval of <P_48>
twelve years . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.396

I rode several chases quite as I could wish . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.397

Mr. Rankine , the surgeon at Douglas , who was born at Boghead , dined
today . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.398

Hallglenmuir had gone away in the morning . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.399

Black had brought me no letters of late from Ayr , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.400

and there were none today for me here , though I had desired them to be
sent by Douglas . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.401

I was somewhat uneasy . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.402

I was rather rash at cards these two nights , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.403

and this night went to bed eight pounds a loser . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.404

But I thought it was a genteel expense , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.405

so did not mind it . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.406

Wednesday 23 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.407

Read the life of the Earl of Cork and Orrery by Duncombe , prefixed to
his Lordship's <font> Letters from Italy . <$$font>
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.408

Paid a visit to Mr. Rankine BOSWELL-1776-1,48.409

and had him to walk with me and see the Place , which , though situated
in no pleasing country , may in time be made a seat of considerable
grandeur , there being a long valley with a river running through it ,
so that when this valley is rendered pretty by cultivation , and clumps
of trees interspersed in it , and the rising grounds on each side are
planted along the horizon , it will be very well .
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.410

There is a natural wood with a rivulet and pretty banks in it a good way
to the west of the castle . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.411

There we met Lady Lucy and Miss Howe . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.412

Lady Lucy has already made some pretty walks and shrubberies ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.413

has taken a resolution to make Douglas a Place , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.414

and declares she will pass four months in the year at it .
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.415

Mr. Rankine and Mr. Porteous of Carmacoup , his brother-in-law , dined
today . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.416

I was successful at cards tonight BOSWELL-1776-1,48.417

and won back six guineas . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.418

I liked much the good easy hospitality here . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.419

I learnt from Randolph a song , " I clapp'd my hand upon her toe , "
etc. BOSWELL-1776-1,48.420

Thursday 24 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.421

Hunted again . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.422

Had called in the morning on my old class-fellow , Mr. McCubbin , the
parish minister . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.423

He dined today , as did Carmacoup . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.424

I was hearty and animated , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.425

and asked today for a pint bottle extraordinary . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.426

I drank too much BOSWELL-1776-1,48.427

and was sick , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.428

but soon got free of the load . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.429

I was vexed that my stout life in Douglas Castle should be debased by
excess . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.430

My fortune at cards tonight was about <font> in equilibrio . <$$font>
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.431

I lost a few shillings . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.432

I had a letter today from my dear wife . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.433

Friday 25 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.434

My reception at Douglas Castle was just what I could wish .
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.435

Lady Lucy grew very affable , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.436

and Douglas and she were exceedingly obliging . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.437

I had this morning after breakfast a chaise from Douglas Mill ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.438

dined at Little Vantage , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.439

and got to Edinburgh about eight o'clock . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.440

Found my children all in good health . BOSWELL-1776-1,48.441

My little son did not know me , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.442

but Veronica and Effie were quite in riotous joy at seeing me again .
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.443

My wife was at Sir George's , BOSWELL-1776-1,48.444

and came home immediately on being informed of my arrival .
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.445

She was very big with child , and plump and healthful .
BOSWELL-1776-1,48.446

Our meeting was truly comfortable ; nothing of melancholy in it , which
is sometimes the <P_49> effect of tenderness . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.447

Sir George and Lady Preston insisted on our supping there .
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.448

We did so , BOSWELL-1776-1,49.449

and were happy in mutual kindness . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.450

Saturday 26 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.451

Went BOSWELL-1776-1,49.452

and waited on Mr. Alexander Boswell {TEXT:Boswall} from the East_Indies
; BOSWELL-1776-1,49.453

found him to be a sensible , lively man . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.454

Agreed to go with him to dine with Lord and Lady Dundonald at La Mancha
, where I had never yet been . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.455

At twelve o'clock I got a letter from Bruce Campbell that Treesbank had
died on Wednesday , and was to be buried on Monday the 28th ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.456

so I determined to go west again next day . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.457

This was quite military expedition . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.458

I had a very good jaunt with Mr. Boswall today . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.459

The old Earl was in uncommon high spirits . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.460

Mr. Boswall called at my house for a few minutes on our return .
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.461

My wife had a full suit of mournings made for me between two o'clock and
ten . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.462

I was surprised at this . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.463

Miss Preston supped with us . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.464

Sunday 27 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.465

My dear wife had breakfast ready for me between six and seven .
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.466

Worthy Grange was called up BOSWELL-1776-1,49.467

and drank a dish of tea with us . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.468

My wife had an alarm of her pains on Tuesday last ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.469

so I resolved to be home again very speedily . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.470

I took post-chaises , changing at Calder , Whit-burn , and Holytown ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.471

and got to Glasgow in six hours and a half . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.472

Joseph was along with me . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.473

I read some chapters in the Bible , and Graham's <font> Telemachus ,
<$$font> a masque . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.474

Found some fine parts in it , BOSWELL-1776-1,49.475

but did not admire the strain of its poetry in general , though I did
its morality . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.476

Robert Boswell had set out last night , as he scrupled to spend Sunday
in travelling . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.477

I esteemed him for his conscientiousness , BOSWELL-1776-1,49.478

but was glad that I had not the same scruple when there was a decent
excuse . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.479

I , however , from a regard to decency , took care to mention at the
inns that I was hurrying west to the burial of my brother-in-law .
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.480

I dined well at Mrs. Graham's , BOSWELL-1776-1,49.481

and then had my bottle of Madeira carried down to her room ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.482

and <paren> writing Tuesday 5 November <$$paren> drank it in her company
with her father , old Mr. Leckie . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.483

I was quite at home here . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.484

Mr. Robert Boswell at last came from his meeting .
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.485

We drank tea . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.486

Then drove through Glasgow , just as the <font> kirks <$$font> were
<font> skailing , <$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,49.487

and got to Treesbank about nine at night . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.488

It is unnecessary to describe what we found there .
BOSWELL-1776-1,49.489

Mrs. Campbell was very composed . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.490

Monday 28 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,49.491

I am sensible that my mode of journalizing is <P_50> unnecessarily
tedious . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.492

Why mention a number of circumstances which memory recalls of course ?
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.493

We had a very creditable burial . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.494

Bruce Campbell , as chief mourner , was at the head of one table , and I
at the head of another , each of twenty . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.495

Lord Loudoun sat at my hand . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.496

He was in his coach and six , BOSWELL-1776-1,50.497

and said he was here both as a relation and a friend .
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.498

I had catched cold last night . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.499

After the burial there was a meeting of the tutors , at which I was of
considerable consequence . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.500

I had sent an express to my father in the morning that he need not come
, BOSWELL-1776-1,50.501

and I had a very kindly answer . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.502

Mr. Robert and I returned to Glasgow this night .
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.503

We got there about two in the morning . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.504

I was uneasy , BOSWELL-1776-1,50.505

but was comforted that I had done my duty to a friend .
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.506

Tuesday 29 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.507

We came to Edinburgh in the fly . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.508

I was flattered to find Robert highly entertained with an account of my
travels in Germany . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.509

Found my wife and children as well as I could wish .
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.510

Wednesday 30 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.511

By such a number of journeys , my head was somewhat confused .
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.512

Ayrshire , which used to appear at a distance , had a wavering situation
in my mind , between its old state from long habit and the new
impression from my having come from it , gone back , and come again in
so short a space of time . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.513

My cold was very troublesome to me . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.514

I called at Dr. Webster's . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.515

He was not at home , BOSWELL-1776-1,50.516

but Annie showed me a letter from her brother , the Colonel , to his
father , after the victory at Long Island . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.517

It had a pretty conclusion : BOSWELL-1776-1,50.518

" I know , my dear Sir , where you will go immediately after reading
this . " BOSWELL-1776-1,50.519

He meant to his knees . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.520

Balbarton dined with us , BOSWELL-1776-1,50.521

and he and M. Dupont drank tea . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.522

Mr. Lawrie was come to town . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.523

But I could not yet begin to business . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.524

Veronica now slept in a little bed in the room with her mamma and me .
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.525

Thursday 31 October . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.526

Captain Erskine called on me . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.527

I walked out with him to Lady Colville's BOSWELL-1776-1,50.528

and sat awhile with her Ladyship , Lady Anne , and the Captain ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.529

and he returned BOSWELL-1776-1,50.530

and dined with me , as did Captain George Preston and Balbarton .
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.531

The two last drank tea . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.532

Annie Cuninghame returned this evening from Dunlop .
BOSWELL-1776-1,50.533

Friday 1 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.534

A wet day . BOSWELL-1776-1,50.535

Walked in the outer part of the Parliament <P_51> House , where the
shops are , with Mr. Saunders , Writer to the Signet ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.536

and was entertained with an account of an additional proof in the cause
, Wilson against Maclean , taken lately in Ireland , at which he had
attended for Maclean . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.537

Waited on the Lord Provost <paren> Kincaid <$$paren> .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.538

He was not at home . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.539

Sat a little with his son . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.540

Sat awhile with Sir William Forbes and Mr. Hunter .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.541

Sat a good while in Donaldson's back shop , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.542

and heard much in favour of the Americans . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.543

Called on Mr. Alexander Boswall . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.544

He asked me to dine with him . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.545

I did so . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.546

There was a pretty large company . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.547

Lady Colville , Lady Anne , and Captain Erskine drank tea ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.548

played at whist , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.549

and supped with us . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.550

Saturday 2 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.551

Sir Alexander Dick had called yesterday when I was abroad , and asked my
wife and Miss Cuninghame and me to dine there today .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.552

His coach came BOSWELL-1776-1,51.553

and carried us out . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.554

I was happy with him as usual . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.555

I said it was not true that the world is grown old and no good men now
to be found as in former times , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.556

for new men of worth are always appearing . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.557

He answered , just as we were coming downstairs to dinner , hastily , "
Yes , yes , the pot is continually boiling , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.558

and there@ @'s always fresh broth . " BOSWELL-1776-1,51.559

I like such metaphorical sallies . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.560

Dr. Boswell , John MacGowan , and several more company dined .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.561

Sunday 3 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.562

Kept the house all day , having taken strong physic ;
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.563

read in the Bible and one of Ogden's sermons , and , in a desultory way
, magazines and newspapers . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.564

Monday 4 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.565

Began to dictate a law-paper , having ten upon my hands .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.566

Did very well . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.567

Mr. George Wallace came BOSWELL-1776-1,51.568

and sat awhile with me , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.569

and gave me some anecdotes of David Hume . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.570

I found him to be rather sceptical , though a worthy man .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.571

My belief at present was pretty firm . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.572

My wife and I and Annie dined at Sir George's , along with Mr.
Alexander Boswall and Dr. Webster . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.573

There was a hard drink , all in bumpers . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.574

I was not drunk , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.575

but after I came home was very sick . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.576

I was willing to see my East_Indian cousin in spirits after a hearty
glass . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.577

He rose to high briskness , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.578

but was much intoxicated with two bottles . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.579

Tuesday 5 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.580

Was uneasy after yesterday's riot , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.581

and dreaded another today , as Mr. Boswall was to dine with me .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.582

However , I finished the paper which I began yesterday .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.583

Mr. Boswall and his sister Miss Peggie , Lieutenant Balfour <paren>
Fernie <$$paren> of the Royals , introduced by them , Dr. Boswell and
his son Robert , Balbarton , Captain George Preston , and Dr. Webster
dined with us . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.584

Sir George was ill , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.585

so we had no more of the Preston family . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.586

Things went on much better than I expected . BOSWELL-1776-1,51.587

We drank a cheerful quantity , BOSWELL-1776-1,51.588

but Mr. Boswall was positive not to go to excess .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.589

I found him to be pretty opinionative , and hasty in his temper .
BOSWELL-1776-1,51.590

But as I was sensible of his friendly behaviour to my uncle the Doctor@
@'s sons , and he was one of the <font> clan <$$font> who had come home
after twenty-seven years' absence with fourscore or one_hundred_thousand
<P_52> pounds and an excellent character , I resolved to pay him much
attention . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.591

At the same time I was aware of carrying this to such a degree as could
not be kept up ; BOSWELL-1776-1,52.592

I knew that in Scotland a stranger is at first prodigiously feasted and
complimented , BOSWELL-1776-1,52.593

and afterwards there is a sad indifference . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.594

I thought I should show him an uniform civility . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.595

All the company but Dr. Boswell , Dr. Webster , and Captain Preston
drank tea . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.596

- And now on this Wednesday , the 6th of November , I have my journal
brought up to the preceding day , according to what I have constantly
purposed but seldom fulfilled . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.597

I hope henceforth never to let time run over me more than a day
unregistered . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.598

Wednesday 6 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.599

It is always to be understood that I write each day's journal the day
after , if I do not mention otherwise . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.600

This day I dictated a law-paper very easily . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.601

Called on Miss Wallace at Mr. Baron Maule's , BOSWELL-1776-1,52.602

and delivered a letter from Lady Betty Cuninghame to her .
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.603

Had not visited the Baron for many years , BOSWELL-1776-1,52.604

I can@ @not tell how ; BOSWELL-1776-1,52.605

for he was always very civil to me , BOSWELL-1776-1,52.606

and is exceedingly entertaining , being full of anecdotes , and having
the true old Scotch gentleman's manners , with a picturesque peculiarity
of humour . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.607

He was in the country today , BOSWELL-1776-1,52.608

but I promised to Miss Wallace to renew my acquaintance .
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.609

To me at least there is as different a set of ideas produced by
different people as I can almost imagine in different planets .
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.610

I find too that the notion of certain <font> ideas <$$font> or manners
and opinions being passed away is not just . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.611

One has only not <font> perceived <$$font> them for perhaps a long time
. BOSWELL-1776-1,52.612

Mr. Alexander Donaldson and his son and Mr. Lawrence Hill , writer ,
dined . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.613

Messieurs Donaldsons drank tea with us . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.614

Thursday 7 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.615

This being the fast-day before the sacrament at Edinburgh , I stayed at
home all day , purposing to write to my brother David , and to make out
some essays for <font> The London Magazine . <$$font>
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.616

But I was indolent BOSWELL-1776-1,52.617

and did little . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.618

Notwithstanding my uncommon activity last autumn , I felt myself almost
as much as ever in a state of bodily laziness and mental barrenness .
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.619

I had received some days ago an agreeable letter from Temple ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.620

and answered it well . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.621

Part of today passed amiably enough in entertaining Veronica , and
teaching her some of the letters of the alphabet .
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.622

On Tuesday last , the 5 of November , she for the first time got the way
of opening the dining-room door , a remarkable acquisition to her .
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.623

She was very proud of it , BOSWELL-1776-1,52.624

opened it very often , BOSWELL-1776-1,52.625

and said , " O papa , is it not fine ? " BOSWELL-1776-1,52.626

For some days past I had been too fond of Annie Cuninghame .
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.627

It made my wife uneasy , BOSWELL-1776-1,52.628

and I was sensible it was <font> not proper <$$font> at least .
BOSWELL-1776-1,52.629

I drank tea at Sir George's . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.630

My father came to town tonight . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.631

Sat awhile with him . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.632

Was glad to have good sedate conversation again . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.633

Friday 8 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,52.634

<paren> Writing on Sunday 10 November . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1776-1,52.635

Mr. Alexander <P_53> Boswall and I dined at Prestonfield .
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.636

Worthy Sir Alexander was most hospitable . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.637

My Indian cousin , who had seen him a little before he left Scotland ,
was delighted with him . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.638

On our return to town , I introduced Mr. Boswall to my father , who
received him very cordially , BOSWELL-1776-1,53.639

and I was glad to observe that Mr. Boswall listened with satisfaction
to his stories . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.640

I had this day read an extraordinary <font> Gazette <$$font> with
accounts of the King's troops having taken New York .
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.641

I regretted it . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.642

But as there were not many British killed or wounded , there was not an
interesting scene . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.643

I finished what I thought a good essay for consolation or cure to a man
who complains of impotence of mind , in answer to my essay in <font> The
London Magazine <$$font> of November {TEXT:missing_"November"} last .
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.644

Saturday 9 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.645

The forenoon passed away in reading and revising law-papers .
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.646

Was at church in the afternoon . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.647

Sat awhile with Dr. Webster . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.648

He and I supped at Sir George's . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.649

Sunday 10 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.650

My wife went to the New Church with me , BOSWELL-1776-1,53.651

and we took the sacrament together . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.652

An odd accident happened to me . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.653

By the awkwardness of a woman who <font> sat <$$font> next me , and my
own , the communion cup had almost been let fall .
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.654

In catching it , a good deal of the wine was dashed upon the table
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.655

and it had a strange appearance on the white cloth .
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.656

I was weak enough to meditate if there could be anything <font> ominous
<$$font> in this . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.657

Luckily I sat in a darkish place under one of the lofts , so that the
accident was little observed . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.658

I was in a sort of dull , indifferent frame , BOSWELL-1776-1,53.659

disliked the Presbyterian mode , BOSWELL-1776-1,53.660

and attended from a regard to decency . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.661

I went home with my wife , BOSWELL-1776-1,53.662

eat a couple of eggs , BOSWELL-1776-1,53.663

and drank a bottle of cider , all but one glass . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.664

My wife came into the room BOSWELL-1776-1,53.665

and said I had drank too much . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.666

Veronica said I should drink no more , BOSWELL-1776-1,53.667

for I " would be fou <paren> drunk <$$paren> and ta'en to the Guard . "
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.668

Her observations are wonderfully sagacious . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.669

I returned to the church , my wife agreeing to stay in the rest of the
day . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.670

Dined at my father's with Miss Cuninghame . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.671

Heard Dr. Blair preach in the afternoon ; BOSWELL-1776-1,53.672

or rather did not hear him , though I was present .
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.673

I very foolishly indulged such a fondness for Annie Cuninghame as was
truly a kind of love , which made me uneasy ; BOSWELL-1776-1,53.674

and I cherished licentious schemes , BOSWELL-1776-1,53.675

and was fretted , forsooth , when she made any opposition .
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.676

I was truly Asiatic . BOSWELL-1776-1,53.677

Love is an uneasiness which , like sickness , may be produced over and
over again by different causes , with much the same sensations .
BOSWELL-1776-1,53.678

My pride was hurt by this fondness <P_54> going so deep ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,54.679

and it pained me that anything should at all interrupt my affection for
my wife and children . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.680

After tea sat awhile at Sir George's . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.681

Was restless ; BOSWELL-1776-1,54.682

came home BOSWELL-1776-1,54.683

and read a little in the Bible . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.684

Had Captain George Preston to sup with us . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.685

Was the better of some social chat . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.686

{COM:symbol_omitted}

Monday 11 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.688

Was at church BOSWELL-1776-1,54.689

and heard Sir Harry Moncrieff preach against spiritual pride .
BOSWELL-1776-1,54.690

In the afternoon dictated a law-paper . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.691

Was still in love with Miss , which vexed me , BOSWELL-1776-1,54.692

and I was exasperated because she was not subservient to my desires .
BOSWELL-1776-1,54.693

Began an <font> irregular ode <$$font> entitled " The Long Island
Prisoners " for <font> The London Chronicle , <$$font> to agitate my
mind a little . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.694

I intended it for a sort of popular unmeaning American rhapsody ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,54.695

but lines rose as I worked which I thought pretty good , and excellent
considering the subject . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.696

My heart was more indifferent than ordinary towards my valuable wife .
BOSWELL-1776-1,54.697

This shocked me . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.698

Called today at Sir George's . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.699

Tuesday 12 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.700

The Session sat down . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.701

Felt myself in a good , healthy , steady state . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.702

Dined at my father's ; BOSWELL-1776-1,54.703

Mr. Campbell of Newfield and his two eldest daughters and Claud there .
BOSWELL-1776-1,54.704

Drank not a bottle altogether , BOSWELL-1776-1,54.705

but was somewhat inflamed , so as to saunter a little in the street .
BOSWELL-1776-1,54.706

Soon checked myself BOSWELL-1776-1,54.707

and went home BOSWELL-1776-1,54.708

and dictated a law-paper . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.709

I need not mention dictating law-papers , more than eating my ordinary
meals . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.710

Now and then I may <font> review <$$font> myself as an advocate , or
mark any remarkable occurrence in my practice . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.711

Today my foolish love was almost gone , which was a very agreeable
circumstance , BOSWELL-1776-1,54.712

and I fully loved my valuable spouse . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.713

I had finished before dinner " The Long Island Prisoners . "
BOSWELL-1776-1,54.714

As to the state of my mind , I felt an acquiescence even in annihilation
, BOSWELL-1776-1,54.715

but hoped as a Christian . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.716

Wednesday 13 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.717

My father was ill of a cold , BOSWELL-1776-1,54.718

and kept the house . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.719

I sat with him awhile . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.720

My wife , who had before felt threatenings of the pains of childbirth ,
grew pretty ill this evening . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.721

I took my bed in the dining-room . BOSWELL-1776-1,54.722

Change of my bedroom gives me a new temporary existence .
BOSWELL-1776-1,54.723

I had several papers to prepare in a hurry , BOSWELL-1776-1,54.724

and Mr. Lawrie had gone today <P_55> to bury an uncle , which was an
inconvenience to me . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.725

I had one of Matthew Dickie's lads to write to me .
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.726

This afternoon I for the first time forgot an appointment for a
consultation . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.727

But I recollected it before the hour was quite run ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.728

and got to it . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.729

The cause was the curious one of Dr. Memis . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.730

I did not feel myself anxious at this inlying . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.731

Dr. Young was in the house all night . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.732

I sat up with him too late . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.733

Thursday 14 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.734

<paren> Writing on Sunday 17 November . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1776-1,55.735

My wife's labour went on all day , with intermissions ;
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.736

but about eleven at night it turned pretty hard . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.737

Veronica's bed was brought up to the dining-room , BOSWELL-1776-1,55.738

and she slept beside me . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.739

I lay down , thinking that the delivery would not be till well on in the
morning . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.740

I was fatigued somehow , BOSWELL-1776-1,55.741

and I had some broken sleep . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.742

Friday 15 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.743

Between two and three in the morning Annie Cuninghame waked me with the
good news that my wife was delivered of a son . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.744

I received the news with little agitation , BOSWELL-1776-1,55.745

got up , BOSWELL-1776-1,55.746

put on my clothes , BOSWELL-1776-1,55.747

and went down BOSWELL-1776-1,55.748

and saw my dear wife , who was in a very good way ;
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.749

but the poor child was sickly . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.750

I went to bed again , BOSWELL-1776-1,55.751

and rose at the usual time BOSWELL-1776-1,55.752

and went to the Parliament House . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.753

I had now the four seasons : Veronica born in spring , Euphame in summer
, Alexander in autumn , and David in winter . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.754

These three forenoons , was entertained with examinations in presence in
the cause , Wilson against Maclean . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.755

Dined today at my father's with Mr. Alexander Boswall ; Annie
Cuninghame , Claud and Robert and Miss Menie Boswells , etc. , there .
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.756

I had sat awhile at Mrs. Boswell of Balmuto@ @'s in the forenoon .
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.757

I drank rather too much , my heart being warm with clannishness .
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.758

Drank tea . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.759

The young child continued to be ill in the evening .
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.760

He sucked little . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.761

His nurse was Annie Mill , Effie's nurse . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.762

Saturday 16 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.763

Mr. Lawrie had returned last night . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.764

I was glad to have him again to write to me today .
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.765

I laboured hard . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.766

Dr. Young was apprehensive about the young child ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,55.767

and Mr. Wood was of opinion that his situation was so precarious that
he should be christened without delay . BOSWELL-1776-1,55.768

So I had Dr. Webster at four o'clock , who , after praying admirably at
my wife's bedside , christened little David in the nursery in the most
private <P_56> manner , Annie Cuninghame and Mr. Lawrie witnesses .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.769

I mentioned this before dinner to my father and Lady Auchinleck ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.770

and settled that if David should live , we should have a good
merry-making as Mr. Alexander Boswall schemed , he having eat seed-cake
on occasion of my christening . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.771

The two witnesses drank a little with the Doctor and me .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.772

He and I took a bottle of claret apiece quite calmly .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.773

Then he went home . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.774

Surgeon Wood drank tea . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.775

I was to go with him to the opening of the Theatre for the winter , Miss
Catley's first appearance here , whom I had never seen .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.776

He drank tea with Miss Cuninghame and me , BOSWELL-1776-1,56.777

and I went with him . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.778

But as I had a great deal to do , I resolved that if I was too late for
her first appearance , to see the impression on the audience , I would
return . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.779

I said , " I want to see the thunder break - to see the sun rise .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.780

If he be risen , I can see him as well at any time of the day as soon
after his rise . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.781

I shall see Miss Catley some other night . " BOSWELL-1776-1,56.782

I <font> was <$$font> too late , BOSWELL-1776-1,56.783

came home , BOSWELL-1776-1,56.784

wrote letters to different friends on my wife's delivery ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.785

and dictated a law-paper . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.786

Yesterday I had snatched a little romping pleasure from Annie .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.787

Tonight snatched still more . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.788

This was an effect very different from gentle fondness .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.789

I was quite easy . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.790

Poor David was better ; BOSWELL-1776-1,56.791

did not moan piteously as he had done , BOSWELL-1776-1,56.792

and sucked well . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.793

I had not been very much affected by the apprehension of losing him .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.794

But I was piously grateful to heaven for hopes of his living ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.795

and as he had fairly begun to advance into a growing state , I flattered
myself he would live . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.796

Sunday 17 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.797

<paren> Writing on Thursday 21 November . <$$paren>
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.798

In the forenoon heard Dr. Webster in the Tolbooth Church with much
satisfaction . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.799

Dined along with him at my father's . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.800

In the afternoon was at the New Church . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.801

Mr. Johnston at Leith preached . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.802

I had shunned Dr. Blair in the forenoon , as he prayed against the
Americans . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.803

I thought Mr. Walker was to preach in the afternoon .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.804

Johnston prayed more violently than Blair . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.805

Drank tea at Mr. Donaldson the bookseller@ @'s , who was soon going to
London . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.806

Buckram Brown was there . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.807

Strange conversation . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.808

Monday 18 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.809

Got up early , BOSWELL-1776-1,56.810

laboured all day at law-papers , BOSWELL-1776-1,56.811

and did excellently . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.812

At seven at night attended a consultation at Macqueen's about Sir
Walter's affairs . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.813

Tuesday 19 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.814

Dined at my father's along with Claud . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.815

Did little in law . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.816

Wrote some letters to friends about my wife's delivery .
BOSWELL-1776-1,56.817

Drank tea in her bedroom . BOSWELL-1776-1,56.818

<P_57>

Wednesday 20 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.820

Received a kind letter from Dr. Johnson , which consoled me , as I had
not heard from him for near three months . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.821

Dr. Boswell and Grange drank tea with me . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.822

I was in sound good health and spirits , but not exalted enough in my
notions ; not ambitious enough to feel superiority of character ; not
devout enough . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.823

The maxim {COM:greek_omitted} is a noble one . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.824

Yet it is to <font> me , <$$font> who have suffered so much from
melancholy , a considerable satisfaction to be free from mental pain .
BOSWELL-1776-1,57.825

Little David was now in a fine way . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.826

Veronica waked in the night between Saturday and Sunday ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,57.827

and cried so that she was carried to her mother's room again , her bed
being taken with her . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.828

My father still kept the house with the cold . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.829

Thursday 21 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.830

Called BOSWELL-1776-1,57.831

and sat a little with Sir George before dinner . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.832

Had been a little with the Commissioner at the Custom-House .
BOSWELL-1776-1,57.833

Had called on Mr. Alexander Boswall , who was hurt by a fall from his
horse . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.834

Did not see him . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.835

In the forenoon a cause came on at the instance of General Scott's
daughters . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.836

The President , as he could not judge in it , being their grandfather ,
quitted the bench BOSWELL-1776-1,57.837

and walked to that part of the bar where I was sitting .
BOSWELL-1776-1,57.838

I did not look towards him , having had no sort of intercourse with him
for above two years , since he , in a most ungentlemanly manner <paren>
to use no worse word <$$paren> persuaded my father , under pretence of
being his <font> friend , <$$font> to make fictitious votes in Ayrshire
contrary to his declared principle in public and private , and that ,
too , in opposition to the party which I had declared I wished to
prevail ; my father having first told me that he would take no part in
the election . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.839

The fellow , from his strong animal spirits , can at times do almost
anything . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.840

He , with all the familiarity imaginable , accosted me , though I looked
another way , BOSWELL-1776-1,57.841

" How@ @'s your father the day , Jamie ? " BOSWELL-1776-1,57.842

I was struck with his assurance . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.843

I own I somehow admired it . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.844

I thought him a clever fellow . BOSWELL-1776-1,57.845

I had presence of mind enough to answer him quite easily that I had not
seen my father yet today , but that he was better yesterday .
BOSWELL-1776-1,57.846

I confess I felt a kind of warm regret that I had no social
communication with the President , who had , through the general <font>
rotten rock <$$font> of his character , <font> veins <$$font> of good
<font> metals : hospitality - quickness of apprehension - glowing
keenness . <$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,57.847

But I could not visit him unless he should make acknowledgements of
having been in the wrong to me , or at least a plausible apology .
BOSWELL-1776-1,57.848

I resolved to be evens with him <font> in ease , <$$font> and some day
soon to go round and <font> whisper <$$font> him as in great confidence
in open court , telling him something very inconsiderable .
BOSWELL-1776-1,57.849

<P_58>

Having been applied to to accept of being Deputy Grand Master of the
Freemasons in Scotland , I wished to avoid it . BOSWELL-1776-1,58.851

But as worthy Sir William Forbes was to be Grand Master and thought my
accepting of the office would be an obligation conferred on him , I
agreed . BOSWELL-1776-1,58.852

I supped at his house this night with ten more of <font> the brethren
<$$font> to concert measures . BOSWELL-1776-1,58.853

We talked with most serious importance , BOSWELL-1776-1,58.854

and I looked round the company BOSWELL-1776-1,58.855

and could not perceive the least ray of jocularity in any of their
countenances . BOSWELL-1776-1,58.856

I however wondered how men could be so much in earnest about parade
which is attended neither with <font> gain <$$font> nor with <font>
power ; <$$font> BOSWELL-1776-1,58.857

but I considered that it was really <font> honourable <$$font> to be
highly distinguished in a society of very universal extent over the
globe , and of which the <font> principles <$$font> are excellent .
BOSWELL-1776-1,58.858

I sat till near one in the morning . BOSWELL-1776-1,58.859

Friday 22 November . BOSWELL-1776-1,58.860

<paren> Writing on Sunday 24 November . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1776-1,58.861

Though I had not drank very much last night , I awaked very ill , so
that I was unable to get up till noon . BOSWELL-1776-1,58.862

I suffered much from sickness and a violent headache ;
BOSWELL-1776-1,58.863

and to add to my distress , poor little David , who had been very uneasy
yesterday , was worse today . BOSWELL-1776-1,58.864

I could not give the least comfort to my wife in her anxiety .
BOSWELL-1776-1,58.865

All I could do was to lie still and try to procure ease to myself .
BOSWELL-1776-1,58.866

I rose between twelve and one , BOSWELL-1776-1,58.867

and just as I entered the Court of Session , it broke up .
BOSWELL-1776-1,58.868

The news came that Lord Coalston's vacant gown was offered to Mr.
Macqueen , and he could not refuse it . BOSWELL-1776-1,58.869

This made a great stir amongst <P_59> us at the bar .
BOSWELL-1776-1,59.870

Sandy Gordon said a day or two ago , " Take care of yourself , Macqueen
. BOSWELL-1776-1,59.871

I hear there@ @'s a press-gang going about for able-bodied judges . "
BOSWELL-1776-1,59.872

I said Ilay Campbell would cut off his thumbs rather than be pressed up
to the bench . BOSWELL-1776-1,59.873

I spoke to Macqueen himself today of his promotion ,
BOSWELL-1776-1,59.874

and he said it was cursedly hard . BOSWELL-1776-1,59.875

<paren> I think that , or " a damned hardship , " was his expression .
<$$paren> BOSWELL-1776-1,59.876

It was giving him at the most , with a double gown , 900 +L {TEXT:+L900}
a year , BOSWELL-1776-1,59.877

and his practice as a lawyer brought him near 2,000 +L {TEXT:+L2,000} a
year . BOSWELL-1776-1,59.878

It was indeed an honour to have such , an office given him without
solicitation . BOSWELL-1776-1,59.879

But , as Falstaff liked no such grinning honour as that of a dead
warrior , Macqueen liked not honour which took so much money from him .
BOSWELL-1776-1,59.880

But if he should refuse it , he could not expect to have it afterwards .
BOSWELL-1776-1,59.881

Ilay Campbell said to me that he would not take a judge's place though
his income were as much as he gets at the bar , BOSWELL-1776-1,59.882

for he thought he had an easier life than he should have as a judge .
BOSWELL-1776-1,59.883

