<BEGIN_boswell-1791-2>

<P_1,8>

Samuel Johnson was born at Lichfield , in Staffordshire , on the 18th of
September , N. S. 1709 ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.3

and his initiation into the Christian Church was not delayed ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.4

for his baptism is recorded , in the register of St. Mary's parish in
that city , to have been performed on the day of his birth :
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.5

His father is there stiled <font> Gentleman , <$$font> a circumstance of
which an ignorant panegyrist has praised him for not being proud ; when
the truth is , that the appellation of Gentleman , though now lost in
the indiscriminate assumption of <font> Esquire , <$$font> was commonly
taken by those who could not boast of gentility . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.6

His father was Michael Johnson , a native of Derbyshire , of obscure
extraction , who settled in Lichfield as a bookseller and stationer .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.7

His mother was Sarah Ford , descended of an ancient race of substantial
yeomanry in Warwickshire . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.8

They were well advanced in years when they married ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.9

and never had more than two children , both sons ; Samuel , their first
born , who lived to be the illustrious character whose various
excellence I am to endeavour to record , and Nathanael , who died in his
twenty-fifth year . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.10

Mr. Michael Johnson was a man of a large and robust body , and of a
strong and active mind ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.11

yet , as in the most solid rocks veins of unsound substance are often
discovered , there was in him a mixture of that disease , the nature of
which eludes the most minute enquiry , though the effects are well known
to be a weariness of life , an unconcern about those things which
agitate the greater part of mankind , and a general sensation of gloomy
wretchedness . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.12

From him then his son inherited , with some other qualities , " a vile
melancholy , " which in his too strong expression of any disturbance of
the mind , " made him mad all his life , at least not sober . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.13

Michael was , however , forced by the narrowness of his circumstances to
be very diligent in business , not only in his shop , but by
occasionally resorting to several towns in the neighbourhood , some of
which were at a considerable distance from Lichfield .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.14

At that time booksellers' shops in the provincial towns of England were
very rare , so that there was not one even in Birmingham , in which town
old Mr. Johnson used to open a shop every market-day .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.15

He was a pretty good Latin scholar , and a citizen so creditable as to
be made one of the magistrates of Lichfield ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.16

and , being a man of good sense , and skill in his trade , he acquired a
reasonable share of wealth , of which however he afterwards lost the
greatest part , by engaging unsuccessfully in a manufacture of parchment
. BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.17

He was a zealous high-churchman and royalist , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.18

and retained his attachment to the unfortunate house of Stuart , though
he reconciled himself , by casuistical arguments of expediency and
necessity , to take the oaths imposed by the prevailing power .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,8.19

<P_1,9>

There is a circumstance in his life somewhat romantick , but so well
authenticated , that I shall not omit it . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.21

A young woman of Leek , in Staffordshire , while he served his
apprenticeship there , conceived a violent passion for him ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.22

and though it met with no favourable return , followed him to Lichfield
, where she took lodgings opposite to the house in which he lived ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.23

and indulged her hopeless flame . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.24

When he was informed that it so preyed upon her mind that her life was
in danger , he with a generous humanity went to her
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.25

and offered to marry her , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.26

but it was then too late : BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.27

Her vital power was exhausted ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.28

and she actually exhibited one of the very rare instances of dying for
love . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.29

She was buried in the cathedral of Lichfield ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.30

and he , with a tender regard , placed a stone over her grave with this
inscription : BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.31

Here lies the body of Mrs. Elizabeth Blaney , a stranger .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.32

She departed this life 20 of September , 1694 . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.33

Johnson's mother was a woman of distinguished understanding .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.34

I asked his old school-fellow , Mr. Hector , surgeon of Birmingham , if
she was not vain of her son . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.35

He said , " she had too much good sense to be vain ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.36

but she knew her son's value . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.37

Her piety was not inferiour to her understanding ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.38

and to her must be ascribed those early impressions of religion upon the
mind of her son , from which the world afterwards derived so much
benefit . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.39

He told me , that he remembered distinctly having had the first notice
of Heaven " a place to which good people went , " and Hell " a place to
which bad people went , " communicated to him by her , when a little
child in bed with her ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.40

and that it might be the better fixed in his memory , she sent him to
repeat it to Thomas Jackson , their man-servant . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.41

He not being in the way , this was not done ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.42

but there was no occasion for any artificial aid for its preservation .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.43

In following so very eminent a man from his cradle to his grave , every
minute particular , which can throw light on the progress of his mind ,
is interesting . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.44

That he was remarkable , even in his earliest years , may easily be
supposed ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.45

for to use his own words in his Life of Sydenham , " That the strength
of his understanding , the accuracy of his discernment , and ardour of
his curiosity , might have been remarked from his infancy , by a
diligent observer , there is no reason to doubt . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,9.46

For , there is no instance of any man , <P_1,10> whose history has been
minutely related , that did not in every part of life discover the same
proportion of intellectual vigour . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.47

In all such investigations it is certainly unwise to pay too much
attention to incidents which the credulous relate with eager
satisfaction , and the more scrupulous or witty enquirer considers only
as topicks of ridicule : BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.48

Yet there is a traditional story of the infant Hercules of toryism , so
curiously characteristick , that I shall not withhold it .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.49

It was communicated to me in a letter from Miss Mary Adye , of Lichfield
. BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.50

" When Dr. Sacheverel was at Lichfield , Johnson was not quite three
years old . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.51

My grandfather Hammond observed him at the cathedral perched upon his
father's shoulders , listening and gaping at the much celebrated
preacher . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.52

Mr. Hammond asked Mr. Johnson how he could possibly think of bringing
such an infant to church , and in the midst of so great a crowd .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.53

He answered , because it was impossible to keep him at home ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.54

for , young as he was , he believed he had caught the publick spirit and
zeal for Sacheverel , and would have staid for ever in the church ,
satisfied with beholding him . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.55

Nor can I omit a little instance of that jealous independence of spirit
, and impetuosity of temper , which never forsook him .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.56

The fact was acknowledged to me by himself , upon the authority of his
mother . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.57

One day , when the servant who used to be sent to school to conduct him
home , had not come in time , he set out by himself , though he was then
so nearsighted , that he was obliged to stoop down on his hands and
knees to take a view of the kennel before he ventured to step over it .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.58

His schoolmistress , afraid that he might miss his way , or fall into
the kennel , or be run over by a cart , followed him at some distance .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.59

He happened to turn about and perceive her . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.60

Feeling her careful attention as an insult to his manliness , he ran
back to her in a rage , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.61

and beat her , as well as his strength would permit .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.62

Of the strength power of his memory , for which he was all his life
eminent to a degree almost incredible , the following early instance was
told me in his presence at Lichfield , in 1776 , by his step-daughter ,
Mrs. Lucy Porter , as related to her by his mother .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.63

When he was a child in petticoats , and had learnt to read , Mrs.
Johnson one morning put the common prayer-book into his hands ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.64

pointed to the collect for the day , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.65

and said , " Sam , you must get this by heart . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.66

She went up stairs , leaving him to study it : BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.67

But by the time she had reached the second floor , she heard him
following her . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.68

" What@ @'s the matter ? " said she . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.69

I can say it , " he replied ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.70

and repeated it distinctly , though he could not have read it more than
twice . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,10.71

<P_1,11>

But there has been another story of his infant precocity generally
circulated , and generally believed , the truth of which I am to refute
upon his own authority . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.73

It is told , that , when a child of three years old , he chanced to
tread upon a duckling , the eleventh of a brood , and killed it ; upon
which , it is said , he dictated to his mother the following epitaph : "
Here lies good master duck , Whom Samuel Johnson trod on ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.74

If it had liv'd , it had been <font> good luck , <$$font>
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.75

For then we@ @'d had an <font> odd one . " <$$font>
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.76

There is surely internal evidence that this little composition combines
in it , what no child of three years old could produce , without an
extension of its faculties by immediate inspiration ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.77

yet Mrs. Lucy Porter , Dr. Johnson's step-daughter , positively
maintained to me , in his presence , that there could be no doubt of the
truth of this anecdote , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.78

for she had heard it from his mother . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.79

So difficult is it to obtain an authentick relation of facts ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.80

and such authority may there be for errour ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.81

for he assured me , that his father made the verses , and wished to pass
them for his child's . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.82

He added , " my father was a foolish old man ; that is to say , foolish
in talking of his children . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,11.83

Young Johnson had the misfortune to be much afflicted with the scrophula
, or king's evil , which disfigured a countenance naturally well formed
, and <P_1,12> hurt his visual nerves so much , that he did not see at
all with one of his eyes , though its appearance was little different
from that of the other . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.84

There is amongst his prayers , one inscribed <font> " When , my <$$font>
Eye <font> was restored to its use , " <$$font> which ascertains a
defect that many of his friends knew he had , though I never perceived
it . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.85

I supposed him to be only near-sighted ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.86

and indeed I must observe , that in no other respect could I discern any
defect in his vision ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.87

on the contrary , the force of his attention and perceptive quickness
made him see and distinguish all manner of objects , whether of nature
or of art , with a nicety that is rarely to be found .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.88

When he and I were travelling in the Highlands of Scotland , and I
pointed out to him a mountain which I observed resembled a cone , he
corrected my inaccuracy by shewing me , that it was indeed pointed at
the top , but that one side of it was larger than the other .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.89

And the ladies with whom he was acquainted agree , that no man was more
nicely and minutely critical in the elegance of female dress .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.90

When I found that he saw the romantick beauties of Islam , in Derbyshire
, much better than I did , I told him that he resembled an able
performer upon a bad instrument . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.91

How false contemptible then are all the remarks which have been made to
the prejudice either of his candour or of his philosophy , founded upon
a supposition that he was almost blind . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.92

It has been said , that he contracted this grievous malady from his
nurse . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.93

His mother yielding to the superstitious notion , which , it is
wonderful to think , prevailed so long in this country , as to the
virtue of the regal touch ; a notion , which our kings encouraged , and
to which a man of such inquiry and such judgement as Carte could give
credit ; carried him to London , where he was actually touched by Queen
Anne . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.94

Mrs. Johnson indeed , as Mr. Hector informed me , acted by the advice
of the celebrated Sir John Floyer , then a physician in Lichfield .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.95

Johnson used to talk of this very frankly ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.96

and Mrs. Piozzi has preserved his very picturesque description of the
scene , as it remained upon his fancy . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.97

Being asked if he could remember Queen Anne , " He had <paren> he said
<$$paren> a confused , but somehow a sort of solemn recollection of a
lady in diamonds , and a long black hood . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.98

This touch , however , was without any effect . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.99

I ventured to say to him , in allusion to the political principles in
which he was educated , and of which he ever retained some odour , that
" his mother had not carried him far enough ; she should have taken him
to Rome . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.100

He was first taught to read English by Dame Oliver , a widow , who kept
a school for young children in Lichfield . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,12.101

He told me she could read the <P_1,13> black letter , and asked him to
borrow for her , from his father , a bible in that character .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.102

When he was going to Oxford , she came to take leave of him ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.103

brought him , in the simplicity of her kindness , a present of
ginger-bread , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.104

and said , he was the best scholar she had ever had .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.105

He delighted in mentioning this early compliment ; adding , with a smile
, that " this was as high a proof of his merit as he could conceive . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.106

His next instructor in English was a master , whom , when he spoke of
him to me , he familiarly called Tom Brown , who , said he , " published
a spelling-book , and dedicated it to the Universe ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.107

- but , I fear , no copy of it can now be had . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.108

He began to learn Latin with Mr. Hawkins , usher , or under-master of
Lichfield school , " a man <paren> said he <$$paren> very skilful in his
little way . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.109

With him he continued two years , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.110

and then rose to be under the care of Mr. Hunter the head-master , who
, according to his account , " was very severe , and wrong-headedly
severe . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.111

He used <paren> said he <$$paren> to beat us unmercifully ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.112

and he did not distinguish between ignorance and negligence ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.113

for he would beat a boy equally for not knowing a thing , as for
neglecting to know it . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.114

He would ask a boy a question ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.115

and if he did not answer it , he would beat him , without considering
whether he had an opportunity of knowing how to answer it .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.116

For instance , he would call up a boy and ask him Latin for a
candlestick , which the boy could not expect to be asked .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.117

Now , Sir , if a boy could answer every question , there would be no
need of a master to teach him . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.118

It is , however , but justice to the memory of Mr. Hunter to mention ,
that though he might err in being too severe ; the school of Lichfield
was very respectable in his time . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.119

The late Dr. Taylor , Prebendary of Westminster , who was educated
under him , told me , that he was an excellent master , and that his
ushers were most of them men of eminence ; that Holbrook , one of the
most ingenious men , best scholars , and best preachers of his age , was
usher during the greatest part of the time that Johnson was at school .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.120

Then came Hague , of whom as much might be said , with the addition that
he was an elegant poet . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.121

Hague was succeeded by Green , afterwards Bishop of Lincoln , whose
character in the learned world is well known . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.122

In the same form with Johnson was Congreve , who afterwards became
chaplain to Archbishop Bouiter , and by that connection obtained good
preferment in Ireland . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.123

He was a younger son of the ancient family of Congreve , in
Staffordshire , of which the poet was a branch .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.124

His brother sold the estate . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,13.125

There was also <P_1,14> Lowe , afterwards Canon of Windsor ; who was
tutor to the present Marquis Townshend , and his brother Charles .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.126

Indeed Johnson was very sensible how much he owed to Mr. Hunter .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.127

Mr. Langton one day asked him how he had acquired so accurate a
knowledge of Latin , in which , I believe , he was exceeded by no man of
his time ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.128

he said , " My master whipt me very well . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.129

Without that , Sir , I should have done nothing . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.130

He told Mr. Langton , that while Hunter was flogging his boys
unmercifully , he used to say , " And this I do to save you from the
gallows . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.131

Johnson , upon all occasions , expressed his approbation of enforcing
instruction by means of the rod . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.132

" I would rather <paren> said he <$$paren> have the rod to be the
general terrour to all , to make them learn , than tell a child , if you
do thus , or thus , you will be more esteemed than your brothers or
sisters . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.133

The rod produces an effect which terminates in itself .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.134

A child is afraid of being whipped , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.135

and gets his task , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.136

and there@ @'s an end on@ @'t ; whereas , by exciting emulation and
comparisons of superiority , you lay the foundation of lasting mischief
; you make brothers and sisters hate each other . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.137

Mr. Langton told me , that when Johnson saw some young ladies in
Lincolnshire who were remarkably well behaved , owing to their mother's
strict discipline and severe correction , he exclaimed , in one of
Shakspeare's lines a little varied . " <font> Rod <$$font> , I will
honour thee for this thy duty . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.138

That superiority over his fellows , which he maintained with so much
dignity in his march through life , was not assumed from vanity and
ostentation , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.139

but was the natural and constant effect of those extraordinary powers of
mind , of which he could not but be conscious by comparison ; the
intellectual difference , which in other cases of comparison of
characters , is often a matter of undecided contest , being as clear in
his case as the superiority of stature in some men above others .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.140

Johnson did not strut or stand on tip-toe : BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.141

He only did not stoop . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.142

From his earliest years , his superiority was perceived and acknowledged
. BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.143

He was from the beginning {COM:greek_omitted} , a king of men .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.144

His schoolfellow , Mr. Hector , has obligingly furnished me with many
particulars of his boyish days ; and assured me , that he never knew him
corrected at school , but for talking and diverting other boys from
their business . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.145

He seemed to learn by intuition ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.146

for though indolence and procrastination were inherent in his
constitution , whenever he made an exertion he did more than any one
else . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.147

In short , he is memorable instance of what has been often observed ,
that the boy is the man in miniature ; and that the distinguishing
characteristicks of each individual are the same , through the whole
course of life . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,14.148

His favourites used to receive very liberal assistance <P_1,15> from him
; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.149

and such was the submission and deference with which he was treated ,
such the desire to obtain his regard , that three of the boys , of whom
Mr. Hector was sometimes one , used to come in the morning as his
humble attendants , and carry him to school . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.150

One in the middle stooped , while he sat upon his back ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.151

and one on each side supported him ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.152

and thus he was borne triumphant . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.153

Such a proof of the early predominance of intellectual vigour is very
remarkable , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.154

and does honour to human nature . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.155

Talking to me once himself of his being much distinguished at school ,
he told me , " they never thought to raise me by comparing me to any one
; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.156

they never said , Johnson is as good a scholar as such a one ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.157

but such a one is as good a scholar as Johnson ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.158

and this was said but of one , but of Lowe ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.159

and I do not think he was as good a scholar . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.160

He discovered a great ambition to excel , which roused him to counteract
his indolence . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.161

He was uncommonly inquisitive ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.162

and his memory was so tenacious , that he never forgot any thing that he
either heard or read . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.163

Mr. Hector remembers having recited to him eighteen verses , which ,
after a little pause , he repeated <font> verbatim <$$font> , varying
only one epithet , by which he improved the line .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.164

He never joined with the other boys in their ordinary diversions ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.165

his only amusement was in winter , when he took a pleasure in being
drawn upon the ice by a boy barefooted , who pulled him along by a
garter fixed round him ; no very easy operation , as his size was
remarkably large . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.166

His defective sight , indeed , prevented him from enjoying the common
sports ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.167

and he once pleasantly remarked to me , how wonderfully well he had
contrived to be idle without them . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.168

Lord Chesterfield , however , has justly observed in one of his letters
, when earnestly cautioning a friend against the pernicious effects of
idleness , that active sports are not to be reckoned idleness in young
people ; and that the lifters torpor of doing nothing , alone deserves
that name . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.169

Of this dismal inertness of disposition , Johnson had all his life too
great a share . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.170

Mr. Hector relates , that " he could not oblige him more than by
sauntering away the hours of vacation in the fields , during which he
was more engaged in talking to himself than to his companion . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,15.171

Dr. Percy , the Bishop of Dromore , who was long intimately acquainted
with him , and has preserved a few anecdotes concerning him , regretting
that he was not a more diligent collector , informs me , that " when a
boy he was immoderately fond of reading romances of chivalry , and he
retained his fondness for them through life ; so that <paren> adds his
Lordship <$$paren> spending part of a summer at my parsonage-house in
the country , he chose for his regular reading <P_1,16> the old Spanish
romance of Felixmarte of Hircania , in folio , which he read quite
through . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.172

Yet I have heard him attribute to these extravagant fictions that
unsettled turn of mind which prevented his ever fixing in any profession
. " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.173

After having resided for some time at the house of his uncle , Cornelius
Ford , Johnson was , at the age of fifteen , removed to the school of
Stourbridge , in Worcestershire , of which Mr. Wentworth was then
master . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.174

This step was taken by the advice of his cousin , the Reverend Mr. Ford
, a man in whom both talents and good dispositions were disgraced by
licentiousness , but who was a very able judge of what was right .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.175

At this school he did not receive so much benefit as was expected .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.176

It has been said , that he acted in the capacity of an assistant to Mr.
Wentworth , in teaching the younger boys . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.177

" Mr. Wentworth <paren> he told me <$$paren> was a very able man , but
an idle man , and to me very severe ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.178

but I can@ @not blame him much . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.179

I was then a big boy ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.180

he saw I did not reverence him ; and that he should get no honour by me
. BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.181

I had brought enough with me , to carry me through ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.182

and all I should get at his school would be ascribed to my own labour ,
or to my former master . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.183

Yet he taught me a great deal . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.184

He thus discriminated , to Dr. Percy , Bishop of Dromore , his progress
at his two grammar-schools . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.185

" At one , I learnt much in the school , but little from the master ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.186

in the other , I learnt much from the master , but little in the school
. " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.187

The Bishop also informs me , that " Dr. Johnson's father , before he
was received at stourbridge , applied to have him admitted as a scholar
and assistant to the Reverend Samuel Lea , M.A. head master of Newport
school , in Shropshire , <paren> a very diligent good teacher , at that
time in high reputation , under whom Mr. Hollis is said , in the
Memoirs of his Life , to have been also educated <$$paren> .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.188

This application to Mr. Lea was not successful ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.189

but Johnson had afterwards the gratification to hear that the old
gentlman , who lived to a very advanced age , mentioned it as one of the
most memorable events of his life , that " he was <font> very near
<$$font> having that great man for his scholar . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.190

He remained at Stourbridge little more than a year ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.191

and then returned home , where he may be said to have loitered , for two
years , in a state very unworthy his uncommon abilities .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,16.192

He had already given several proofs of his poetical genius , both in his
school-exercises and in other occasional <P_1,17> compositions .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,17.193

Of these I have obtained a considerable collection , by the favour of
Mr. Wentworth , son of one of his masters , and of Mr. Hector , his
schoolfellow and friend ; from which I select the following specimens :
{COM:verses_omitted} BOSWELL-1791-2,1,17.194

<P_1,18>

{COM:verses_omitted}

<P_1,19>

{COM:verses_omitted}

<P_1,20>

{COM:verses_omitted}

<P_1,21>

{COM:verses_omitted}

<P_1,22>

{COM:verses_omitted}

<P_1,23>

{COM:verses_omitted}

The two years which he spent at home , after his return from Stourbridge
, he passed in what he thought idleness , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.207

and was scolded by his father for his want of steady application .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.208

He had no settled plan of life , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.209

nor looked forward at all , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.210

but merely lived from day to day . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.211

Yet he read a great deal in a desultory manner , without any scheme of
study , as chance threw books in his way , and inclination directed him
through them . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.212

He used to mention one curious instance of his casual reading , when but
a boy . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.213

Having imagined that his brother had hid some apples behind a large
folio upon an upper shelf in his father's shop , he climbed up to search
for them . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.214

There were no apples ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.215

but the large folio proved to be Petrarch , whom he had seen mentioned
in some preface , as one of the restorers of learning .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.216

His curiosity having been thus excited , he sat down with avidity ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.217

and read a great part of the book . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.218

What he read during these two years , he told me , was not works of mere
amusement , " not voyages and travels , but all literature , Sir , all
ancient writers , all manly ; though but little Greek , only some of
Anacreon and Hesiod ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,23.219

but in this irregular manner <paren> added he <$$paren> I had looked
into a great many books , which were not commonly known at the
Universities , <P_1,24> where they seldom read any books but what are
put into their hands by their tutors ; so that when I came to Oxford ,
Dr. Adams , master of Pembroke College , told me , I was the best
qualified for the University that he had ever known come there . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.220

In estimating the progress of his mind during these two years , as well
as in future periods of his life , we must not regard his own hasty
confession of idleness ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.221

for we see , when he explains himself , that he was acquiring various
stores ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.222

and , indeed , he himself concluded the account , with saying , " I
would not have you think I was doing nothing then . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.223

He might , perhaps , have studied more assiduously ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.224

but it may be doubted , whether such a mind as his was not more enriched
by roaming at large in the fields of literature , than if it had been
confined to any single spot . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.225

The analogy between body and mind is very general ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.226

and the parallel will hold as to their food , as well as any other
particular . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.227

The flesh of animals who feed excursively , is allowed to have a higher
flavour than that of those who are cooped up . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.228

May there not be the same difference between men who read as their taste
prompts , and men who are confined in cells and colleges to stated tasks
? BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.229

That a man in Mr. Michael Johnson's circumstances should think of
sending his son to the expensive University of Oxford , at his own
charge , seems very improbable . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.230

The subject was too delicate to question Johnson upon :
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.231

But I have been assured by Dr. Taylor , that the scheme never would
have taken place , had not a gentleman of Shropshire , one of his
schoolfellows , spontaneously undertaken to support him at Oxford , in
the character of his companion ; though , in fact , he never received
any assistance whatever from that gentleman . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.232

He , however , went to Oxford , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.233

and was entered a Commoner of Pembroke College , on the 31st of October
, 1728 , being then in his nineteenth year . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.234

The Reverend Dr. Adams , who afterwards presided over Pembroke College
with universal esteem , told me he was present , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.235

and gave me some account of what passed on the night of Johnson's
arrival at Oxford . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.236

On that evening , his father , who had anxiously accompanied him , found
means to have him introduced to Mr. Jorden , who was to be his tutor .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.237

His being put under any tutor , reminds us of what Wood says of Robert
Burton , authour of the " Anatomy of Melancholy , "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.238

When elected student of Christ Church ; " for form's sake , <font>
though he wanted not a tutor <$$font> , he was put under the tuition of
Dr. John Bancroft , afterwards Bishop of Oxon. "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,24.239

<P_1,25>

His father seemed very full of the merits of his son ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.241

and told the company he was a good scholar , and a poet , and wrote
Latin verses . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.242

His figure and manner appeared strange to them ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.243

but he behaved modestly , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.244

and sat silent , till upon something which occurred in the course of
conversation , he suddenly struck in and quoted Macrobius ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.245

and thus he gave the first impression of that more extensive reading in
which he had indulged himself . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.246

His tutor , Mr. Jorden , fellow of Pembroke , was not , it seems , a
man of such abilities as we should conceive requisite for the instructor
of Samuel Johnson , who gave me the following account of him .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.247

" He was a very worthy man , but a heavy man , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.248

and I did not profit much by his instructions . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.249

Indeed , I did not attend him much . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.250

The first day after I came to college , I waited upon him ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.251

and then staid away four . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.252

On the sixth , Mr. Jorden asked me why I had not attended .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.253

I answered , I had been sliding in Christ-Church meadow .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.254

And this I said with as much <font> non-chalance <$$font> as I am now
talking to you . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.255

I had no notion that I was wrong or irreverent to my tutor . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.256

Boswell . " That , Sir , was great fortitude of mind . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.257

Johnson . " No , Sir ; stark insensibility . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.258

The fifth of November was at that time kept with great solemnity at
Pembroke College , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.259

and exercises upon the subject of the day were required .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.260

Johnson neglected to perform his , which is much to be regretted ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.261

for his vivacity of imagination , and force of language , would probably
have produced something sublime upon the gunpowder plot .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.262

To apologise for his neglect , he gave in a short copy of verses ,
entitled <font> Somnium , <$$font> containing a common thought ; " that
the Muse had come to him in his sleep , and whispered that it did not
become him to write on such subjects as politicks ; he should confine
himself to humbler themes : " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.263

but the versification was truly Virgilian . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.264

He had a love and respect for Jorden , not for his literature , but for
his worth . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.265

" Whenever <paren> said he <$$paren> a young man becomes Jorden's pupil
, he becomes his son . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.266

Having given a specimen of his poetical powers , he was asked by Mr.
Jorden , to translate Pope's Messiah into Latin verse , as a Christmas
exercise . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,25.267

He performed it with uncommon rapidity , and in so masterly a manner ,
<P_1,26> that he obtained great applause from it , which ever after kept
him high in the estimation of his College , and , indeed , of all the
University . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,26.268

It is said , that Mr. Pope expressed himself concerning it in terms of
strong approbation . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,26.269

Dr. Taylor told me , that it was first printed for old Mr. Johnson ,
without the knowledge of his son , who was very angry when he heard of
it . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,26.270

A miscellany of Poems , collected by a person of the name of Husbands ,
was published at Oxford in 1731 . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,26.271

In that miscellany Johnson's Translation of the Messiah appeared , with
this modest motto from Scaliger's Poeticks , <font> " Ex alieno ingenio
Poeta , ex suo tantum versificator . " <$$font> BOSWELL-1791-2,1,26.272

I am not ignorant that critical objections have been made to this and
other specimens of Johnson's Latin Poetry . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,26.273

I acknowledge myself not competent to decide on a question of such
extreme nicety . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,26.274

But I am satisfied with the just and discriminative eulogy pronounced
upon it by my friend Mr. Courtenay . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,26.275

{COM:verses_omitted}

<P_1,27>

{COM:verses_omitted}

The " morbid melancholy " which was lurking in his constitution , and to
which we may ascribe those particularities , and that aversion to
regular life , which , at a very early period , marked his character ,
gathered such strength in his twentieth year , as to afflict him in a
dreadful manner . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.279

While he was at Lichfield , in the College vacation of the year 1729 ,
he felt himself overwhelmed with an horrible hypochondria , with
perpetual irritation , fretfulness , and impatience ; and with a
dejection , gloom , and despair , which made existence misery .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.280

From this dismal malady he never afterwards was perfectly relieved ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.281

and all his labours , and all his enjoyments , were but temporary
interruptions of its baleful influence . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.282

How wonderful , how unsearchable are the ways of God !
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.283

Johnson , who was blest with all the powers of genius and understanding
in a degree far above the ordinary state of human nature , was at the
same time visited with a disorder so afflictive , that they who know it
by dire experience , will not envy his exalted endowments .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.284

That it was , in some degree , occasioned by a defect in his nervous
system , that inexplicable part of our frame , appears highly probable .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.285

He told Mr. Paradise that he was sometimes so languid and inefficient ,
that he could not distinguish the hour upon the town-clock .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.286

Johnson , upon the first violent attack of this disorder , strove to
overcome it by forcible exertions . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.287

He frequently walked to Birmingham and back again ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.288

and tried many other expedients , but all in vain .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.289

His expression concerning it to me was , " I did not then know how to
manage it . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.290

His distress became so intolerable , that he applied to Dr. Swinfen ,
physician in Lichfield , his godfather , and put into his hands a state
of his case , written in Latin . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.291

Dr. Swinfen was so much struck with the extraordinary acuteness ,
research , and eloquence of this paper , that in his zeal for his godson
he shewed it to several people . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.292

His daughter , Mrs. Desmoulins , who was many years humanely supported
in Dr. Johnson's house in London , told me , that upon his discovering
that Dr. Swinfen had communicated his case , he was so much offended ,
that he was never afterwards fully reconciled to him .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.293

He indeed had good reason to be offended ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.294

for though Dr. Swinfen's motive was good , he inconsiderately betrayed
a matter deeply interesting and of great delicacy , which had been
entrusted to him in confidence ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,27.295

and exposed a <P_1,28> complaint of his young friend and patient , which
, in the superficial opinion of the generality of mankind , is attended
with contempt and disgrace . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.296

But let not little men triumph upon knowing that Johnson was an
Hypochondriack , was subject to what the learned , philosophical , and
pious Dr. Cheyne has so well treated , under the title of " The English
Malady . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.297

Though he suffered severely from it , he was not therefore degraded .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.298

The powers of his great mind might be troubled , and their full exercise
suspended at times , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.299

but the mind itself was ever entire . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.300

As a proof of this , it is only necessary to consider , that , when he
was at the very worst , he composed that state of his own case , which
shewed an uncommon vigour , not only of fancy and taste , but of
judgement . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.301

I am aware that he himself was too ready to call such a complaint by the
name of <font> madness <$$font> ; in conformity with which notion , he
has traced its gradations , with exquisite nicety , in one of the
chapters of his Rasselas . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.302

But there is surely a clear distinction between a disorder which affects
only the imagination and spirits , while the judgement is sound , and a
disorder by which the judgement itself is impaired .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.303

This distinction was made to me by the late Professor Gaubius of Leyden
, physician to the Prince of Orange , in a conversation which I had with
him several years ago , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.304

and he expanded it thus : " If <paren> said He <$$paren> a man tells me
that he is grievously disturbed , for that he <font> imagines <$$font>
he sees a russian coming against him with a drawn sword , though at the
same time he is <font> conscious <$$font> it is a delusion , I pronounce
him to have a disordered imagination ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.305

but if a man tells me that he <font> sees <$$font> this , and in
consternation calls to me to look at it , I pronounce him to be <font>
mad <$$font> . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.306

It is a common effect of low spirits or melancholy , to make those who
are afflicted with it imagine that they are actually suffering those
evils which happen to be most strongly {TEXT:"most_strongly"_unclear}
presented to their minds . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.307

Some have fancied themselves to be deprived of the use of their limbs ,
some to labour under acute diseases , others to be in extreme poverty ,
when , in truth , there was not the least reality in any of the
suppositions ; so that when the vapours were dispelled , they were
convinced of the delusion . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.308

To Johnson , whose supreme enjoyment was the exercise of his reason ,
the disturbance or obscuration of that faculty was the evil most to be
dreaded . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.309

Insanity , therefore , was the object of his most dismal apprehension ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.310

and he fancied himself seized by it , or approaching to it , at the very
time when he was giving proofs of a more than ordinary soundness and
vigour of judgement . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.311

That his own diseased imagination should have so far deceived him , is
strange ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,28.312

but it is stranger still that some of his friends should have given
credit to his groundless <P_1,29> opinion , when they had such undoubted
proofs that it was totally fallacious ; though it is by no means
surprising that those who wish to depreciate him , should , since his
death , have laid hold of this circumstance , and insisted upon it with
very unfair aggravation . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.313

Amidst the oppression and distraction of a disease which very few have
felt in its full extent , but many have experienced in a slighter degree
, Johnson , in his writings , and in his conversation , never failed to
display all the varieties of intellectual excellence .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.314

In his march through this world to a better , his mind still appeared
grand and brilliant , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.315

and impressed all around him with the truth of Virgil's noble sentiment
- <font> " Igneus est ollis vigor et caelestis origo . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.316

<$$font> The history of his mind as to religion is an important article
. BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.317

I have mentioned the early impressions made upon his tender imagination
by his mother , who continued her pious care with assiduity , but , in
his opinion , not with judgement . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.318

" Sunday <paren> said he <$$paren> was a heavy day to me when I was a
boy . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.319

My mother confined me on that day , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.320

and made me read ' The Whole Duty of Man , ' from a great part of which
I could derive no instruction . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.321

When , for instance , I had read the chapter on theft , which from my
infancy I had been taught was wrong , I was no more convinced that theft
was wrong than before ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.322

so there was no accession of knowledge . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.323

A boy should be introduced to such books , by having his attention
directed to the arrangement , to the stile , and other excellencies of
composition ; that the mind being thus engaged by an amusing variety of
objects , may not grow weary . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.324

He communicated to me the following particulars upon the subject of his
religious progress . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.325

" I fell into an inattention to religion , or an indifference about it ,
in my ninth year . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.326

The church at Lichfield , in which we had a seat , wanted reparation ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.327

so I was to go and find a seat in other churches ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.328

and having bad eyes , and being aukward about this , I used to go and
read in the fields on Sunday . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.329

This habit continued till my fourteenth year ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.330

and still I find a great reluctance to go to church .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.331

I then became a sort of lax <font> talker <$$font> against religion ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.332

for I did not much <font> think <$$font> against it ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.333

and this lasted till I went to Oxford , where it would not be <font>
suffered <$$font> . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.334

When at Oxford , I took up ' Law's Serious Call to the Unconverted , '
expecting to find it a dull book , <paren> as such books generally are ,
<$$paren> and perhaps to laugh at it . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.335

But I found Law quite an overmatch for me ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.336

and this was the first occasion of my thinking in earnest of religion ,
after I became capable of rational inquiry . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,29.337

From this time <P_1,30> forward , religion was the predominant object of
his thoughts ; though , with the just sentiments of a conscientious
christian , he lamented that his practice of its duties fell far short
of what it ought to be . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,30.338

This instance of a mind such as that of Johnson being first disposed ,
by an unexpected incident , to think with anxiety of the momentous
concerns of eternity , and of " what he should do to be saved , " may
for ever be produced in opposition to the superficial and sometimes
profane contempt that has been thrown upon those occasional impressions
which it is certain many christians have experienced , though it must be
acknowledged that weak minds , from an erroneous supposition that no man
is in a state of grace who has not felt a particular conversion , have ,
in some cases , brought a degree of ridicule upon them ; a ridicule , of
which it is inconsiderate or unfair to make a general application .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,30.339

How seriously Johsnon was impressed with a sense of religion , even in
the vigour of his youth , appears from the following passage in his
minutes kept by way of diary : BOSWELL-1791-2,1,30.340

" Sept. 7 , 1736 . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,30.341

I have this day entered upon my 28th year . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,30.342

Mayest thou , O God , enable me , for Jesus Christ's sake , to spend
this in such a manner , that I may receive comfort from it at the hour
of death , and in the day of judgement ! BOSWELL-1791-2,1,30.343

Amen . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,30.344

<P_1,31>

The particular course of his reading while at Oxford , and during the
time of vacation which he passed at home , can@ @not be traced .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.346

Enough has been said of his irregular mode of study .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.347

He told me , that from his earliest years he loved to read poetry , but
hardly ever read any poem to an end ; that he read Shakspeare at a
period so early , that the speech of the Ghost in Hamlet terrified him
when he was alone ; that Horace's Odes were the compositions in which he
took most delight , and it was long before he liked his Epistles and
Satires . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.348

He told me what he read <font> solidly <$$font> at Oxford was Greek ;
not the Grecian historians , but Homer and Euripides , and now and then
a little Epigram ; that the study of which he was most fond was
Metaphysicks , but he had not read much , even in that way .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.349

I always thought that he did himself injustice in his account of what he
had read , and that he must have been speaking with reference to the
vast portion of study which is possible , and to which a few scholars in
the whole history of literature have attained ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.350

for when I once asked him whether a person whose name I have now
forgotten , studied hard , he answered " No , Sir .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.351

I do not believe he studied hard . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.352

I never knew a man who studied hard . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.353

I conclude , indeed , from the effects , that some men have studied hard
, as Bentley and Clarke . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.354

Trying him by that criterion upon which he formed his judgement of
others , we may be absolutely certain , both from his writings and his
conversation , that his reading was very extensive .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.355

Dr. Adam Smith , than whom few are better judges on this subject , once
observed to me that " Johnson knew more books than any man alive . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.356

He had a peculiar facility in seizing at once what was valuable in any
book , without submitting to the labour of perusing it from beginning to
end . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.357

He had , from the irritability of his constitution , at all times , an
impatience and hurry when he either read or wrote .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.358

A certain apprehension , arising from novelty , made him write his first
exercise at College twice over ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.359

but he never took that trouble with any other composition ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.360

and we shall see that his most excellent works were struck off at a heat
, with rapid exertion . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.361

Yet he appears , from his early notes or memorandums , in my possession
, to have at various times attempted , or at least planned , a
methodical course of study , according to computation , of which he was
all his life fond , as it fixed his attention steadily upon something
without , and prevented his mind from preying upon itself .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,31.362

Thus I find in his hand-writing the number of lines in each of two of
Euripides's Tragedies , of the Georgicks of Virgil , of the first six
books of the Aeneid , of Horace's Art of Poetry , of three of the books
of Ovid's Metamorphosis , of some parts of Theocritus , and of the tenth
<P_1,32> Satire of Juvenal ; and a table , shewing at the rate of
various numbers a day , <paren> I suppose verses to be read <$$paren>
what would be , in each case , the total amount in a week , month , and
year . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.363

No man had a more ardent love of literature , or a higher respect for it
, than Johnson . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.364

His apartment in Pembroke College was that upon the second floor , over
the gateway . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.365

The enthusiasts of learning will ever contemplate it with veneration .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.366

One day , while he was sitting in it quite alone , Dr. Panting , then
master of the College , whom he called " a fine Jacobite fellow , "
overheard him uttering this soliloquy in his strong , emphatick voice :
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.367

" Well , I have a mind to see what is done in other places of learning .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.368

I@ @'ll go and visit the Universities abroad . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.369

I@ @'ll go to France and Italy . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.370

I@ @'ll go to Padua . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.371

And I@ @'ll mind my business . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.372

For an <font> Athenian <$$font> blockhead is the worst of all blockheads
. " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.373

Dr. Adams told me that Johnson , while he was at Pembroke College , "
was caressed and loved by all about him , was a gay and frolicksome
fellow , and passed there the happiest part of his life . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.374

But this is a striking proof of the fallacy of appearances , and how
little any of us know of the real internal state even of those whom we
see most frequently ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.375

for the truth is , that he was then depressed by poverty , and irritated
by disease . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.376

When I mentioned to him this account as given me by Dr. Adams , he said
; " Ah , Sir , I was mad and violent . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.377

It was bitterness which they mistook for frolick .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.378

I was miserably poor , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.379

and I thought to fight my way by my literature and my wit ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.380

so I disregarded all power and all authority . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.381

The Bishop of Dromore observes in a letter to me , " The pleasure he
took in vexing the tutors and fellows has been often mentioned .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.382

But I have heard him say , what ought to be recorded to the honour of
the present venerable master of that College , the Reverend William
Adams , D.D. {COM:missing_comma} who was then very young , and one of
the junior fellows ; that the mild but judicious expostulations of this
worthy man , whose virtue awed him , and whose learning he revered ,
made him really ashamed of himself , ' though I fear <paren> said he
<$$paren> I was too proud to own it . ' " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,32.383

I have heard from some of his contemporaries {COM:see_errata} that he
was generally seen lounging at the College gate , with a circle of young
students round him , whom he was entertaining with wit , and keeping
from their studies , if not <P_1,33> spiriting them up to rebellion
against the College discipline , which in his maturer years he so much
extolled . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.384

He very early began to attempt keeping notes or memorandums , by way of
a diary of his life . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.385

I find , in a parcel of loose leaves , the following spirited resolution
to contend against his natural indolence : BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.386

" <font> Oct. 1729 . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.387

Desidiae valedixi ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.388

syrenis istius cantibus surdam posthac aurem obversurus . <$$font>
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.389

I bid farewell to Sloth , being resolved henceforth not to listen to her
syren strains . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.390

I have also in my possession a few leaves of another <font> Libellus ,
<$$font> or little book , entitled Annales , in which some of the early
particulars of his history are registered in Latin .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.391

I do not find that he formed any close intimacies with his
fellow-collegians . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.392

But Dr. Adams told me , that he contracted a love and regard for
Pembroke College , which he retained to the last .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.393

A short time before his death he sent to that College a present of all
his works , to be deposited in their library , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.394

and he had thoughts of leaving to it his house at Lichfield ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.395

but his friends who were about him very properly dissuaded him from it ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.396

and he bequeathed it to some poor relations . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.397

He took a pleasure in boasting of the many eminent men who had been
educated at Pembroke . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.398

In this list are found the names of Spenser , Mr. Hawkins the Poetry
Professor , Mr. Shenstone , Sir William Blackstone , and others , not
forgetting the celebrated popular preacher , Mr. George Whitefield , of
whom , though Dr. Johnson did not think very highly , it must be
acknowledged that his eloquence was powerful , his views pious and
charitable , his assiduity almost incredible ; and , that since his
death , the integrity of his character has been fully vindicated .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.399

Being himself a poet , Johnson was peculiarly happy in mentioning how
many of the sons of Pembroke were poets ; adding , with a smile of
sportive triumph , " Sir , we are a nest of singing birds . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.400

He was not , however , blind to what he thought the defects of his own
College ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.401

and I have , from the information of Dr. Taylor , a very strong
instance of that rigid honesty which he ever inflexibly preserved .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.402

Taylor had obtained his father's consent to be entered of Pembroke ,
that he might be with his schoolfellow Johnson , with whom , though some
years older than himself , he was very intimate .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.403

This would have been a great comfort to Johnson .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.404

But he fairly told Taylor that he could not , in conscience , suffer him
to enter where he knew he could not have an able tutor .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.405

He then made inquiry all round the University , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,33.406

and having found that Mr. Bateman , of <P_1,34> Christ-Church , was the
tutor of highest reputation , Taylor was entered of that College .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.407

Mr. Bateman's lectures were so excellent , that Johnson used to come
and get them at second-hand from Taylor , till his poverty being so
extreme , that his shoes were worn out , and his feet appeared through
them , he saw that this humiliating circumstance was perceived by the
Christ-Churchmen , and he came no more . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.408

He was too proud to accept of money , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.409

and somebody having set a pair of new shoes at his door , he threw them
away with indignation . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.410

How must we feel when we read such an anecdote of Samuel Johnson !
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.411

His spirited refusal of an eleemosynary supply of shoes , arose , no
doubt , from a proper pride . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.412

But , considering his ascetick disposition at times , as acknowledged by
himself in his Meditations , and the exaggeration with which some have
treated the peculiarities of his character , I should not wonder to hear
it ascribed to a principle of superstitious mortification ; as we are
told by Turfellinus , in his Life of St. Ignatius Loyola , that this
intrepid founder of the order of Jesuits , when he arrived at Goa ,
after having made a severe pilgrimage through the eastern deserts ,
persisted in wearing his miserable shattered shoes , and when new ones
were offered him , rejected them as an unsuitable indulgence .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.413

The <font> res angusta domi <$$font> prevented him from having the
advantage of a complete academical education . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.414

The friend to whom he had trusted for support had deceived him .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.415

His debts in College , though not great , were increasing ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.416

and his scanty remittances from Lichfield , which had all along been
made with great difficulty , could be supplied no longer , his father
having fallen into a state of insolvency . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.417

Compelled , therefore , by irresistible necessity , he left the College
in autumn , 1731 , without a degree , having been a member of it little
more than three years . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.418

Dr. Adams , the worthy and respectable master of Pembroke College , has
generally had the reputation of being Johnson's tutor .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.419

The fact , however , is , that in 1731 Mr. Jorden quitted the College
and his pupils were transferred to Dr. Adams ; so that had Johnson
returned , Dr. Adams <font> would have been his tutor <$$font> .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.420

It is to be wished , that this connection had taken place .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.421

His equal temper , mild disposition , and politeness of manners , might
have insensibly softened the harshness of Johnson , and infused into him
those more delicate charities , that <font> Petite morale , <$$font> in
which , it must be confessed , our great moralist was more deficient
than his best friends could fully justify . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.422

Dr. Adams paid Johnson this high compliment . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.423

He said to me at Oxford , in 1776 , " I was his nominal tutor ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.424

but he was above my mark . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,34.425

When I <P_1,35> repeated it to Johnson , his eyes flashed with grateful
satisfaction , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.426

and he exclaimed , " That was liberal and noble . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.427

And now <paren> I had almost said <font> poor <$$font> <$$paren> Samuel
Johnson returned to his native city , destitute , and not knowing how he
should gain even a decent livelihood . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.428

His father's misfortunes in trade rendered him unable to support his son
; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.429

and for some time there appeared no means by which he could maintain
himself . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.430

In the December of this year his father died . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.431

The state of poverty in which he died , appears , from a note in one of
Johnson's little diaries of the following year , which strongly displays
his spirit and virtuous dignity of mind . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.432

" <font> 1732 Julii 15 . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.433

Undecim aureos deposui , quo die quicquid ante matris funus <paren> quod
serum sit precor <$$paren> de paternis bonis sperari liect , viginti
scilicet libras accepi . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.434

Usque adeo mibi fortuna fingenda est . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.435

Interea , ne paupertate vires animi languescant , nec in flagitia
egestas abigat , cavendam . <$$font> BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.436

I layed by eleven guineas on this day , when I received twenty pounds ,
being all that I have reason to hope for out of my father's effects ,
previous to the death of my mother ; an event which I pray God may be
very remote . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.437

I now , therefore , see that I must make my own fortune .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.438

Meanwhile , let me take care that the powers of my mind may not be
debilitated by poverty , and that indigence do not force me into any
criminal act . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.439

Johnson was so far fortunate , that the respectable character of his
parents , and his own merit , had , from his earliest years , secured
him a kind reception in the best families at Lichfield .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.440

Among these I can mention Mr. Howard , Dr. Swinfen , Mr. Simpson ,
Mr. Levett , Captain Garrick , father of the great ornament of the
British stage ; but above all , Mr. Gilbert Walmsley , Register of the
Prerogative Court of Lichfield , whose character , long after his
decease , Dr. Johnson has , in his life of Edmund Smith , thus drawn in
the glowing colours of gratitude : BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.441

" Of Gilbert Walmsley , thus presented to my mind , let me indulge
myself in the remembrance . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.442

I knew him very early ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.443

he was one of the first friends that literature procured me ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.444

and I hope that , at least , my gratitude made me worthy of his notice .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.445

He was of an advanced age , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.446

and I was only not a boy ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.447

yet he never received my notions with contempt .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,35.448

He was a whig , with all the virulence <P_1,36> and malevolence of his
party ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.449

yet difference of opinion did not keep us apart .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.450

I honoured him , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.451

and he endured me . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.452

He had mingled with the gay world without exemption from its vices or
its follies ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.453

but had never neglected the cultivation of his mind .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.454

His belief of revelation was unshaken ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.455

his learning preserved his principles ; BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.456

he grew first regular , and then pious . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.457

His studies had been so various , that I am not able to name a man of
equal knowledge . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.458

His acquaintance with books was great , BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.459

and what he did not immediately know , he could , at least , tell where
to find . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.460

Such was his amplitude of learning , and such his copiousness of
communication , that it may be doubted whether a day now passes , in
which I have not some advantage from his friendship .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.461

At this man's table I enjoyed many cheerful and instructive hours , with
companions , such as are not often found - with one who has lengthened ,
and one who has gladdened life ; with Dr. James , whose skill in
physick will be long remembered ; and with David Garrick , whom I hoped
to have gratified with this character of our common friend .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.462

But what are the hopes of man ! BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.463

I am disappointed by that stroke of death , which has eclipsed the
gaiety of nations , and impoverished the publick stock of harmless
pleasure . " BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.464

In these families he passed much time in his early years .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.465

In most of them , he was in the company of ladies , particularly at Mr.
Walmsley's , whose wife and sisters-in-law , of the name of Aston , and
daughters of a baronet , were remarkable for good breeding ; so that the
notion which has been industriously circulated and believed , that he
never was in good company till late in life , and , consequently , had
been confirmed in coarse and ferocious manners by long habits , is
wholly without foundation . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.466

Some of the ladies have assured me , they recollected him well when a
young man , as distinguished for his complaisance .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.467

And that this politeness was not merely occasional and temporary , or
confined to the circles of Lichfield , is ascertained by the testimony
of a lady , who , in a paper with which I have been favoured by a
daughter of his intimate friend and physician , Dr. Lawrence , thus
describes Dr. Johnson some years afterwards : BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.468

" As the particulars of the former part of Dr. Johnson's life do not
seem to be very accurately known , a lady hopes that the following
information may not be unacceptable . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.469

She remembers Dr. Johnson on a visit to Dr. Taylor , at Ashborn , some
time between the end of the year 37 , and the middle of the year 40 ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,36.470

she <P_1,37> rather thinks it to have been after he and his wife were
removed to London . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.471

During his stay at Ashbourn , he made frequent visits to Mr. Meynell ,
at Brodley , where his company was much desired by the ladies of the
family , who were , perhaps , in point of elegance and accomplishments ,
inferiour to few of those with whom he was afterwards acquainted .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.472

Mr. Meynell's eldest daughter was afterwards married to Mr.
Fitzherbert , father to Mr. Alleyne Fitzherbert , lately minister to
the court of Russia . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.473

Of her , Dr. Johnson said , in Dr. Lawrence's study , that she had the
best understanding he ever met with in any human being .
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.474

At Mr. Meynell's he also commenced that friendship with Mrs. Hill
Boothby , sister to the present Sir Brook Boothby , which continued till
her death . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.475

The <font> young woman whom he used to call Molly Aston <$$font> , was
sister to Sir Thomas Aston , and daughter to a Baronet ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.476

she was likewise sister to the wife of his friend Mr. Gilbert Walmsley
. BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.477

Besides his intimacy with the above-mentioned persons , who were surely
people of rank and education , while he was yet at Lichfield he used to
be frequently at the house of Dr. Swinsen , a gentleman of a very
ancient family in Staffordshire , from which , after the death of his
elder brother , he inherited a good estate . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.478

He was , besides , a physician of very extensive practice ;
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.479

but for want of due attention to the management of his domestic concerns
, left a very large family in indigence . BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.480

One of his daughters , Mrs. Desmoulins , afterwards found an asylum in
the house of her old friend , whose doors were always open to the
unfortunate , and who well observed the precept of the gospel ,
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.481

for he was kind to the unthankful and to the evil . "
BOSWELL-1791-2,1,37.482

