<BEGIN_boswell-1783-2>

<P_47>

Wednesday 1 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.3

<paren> Writing the 14 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,47.4

Rose early ; BOSWELL-1783-2,47.5

a fine frosty morning . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.6

Left Coilsfield with youthful ideas of that social family ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,47.7

and rode briskly to Rozelle . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.8

Found there Lord Crawford , whom I had not seen for seven years , and
his brother Bourtreehill . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.9

Talked of going home after breakfast . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.10

But the Countess and Lady Mary asked me to stay in so obliging a manner
that I passed all New Year's Day there , BOSWELL-1783-2,47.11

and was really happy ; BOSWELL-1783-2,47.12

only when alone with the Countess , was hurt by perceiving her distress
on account of her son Bute , who , it was feared , was lost in the
<font> Centaur . <$$font> BOSWELL-1783-2,47.13

Was sober and just as I could wish . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.14

Knockroon and Bailie Neill were both with me about business , of which I
found myself sufficiently capable . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.15

Thursday 2 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.16

<paren> Writing the 14 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,47.17

Rode home to breakfast ; BOSWELL-1783-2,47.18

still a fine frost . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.19

Had James Bruce along with me , while I <paren> writing 15 January
<$$paren> took a note of trees round my farmyards , marking what were to
grow and what to be cut . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.20

This amused me much . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.21

I this day finished my survey of them in that part of the barony which
lies to the south of the <font> via sacra <$$font> , as my father used
to call the kirk road . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.22

I then sat as preses of a meeting of heritors and farmers in the church
which had been very properly called by Mr. Dun to consider of securing
meal for the people , particularly of the village , as an apprehension
had been taken that it would be carried out of the parish and sold at a
distance . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.23

He suggested that each of us , according to our stock of it , should
engage to have a certain number of bolls kept to be sold at the market
price , which was then 15 <font> d. <$$font> BOSWELL-1783-2,47.24

I subscribed for forty bolls ; BOSWELL-1783-2,47.25

and the subscription in all amounted to above eighty .
BOSWELL-1783-2,47.26

I had three bolls ready at Brigend Mill , which I ordered to be sold out
directly at 14 <font> d . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.27

, <$$font> but declaring publicly that this was not to be any rule to
the farmers , who were to have the market price . BOSWELL-1783-2,47.28

There was something comfortable in <P_48> thus quieting the minds of the
people . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.29

I then rouped my farm of Dernlaw for a year in grass , at Lapraik's ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,48.30

and got within a few pounds of the rent paid for it in the ordinary
state of a farm . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.31

Then the Laird of Logan , Old Mr. John Boswell , some others , and
myself dined at Mr. Dun's . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.32

After tea Mr. Halbert , the session-clerk , came BOSWELL-1783-2,48.33

and I revised his register . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.34

Then I walked home , accompanied by Mr. Millar ; BOSWELL-1783-2,48.35

and the evening was concluded as usual most decently with family worship
and a sober supper . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.36

Friday 3 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.37

<paren> Writing the 15 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,48.38

Mounted early , BOSWELL-1783-2,48.39

rode to Fairlie ; BOSWELL-1783-2,48.40

the Laird not at home . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.41

Went on to Eglinton , where he was , and where I was to dine .
BOSWELL-1783-2,48.42

Reached it about ten - excellent alertness . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.43

Found Fairlie , Captain Peebles , and Williamwood , whom I had never
seen before . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.44

I liked him much . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.45

The Baron of Lochrig also appeared . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.46

Captain John Fergusson arrived BOSWELL-1783-2,48.47

and paid a forenoon visit . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.48

The Earl made his appearance about noon . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.49

He and I and Fairlie walked near to Irvine . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.50

His Lordship was very glad to see me . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.51

I had a plain conversation with him on the politics of the county .
BOSWELL-1783-2,48.52

I told him he might depend upon my assistance in <paren> writing 19
January <$$paren> his interest , BOSWELL-1783-2,48.53

and I desired to know if he was again to set up Col. Hugh Montgomerie .
BOSWELL-1783-2,48.54

He said the Colonel was to stand . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.55

He said he was much obliged to me , BOSWELL-1783-2,48.56

and he really seemed to be keen . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.57

I told him that though his Lordship were not to support my friend Hugh ,
I would stand by him if he had but a wish for being Member .
BOSWELL-1783-2,48.58

But in case of his not choosing it , I intended to offer myself .
BOSWELL-1783-2,48.59

I told the Earl that since I had the influenza last summer I really was
not able to drink ; and if it was disagreeable to him that a man should
sit by him without drinking , I would take my horse and go away .
BOSWELL-1783-2,48.60

He said I should do just as I pleased . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.61

I paid a visit before dinner to my old acquaintance , Mrs. Reid the
housekeeper . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.62

At dinner there was quite a comfortable company ; just the Earl , the
Laird of Fairlie , the Baron of Lochrig , and Knockroon and myself ;
BOSWELL-1783-2,48.63

neither grandees , nor numbers to make his Lordship hold himself up in
state . BOSWELL-1783-2,48.64

He was quite cheerful and easy , BOSWELL-1783-2,48.65

and at my request sung <font> Sheriffmuir , <$$font> " Coming through
the broom , " and " Row me o'er the lea-rig . " BOSWELL-1783-2,48.66

I had some old <P_49> Malaga ; BOSWELL-1783-2,49.67

and finding I really had liberty to drink as I pleased , my heart
dilated , BOSWELL-1783-2,49.68

and I drank two bottles all but three glasses . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.69

We then played <font> vingt-et-un <$$font> till supper , at which I did
my part decently enough ; BOSWELL-1783-2,49.70

but being sleepy with my potion , went to bed as soon as the cloth was
taken away . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.71

Saturday 4 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.72

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,49.73

Awaked very ill , BOSWELL-1783-2,49.74

and was somewhat vexed that I had not been able to maintain my sobriety
even at Eglinton . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.75

It was a wet morning . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.76

Fairlie and Knockroon went away before I got up . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.77

I had some tea , BOSWELL-1783-2,49.78

and then followed them to Fairlie , where I breakfasted ;
BOSWELL-1783-2,49.79

then went to Riccarton to a meeting of the tutors and curators of
Treesbanks ; BOSWELL-1783-2,49.80

dined at Mr. Bruce Campbell's , BOSWELL-1783-2,49.81

and then went to Loudoun , where I found the excellent Earl , and the
Laird of Dunlop and the Major with him . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.82

Was comfortable here , and much pleased to see little Lady Flora , a
fine , healthful child . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.83

Miss Bell MacLeod and Mrs. Vernon were here . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.84

After tea I played whist , BOSWELL-1783-2,49.85

and after supper drank very little . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.86

Was glad to find no continuation of a drinking disposition .
BOSWELL-1783-2,49.87

Thought I should be often at this good Place , where I was truly happy .
BOSWELL-1783-2,49.88

Sunday 5 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,49.89

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,49.90

Being resolved to appear at my own parish church , I had chocolade early
BOSWELL-1783-2,49.91

and set out in good <P_50> time ; BOSWELL-1783-2,50.92

a fine morning . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.93

Called on Mr. Auld at Mauchline BOSWELL-1783-2,50.94

and engaged him to be with me at four o'clock . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.95

Alighted when I had passed the Howford bridge , BOSWELL-1783-2,50.96

and having ordered my horses home , walked to Willockstown , which I had
never seen , BOSWELL-1783-2,50.97

and conversed with William Murdoch , the tenant , whom I found to be a
sensible , candid man . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.98

Then went by the Tenshillingside BOSWELL-1783-2,50.99

and visited old John Colville , whom I had placed in a good house there
in his eighty-ninth year . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.100

He was lying in bed BOSWELL-1783-2,50.101

and conversed very distinctly , BOSWELL-1783-2,50.102

and told me it was the best house he had ever been in .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.103

I also looked in upon Quintin Dun , who was not well .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.104

My heart was calmly benevolent . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.105

I went by the turnpike and the Old House , BOSWELL-1783-2,50.106

and was happy as in my early years , with the addition of the loftiness
of being Laird . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.107

I called on James Bruce , who walked so far with me .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.108

Then had breakfast , BOSWELL-1783-2,50.109

shifted , BOSWELL-1783-2,50.110

and was made happy with an agreeable letter from my dear wife .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.111

Then took fresh horses <paren> old Browning for myself <$$paren>
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.112

and rode to church . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.113

Mr. Millar preached . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.114

Had a cordial short conversation with Mr. Dun ; BOSWELL-1783-2,50.115

and Mr. John Boswell , Senior , and Mr. Millar rode home with me .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.116

Mr. Auld arrived ; BOSWELL-1783-2,50.117

and we passed the evening in most decent and agreeable sociality , quite
in the style of the family . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.118

Mr. Auld said prayers , BOSWELL-1783-2,50.119

and mentioned those of this family in former generations .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.120

I was just as I wished to be . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.121

I was quite satisfied with my character and conduct at present .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.122

It was what would have pleased my father and my grandfather .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.123

May I ever behave in like manner at the seat of my ancestors !
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.124

Monday 6 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.125

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,50.126

Let me write shorter . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.127

I had received so polite a card from Lord Dumfries , I wished to
breakfast with him today . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.128

But so many of my tenants came about me , I did not get away till about
eleven . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.129

I paid him and the Countess a short visit ; BOSWELL-1783-2,50.130

then called on Mr. George Reid , whom I must see every time I am in the
country ; BOSWELL-1783-2,50.131

then rode to Ayr BOSWELL-1783-2,50.132

and dined at Knockroon's with Dr. Campbell . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.133

Visited Lady Cunninghame ; BOSWELL-1783-2,50.134

drank tea with John Webster . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.135

Met on business with Garallan and Mr. James Fergusson .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.136

Then went to Lady Crawford's . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.137

But found she had received sad accounts of her son Bute being lost , and
was confined to her room . BOSWELL-1783-2,50.138

Would not go in to Lord Crawford , etc. , who were there ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.139

but went back to Ayr quite dreary , BOSWELL-1783-2,50.140

and resolved to sit all night by myself till bedtime .
BOSWELL-1783-2,50.141

Next morning <P_51> early Dr. Campbell was to go with me by Straiton to
Craigengillan's . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.142

I tried a bottle of perry , which put some spirit into me ;
BOSWELL-1783-2,51.143

then sat an hour with Lady Cunninghame , who had Miss Whitefoord of
Dunduff with her . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.144

Was a little relieved . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.145

But returned to the King's Arms to indulge melancholy .
BOSWELL-1783-2,51.146

Luckily for me , Knockroon joined me , BOSWELL-1783-2,51.147

and his contentment , and saying our own distresses were enough for us ,
and some good veal cutlets and warm port with spice , made me very
comfortable . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.148

Unnecessary sadness is irrational . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.149

My melancholy could do Lady Crawford no good . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.150

She did not see me , to be soothed by it . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.151

Tuesday 7 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.152

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,51.153

It was a rainy morning . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.154

But Dr. Campbell and I rode briskly along . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.155

It soon faired , BOSWELL-1783-2,51.156

and I had a most agreeable ride with him , quite new to me after we
passed Dalrymple bridge , up the Water of Girvan by Glencaird .
BOSWELL-1783-2,51.157

One purpose I had this morning was to view Sir John Whitefoord's old
family seat , Blairquhan . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.158

I was much pleased with my ride , BOSWELL-1783-2,51.159

and the ancient house and large plane - and ash-trees at this Place
delighted my ancient baron soul . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.160

We breakfasted at Straiton , BOSWELL-1783-2,51.161

and I viewed the church and churchyard , which is uncommonly spacious
and has several old trees in it . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.162

Got to Berboth to dinner , BOSWELL-1783-2,51.163

Craigengillan huzzaed when he saw me , BOSWELL-1783-2,51.164

and I returned the jovial shout . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.165

The day passed heartily , BOSWELL-1783-2,51.166

and I had the happiness to be assured that his beautiful daughter should
go with me to Auchinleck , as I was to conduct her to our house at
Edinburgh . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.167

Wednesday 8 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.168

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,51.169

Dr. Campbell went away betimes . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.170

I passed the forenoon in taking down from Craigengillan's dictating a
number of particulars of his life , which for good sense , activity ,
and prosperity is truly remarkable . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.171

I had formerly taken down some anecdotes of it . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.172

Captain McAdam came before dinner . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.173

The day passed as heartily as yesterday . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.174

I was in sound , cheerful spirits , just as I could wish to be .
BOSWELL-1783-2,51.175

Thursday 9 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.176

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,51.177

A terrible morning ; wind , hail , thunder , and lightning .
BOSWELL-1783-2,51.178

It grew better , BOSWELL-1783-2,51.179

and I set out with Miss McAdam on horseback through the moors .
BOSWELL-1783-2,51.180

Captain McAdam went with us till the road to New Cumnock struck off .
BOSWELL-1783-2,51.181

Wind and rain came on , BOSWELL-1783-2,51.182

and we were wet to the skin . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.183

Craigengillan's servant Gilbert , a Cumnock man , was so excellent a
guide that there seemed no difficulty in the moor road .
BOSWELL-1783-2,51.184

I sent forward William Lennox . BOSWELL-1783-2,51.185

We passed through <P_52> Lord Dumfries's Place to have a short road ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,52.186

and when we got to Auchinleck , things were pretty comfortable , so that
my beautiful charge and I passed the afternoon and evening very
agreeably . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.187

I was vain of such a trust . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.188

I recollect this as one of the most pleasing days of my life : the
certainty of being undisturbed by company ; looking at books , medals ,
etc. , with a sweet creature ; in short a group of good ideas .
BOSWELL-1783-2,52.189

She told me since she had also such a recollection .
BOSWELL-1783-2,52.190

Friday 1O January . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.191

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,52.192

After an early breakfast , had a chaise from Cumnock which drove us
there . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.193

I was detained by several of my tenants a good while .
BOSWELL-1783-2,52.194

We then had all the fly secured , BOSWELL-1783-2,52.195

and after a very good journey got to my house in Edinburgh about eleven
at night . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.196

It was comfortable to me to be with my wife and children again .
BOSWELL-1783-2,52.197

Saturday 11 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.198

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,52.199

The day passed I know not well how . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.200

Grange and several of our young friends dined with us .
BOSWELL-1783-2,52.201

Sunday 12 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.202

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,52.203

At home in the forenoon waiting till it should fair , that I might go to
Duddingston ; BOSWELL-1783-2,52.204

but the rain continued . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.205

Heard Dr. Blair in the afternoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.206

Paid a visit to Lady Auchinleck . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.207

Supped at Dr. Webster's . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.208

Nobody there but old Mr. John McLure . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.209

Monday 13 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.210

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,52.211

Dr. Webster and I dined at Lady Dundonald's . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.212

Mr. Callender from Quebec there , who talked a great deal , and gave us
very distinct information about Canada . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.213

Dr. Webster and Grange supped with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.214

Tuesday 14 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.215

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,52.216

Dr. Webster and I dined at Commissioner Cochrane's , where we again met
Mr. Callender , as also his father , Mr. Callender , Clerk of Session
. BOSWELL-1783-2,52.217

The Commissioner's gentlemanly good sense pleased me .
BOSWELL-1783-2,52.218

But I was sorry to think he was so old , BOSWELL-1783-2,52.219

and when he shivered a little , he said it was a coldness before death .
BOSWELL-1783-2,52.220

Wednesday 15 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.221

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,52.222

Grange dined with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.223

I began to have a little return of bad spirits . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.224

Thursday 16 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.225

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,52.226

After making my appearance in the Court of Session , where I had nothing
to do today , I went to Lady Colville's BOSWELL-1783-2,52.227

and took a second breakfast , Lord Kellie , who was come from Fife ,
having called on me . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.228

My spirits were pretty good . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.229

But the enamel of my sound mind was a little broken .
BOSWELL-1783-2,52.230

I paid a visit at Mr. Wellwood's . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.231

Missed Sir Charles Preston and Miss Preston . BOSWELL-1783-2,52.232

Visited <P_53> Colonel Montgomerie . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.233

Wrote a part of <font> The Hypochondriack <$$font> No. 64 .
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.234

Dined at Mr. George Wallace's . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.235

Not as I could wish . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.236

Friday 17 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.237

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,53.238

Finished , I think , No. 64 . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.239

The Court of Session was irksome to me . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.240

Old Mar came to me in the afternoon BOSWELL-1783-2,53.241

and absurdly opposed my writing Dr. Johnson's life , against whom he
had the most ignorant Scotch prejudice . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.242

He and the Rev. James Cochrane drank tea with us .
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.243

I waited by invitation on Mrs. Drummond , who was anxious about my
scheme of writing her husband's life , which I however resolved should
not be done in a hurry . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.244

I could not sup with her , as I was busy with law .
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.245

There was a dreariness in the thought that Lord Kames was gone , while I
sat in his house . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.246

Miss McAdam is so sweet and amiable a part of our family that I can@
@not sufficiently express my happiness at having her with us .
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.247

My wife is now in as good health and looks as I ever saw her .
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.248

Poor little James is miserably distressed with a scorbutic disorder ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.249

but Mr. Wood declares it not dangerous . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.250

Veronica is a day-boarder with Mrs. Billingsley .
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.251

I am pleased in assisting her to learn French . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.252

Saturday 18 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.253

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,53.254

To what purpose waste time in writing a journal of so insipid a life ?
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.255

I had a cold and hoarseness , BOSWELL-1783-2,53.256

but would not be absent from the annual dinner of Mundell's scholars ,
at which I got into better spirits than I could have imagined .
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.257

I sat by Mr. Ilay Campbell , who had in the most obliging manner given
me his opinion in writing upon my father's settlements .
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.258

I half resolved to drink pretty freely on so merry an occasion ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.259

but found my constitution so altered in that respect , I really could
not . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.260

Ilay Campbell said this meeting grew better every year .
BOSWELL-1783-2,53.261

I came home about nine . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.262

Sunday 19 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.263

<paren> Writing on the 23 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,53.264

Had a hoarseness and sore throat , having been troubled with a cold some
days . BOSWELL-1783-2,53.265

Lay in bed <P_54> all forenoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.266

Was not in a good frame , BOSWELL-1783-2,54.267

but kept myself quiet . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.268

Rose at dinner-time . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.269

Miss Preston and Sir William Augustus Cunynghame sat awhile with us .
BOSWELL-1783-2,54.270

I read today two of Mr. Carr's sermons and the first volume of Miss
Burney's <font> Cecilia . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.271

<font> In the evening the children said divine lessons .
BOSWELL-1783-2,54.272

Sir Charles and Colonel Preston and Sir W. A. Cunynghame supped with
us . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.273

Monday 20 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.274

<paren> Writing the 23 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,54.275

Dictated some law tolerably , but with no relish .
BOSWELL-1783-2,54.276

Supped by earnest invitation with Mrs. Drummond ; BOSWELL-1783-2,54.277

read her a part of my notes for her husband's life ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,54.278

and was shown his and her settlements . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.279

Had visited the Hon. A. Gordon before I went to her .
BOSWELL-1783-2,54.280

Was sadly impressed with a conviction of the transient nature of human
life with all its concerns and occupations . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.281

Tuesday 21 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.282

<paren> Writing the 23 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,54.283

Had little to do . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.284

Lady Colville , Lady Anne Erskine , Lord Kellie and the Hon. Andrew
dined BOSWELL-1783-2,54.285

and drank tea with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.286

I was not in high spirits , BOSWELL-1783-2,54.287

and did not much enjoy the day . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.288

Wednesday 22 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.289

<paren> Writing 1 February . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,54.290

Nothing to mark but that Miss Christy Hart supped with us , which amused
me . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.291

Thursday 23 January , <paren> Writing 1 February . <$$paren>
BOSWELL-1783-2,54.292

Grange dined with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.293

I was pretty well . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.294

Friday 24 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.295

<paren> Writing 1 February . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,54.296

Drank tea with Mrs. Mingay at her particular request .
BOSWELL-1783-2,54.297

Had no animation such as I could wish . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.298

Have this week visited several times the Hon. A. Gordon , confined by
a sore leg . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.299

Saturday 25 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,54.300

<paren> Writing 1 February . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,54.301

Could not refuse an invitation to dine with poor Crosbie , with whom I
had passed many a jovial and instructive hour in his better days , but
who was now ruined in his circumstances and married to a strumpet .
BOSWELL-1783-2,54.302

We had with us a <P_55> Major Poynton who could tell us about the
North_American Indians , Mr. John Donaldson , the painter , and Mr.
Anderson , Remembrancer of Exchequer . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.303

It was awkward and humiliating to see Crosbie in this state .
BOSWELL-1783-2,55.304

Dr. Brown <paren> Joannes Bruno <$$paren> came after Poynton went away
, BOSWELL-1783-2,55.305

and we talked away tolerably . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.306

I drank tea at Princes Street Coffee-house . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.307

Lord Crawford , Colonel Montgomerie , and Mr. John Hunter supped with
us . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.308

Sunday 26 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.309

<paren> Writing 2 February . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,55.310

Grange and I heard the Hon. and Rev. James Cochrane preach in the Old
English Chapel . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.311

I heard Dr. Webster in the afternoon on " I will be to them a father ,
" etc. BOSWELL-1783-2,55.312

I drank tea at Mrs. Preston's with Veronica . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.313

The children said divine lessons . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.314

I supped at Dr. Webster's . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.315

Monday 27 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.316

<paren> Writing 2 February . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,55.317

Breakfasted with Baron Gordon . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.318

Heard him read my first <font> Hypochondriack <$$font> on saving money ,
of which he highly approved . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.319

I left him it and the next , and the three on death , to read .
BOSWELL-1783-2,55.320

Found Lord Cassillis at Dunn's Hotel , Lord Dumfries with him .
BOSWELL-1783-2,55.321

Was glad to find him easy with me as usual , having heard that he was
offended at a little jocular song I had joined with Sundrum in making
upon his Lordship and the Miss Coopers , of which indeed I was the
inventor . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.322

But it would have been weak in him to be seriously angry ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,55.323

and I should have been really sorry . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.324

I called at Lady Auchinleck's , BOSWELL-1783-2,55.325

she out {COM:sic} . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.326

Sat a little with Miss Boswell . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.327

Sat a little at Miss Ords' . BOSWELL-1783-2,55.328

Then visited Lady Glencairn , with whom I had a good conversation
BOSWELL-1783-2,55.329

<paren> had called at Lord Alva's , who was not at home <$$paren> ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,55.330

then visited Commissioner Cochrane , who had been ill , but was better .
BOSWELL-1783-2,55.331

Felt <P_56> that the exercise of walking and variety of visiting cleared
my mind of the gloom and languor which had for some time distressed me .
BOSWELL-1783-2,56.332

My table was now clear . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.333

I had not one paper to write . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.334

In the evening Sir Walter Montgomerie-Cuninghame supped with us .
BOSWELL-1783-2,56.335

Tuesday 28 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.336

<paren> Writing 2 February . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,56.337

My mind was again cloudy and listless . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.338

I looked back with wonder and wishfulness on my healthful state of mind
last autumn and this winter till after my return from Ayrshire , which I
had flattered myself was to be permanent . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.339

Sir Walter , Grange , and Mr. James Loch dined with us .
BOSWELL-1783-2,56.340

Sir Walter stayed tea {COM:sic} BOSWELL-1783-2,56.341

and then came the Hon. and Rev. James Cochrane , whom I kept to supper
, though I was in such want of spirits that I not only had difficulty to
speak a little , and affect attention , but was obliged to go for a
little and lie down on my bed , just for a kind of relief from teasing
pain . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.342

Wednesday 29 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.343

<paren> Writing 2 February . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,56.344

My wife and I and Miss McAdam and Sir Walter dined at Lady Auchinleck's
; BOSWELL-1783-2,56.345

Miss Preston , etc. , there . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.346

I was dull , BOSWELL-1783-2,56.347

but conducted myself sufficiently well . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.348

I was tenderly affected while I viewed the furniture which I had used to
see in my honoured father's time ; BOSWELL-1783-2,56.349

and when I passed the door of the room where he died , my heart was
touched with a tremulous awe . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.350

My client Killantringan supped with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.351

Sir Walter and his brother David came in late BOSWELL-1783-2,56.352

and also supped , BOSWELL-1783-2,56.353

and assisted in entertaining him , for which I was not very fit .
BOSWELL-1783-2,56.354

During this hypochondria <font> Cecilia <$$font> entertained me .
BOSWELL-1783-2,56.355

Thursday 30 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.356

<paren> Writing 2 February . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,56.357

Called on Lord Eglinton , who had been two nights in town .
BOSWELL-1783-2,56.358

He walked to my house with me BOSWELL-1783-2,56.359

and saw my wife . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.360

I then called with him at Lord Chief Baron's ; BOSWELL-1783-2,56.361

not at home . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.362

My wife and I , Miss McAdam , and Colonel Montgomerie dined at Lord
Justice Clerk's ; BOSWELL-1783-2,56.363

Lord Kellie , Lady Colville , etc. , there . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.364

A great feast , BOSWELL-1783-2,56.365

and his conversation hearty and animated . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.366

Sir Walter supped with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.367

Had some regret at not keeping the day . BOSWELL-1783-2,56.368

But thought it rather long BOSWELL-1783-2,56.369

<P_57>

Friday 31 January . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.371

<paren> Writing 10 February . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,57.372

My wife and I and Miss McAdam dined BOSWELL-1783-2,57.373

and drank tea at Lady Colville's . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.374

Her Ladyship was ill BOSWELL-1783-2,57.375

and did not appear . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.376

Sir William and Lady Forbes were there . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.377

I drank more than was necessary . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.378

I supped at Maclaurin's with Baron Gordon , Cullen , Drimnin , and
Corrimony . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.379

Cullen's mimicry entertained us so much that we did not part till near
three in the morning . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.380

I had a bad cold BOSWELL-1783-2,57.381

and drank a good deal of Madeira to keep out the night air , so that I
was heated . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.382

Saturday 1 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.383

<paren> Writing the 10 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,57.384

Awaked so ill that I could not rise , BOSWELL-1783-2,57.385

but was obliged to lie in bed till near three . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.386

Was somewhat vexed that I had allowed myself such an indulgence last
night . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.387

But it could not well have been avoided . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.388

Rose BOSWELL-1783-2,57.389

and entertained Killantringan , his wife and daughter and son , and
Matthew Dickie at dinner and tea . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.390

Was quite sober . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.391

Sunday 2 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.392

<paren> Writing the 10 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,57.393

My cold continued . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.394

I kept the house in the forenoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.395

Heard Dr. Blair in the afternoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.396

The children said divine lessons . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.397

I was in a dull state of mind . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.398

Monday 3 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.399

<paren> Writing the 10 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,57.400

I breakfasted at Lady Colville's . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.401

Lord Kellie had gone for London on Saturday . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.402

The Hon. Andrew walked with me to town . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.403

It was curious to hear from him that he had not at any time even a wish
to distinguish himself . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.404

He just acquiesced in a consciousness of want of spirits and activity .
BOSWELL-1783-2,57.405

The Earls of Crawford , Eglinton , and Cassillis , and Colonel Hugh
Montgomerie supped with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.406

I drank negus , BOSWELL-1783-2,57.407

and was quite calm . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.408

Tuesday 4 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.409

<paren> Writing the 10 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,57.410

Sir Charles and Miss Preston , Baron Gordon , Miss Leslie , Dr. Webster
, Mr. George Wallace , Mr. Maclaurin , Mr. Robert Dundas dined with
us ; BOSWELL-1783-2,57.411

a good creditable day . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.412

Dr. Webster , the Baron , and Mr. Wallace drank tea with me , my wife
having gone out , after the ladies had drank tea , to Corri's concert
with Miss McAdam . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.413

Sir Walter and Grange supped with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.414

Wednesday 5 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.415

<paren> Writing the 10 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,57.416

Sat awhile with Lord Eglinton . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.417

His Lordship , Lady Colville , and Mr. Hamilton of Grange supped with
us . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.418

I drank some rum punch from social inclination . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.419

Was sober though . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.420

Dr. Young died suddenly this afternoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.421

Thursday 6 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.422

<paren> Writing the 10 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,57.423

Grange dined with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,57.424

I recollect nothing else except that I had the satisfaction of being
<P_58> actively benevolent and getting James Samson , a Trabboch
deserter , set at liberty . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.425

Friday 7 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.426

<paren> Writing the 10 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,58.427

Felt myself restless and uneasy after dinner . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.428

Went down to my worthy friend Grange , BOSWELL-1783-2,58.429

and he and I drank one bottle of good old mountain BOSWELL-1783-2,58.430

and eat some toasted hard biscuit , BOSWELL-1783-2,58.431

and were cordial , BOSWELL-1783-2,58.432

and I soon grew well . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.433

I experienced clearly that <font> mental <$$font> distress may be
removed by <font> material <$$font> applications .
BOSWELL-1783-2,58.434

Saturday 8 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.435

<paren> Writing the 10 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,58.436

Awaked with a rheumatism in my right shoulder . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.437

Attended a Faculty meeting of my brethren , where we had a debate for
two hours whether we should oppose the granting of a royal charter to
the Society of Scottish Antiquaries . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.438

Only eleven of us were against opposing . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.439

Thirty-seven were for opposing . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.440

I was vexed that there was such a majority on the illiberal side .
BOSWELL-1783-2,58.441

I was very uneasy with the rheumatism all day . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.442

My good friend the Hon. A. Gordon came BOSWELL-1783-2,58.443

and took a share of our family dinner and a bottle of claret cordially .
BOSWELL-1783-2,58.444

I took very little wine , not to inflame my blood .
BOSWELL-1783-2,58.445

He drank tea with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.446

In the evening I received a letter from Dr. Johnson so rigorous against
my drinking wine at all , and so discouraging to my settling in London ,
that I was a good deal hurt . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.447

Sunday 9 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.448

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,58.449

My rheumatism pained me much . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.450

I kept at home BOSWELL-1783-2,58.451

and heard the children say divine lessons till after church hours
<paren> except being at Dr. Young's funeral <$$paren> ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,58.452

and then went in a chair BOSWELL-1783-2,58.453

and dined <paren> for the first time <$$paren> with the Hon. Henry
Erskine ; BOSWELL-1783-2,58.454

the Hon. Alexander Gordon , Mr. David Erskine , and his brother
Archibald there . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.455

I drank Teneriffe negus BOSWELL-1783-2,58.456

and was comfortably warmed in body , BOSWELL-1783-2,58.457

but my mind roved on London , BOSWELL-1783-2,58.458

and was discontent , though we had good social talk .
BOSWELL-1783-2,58.459

Monday 10 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.460

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,58.461

I recollect nothing . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.462

Tuesday 11 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.463

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,58.464

Paid a visit to Lady Auchinleck in the forenoon , BOSWELL-1783-2,58.465

and I think drank tea with Mr. Nairne . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.466

I am sure I did so one day this week . BOSWELL-1783-2,58.467

<P_59>

Wednesday 12 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.469

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,59.470

It was a very long time since I had paid a visit to Sir Alexander Dick .
BOSWELL-1783-2,59.471

There is no accounting for such eclipses . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.472

It vexed me to think of them . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.473

I at once resolved to go out to him . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.474

Worthy Grange accompanied me , BOSWELL-1783-2,59.475

and we found him as happy as ever . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.476

But I had not such a relish of anything as I could wish .
BOSWELL-1783-2,59.477

Grange both drank tea BOSWELL-1783-2,59.478

and supped with me . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.479

Thursday 13 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.480

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,59.481

Was weary and fretful . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.482

Sir Walter dined with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.483

His thoughtless conduct and wretched circumstances hurt me .
BOSWELL-1783-2,59.484

In the evening I felt all at once a flow of good spirits ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,59.485

and with great ease wrote several letters for next night's post , one of
which was to the Bishop of Killaloe , a correspondence which I had
delayed to begin for almost two years after we had cordially settled it
in London . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.486

I <font> must <$$font> believe that man is in many respects subject to
influence quite unknown to him . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.487

I have day after day resolved to write to the Bishop ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,59.488

yet it has been deferred , though I was vexed at the delay and loss of
real pleasure from his correspondence . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.489

On a sudden I have written to him , BOSWELL-1783-2,59.490

and now can@ @not imagine <font> how <$$font> it was put off or <font>
where <$$font> was the difficulty . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.491

Father of Spirits ! BOSWELL-1783-2,59.492

I implore thy benignant influence ! BOSWELL-1783-2,59.493

Friday 14 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.494

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,59.495

Paid a visit to Mr. Crosbie , BOSWELL-1783-2,59.496

and found with him a son of Paul Sandby's , a young officer in the army
, whom I asked to dine with me , that I might show some civility to the
son of so fine an artist . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.497

The rest of the company were Capt. William Dick , the Rev. Mr.
William Bennet , and Grange . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.498

I was not at my ease . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.499

I viewed all things with a sad indifference . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.500

Phemie had been tried as a complete boarder at Mrs. Billingsley's .
BOSWELL-1783-2,59.501

But she was so unhappy at not coming home at night that she was made
only a day-boarder as well as Veronica . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.502

Little James and Betty were still distressed with a scorbutic eruption .
BOSWELL-1783-2,59.503

Saturday 15 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.504

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,59.505

Was very feeble-minded . BOSWELL-1783-2,59.506

<P_60>

Looked into books in the Advocates' Library for a motto to <font> The
Hypochondriack <$$font> No. 65 . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.508

Found one on time in Josephus . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.509

Put down some hints , BOSWELL-1783-2,60.510

but was indifferent whether I should write well or ill .
BOSWELL-1783-2,60.511

Went with the Hon. Alexander Gordon and Grange to Hall's Cellar , near
Nicolson Street , BOSWELL-1783-2,60.512

and tasted some claret . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.513

Was in a dissipated frame . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.514

Grange dined with me . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.515

In the evening I was quite in the humour of London life ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,60.516

and wished to go to Princes Street Coffee-house and sup .
BOSWELL-1783-2,60.517

But was persuaded to stay at home , BOSWELL-1783-2,60.518

and indulged myself with a broiled bone and some rum punch , which I
seldom choose . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.519

I was hearty at home . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.520

Sunday 16 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.521

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,60.522

Was at the New Church all day , BOSWELL-1783-2,60.523

and felt a satisfaction in decent regularity . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.524

Heard Mr. Hardy at Ballingry lecture well in the forenoon and Mr.
Walker preach as usual in the afternoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.525

Visited the Hon. Alexander Gordon between sermons .
BOSWELL-1783-2,60.526

Then he called BOSWELL-1783-2,60.527

and eat a bit of veal with us ; BOSWELL-1783-2,60.528

Mr. Grant of Monymusk at dinner . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.529

At Gordon's pressing request I went to him in the afternoon , after
hearing my children say divine lessons , BOSWELL-1783-2,60.530

and tasted different kinds of claret , BOSWELL-1783-2,60.531

and then drank tea with him . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.532

Tasting heated me a little BOSWELL-1783-2,60.533

and made me wish if possible to be a pure water-drinker .
BOSWELL-1783-2,60.534

Sir Charles and Colonel Preston , Mr. William Nairne , Hon. Alexander
Gordon , and Hon. Andrew Cochrane supped with us ;
BOSWELL-1783-2,60.535

a good cheerful evening . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.536

Monday 17 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.537

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,60.538

Had a visit of Colonel Montgomerie . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.539

Was in poor spirits , BOSWELL-1783-2,60.540

but wrote an <font> Hypochondriack <$$font> with curious ingenuity of
thinking . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.541

I wrote chiefly to please myself , and with a view to make out a couple
of proper volumes of that periodical paper ; BOSWELL-1783-2,60.542

for my partners of the <font> London Magazine <$$font> did not relish it
much . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.543

I was not in the least affected by this , because I had no opinion of
their taste in writing , BOSWELL-1783-2,60.544

for they wished rather for a <font> merry essay . <$$font>
BOSWELL-1783-2,60.545

I wrote to Dilly that I wished to continue it to No. 70 , the years of
man's life . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.546

But if the partners really thought they could find a variety of
materials all better , I should close it next month .
BOSWELL-1783-2,60.547

It is wonderful how the spur of engagement makes me write .
BOSWELL-1783-2,60.548

Tuesday 18 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.549

<paren> Writing the 19 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,60.550

Was rather better , but quite dissatisfied with the narrow sphere here ,
and perpetually languishing for London eminence . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.551

Dined at Commissioner Cochrane's ; BOSWELL-1783-2,60.552

Dr. Webster there . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.553

They both approved much of my continuing to apply to business as a
lawyer . BOSWELL-1783-2,60.554

My mind however was so clouded and so broken that I could not feel with
clearness and strength the distinction <P_61> between doing well and
doing ill in this uncertain and short life . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.555

Strange that one should think so differently at different times .
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.556

For upon some occasions I am quite animated with good ambition .
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.557

I however this day wrote an able Petition for Garallan in support of a
Decreet Arbitral which a majority of the Lords had very erroneously
reduced . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.558

I was pleased with my own powers , while I at the same time did not
<font> feel <$$font> that it was of much consequence to have talents .
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.559

Such was the state of my mind . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.560

Wednesday 19 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.561

<paren> Writing the 20 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,61.562

Felt all at once in the Court of Session a happy state of mind which
made me view it with complacency instead of disgust .
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.563

I wondered , while I experienced how little reality there is in external
things . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.564

<paren> Writing the 21 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,61.565

I went BOSWELL-1783-2,61.566

and visited Lord Gardenstone , who was confined to the house , this
forenoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.567

I had not visited him for many years , I know not why .
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.568

I found his conversation both substantial and animated ;
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.569

and as we are prone to look at objects with the eyes of those with whom
we are at the time , if we have any respect for their faculties , I was
the better for hearing him give an account of his views of life .
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.570

He told me he never had higher views than to be a judge in Scotland ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.571

and he was made a judge in his forty-second year .
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.572

I asked him if he never had high ambitious views , which make me unhappy
. BOSWELL-1783-2,61.573

He said never . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.574

Nay , he had his mind prepared for being disappointed of a judge's place
, BOSWELL-1783-2,61.575

and was to have retired to the country . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.576

He said he never had five minutes' uneasiness at a time except from a
bad hand at whist or a bad partner . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.577

All this <paren> if true <$$paren> was sound philosophy ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.578

and I thought I might have it . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.579

But it was being contented with a lower state than what my keen and
constant wishes for years have prompted , and which I have an impression
I ought not to despair of obtaining . BOSWELL-1783-2,61.580

The great difficulty is to settle between foolish fancy and spirited
ambition ; BOSWELL-1783-2,61.581

and probably I shall dream and balance till it is too late to exert .
BOSWELL-1783-2,61.582

<P_62>

Thursday 20 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.584

Sir Walter and Grange dined with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.585

I called a little on Maclaurin after dinner . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.586

Went to the Pantheon in the evening to hear a debate on this curious
question : whether it was most culpable for a young woman to marry an
old man or for an old woman to marry a young man .
BOSWELL-1783-2,62.587

But it was so crowded and blackguard , I soon left it in disgust .
BOSWELL-1783-2,62.588

Grange supped with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.589

I was now happy in the consciousness that I had written every letter
which I had any call to write , and in short that I was upon very even
terms with my duty in life in small or in great things .
BOSWELL-1783-2,62.590

I had not much practice in the Court of Session . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.591

But I did well what was entrusted to me . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.592

I had a regular weekly return of work and weather from Mr. James Bruce
, my faithful overseer at Auchinleck , BOSWELL-1783-2,62.593

and I wrote to him as regularly . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.594

Friday 21 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.595

<paren> Writing on the 26 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,62.596

My wife and I and Miss McAdam dined at Dr. Webster's with Sir Charles
and Miss Preston , etc. BOSWELL-1783-2,62.597

I was pleased with the manners of Mr. Watson of Saughton , a man
against whom there is a general prejudice . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.598

I drank some claret with His Holiness , which pleased me at the time and
did me no harm afterwards . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.599

I was in a good manly frame . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.600

The Laird of Fairlie , who came to town yesterday , Mr. Matthew Dickie
, and Captain Trotter , Mortonhall's son , supped with us .
BOSWELL-1783-2,62.601

I was cheerful and moderate . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.602

Saturday 22 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.603

<paren> Writing on the 26 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,62.604

I took a walk to Leith BOSWELL-1783-2,62.605

and paid a visit to David Boswell and his wife . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.606

Poor man , though he be a dancing-master , he is a branch of the family
of Auchinleck , BOSWELL-1783-2,62.607

and gets his bread honestly . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.608

I regret that my wife will not receive him and his wife to dine with us
privately . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.609

She is wrong . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.610

I am however to have him to dine with me soon . BOSWELL-1783-2,62.611

I met Colonel Montgomerie a little before dinner in Princes Street ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,62.612

and engaged him to dine with us <P_63> without ceremony .
BOSWELL-1783-2,63.613

We had also the Laird of Fairlie , Mr. Thomas Smith , Craigengillan's
agent <paren> first time <$$paren> , young Craigengillan and his tutor ,
and the young Campbells . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.614

I was quite sober , BOSWELL-1783-2,63.615

and was truly happy to find that the rage for strong liquor , which used
to vex me , had ceased . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.616

Such is the agreeable change which I have experienced in my constitution
within these seven or eight months . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.617

In the evening I accompanied Colonel Montgomerie to Fortune's , where he
was engaged with a party , all of my acquaintance but one , to sup and
hear MacLauchlan , the excellent fiddler , play Highland tunes .
BOSWELL-1783-2,63.618

The company with us was Colonel John Macdonell , Colonel Wemyss , Sir
John Scott , and Mr. MacNeill of Colonsay , whom I had never seen
before . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.619

He is proprietor of one of the Hebrides , twelve miles long and I think
four broad , and I believe of another island also .
BOSWELL-1783-2,63.620

I loved him at once ; BOSWELL-1783-2,63.621

for he told me there was in his island an ancient building raised by St.
Columba before he went to Iona ; that it never had a roof , for that the
Saint had vowed not to settle anywhere from whence he could see Ireland
; and having descried Ireland from Colonsay after the walls of his
building were up , he stopped and left it , BOSWELL-1783-2,63.622

and Mr. MacNeill said he himself had built a stone wall round it to
secure it from being hurt . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.623

He also spoke with admiration of Dr. Johnson's <font> Journey ,
<$$font> BOSWELL-1783-2,63.624

repeated some passages of it , BOSWELL-1783-2,63.625

and said he was angry at his countrymen for imagining that it was
unfavourably intended . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.626

I was surprised with this gentleman . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.627

I expected to have found him a rough Highlander . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.628

But he proved to be a well-informed man of the world .
BOSWELL-1783-2,63.629

He knew the most fashionable people . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.630

He spoke French well . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.631

I drank a little weak gin punch without souring , BOSWELL-1783-2,63.632

and relished the fiddler's music and the company so well that I did not
get home till about two in the morning . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.633

But I was not in the least inflamed . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.634

I thought in my chair coming home of Dr. Johnson's observation that no
society is so agreeable as that in a tavern . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.635

My rheumatism was now gone . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.636

But a large pimple on one of my hands had turned to a sore which was
painful and troubled me . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.637

I am too easily troubled . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.638

Sunday 23 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.639

<paren> Writing the 26 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,63.640

Was at the New Church both forenoon and afternoon ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,63.641

but attended indifferently . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.642

Dr. Carlyle preached in the afternoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,63.643

I was in that kind of frame in which I believe a great many men are
during the course of their lives : BOSWELL-1783-2,63.644

I was <P_64> well enough , without any lively sensation at all .
BOSWELL-1783-2,64.645

The children said divine lessons in the evening . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.646

Grange supped with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.647

I fell into a fretful fit . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.648

The Hon. A. Gordon drank tea with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.649

Monday 24 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.650

<paren> Writing the 28 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,64.651

Breakfasted at Lady Colville's . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.652

Was " pressed with the load of life . " BOSWELL-1783-2,64.653

But when I got home , dictated law papers pretty well .
BOSWELL-1783-2,64.654

Was at a meeting of proprietors of land to consider of an application to
Parliament to improve the rights of voting in our counties ;
BOSWELL-1783-2,64.655

was in such low spirits that it seemed to me a matter of indifference .
BOSWELL-1783-2,64.656

There was a fire in the close next to our court just before dinner ,
which gave some alarm but was extinguished . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.657

Grange dined with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.658

Mr. George Wallace and the Hon. Alexander Gordon , who came to inquire
how we were , drank some wine . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.659

Tuesday 25 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.660

<paren> Writing the 28 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,64.661

Had a large company at dinner : Lord Gardenstone , who had never before
been with me . Lord Eskgrove , the successor of my father on the bench
, Commissioner Cochrane , etc. BOSWELL-1783-2,64.662

Had no vivid enjoyment , BOSWELL-1783-2,64.663

but in a discontented frame speculated on every man's situation who was
at table compared with my own , BOSWELL-1783-2,64.664

but relished none of them . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.665

Languished for London , Parliament , or any state of animated exertion .
BOSWELL-1783-2,64.666

Was vexed this forenoon by hearing the Lord President and several others
of the judges give what I thought most erroneous opinions against my
client Garallan , though Lords Braxfield , Monboddo , Hailes , and
others were for him . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.667

Perhaps it is a weakness to be hurt like Heraclitus at observing the
faults of human nature . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.668

But I can@ @not help it . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.669

Wednesday 26 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,64.670

Mr. R. Mackintosh , who after an absence of many years appeared at our
bar today to support the Earl of Crawford against Lady Mary Campbell's
claim for the family estate , interested me as an able unfortunate man .
BOSWELL-1783-2,64.671

His stately appearance too <P_65> had influence upon me .
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.672

I had been very keen against him in his contest with my friend Dempster
, BOSWELL-1783-2,65.673

and knew not how he might think of me . BOSWELL-1783-2,65.674

Yet I wished to show him attention . BOSWELL-1783-2,65.675

He addressed himself to me very politely , BOSWELL-1783-2,65.676

and I sat down by him BOSWELL-1783-2,65.677

and had some good talk . BOSWELL-1783-2,65.678

There was something curious in seeing him in the Court again after so
long an absence , and something humbling to think that it was much
diminished in dignity and abilities since he left it .
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.679

<paren> Writing 2 March . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,65.680

I dictated a great deal today , having several law papers to write .
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.681

I was sensible that I was not fit to go through a great deal of business
. BOSWELL-1783-2,65.682

Yet I repined that I had too little ; though I considered that a
gentleman of good fortune never gets much practice at our bar , and that
I had more than anyone in that situation ever had .
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.683

Grange and Mr. Lawrie dined with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,65.684

Formerly Mr. Lawrie used to eat almost constantly at my table ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.685

but it being disagreeable to my wife and indeed to myself to have him
constantly since he had a family of his own , I invite him rarely .
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.686

Veronica continues to be a day-boarder at Mrs. Billingsley's .
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.687

Phemie was fixed as a boarder both day and night .
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.688

But she cried so much that after persisting for a week , we allowed her
to come home every evening as well as her sister .
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.689

Thursday 27 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,65.690

<paren> Writing 2 March . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,65.691

I went in the forenoon BOSWELL-1783-2,65.692

and paid a visit to Mr. R. Mackintosh at Paterson the stabler@ @'s in
the Pleasance ; BOSWELL-1783-2,65.693

found him surrounded with law books and papers and quite like a man
immersed in business . BOSWELL-1783-2,65.694

He talked in a style much above common , with a force and a command of
expression and a manly manner which I admired , while I felt for him on
account of the state of his affairs , which I was told was bad .
BOSWELL-1783-2,65.695

I paid him much attention , partly from benevolence , partly from my
never-failing wish to know distinguished men . BOSWELL-1783-2,65.696

Clerk Matthew and some more secondary company <P_66> dined with us .
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.697

In the evening I was sadly shocked by a visit of Mr. Crosbie's clerk ,
Mr. Maule , who with tears in his eyes showed me a letter to his master
telling him that if he did <paren> writing 7 March <$$paren> not pay
fifteen guineas , he should be apprehended next day .
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.698

I had been put upon my guard against applications for money from that
quarter , BOSWELL-1783-2,66.699

and told what was true : that I had at present no money but what I
borrowed ; BOSWELL-1783-2,66.700

and so waived the demand at the time , BOSWELL-1783-2,66.701

but said I should endeavour to get the affair settled next morning ,
which indeed I hoped to do with the assistance of others at the bar .
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.702

How wretched a change was it for a man of uncommon knowledge , abilities
, and spirit to be thus in danger of imprisonment for a small sum !
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.703

Friday 28 February . BOSWELL-1783-2,66.704

<paren> Writing 7 March . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,66.705

Maclaurin accosted me in the Court of Session thus :
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.706

" You would do nothing last night for an old friend , "
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.707

and told me that Mr. Ilay Campbell had paid ten and he five guineas to
relieve Crosbie . BOSWELL-1783-2,66.708

I was uneasy a little to think that my benevolence might be suspected .
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.709

Yet I was conscious how sincerely I felt for Crosbie , and that in case
of necessity , I should have advanced the fifteen guineas for him ,
though I doubted if it would be right to contract more debt while in
reality I as yet owed more than my funds could discharge .
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.710

And Maclaurin observed that it was wrong in Crosbie to take money from
one of us and give to any other person . BOSWELL-1783-2,66.711

It would be better for him to clear himself by a <font> cessio bonorum ,
<$$font> and then take aids from his friends . BOSWELL-1783-2,66.712

I had this evening Mr. R. Mackintosh , Mr. Ilay Campbell <paren>
appointed Solicitor-General <$$paren> , Mr. George Wallace , the Laird
of Fairlie , and Grange at supper . BOSWELL-1783-2,66.713

I drank almost a bottle of claret , as we sat till near three in the
morning . BOSWELL-1783-2,66.714

Mackintosh harangued fluently but with too much vanity .
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.715

Mr. Campbell was as usual silent and indifferent .
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.716

But he gave a wonderful testimony of his confined Scottish views .
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.717

He said Sir Gilbert Elliot and Lord Advocate , he thought , would have
done better to have continued at the bar here . BOSWELL-1783-2,66.718

I exclaimed , " I would rather have vital motion in the House of Commons
than be Lord President of the Court of Session . "
BOSWELL-1783-2,66.719

Mackintosh seemed to think of <P_67> returning to the practice of the
law here , as there was now a great opening for one of his seniority and
abilities . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.720

The Solicitor encouraged him to return . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.721

I secretly dreaded that he might be mortified by neglect .
BOSWELL-1783-2,67.722

Saturday 1 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.723

<paren> Writing the 7 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,67.724

I dined at the Hon. A. Gordon's with Baron Gordon , Maclaurin , the
Solicitor , Harry Erskine , Cullen ; a party settled a forthnight before
. BOSWELL-1783-2,67.725

The Solicitor's lady and Miss McAdam were there . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.726

My wife had a bad cold BOSWELL-1783-2,67.727

and could not go . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.728

We had some merriment , BOSWELL-1783-2,67.729

and sat till ten over claret , I drinking little .
BOSWELL-1783-2,67.730

But upon the whole , it was not a good day . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.731

Sunday 2 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.732

<paren> Writing the 7 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,67.733

Stayed at home in the forenoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.734

Heard Mr. Walker in the afternoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.735

The children said divine lessons . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.736

Sir Charles Preston and the Hon. and Rev. James Cochrane supped with
us . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.737

I have for some time been in a state of mind not so bad as miserable ,
but insipid and uneasy , having no pursuits that animate me , and
viewing life as hardly worth being in earnest . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.738

I am lamentably indifferent to religion . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.739

It is amazing how very different I am at different times .
BOSWELL-1783-2,67.740

Monday 3 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.741

<paren> Writing the 12 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,67.742

Had Mr. James Donaldson at dinner . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.743

His petulance was displeasing . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.744

But I take notice of him on his father's account .
BOSWELL-1783-2,67.745

Was at Barnard's ball at night BOSWELL-1783-2,67.746

and saw my daughters dance . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.747

First time of my being at a public place since my father's death ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,67.748

and this was a kind of duty . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.749

My wife got a fright with a carriage coming near a chair in which were
two of our children , which made her spit blood . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.750

Tuesday 4 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.751

<paren> Writing the 12 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,67.752

My wife kept the house . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.753

Miss McAdam and I and the children dined at Lady Auchinleck's ;
BOSWELL-1783-2,67.754

Commissioner Cochrane , Dr. Webster , and Balmuto there .
BOSWELL-1783-2,67.755

Wednesday 5 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.756

<paren> Writing the 13 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,67.757

My wife still kept the house . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.758

Miss McAdam and I dined with Mr. Gilbert Innes <paren> my first time
there <$$paren> . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.759

A decently good day . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.760

Thursday 6 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,67.761

<paren> Writing the 13 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,67.762

Dictated a paper of forty pages for the proprietors of the Edinburgh and
Dumfries Fly against <P_68> a judgement obtained against them by Dalziel
, one of their number . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.763

Was pleased with my abilities . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.764

Friday 7 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.765

<paren> Writing the 13 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,68.766

I recollect nothing . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.767

Saturday 8 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.768

<paren> Writing the 13 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,68.769

I dined at Lord Eskgrove's with Lord Alva and son , Maclaurin , etc.
BOSWELL-1783-2,68.770

Drank so much as to be a little heated . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.771

But our conversation was pretty good . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.772

Lord Eskgrove made a pretty just remark which was new to me : that
decisions of the courts in England are not found fault with as in
Scotland , because <font> there <$$font> a number of lawyers who are not
in a cause attend to it and form an impartial opinion . Whereas here ,
except in a very few instances , no lawyers attend to a cause except
those interested in it , so that in every case there is one side to rail
from prejudice or bias . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.773

Sunday 9 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.774

<paren> Writing the 13 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,68.775

Heard Mr. Walker in the forenoon and Dr. Blair in the afternoon .
BOSWELL-1783-2,68.776

The children said divine lessons . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.777

Grange and I supped at Dr. Webster's . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.778

Little James , who had been very ill from the effects of mercury given
him for his scorbutic complaint , was now a good deal better .
BOSWELL-1783-2,68.779

His mother and I had a sad alarm about him . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.780

She had no return of the spitting of blood . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.781

Dr. Gillespie dined with us today . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.782

Monday 10 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.783

<paren> Writing the 13 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,68.784

I dined at Lady Colville's with Lord Kellie , who returned from London
last night . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.785

His steady sense and preferring a creditable private life to the bustle
of Court or Parliament struck me to meditation . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.786

Tuesday 11 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.787

<paren> Writing the 13 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,68.788

The Lords of Session disregarded my paper for the fly proprietors .
BOSWELL-1783-2,68.789

I was so much hurt by what I thought gross injustice that I really
inclined never to enter the Court again . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.790

Grange and I paid a visit to Sir Alexander Dick , BOSWELL-1783-2,68.791

and Grange dined with me . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.792

I thought of setting out for London next morning , BOSWELL-1783-2,68.793

but resolved to stay two days quietly and write <font> The
Hypochondriack <$$font> No. 66 . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.794

Wednesday 12 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.795

<paren> Writing the 13 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,68.796

After much search among books in the Advocates' Library , found a good
motto for keeping a diary , the subject of No. 66 .
BOSWELL-1783-2,68.797

Grange dined with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,68.798

<P_69>

Thursday 13 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.800

Sat calmly incog. at home . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.801

Wrote most part of No. 66 . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.802

It was the Fast Day before the Sacrament . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.803

Sir W. Forbes paid me a private visit . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.804

I was somewhat hurried , notwithstanding two days of preparation .
BOSWELL-1783-2,69.805

Grange dined and supped with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.806

Friday 14 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.807

<paren> Writing the 22 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,69.808

Got into the Dumfries diligence at four in the morning ,
BOSWELL-1783-2,69.809

and with two other gentlemen reached Moffat about six in the evening .
BOSWELL-1783-2,69.810

They went on to Dumfries . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.811

I sent for my brother John , who was glad to see me , and seemed in so
cordial a frame that I resolved to stay a day here , though I risked the
fly to Carlisle being full next day . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.812

Moffat has a very agreeable place in my mind , as I there first saw the
gaiety of genteel company , and as I there have meditated much when my
fancy was finer than it now is . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.813

We drank tea comfortably , BOSWELL-1783-2,69.814

and I invited Mr. Little , the landlord , to sup with us , which he did
. BOSWELL-1783-2,69.815

He is my old acquaintance and my client . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.816

Saturday 15 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.817

<paren> Writing the 22 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,69.818

I breakfasted with John at his room , by invitation .
BOSWELL-1783-2,69.819

I wished to pay him all proper attention , BOSWELL-1783-2,69.820

and I submitted to continual restraint in conversation with him , as he
is proud and irritable . BOSWELL-1783-2,69.821

We walked to the well and about the village on all quarters .
BOSWELL-1783-2,69.822

His recovery of reason to the degree which he now has <P_70> it , after
being several years in confinement , is remarkable .
BOSWELL-1783-2,70.823

But he <paren> writing the 24 <$$paren> told me he had been drinking
hard of late , which alarmed me , BOSWELL-1783-2,70.824

and I counselled him against it . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.825

We saw Lord Hopetoun's house here . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.826

The landlord dined with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.827

Then we had coffee , BOSWELL-1783-2,70.828

and a little after seven I got into the diligence from Glasgow to
Carlisle , in which was only a son of Mr. Gillespie at Douglas Mill ,
who was going out to Canada . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.829

The weather was cold , BOSWELL-1783-2,70.830

and I felt it disagreeable and somewhat mean to travel in a
stage-machine . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.831

But I considered that it was wise for me to be rigidly economical till
at least my funds should be quite sufficient to pay all my debts .
BOSWELL-1783-2,70.832

Sunday 16 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.833

<paren> Writing the 24 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,70.834

Arrived at the Bush Inn , Carlisle , about four in the morning .
BOSWELL-1783-2,70.835

Lay down without throwing off my clothes , having bad accommodation , as
fly passengers are looked upon as low people . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.836

Rose between eight and nine . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.837

Went to the deanery , where my friend Dr. Percy , formerly Dean , now
Bishop of Dromore , was ready to receive me , as I had engaged on his
invitation to be with him . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.838

Was sorry to hear from him that his only son , who had gone to Italy for
the recovery of his health from an asthmatic complaint , was given over
. BOSWELL-1783-2,70.839

But as I perceived that the Bishop could be social notwithstanding , I
did not affect to dwell long upon the melancholy subject .
BOSWELL-1783-2,70.840

We talked as usual of Dr. Johnson . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.841

I regretted that there was not somebody continually to collect his
sayings . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.842

" Why , " said the Bishop , " you collect . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.843

" " But I have little opportunity , " said I . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.844

" You all collect some . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.845

But I venture more than any of you . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.846

I am like the man ' who gathers samphire , dreadful trade . '
BOSWELL-1783-2,70.847

I gather upon the face of the rock while there is a storm . "
BOSWELL-1783-2,70.848

" True , " said the Bishop . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.849

" Others will pick up a flower in the meadow . " BOSWELL-1783-2,70.850

The allusion was not amiss to the difference between conversing with the
Doctor when mild and when passionate . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.851

Mrs. Percy and the Bishop's two daughters appeared at breakfast .
BOSWELL-1783-2,70.852

He ordered my baggage to be brought from the inn , that I might be his
guest at the deanery in full hospitality . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.853

We went to the cathedral in the forenoon . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.854

Mr. Archdeacon Paley preached uncommonly well . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.855

There was a very good organist . BOSWELL-1783-2,70.856

I had not the exquisite sensations from being <P_71> in England which I
had in my youth , BOSWELL-1783-2,71.857

but was steady as a laird . BOSWELL-1783-2,71.858

I was somewhat cold and uneasy after last night's fatigue .
BOSWELL-1783-2,71.859

The Bishop took the ladies and me out an airing {COM:sic} in his coach .
BOSWELL-1783-2,71.860

It pleased me to see him enjoying such a respectable situation , in
which he seemed to be easier than I could have imagined , considering
how humble his original state was . BOSWELL-1783-2,71.861

He told me that he was with Shenstone soon after Toldervy , a London
rider <paren> who while he took orders for linen , I believe , was at
the same time employed by some London booksellers to compile a Tour
<$$paren> , had been catched by him copying some of his inscriptions to
insert ; and his purpose being discovered , Shenstone had prevailed with
him to show him his notes , in which he found all the absurdities which
circulated concerning him in the neighbourhood ; how Maria was a lady in
love with him who broke her heart because he refused her , and such
stuff . BOSWELL-1783-2,71.862

He coaxed Toldervy to leave his notes of the Leasowes to have additions
made to them , BOSWELL-1783-2,71.863

and put him off from time to time till the first volume of the <font>
Tour <$$font> was published , and an account helped by Mr. Shenstone
himself was promised in the second volume . BOSWELL-1783-2,71.864

But the first not having succeeded , it never appeared .
BOSWELL-1783-2,71.865

So Shenstone escaped what his extreme sensibility was frightened to
think might come out . BOSWELL-1783-2,71.866

The Bishop was led to tell me this anecdote from my mentioning Pennant ,
whose <font> Tour <$$font> he said was written in the style of a rider .
BOSWELL-1783-2,71.867

We went to evening prayers , after which we had a very good dinner , the
archdeacon and Counsellor Clark with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,71.868

Our conversation turned chiefly on the strange state of politics .
BOSWELL-1783-2,71.869

The Bishop however enlivened it with literary anecdote .
BOSWELL-1783-2,71.870

He told us that Morell , S. T. P. , who is an excellent Greek scholar
and is supposed to have helped Dr. Gregory Sharpe , who was very
ambitious to appear a scholar , used to compose words for Handel's music
, and Handel used to carry him down with him to - , where he entertained
him . BOSWELL-1783-2,71.871

Morell could not live without his wife . BOSWELL-1783-2,71.872

So he had her conveyed down and lodged in a garret , the window of which
looked <P_72> into the room where Handel and he dined .
BOSWELL-1783-2,72.873

Handel had always a good dinner ; BOSWELL-1783-2,72.874

and as he was blind , Morell used to make signs to his wife most
significantly , pointing to a fowl or veal or whatever dishes were upon
the table , that she might choose what she liked , which she did by a
nod ; BOSWELL-1783-2,72.875

and Morell , having a waiter in his confidence , had it carried to her .
BOSWELL-1783-2,72.876

I was much satisfied with the Bishop's having repaired the deanery and
preserved the old Gothic style with modern elegance .
BOSWELL-1783-2,72.877

Mr. Clark stayed supper , after which the Bishop assembled his family
and read prayers , partly from the evening service , partly by the
Bishop of Man . BOSWELL-1783-2,72.878

It was very agreeable to me to be present at this decent family devotion
. BOSWELL-1783-2,72.879

I had a very excellent apartment , which I enjoyed much after last
night's uneasiness . BOSWELL-1783-2,72.880

Monday 17 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,72.881

<paren> Writing the 24 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,72.882

The Bishop showed me the correspondence between him and Drs. Blair and
Ferguson concerning Ossian , in which I thought my countrymen made but a
shabby figure ; though I also thought the Bishop insisted too much upon
the evidence of minutes kept by him , which he showed me , and I saw
were very curt and did not mention having heard Erse poetry repeated at
Dr. Ferguson's , but only fixed the date of his drinking tea there .
BOSWELL-1783-2,72.883

The Bishop was very keen and violent upon the subject .
BOSWELL-1783-2,72.884

This was a fresh instance of the uncertainty of literary friendship .
BOSWELL-1783-2,72.885

But to own the truth , my mind was now in such an indifferent frame that
I looked on all human concerns as scenes in a drama , and it did not
seriously affect me . BOSWELL-1783-2,72.886

I paid a visit to the Miss Waughs and to Dr. Carlyle , an old connexion
<P_73> of our family . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.887

I walked with the Bishop , BOSWELL-1783-2,73.888

and dined well again with him . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.889

He gave me hopes of a visit at Auchinleck . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.890

About five o'clock I got into the post-coach for London , which
travelled on night and day till it arrived at the Bell Savage Inn upon
Ludgate Hill on Thursday evening the 20 . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.891

I group the days of this journey together , as nothing happened worth
recording . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.892

I was absolutely distressed with the fatigue , BOSWELL-1783-2,73.893

and thought this mode of travelling a punishment to which I would never
again submit . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.894

I made the most of what companions I had in the coach that my humour
inclined me to do . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.895

But that was not much . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.896

I took a hackney-coach BOSWELL-1783-2,73.897

and drove to Mr. Dilly's , my constant landing-place , where I found a
cordial reception . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.898

Friday 21 March . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.899

<paren> Writing the 24 . <$$paren> BOSWELL-1783-2,73.900

My brother David breakfasted with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.901

I called at Dr. Johnson's , BOSWELL-1783-2,73.902

and was told he was at Mrs. Thrale's . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.903

Went to Nerot's BOSWELL-1783-2,73.904

and got my hair dressed , so as to appear decently well .
BOSWELL-1783-2,73.905

Felt a steadiness as Laird of Auchinleck which I never before
experienced in London , BOSWELL-1783-2,73.906

Went to Mrs. Thrale's in Argyll Buildings . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.907

Was shown into Dr. Johnson's room . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.908

He said , " I am glad you are come . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.909

I am very ill . " BOSWELL-1783-2,73.910

I was disagreeably surprised to find him looking very pale , and
afflicted with a difficulty of breathing . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.911

For in his last letter to me he said nothing of his being ill again .
BOSWELL-1783-2,73.912

I shall collect his conversation as well as I can .
BOSWELL-1783-2,73.913

He said the superiority of a country gentleman over the people on his
estate was very agreeable , and that whoever says he does not feel it
agreeable , lies . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.914

For it must be agreeable to have a casual superiority over those who are
by nature equal with us . BOSWELL-1783-2,73.915

I objected great proprietors of land preferring living in London .
BOSWELL-1783-2,73.916

" Why , Sir , " said he , " the pleasure <P_74> of living in London and
the intellectual superiority to be enjoyed there may counterbalance the
other . BOSWELL-1783-2,74.917

Besides , a man may prefer the state of the country gentleman upon the
whole , BOSWELL-1783-2,74.918

and yet there may never be a moment when he is willing to make the
change . " BOSWELL-1783-2,74.919

He said , " It is better to have five per_cent out of land than out of
money , because it is more secure ; BOSWELL-1783-2,74.920

but the readiness of transference and promptness of interest make many
people prefer the funds . " BOSWELL-1783-2,74.921

He said , " A man is not so much afraid of being a hard creditor as of
being a hard landlord . " BOSWELL-1783-2,74.922

" Because , " said I , " there is a sort of kindly connexion between a
landlord and his tenants . " BOSWELL-1783-2,74.923

" No , Sir , " said he . BOSWELL-1783-2,74.924

" Many landlords here never see their tenants . BOSWELL-1783-2,74.925

It is because if a landlord drives away his tenants , he may not get
others ; whereas the demand for money is so great it may always be lent
. " BOSWELL-1783-2,74.926

He imputed the present anarchy in Government in a good measure to the
Revolution . BOSWELL-1783-2,74.927

" For , " said he , " this Havoverian family is <font> isolée <$$font>
here . BOSWELL-1783-2,74.928

They have no friends . BOSWELL-1783-2,74.929

Now the Stuarts had friends who stuck by them so late as 1745 .
BOSWELL-1783-2,74.930

When the right of the King is not reverenced , there will not be
reverence for those appointed by the King . " BOSWELL-1783-2,74.931

