<BEGIN_bracken-1738-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

The ART of FARRIERY IMPROVED . BRACKEN-1738-2,1.4

CHAP. I. BRACKEN-1738-2,1.5

<font> Of the Signs of Sickness in Horses . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,1.6

<$$heading>

I have formerly <paren> in my Preface to the Notes upon Captain <font>
Bourdon's Pocket Farrier <$$font> <$$paren> hinted , that it is a very
difficult Matter to come at the true Knowledge of Distempers in Horses ,
and that more Skill and Judgment is requir'd in the Cure of them , than
in those of a Human Body ; because the poor Creature can@ @not answer
any Questions , therefore we must have recourse to the Motions of his
Head , Gestures of his Body , <font> &c. <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,1.8

Monsieur <font> Solleysell <$$font> , a <font> French <$$font> Author ,
has treated very largely as to the last Particulars ; BRACKEN-1738-2,1.9

but his prolix manner of Writing , as well as that of some others of the
same Stamp , has been a means to bewilder and confound most of our
common <font> Farriers <$$font> , who <paren> I am sorry to say it
<$$paren> are generally an ignorant Set of <font> empty Coxcombs
<$$font> , whose Discourse about Distempers would make a knowing Person
sick to hear it : BRACKEN-1738-2,1.10

<P_2>

And were it not for beneficent Nature , whose Power happens to be too
strong and working for the Recovery of the sick Creature , in opposition
to the Farrier's Prescription , I say , was it not for this , they would
most <paren> if not all of them <$$paren> be cashier'd Gentlemens
Stables . BRACKEN-1738-2,2.12

But it is in this Science , as well as in all other Branches of Physic ,
<font> viz. <$$font> that a Person shall have the Name of performing a
Cure , when Nature has been the principal , if not the only , Agent in
it ; and no doubt many times would <paren> with proper Diet , Exercise ,
<font> &c. <$$font> <$$paren> restore Health sooner , was it not for a
long Tribe of ill-contriv'd Medicines , or rather Hotch-potches , forced
into a Horse's Stomach , in small Spaces of Time , which obstruct her in
her Operations . BRACKEN-1738-2,2.13

But before I proceed to a Definition of Sickness . I think proper first
to define what is meant by <font> Health . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,2.14

<font> Health <$$font> then is justly defined the Faculty of performing
all the Actions proper , <paren> in any Creature as well as a human Body
<$$paren> in the most perfect Manner : BRACKEN-1738-2,2.15

and all the Effects of these Actions are such , as regard certain
determin'd Motions , or the Change and Alteration of what is receiv'd
into the Body ; BRACKEN-1738-2,2.16

and on the contrary . <font> Sickness <$$font> or <font> Disease
<$$font> , is an unusual Circulation of Blood , or the circular Motion
of Blood augmented , or diminished , either throughout the whole Body ,
or some part of it ; BRACKEN-1738-2,2.17

and this is what has been a generally received <font> Axiom <$$font>
ever since the Circulation of the Blood was known , and Mathematic's and
Natural Philosophy have been introduced into the Practice of Physick .
BRACKEN-1738-2,2.18

Most of our ancient Authors who have writ upon the <font> Art of
Farriery <$$font> , have puzzled the World with their Accounts of Horses
Complexions , <paren> as they idly term it . <$$paren>
BRACKEN-1738-2,2.19

and from these Complexions they imagine a great many Diseases proceed .
BRACKEN-1738-2,2.20

Others again , lay the greatest Stress upon the <font> four Elements
<$$font> , which the Chymists confine to <font> Fire , Air <$$font> ,
<P_3> <font> Water <$$font> and <font> Earth <$$font> ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,3.21

and then proceed to give an Account of the <font> four Humours <$$font>
, which they will have to be <font> Blood , Fleghm , Choler <$$font> and
<font> Melancholy ; <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,3.22

then they go on with their <font> Temperaments <$$font> , such as <font>
Hot , Dry , Cold <$$font> and <font> Moist <$$font> , as this or that
Humour is predominant ; BRACKEN-1738-2,3.23

and some of them , particularly <font> Markham <$$font> , has refined so
far on this Head , as to pretend to tell by the Colour , of a Horse ,
which of the Elements has the Ascendant in him . BRACKEN-1738-2,3.24

Indeed I can@ @not say but there is something in the Colour of a Horse
which may denote his being hardy and able to endure all Weathers , or
otherwise , of a washy Constitution ; BRACKEN-1738-2,3.25

But I am far from thinking , that there is so much in the Colour as
<font> Markham <$$font> imagines ; BRACKEN-1738-2,3.26

I shall therefore deviate from the common Paths of these <font>
Rosicrusian Sages <$$font> , <paren> whose Brains were much more full of
Humours than most Horses Bodies with which they had any thing to do ,
<$$paren> and inculcate a Practice founded upon right Reason and
Experience . BRACKEN-1738-2,3.27

I take a Horse , of the best Sort , to be one neither too fiery nor
sluggish ; BRACKEN-1738-2,3.28

for if he be of the first Disposition , he@ @'s subject to Fevers and
Asthma's , which last is what the Farriers call a Broken Wind ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,3.29

and if he@ @'s of a dull , sluggish Temper , he@ @'s more subject to the
Grease , and Scratches , with all the foul Concomitants of a slow and
languid Blood ; such as the Farcin , distemper'd Eyes , Poll-Evil , all
Eruptions or Breakings out upon his Body , with several other Disorders
, which I shall touch upon in the Sequel of this Discourse .
BRACKEN-1738-2,3.30

As to the six <font> Non-naturals <$$font> , or <font> Res non naturals
<$$font> as they are called by the <font> Latins <$$font> , I shall not
trouble the Reader with a Discourse upon them , seeing I think the same
would not profit much . BRACKEN-1738-2,3.31

Therefore , I shall content my self with the bare mention of them , and
make use of the Term as often as I shall find occasion ; though , I hope
, with greater Perspicuity and Plainness than many who have writ , upon
this Subject , before me . BRACKEN-1738-2,3.32

<P_4>

First then , a particular Regard must be had to the Symptom most urgent
, or in plainer Terms , to the most dangerous Sign or Token of the
Distemper ; as for Example , If a Horse be seiz'd with a <font>
Haemorrhage <$$font> , or Violent Bleeding , from a Wound or otherwise ,
the main Business is to stop it , and afterwards to consider of proper
Medicines to remove the Cause ; BRACKEN-1738-2,4.34

in like manner , if a Horse , or <paren> as is most frequent <$$paren> a
Colt be in the <font> Strangles , Bleeding , Glysters , Sweating
<$$font> , and other <font> Evacuations <$$font> are immediately
required , setting aside all other Considerations of Sickness .
BRACKEN-1738-2,4.35

<font> Secondly <$$font> , if there be several Diseases at one and the
same Time , regard must be had to them jointly ; BRACKEN-1738-2,4.36

only take this along with you , <font> viz. <$$font> that <font> the
most dangerous Enemy is first to be encounter'd . <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,4.37

<font> Thirdly <$$font> , if the Indication or Sign of a Disease be
taken from the Blood , it is to be considered , that all Disorders
thereof depend on the circulatory Motion being increased or diminished ;
and that all the Changes in the Texture and Quality of the Blood <paren>
as also in it's {COM:sic} Quantity <$$paren> are attended with either a
Diminution , or Increase of the Blood's Velocity : BRACKEN-1738-2,4.38

Therefore , if the Quantity is too much augmented , Bleeding and other
Evacuations are necessary ; BRACKEN-1738-2,4.39

but if it's {COM:sic} Quantity is diminished , then Restoratives , Rest
, and nourishing Food may be required : BRACKEN-1738-2,4.40

And if this last proceed from any Error in the Stomach , causing Loss of
Appetite <font> &c. <$$font> then those things which create Hunger and
help <font> Digestion <$$font> are to be administer'd ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,4.41

and if the <font> Crasis <$$font> or Texture of the Blood be changed ,
<paren> as is usual in long continued Sicknesses <$$paren> then it may
be necessary <paren> having due regard to other Intentions <$$paren> to
prescribe such Things as may correct the vitiated Mass .
BRACKEN-1738-2,4.42

<font> Fourthly <$$font> , when the Distemper proceeds from an Increase
or Diminution of some Secretion or Discharge , the Cure <paren> for the
most part <$$paren> consists <font> in enlarging the Secretions <$$font>
, which are too sparing , and <P_5> restraining such as are too liberal
; BRACKEN-1738-2,5.43

and no doubt <font> the safest Method to restrain any augmented
Secretion , is by increasing some other . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,5.44

And this Practice , if rightly understood , would be of the greatest Use
and Benefit to <font> Farriers <$$font> , as it is now a received Maxim
in Physick . BRACKEN-1738-2,5.45

I would be understood , when I speak of an augmented Secretion , that
such Secretion or Discharge is a Disease , and not a Remedy ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,5.46

for very often a Secretion augmented proves a Cure of some Disease
either already broke out , or lurking in the Body ; BRACKEN-1738-2,5.47

and in such Case all imaginable Care is required , least we should by
stopping <paren> or even checking <$$paren> such critical Discharges ,
bring on a Train of Evil far worse than the present .
BRACKEN-1738-2,5.48

It is impossible for me to teach <paren> the greatest Number of
<$$paren> my Readers , the Usefulness of this <font> Theory <$$font> ,
by reason it requires long Study and Experience ; BRACKEN-1738-2,5.49

however I shall give an Instance or two , and then proceed .
BRACKEN-1738-2,5.50

I say then , if a Horse be <font> Lax <$$font> , or has a Scouring upon
him , if such Discharge proceed from a Disorder of the Guts , only by a
<font> Putrefaction <$$font> of the Excrements too long retained , in
such Case no Man in his Senses will give Medicines which Astringe or
Bind , but on the contrary , exhibit something which may slowly and
safely promote this so necessary Discharge . BRACKEN-1738-2,5.51

But if the Cause of a Looseness proceeds from an <font> obstructed
Transpiration <$$font> , or that Sweating , which we call <font>
insensible Perspiration <$$font> , being stopped , then indeed such
Things as promote <font> Sweat <$$font> and <font> Urine <$$font> are
most eligible . BRACKEN-1738-2,5.52

The like Method is to be observed in most other Secretions , as in
<font> Sweat , Urine <$$font> , running at the Mouth and Nose , which is
often observable in Horses in the decline of Sickness , and when the
Distemper is going off . BRACKEN-1738-2,5.53

<font> Fifthly <$$font> , as in Man , so in Horses , Nature <paren> or
at least what we understand by that Name <$$paren> is the best and
surest Guide , BRACKEN-1738-2,5.54

and therefore the <font> Farrier ought <$$font> diligently to follow her
, because whenever <P_6> she finds her self oppressed , she endeavours
to dislodge the Enemy , and to that end , tries all the nearest and
properest Means : BRACKEN-1738-2,6.55

And it is suprisingly wonderful , what a Number of <font> Outlets
<$$font> and <font> Drains Nature <$$font> has furnished for the
Preservation of Health , or the Recovery of it when lost ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,6.56

for such , are most or all the <font> Glands <$$font> by which Secretion
is performed . BRACKEN-1738-2,6.57

Furthermore , though Nature is diligently and carefully to be observed
and assisted in her due Operations ; yet she is not to be compelled ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,6.58

but must her self be the <font> Beginner <$$font> , BRACKEN-1738-2,6.59

nay and ought to be very often the <font> Finisher <$$font> of the Work
also . BRACKEN-1738-2,6.60

I think I have said enough under these Heads , BRACKEN-1738-2,6.61

therefore I shall proceed to a Discovery of some Errors in the Methods
usually taken to prevent Diseases in Horses , with the properest Means
to preserve <font> Health . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,6.62

<heading>

CHAP. II. BRACKEN-1738-2,6.64

<font> Discovering some Errors in the Methods usually taken to prevent
Diseases in Horses , with an Account of the most proper Means to
preserve Health . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,6.65

<$$heading>

And first , I say <font> Health <$$font> , in it's {COM:sic} best Estate
, is only <font> relative : <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,6.67

for it is impossible any Creature should keep at the same Standard or
<font> Mathematical point <$$font> of Health , even a Moment of Time ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,6.68

therefore 't@ @is only Relative : BRACKEN-1738-2,6.69

Yet all Creatures may properly be said to enjoy Health , when they
<font> sleep , eat , digest well , and move without pain ; <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,6.70

and all this depends upon a regular and uniform Motion of the Blood ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,6.71

and whatever contributes to that regular and uniform Motion , must be
the Means to preserve Health . BRACKEN-1738-2,6.72

But , on the other hand , it must be allowed , that the same Means which
are used in times of Sickness , to restore the Blood to its regular
Motion , must be prejudicial in a State of Health , by <P_7> reason such
Means must effect a Change in the <font> Animal Oeconomy <$$font> , more
than necessary . BRACKEN-1738-2,7.73

Thus Bleeding and Purging , may be serviceable to prevent a Disease ,
provided a Horse be <font> Plethorick <$$font> and full of Blood ; or if
he has other Signs or Symptoms which denote such Evacuations useful :
BRACKEN-1738-2,7.74

But then it must be allowed , these are Diseases actually begun ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,7.75

and if a Horse has none of these Signs that require Evacuation , all the
Effect bleeding can have upon him , is the <font> Lessening the Quantity
<$$font> , which is too often the Case , and of pernicious Consequence ,
by reason such Evacuation gives the Blood a different Motion from what
it before had in a <font> healthful State . <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,7.76

Should any one pretend to insist , that these Evacuations are made in
order to bring a Horse into a better and more healthful State , and
thereby strengthen his Body , and enable him the more to resist Diseases
; I answer , that there is a certain State of Health which is natural
and agreeable to every Horse , and that it consists in the
before-mentioned Requisites , <font> viz. in a Life free from Pain or
any Sensible Imperfection . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,7.77

And there is not the least doubt but <paren> as among Men <$$paren> one
Horse may in Constitution differ from another , and enjoy a more perfect
Degree of Health ; which Difference is owing to their original
Conformation , Structure or Make . BRACKEN-1738-2,7.78

And of this Part of Knowledge we are much more in the Dark with relation
to Brute Creatures , for as much as their Complexions or Constitutions
are not discoverable thro' their Skins ; BRACKEN-1738-2,7.79

but these may easily be perceived in a human Body , and a very just
<font> Prognostick <$$font> or Token formed with relation to their
inward State of Health . BRACKEN-1738-2,7.80

For how common is it for us to say of a Child or young Person , he or
she is an Ill-thriven or puny Creature ; BRACKEN-1738-2,7.81

but as I have just now hinted , this Judgment is not so easily made in
Brutes , for Reasons too plain to be objected against .
BRACKEN-1738-2,7.82

<P_8>

<font> Lastly <$$font> , all that can be expected , from tampering with
Horses that are in their best State , is little or no Alteration ; more
especially if a Horse has Youth and Strength to withstand the Shocks
given to Nature by Physick ill administered ; BRACKEN-1738-2,8.84

or if otherwise , it will certainly be an Alteration for the worse , by
reason that a Horse <paren> naturally of a strong Habit of Body
<$$paren> may thereby be brought into an habitual Weakness , and this
becomes a Disease . BRACKEN-1738-2,8.85

So likewise may a weak Horse be made much weaker <paren> I mean a
naturally weak and tender constitutioned Horse <$$paren> by
Male-Administration of , or Tampering with Physick , which Accidents
very frequently happen by such unskilful Management , altho' they are
generally attributed to some other Cause , as foreign to the Affair , as
to say , that <font> Tenterden Steeple was the Cause of the Goodwin
Sands : <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,8.86

I fancy what has led Farriers into these Errors , is their confused
Notion of Blood and Humours ; although I must ingenuously confess , I
never yet talked with any one of their Tribe that could distinguish
between a <font> Vein <$$font> and an <font> Artery <$$font> , or a
<font> Tendon <$$font> and <font> Nerve , &c. <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,8.87

Therefore , how can it be expected , such illiterate <paren> but
positively ignorant <$$paren> Coxcombs , should perform any Thing
extraordinary in the Cure of either inward or outward <font> Maladies .
<$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,8.88

For these <font> Adepts <$$font> would make us believe , that almost all
<font> Diseases <$$font> proceed from corrupt Blood , and therefore
imagine the same , like Pond , or Ditch-Water , which gathers Mud , or
Filth at certain Times , so that it should be often cleansed .
BRACKEN-1738-2,8.89

And because the Blood of these Creatures <paren> most of them being used
to Toil and hard Labour <$$paren> is for the most part of an unpleasant
Aspect , they seldom or never take it away , BRACKEN-1738-2,8.90

but they declare him full of corrupt and bad Humours , not considering
that this may be the most natural State his Blood could be in at that
Time , and that the same may be cleansed or purified sooner than by
Bleeding , although I own this <font> practice <$$font> does <P_9> not
so well <font> quadrate <$$font> or square with the outward Senses of
most People who judge by Appearances only . BRACKEN-1738-2,9.91

In the next place you are told that the Horse wants Purging as well as
Bleeding ; BRACKEN-1738-2,9.92

for the Farriers <paren> poor Souls <$$paren> have not the least Notion
of alterative Medicines , whereas the greatest Feats may <paren> without
any manner of dispute <$$paren> be performed by such things in most
obstinate chronic Cases which have puzzled even the tip-top Gentlemen of
the Profession . BRACKEN-1738-2,9.93

There is another Thing which seems to have given Encouragement to the
Practice of administring Medicines to Horses which did not thrive well
<paren> as the Term goes , <$$paren> <font> viz. <$$font> because they
have been observed to eat plentifully and not become fatter or in better
liking , till such time as Evacuations have been pretty largely and
plentifully made : BRACKEN-1738-2,9.94

Indeed whenever any such thing happens , there is then a Sign of a
Disease , proceeding from some Obstructions in the <font> Mesentery
<$$font> or <font> Net <$$font> <paren> as it is called in other
Creatures besides Men . <$$paren> or from some viscid , tough , or
slimy Humour or Matter lodged in the first Passages , <paren> which are
the Stomach and Guts ; <$$paren> BRACKEN-1738-2,9.95

this indeed may hinder a sufficient Quantity of Chyle <paren> which is
the white Juice of our digested Food <$$paren> from entering into the
Blood : BRACKEN-1738-2,9.96

But , I do@ @n't mean such , therefore would be understood only as to
those Horses , which on full Examination and Experience , are found to
enjoy as sound and perfect a State of Health as they have ever been
known of . BRACKEN-1738-2,9.97

These are the Horses which should not be bled , purged , or have Cordial
Drinks given , at such Times as are prescribed in Farriers Books :
BRACKEN-1738-2,9.98

For what can be more ridiculously absurd , than <paren> as is the common
Custom <$$paren> to bleed a whole <font> Troop <$$font> of <font>
Dragoon Horses <$$font> in a Morning , just before they are turned to
Summer-Grass ; BRACKEN-1738-2,9.99

surely they are not all in the same Distemper at one and the same Time ,
and which requires Bleeding ; BRACKEN-1738-2,9.100

and this is performed by way of preventing Diseases :
BRACKEN-1738-2,9.101

But let such , who warrant <P_10> the Practice , go on in the blind Road
of Ignorance ; BRACKEN-1738-2,10.102

for I suppose they will be averse to better Guides .
BRACKEN-1738-2,10.103

But least I should be thought too peremptory and positive upon this Head
, or to deviate too far from the common receiv'd Rules about Bleeding ,
Purging , <font> &c. <$$font> I shall lay down some few Cases , wherein
Bleeding , or other Evacuations may be made , even when there are no
Indications to be taken from Sickness : BRACKEN-1738-2,10.104

But even these are discretionary , and to be practiced with Caution and
Judgment : BRACKEN-1738-2,10.105

For instance , Bleeding may be of Service to young Horses which are
pretty fat , or have undergone any hard Exercise , or after a Journey in
a hot Season ; because either the one or the other is apt to augment and
increase the Blood's Motion in too great a Degree , which may <paren>
before it has acquired any ill Tendency <$$paren> be thus remedied :
BRACKEN-1738-2,10.106

But even this may not be necessary to Horses that are accustomed to
constant Exercise , as Hunting , or the like , or those that travel
mostly the Year@ @about ; BRACKEN-1738-2,10.107

such are <font> Stage-Coach-Horses , Post-Horses , &c.
BRACKEN-1738-2,10.108

Secondly <$$font> , a Horse that has been much used to standing , and
gets but little Exercise , may have a Vein opened , especially if there
be any Reason , to suspect his Blood growing Viscid and stagnating for
Want of proper Airings ; because , while he is thus kept , a Disease may
insensibly , and by Degrees , be creeping upon him , while as yet no
certain Indication can be taken from outward Signs .
BRACKEN-1738-2,10.109

<font> Thirdly <$$font> , it may be proper to bleed , provided a Horse
has had the Misfortune to tumble into a Pit of Water or deep Ditch , and
the more so , if he has continued there any considerable Time ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,10.110

for although he does not shew immediate Signs of Sickness , yet such
Accidents are a sufficient Warrantry for Bleeding and Cordial Remedies ;
by reason the Astriction or Shutting up of the Pores , occasioned by the
Coldness and pressure of the Water , may cause either a Fever , or a
violent Cough , which may very likely end in the Glanders , or some
other as fatal Distemper . BRACKEN-1738-2,10.111

<P_11>

The same Cautions should be observed , as to administering purging
Medicines to a Horse , which ought never to be done barely at a Venture
, but when the Farrier , or Owner may have a strong Suspicion of a
latent or hidden Distemper , which as yet is not discernable ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,11.113

and this may be thought necessary when a Horse has eaten unwholesome
Food , or drunk bad Waters , which he has not been accustomed to ;
whether it proceed from Carelessness or want of better Nourishment .
BRACKEN-1738-2,11.114

I say , in these , or such like Cases , Bleeding or Purging may be used
by way of Prevention . BRACKEN-1738-2,11.115

And I the rather so far give into these Methods , <paren> with respect
to Brute Creatures <$$paren> because several of their Diseases may
actually have a footing , before they can well be discerned , and
because they do not immediately shew us any Signs or Complaints of
Sickness . BRACKEN-1738-2,11.116

Yet , notwithstanding all I have said , the Practice of giving Medicines
at Random is not justifiable , by reason it oftener proves prejudicial
than any way contributing to the Horse's Safety . BRACKEN-1738-2,11.117

And I therefore affirm , that <font> unnecessary Evacuations of any kind
, can@ @not be the way to prevent Diseases , but that due Feeding and
proper Exercise , are the only safe Means , and will sooner bring a
Horse into good riding Order , than repeated Doses of Physick , when
there is no apparent Necessity for it . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,11.118

All Evacuations or Discharges effectuated by Medicines , lessen the
Quantity of the Blood , but most immediately Blood-letting :
BRACKEN-1738-2,11.119

And if this has been frequently repeated , or Blood taken away at once
in a large Quantity , the remaining part becomes languid in its Motion :
Forasmuch as a lesser Quantity of Spirits must of consequence be derived
or separated from a lesser Quantity of Blood ; BRACKEN-1738-2,11.120

therefore it has not Force enough to reach the Passages of the Skin and
<font> miliary Glands <$$font> , so as to make the proper Secretions
there ; BRACKEN-1738-2,11.121

and from hence it may be <P_12> observed , that <font> instead of
preventing Diseases it becomes the Parent of many . <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,12.122

Purging does much the same as Bleeding , though after a different Manner
, BRACKEN-1738-2,12.123

and may indeed be of much worse consequence to Horses , seeing all such
Evacuations act more directly against Nature , even to such a Degree ,
that the whole animal Frame is put into great Hurry and Discomposure by
the Exhibition of purging Medicines ; BRACKEN-1738-2,12.124

for there is a wide and very different Operation of Purges given to a
Horse from that in a human Body , which the least Discernment may
discover : BRACKEN-1738-2,12.125

For Example , a Man is in an upright Posture , which helps to forward
such Discharges ; BRACKEN-1738-2,12.126

but this Creature , being in a prone and horizontal One , the Medicine ,
by such Means , lies longer in his Stomach and Guts ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,12.127

and twitches and vellicates their tender Membranes in a much greater
Degree ; BRACKEN-1738-2,12.128

neither can you force or oblige him to drink warm Water , if he be not
of himself inclinable thereto . BRACKEN-1738-2,12.129

The best Method , in my Opinion , to prevent Diseases , is , in the
first place , not to give a Horse any kind of Food which may be thought
unwholsome , and let them drink Rain or River Water , which is clear and
not troubled . BRACKEN-1738-2,12.130

I say these , along with proper Exercise , must conduce more to the
Preservation of Health , than all or any the differently prescribed
purging Physick too commonly made Use of without Reason .
BRACKEN-1738-2,12.131

Exercise , no doubt , is essentially necessary for preserving Health in
any kind of Animal , but more especially a Horse , whose very Nature
requires Abundance of it , <paren> if he has his full Feeding ;
<$$paren> BRACKEN-1738-2,12.132

for , by Exercise the Blood is not only forced thro' the smallest Veins
and Arteries by the several Contractions of the Muscles ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,12.133

but all the little Glands and Strainers of the Body are thereby forced
to throw out and discharge their several Contents , which certainly must
be a great , if not the greatest Means to preserve Health .
BRACKEN-1738-2,12.134

And this <P_13> Preservation ought to be continued , in Proportion to a
Horse's Strength and Manner of Feeding ; BRACKEN-1738-2,13.135

for one of these Creatures , of a delicate and tender Make or
Constitution , can@ @not bear much Exercise , BRACKEN-1738-2,13.136

nor should such a Horse's Airings be violent but gentle ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,13.137

and by this Management he may perform Work enough for most Men's
occasions , though I must own he would not suit my <font> Taste <$$font>
or <font> Business . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,13.138

<heading>

CHAP. III. <font> Contains some general Rules to be observed in
Bleeding and Purging Horses . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,13.140

<$$heading>

I have , in the foregoing Chapter , taken notice of some Errors
committed in Bleeding and Purging , BRACKEN-1738-2,13.142

therefore I shall , in this , lay down some general Rules to be observed
in these Operations . BRACKEN-1738-2,13.143

And first , I say , Bleeding is the most ready , as well as the most
useful Operation , for relieving any Creature in Sickness , or Diseased
, that can possibly be performed : BRACKEN-1738-2,13.144

For by this the most immediate Relief is obtained , seeing that by it
the fierce <font> Aestus <$$font> or Heat of the Blood , together with
its Velocity , is restrained and abated ; BRACKEN-1738-2,13.145

and not only the Heat and Velocity , but likewise its Viscidity or
Clammyness , may <paren> in some measure <$$paren> be destroyed .
BRACKEN-1738-2,13.146

Therefore in all Cases , where the Blood is too much agitated and in
Motion , or where it is thick and fizey ; I say , in these and such like
Cases , this Operation is of Service . BRACKEN-1738-2,13.147

But I shall lay down some particular Directions which more especially
require Bleeding , BRACKEN-1738-2,13.148

and , in doing this , I shall not tie People down to particular Times or
Seasons , or the Influences of the Planets , though indeed the old
physical Writers put great Stress upon the last of these ,
notwithstanding they were ignorant of natural Philosophy , <P_14> a
Science so essentially necessary in the Cure of Diseases either in Human
or Brute Creatures . BRACKEN-1738-2,14.149

I do not deny , but in several Cases the <font> Planetary <$$font>
Influences upon the <font> Fluids <$$font> of the Body are exceeding
wonderful ; BRACKEN-1738-2,14.150

and these Operations the learned Dr. <font> Mead <$$font> has fully
explained , in his Treatise <font> de imperio Solis et Lunae : <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,14.151

But this Gentleman's Way of splitting Hairs is too tedious a Task for me
to {TEXT:to_to} venture on at present ; BRACKEN-1738-2,14.152

neither would the same <paren> in my Opinion <$$paren> be either
edifying or instructive to the greatest Part of my Readers .
BRACKEN-1738-2,14.153

Therefore I hope to pursue my first Rule and Design , which was to
publish this Book with all the Perspicuity and Plainness imaginable .
BRACKEN-1738-2,14.154

And <font> first <$$font> , Bleeding ought to be avoided <paren> if it
can with Safety <$$paren> in all Extremities of Heat or Cold ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,14.155

and the Signs which require it are a <font> Plethora <$$font> or
Overfulness of the Blood-Vessels , BRACKEN-1738-2,14.156

and this may be discovered by a Horse's being pursive when he is put to
any Kind of Exercise , that is if he be not actually <font> Astmatick
<$$font> , <paren> or Broken-winded as the Farrier's Term goes ;
<$$paren> BRACKEN-1738-2,14.157

and even in this Case Bleeding wonderfully relieves a Horse's Breathing
, by lessening the Quantity of that Fluid with which his Lungs are so
inflated and blown up . BRACKEN-1738-2,14.158

<font> Secondly <$$font> , Blood-letting is requisite and necessary in
almost all Fevers , whether Simple or Complicate , that is to say ,
whether the Fever consists in an augmented Velocity or Quickness of the
Blood's Motion , or when the Blood is <paren> along with this increasing
Motion <$$paren> vitiate or corrupt . BRACKEN-1738-2,14.159

But Care should be taken to form a right Judgment of the Distemper :
BRACKEN-1738-2,14.160

For , if it have its Origin from Want of Blood and Spirits , as is
frequently the Case , after large <font> Haemorrhages <$$font> or
accidental Losses of Blood ; or after long Scouring , or too plentiful
Evacuations of whatsoever Kind ; or when a Horse has for some time been
in a wasting or declining Condition ; I say , in these Cases <paren>
although some Indications or Signs may shew Bleeding proper <$$paren>
<P_15> yet it ought to be practised with the greatest Caution and
Circumspection ; and if Blood must be taken away , it ought only to be
done sparingly and in very small Quantities . BRACKEN-1738-2,15.161

<font> Thirdly <$$font> , I would have the Farrier always remember this
General Rule , to wit , that <font> Bleeding is requisite in all
Impostumations or Gatherings of corrupt Matter in any Part of a Horse's
Body , and more especially when such Swellings are situate upon the
Glands or Kernels of the Throat , or when they endanger Suffocation , or
any other evil Accident : <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,15.162

But if the Farrier is consulted too late , I mean if he is only called
when the Horse has been ill for several Days , and that there is a
Tendency to Suppuration , or coming to a Head , as it is vulgarly called
; I say , in this case Bleeding is not to be used , because by so doing
we oppose Nature , who is at this time endeavouring to throw off the
Enemy another way . BRACKEN-1738-2,15.163

But in Swellings of the Legs , occasioned by the <font> Grease <$$font>
<paren> as it is called , <$$paren> Bleeding may be serviceable ,
especially if it be used in the Beginning of the Disorder ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,15.164

for by this Help <font> Revulsion <$$font> or a forcing the Humours to a
contrary Part , is performed , BRACKEN-1738-2,15.165

and when this is effected , then it is necessary to purge the Horse in
order to carry such Foulness off by the most proper Outlet :
BRACKEN-1738-2,15.166

For , what signifies causing a <font> Revulsion <$$font> , unless you
afterwards free the Horse's Body of what@ @'s oppressive and burthensome
to Nature : BRACKEN-1738-2,15.167

For if the peccant Humour happens <paren> by Bleeding <$$paren> to be
translated from the Extremities , it is ten to one but some more noble
Part is affected by it , unless special Care be taken to purge it off in
the most judicious Manner . BRACKEN-1738-2,15.168

I have said , that Bleeding is proper on Account of Swellings in the
Legs , occasioned by the <font> Grease <$$font> , provided it be used in
the Beginning , and before they are too much inflamed , by reason this
Distemper at first chiefly proceeds from a Stagnation or undue
Circulation of the Blood in these extreme Parts , where the same loses a
great deal of its Force , by <P_16> reason of the Smallness of the
Vessels , and the Distance from the Heart . BRACKEN-1738-2,16.169

And I hope <paren> in the Sequel of this Discourse <$$paren> plainly to
make appear , that this undue Circulation is mostly the Cause of the
Grease , which is contrary to the Notions of former Writers , who
imagined that in such Cases the Blood was full of Impurities and
Corruption , as they idly term it . BRACKEN-1738-2,16.170

<font> Fourthly <$$font> , Bleeding is requisite in any violent Pains ,
inwardly or outwardly , or as the Physicians write , Internal or
External , as Wounds or Bruises , and Pain and Inflammation of the Lungs
or <font> Pleura <$$font> , which is the Noble and Sensible Membrane
that covers all the Cavity of the <font> Thorax <$$font> , or Chest in
Horses ; or in Inflammations of the Liver , when they can be discovered
; BRACKEN-1738-2,16.171

and I shall do my best to inform the Reader , how he may distinguish
each of these Kinds of Inflammations , when I come to treat of the
Distempers of the Breast . Though , notwithstanding what some Gentlemen
have writ about Pains in the <font> Stomach , Lungs , Liver , Pancreas
<$$font> or Sweat-Bread and the like , I must own it a very difficult
Task to discover the Seat of internal Pains in Horses .
BRACKEN-1738-2,16.172

<font> Fifthly <$$font> , Bleeding is proper , in most , if not all ,
Disorders of the Head ; such as <font> Vertigo's <$$font> , commonly
called the Staggers in Horses ; and in the first Stage or Beginning of
Colds , by which Defluctions of Rheum are apt to fall upon the Lungs and
oftentimes the Eyes . BRACKEN-1738-2,16.173

Several former Authors forbid Bleeding in the Diseases of the Eyes ,
particularly the <font> Sieur de Solleysell <$$font> , who no doubt has
made the Remark from his having seen some ill Effects of it in such
Distempers : BRACKEN-1738-2,16.174

But the Question is , whether this Gentleman form'd a right Judgment of
particular Cases , and duly weighed and considered all the Symptoms
together ? BRACKEN-1738-2,16.175

For if a Horse be Lean and out of Order , that is , when the State of
the Blood is very low and poor , and the Heart scarce able to drive it
round the Horse's Body , why , then indeed <P_17> it is most likely to
stagnate or stop in the Extremities and small Capillary or Hair-like
Blood-Vessels ; because the succeeding Fluid is destitute of force to
impel or drive forward the antecedent Part of the Blood :
BRACKEN-1738-2,17.176

And this no doubt is true Doctrine , since by taking Blood away , we
take away from its Force or <font> Momentum <$$font> , which in the Case
described is already too small , BRACKEN-1738-2,17.177

and therefore Bleeding may sometimes <paren> as <font> Solleysell
<$$font> has observed <$$paren> occasion Disorders of the Eyes , if not
absolute and total Blindness . BRACKEN-1738-2,17.178

But then in all Overfulness of the Vessels , from hard-riding , or from
whatever Cause , which drives the Blood into the Extremities faster then
it can be returned by the small Capillary Vessels , or if the State of
the Blood be too viscid or clammy , by which Means it loiters in the
small Vessels of the Eye-lids or Body of the Eyes , Bleeding must then
be of Service , BRACKEN-1738-2,17.179

and from the same Theory it may be proper in the <font> Farcin <$$font>
, and other Diseases of the <font> Skin . <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,17.180

<font> Lastly <$$font> , the Horse's Age should be considered :
BRACKEN-1738-2,17.181

For a young Horse , though he be more subject to Diseases than an old
hardened Stager , yet he will sooner recover the Loss of his Blood ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,17.182

and in my Opinion , a Horse in the Prime of his Years , will of all Ages
withstand such Evacuation best : BRACKEN-1738-2,17.183

But as to regulating when and at what Age a Horse may be said to be in
his Prime , it is very uncertain , BRACKEN-1738-2,17.184

and must only be learned from such and such Breeds of Horses ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,17.185

for , there is <paren> to my own Knowledge <$$paren> as much Difference
in this Particular with relation to the Prime of Age in Horses , as
there is in Man , BRACKEN-1738-2,17.186

and there are as long-lived , stout and hardy Generations <paren>
comparatively speaking <$$paren> amongst these Creatures , as amongst
Mankind ; BRACKEN-1738-2,17.187

and on the contrary , some are old whilst they are yet young , <paren>
if I may be allow'd the Expression . <$$paren> BRACKEN-1738-2,17.188

The Reason why a Horse is not subject to Sickness and Faintings during
the Operation of Bleeding , is because of his prone and <font>
Horizontal <$$font> Posture , <P_18> which does not require so strong a
<font> Systole <$$font> or Contraction of the Heart , in order to throw
the Blood round the Body , as it would if in a perpendicular Situation .
BRACKEN-1738-2,18.189

This is plain to any one who has the least Notion of <font> Mechanicks ;
<$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,18.190

and for the same Reason a Man will lose twice the Quantity of Blood
lying upon a Bed or Couch , without being sick , than he can in an
upright Posture ; which Truth was well known to our famous <font>
Sydenham <$$font> , although this great and faithful Observer was very
much wanting in <font> Mathematical <$$font> and <font> Mechanical
<$$font> Knowledge , so that he could not share the real Pleasures of
those who have a <font> Why for a Wherefore . <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,18.191

I shall now proceed to shew in what Cases Purging may be necessary , and
then give an Account of those <font> Fevers <$$font> in general which
infest this poor useful Animal . BRACKEN-1738-2,18.192

<font> Purging <$$font> , I say then , is brought about by such
Medicines , which by their Irritation provoke and stimulate the
Membranes of the Stomach and Guts , whereby the <font> Peristaltic
<$$font> or <font> vermicular <$$font> Motion of the latter is quickened
, so as to shake or throw off their Contents : BRACKEN-1738-2,18.193

But if the Dose happens to be too large , or abounds much with <font>
Resinous <$$font> Particles , which of all are most pricking and
stimulating , or <paren> to speak after the common Way <$$paren> if very
strong Physick be given , it not only carries off what is contained in
the Stomach and Guts , BRACKEN-1738-2,18.194

but likewise causes such reiterated and frequent Twitches , as derive a
more than ordinary Quantity of Blood and Spirits into those Parts ,
whence is separated and discharged Abundance of the <font> Serum
<$$font> or watery Part of the Blood , by the common Passages .
BRACKEN-1738-2,18.195

And from hence it is evident , that a Medicine may be so contrived , as
to carry off more or less of the Substance of the Blood , according as
the Dose is increased or diminished , or as it abounds more or less with
purging Particles , and consequently may be rendered profitable or
hurtful . BRACKEN-1738-2,18.196

<P_19>

It is needless to detain the Reader with the Manner of preparing the
Body for this Operation ; BRACKEN-1738-2,19.198

neither shall I lay down Rules for rendering this or that Sort of <font>
Humour <$$font> fit for Discharge by Medicines , which have with much
Industry and more Ignorance , been devised to prepare <font> Choler ,
Phlegm , Melancholy <$$font> , and the like whimsical imagin'd <font>
Humours ; <$$font> that Sort of Practice being now justly exploded as
ridiculous and uncertain ; since it is plain , that all Kinds of purging
Medicines differ only in Degrees of Strength , and operate no otherwise
upon different Humours , than as they stimulate more or less , and
either work no farther than the <font> Primae Viae <$$font> , or first
Passages , or else cause a Discharge from the Parts more remote from
their Scene of Action , which principally lies in the Stomach and Guts .
BRACKEN-1738-2,19.199

And what particular Regard is to be had to the different Kinds of
purging Medicines will , I hope , be sufficiently shewn to the Reader's
Satisfaction in the Sequel of this Treatise , when I come to treat of
Distempers which may demand Purging . BRACKEN-1738-2,19.200

And therefore at present , I shall only lay down some general Directions
, which may be of use to all those <font> Gentlemen <$$font> who keep
valuable Horses . BRACKEN-1738-2,19.201

And <font> First <$$font> , I say , Purging is necessary in most or all
<font> Plethorick <$$font> Cases when there is a Redundancy of Blood ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,19.202

but the Horse should first of all be bled to render his Body cool and
lightsome : BRACKEN-1738-2,19.203

For , if he be purged when his Body is full , it may , <paren> unless
the other Secretions are free <$$paren> I mean the Discharges by Urine ,
<font> &c. <$$font> occasion <paren> during the Operation <$$paren> a
too great Hurry in the Motion of the Blood , BRACKEN-1738-2,19.204

or by driving or forcing off too great a Quantity of Blood , <font> &c.
<$$font> into the Intestines or Guts , an Inflammation may ensue .
BRACKEN-1738-2,19.205

And for this Reason it is judged proper that those Horses , which are
<font> Plethorick <$$font> or full of Blood , should only have mild and
easy working Purges given them . BRACKEN-1738-2,19.206

<P_20>

<font> Secondly <$$font> , Purging may be allowable in Disorders of the
Stomach , before other Things are administered , and this , because a
Horse can seldom or perhaps never disgorge himself by Vomit .
BRACKEN-1738-2,20.208

<font> Thirdly <$$font> , it is proper in all Foulnesses of the Guts ,
for driving out all viscid and slimy Matter , and particularly when a
Horse is troubled with Worms , provided the Purge consists of such
Ingredients , as I shall hereafter mention , when I come to treat of
this common though troublesome <font> Reptile <$$font> , which afflicts
most Horses sooner or later . BRACKEN-1738-2,20.209

And furthermore , Purging may be necessary in Costiveness , and in
several kinds of <font> Diarrhaea's <$$font> or Loosenesses of the Belly
; BRACKEN-1738-2,20.210

but these likewise must consist of well adapted Ingredients , <font>
viz. <$$font> such as after Purging in a gentle and easy Manner ,
constringe and leave a binding Quality behind them , so as to shut up ,
in some Sort , the excretory Ducts of the intestinal Glands :
BRACKEN-1738-2,20.211

Yet great Care must be taken in this Matter , left by improper Purges ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,20.212

the Glands should be so relaxed as to bring on an Inflammation of the
Guts , by the too violent Operation of the Medicine .
BRACKEN-1738-2,20.213

<font> Fourthly <$$font> , and <font> Lastly ; <$$font> I recommend
Purging as useful in gross Habits , where there is any Tendency to
swelling of the Limbs , or any other Part of the Body ; in humid and
watery Diseases ; in Disorders of the Liver , causing the Jaundice
<paren> or Yellows in Horses ; <$$paren> in Diseases of the Eyes and
Head , where there is not any Fever , but only a Stagnation of the Blood
, in some of the small Capillary or Hair-like Vessels ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,20.214

for Purging , in such Cases , not only drains off Part of the
superabundant Matter , BRACKEN-1738-2,20.215

but also <paren> by putting the Blood in a brisker Motion <$$paren>
causes a Separation of its grosser Parts ; so that it moves with more
Ease and Freedom through all its <font> Canals <$$font> , and by this
Means is brought more readily to the secretory Offices , or particular
Outlets , designed by <font> Nature <$$font> to throw off the
excrementitious Parts of Nourishment . BRACKEN-1738-2,20.216

<P_21>

I must not , however , close this Chapter , without acquainting the
Reader , that in Bleeding and Purging a particular Regard must be had to
the Strength of every Horse ; by Reason <paren> in the last Case
<$$paren> the Irritation , or pricking and convulsive Twitching , which
many Kinds of Purges occasion , <paren> during their Operation ,
<$$paren> brings on <font> great Sickness , convulsive Motions of the
Body , damp Sweats , &c. which too often end in Death . <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,21.218

A Horse is with much more Difficulty purged than a Man , because of
their prone or horizontal Posture , which helps nothing towards
forwarding the Medicine ; BRACKEN-1738-2,21.219

therefore the Physick lies mostly twenty_four Hours in his Guts , before
it operates . BRACKEN-1738-2,21.220

And , for the most Part , the Purges given to Horses consist of such
Things as are of a resinous Quality , BRACKEN-1738-2,21.221

and these , of all other , are most subject to cause violent Gripings ,
cold Sweats , <font> &c. ; <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,21.222

for , as they are ordered mostly without any Mixture to qualify this
Property , it is much , many Horses get through their Physick every
Spring : BRACKEN-1738-2,21.223

And I rather attribute it to the Strength of the Horse's Constitution ,
than to any good Judgment in the Farriers , or common Keepers of
galloping Horses . BRACKEN-1738-2,21.224

For there is no Doubt , in the least , but the same general Rule will
hold good in purging Horses , as it does in Men ; BRACKEN-1738-2,21.225

I mean , the <font> Idiosyncracy <$$font> of Bodies is to be first
<paren> as much as may be <$$paren> studied amongst these Creatures :
BRACKEN-1738-2,21.226

And this Knowledge of the peculiar Temperament or Disposition of this or
that Horse , with relation to his being easily or difficultly wrought
upon by any Kind of Medicines , will , I am convinced , be the greatest
Guide a Farrier can follow . BRACKEN-1738-2,21.227

And this Disposition may , in some Measure , be learned from the Horse's
Constructure or Make , the firmness of his Flesh , <font> &c. <$$font>
; BRACKEN-1738-2,21.228

for those Horses which are kept at hard Meat a long Time together , and
get pretty well of Exercise along with it , are <paren> it is very well
known <$$paren> most difficultly purged , by Reason they have fewer
Juices <P_22> to work upon , than a gross fat Horse , who has little or
no Exercise . BRACKEN-1738-2,22.229

I have given these loose Hints about Bleeding and Purging , before I
enter upon a Discourse of the Distempers incident to Horses , as the
same was necessary to be consider'd by all Farriers , and is , or ought
to be , one of the Fundamentals of their Practice ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,22.230

I mean this , <font> viz. <$$font> that every Farrier should rightly
and duly weigh each and every Symptom or Token of Sickness in a Horse ,
and consider well , whether he requires Bleeding , or Purging , or both
; and not , <paren> as is too common , <$$paren> strike his Fleams into
his Neck , or toss a Purge into his Stomach , <font> hab nab <$$font> at
random , which may very likely go near to kill him , when performed
without due Caution . BRACKEN-1738-2,22.231

But what relates to this , and other Operations , both manual and other
, will , I hope , be fully and clearly laid down in the Sequel of this
Book , to the Farrier's Satisfaction , as well as of all Gentlemen , who
admire good Horses . BRACKEN-1738-2,22.232

And I shall do my utmost , to apply all general Rules as justly and
methodically as possible . BRACKEN-1738-2,22.233

<heading>

CHAP. IV . BRACKEN-1738-2,22.235

<font> Of the Strangles . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,22.236

<$$heading>

As this is , for the most Part , one of the first Distempers that young
Colts are subject to , I judge it proper to be first treated of ; after
which , I shall enumerate the different Kinds of Fevers , to which
Horses are liable . BRACKEN-1738-2,22.238

And <font> First <$$font> , I say , the Strangles is a Swelling under
the Throat between the Jaw-Bones , and seems not to differ <paren> in
any great Degree <$$paren> from what we term the Quinsy in human Bodies
; though it is said , that the Seat of the Strangles is not so much upon
the Glands as upon the Muscles , and therefore it proceeds sooner to
Impostumation , or Gathering , <P_23> <paren> as it is called <$$paren>
; BRACKEN-1738-2,23.239

neither is it thought there is so much Danger in the Strangles in Horses
, as in a Quinsy in human Bodies , by reason the Muscles of the <font>
Larynx <$$font> , or Wind-Pipe , are not so much afflicted in the first
, as in Man : BRACKEN-1738-2,23.240

For in Horses , the Muscles of the Tongue seem only to be touched with
the Distemper , BRACKEN-1738-2,23.241

and therefore it is , that the Matter comes naturally to have an
external <font> Discharge . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,23.242

I have said , that young Colts are most subject to the Strangles ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,23.243

and , as I remember , Monsieur <font> Solleysell <$$font> , the <font>
French <$$font> Farrier , compares this Distemper in Colts to the
Small-Pox in Children , BRACKEN-1738-2,23.244

and he has taken Notice , that few Horses are troubled with it above
once in their Life , unless the Matter of the Strangles has been
imperfectly cast off , and that then indeed , it generally returns at
six , ten , or twelve Years of Age . BRACKEN-1738-2,23.245

This Author farther observes , that the <font> Morbisic <$$font> or
offending Matter is sometimes cast off by the Limbs , and other Parts of
the Body , and more especially by those Members that have been any way
hurt or weakened ; BRACKEN-1738-2,23.246

for the Humour or Matter of the Disease , by Translation , soonest
affects the weakest Parts . BRACKEN-1738-2,23.247

The last Author mentioned , was very meanly skilled in the Anatomical
Structure or Make of a Horse , although he was a very diligent Observer
of all manner of Accidents to which that Creature is liable :
BRACKEN-1738-2,23.248

If therefore he had been better acquainted with Anatomy , his Accounts
might have been edifying as well as more instructive to his Readers .
BRACKEN-1738-2,23.249

For although this Distemper of the Strangles be near allyed to an
external Quinsy , as to its Situation , and also in many other Respects
; yet , no doubt , as it mostly happens to Colts , it may <paren> not
without Reason <$$paren> bear an Affinity to the Small-Pox :
BRACKEN-1738-2,23.250

For , as the Blood of young Horses may reasonably be supposed equally
Fluid , having not as yet been sufficiently comminuted , or divided by
frequent Circulations , therefore , while they are in this imperfect
<P_24> State , they are rendered more liable to Diseases ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,24.251

and when these happen , they fuse and melt the Blood ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,24.252

or purify it from its Viscidities or grosser Parts , by some proper
Out-lets or Discharges , which are answerable to those by which the
Small-Pox are thrown out and discharged in human Bodies .
BRACKEN-1738-2,24.253

But as the Small-Pox breaks out in little Pustules , or Bladders full of
Matter all over the Skin , wheresoever the Vessels are smallest , and
where the Blood is most apt to stagnate or stop ; yet because the
Blood-Vessels in Horses are considerably stronger and thicker than in
our Bodies , therefore these Impurities can@ @not be so readily
discharged in the Manner aforesaid , BRACKEN-1738-2,24.254

but break out in Boils and Swellings in the Neck , <font> &c. <$$font>
BRACKEN-1738-2,24.255

And I hope this Account may satisfy every impartial Reader , why Colts
are most subject to the Strangles , and other Impostumations , than
those Horses which are arrived at a more mature State .
BRACKEN-1738-2,24.256

I would be understood under this Head , that most Colts <paren> though
not all <$$paren> have the Strangles before they arrive at six Years of
Age ; BRACKEN-1738-2,24.257

yet , I will not say but the Distemper may be sooner or later brought on
by Colds , or other Mismanagement in keeping : BRACKEN-1738-2,24.258

And I must own , that although I have bred several Colts myself , yet
not one , to my Remembrance , ever had the Strangles ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,24.259

and this I attributed mostly to their being kept warm in Winter with
good Meat , <font> &c. <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,24.260

And though this <font> Theory <$$font> seems to contradict what I just
now advanced , <font> viz. <$$font> that the Distemper called the
Strangles seems implanted in the very Nature of Horses , yet I imagine
the Seeds of it do not always meet with a proper <font> Nidus <$$font> ,
so as to propagate the Strangles , till such Time as the young Horse has
contracted <paren> what we call <$$paren> Colds , or , in better <font>
English <$$font> , till such Time as by the Constipation , or shutting
up of the Pores by the Violentness of the Seasons , insomuch that the
requisite Perspiration is impeded , and proper Ferment produced , which
brings forth the Distemper <P_25> mentioned . BRACKEN-1738-2,25.261

And this is not a very ill_grounded Hypothesis , if it be considered ,
<paren> as is really the Case with several Kinds of Seeds , <$$paren>
how they will lie in the Earth Scores of Years together , without
producing any such Thing as a Crop till such Time as the ground be dug
up and husbanded , BRACKEN-1738-2,25.262

and then indeed you shall have Turneps , Mustard-Seed , and such like ,
without sowing one Grain ; nay , altho' the same Ground has not been
turned over for a_Hundred Years before . BRACKEN-1738-2,25.263

And of this Fact I have been an Eye-Witness , <paren> so far as my own
Memory could inform me ; <$$paren> BRACKEN-1738-2,25.264

and it is well known in the Field-Country of <font> Lancashire <$$font>
, that so sure as any Person throws up a new Ditch , so sure he will
reap a fine Crop of Mustard-Seed , without strewing any upon the Ground
before-hand . BRACKEN-1738-2,25.265

Mr. <font> Ray <$$font> , in his Natural History of Plants , has said
enough to convince any unprejudiced Person of the aforesaid Truth ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,25.266

and I have dwelt the longer upon this Matter , by reason of the great
<font> Analogy <$$font> there is between <font> Plants <$$font> and
<font> Animals <$$font> , with relation to a great many inward as well
as outward Distempers : BRACKEN-1738-2,25.267

And this , if my Time would permit , I could with great Reason make
appear . BRACKEN-1738-2,25.268

But I must proceed to my Subject-Matter . BRACKEN-1738-2,25.269

I say then , so soon as it is perceived that a Colt <paren> or it may be
a Horse of riper Years <$$paren> has the Symptoms or Signs of the
Strangles upon him , and that the same has a Tendency between the Jaws ,
<paren> as is most common , from the dependant Situation of the Head ,
<$$paren> and that the Passages of the Gullet and Wind-Pipe are not
endangered , the safest Way is to ripen the Swelling , and bring it to
suppurate , or burst , by warm Cloathing , and Applications which soften
the inflamed Parts . BRACKEN-1738-2,25.270

For Example ; the following excellent Poultice is proper to bring the
offending Matter outward , and thereby prevent Suffocation , and other
evil Accidents attending the <font> Larynx <$$font> and <font> Pharynx
<$$font> , or Muscles of the Wind-Pipe and Gullet .
BRACKEN-1738-2,25.271

<P_26>

<font> Take Leaves of Mallows , and Marsh-Mallows , <paren> either green
or dry , <$$paren> each ten Handfuls ; white Lilly-Root , half a Pound .
BRACKEN-1738-2,26.273

Boil these very soft in Water , BRACKEN-1738-2,26.274

and press them out strongly ; BRACKEN-1738-2,26.275

then take Lin-Seed , and Fenugreek-Seed , each four Ounces ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,26.276

bruise them , BRACKEN-1738-2,26.277

and boil 'em in two Quarts of Water slowly , till it become of a
mucilaginous Consistence ; after which , stir and beat it up well with
the Leaves and Roots ; BRACKEN-1738-2,26.278

then add four Ounces of Ointment of Marsh-Mallows , and one pound of
rendered Hogs-lard ; BRACKEN-1738-2,26.279

mix well , BRACKEN-1738-2,26.280

and keep for Use . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,26.281

This is a most incomparable <font> Cataplasm <$$font> or Poultice , in
several Cases besides what I have mentioned , when Nature is , as it
were , desponding , and can@ @not throw off the Load of Matter which
causes the Distemper or Swelling , seeing that by its genial Warmth
<paren> for it ought to be applied pretty warm <$$paren> it comforts the
stretched <font> Fibrillae <$$font> or animal Threads , which are
distended beyond their natural <font> Tone <$$font> or Dimensions by the
Influx of the offending Matter , and also greatly contributes to thin
the Skin , by its mollifying and softening Quality . So that these two
principal and great Ends are answered by the Application of the
aforesaid Poultice , <font> viz. <$$font> bringing Relief to the
distended Fibres , and also thinning the Skin and muscular Flesh ;
insomuch that the fluctuating Matter may with more Ease be felt by the
Finger , than it otherwise would be . BRACKEN-1738-2,26.282

In fine , I can@ @not say too much in Praise of this <font> Cataplasm
<$$font> , whose Virtues are so unparalleled by any other I could ever
contrive ; <paren> I mean in relation to tumefied or swelled Glands in
any Part of the Body ; <$$paren> BRACKEN-1738-2,26.283

and I have known it used by my Direction , to Horses in the Strangles ,
which have received great Benefit from it . BRACKEN-1738-2,26.284

The Manner of applying it is upon a double Cloth , very thick and pretty
warm , always adding a fresh Poultice as the old grows dry .
BRACKEN-1738-2,26.285

<P_27>

If the <font> Tumour <$$font> breaks , the Wound may be dressed with the
Ointment under the Title of the <font> Farrier's Ointment <$$font>
spread warm on Tow , or such like , and the <font> Poultice <$$font>
over all : BRACKEN-1738-2,27.287

For you must remember to keep this going on till all the Glands are
fallen , or come to their natural State and Bigness ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,27.288

otherwise , it hath happen'd , as I have often observed , that for want
of using the Poultice <paren> or some such Application <$$paren> the
Glands have been so indurated or hardened , that they would not yield to
any Thing but Extirpation or Cutting out , and would turn out like a
boiled Turnep or Potatoe , upon giving the Skin a cross Incision or Cut
, and pulling them out with one's Fingers . BRACKEN-1738-2,27.289

Or , for want of this Operation , the Horse has been big and swelled
about the Jaws during the whole Course of his Life .
BRACKEN-1738-2,27.290

I advise to lay all sinuous or hollow Wounds or Ulcers open , as far as
possible without Danger to the Blood-Vessels , Nerves , or Tendons , and
to make the Incision according to the Direction or Length of the Fibres
, that is , you ought not to cut a-cross the Muscles , or Leaders ,
<paren> as they are called by Farriers . <$$paren>
BRACKEN-1738-2,27.291

The Dressings , after Incision , should consist of those Things which
are of a <font> detersive <$$font> and <font> mundifying <$$font>
Quality , such as are all the Kinds of Turpentine , which I shall have
occasion to speak of in the following Pages . BRACKEN-1738-2,27.292

These incorporated well with Honey , Yolks of Eggs , <font> &c.
<$$font> as I shall describe under the Name of the <font> black
digestive Ointment <$$font> , along with the <font> Farrier's green
Ointment ; <$$font> and a few Mixtures , mostly spirituous , I believe
will be sufficient for most or all Wounds , both recent and green , as
well as those which , through bad Management and length of Time , are
grown sinuous or hollow , and therefore difficult of Cure .
BRACKEN-1738-2,27.293

Of a contrary Quality to Turpentines are all Kinds of <font> Oil ,
Hog's-lard , &c. <$$font> with all the Tribe of <font> unctuous , oily
, greasy Applications <$$font> , such as <paren> for the most Part
<$$paren> Farriers are wont to apply to <P_28> Wounds :
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.294

For these greasy Applications are very pernicious , by reason they
occasion <font> Fungous <$$font> or proud Flesh , and likewise foul the
Bones , Tendons , <font> &c. <$$font> where the Wounds are deep ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.295

therefore I would advise all Gentlemen to toss such Compositions out of
their Stables , as detrimental . BRACKEN-1738-2,28.296

Indeed there is some Butter ordered in my <font> Farrier's Ointment
<$$font> , BRACKEN-1738-2,28.297

but the Thing could not be made any way lower , or of an easier Kind
than the <font> black digestive Ointment <$$font> , without it
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.298

and besides , <font> May-Butter <$$font> , when Cows are at Grass ,
partakes of a fine mundifying or cleansing Quality , far before
Hogs-Lard , or such like . BRACKEN-1738-2,28.299

And this I have many Times experienced to my Satisfaction .
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.300

Tents are also pernicious in most Cases , BRACKEN-1738-2,28.301

for they occasion the Flesh to grow callous , or hard and horny ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.302

and this is what is meant by the Wounds growing Fistulous ;
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.303

and till this Callosity or horny Part be destroyed by Knife , Fire , or
corrosive Powders , there is no such Thing as healing the Wound ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.304

and on this Account it will discharge a nasty , stinking , sanious
Matter , while the Horse lives . BRACKEN-1738-2,28.305

Mr. <font> Gibson <$$font> <paren> in his Book of Farriery <$$paren> is
very tedious and prolix in treating about the Cure of the Wound , when
the Matter of the Strangles runs off ; BRACKEN-1738-2,28.306

but he might have said as much to the Purpose in a few Words , <font>
viz. Keep the Horse's Body and especially his Throat , warm ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.307

and dress the Wound with some good digestive and warming Ointment ,
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.308

and apply a softening Poultice thick and warm over all , till such Time
as the Glands or Kernels are fallen , and the Humours dispersed :
<$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,28.309

But this is not brought about but with great Care and Patience :
BRACKEN-1738-2,28.310

For in all the Swellings , either in Human or Brute Creatures , none are
so tedious and difficult of Resolution <paren> or being dissolved
<$$paren> as Tumours or Swellings of the Glands , and this by Reason of
the Coldness of their Nature <paren> if I may be allowed the Expression
; <$$paren> BRACKEN-1738-2,28.311

for the Blood , <font> &c. <$$font> or rather the juice , make so slow
a Circuit in the <P_29> Glands , in Comparison to what it does through
the other <paren> mostly rectilinear <$$paren> Canals of our Bodies ,
that these Swellings , from want of Heat , <paren> which Philosophers
know consists in Motion , <$$paren> are of a slow Procedure .
BRACKEN-1738-2,29.312

I have said thus much in relation to the Strangles , which I hope may be
sufficient : BRACKEN-1738-2,29.313

For in this Chapter , as well as the following , I shall not trouble the
Reader with long Accounts of Things , which would rather puzzle and
incumber his Memory , than any way tend to his Information .
BRACKEN-1738-2,29.314

Therefore I now proceed to say something of the <font> spurious or false
and Bastard Strangles . <$$font> BRACKEN-1738-2,29.315

