<BEGIN_brady-1713-2>

<P_29>

<heading>

Sermon II . BRADY-1713-2,29.4

A moderate Condition the happiest and safest . BRADY-1713-2,29.5

Prov. xxx. 8 , 9 . BRADY-1713-2,29.6

<$$heading>

<font> Give me neither Poverty nor Riches , BRADY-1713-2,29.8

feed me with Food convenient for me : Lest I be full , and deny thee ,
and say , Who is the Lord ? or lest I be poor , and steal , and take
the name of my God in vain . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,29.9

How much are the greatest part of Mankind mistaken , in the common
pursuit which they make after Happiness ! whilst they look upon <P_30>
it as a thing of an extravagant Nature , which is only to be met with in
Extremes ! BRADY-1713-2,30.10

Hence it comes to pass , that some think it can@ @not be attained to ,
but in a lofty and splendid Condition of Life ; that the more they are
exalted above the ordinary Level , the nearer Approaches they are making
to it ; and that Felicity is the Portion only of those few , who seem to
monopolize the Riches and Honours of this World : BRADY-1713-2,30.11

But woful Experience has oftentimes convinc'd us , that so high a
Standing is very slippery , that these upper Regions are the Seat of
Tempests , and that the Head is apt to turn round and grow giddy by
being advanced to so great an Elevation . BRADY-1713-2,30.12

The palpable Inconveniencies which attend this Condition , have given
Occasion to others , as unsuccessfully , to seek after Happiness in the
contrary Extreme ; divesting themselves , in a manner , of all relation
to this World , <paren> with which , however , they must Sympathize as
long as they are a part of it , <$$paren> and denying themselves those
Comforts and Conveniences of Life , which God , who gives liberally and
upbraids not , has bountifully provided for all his Creatures .
BRADY-1713-2,30.13

So very easie it is to fall into one Error , while <P_31> we blindly run
away from another ! BRADY-1713-2,31.14

And so hard it is , to stop in the Golden Mean , which is the place of
happiness , as well as of Vertue ! BRADY-1713-2,31.15

Riches have their Snares , and Poverty its Temptations ;
BRADY-1713-2,31.16

each estate of Life is exposed to sundry Hazards ; whilst he , whose
happy Lot has fallen between them both , is in no danger of being liable
to any such Extremities . BRADY-1713-2,31.17

The Prayer therefore , in my Text , is most wisely calculated , for
avoiding all Excesses and Defects of this nature , and steering an even
Course in the midst of two great Difficulties ; BRADY-1713-2,31.18

<font> Give me neither Poverty nor Riches , BRADY-1713-2,31.19

feed me with food convenient for me ; lest I be full and deny thee , and
say , who is the Lord ? or lest I be poor and steal , and take the name
of my God in vain . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,31.20

These Words are a part of <font> Agur <$$font> 's Prayer ; a Man of so
eminent a Character for Wisdom , that we find his Works joined with
those of <font> Solomon <$$font> ; BRADY-1713-2,31.21

and they contain one of those two Requests , for which he passionately
addresses himself to Almighty God : BRADY-1713-2,31.22

<font> Two things <$$font> <paren> says he <$$paren> <font> have I
required of thee , BRADY-1713-2,31.23

deny me not them before I die : <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,31.24

The <font> First <$$font> , in relation to his Spiritual Concernments ,
<font> Remove far <P_32> from me Vanity and Lies : <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,32.25

The <font> Second , <$$font> in respect of his Temporal Affairs , <font>
Give me neither poverty nor riches <$$font> , &c. BRADY-1713-2,32.26

This latter Request of devout <font> Agur <$$font> , which I have chosen
for the Subject of my present Discourse , is naturally divided into
these two parts : I. First <font> A Petition . <$$font> And , II.
Secondly , <font> The reason of it . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,32.27

First , <font> A Petition <$$font> , expressed two ways , Negatively ,
declaring what he would not have , <font> Give me neither poverty nor
riches <$$font> ; and Positively , containing what he would have ,
<font> Feed me with food convenient for me . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,32.28

Secondly , <font> The reason of this Petition <$$font> , and that in
relation to both the Branches of it ; <font> Give me not riches , lest I
be full , and deny thee , and say , who is the Lord ?
BRADY-1713-2,32.29

Give me not Poverty , lest I be poor , and steal , and take the name of
my God in vain . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,32.30

<font> First <$$font> then , Let us examine {TEXT:examin} this Petition
of <font> Agur <$$font> ; which , tho' expressed after two manner of
ways , yet can@ @not be <P_33> reckoned more than one single Request :
Since , if he has neither too much nor too little , he must have that
Food which is convenient for him ; and if he has that desirable
Competency , he must be free from the Extremes both of Poverty and
Riches . BRADY-1713-2,33.31

But here we must observe , that this Prayer of <font> Agur <$$font> , is
not absolute but comparative , BRADY-1713-2,33.32

he does not pray directly against Poverty or Riches , as if either
Condition were unlawful in itself , since the Blessing of God may go
along with either of them ; BRADY-1713-2,33.33

but it is a Prayer of Choice and Preference ; as if he had said , Rather
than either Poverty or Riches , give me , O Lord , a mean {TEXT:mein}
betwixt them both : BRADY-1713-2,33.34

and this is a way of writing , very usual in the Scriptures , by an
{COM:greek_omitted} or the opposing of two things , to express a
{COM:greek_omitted} or our preferring of one to t'other ;
BRADY-1713-2,33.35

thus , for Instance , in the Prophet <font> Hosea , I will have mercy
and not sacrifice <$$font> ; which must not be understood as if God
forbad Sacrifice , but must be taken in this sence , I had rather have
Mercy than Sacrifice . BRADY-1713-2,33.36

And thus again in Saint <font> Matthew <$$font> 's Gospel , <font> Lay
not up for yourselves treasures upon earth , but lay up for yourselves
treasures in heaven <$$font> ; which must by no means be <P_34>
construed as a direct prohibition against laying up any worldly
Provisions ; but must be understood as if our Saviour had said , Rather
lay up Treasures in Heaven than in Earth , BRADY-1713-2,34.37

have a greater Regard to the one than to the other . BRADY-1713-2,34.38

Having thus removed some small Difficulties in the way , let us proceed
to the consideration of this Request of <font> Agur <$$font> ; which ,
that we may explain more fully and distinctly , we must enquire into the
Positive part of his Petition , in which he desires to be fed with Food
convenient for him ; since , from the due stating of that Condition , we
shall easily discover what he prays against , under the several Names of
<font> Poverty <$$font> and <font> Riches . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,34.39

This Food convenient is stiled in the Original , {COM:hebrew_omitted}
the Bread of my Alotment , or of my competent Allowance ;
BRADY-1713-2,34.40

and answers exactly to that Petition in the Lord's Prayer , in which we
pray for our <font> daily bread : <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,34.41

For the {COM:greek_omitted} , the sufficient or <font> daily bread
<$$font> , which we there pray for , is such a competent Portion of all
necessary Provisions as cuts off all Superfluity on the one side , and
guards us against Necessity on the other ; BRADY-1713-2,34.42

and therefore <font> Tremellius <$$font> , well observing the Agreement
that there is between <P_35> these two Petitions , has borrowed the
Words of <font> Agur <$$font> to express our Saviour's sence , in his
most elegant and judicious <font> Hebrew <$$font> Catechism ;
BRADY-1713-2,35.43

{COM:hebrew_omitted} <paren> says he <$$paren> {COM:hebrew_omitted}
bestow upon us our sufficient Bread ; as if our Saviour had reference to
this very Text , in that Standard which he gave us for our Devotions .
BRADY-1713-2,35.44

This Sufficiency therefore , which <font> Agur <$$font> here desires ,
and which our Lord allows us to beg of our heavenly Father , will be
most truly understood by us , if we consider , that a Competency may be
conceived under a double Notion , either in regard to our Nature and
Constitution , that which may support a Man in his Life and Health , or
in respect of a Man's Condition and Quality , that which may maintain
him decently and conveniently , in that Rank and Degree in which God has
placed him : BRADY-1713-2,35.45

<font> Feed me <$$font> <paren> says <font> Agur <$$font> <$$paren>
<font> with food convenient for me . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,35.46

If <font> Agur <$$font> be a single and private Person , a small
Competency will then suffice him ; BRADY-1713-2,35.47

if he be the Master of a Family , he prays for as much as will maintain
him and his Dependants ; BRADY-1713-2,35.48

if he be a Person of Honour and publick Employment , he desires what may
support him in that Post and Condition : BRADY-1713-2,35.49

for the Sufficiency <P_36> he requires , is that , which if he wants he
is in Poverty , and which if he exceeds he may be looked upon as Rich ;
BRADY-1713-2,36.50

but every Man's Reason will abundantly inform him , that the proportion
of Wealth which would make a private Man very Rich , if enjoy'd by a
Prince or some great Minister of State , would leave him most despicably
Poor and Wanting : BRADY-1713-2,36.51

What therefore <font> Zeba <$$font> and <font> Zalmunna <$$font> said to
<font> Gideon , As is the Man so is his Strength <$$font> ; we may fitly
apply to the present purpose , as is the Man so is his Competency :
BRADY-1713-2,36.52

In whatsoever Condition God has placed any one , he ought to pray for a
convenient Maintenance to support him in it ; BRADY-1713-2,36.53

but to ask any thing farther he has no warrant , neither by this Prayer
of <font> Agur <$$font> , nor by that which Christ himself taught us .
BRADY-1713-2,36.54

This then is the full sence of <font> Agur <$$font> 's Petition ,
BRADY-1713-2,36.55

this is the Condition which he begs to live in , when he desires <font>
food convenient for him <$$font> ; BRADY-1713-2,36.56

whatsoever is above or below this Competency is what he deprecates and
prays to be delivered from , under the name of <font> Riches <$$font> on
the one side , and <font> Poverty <$$font> on the other .
BRADY-1713-2,36.57

Before I proceed to the <font> Second <$$font> General , the Reasons
upon which his Request is <P_37> grounded , give me leave to draw a few
useful Observations , from the Consideration of what has been already
delivered . BRADY-1713-2,37.58

And , <font> 1st <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , If we
ought , with <font> Agur <$$font> , to pray against Riches , then
certainly we should never covet or seek after abundance and excess of
worldly Treasures ; BRADY-1713-2,37.59

but should have our Aims and Desires stinted at such a Competency , as
agrees with that state of Life to which it has pleased God to call us :
BRADY-1713-2,37.60

If the other were allowable , <font> Agur <$$font> would not have prayed
against it ; BRADY-1713-2,37.61

but , <font> Give me not riches <$$font> , says he , BRADY-1713-2,37.62

<font> feed me with food convenient for me . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,37.63

What we have no ground in God's Word to pray for , that we have no
warrant to wish for or desire : BRADY-1713-2,37.64

<font> Ye ask BRADY-1713-2,37.65

and have not <$$font> , says the Apostle , <font> because ye ask amiss :
<$$font> BRADY-1713-2,37.66

Neither this Petition of Holy <font> Agur <$$font> , nor that Model of
our Prayers which our blessed Saviour gave us , afford us any
Encouragement to seek after Superfluities ; BRADY-1713-2,37.67

nor is there any Example in the whole Book of God , of any good Man that
prayed for Abundance or Excess ; BRADY-1713-2,37.68

all their Wishes were as modest as that of <font> Jacob , If the Lord
will give me food to eat and raiment to put on , then shall the Lord be
my God . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,37.69

I would not have any one here <P_38> mistake me , as if I thought it
were an unlawful matter , to have and enjoy Riches when God bestows them
; BRADY-1713-2,38.70

but I avow it to be unwarrantable to seek after them solicitously :
BRADY-1713-2,38.71

the things in themselves are of an indifferent Nature ,
BRADY-1713-2,38.72

and can@ @not be pronounced simply to be Good or Evil ;
BRADY-1713-2,38.73

nay , Plenty and Abundance are call'd the Gift of God ; and , more than
that , the Blessings of God BRADY-1713-2,38.74

and Blessings indeed they are when God graciously imparts them , but no
Blessing to such as greedily hunt after them . BRADY-1713-2,38.75

In relation to the former , the wise Man tells us , that the <font>
Blessing of God maketh rich <$$font> ; BRADY-1713-2,38.76

and in respect of the latter , he also assures us , that <font> he that
makes haste to be rich shall not be innocent . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,38.77

Let then neither our Desires nor Endeavours exceed <font> Agur <$$font>
's Wish , to have <font> Food convenient <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,38.78

if God sees it good for us to have more , he will send it us without our
seeking ; BRADY-1713-2,38.79

and will also , most assuredly , send his Grace along with it , that it
may be used to his Glory , and the good of the Owners .
BRADY-1713-2,38.80

Thus much for the first Observation , <font> Give me not Riches .
<$$font> BRADY-1713-2,38.81

I proceed to observe , <font> 2dly <$$font>
{COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , If we ought , with <font> Agur
<$$font> , to pray against Poverty , then a superstitious Affectation
<P_39> of wilful Poverty <paren> for which the <font> Romish <$$font>
Monks so magnify themselves , <$$paren> is neither a State of Christian
Perfection , nor a part of Religion acceptable to God :
BRADY-1713-2,39.82

If it were , it could not lawfully be prayed against , nor a competent
Subsistence be prayed for BRADY-1713-2,39.83

but , <font> Give me not Poverty <$$font> , <paren> says <font> Agur
<$$font> <$$paren> BRADY-1713-2,39.84

<font> feed me with food convenient for me . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,39.85

I know there are two Passages which are sometimes made use of , to
justify this Proceeding which my Text discountenances ; our Saviour's
Words to the Young Man in the Gospel , who came asking , <font> what he
should do to inherit eternal life <$$font> , and is commanded to <font>
sell all that he has and give it to the poor <$$font> ; and the practice
of the Primitive Professors of Christianity who sold their Lands and
Possessions , and laid them down at the Apostles Feet .
BRADY-1713-2,39.86

But to the first of these Instances it may be answered , that this
direction of our blessed Saviour , was particularly intended as a Trial
of him , to convince him that he had not that real Solicitude , which he
pretended to have for his spiritual Welfare ; since , if he had , he
would never have put his Temporal Possessions , in the Ballance with
such Concernments as were Eternal : BRADY-1713-2,39.87

He said , <P_40> he had kept all the Commandments from his Youth ;
BRADY-1713-2,40.88

and professed himself willing to proceed still farther , if he yet
lacked any thing to secure his future Happiness : BRADY-1713-2,40.89

but our Saviour saw the Failing , which he was not sensible of in
himself ; BRADY-1713-2,40.90

and , by attacking him on the weak side of his great Possessions , sent
him away , at once , both sorrowful and asham'd . BRADY-1713-2,40.91

But this is , by no means , to be look'd upon as a general Command , or
to be apply'd to use upon other ordinary Occasions . BRADY-1713-2,40.92

Indeed , we ought all to be so dispos'd in our Hearts , as to be willing
to quit all our Earthly Enjoyments , when they stand in competition with
our Duty towards God ; BRADY-1713-2,40.93

we ought , in Spirit and Affection , to renounce the World , and to
value Christ above all Riches ; BRADY-1713-2,40.94

but we are not oblig'd to strip ourselves without any necessity , or to
cast our Goods over-board when we are not in a Storm :
BRADY-1713-2,40.95

And in this sense it was , that St. <font> Peter <$$font> declar'd ,
that he had left all and follow'd Christ ; that is , that he was willing
and ready so to do , tho' he still kept his House which was at <font>
Capernaum <$$font> . BRADY-1713-2,40.96

As to the second Instance , of those primitive Converts , who gave up
their Property <P_41> into the hand of the Apostles , and made them
Trustees for the disposal of their Substance ; we may remember that they
were only the Jews which did it , who , upon their Conversion to
Christianity , believed that their Country should be suddenly made
desolate , as was expressly foretold to them by our Saviour ;
BRADY-1713-2,41.97

and therefore wisely did they lay out that Wealth to the best advantage
, which they could not propose to enjoy very long : BRADY-1713-2,41.98

Let us also consider , that it was absolutely necessary , at that
juncture , that some such Advances should be made , to furnish out the
Apostles , who were Men of low Fortunes , for preaching the Gospel
universally ; BRADY-1713-2,41.99

and therefore we find them very solicitous afterwards , to have
Contributions made by the <font> Gentile <$$font> Converts , for the
poor Saints residing at <font> Jerusalem <$$font> ; who had disfurnished
themselves for the common Benefit , and at whose Charges <paren> in a
great measure <$$paren> the Gospel had been propagated :
BRADY-1713-2,41.100

But this can have no force upon us at present , when the Scene of
Affairs is so very different ; BRADY-1713-2,41.101

nor must we draw occasional Practices , into a Rule and Authority for
general Performances : BRADY-1713-2,41.102

A Christian may now rejoice in the fruit of his Labours , <P_42> and sit
with Joy under his own Vine ; looking up gratefully to God his
Benefactor , and receiving and using his Blessings with Thanksgiving .
BRADY-1713-2,42.103

And thus much for the second Observation . <font> Give me not Poverty .
<$$font> From the Consideration of which , and of that which went before
it , it will necessarily follow , that a middle Estate between
Superfluity and Necessity is , in our Choice , to be preferred as the
best and happiest Accommodation of Life : BRADY-1713-2,42.104

He that has once attained to this Competency , has all the Contentment
which can be found in temporal Enjoyments ; BRADY-1713-2,42.105

and Experience will teach him , that after such a Sufficiency ,
Contentment will never encrease any farther , though Riches encrease
never so much . BRADY-1713-2,42.106

And now we have examined <font> Agur <$$font> 's Petition , and seen
what useful Observations may be deduced from it , let us go on to the
consideration of our <font> Second general Head <$$font> , which
contains the Reason of this Petition of his , and that in respect of the
several Branches of it : BRADY-1713-2,42.107

He prays against too great Abundance , lest he <font> should be full and
deny God , and say , who is the Lord ? <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,42.108

And he also prays <P_43> against the contrary Extreme , lest he should
be <font> poor and steal , and take the name of his God in vain .
<$$font> BRADY-1713-2,43.109

<font> First <$$font> then , The reason why <font> Agur <$$font> offers
up his Petition against too great an Affluence of temporal Enjoyments ,
is , <font> lest he should be full and deny God , and say , who is the
Lord ? <$$font> that is , Lest he should fall into Impiety and
Irreligion : BRADY-1713-2,43.110

For as to know God and to confess him , is , in Scripture Language , to
serve and to obey him ; so to forget God , or to deny him , is to be
void of all Regard or Obedience to him . BRADY-1713-2,43.111

Now to this supine and stupid Negligence , great Riches are too apt to
betray their Possessors ; BRADY-1713-2,43.112

and therefore they who enjoy them are indispensably obliged to be
extremely cautious in watching over their ways , <font> lest they fall
<$$font> <paren> as the Apostle words it <$$paren> <font> into
temptation and a snare . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,43.113

It is very natural for Riches to minister to our <font> Pride <$$font> ,
because Power is their Companion , and Respect their usual Consequence ;
not only to that Pride which makes us slight our Fellow-Creatures , but
which enclines us to defy even God himself : BRADY-1713-2,43.114

<font> According to their pasture <$$font> <paren> says the Lord
<$$paren> <font> so were they filled ; BRADY-1713-2,43.115

and their hearts were lifted up <$$font> ; BRADY-1713-2,43.116

<P_44>

<font> therefore have they forgotten me : <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,44.118

The study therefore of <font> Humility <$$font> must be the sovereign
Antidote , to repress the swellings of this inward Poyson ;
BRADY-1713-2,44.119

and by how much the more our Circumstances lead us into this Danger , by
so much the more industriously should we apply ourselves , <font> to
learn of Christ to be meek and lowly in heart . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,44.120

Another Vice to which Riches do usually betray us , is that of <font>
Luxury <$$font> and <font> Intemperance <$$font> ; BRADY-1713-2,44.121

the gratifying of our Appetites is then within our own Power ,
BRADY-1713-2,44.122

and we may say to ourselves , with the Fool in the Gospel , <font> Soul
take thine ease , BRADY-1713-2,44.123

eat BRADY-1713-2,44.124

drink BRADY-1713-2,44.125

and be merry <$$font> ; BRADY-1713-2,44.126

It is therefore the Rich Man's Duty to stand always upon his guard , and
to exercise himself in the practice of <font> Purity <$$font> and
Abstinence ; lest he should be otherwise misled by the deceitfulness of
Riches , <font> to make provision for the Flesh to fulfil the Lusts
thereof . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,44.127

Covetousness is another Danger to which Wealth exposes us ;
BRADY-1713-2,44.128

the desire of Riches encreases often with them , BRADY-1713-2,44.129

and our thirst after them is enflamed by that which ought to quench it :
BRADY-1713-2,44.130

When a Competency is exceeded , we have passed our just Bounds ,
BRADY-1713-2,44.131

and there is nothing left to regulate or restrain us :
BRADY-1713-2,44.132

and therefore it is most necessary to correct <P_45> their
overfruitfulness , by the retrenchments of <font> Charity <$$font> and
<font> Liberality <$$font> that so the Flood of our Prosperity , which
would break down all Fences , if it flowed in one Torrent ; by being
sluced out into several Streams , may be useful and delightful to all
the Neighbourhood . BRADY-1713-2,45.133

Such a devout Consecration of one part of our Substance will sanctify
the Remainder to our own enjoyment , and make that Wealth serviceable to
the raising of us up , which would otherwise be an occasion but of
greater falling . BRADY-1713-2,45.134

Thus we have viewed some Dangers of too prosperous a Condition ,
BRADY-1713-2,45.135

and have laid down some Remedies which may secure us against them .
BRADY-1713-2,45.136

Let us now cast our Eye upon the other Extreme ; and see whether <font>
Agur <$$font> had not as good Reasons for his praying against Poverty
and the ill Consequences of it . BRADY-1713-2,45.137

<font> Secondly <$$font> then , <font> Agur <$$font> begs of God that he
would keep him from a necessitous Condition , lest he should <font> be
poor and steal , and take the name of his God in vain <$$font> ; that is
, lest his Poverty should at any time encline him to rob his Neighbour
of his Right , and to back his Injustice with Lies and Perjury .
BRADY-1713-2,45.138

<P_46>

Whatever Wrong , of any kind , we do our Neighbour in his Substance ,
either by Cozenage or Defrauding , may as well be contained under the
Notion of Stealing , as that of Robbery or private Theft ;
BRADY-1713-2,46.140

and in this large sense we find it taken , in the Prohibition given us
by the Eighth Commandment . BRADY-1713-2,46.141

But nothing is more likely to put People upon such Methods , than the
finding themselves pinched by Want and Poverty : BRADY-1713-2,46.142

Necessity is the usual Plea in Cases of this Nature ,
BRADY-1713-2,46.143

and is commonly the Excuse of such as are surprized :
BRADY-1713-2,46.144

And , without doubt , it is no ordinary Temptation , to see others about
us abound in those good things , for want of which we are ready to
perish : BRADY-1713-2,46.145

but since Injustice is always Injustice , and that Circumstances can@
@not alter the nature of things , no Necessity can make such an Action
lawful or allowable ; BRADY-1713-2,46.146

and tho' <font> Agur <$$font> should be poor , yet were it a Sin for him
to Steal , BRADY-1713-2,46.147

and therefore it is that he prays against it . BRADY-1713-2,46.148

But as this is commonly the Vice of the meanest sort of People , so is
it also the inlet to another Sin ; BRADY-1713-2,46.149

and nothing is more frequent when one is taken upon suspicion , than to
have recourse immediately to <font> Lying <$$font> and <font>
Forswearing <$$font> , that so <P_47> one Sin may be concealed by the
Commission of another . BRADY-1713-2,47.150

But <font> Agur <$$font> had a very particular Reason to add this , as a
consequence of the former Transgression because , by the custom of his
Country , it was extremely likely that it should so happen :
BRADY-1713-2,47.151

Theft , among the <font> Jews <$$font> , by the divine Law , was not
punished with Death , but only with Restitution and an additional
Overplus ; BRADY-1713-2,47.152

and where the proof of the Fact was not plain enough against the
Criminal , an Oath of the Lord was administered unto him , according to
which he was acquitted or condemned : BRADY-1713-2,47.153

Now the same ill Principle which could lead him to Injustice , might
also go very far in tempting him to Perjury ; since that would secure
him against the Shame and the Punishment , which his Offence <paren> if
discovered <$$paren> must necessarily bring upon him .
BRADY-1713-2,47.154

And how often do we see , amongst our Offenders in this kind , those who
will forswear themselves to palliate their Guilt , though no Law or
Judge constrains them to swear at all ! BRADY-1713-2,47.155

And as for Lying , the next Neighbour to it , we find that to be the
ordinary and almost inseparable Effect of this Sin .
BRADY-1713-2,47.156

Those then , who are by Poverty exposed to these Temptations , must
<P_48> be very watchful against these two Offences : BRADY-1713-2,48.157

And by imprinting seriously within their Minds , a due Reverence for God
and a resignation to his Will ; must endeavour to submit to whatever
Portion he allots them , and to secure him for their Friend when they
have no other . BRADY-1713-2,48.158

We see then how liable this Condition is to Hazards , and for how
weighty Reasons it was prayed against by <font> Agur : <$$font> From
whence we may conclude , that the want of things needful , has its
Dangers and Temptations as well as too great an Abundance .
BRADY-1713-2,48.159

Thus have we examined the several Motives which enclined <font> Agur
<$$font> to pray both against Riches and Poverty ; BRADY-1713-2,48.160

and from the Consideration which we have had of them , we may raise some
such useful Observations as these . BRADY-1713-2,48.161

<font> 1st <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , We may observe
from his Practice and Example , that the rule and measure of our
Endeavours and Desires , in the gaining , and enjoying these outward
Conveniences , ought to be their Subserviency to our Spiritual
Advantages , and the forwarding us in our Duty to God and to our
Neighbour . BRADY-1713-2,48.162

This we find was <font> Agur <$$font> 's Method ; BRADY-1713-2,48.163

<P_49>

he desires such a proportion of earthly Possessions , as might neither ,
through Fulness , make him forget God , nor tempt him , through Want ,
to sin against Him and his Neighbour : BRADY-1713-2,49.165

He does not pray for this Competent Condition , only upon the account of
the easiness of its Circumstances , and its desirable freedom both from
Envy and Contempt , though that were sufficient abundantly to recommend
it ; BRADY-1713-2,49.166

but his great Concern is , in respect of the Temptations to which either
Extreme is much more liable : BRADY-1713-2,49.167

And this indeed , is the Compass which we ought to sail by , to avoid
Shipwreck and reach the Port in safety : BRADY-1713-2,49.168

That proportion of Provisions for this Life which may best stand with
the Improvement of our Graces , which may most farther and enable ,
least hinder and obstruct us , in our religious Duty towards God , and
pious Charity to our Neighbour ; that should be the stint of our worldly
Desires , and the Aim of all our Labours under the Sun :
BRADY-1713-2,49.169

either more or less than is consistent with this , is so far from
deserving to be wished or sought for , that we ought , with <font> Agur
<$$font> , to pray against it , and to say , Lord , <font> Lead us not
into temptation : <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,49.170

But how preposterously <P_50> do some Men act upon these Occasions , who
are so far from making use of temporal Things , only in regard to the
advantage of the Spirit , that they keep God's Laws and obey his
Commandments no farther than they comport with their worldly Interest !
BRADY-1713-2,50.171

This was the Sin of <font> Jeroboam , <$$font> who would serve the God
of his Fathers , as far as might consist with the safety of his Kingdom
, but no farther : BRADY-1713-2,50.172

and this very Criminal gives us also an Instance of the fatal
Consequences of such a Proceeding ; BRADY-1713-2,50.173

for it <font> became sin to the house of Jeroboam , to cut it off from
the face of the earth . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,50.174

<font> 2dly <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , We may farther
observe from the Practice of <font> Agur <$$font> , that in order to
secure an unblemished Innocence , we ought not only to avoid gross
Transgressions , but even every Occasion which may expose us to them ;
BRADY-1713-2,50.175

for we find him not praying immediately , that he may not deny God , or
that he may not steal ; but to be kept from too great abundance , lest
it might betray him into the first Offence and to be secured from too
great Penury , lest it might mislead him into the other .
BRADY-1713-2,50.176

And this is what the Apostle advises us to , when he bids us to <P_51>
flee all appearance of Evil . BRADY-1713-2,51.177

He who allows himself to run into the opportunities of doing evil ,
needs no other Tempter to induce him to its Practice :
BRADY-1713-2,51.178

Thus <font> David <$$font> , by seeing <font> Bathsheba <$$font> washing
herself , was tempted to the commission of Adultery and Murther ;
BRADY-1713-2,51.179

thus <font> Peter <$$font> , by intruding into the High-Priest's Hall ,
out of too much Confidence in his own Strength , came to <font> deny the
Lord which bought him <$$font> : BRADY-1713-2,51.180

And for this cause it was , that God forbad his People to have any
Commerce or Affinity with such as worshipped Idols ; lest by these
occasions they might be drawn in , to join , at length , in the same
Idolatry with them . BRADY-1713-2,51.181

How imprudently then do they manage themselves who care not what places
they haunt , or what Company they keep ; either to satisfy their idle
Curiosity , or <paren> as sometimes they pretend <$$paren> to gain a
greater loathing of their Courses ? whilst they play so long with these
Temptations , as the Fly does with the Flame , till at last they are
consumed , as that is : BRADY-1713-2,51.182

If we would be certain to avoid Sin , we {TEXT:me} must avoid all
occasions that may lead us to it ; BRADY-1713-2,51.183

and we must not indulge ourselves , even in contemplating the <P_52>
beauty of the Fruit , if we would be sure not to pluck , and eat , and
die . BRADY-1713-2,52.184

To conclude then , Let such as are Rich in this World , make good use of
the Talents which are entrusted to their Care , as knowing they must one
Day give an account of their Stewardship ; BRADY-1713-2,52.185

and by frequent Acts of Mercy and Liberality , let them reduce
themselves , in some measure , towards the safe Level of a happy
Competency . BRADY-1713-2,52.186

Let those whom God has placed in wanting Circumstances , patiently
submit to his good Will and Pleasure , carefully watch against the
temptations of that State , and endeavour , by Industry and an honest
Conversation , to raise themselves up nearer to a comfortable
Sufficiency , BRADY-1713-2,52.187

And let those who are possessed of that moderate Fortune , which is free
from the Dangers we have been considering , bless God that their Lot is
fallen in so fair a ground , and that they have such a goodly Heritage .
BRADY-1713-2,52.188

And let us all beg of our heavenly Father , ' without whom nothing is
strong , nothing is holy , that he being our Ruler and our Guide , we
may so pass through things Temporal , that finally we lose not the
things which are Eternal . ' BRADY-1713-2,52.189

<P_53>

<font> To Him , the Father , Son , and Holy Ghost , Three Persons but
one God , be ascribed all Honour , Power , Might , Majesty and Dominion
, henceforth and for evermore . <$$font> Amen . BRADY-1713-2,53.191

<P_54_absent_in_text>

<P_55>

<heading>

Sermon III . BRADY-1713-2,55.195

Christian Abstinence stated , with its vast Encouragements .
BRADY-1713-2,55.196

<$$heading>

1 Cor. ix. 25 . BRADY-1713-2,55.198

<font> And every Man that striveth for the mastery , is temperate in all
things : BRADY-1713-2,55.199

now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown , but we an incorruptible .
<$$font> BRADY-1713-2,55.200

The Design of the Apostle throughout this whole Chapter , is both to
assert the Right which every Christian has to a moderate use of all
God's good Creatures ; and also <P_56> to insinuate the Obligation which
lies upon them , under some certain Circumstances , to waive {TEXT:wave}
that Privilege , and to lay a voluntary Restraint upon themselves :
BRADY-1713-2,56.201

Pursuant to this Design , in the beginning of this Chapter , he puts in
his claim to Christian Liberty ; BRADY-1713-2,56.202

<font> Am I not an Apostle ? BRADY-1713-2,56.203

Am I not free ? BRADY-1713-2,56.204

Have not we Power to eat and to drink ? <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,56.205

And declares afterwards his readiness to abridge himself of that Freedom
, when such a concession is likely to produce so good Effect ;
BRADY-1713-2,56.206

<font> But I <$$font> <paren> says he <$$paren> <font> have used none of
these things ; BRADY-1713-2,56.207

for tho' I be free from all men , yet have I made my_self servant unto
all , that I may gain the more . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,56.208

Such a happy Disposition this , and temper of Mind , as if we take care
{COM:parasitic_gap} to Copy out in our Lives and Conversations , will
guard against all Superstitious rigidness on the one hand , and secure
us from any irregular licentiousness on the other : BRADY-1713-2,56.209

For as we , perhaps , may find some few , who effect too precise and
strict an Austerity , forbidding such things as God has not prohibited ,
and exacting at all times , such a constant Self-denial
{TEXT:Selfdenial} , as God has only required upon some particular
Occasions ; so may we too often meet with many others , who <P_57> are
apt to indulge themselves too much ; who stretch this their Liberty to
too great a Latitude ; allowing themselves continually in the use of
those enjoyments , which Christian Prudence does at some@ @times oblige
them to retrench . BRADY-1713-2,57.210

Whenever then , with more than ordinary application of Mind , we are
vigorously entering upon our Christian Warfare ; whenever we take up
more than usual Resolutions of <font> pressing forwards to the mark for
the prize of our high calling <$$font> , we must prepare ourselves to
endure hardness , BRADY-1713-2,57.211

as good Soldiers of Christ Jesus , we must lay aside every Weight to run
the Race that is set before us , BRADY-1713-2,57.212

and we must imitate those Champions who thus <font> strive for the
mastery <$$font> , by being , like them , <font> temperate in all things
<$$font> ; especially considering how much stronger the Inducements are
on our side than on theirs ; since <font> they do it to obtain a
corruptible crown , but we <$$font> such a Crown as is <font>
incorruptible . BRADY-1713-2,57.213

And every man that striveth for the mastery , is temperate in all things
; BRADY-1713-2,57.214

now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown , but we an incorruptible .
<$$font> BRADY-1713-2,57.215

<P_58>

In my following Discourse upon which Words , I shall briefly insist upon
these Three Particulars . BRADY-1713-2,58.217

I. <font> First <$$font> , I shall explain what is meant by <font>
striving for the mastery <$$font> ; BRADY-1713-2,58.218

and , by enquiring into those ancient Customs of the <font> Grecians
<$$font> , to which the Apostle here alludes , shall search out the true
sense of this most elegant Expression . BRADY-1713-2,58.219

II. <font> Secondly <$$font> , I shall examin the Duty recommended ,
that we should be <font> temperate in all things <$$font> ; and shew how
necessarily it must be practised by us , if ever we resolve to <font>
strive for the mastery . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,58.220

III. <font> Thirdly <$$font> , I shall weigh the Motive here laid down
, to enforce the practise of this Duty ; that we do it to obtain a
<font> Crown <$$font> that is <font> incorruptible <$$font> ; whereas
others who are temperate when they strive for the Mastery , are so only
in order to gain a <font> corruptible Crown . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,58.221

I. <font> First <$$font> then , I shall explain what is meant by <font>
striving for the Mastery <$$font> ; BRADY-1713-2,58.222

and , by enquiring into those ancient Customs of the <font> Grecians
<$$font> , to which the Apostle here alludes , shall search <P_59> out
the true sense of this most elegant Expression . BRADY-1713-2,59.223

The Word which is here rendered to <font> strive for the mastery
<$$font> in the Original Language is {COM:greek_omitted} ;
BRADY-1713-2,59.224

and manifestly refers to the ancient {COM:greek_omitted} , or Festival
Games amongst the <font> Grecians <$$font> , which were always
celebrated with the greatest Concourse and Solemnity ; in any of which ,
to bear away the Prize , was reckoned by them a most considerable
Achievement {TEXT:Atchievment} , and reflected a lasting Honour , not
only on the Champion , but on the City too , of which he was either
Native or Inhabitant : BRADY-1713-2,59.225

And therefore , if we would rightly understand this most excellent
Allusion of the Apostle , we must look into the Customs which were
usually observed in the noted Solemnization of these National Festivals
. BRADY-1713-2,59.226

Of these there were four most famous ones in <font> Greece <$$font> ,
the <font> Olympick <$$font> , the <font> Pythian <$$font> , the <font>
Nemean <$$font> , and the <font> Isthmian <$$font> , in which those who
excelled in Strength or Agility , were wont to <font> strive for the
mastery <$$font> in five manly sorts of Exercise ; which were Running ,
Leaping , Cuffing , Wrestling , and throwing the Bar ; those being the
Entertainments at all those Festivals , which only differed in name and
in <P_60> the place of their Celebration . BRADY-1713-2,60.227

One of these , which was called the <font> Isthmian <$$font> , from the
<font> Isthmus <$$font> , or neck of Land upon which <font> Corinth
<$$font> was built , was constantly celebrated in <font> Achaia <$$font>
, of which Province <font> Corinth <$$font> was the Mother-City , being
also the Seat of the Proconsul ; BRADY-1713-2,60.228

and therefore the Apostle addresses to the <font> Corinthians <$$font>
in the foregoing Verse , with {COM:greek_omitted} , <font> Do ye not
know ? <$$font> as presuming that they were particularly acquainted
with all the Customs which he here either mentions or refers to .
BRADY-1713-2,60.229

Of those five manly Exercises in which they were employed , the Apostle
only alludes to the two most famous ones , Wrestling and Running ; to
the former , in the last Verses of this same Chapter , <font> I keep
under my body , and bring it into subjection <$$font> ; to the latter ,
in {TEXT:in_in} my Text and the Verse before it ; <font> so run as ye
may obtain ; BRADY-1713-2,60.230

and every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things .
<$$font> BRADY-1713-2,60.231

Now in this exercise of Running , to which my Text confines me , the
manner was for a certain Number , in a general Assembly of all <font>
Greece <$$font> , to start together from the place where they were
appointed to set out ; and keeping between two Lines which were plainly
marked out for them , vigorously <P_61> to contend which should first
reach the Goal , where a Crown of Leaves was fixed , as a Reward for the
Conqueror ; which , however , was not to be snatch'd by the first comer
thither , till the Judges who took notice whether things had been done
regularly , had publickly declared that he had fairly gained the Victory
. BRADY-1713-2,61.232

To this sort of Race it is , that the Apostle compares the Life and
Conversation of a Christian ; and that with an Allusion the most exact
that can be : BRADY-1713-2,61.233

For what is a Christian , but one who is endeavouring , in the sight of
God and of all Mankind , to run the Race of Godliness , according to
those Rules which the Gospel of his Saviour has most clearly laid before
him ? and to finish his Course after so commendable a manner , as may
entitle him to receive the Crown of Righteousness , <font> which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give him in that day ? <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,61.234

And therefore , as these Runners used some necessary Precautions , and
managed themselves after a different rate from such others as had no
Intention of engaging in the Race ; whether by dieting themselves , or
breathing themselves , or such like Preparatives : So ought also a good
Christian to deport himself , after <P_62> a differing manner from the
rest of Mankind ; carefully to make use of all such Methods as may most
probably conduce to the attainment of his End ; removing every
Stumbling-Block , and shaking off every Encumbrance , which may hinder
him in <font> running the race that is set before him :
BRADY-1713-2,62.235

For every Man that striveth for the mastery <$$font> , the Apostle
assures us , <font> is temperate in all things . <$$font> Which leads
me to the Consideration of my II. <font> Second <$$font> Particular ,
namely , To examine the Duty recommended , that we should be <font>
temperate in all things <$$font> ; and to shew how necessarily it must
be practised by use , if ever we resolve <font> to strive for the
mastery . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,62.236

That Temperance which is here recommended by the Apostle , may be
considered by us under a double Notion : either in a more restrained and
limited sense , as it has respect only to our eating and our drinking ;
or , <paren> because we are advised to be <font> temperate in all things
<$$font> <$$paren> in a more large and general Acceptation , as it has a
regard to the whole Scheme of our Actions . BRADY-1713-2,62.237

I shall accordingly examine it in these two several Senses ;
BRADY-1713-2,62.238

and shall , <font> 1st <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} ,
shew , That those who <font> strive <P_63> for the Mastery <$$font> ,
must be moderate in their Refreshments , as to eating and drinking .
And , <font> 2dly <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , That
they must also lay a becoming Restraint upon every thing besides which
may interrupt {TEXT:interupt} them in their Progress .
BRADY-1713-2,63.239

<font> 1st <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} then , <paren> I
say <$$paren> Every Man <font> that strives for the mastery <$$font> ,
must be moderate in his Refreshments of eating and drinking .
BRADY-1713-2,63.240

The pious Wisdom of our Church has carefully provided for the Advantages
of her Children , that as at all times they are obliged to shun Rioting
and Drunkenness , so at some times they should practice more strict
Rules of Temperance , by a higher degree of Abstinence than is usually
required : BRADY-1713-2,63.241

Thus to usher in the Kalendary Holy-days , as Days that are set apart
for more than ordinary Devotion , she has thought fit to prefix to each
of them a Fast or Vigil : BRADY-1713-2,63.242

And thus , the better to prepare us for that awful piece of Worship ,
which is required to be performed by every Member of our Church , that
has attained to Years of Judgment and Discretion , at the great and
venerable Feast of <font> Easter <$$font> ; I mean the solemn Reception
of the Blessed Sacrament ; she has instituted the <font> Quadragesimal
<$$font> or Forty days Fast , call'd <P_64> otherwise , the Lent or
Spring-Fast , for so the Word signifies in the <font> Saxon <$$font>
Language ; some degrees of Abstinence being fit to be practised , to
qualify us for the Entrance upon any great Duty . BRADY-1713-2,64.243

Not that this Abstinence must be supposed to consist in the rejection of
one sort of Meat , and the allowance of another ; according to the
absurd Usage and Opinion of the Romanists , who indeed forbear Flesh ,
but regale with Fish and Sweetmeats ; this being so far from deserving
the Name of Abstinence , that it is a perverse mixture both of Luxury
and Superstition : BRADY-1713-2,64.244

Much less is it required that for so long a time , we should quit the
usual Nourishment to which we have been accustomed , for Roots and Herbs
and other Vegetables ; that being the way to alter the whole Habit of
our Bodies , to impair our Health , and to weaken our Constitutions :
BRADY-1713-2,64.245

But we must exercise ourselves in it after this following manner ; by
letting it , in some measure , affect the Quantity , and , in some
measure , the Quality of our Refection : BRADY-1713-2,64.246

We must only allow ourselves such moderate Refreshments as may answer
the necessities and conveniencies of Nature , without ministring to our
Lusts or pampering <P_65> us to wantonness ; BRADY-1713-2,65.247

and we must not be too nice in the choice of our Provisions , or make
Pleasure the chief End which we propose to ourselves in them :
BRADY-1713-2,65.248

For this Temperance of ours , as we are directed , must resemble that of
other Racers ; who only refrained from too free a Diet , such as might
either burthen them , by its Bulk or Heaviness , or soften and enervate
them , by its too great Delicacy ; confining themselves to such a kind
and proportion , as might keep up their Spirits , and preserve their
Vigour , as well as correct the Evils of Excess and Intemperance .
BRADY-1713-2,65.249

And indeed the aiming at too great an Austerity , in this , as well as
other Instances of Mortification , tho' it may safely be practised by
some devout Souls , the Goodness of whose Intentions may sanctify their
Practises ; yet can@ @not it justly be obtruded upon others , without
making too great a Breach upon their Christian Liberty ;
BRADY-1713-2,65.250

nor is it wholly free from the Danger of Spiritual Pride , and of
leading us to despise those who are not equal Proficients :
BRADY-1713-2,65.251

But in what degree each single Person is obliged to this Abstinence , is
what can@ @not be reduced to any certain Standard , BRADY-1713-2,65.252

it must be left to every Man's own <P_66> Christian Prudence , to be
practised according to their several Abilities , and to the measure of
Grace which God has imparted ; BRADY-1713-2,66.253

much more is certainly expected from some , than is fit to be attempted
by many others ; BRADY-1713-2,66.254

and they who trifle in this Case will but deceive themselves , since God
, who knows their Circumstances , can@ @not be mocked :
BRADY-1713-2,66.255

This however we may be bold to assert in general ; that whatever
Abstinence in Eating and Drinking , shall appear subservient , upon a
due Examination , to the promotion of our Piety , and the fervency of
our Devotions ; this , and no other , is that which God requires of
every Man amongst us , <font> that striveth for the mastery . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,66.256

But , <font> 2dly <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , <font>
Every Man that strives for the Mastery <$$font> , must also lay a
becoming Restraint upon every thing else which may interrupt him in his
Progress ; BRADY-1713-2,66.257

for this is contained in the larger Sense of the Words , by which we are
advised to be <font> Temperate in all things . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,66.258

For the Original Expression {COM:greek_omitted} , has a signification of
much greater Latitude , than what we usually mean by being Temperate :
BRADY-1713-2,66.259

{COM:greek_omitted} is the same with <P_67> {COM:greek_omitted} , to
have within one's {TEXT:ones} Power ; BRADY-1713-2,67.260

and it implies thus much , That the Champion has the Better of all such
things , brings all such things in Subjection to him , as would make him
flag in the Course which he is about to begin , or grow weary and remiss
before he gains the Garland . BRADY-1713-2,67.261

Now there are several things which may put as great a stop to our
advancing in the Course of Piety and Vertue , as any intemperance of
which we can be guilty , in relation to our Behaviour in Eating or in
Drinking ; BRADY-1713-2,67.262

and therefore if we would run , not as uncertainly , but so as to secure
to ourselves the recompence of Reward , we must refrain as cautiously
from all other Encumbrances , which may either be likely to clog us in
our Speed , or to divert us from the Goal to which our Labours are
directed . BRADY-1713-2,67.263

Of these there are Three , which we may justly suspect will give a very
great check to our Christian Progress , unless by this Temperance ,
which we must exercise in all things we are qualified to refrain from
them while we are striving for the Mastery . BRADY-1713-2,67.264

The first is , <font> Incontinence <$$font> , a Temptation of the Flesh
: BRADY-1713-2,67.265

The second is <font> Covetousness <$$font> , a Delusion of the World :
BRADY-1713-2,67.266

<P_68>

And the third is <font> Idleness <$$font> , a Suggestion of the Devil .
BRADY-1713-2,68.268

These are some Impediments which our three grand Adversaries will not
fail incessantly to be throwing in our way , in order to disturb us in
the Race of Godliness . BRADY-1713-2,68.269

<font> First <$$font> then , We must refrain from the Sin of <font>
Incontinence <$$font> , which is a most strong Temptation of the Flesh ,
if we would so Run as to receive the Prize . BRADY-1713-2,68.270

<font> Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam , Abstinuit Venere
<$$font> , says the Heathen Poet ; BRADY-1713-2,68.271

He that designs to reach the Goal by Running , takes care chiefly to
abstain from the Sin of Uncleanness : BRADY-1713-2,68.272

This is a Vice the most effeminating of any , which renders him who
gives himself up to it , unfit for any manly Contest , of Strength or
Activity : BRADY-1713-2,68.273

This is that <font> Law within our Members <$$font> , that is at utter
Enmity <font> with the Law of God in our Spirit <$$font> , which
prescribes us the Race in which we are to run , BRADY-1713-2,68.274

it is that <font> Body of Death <$$font> that the Apostle complains of ,
which would turn us out of the Road to Life and Immortality .
BRADY-1713-2,68.275

Unless therefore we mortify these our <font> Members which are upon the
Earth , Fornication , Uncleanness , Evil <P_69> Concupiscence <$$font> ,
and the like ; we can never move effectually towards Heaven and
Happiness , or hope to be admitted into the Society of those <font>
Virgins who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,69.276

But , <font> Secondly <$$font> , We must also abstain from the Sin of
<font> Covetousness <$$font> , which is a most forcible Delusion of the
World , if we would so run as to receive the Prize .
BRADY-1713-2,69.277

How prepost'rous would it appear in any Person , that is about to <font>
strive for the Mastery <$$font> in Running , to lade himself all over
with thick Clay , and to weigh himself down with the heaviest Metals !
BRADY-1713-2,69.278

Is it possible for him to hope for Conquests , who should Acouter
{COM:sic} himself for the Race after so absurd a manner !
BRADY-1713-2,69.279

Yet full as ridiculous is the management of that Person , who attempts
to run his Christian Course , or to aim at the Prize , with so much
Earth about him : BRADY-1713-2,69.280

It is impossible for him at once to serve God and Mammon ;
BRADY-1713-2,69.281

he must renounce the one or forego the other ; BRADY-1713-2,69.282

and he who thus ties himself fast to the perishing Riches of this World
, will find himself entangled by them in his Christian Progress ; <P_70>
and not able to keep pace with these disinterested Souls , who have
divested themselves of all these worldly Incumbrances , by laying up for
themselves <font> Treasures in Heaven . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,70.283

But , <font> Thirdly <$$font> , We must farther disallow ourselves in
the Sin of <font> Idleness <$$font> , which is a most dangerous
Suggestion of the Devil , if we would so run as to receive the Prize .
BRADY-1713-2,70.284

He that wishes and designs to be the first at the Goal , must not loiter
or stand still in the middle of his Course ; BRADY-1713-2,70.285

nay , he must rather do as it is the custom of all Racers , exercise
himself beforehand , in order to be more ready , and breathe himself
every Day , to fit him for the Contest : BRADY-1713-2,70.286

A Crown is not held out to the Lazy but Industrious ;
BRADY-1713-2,70.287

and if , as we are informed by the Apostle , tho' many run for it , but
one can get it ; we may be sure that he is excluded from all hopes of it
, who dozes away that time in which he should exert his utmost Diligence
. BRADY-1713-2,70.288

Blessed be God , in our Christian Race , there are many Crowns and many
Conquerors , BRADY-1713-2,70.289

but yet no Wreath of Victory will be given unto any , who do not , in
order to <P_71> their laying hold upon it , <font> press forwards to the
mark for the prize of their high calling : <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,71.290

God who is the Judge that bestows the Crown , is also a Spectator of the
haste which we make towards it ; BRADY-1713-2,71.291

and he will never rank the Lazy and Indifferent with those , who by
<font> patience and perseverance inherit the promises . <$$font>
BRADY-1713-2,71.292

If then we lay upon ourselves such convenient Restraints , and watch
carefully against those Sins which would so easily beset us , thro'
Christ , who will enable us , we may run our Race with comfort ,
BRADY-1713-2,71.293

and by his assistance may be more than Conquerors : BRADY-1713-2,71.294

And having by a <font> patient continuance in well-doing , fought for
glory , and honour , and immortality <$$font> , we shall certainly
<paren> if we faint not <$$paren> <font> reap in due season , have our
fruit unto holiness and in {TEXT:missing_"in"} the end everlasting life
. <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,71.295

Thus was it that the ancient Heroes of <font> Greece <$$font> , prepared
themselves for the Lists , to strive for the Mastery ;
BRADY-1713-2,71.296

and yet how weak were their Inducements , in comparison of ours ! since
they aimed at a light Garland of soon-withering Leaves , and we at an
Eternal Weight of immarcescible {TEXT:immarcessible} Glory ! Which
brings me to the Consideration of my <P_72> <font> Third and last
Particular <$$font> , namely , To weigh the Motive here laid down to
enforce the Practice of this Duty ; <font> That we do it to obtain a
crown that is incorruptible <$$font> ; whereas others , who are
temperate , while they strive for the Mastery , are so only in order to
gain <font> a corruptible crown . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,72.297

Reward is the greatest Spur to Industry : BRADY-1713-2,72.298

And God who has implanted within our very Nature , that most excellent
Principle of Self-love , incites us to our Duty by the promise of a
Recompence , BRADY-1713-2,72.299

and when he assigns the Work contracts also for the Wages :
BRADY-1713-2,72.300

He knows that a Journey thro' a barren Wilderness , were enough to
deject and confound our Spirits , if we were not sure to enter into the
promised <font> Canaan , into a land that flowed with milk and honey :
<$$font> BRADY-1713-2,72.301

He knows that the fatigue of a long and painful Race , would be apt to
make us droop before our Course were finished , if our Diligence were
not excited and our Vigour kept up , by the hope of that Crown which is
reserved for us at the end of it : BRADY-1713-2,72.302

He knows that the Difficulties with which we must encounter , in leading
a Life <P_73> of Piety amongst the Contradictions of Sinners , can be no
way made tolerable , but by looking up to Heaven , and anticipating that
Joy which shall be one Day revealed : BRADY-1713-2,73.303

And therefore he allows and encourages us to expect a Reward ,
BRADY-1713-2,73.304

exhorts and commands us to consult our truest Interest ;
BRADY-1713-2,73.305

and expects not that we should love him merely {TEXT:meerly} for himself
, without any regard at all to our own Advantage , until we arrive at
that State in which we shall know him fully , and lose ourselves <paren>
as it were <$$paren> in being united with him . BRADY-1713-2,73.306

According to this way of God's dealing with us , the Apostle <paren> you
see <$$paren> grounds his earnest Exhortation , That we should <font> be
temperate in all things <$$font> , while we are <font> striving for the
mastery <$$font> , upon the hope and expectation which we may justly
entertain , of obtaining , at the last , a <font> Crown <$$font> that is
<font> incorruptible <$$font> . BRADY-1713-2,73.307

To give greater Weight to the Matter now in hand , I shall endeavour to
improve upon the Argument of St. <font> Paul <$$font> , and to carry
farther the Comparison which he here makes , between the Encouragement
which a Christian has , and that which the <font> Grecian <$$font>
Champions could pretend to , by not barely confining <P_74> it to the
Crown and Wreath of Victory , but by stating and comparing all such
other Inducements , as might probably encline either of them to labour
for the Conquest . BRADY-1713-2,74.308

And , <font> First <$$font> , One powerful Motive to dispose the <font>
Grecian <$$font> Champions to exert all their Activity to win the Race
they were engaged in , was the Universal Applause which they were sure
to meet with in that general Concourse of their whole Nation , which was
therefore called {COM:greek_omitted} , or a Full Assembly :
BRADY-1713-2,74.309

For as soon as the Judges had declared the Conqueror , he was saluted
with the Acclamations of all present , BRADY-1713-2,74.310

and received the Compliments {TEXT:Complements} and Congratulations ,
both of his Friends and Citizens , and the whole <font> Greek <$$font>
Nation . BRADY-1713-2,74.311

But what is there in the Praise or Suffrage of weak Mortals , that can
stand in Competition with those lasting Eulogies , which Ten-thousand
times Ten-thousands of Saints and Angels , shall unanimously bestow upon
the Christian Triumpher ! when God the Righteous Judge shall pronounce
his own Euge {COM:sic} , with a <font> Well done thou good and faithful
servant ! <$$font> And that before an <P_75> Audience the most august
and numerous , before the whole Theatre of Heaven and Earth !
BRADY-1713-2,75.312

<font> Secondly <$$font> , Another strong inducement which enclined the
<font> Grecian <$$font> Champions , to make use of all their Diligence
to out-strip their Fellow-Racers , was a Prospect of those Privileges
which would certainly be granted , if by their Skill and Industry they
came off with Conquest : BRADY-1713-2,75.313

For it was customary to give them the Freedom of their City , to ennoble
{TEXT:enoble} their Family to succeeding Generations , and to call the
Years after their Names . BRADY-1713-2,75.314

And yet how little will all these Advantages appear , if compared with
the vast Benefits of the Christian Conqueror ! BRADY-1713-2,75.315

He is made a free Denizen of the <font> New Jerusalem , a City whose
maker and builder is God ! <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,75.316

He becomes a Son of the <font> great Lord of all things <$$font> , and a
sure Inheritor of his Everlasting Kingdom ! BRADY-1713-2,75.317

And he has his Name written in the <font> Book of Life <$$font> , a
Record that shall stand good to all Eternity ! BRADY-1713-2,75.318

<font> Thirdly <$$font> , Another prevailing Argument to persuade the
<font> Grecian <$$font> Racers to contend <P_76> for the Victory with
unwearied Industry , was the expectation of that Crown which was the
Prize of their Contest , and was reserved by the Judges as the Reward of
the best Runner : BRADY-1713-2,76.319

For as soon as the foremost had arrived at the Goal , and without
transgressing any of the established Rules , and fairly got the better
of his numerous Competitors , the publick Herald proclaimed him Victor ,
BRADY-1713-2,76.320

and the Judges who were some of the most honourable of the Assembly ,
Crowned him in a solemn manner with a Garland made of Leaves , which he
wore for some time as the Badge of his Conquest , and afterwards laid up
as a Trophy of Honour . BRADY-1713-2,76.321

But what Analogy or Resemblance have these empty Achievements
{TEXT:Atchievements} to that solid and substantial Recompence of Reward
, which God has prepared for the Victorious Christian !
BRADY-1713-2,76.322

The Trumpet of God shall divulge his Triumph from one Corner of the
Universe to the other ; BRADY-1713-2,76.323

God the Unerring Judge shall pronounce him Conqueror ,
BRADY-1713-2,76.324

and shall surround his Temples with a Diadem of Stars , and set a Crown
of Glory upon his Head , not subject to the Inconveniencies of a Leafy
<P_77> Wreath , which must decay and wither and moulder into Ashes ; but
Immortal as the Wearer , Eternal as the Giver , <font> incorruptible ,
undefiled , and that fadeth not away . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,77.325

If then every one of those who <font> strive for the Mastery <$$font> ,
governed themselves exactly , and were <font> temperate in all things
<$$font> only that they might obtain an incorruptible Crown , how justly
may we conclude , as the Apostle well infers , that we ought to demean
ourselves after a much more careful manner , since we do it to obtain
<font> a Crown that is incorruptible . <$$font> BRADY-1713-2,77.326

Let us then vigorously run the Race of Christianity ;
BRADY-1713-2,77.327

and , in order to it , let us manage ourselves after such a manner as
becomes those who would accomplish the Course of Godliness .
BRADY-1713-2,77.328

