<BEGIN_bradley1-1905-1>

<P_197>

<heading>

Chapter X BRADLEY1-1905-1,197.4

The Vale of Conway BRADLEY1-1905-1,197.5

<$$heading>

A few minutes after leaving Marl we are again in sight of Conway .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,197.7

But the best road to the bridge and Llandudno junction - synonymous
terms - strikes the river close to the village of Deganwy , which will
assuredly detain us for a time . Not because it is adjacent to one of
the best golf links in Wales and contains a delightfully situated and
comfortable hotel ; I hope I know my duty better than that . Nor yet
because as an architectural creation it commends itself in the faintest
degree to any of the artistic senses . BRADLEY1-1905-1,197.8

On the contrary , the original inhabitant who is fond of recalling the
place , when he and his family composed all that there was of it , is
barely past middle age , BRADLEY1-1905-1,197.9

and the mark of the contractor lies as heavily upon this , as upon most
seaside places that are alive for three months of the year , and dead
for nine . BRADLEY1-1905-1,197.10

I have no doubt that the patrons of the Queen of Welsh Watering-places ,
as they stop here at the little station for the collector to take up
their tickets , sniff mightily at a place that would seem to have
nothing to make up for its painful lack of antiquity , in the way of
marine festivity . BRADLEY1-1905-1,197.11

Indeed I have myself more than once heard it reflected upon from the
train as " a God-forsaken hole . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,197.12

But then points of view are different , BRADLEY1-1905-1,197.13

and the gentleman who leans to this one would almost <P_198> certainly
refer to Llewelyn ap Iorwerth as an old bloke or even a Johnny ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.14

and would think nothing of carving his own distinguished name on that
monarch's coffin in the Gwydir chapel if he were not closely watched .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.15

Deganwy beyond a doubt is no dream of brick and stone .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.16

But , after all , this is less than nothing . BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.17

It is the outlook from such places and their environment that count ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.18

and at Deganwy these are entirely delightful . BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.19

Immediately beneath its windows the river discharges itself into the sea
in curious fashion ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.20

for , after playing for many miles over broad sandy flats , the haunt at
the tide's ebb of clouds of sea-fowl , here , by Deganwy , it suddenly
contracts BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.21

and rushes forward to the sea between high shelving banks of firm sand
and pebbles . BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.22

Behind the village , sheep pastures and furzy commons trend upwards to
two great crests of rock like the humps on a dromedary's back .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.23

In the hollow between them stands an inconsequent fragment of masonry ,
all that is left of the once famous castle which has given its name to
the village , and for that matter brought us here .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.24

Twice in each day , past the very door-steps of Deganwy , and in a clean
, firm , deep channel , perhaps 300 yards in width , the mountain waters
of the Conway and the Lledr , the Llugwy and {TEXT:Llugwyand} the Machno
, and of a_hundred hill-born brooks , go whirling to the sea ;
BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.25

and twice a day the sea comes surging back through these narrows ,
filling the whole estuary above them to Conway bridge , and from Conway
bridge deep into the hills , whither we shall shortly follow it .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.26

Towards Llandudno and the Orme , a couple of miles away , a pleasant
sandy shore divides the sea from wild commons all aglow with gorse and
bracken , rolling here into sand-hills where tufty , bent grass quivers
precariously in the wind , or sinking there into cuppy , sheltered
hollows where sheep nibble upon soft carpets of immemorial turf ; while
in the north the great mass of the Orme rises grimly out of the sea from
its encircling fringe of foam . BRADLEY1-1905-1,198.27

Looking westward across the narrows and over the wide , turf-clad ,
gorse-sprinkled , <P_199> sandy flats , that Nature , with rare
forethought , seems to have formed here for golfers yet unborn , the
steep and rugged promontory of Penmaenbach shoots finely up
eight_hundred feet into the sky , BRADLEY1-1905-1,199.28

and , rolling back over the higher crests of Caer Lleion , drops
ultimately down amongst the woods and faint smoke-wreaths of Conway town
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,199.29

Stretching away from the face , as it were , of Penmaenbach , the
low-lying coast of Anglesey spreads itself beneath the setting sun ,
from the rich banks of the Menai , by Bangor , to the lonely island of
Priest-home , and away and beyond again up the wild eastern coast to
Point Linas and Llaneilian . BRADLEY1-1905-1,199.30

Why the sunsets over Anglesey , as we see them from this coast , should
surpass any others in Wales I can@ @not tell , BRADLEY1-1905-1,199.31

I only know that they do . BRADLEY1-1905-1,199.32

Nor should I venture so much insistence on what has this long time been
a secret conviction but for the authority of gentlemen in this part of
the world to whom sunsets and effects appeal in a business as well as an
artistic sense . BRADLEY1-1905-1,199.33

It is small wonder so many artists make their headquarters , and ,
indeed , live permanently , at this mouth of the Conway , seeing what
infinite variety there is here of light and scene , what a wealth of
detail on sea and shore , and what ready access to the best inland
scenery in Wales . BRADLEY1-1905-1,199.34

If I were doomed to spend the rest of my life behind a single window , I
would have that window , before all places I know of in Great Britain ,
on the foremost point of the dry , shingly , breezy , and above all ,
sunny , spit on which this new village stands . BRADLEY1-1905-1,199.35

And from there I would look out over the ceaseless clashing of the sea
and river , not only to the heights of Penmaenbach and the ever-@
@changing hills of Mona , but what I have as yet said nothing of , and
what is , perhaps , the greatest of the many charms of Deganwy .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,199.36

This is the view up the estuary , to where , between the woodlands of
Bodlondeb and Benarth , Conway lifts its noble castle and its hoary
walls with such infinite dignity , and appeals so eloquently , not only
to <P_200> those who have eyes to see , but so loudly to those also who
have ears to hear the echoes from the past . BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.37

By this stretch of waterside , too , we come into touch with the
sea-going side of Welsh life , which seems , in some ways , more aloof
from the life of the country , as one knows it inland , than is the case
in Devonshire or Cornwall , or other more or less sea-girt regions .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.38

But if Conway , in a land sense , is most distinctly a highway , as a
port it is eminently a byway , and on that account , perhaps , so much
the more picturesque . BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.39

All sorts of quaint craft come forging through Deganwy narrows with the
flood , or dropping down them with the ebb ; and so close , of necessity
, to the steep , shingly beach that a full-rigged barque or schooner
will cast a great shadow over the window where I fain would be , and the
talking of the sailors on the deck be plainly audible .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.40

This is not , however , to assume it will be understandable ;
BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.41

for if it be not Welsh , it will quite probably be Dutch or Swedish ,
these industrious folk having an immemorial and consistent traffic with
Conway . BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.42

Beneath the lower wall of the old town , on the rude wharf and beach ,
where nets and boats and sails lie about in much confusion , and where
the sea-going folk congregate , and mostly live , you may note over
humble doors characters inscribed that the total stranger to Welsh might
be apt to carelessly pass over as the mystic tongue of the country .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.43

But , as a matter of fact , they are notices in Scandinavian and Dutch
for the benefit of these ancient and acceptable visitors to Conway .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.44

There is no tourist traffic by water here , BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.45

but you may , at anytime , see all sorts of quaint and humble craft , up
even to 500 tons , with sails of various hues , and hulls of many shapes
and colours , working their way in or out , or lying in the river .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,200.46

Small cutters , too , or centre-boards , handled by local amateurs ,
will now and again come dashing out when the tide is flowing , and rush
at this Deganwy channel , battling and twisting and writhing in the
hands of their skilful skippers , in half-frolicsome efforts to fight
<P_201> the inrushing sea , and to join their white wings in battle with
the wind against the surging tide . BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.47

In curious contrast to these playful butterflies of the sea are the
mussel catchers , a leading feature here in local life , patiently
clawing at the river bottom with their long-handled rakes , from the
bows of their boats as they lie at anchor in mid-channel , a long and
noiseless procession . BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.48

They have been at this business - as a community I mean - ever since
time was ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.49

and so have this queer group of fearsome-looking females just below our
window , with large baskets on their backs , some dozen or twenty in
number , cackling Welsh in raucous voices , and waiting for a capacious
sailing boat that is forging towards them along the edge of the steep ,
gravelly shore . BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.50

With their faded shawls , tattered straw hats , short petticoats , and
thick legs rolled in layers of old stockings ; their worn-out overcoats
, clump boots , and swathes of patched cloth , they strike a spectator ,
particularly from an elevation , - as a collection of animated rag-bags
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.51

My young artist friend , who , it may be remembered , was so anxious to
immortalise Evan Evans among his fishing-tackle at Llangollen , thought
that the first vision of these Gabalunzie ladies suggested rather a
moving dust-heap , BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.52

and I really think the simile so entirely admirable
BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.53

I must not rob her of the credit of it . BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.54

They are , in truth , a tribe unto themselves , BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.55

and have little enough in common with the ordinary trim and tidy Welsh
peasant woman . BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.56

Perhaps , however , the picture is most complete when the whole troop
have waddled on board , and are packed tight around the seats of the
broad-beamed boat , waiting for the sail to bulge .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.57

That , indeed , is a sight to make an artist's heart leap for joy , and
one in which even a mere layman can take much delight .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.58

They are bound for the mouth of the river , where the receding tide
leaves mussels high and dry upon the rocks , to be had for the picking .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.59

Once upon a time these women made more out of the pearls found in the
shells than it is now possible to do out of the fish - a great deal more
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,201.60

For Conway pearls were , in former days , quite an item in local <P_202>
trade . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.61

The great ladies of North Wales in the 16th and 17th centuries were
proud to wear them on their necks and arms . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.62

The old Welsh regalia contained some , BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.63

and , I rather think , among the Crown Jewels in the Tower there are one
or two specimens . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.64

But the demand for mussels nowadays in Liverpool and elsewhere leaves
but little opportunity for the slow development of the pearl .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.65

The people of North Wales have not been , as a race , greatly given to
going down to the sea in ships . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.66

I have no doubt , however , that the fraction who have been thus
addicted have contributed their proportionate share to the maritime
glories of Britain . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.67

The Welshman is of the same stock as the Cornishman and the Breton ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.68

and what he puts his hand to he , as a rule , does thoroughly in quiet ,
workmanlike fashion ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.69

and if he is not hardy I do not know who is . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.70

Great as is the stretch of sea-coast in North Wales and Anglesey , I
doubt if its contour was conducive to the spirit of adventure in days
when that spirit was strongest . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.71

There are no deep inlets . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.72

The mountain rivers rush swiftly to the sea , BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.73

and vast stretches of sand , both on the north coast and Cardigan Bay ,
are laid bare by every ebbing tide . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.74

There were few towns to foster rivalries or to give each other heart in
great sea ventures . BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.75

What few there were had mostly sprung from Anglo-Norman garrisons .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.76

The Welshman loved to live upon his farm apart , BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.77

and his warlike energies had for centuries been wholly bent on fighting
as a soldier in defence of his country or his province .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.78

In the great sea period of the 16th century , the traditions of
soldiering must have been even still paramount in Wales .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.79

We need not go back so far as the battle of Crecy , where a third of the
British army were Welshmen : or to Agincourt , where Welsh knights were
greatly in evidence : or even to the desolating wars of Glyndwr .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.80

For the Wars of the Roses , at the very opening of the Tudor period ,
stirred the old military spirit of the Principality to its very depths ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,202.81

and left North Wales , as we may have cause to <P_203> notice later on ,
in a state of long-continued turbulence and electricity .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,203.82

This is wandering somewhat , however , from the banks of the Conway and
from the point . BRADLEY1-1905-1,203.83

Though North Welshmen , for these and various other causes , did not go
down to the sea in ships in the same strength and with anything like the
same enthusiasm as Mr. Norway has so graphically shown us , the men of
Western England did , BRADLEY1-1905-1,203.84

thousands of hardy fishermen have been bred {COM:picture_omitted} around
the coast , BRADLEY1-1905-1,203.85

and the Conway estuary has its share . BRADLEY1-1905-1,203.86

But I do not think there is the sympathy between these sea-shore people
and the farmers on the hills behind , you would find in Devonshire , or
even on the East Coast . BRADLEY1-1905-1,203.87

Your Conway mariner , who has ploughed the seas on Atlantic liners or
East_India-men , or braved the dangers of the Labrador and Newfoundland
fisheries , feels , I think , the " inwardness " of his relatives on
shore , who plough the fields . BRADLEY1-1905-1,203.88

The Welsh landsman , living round the coast , is wholly a landsman .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,203.89

It is the mountains , <P_204> not the sea , that to him speak loudest .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.90

To them he looks for inspiration , not to waves and cliffs ;
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.91

and the instinct which would probably guide him safely through moorland
mists , would probably be found wanting on a stormy sea .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.92

Your Conway fisherman is , however , a Welshman to the core .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.93

He is almost sure to be a Baptist or a Calvinistic Methodist ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.94

and there is not the least likelihood of his having forgotten his
mother-tongue . BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.95

But he has , of course , some dash of the cosmopolitan about him , and
the intense " parochialism " of his friends on shore ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.96

and the lack of interest in the outside world which certainly
distinguishes the Welsh peasant , grates somewhat upon his soul ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.97

and at times he will speak his mind very freely upon the subject .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.98

Now I can well fancy that the Cornish preacher who thumps the desk of
the local chapel has his veins full of sea-going blood , and could
himself , perhaps , take the tiller or grasp an oar at a tight@ @pinch ;
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.99

and , at any rate , his homely metaphors and illustrations must often
smack of salt-water . BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.100

But I can@ @not imagine a North_Welsh minister , of the mainland at any
rate , doing any of these things . BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.101

He is knowing in pigs and black cattle , and well up in the price of
lambs ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.102

but his creed is to make his human flock a little world unto themselves
, his chapel their metropolis , with a little dissipation now and then
in politics , which mean for him , and them mostly - Church
Disestablishment and Disendowment . BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.103

Indeed , I can@ @not think what Wales will do when this question is
definitely settled . BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.104

Nor am I surprised , when rowing up the estuary to Conway with John
Jones , or out catching codlings with Hugh Evans , that they sometimes
give one to understand that their experiences and travels are not
appreciated as they should be by their friends of the chapel , though
these latter have all their lives been accustomed to look out upon the
sea . BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.105

A few fragments only remain of what was once Deganwy Castle , though in
Leland's day there were still " great ruins . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.106

It was destroyed and rebuilt several times , which is no wonder , seeing
that it menaced alternately both invaders and invaded .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,204.107

<P_205>

Its site , indeed , tells its own tale to any one with the most
elementary knowledge of Welsh history . BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.109

It was , in short , the key to the inner line of Welsh defence .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.110

Before Edward the First built Conway and the route of travel shifted up
to the ferry opposite the town , now replaced by the two bridges , the
channel of Deganwy was the natural crossing-place between Snowdonia and
the Perfeddwlad , the Rubicon {TEXT:rubicon} which divided the inner
sanctuary of Gwynedd from the blood-stained lands between the Conway and
the Dee . BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.111

Again and again the tide of battle and invasion had swept so far ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.112

but since the Romans no invader had crossed it permanently .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.113

Whatever else might happen , the four lordships of Snowdon <paren> Eryri
and Arfon , Lleyn and Eivionydd <$$paren> , the present Carnarvonshire ,
in fact , held their own practically inviolate , BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.114

and , holding their own , protected Anglesey , not , it is true , from
interminable ravagings , but from any serious occupation .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.115

The Perfeddwlad and Merioneth , on the other hand , the former
especially , were swept by incursions innumerable from end to end ,
though never Saxonised and never really conquered till the close of the
long struggle was at hand . BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.116

But before this broad shining river and the mighty hills beyond ,
invading hosts , with rare exceptions , shrank back , starved , beaten ,
or baulked ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.117

and this old castle of Deganwy was always and ever the focus of the
strife . BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.118

Snowdonia is lightly dismissed by old English writers as a barren waste
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.119

As a matter of fact , there were thousands of acres of fine grazing for
the hardy black cattle which constituted the wealth of North Wales ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.120

and in its far western peninsula were thousands more of fertile tillage
lands , while Anglesey , since the days when the Romans , according to
tradition , cut down the sacred groves , has been a fat grain-growing
country . BRADLEY1-1905-1,205.121

Says Giraldus , who brought his archbishop across this very ferry in the
year 1188 , and firmly believed the local superstition that the Conway
travelled far out to sea , " preserving its stream inviolate " - " I
must not pass over in silence the mountains called Eryri by the Welsh ,
and by the English Snowdon , or mountains <P_206> of snow , which
gradually increasing from the land of the Sons of Conan , and extending
themselves northward even to Deganwy , seem to rear their lofty summits
to the clouds . BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.122

They are said to be of so great an extent that , according to an ancient
proverb , as Mona could supply corn for all Wales , so could the
mountains of Eryri afford sufficient pasture for all its herds . "
BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.123

And indeed we know well this is precisely what it often did , and that
whenever time allowed before every great war the fords of the Upper
Conway - for Welshmen and cattle could go where invaders could not -
were churned into foam by the plunging of great herds of cattle and
other stock hurrying to the Snowdon passes . BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.124

Passionately , however , as the old Welsh fought for their country ,
even to the banks of the Dee , there seems to have been a special
sentiment about Snowdonia . BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.125

The spirit of patriotism seems to have burned here its brightest and
most unquenchable flame . BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.126

It was a veritable citadel , a rock of defence , a refuge in time of
stress . BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.127

The very Princes of all Gwynedd , and of all Wales , as they sometimes
were , took a special pride in their second title of Lords of Snowdon .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.128

Whatever might happen , the feeling that the four cantrefs must be held
sacred and inviolate at all costs , was permanent .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.129

Maelgwyn , a Prince of North Wales in the sixth century , erected the
first castle at Deganwy . A warlike person , but whose habits of life
were so loose that when the yellow plague , engendered , it is said , by
the festering unburied corpses of unnumbered men slain in battle ,
struck this region , he shut himself up in the little church of Llanrhos
standing over yonder on the next ridge , terrified at the thought of his
past life . BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.130

He was also unnerved by a prophecy of the Great Taliesin , which had
foretold that a creature with yellow teeth , hair and eyes should come
up out of the marsh to destroy him . BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.131

It is said that he looked through the keyhole of the church , saw the
yellow monster , and promptly expired , which is only an ambiguous
method , I take it , of explaining that the first founder of Deganwy
died of the plague . BRADLEY1-1905-1,206.132

<P_207>

Among the many invaders who encamped large armies on these pleasant
sheep pastures between the castle and the river was King John , who was
here twice during his wars with his son-in-law , Llewelyn the Great .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.134

On the first occasion the Welsh got behind him BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.135

and cut off his supplies . BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.136

His people were reduced to eating their horses , and these failing , to
retire ignominiously home , the King at their head in a towering passion
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.137

On the second venture he was more successful , getting across the river
and sending a detachment on to burn Bangor , which , being a cathedral
town , was sufficient to incur his hatred . BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.138

He also carried off the bishop , who regained his liberty however for
the somewhat curious equivalent of 200 hawks . BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.139

It was hereabouts , too , that they brought up before the King , a
Welshman caught red-handed in the murder of a priest .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.140

The trembling culprit , who no doubt fully expected to be flayed alive ,
must have been pleasantly surprised when , instead of this , the King
patted him heartily on the back , exclaiming , " Well done , thou good
and faithful servant , BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.141

thou has slain mine enemy , BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.142

depart in peace . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.143

But the most graphic picture we have of war as it was upon the banks of
the Conway in olden days relates to an expedition that Henry III. made
against Prince Dafydd , the son and successor of Llewelyn the Great .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.144

It was the old dispute about homage , BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.145

and an element of humour , for a wonder , signalised its inception .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.146

For Dafydd , in whose breast the latest treaty with the King of England
rankled sorely , sent privately to the Pope , offering to pay 500 marks
if he would absolve him from his oaths . BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.147

The Pope agreed , BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.148

and sent instructions to his representatives among the abbots to make
sure the money was all right . BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.149

In the meantime , however , Henry heard of what was going on ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.150

and , chuckling in his sleeve , for his revenues were on a different
scale from poor Dafydd's , sent post-haste to his Holiness , intimating
, to put it vulgarly , his readiness to " go one better . "
BRADLEY1-1905-1,207.151

<P_208>

The Pope knocked under at once to the highest bidder ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.153

and Henry forthwith proceeded to advance against his nephew with a large
army of English and Gascons . BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.154

But Dafydd was too quick , BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.155

and fell upon his uncle near the Marches , at the far end of that very
sea-road we travelled in the last chapter , BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.156

and slew all the Gascons and a great number of English knights and
nobles . BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.157

The King , however , summoned the Irish to his aid , who landed in
Anglesea , while he himself struggled on to Deganwy ; the stock and
movables of the Perfeddwlad having , as usual , been driven across the
Conway . BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.158

Here the Royal army remained for half the autumn ;
BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.159

and Mathew of Paris has preserved for us a " letter from the front , "
written by an English knight , and describing the hardships of camp life
at Deganwy - BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.160

" The King with his army is encamped at Gannock {ED:Deganwy}
BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.161

and is busy in fortifying that place , sufficiently strong already ,
about which we lay in our tents , watching , fasting , praying , and
freezing . BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.162

We watch for fear of the Welsh , who were used to come suddenly upon us
in the night-time . BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.163

We fast for want of provisions , the halfpenny loaf being now risen and
advanced to fivepence . BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.164

We pray that we may speedily return safe and scot-free home ;
BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.165

and we freeze for want of winter garments , having but a thin linen
shirt to keep us from the wind . BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.166

There is a small arm of the sea under the castle where we lye which the
tide reached , by the conveniency of which many ships bring us provision
and victuals from Ireland and Chester . BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.167

This arm lies betwixt us and Snowdon , where the Welsh are encamped ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.168

and is in breadth , when the tide is in , about a bow shot .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.169

Now it happened that upon the Monday before Michaelmas Day an Irish
vessel came up to the mouth of the haven with provision to be sold to
our camp , which , being negligently looked to by the mariners , was
upon the low ebb stranded on the other side of the castle , near the
Welsh . BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.170

The enemy , perceiving this , descended from the mountains
BRADLEY1-1905-1,208.171

and laid siege to the ship , which was fast upon the <P_209> dry sands ;
whereupon we detached in boats three_hundred men of the borders of
Cheshire and Shropshire , with some archers and men-at-arms , to rescue
the ship ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.172

but the Welsh upon the approach of our men withdrew themselves to their
usual retirements in the rocks and woods , BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.173

and were pursued for about two miles by our men afoot , who slew great
numbers of them . BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.174

But in their return back , our soldiers , being too covetous and greedy
of plunder , among other sacrilegious and profane actions , spoiled the
Abbey of Aberconway , BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.175

and burnt all the books and other choice utensils belonging to it . "
BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.176

This was indeed one of the worst acts of iconoclasm that ever befel
Wales . BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.177

The great Abbey of Aberconway , founded by Llewelyn ap Iorwerth , shared
with that of Ystradfflur , or Strata Florida , the honour of keeping the
chronicles of the Principality , the monks of the two houses
interchanging periodical visits and correcting each other's records ,
which were carefully kept from day to day . BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.178

" But the Welsh , " our special correspondent goes on to say , "
distracted <bracket> as well they may have been <$$bracket> at these
irreligious practices , got together in great number ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.179

and in a desperate manner setting upon the English , killing great
numbers and following the rest to the water-side , forced as many as
could not make their escape into the boats to commit themselves to the
mercy of the waves . BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.180

Those they took prisoners they thought to receive for exchange ;
BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.181

but hearing how we put some of their captive nobility to death <bracket>
twenty-eight young nobles , hostages , had been executed in London
<$$bracket> , they altered their minds , BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.182

and in a revengeful manner scattered their delacerated carcases along
the surface of the water . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.183

Such were the amenities of Anglo-Welsh war in the thirteenth century .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.184

The letter goes on to tell in great detail of a long struggle for the
stranded ship , which contained three_hundred hogsheads of wine and
other provisions , which the Welsh at last captured .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,209.185

" And thus we lay encamped in great misery and distress for want of
necessaries , exposed to great and <P_210> frequent dangers , and in
great fear of the private assaults and sudden incursions of our enemies
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.186

There remained but one hogshead of wine in the whole army , a bushel of
corn being sold for twenty shillings , a fed ox for three or four marks
, and a hen for eightpence ; so that there happened a very lamentable
mortality both of man and horse , for want of necessary sustenance of
life . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.187

If there is nothing left of this famous old frontier fortress of
Snowdonia but its memories and a block or two of masonry , there is
little fear of the great Norman pile that rose to signalise and cement
its conquest suffering in the same fashion . BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.188

As you step off the bridge and pass out of the sunshine into the chill
shadow of the great , pitiless-looking towers of Henry de Elfreton , the
thought strikes you that they surely must have carried conviction to the
most ardent patriot of the hopelessness of further resistance .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.189

They did not seem to , however , BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.190

for we know that the Welsh rose again only ten years after the castle
was built . BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.191

It was a futile effort , and due to the first attempt at direct taxation
for the French wars . BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.192

Edward , as his Marchers could not suppress the rising , had to come
down himself . BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.193

He had already spent one Christmas at Conway , BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.194

and the story goes how , on the present occasion , being cut off from
his troops , who lay at Deganwy , by a big tide in the river , he was
nearly starved out in his own new castle and captured by the Welsh .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.195

But another thought may strike you , too , as you pay your bridge-toll
under the frowning portals of the English gate and pass on into the
little town , BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.196

and this is , that Conway seems to have been not wholly unsuccessful in
living up to its surroundings - no mean achievement .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.197

It has accomplished this , perhaps , in rather a negative than an active
fashion , and by simply remaining an old Welsh country town , as if
there were nothing to see , and no sightseers , and no tourist traffic
within fifty miles . BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.198

For this sublime self-possession we may thank heaven , though it may not
, perhaps , have been sorely tried . BRADLEY1-1905-1,210.199

People , after all , would not be greatly inclined to take up their
quarters in a town <P_211> encompassed by mediaeval walls and towers ,
when sunny watering places abounded near by , though they pass through
it in thousands , eating and drinking much and merrily in its
old-fashioned {COM:picture_omitted} hostelries .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,211.200

There is not much actual detail that is interesting in Conway town
itself ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,211.201

Welsh stone and Welsh slate soon look mellow and old ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,211.202

and Welsh roofs and walls have a <P_212> capacity for producing abundant
crops of vegetation , which pleases the fancy ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.203

the streets , too , are mostly narrow and on a slope ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.204

and always lead to a gate in the old walls , which gives them much
distinction . BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.205

There is a fine old church , however , and a market-place presided over
by a statue of Lllewelyn the Great , who , besides having at one time
re-conquered all Wales , founded the Abbey of Aberconway already
mentioned . BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.206

Then there is that incomparable half-feudal half-Tudor house of the
Wynnes of Gwydir , Pläs Mawr , which art and antiquarian societies have
made their own , and saved from all chance of decay .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.207

Its proportions , like those of the castle , require an artist's pencil
to do them justice ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.208

so I will merely remark that the Cambrian Art Society holds its
exhibitions here , and the public are at all times admitted for a
trifling fee , and no one should pass it by . BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.209

Conway , like Carnarvon , Beaumaris , and Denbigh , is practically an
Edwardian town , though around Llewelyn's Cistercian Abbey a Welsh town
, of a sort , existed , BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.210

for a charter given to it by the same Llewelyn was recently discovered .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.211

But the real interest of Conway , like the other towns , dates from the
castle , when Anglo-Norman adventurers settled down under its protection
as traders with special charters from Edward , and to the exclusion of
all natives . BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.212

There they remained , gentlemen merchants and monopolists in a small way
for generation after generation , jealously guarding their privileges of
trading , ferries , and market stands ; speaking English always , and
living under English laws , while the Welsh outside were permitted to
retain their own . BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.213

" Merchants of Beaumaris , " says an old Welsh saw , " lawyers of
Carnarvon and gentlemen of Conway . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.214

This merely means , no doubt , that the trading aristocracy of Conway
gave themselves airs , though they do not appear to have spread out into
the neighbourhood like the Denbigh garrison as the founders of landed
families . BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.215

But as late as the reign of Henry VII. they were jealous of Welshmen
holding any place of trust in the town , BRADLEY1-1905-1,212.216

and petitioned <P_213> the King to preserve them from such competition .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.217

" It is no more meate , " says this precious document , " for Welshmen
to bear office in Wales , especially in any of the three English towns ,
than it is for a Frenchman to hold office in Calais . "
BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.218

The names , however , we find on this compact and exclusive burgess roll
of Conway have long completely disappeared . BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.219

This would seem to be due to no sterility on their part if one may judge
from the statement on the tomb of Nicholas Hookes , in Conway church ,
which declares him to be the forty-first child of his father and the
happy parent of twenty-seven children . BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.220

These Anglo-Norman trading towns were a unique feature of old Welsh life
and a rankling sore to the natives , so long as the racial distinctions
were maintained . BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.221

Wales smouldered on , profoundly discontented in its connection with
England till its pride was soothed by supplying a King of its own blood
to the throne of Britain in the person of Henry VII. , and the
anomalies and abuses of its government swept away by his bluff son .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.222

Edward I. had treated the conquered Welsh in statesman-like fashion for
his period . BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.223

He had created the four northern counties of Flint , Merioneth ,
Carnarvon and Anglesey , besides Cardigan and Carmarthen , where his
officers administered tolerable justice to the Welsh under Welsh law and
to the English under English law . BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.224

But the rest of the country was left in the lamentable confusion of "
Lordships , " or " Honours " where each ruler , Welsh or English , did
what was right in his own eyes , which generally included the cherishing
of criminals and refugees from their neighbours' domains .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.225

Most people , too , will probably be surprised to hear that Wales
returned no members to Parliament till the reign of Henry VIII .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.226

Throughout this transition period of Welsh history - these two centuries
of reluctant and more or less protesting union - the English towns were
not only a sore , but also a great temptation to riotous chieftains when
the times were rife for fighting in a small way .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.227

Fair days were of course the great gatherings of Welsh rural life ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,213.228

and they are no slight events <P_214> even now .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.229

But in old times every disturbance was hatched amid the steam of the
heaving mass of black cattle and wild mountain sheep , which thronged
the muddy market-places and choked the narrow streets .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.230

The critical nature of these occasions remained as a tradition , at any
rate so late as the time of Elizabeth . BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.231

For even then a proclamation was read every fair day at Conway enjoining
the public to keep the King's peace , " no man to beare anie weapons or
harnesse upon him under paine of sayme to be forfeited , &c. "
BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.232

That towns such as these should have a somewhat stirring history is only
natural , BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.233

and that quaint customs should survive is only to be expected .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.234

At Conway an old ceremony called the " Stocsio " obtained till the
present reign , being observed at Eastertide , when on the Sunday crowds
carrying wands of gorse were accustomed to proceed to a small hill
outside the town known as Pen twt . BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.235

There the most recently married man was deputed to read out to a
bare-headed audience the singular and immemorial rules that were to
prevail in the town on the following day : BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.236

All men under sixty were to be in the street by six o'clock in the
morning ; those under forty by four , while youths of twenty or less
were forbidden to go to bed at all . BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.237

Houses were searched , BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.238

and much rough horse-play was going about . BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.239

Defaulters were carried to the stocks , and there subjected to a
time_honoured and grotesque catechism , calculated to promote much
ridicule . BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.240

Ball-play in the castle too was a distinguishing feature of all these
ancient fêe days . BRADLEY1-1905-1,214.241

It really must be a fine thing to be Mayor of Conway ; a different
matter altogether from presiding at the civic board of
Pedlington-in-the-Marsh or Smokeborough-on-Sea . To flaunt your robes
and chains of office against such a background as the panelled walls of
Pläs Mawr , and to pass in and out of your domain beneath heavy_browed
feudal gateways . Above all , to be Constable , as the Mayors of Conway
are , of King Edward's stately pile , and do its honours to deputations
of learned and distinguished bodies , who in these particulars are among
the <P_215> {COM:illustration_omitted} <P_216> great ones of the earth .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.242

To look at the list of his predecessors in this honoured office would be
certainly calculated to make the mind of an average grocer with an
imagination reel to some purpose . BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.243

Space presses , BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.244

and I can only here pause at one of the names that if collected would
make a sufficiently distinguished roll . BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.245

And this is chiefly because the bearer of it is looking down upon me as
I write . BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.246

A full_length portrait of a fine upstanding soldier-like man with brown
hair and eyes , and a fresh complexion clad in a black velvet dress of
the Stuart period and wearing a wide_brimmed hat .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.247

It is John Williams , Archbishop of York , formerly Dean of Westminster
, and Lord Keeper of the Seals . BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.248

He was a Conway man , and in a sense self_made ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.249

but then he was also a Williams of Cochwillon , as well as of the blood
of Penrhyn <paren> Bangor <$$paren> , which to a Welshman not ignorant
of his country's past , will explain his influence in these parts .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.250

His period was that of the first Charles , BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.251

and when the Civil War had for the time wholly dislocated church
dignities and powers , he conceived that he could serve his master
better in North Wales than by preaching to him at Oxford or Chester .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.252

So , betaking him to Conway , with the King's commission as Governor ,
and a promise of reimbursement for his outlay , when times permitted ,
he proceeded to put that town and fortress in a state of defence , and
out of his own private fortune to stock it with provisions and munitions
of war . BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.253

Furthermore , when the tide of battle began to roll towards Wales , he
followed the example of Governor Salusbury at Denbigh ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.254

and invited all the people of the surrounding country to bring their
valuables to Conway , and deposit them within the town and castle .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.255

The militant archbishop then took off his coat BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.256

and declared himself prepared to hold the place against all comers .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.257

Things , however , began to get critical in North Wales .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.258

Chester was a seat of much activity . BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.259

Powder was burning in the Vale of Clwyd and on the Marches of Montgomery
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.260

Rupert was surging through the country with troops of horse ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,215.261

and the Welsh Parliamentary leaders , Mytton <P_217> and Myddelton ,
might move on Conway at any time . BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.262

Prince Rupert , it seems , did not think much of archbishops as
combatants , nor did his trusty henchman , Sir John Owen of Clenenny ,
which is in Eivioneth beyond Snowdonia . BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.263

Their thoughts took quick action , BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.264

and under the Prince's commission Sir John , honest and valiant almost
to eccentricity , but blunt , doubtless , and rough_spoken , came to
Conway , BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.265

and turning the archbishop with scant ceremony out of the place he had
victualled and fortified at his own expense , assumed the command .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.266

It was more than episcopal , or any other flesh and blood could stand .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.267

The ejected cleric retired to Gloddaeth , whose owner , his relative ,
it may be remembered , was in the service of the King .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.268

And there , in view of Conway , he fumed BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.269

and raged , writing letters to the King , in which he declared that Sir
John had not only turned all his <paren> Williams' <$$paren> people out
of the Castle , but had detained his private luxuries , not allowing the
unhappy prelate so much as white wine enough to make a posset with , or
even any small-beer to manufacture a caudle for his rheumatism .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.270

The King had of course trouble enough of his own on hand ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.271

and Sir John continued to sit tight . BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.272

It was now , however , the year '46 . BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.273

All men could see the end was near , when Mytton pushing a force rapidly
on from Denbigh appeared before Conway . BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.274

Now the archbishop had a great deal of property , both in the castle and
town . BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.275

Moreover , all his friends and neighbours , by his suggestion , had
deposited their valuables there . BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.276

Here , then , was a great chance to earn much popularity , to conciliate
the Parliamentary party , and , above all , to pay out Sir John .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.277

To General Mytton , therefore , went the astute cleric ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.278

and made arrangements that , if not heroic , were eminently sound and
politic . BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.279

In short , it was agreed that the general should preserve and respect
the property of the archbishop and his Royalist friends in Conway ; on
condition of the latter joining him with all their forces in an attack
upon the place . BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.280

Sir John had no idea of yielding to Mytton's summons ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,217.281

so the combined forces threw <P_218> themselves on the town
BRADLEY1-1905-1,218.282

and carried it by storm , the archbishop heading his own party and being
wounded in the assault - most certainly the last instance of an English
prelate leading a storming-party . BRADLEY1-1905-1,218.283

The castle itself fell soon afterwards . BRADLEY1-1905-1,218.284

Mytton faithfully observed his part of the undertaking .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,218.285

So the local loyalists saved their valuables BRADLEY1-1905-1,218.286

and got good terms , BRADLEY1-1905-1,218.287

and the archbishop not only earned their gratitude , but that of the
Parliament , to say nothing of the lesson administered to poor Sir John
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,218.288

Of this stout soldier I shall have something to say when we come to his
tomb at Penmorfa and his house at Clenenny , that will , I am sure , in
spite of his rough treatment of the archbishop , show him to have been
the finer man of the two . BRADLEY1-1905-1,218.289

<P_219>

<heading>

Chapter XI BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.292

The Vale of Conway BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.293

<$$heading>

Now , of the three chief valleys of North Wales - for the Severn is a
midway region unto itself - the Vale of Conway is , I need hardly say ,
the most popular among English tourists . BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.295

It is more accessible from the watering places than the Dee ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.296

and tapping so readily , through its tributary valleys , the heart of
Snowdonia , and itself actually washing for so great a distance the
western edges of the wild Carnarvon highlands , nature is here upon a
scale to which the peaceful serenity of the Vale of Clwyd makes no
pretension . BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.297

So far as roads are concerned we may follow up the Conway with equal
comfort upon either bank . BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.298

But remembering that it is thirteen miles to Llanrwst , and the river
for nearly the whole distance a tideway , and only to be crossed , and
that with something of a detour , at one point , it will be necessary to
consider somewhat before electing which gateway in the walls of Conway
to ride out of . BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.299

The obvious thing to do of course would be to go one way and return
another , as I have often done myself in an afternoon with an abundance
of pleasure . BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.300

But for us there is no such retracing of steps possible .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.301

Nor at the same time need there be the slightest hesitation under such
circumstances as to which side of the valley to select .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.302

It is , moreover , fortunate that the best outlook may also be enjoyed
from somewhat the best of the two roads . BRADLEY1-1905-1,219.303

<P_220>

We will recross the bridge then into Denbighshire , and passing the fine
new station at Llandudno Junction , go circling round at best pace , in
more or less company with the railroad , this broad expansion of the
river that makes Conway and its hills and woods appear at high tide as
if it was a lake rather than a stream on whose bosom their shadows
flickered . BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.305

And while thus engaged on working round to meet the water again at
Llansaintffraid-Glan-Conway , I will take the opportunity of paying a
tribute to , what one might almost call , the picturesque audacity of
this north shore railroad , along which the Irish mail goes flaming and
roaring and screaming through the stormiest days and wildest nights .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.306

Few of us , I fancy , realise what skill and patience and money it takes
to fight the ocean as the North Western has to fight it for many a mile
between the mouths of the Dee and Menai . BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.307

The triumphs of constructive engineering such as have overcome the
precipices of Penmaenmawr and Penmaenbach are patent to any one ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.308

and the raging of the waves against them is continually in evidence .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.309

But the long levels between Rhyl and Colwyn that look so uneventful to
the traveller when summer seas are breaking softly on the sand and
shingle , have been in fact a source of sleepless vigilance and anxious
care to those who carry the financial and the moral burden of so great
an artery of travel . BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.310

There are glimpses here upon this lower reach of the Conway of a kind
that we shall not see again as the valley closes in upon us and excludes
the beauty of distance for that of detail and foreground .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.311

For on this open sweep as we approach Glan Conway , the sky upon the
west and north-west is entirely filled with the mountain peaks of the
hither portion of Snowdonia . BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.312

The monarch of them all it is true is hidden from these lowlands ;
BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.313

but its most serious rival , so far as altitude may count , Carnedd
Llewelyn , crowns the centre of the long procession , which begins with
Moel Eilio upon the left and ends with Tal y fan upon the right .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,220.314

That it is given to us to see this exquisite panorama upon all occasions
would be an <P_221> unpardonable insinuation . BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.315

But if storm and shadow , gloom and mist delight to revel in the
mountains of Carnarvon , as amid all other British highlands , what a
compensation is afforded when they lift betimes , and the sunshine and
the moisture of the sky and ocean play hide_and_seek among the hills .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.316

Our road , however , for some four miles after this withdraws itself
from the river bank BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.317

and winds about in pleasant , though for a time in not too level fashion
, among Denbigh farmhouses and hamlets , where little brooks go dancing
downwards through the shade , and chubby children bound for school come
chattering in Welsh out of country lanes and yokels , shouting at their
teams in the Kymric tongue , drop down through narrow gateways , with
great loads of hay , from the steep fields above .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.318

I must myself admit to never having heard a Welsh carter or drover break
into English when he felt moved to address his horses with some special
wealth of expletive . BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.319

Indeed , I could much more readily imagine a Saxon turning to Welsh , if
he knew how , in such an emergency . BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.320

But perhaps the Celtic revival has banished the use of English oaths ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.321

for the excellent George Borrow , was greatly scandalised by the
frightful English execrations with which a carter lad near Llansilin
broke in upon his ruminations over the shade of Huw Morris .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.322

Borrow remonstrated with the youth in the same tongue , being near the
border , BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.323

but was taken aback at being answered by a " dim saesneg . "
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.324

" What do you mean , then , " said he in Welsh , " by saying that you
have no English ? BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.325

You were talking English just now to your horses . "
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.326

" Yes , " said the lad , " I have English enough for my horses ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.327

and that is all . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.328

" But why do you want English for your horses ? "
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.329

" It@ @'s no use speaking Welsh to them , " said the boy .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.330

" Welsh is@ @n't strong enough . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.331

" Is@ @n't Diawl tolerably strong ? " ventured the other .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,221.332

<P_222>

" Not strong enough for horses , " said the boy ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.334

" If I were to say Myn Diawl to my horses or even Cas András , they
would laugh at me . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.335

" What a triumph , remarks our author , for the English language , that
Welsh carters are obliged to make use of it to get their horses along !
" BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.336

He seemed to think , however , that the triumph was hardly on its merits
, and that their Welsh execrations would be quite as effective on a
horse or anything else as English ones ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.337

and such an eminent philologist as Borrow ought to be a judge of this .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.338

And he goes on to tell us the origin of the Welsh oath , Cas András ,
tracing it to Druidical times , András or Andraste being the fury of the
ancient Kymri , to whom they built temples and offered sacrifices out of
fear . BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.339

But we are looking down upon the river again , BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.340

and with the impetus of a mile-long hill at Eglwys bach are in a short
time upon its shores . BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.341

The Conway , though still , and for sometime longer tidal , loses here
all character of an estuary , BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.342

and just where the banks draw nearer to each other , an imposing new
bridge amid much rejoicing and celebration has been thrown recently
across the channel . BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.343

Here was the time-honoured ferry of Tal-y-Cafn , the only link for miles
and miles between Denbighshire and Carnarvon ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.344

and where the lane leading to it leaves the roadside is the old posting
house , now furbished up and flourishing with modern travel , that
cheered those who went and came by it or offered them a refuge in times
of stress by flood or storm . BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.345

Not far beyond , too , upon the further bank , is the hamlet of Caerhun
, the Conovium of the Romans - a half-way station between Bodfari , in
the Vale of Clwyd , and the greater garrison of Carnarvon -
BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.346

and though bearing no outward traces of those distant times has
furnished to the excavator many strange and curious relics of the Roman
legions . BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.347

Hitherto , the road , though excellent in itself , has been unduly hilly
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,222.348

But now for six miles onward to Llanrwst it is <P_223> level going of
the best , BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.349

and not only that , but the most celebrated of Welsh valleys here begins
to do justice to its reputation . BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.350

The hills upon the Carnarvon side no longer shrink back as hitherto ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.351

or slope upward ridge by ridge to the distant heights beyond ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.352

but begin to press upon the river bank BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.353

and with their lower ledges form a bold escarpment that rises high above
the vale . BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.354

For the most part this noble ridge is densely clad with foliage , though
showing for a time a barer and more varied front of rock and heather ,
down which mountain streams fed by neighbouring lakes come leaping , and
this from no mean altitude , in creamy wreaths of foam .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.355

And yet though all that opens to our right and before us is classic
ground in British landscape , we are brushing with our left shoulders
the fringe of a country that almost no man knows ; always excepting , of
course , the people who happen to live in it , BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.356

and they are numerous enough - fifty-acre farmers , to use an old
expression , and Dissenters mostly , and Welshmen to a man .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.357

This square block between the Conway and the Clwyd , the Hiraethog
wilderness and the sea , not far short of twenty miles in length and
breadth , is a terra incognita to the average visitor .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.358

The roads , except a good one from Abergele to Llanrwst , are
indifferent and perpendicular . BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.359

But the scenery in a quiet way is charming . A sea of hills , in short
, that mostly reach a_thousand feet , and seldom rise much more ; a
labyrinth of narrow valleys , where crystal streams go prattling over
verdant meads . A land where oak woods blow in much luxuriance on the
lower slopes , and sweet sheep pastures share the hill-tops with breaks
of golden furze ; where villages and ancient but meagrely attended
churches nestle in ideal nooks , and a profoundly peaceful rural life
untapped by railroads , untouched by mines or quarries , or tourists ,
defies the outer world , and remains , above all things , Welsh of the
very Welsh . BRADLEY1-1905-1,223.360

But in gossiping thus about regions into which , though so near us , we
may not venture , I have unwittingly passed by upon the roadside a not
very noticeable country house , but which <P_224> represents so far as
its site goes one of the greatest religious houses of mediaeval Wales .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.361

This is Maenan Abbey , the successor of that great foundation of
Aberconway , founded by Llewelyn the Great , of whose lamentable
destruction , with all its precious records , by the English , I spoke
of in a former chapter . BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.362

Edward the First , who tried to make amends after his conquest for the
havoc then wrought by rebuilding churches and monasteries ,
re-established here the Conway monks ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.363

and Edward the Second , as a boy , received upon this spot the
allegiance of the Bishop of Bangor and all the local clergy .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.364

A friend who was brought up here tells me that medicinal herbs could
still be found in his youth in the old Convent garden , and that a
meadow is still called Cae Gwenllian , or the field of the white nun .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.365

The last abbot is said to have been not only compensated but entirely
consoled for his ejection by a license to break his vow of celibacy ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.366

so I take it he must have been very much in love .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.367

It went to Wynnes at the dissolution , a different family , however ,
from that powerful and acquisitive {TEXT:aquisitive} one which
controlled for generations , as will soon appear , most of this region .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.368

The history , in short , of the Vale of Conway for two centuries , from
the town limits to the misty ridges by Pen-machno and Festiniog , is the
history of the Wynnes of Gwydyr . BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.369

But we are nearing Llanrwst . BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.370

In the valley , which is flat and fertile and a mile perhaps in width ,
the grain is yellowing , BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.371

and the haycocks stand thick upon the already springing aftermath .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.372

The winding river , still influenced by the tide , is as yet voiceless .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.373

The summer wind stirs briskly in a wood of ancient beech trees that for
some time throws our road in shadow , BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.374

and restless flocks of starlings , freshly gathered from a score of snug
retreats in ivied walls and smokeless chimneys , fly hither and thither
over the flat fields , as if doubtful as yet of the discretion of their
leaders . BRADLEY1-1905-1,224.375

Or a heron perhaps forges onwards in mid-air , its great grey wings
beating with steady and effective action against the dark background of
the Gwydyr woods which have now begun to clothe the opposing hills with
<P_225> a rich mantle from their summit to their base .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.376

Over against them and nestling at their foot lies Trefriw .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.377

And this reminds me that a steam launch plies between this head of tide
water and Deganwy every day in summer , and affords , there is no
denying it , an even better prospect of the Lower Conway than the road
we have just travelled . BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.378

Now Trefriw is a summer resort , and one especially dear to the hearts
of Welsh dissenters - above all , to ministers .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.379

And this is not because its ancient church was founded by Llewelyn the
Great to save , as 't@ @is said , his wife Joan , the daughter of John
of England , the fatigue of mounting the steep hill to Llanrhychwyn ,
one of the oldest and most curious churches in Wales ; nor yet because
the overhanging steeps lead directly , among other beautiful spots , to
Llyn Geirionydd , where Taliesin is reputed to have lived .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.380

For I can@ @not learn that Welsh dissenters , whose claim it is to be
the patriotic party , care one jot nowadays about these things , for
which at one time Welshmen had so great a passion .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.381

That a select few afford a sharp and brilliant contrast to this studied
dulness , only emphasises a fact which these notable exceptions are
themselves among the first to admit and deplore .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.382

Welsh history for the average Nonconformist begins with the Methodist
revival , with Howell Harris , Rowlands , and Charles of Bala . Noble
men beyond a doubt , who did great and noble work in the last century
and later , when , thanks in the main to Anglican misgovernment , the
Welsh Church was in a lamentable and parlous state .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.383

But the history of their successors is not especially inspiring .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.384

Nor are chapel statistics and sectarian rivalries the kind of interests
to be absorbingly cultivated without producing a mental atmosphere that
seems all ajar with the physical beauties and romantic past of Wales .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.385

" Thank God we have outgrown these superstitions , " is a common retort
of the Country minister to any expression of regret at this indifference
. BRADLEY1-1905-1,225.386

What can be said of such an attitude ? unless indeed <P_226> it helps
to convince us that the move for higher education in Wales has come none
too soon . BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.387

All this may not seem to be very pertinent to Trefriw , except that the
place is chiefly notable for its mineral waters , and that Welsh
nonconformity , particularly its clergy , is greatly given to gathering
round such places , in seasons of relaxation . BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.388

The English parson , and to some extent , his Welsh brother , takes his
holiday strenuously . BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.389

You will meet him on the hills , or by the riverside , or on his bicycle
; but not so the Welsh preacher : as a class I mean , of course .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.390

It may seem strange that men who lead temperate , well_nourished ,
well_occupied , but not laborious lives , amid the fresh breezes of the
Welsh hills , should be so fond of filling their insides from these
nauseous fountains . BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.391

At any rate the life around these simple centres seems to have for them
some marvellous attraction ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.392

and hither , too , their deacons and their people follow them .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.393

I have never stayed at Trefriw ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.394

but of other places of a like nature in Wales I have had considerable ,
though involuntary experience , BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.395

and at nearly all of them the preacher is greatly in evidence .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.396

The gentle toddle backwards and forwards to the wells , and the
unlimited opportunities for conversation with people of his own sort and
kind , all shewing him a ready deference , has its obvious attractions .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.397

Nor do these reverend habitues and their lay lieutenants ever seem to
flinch for an instant , as weaker mortals do , from the draughts of
sulphur or alum , that mark at stated intervals the flight of the placid
hours . BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.398

One is given to regarding this kind of place as the haunt of jaded
Sybarites from cities , whose livers are oppressed with burdens too
great to bear and joints racked with the penalties of too great
indulgence . BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.399

But the simple preacher from the Welsh hills would drink one of these
men under the table in the matter of sulphur or alum , and go on his way
rejoicing . BRADLEY1-1905-1,226.400

If any one doubts my word , let him spend a week at Llandrindod Wells ,
and note the feats performed there at <P_227> the Pump-rooms in the
morning by Methodist and Baptist experts . BRADLEY1-1905-1,227.401

But precisely why the high priests and deacons of Nonconformity , the
most temperate_living class of a hardy healthy race , should have such a
seeming passion for these fearsome liquids passes my understanding .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,227.402

But , after all , with most of the community that gather at Trefriw and
such places , the water is , no doubt , a secondary consideration ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,227.403

and the existence led there is characteristic .
{COM:illustration_omitted} BRADLEY1-1905-1,227.404

Violent exercise and games of a robust sort are wholly against the Welsh
Nonconformist tradition . BRADLEY1-1905-1,227.405

And if the younger generation are now struggling to shake off the
fetters , and will unquestionably do so before long that does not alter
the case . BRADLEY1-1905-1,227.406

Narrow Puritanism is in the main of course accountable for this ,
BRADLEY1-1905-1,227.407

but there is a feeling also , rather latent perhaps than expressed that
Church people do these things , BRADLEY1-1905-1,227.408

and it behoves therefore a good nonconformist to so order <P_228> his
ways that they shall in all things be different .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.409

A country football club is wicked in North Wales , because in Manchester
some people bet on football matches . BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.410

An incipient cricket club in a village with which I am intimate was
quashed by the preachers on the amazing plea that it " encouraged
swearing . " BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.411

I do not suggest for a moment that opposition to wholesome sport is
always so blatant , still less always successful ;
BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.412

but it is nearly always there , quiet and strong , in North Wales , at
any rate . BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.413

Each chapel would fain gather together its members for as many evenings
, or holidays in the week as possible , not necessarily for religious
exercises , but for indoor ones of various sorts .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.414

This in its ways is admirable ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.415

but there are motives , not reprehensible , but by no means wholly
sprititual , underlying it all . BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.416

Combative churchmen , of course , declare this anxious shepherding of
the flock to mean simply pennies , BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.417

for these , naturally enough , are of vital consequence to a
self-supporting congregation . BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.418

But every Welshman knows well that this constant " calling of the roll ,
" is partly due to a vague dread lest the younger people should drift
into the more robust amusements of their neighbours , and thence perhaps
into another point of view . BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.419

Bicycles , as a matter of fact , caused a not {TEXT:no} inconsiderable
flutter in the dovecotes . BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.420

Nothing can be said against their use <paren> on a week day <$$paren>
even by the preachers ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.421

but , none the less , they do not love them . BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.422

The very joy of their rapid movement suggests independence and even
frivolity , BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.423

and is out of harmony with the sombre and circumscribed traditions of
the chapel . BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.424

This , however , is a natural Calvinistic instinct rather than a
formulated grievance , BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.425

nor can anything be openly said by the most prodigious bigot .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.426

But when a young man or woman can ride fifty or sixty miles in a day ,
an independence of habit and observation is formed that is much more
hostile to present conditions than any cricket or football matches .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,228.427

In the matter of discipline generally , it has already come to something
approaching a struggle between the cast-iron views of the old school
<P_229> and the human instincts of the younger and the new .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.428

So much I may state with entire confidence ; BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.429

and no one for a moment supposes that it is the young in this close of
the nineteenth century that will give way , BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.430

and heaven forbid that in this particular they should .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.431

But around the sulphur and the alum fountains no such forebodings enter
to disturb the holy calm . BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.432

The preacher and the deacon , the middle-aged and the serious , are
there in too great force . BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.433

A little carriage exercise , a little croquet perhaps , much gentle
ambulation to the station or the wells and back , an immense amount of
conversation about chapels , ministers , and disestablishment , and more
continuous hand-shaking than I have ever seen , even in America , fill
the quiet hours . BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.434

A Welshman who knows his country as few do has recently declared that
the transfer of a country preacher from one neighbouring district to
another is of infinitely greater interest to the average Nonconformist
than an important change in the Cabinet . BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.435

This is , I think , the very worst that can be said of Welshmen , that
is to say of the class who more particularly claim for themselves the
title of " good Welshmen , " this pettiness of interest and lack of
pride in Imperial concerns , in which the best men of the Principality
have always taken , and still take , their part .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.436

And for such an attitude Nonconformity is beyond a doubt responsible .
BRADLEY1-1905-1,229.437

