<BEGIN_brightland-1711-1>

<P_1>

<heading>

Reasons for an English Education . BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,1.4

<$$heading>

New Methods being always liable to Censure , 't@ @is requisite to prefix
some Reasons for this Proposal of an <font> English Education , <$$font>
and for having the Youth of <font> Great Britain <$$font> taught the
<font> Grammar <$$font> and <font> Rhetoric , &c. <$$font> of their own
Mother-Tongue , before they learn Latin , or any other Language .
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,1.6

First then , Can any thing be more Absurd and Barbarous , than our
present Method of Disciplining Children in the <font> Initiatory
<$$font> part of Literature ? To push tender Wits into the intricate
Mazes of Grammar , and a Latin Grammar ? To learn an Unknown <font> Art
<$$font> by an Unknown <font> Language ? <$$font> To carry them a Dark
Round-about Way , to let them in at a Back-door ? Whereas by Teaching
them First the Grammar of their Own Mother-Tongue , so easie to be
learnt , {TEXT:.} Their Advance to the Grammars of Latin and Greek would
be gradual and pleasant : BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,1.7

But our precipitate Practice of hurrying them over such a Gulph , before
we have built 'em a Bridge to it , is such a Shock to their weak
{TEXT:Weak} Understandings , that they very seldom recover it .
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,1.8

{COM:note_omitted}

<P_2>

To Speak and Write without Absurdity the Language of one's Country , is
certainly commendable in Persons of all stations , but to some
indispensably {TEXT:indispensibly} necessary . BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,2.11

{COM:note_omitted}

I appeal to common Sense , if the having a Grammar of our Mother-Tongue
<paren> first taught in our Schools <$$paren> would not so far
facilitate our Youths learning their Latin and Greek Grammars , as to
afford 'em spare-time for Arithmetic , Astronomy , Geography , History ,
and other useful Knowledges , that would make them pass the Spring of
their Life with Pleasure and Profit , that is now miserably worn out in
Grammatical Perplexities . BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,2.13

{COM:note_omitted}

<P_3>

'T@ @is <paren> I humbly conceive <$$paren> evident from the Premises ,
that the propos'd Method of Commencing with an <font> English Education
<$$font> would be a great Benefit to our Youth , whether continued , or
taken off from School ; to Adult Persons , that have forgot or never had
School-Learning any farther than to Read ; since by the help of an
<font> English Grammar <$$font> and <font> Rhetoric <$$font> they may
arrive to no small Accomplishments both in Speaking and Writing .
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,3.16

{COM:note_omitted}

Now the Reasons for <paren> and good Consequences of <$$paren> having
our <font> English Youth <$$font> first taught the <font> Rhetoric ,
<$$font> as well as <font> Grammar , <$$font> of their own Language ,
being much the same , what I have to add shall be with reference to Both
. BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,3.18

'T@ @is contrary to Sense and Reason <paren> says an able Judge in this
Case <$$paren> to put our <font> English Youth <$$font> to toil in
foreign Languages , while our own Excellent Language lies neglected , as
if it were savage and unfit to entertain the Liberal Arts and Sciences ;
whereas , if we would take care to polish and adorn our Language , we
should find it as capable of being the Receptacle and Repository of
Learning , as those that are call'd the <font> Learned Languages .
<$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,3.19

{COM:note_omitted}

But after all , <paren> because Arguments from Interest are most
persuasive <$$paren> I would ask those Parents , who have their Children
bred Scholars chiefly for a Livelihood , In what Language is the
Thriving Business of our Nation transacted ? And , Whether a voluble
<font> English Tongue <$$font> <P_4> in their Head will not carry them
farther in the ways of Profit and Preferment , than all the <font>
Learned Languages ? <$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,4.21

{COM:note_omitted}

Generous Spirits will always have a Concern for the Benefit and Credit
of their Country : BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,4.23

And how far the Honour and Interest of <font> Great Britain <$$font> are
concern'd in the Cultivating of Our Language , I presume not to say ;
only , That a neighbouring Nation has taken Care of Theirs , and found
their Accounts in@ @'t . BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,4.24

The 'foremention'd <font> Cicero , <$$font> when advanc'd to the
Consulship , was so far from neglecting his Mother-Tongue , that in the
heat of Civil War between <font> Caesar <$$font> and <font> Pompey ,
<$$font> when he knew not whither to send Wife or Children , nor where
to hide his own Head , he importunes his Friend <font> Atticus <$$font>
<paren> in a Letter of State-matters <$$paren> to satisfie him , whether
he ought to write <font> ad Piraeum , in Piraea , in Piraeum , <$$font>
or <font> Piraeum <$$font> without a Preposition ;
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,4.25

then adds these Emphatical Words , BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,4.26

<font> Resolve me this Doubt , and you will rid me of a great Vneasiness
. <$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,4.27

What ! This Prince of Eloquence , at the Age of 60 , a Man of his
Authority , in that Care for his Country , in that Jeopardy for Himself
, and extreme Necessity of his dearest Friends , so Sollicitous for a
small Criticism in the Grammar of <font> his Native Language ! <$$font>
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,4.28

And can we give our <font> British Censor <$$font> just Cause to
complain of the continual corruption in our Stile , that a Catalogue
could be produc'd of lately-@ @written <font> English <$$font> Books of
100 <font> l. <$$font> price , without ten Lines together of Common
Grammar , or Common Sense ? BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,4.29

Then how Unaccountable is it , that the Teaching a Good <font> English
<$$font> Stile should be no Part of <font> English <$$font> Disciplin ;
<P_5> and to put our Youth upon the study of Foreign Languages with the
same Discretion that sends them to travel Foreign Countries , before
they know the Constitution and Customs of their Own !
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.30

But here an importunate Question will be ask'd , <font> viz. <$$font>
Why an <font> English <$$font> Education ? BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.31

Had we no <font> good Scholars <$$font> made in the Old Way ?
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.32

Yes , and <font> good Masters <$$font> of Stile too ; never more than in
our Days , and of several Professions , BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.33

especially the Divines of Our Church , whose Discourses <paren> with all
the Charms of Foreign Eloquence <$$paren> have kept up the Dignity of
Our Mother-Tongue by <font> The Comprehensive English Energy , <$$font>
as the Lord <font> Roscommon <$$font> calls it ; BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.34

particularly that Oracle of English Stile , who <font> Extensive Sense
still into Compass drew ; Said what was just , and always something New
. <$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.35

The most Polite Ages of <font> Greece <$$font> and <font> Rome <$$font>
pretend to but One Perfect Pattern of Eloquence ; and that in <font>
Caesar <$$font> only cou'd no Fault be found . BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.36

Now I think I may modestly ask , Whether that small Piece , call'd
<font> Observations on Monsieur <$$font> Sorbier's <font> Voyage into
<$$font> England , will not bear reading after the Celebrated
Commentaries of <font> Caesar ? <$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.37

Nor has the Province of <font> Poetry <$$font> been so ill serv'd , as
not to answer the Character given by the same sagacious noble Critic ,
that <font> - One Massy <$$font> English Line <font> Drawn in <$$font>
French Wire , <font> would thro' whole <$$font> Pages <font> shine .
<$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.38

What shall we say then ? BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.39

has our <font> Censor <$$font> complain'd without Cause , and given a
false Alarm of Danger to the Language of our Country , that our Sterling
English is got into the Hands of Clippers and Coyners ?
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.40

I refer those that make a Doubt , to his Remonstrance of the Case .
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,5.41

I crave leave farther to assert , That the chief Criminals have been our
late Pretenders to Wit , to whom we may say <P_6> as <font> Petronius
<$$font> to the Wittlings of his time , <font> Gentlemen , give me leave
to tell you , that you have been the Principal Persons that have
murder'd Eloquence . <$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,6.42

Our Stage-Buffoons <paren> from puny Actors turn'd Authors <$$paren>
have at once endeavour'd to debauch our Morals and Dialect , by
senseless Cant , and new Affectations of Speech , that have catch'd the
Town , and infected Conversation ; so that it concern'd the <font>
Censor of Great Britain <$$font> to take care that the Commonwealth of
Letters come to no Damage ; which , like other States , when , arriv'd
to Perfection , is then in most danger of falling to Decay .
BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,6.43

<font> J. B. <$$font> upon the great Encouragement to the First
Impression of his <font> Grammar <$$font> , has with indefatigable
Industry consulted all the Polite and Learned Men that he and his
Friends cou'd engage , in order to obtain such Improvements , as might
make it approach near to Perfection in the <font> Second Edition :
<$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,6.44

And , to render his System of an English Education Compleat , he has
procur'd an Addition of the Arts of <font> Poetry , Rhetoric <$$font>
and <font> Logic . <$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,6.45

In the <font> Poetry <$$font> is deliver'd not only the Versification
and Numbers of our Tongue , but also Rules for the several Provinces of
that Useful Art , which will fix in the Minds of Youth a true Judgment
of Performances in that kind . BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,6.46

The <font> Rhetoric <$$font> shall not only be drawn from the Best of
the <font> Ancients <$$font> and <font> Moderns , <$$font> and from the
Nature of the Thing , but be deliver'd in such Terms , as may <font>
inform <$$font> <paren> not <font> puzzle <$$font> <$$paren> the Learner
. BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,6.47

The <font> Logic <$$font> will be freed from the useless <font> Jargon
<$$font> and <font> Methods <$$font> of the <font> Schools , <$$font>
and appear a Just Art of <font> Reasoning <$$font> ; always directed to
the finding out of Truth , and not for the support of <font> Squabbles .
<$$font> BRIGHTLAND-1711-1,6.48

