<BEGIN_brougham2-1825-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

Practical Observations , &c. BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.4

<$$heading>

I begin by assuming that there is no class of the community so entirely
occupied with labour as not to have an hour or two every other day at
least , to bestow upon the pleasure and improvement to be derived from
reading - or so poor as not to have the means of contributing something
towards purchasing this gratification , the enjoyment of which , beside
the present amusement , is the surest way both to raise our character
and better our condition . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.6

- Let us consider how the attainment of this inestimable advantage may
be most successfully promoted . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.7

It is no doubt manifest , that the people themselves must be the great
agents in accomplishing the work of their own instruction .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.8

Unless they deeply feel the usefulness of knowledge , and resolve to
make some sacrifices for the acquisition of it , there can be no
reasonable prospect of this grand object being attained .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.9

But it is equally clear , that to wait until the whole people with one
accord take the determination to labour in this good work would be
endless . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.10

A portion of the community may be sensible of its advantages , and
willing at any fair price to seek them , long before the same laudable
feeling becomes universal ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.11

and their successful efforts to better their intellectual condition can@
@not fail to spread more widely the love of learning , and the disrelish
for sensual and vulgar gratifications . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.12

But although the people must be the source and the instruments of their
own improvement , they may be essentially aided in their efforts to
instruct themselves . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.13

Impediments which might be sufficient to retard or wholly to obstruct
their progress , may be removed ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.14

and efforts which , unassisted , might prove fruitless , arising perhaps
from a transient , or only a partial enthusiasm for the attainment of
knowledge , may , through judicious encouragement , become effectual ,
and settle into a lasting and an universal habit .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.15

A little attention to the difficulties that principally beset the
working classes in their search after information , will lead us to the
knowledge both of the direction in which their more affluent neighbours
can lend them most valuable assistance , and of the part which must be
borne by themselves . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.16

Their difficulties may all be classed under one or other of two heads -
want of money , and want of time . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.17

To the first belongs the difficulty of obtaining those books and
instructors , which persons in easier circumstances can command ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,1.18

and to the second <P_2> it is owing that the same books and instructors
are not adapted to them , which suffice to teach persons who have
leisure to go through the whole course of any given branch of science .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.19

In some lines of employment , there is a peculiar difficulty in finding
time for acquiring knowledge ; as in those which require severe labour ,
or , though less severe , yet in the open air ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.20

for here the tendency to sleep immediately after it ceases , and the
greater portion of sleep required , oppose very serious obstacles to
instruction : BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.21

on the other hand those occupations are less unfavourable to reflection
, BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.22

and have a considerable tendency to enlarge the mind .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.23

The first method , then , which suggests itself for promoting knowledge
among the poor , is the encouragement of cheap publications ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.24

and in no country is this more wanted than in Great Britain , where ,
with all our expertness in manufactures , we have never succeeded in
printing books at so little as double the price required by our
neighbours on the continent . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.25

A gown , which any where else would cost half a guinea , may be made in
this country for half a crown ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.26

but a volume , fully as well or better printed , and on paper which , if
not as fine , is quite fine enough , and far more agreeable to the eyes
, than could be bought in London for half a guinea , costs only six
francs , or less than five shillings , at Paris . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.27

The high price of labour in a trade where so little can be done , or at
least has been done by machinery , is one of the causes of this
difference . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.28

But the direct tax upon paper is another ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.29

and the determination to print upon paper of a certain price is a third
; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.30

and the aversion to crowd the page is a fourth . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.31

Now all of these , except the first , may be got over .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.32

The duty on paper is threepence a pound , which must increase the price
of an octavo volume eightpence or ninepence ; and this upon paper of
every kind , and printing of every kind ; so that if by whatever means
the price of a book were reduced to the lowest , say to three or four
shillings , about a fourth or a fifth must be added for the tax ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.33

and this book , brought as low as possible to accommodate the poor man ,
with the coarsest paper and most ordinary type , must pay exactly as
much to government as the finest hot-pressed work of the same size .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.34

This tax ought , therefore , by all means , to be given up ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.35

but though , from its being the same upon all paper used in printing ,
no part of it can be saved by using coarse paper , much of it may be
saved by crowding the letterpress , and having a very narrow margin .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.36

This experiment has been tried of late in London upon a considerable
scale ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.37

but it may easily be carried a great deal further .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.38

Thus , Hume's History has been begun ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,2.39

and one volume , containing about two_and_a_half <P_3> of the former
editions ; has been published . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.40

It is sold for six shillings and sixpence ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.41

but it contains a great number of cuts neatly executed ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.42

the paper is much better than is necessary ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.43

and the printing is perfectly well done . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.44

Were the cuts omitted , and the most ordinary paper and type used , the
price might be reduced to 4 <font> s. <$$font> or 4 <font> s. <$$font>
6 <font> d. <$$font> ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.45

and a book might thus be sold for 12 <font> s. <$$font> or 14 <font> s.
<$$font> , which now costs perhaps above two pounds .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.46

A repeal of the tax upon paper , which is truly a tax upon knowledge ,
and falls the heaviest upon those who most want instruction , would
further reduce the price to nine or ten shillings .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.47

The method of publishing in Numbers is admirably suited to the
circumstances of the classes whose income is derived , from wages .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.48

Twopence is easily saved in a week by almost any labourer ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.49

and by a mechanic sixpence in a week may without difficulty be laid by .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.50

Those who have not attended to such matters , would be astonished to
find how substantial a meal of information may be had by
two_penny-worths . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.51

Seven numbers , for fourteen pence , comprise Franklin's Life and Essays
; four for eightpence , Bacon's Essays ; and 36 for six shillings , the
whole of the Arabian Nights . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.52

Cook's Voyages , in threepenny numbers , with many good engravings , may
be had complete for seven shillings ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.53

and Plutarch's Lives , for ten shillings , will soon be finished .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.54

The Mirror , a weekly publication , containing much matter of harmless
and even improving amusement , selected with very considerable taste ,
has besides , in almost every number , information of a most instructive
kind . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.55

Its great circulation must prove highly beneficial to the bulk of the
people . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.56

I understand , that of some parts upwards of 80,000 were printed ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.57

and there can be no doubt that the entertainment which is derived from
reading the lighter essays , may be made the means of conveying
knowledge of a more solid and useful description - a consideration which
I trust the conductor will always bear in mind . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.58

The Mechanics Magazine , most ably edited by Mr. Robertson , has from
its establishment , had an extensive circulation ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.59

and it communicates for threepence a week , far more valuable
information , both scientific and practical , than was ever before
placed within the reach of those who could afford to pay six times as
much for it . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.60

A similar work is published at Glasgow upon the same plan .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.61

The Chemist , also for threepence , is learnedly and judiciously
conducted by Mr. Hodgkin , BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.62

and contains an admirable collection of the most useful chemical papers
and intelligence . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,3.63

A Mechanics Register has lately been begun , and with <P_4> immediate
success . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.64

It is a weekly paper , for the same price ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.65

and although , being principally intended for the use of the workmen ,
it bestows peculiar attention on whatever concerns that order , yet the
occurrences which it communicates , and the discussions which it
contains , are also those most interesting to philosophers themselves .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.66

The day , indeed , seems now to break , when we may hope to see no
marked line of separation between the two classes .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.67

I trust another distinction will also soon be known no more .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.68

The circulation of cheap works of a merely amusing kind , as well as of
those connected with the arts , is at present very great in England ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.69

those of an aspect somewhat more forbidding , though at once moral ,
interesting , and most useful , is very limited ; while in Scotland
there is a considerable demand for them . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.70

Habits of reading longer formed in that country , have taught the
inhabitants , that nothing in reality can be more attractive than the
profound wisdom of every day's application , sustained by unbounded
learning , and embellished with the most brilliant fancy , which so
richly furnishes every page of the Essays of Bacon .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.71

It is undoubtedly from the circumstance just mentioned , that in looking
over the list of those cheap publications , which are unconnected with
the arts , we certainly do not find many that are of a very instructive
cast ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.72

and here it is that something may be done by way of encouragement .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.73

That the demand for books , cheap as well as dear , must tend to produce
them , no one denies ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.74

but then it is equally certain , that the publication of cheap books
increases the number of readers among the poor ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.75

and one can hardly conceive a greater benefit than those would confer ,
who should make a judicious selection from our best authors upon ethics
, politics and history , and promote cheap editions of them in Numbers ,
without waiting until the demand was such as to make the sale a matter
of perfect certainty . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.76

Lord John Russell , in his excellent and instructive speech upon
Parliamentary Reform , delivered in 1822 , stated , that ' an
establishment was commenced a few years ago , by a number of individuals
, with a capital of not less than a_million , for the purpose of
printing standard works at a cheap rate ; ' BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.77

and he added , that it had been ' very much , checked in its operation
by one of those Acts for the suppression of knowledge which were passed
in the year 1819 , although one of its rules was not to allow the
venders of its works to sell any book on the political controversies of
the day . ' BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.78

The only part of this plan which appears at all objectionable , is the
restriction upon politics . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.79

Why should not political , as well as all other works , be published in
a cheap form , and in Numbers ? BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.80

That history , the nature of the constitution , the doctrines of
political economy , may safely be disseminated in this shape , no man
now-a-days will be hardy enough to deny . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,4.81

<P_5>

Popular tracts , indeed , on the latter subject , ought to be much more
extensively circulated for the good of the working classes , as well as
of their superiors . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.83

The interests of both are deeply concerned in sounder views being taught
them ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.84

I can hardly imagine , for example , a greater service being rendered to
the men , than expounding to them the true principles and mutual
relations of population and wages ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.85

and both they and their masters will assuredly experience the effects of
the prevailing ignorance upon such questions , as soon as any
interruption shall happen in the commercial prosperity of the country ,
if indeed the present course of things , daily tending to lower wages as
well as profits , and set the two classes in opposition to each other ,
shall not of itself bring on a crisis . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.86

To allow , or rather to induce the people to take part in those
discussions , is therefore not merely safe , but most wholesome for the
community , BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.87

and yet some points connected with them are matter of pretty warm
contention in the present times ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.88

but these may be freely handled , it seems , with safety ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.89

indeed , unless they are so handled , such subjects can@ @not be
discussed at all . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.90

Why then may not every topic of politics , party as well as general , be
treated of in cheap publications ? BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.91

It is highly useful to the community that the true principles of the
constitution , ecclesiastical and civil , should be well understood by
every man who lives under it . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.92

The great interests of civil and religious liberty are mightily promoted
by such wholesome instruction ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.93

but the good order of society gains to the full as much by it .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.94

The peace of the country , and the stability of the government , could
not be more effectually secured than by the universal diffusion of this
kind of knowledge . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.95

The abuses which through time have crept into the practice of the
constitution , the errors committed in its administration , and the
improvements which a change of circumstances require even in its
principles , may most fitly be expounded in the same manner .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.96

And if any man or set of men deny the existence of such abuses , see no
error in the conduct of those who administer the government , and regard
all innovation upon its principles as pernicious , they may propagate
their doctrines through the like channels . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.97

Cheap works being furnished , the choice of them may be left to the
readers . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.98

Assuredly , a country which tolerates every kind , even the most
unmeasured , of daily and weekly discussion in the newspapers , can have
nothing to dread from the diffusion of political doctrines in a form
less desultory , and more likely to make them be both well weighed at
the time , and preserved for repeated perusal . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.99

It can@ @not be denied , that the habit of cursory reading , engendered
by finding all subjects discussed in publications , which , how great
soever their merits may be , no one looks at a second time , is
unfavourable to the acquisition of solid and permanent information .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,5.100

<P_6>

Although the publication of cheap works is the most effectual method of
bringing knowledge within the reach of a poor man's income , there are
other modes deserving our attention , whereby a similar assistance may
be rendered , and his resources economized . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.102

Circulating libraries may in some circumstances be of use ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.103

but , generally speaking , they are little suited to those who have only
an hour or two every day , or every other day , to bestow upon reading .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.104

<font> Book Clubs , <$$font> or <font> Reading Societies , <$$font> are
far more suited to the labouring classes , BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.105

may be established by very small numbers of contributors ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.106

and require an inconsiderable fund . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.107

If the associates live near one another , arrangements may be easily
made for circulating the books , so that they may be in use every moment
that any one can spare from his work . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.108

Here , too , the rich have an opportunity presented to them of promoting
instruction without constant interference ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.109

the gift of a few books , as a beginning , will generally prove a
sufficient encouragement to carry on the plan by weekly or monthly
contributions ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.110

and with the gift a scheme may be communicated , to assist the
contributors in arranging the plan of their association .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.111

I would here remark the great effect of combination upon such plans , in
making the money of individuals go far . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.112

Three-halfpence a week laid by in a whole family , will enable it to
purchase in a year one of the cheap volumes of which I have spoken above
, BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.113

and a penny a week would be sufficient , were the publications made as
cheap as possible . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.114

Now , let only a few neighbours join , say ten or twelve , and lend each
other the books bought ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.115

and it is evident , that for a price so small as to be within the reach
of the poorest labourer , all may have full as many books in the course
of the year as it is possible for them to read , even supposing that the
books bought by every one are not such as all the others desire to have
. BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.116

The publication of books in Numbers greatly helps this plan ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.117

for it enables those who choose to begin it at any time , without
waiting until they have laid by enough to purchase a volume in each
family ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.118

and where books not so published are wanted , booksellers would do well
to aid such associations by giving them a year's credit ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.119

whatever propagates a taste for reading must secure their interest in
the end . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.120

In many parts of Scotland , <font> Parish Libraries <$$font> have been
formed with a view to the same object . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.121

They originated , I believe , in general with the wealthier classes and
the farmers ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,6.122

but after laying the foundation <P_7> by collecting a few books , those
persons left the management most wisely to the readers themselves ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.123

and required them to pay for the support of the fund and purchase of new
books . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.124

<font> Cottage Libraries <$$font> upon a somewhat similar plan are
beginning to be formed in some parts of England .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.125

There is one at Taunton , where the contributors pay only a penny a week
, BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.126

and above a_thousand issues of books have been made to 80 persons in the
course of a year . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.127

The only officers are a treasurer and librarian , who attend every
Saturday evening , to exchange the books and receive subscriptions .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.128

They also select the books ; a faulty arrangement in my opinion , unless
the officers are themselves chosen by the readers .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.129

The obvious and the sound plan is to establish some general regulation
respecting the kind of books to be purchased , <paren> which must , in
some degree , depend on the circumstances of each association ,
<$$paren> and then to let each contributor choose in proportion to what
he pays , or to let several join in choosing a book equal in price to
their united contributions . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.130

If the rich patrons of the scheme wish to interfere with the choice , it
should be either by giving books , or choosing in proportion to their
pecuniary contribution . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.131

But I confess I should be better pleased to see such libraries , after
they are once established , left wholly to the support of the readers ,
who are sure to care for them if they pay for them , long after richer
patrons would tire of the details . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.132

An excellent plan was about ten years ago adopted by Mr. S. Brown , of
Haddington , for instructing the towns and villages of the county of
East-Lothian , in succession , by means of the same books .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.133

It began with only a few volumes ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.134

but he now has 19 <font> Itinerant Libraries <$$font> of 50 volumes each
, which are sent round the different stations , remaining a certain time
at each . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.135

For these there are 19 divisions , and 15 stations , 4 divisions being
always in use at the chief town , and 2 at another town of some note .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.136

An individual at each station acts as librarian .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.137

There are 700 or 800 readers , BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.138

and the expenses , under 60 <font> l. <$$font> a year , are defrayed by
the produce of a sermon , the sale of some tracts , and subscriptions ,
in small sums averaging <font> 5 <font> s. <$$font>
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.139

This plan is now adopted in Berwickshire , by Mr. Buchan , of Kelloe ,
with this very great improvement that the current expenses are defrayed
by the readers , who pay twopence a month , and I hope choose the books
. BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.140

These libraries have given rise to a scientific Institution , as we
shall presently see ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.141

and it is peculiarly gratifying to observe that the original scheme from
which the whole has followed , was merely a library for <font> religious
tracts <$$font> , established ever since 1810 ; and into which were
afterwards introduced , in perfect consistency with the primary object ,
some literary and scientific works . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.142

It is , however , not only necessary that the money of the working
classes , but their time also , should be economized ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.143

and this consideration leads to various suggestions .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,7.144

<P_8>

In the <font> first <$$font> place , there are many occupations in which
a number of persons work in the same room ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.146

and unless there be something noisy in the work , one may always read
while the others are employed . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.147

If there are twenty-four men together , this arrangement would only
require each man to work one extra day in four weeks , supposing the
reading to go on the whole day , which it would not ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.148

but a boy or a girl might be engaged to perform the task , at an expense
so trifling as not to be felt . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.149

This expedient , too , it may be observed , would save money as well as
time ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.150

one copy of a book , and that borrowed for the purpose , or obtained
from a reading society or circulating library , would suffice for a
number of persons . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.151

I may add , that great help would be given by the better informed and
more apt learners , to such as are slower of apprehension and more
ignorant ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.152

and discussion <paren> under proper regulations <$$paren> would be of
singular use to all , even the most forward proficients ; which leads me
to observe , <font> Secondly <$$font> , That societies for the express
purpose of promoting conversation are a most useful adjunct to any
private or other education received by the working classes .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.153

Those who do not work together in numbers , or whose occupation is of a
noisy kind , may thus , one or two evenings in the week , meet and
obtain all the advantages of mutual instruction and discussion .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.154

An association of this kind will naturally combine with its plan the
advantages of a book club . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.155

The members will most probably be such as are engaged in similar
pursuits , and whose train of reading and thinking may be nearly the
same . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.156

The only considerable evils which they will have to avoid , are , being
too numerous , and falling too much into debate .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.157

From twenty to thirty seems a convenient number ; and nearer the former
than the latter . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.158

The tone ought to be given from the beginning , in ridicule of
speech-making , both as to length and wordiness .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.159

A subject of discussion may be given out at one meeting for the next ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.160

or the chairman may read a portion of some work , allowing each member
to stop him at any moment , for the purpose of controverting ,
supporting , or illustrating by his remarks the passage just read .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.161

To societies of this kind master workmen have the power of affording
great facilities . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.162

They may allow an hour on the days when the meetings are holden ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.163

or if that is too much , they may allow the men to begin an hour earlier
on those days ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.164

or if even that can@ @not be managed , they may let them have an hour
and a half , on condition of working half an hour extra on three other
days . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.165

But a more essential help will be the giving them a place to meet .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.166

There are hardly twenty or thirty workmen in any branch of business ,
some of whose masters have not a room , workshop , warehouse , or other
place sufficient to accommodate such a society : BROUGHAM2-1825-2,8.167

and it is quite <P_9> necessary that the place of rendezvous should on
no account be the alehouse . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.168

Whoever lent his premises for this purpose might satisfy himself that no
improper persons should be admitted , by taking the names of the whole
club from two or three steady men , who could be answerable for the
demeanour of the rest . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.169

Any interference beyond this would be unwise : unless in so far as the
men might voluntarily consult their masters from time to time ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.170

and their disposition to do so must depend wholly upon the relations of
kindness and mutual confidence subsisting between the parties .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.171

If any difficulty should be found in obtaining the use of a room from
their masters , there seems to be no good reason why they should not
have the use of any school-room that may be in their neighbourhood ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.172

and one room of this kind may accommodate several societies ; three , if
the meetings are twice a week ; and six , if they only meet once .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.173

I shall presently illustrate this matter further when I come to speak of
the Glasgow Institution . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.174

In the <font> third <$$font> place , it is evident that as want of time
prevents the operative classes from pursuing a systematic course of
education in all its details , a more summary and compendious method of
instruction must be adopted by them . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.175

The majority must be content with never going beyond a certain point ,
and with reaching that point by the most expeditious route .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.176

A few , thus initiated in the truths of science , will no doubt push
their attainments much further ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.177

and for these the works in common use will suffice ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.178

but for the multitude it will be most essential that works should be
prepared adapted to their circumstances . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.179

Thus , in teaching them geometry , it is not necessary to go through the
whole steps of that beautiful system , by which the most general and
remote truths are connected with the few simple definitions and axioms ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.180

enough will be accomplished , if they are made to perceive the nature of
geometrical investigation , and learn the leading properties of figure .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.181

In like manner , they may be taught the doctrines of mechanics with a
much more slender previous knowledge both of geometry and algebra , than
the common elementary works on dynamicks presuppose {TEXT:pre-suppose}
in the reader . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.182

Hence , a most essential service will be rendered to the cause of
knowledge by him who shall devote his time to the composition of
elementary treatises on the Mathematics , sufficiently clear , and yet
sufficiently compendious , to exemplify the method of reasoning employed
in that science , and to impart an accurate knowledge of the most useful
fundamental propositions , with their application to practical purposes
; and treatises upon Natural Philosophy , which may teach the great
principles of physics , and their practical application , to readers who
have but a general knowledge of mathematics , or who are even wholly
ignorant of the science beyond the common rules of arithmetic .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,9.183

Nor let <P_10> it be supposed , that the time thus bestowed is given
merely to instruct the people in the rudiments of philosophy , though
this would of itself be an object sufficiently brilliant to allure the
noblest ambition ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.184

for what higher achievement did the most sublime philosophy ever aspire
after , than to elevate the views and refine the character of the great
mass of mankind - at least in later times , when science no longer looks
down as of old upon the multitude , supercilious , and deeming that
great spirits alone perish not with the body ? BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.185

But if extending the bounds of science itself be the grand aim of all
philosophers in all ages , they indirectly , but surely , accomplish
this object , who enable thousands to speculate and experiment for one
to whom the path of investigation is now open . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.186

It is not necessary that all who are taught , or even any large
proportion , should go beyond the rudiments ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.187

but whoever feels within himself a desire and an aptitude to proceed
further , will press forward ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.188

and the chances of discovery , both in the arts and in science itself ,
will be thus indefinitely multiplied . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.189

Indeed , those discoveries immediately connected with experiment and
observation , are most likely to be made by men , whose lives being
spent in the midst of mechanical operations , are at the same time
instructed in the general principles upon which these depend , and
trained betimes to habits of speculation . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.190

He who shall prepare a treatise simply and concisely unfolding the
doctrines of Algebra , Geometry , and Mechanics , and adding examples
calculated to strike the imagination , of their connexion with other
branches of knowledge , and with the arts of common life , may fairly
claim a large share in that rich harvest of discovery and invention
which must be reaped by the thousands of ingenious and active men , thus
enabled to bend their faculties towards objects at once useful and
sublime . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.191

Although much may be done by the exertions of individuals , it is
manifest that a great deal more may be effected by the labours of a body
, in furthering this important measure . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.192

The subject has for some time past been under consideration ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.193

and I am not without hopes of seeing formed a Society for promoting the
composition , publication , and distribution of cheap and useful works .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.194

To qualify persons for becoming efficient members of this association ,
or co-operating with it all over the country , neither splendid talents
, nor profound learning , nor great wealth are required .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.195

Though such gifts , in their amplest measure , would not be thrown away
upon so important a design , they are by no means indispensable to its
success . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,10.196

A well-informed man of good sense , filled with the resolution to obtain
for the great body of his fellow-creatures , that high improvement which
both their understandings and their morals are by nature fitted to
receive , may labour in this good work , either in the central
institution or in some remote district , with the certainty of success ,
if he have <P_11> only that blessing of leisure for the sake of which
riches are chiefly to be coveted . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.197

Such a one , however averse by taste or habit to the turmoil of public
affairs , or the more ordinary strifes of the world , may in all quiet
and innocence enjoy the noblest gratification of which the most aspiring
nature is susceptible ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.198

he may influence by his single exertions the character and the fortunes
of a whole generation , and thus wield a power to be envied even by
vulgar ambition for the extent of its dominion - to be cherished by
virtue itself for the unalloyed blessings it bestows .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.199

<font> Fourthly , <$$font> The preparation of elementary works is not
the only , nor , at first , is it the most valuable service that can be
rendered towards economizing the time of the labouring classes .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.200

The institution of Lectures is , of all the helps that can be given ,
the most valuable , where circumstances permit ; that is , in towns of a
certain size . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.201

Much may thus be taught , even without any other instruction ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.202

but , combined with reading , and subservient to it , the effects of
public lectures are great indeed , especially in the present deficiency
of proper elementary works . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.203

The students are enabled to read with advantage ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.204

things are explained to them which no books sufficiently illustrate ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.205

access is afforded to teachers , who can remove the difficulties which
occur perpetually in the reading of uneducated persons ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.206

a word may often suffice to get rid of some obstacle which would have
impeded the unassisted student's progress for days ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.207

and then , whatever requires the performance of experiments to become
intelligible , can only be learnt by the bulk of mankind at a lecture ,
inasmuch as the wealthy alone can have such lessons in private , and
none but men highly gifted can hope to master those branches of science
without seeing the experimental illustrations . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.208

The branches of knowledge to which these observations chiefly apply ,
are Mechanical Philosophy and Chemistry , both as being more intimately
connected with the arts , and as requiring more explanation and
illustration by experiment . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.209

But the Mathematics , Astronomy , and Geology , the two former
especially , are well fitted for being taught publicly ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.210

and are of great practical use . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.211

Nor is there any reason why Moral and Political Philosophy should not be
explained in public lectures , though they may be learnt by reading far
more easily than the physical sciences . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.212

In all plans of this description , it is absolutely necessary that the
expenses should mainly be defrayed by those for whose benefit they are
contrived . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.213

It is the province of the rich to lay the foundation , by making certain
advances which are required in the first instance , and enabling the
poor to come forward , both as learners and contributors .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,11.214

But no such scheme can either take a deep root , or spread over the
country so as to produce its full measure of good , unless its support
is derived from <P_12> those who are chiefly to reap the benefits .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.215

Those benefits are well worth paying for ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.216

they are not only of great value in the improvement and gratification
which they afford to the mind , but in the direct addition which they
make to the pecuniary resources of the labouring classes .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.217

Instruction in the principles upon which the arts depend , will repay in
actual profit to those who live by the arts , far more than the cost of
learning . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.218

An artisan , a dyer , an engine-maker , will gain the more in money or
money's worth for being an expert chemist or mechanician ; and a
farm-servant , or bailiff , for knowing the economy and diseases of
cattle . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.219

I have before me the extract of a letter from one of the greatest
engine-makers in the country , stating , that a young man in humble life
had been selected from among many applicants , to fill a considerable
place in the manufactory , on account of his proficiency in science .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.220

The profit directly accruing from the knowledge of those sciences
provides an immediate fund , out of which the cost of acquiring it may
be easily defrayed ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.221

but a fund is as certainly though somewhat more remotely secured for
repaying , with large interest , the expense of acquiring knowledge of a
more general description - those branches of learning which improve the
morals , expand the understanding , and refine the taste .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.222

That invaluable fund is composed of the savings made by substituting
pure and harmless and cheap gratifications , in the stead of luxuries
which are both grosser and more costly - hurtful to the health , and
wasteful of time . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.223

The yearly cost of a lecture in the larger cities , where enlightened
and public-spirited men may be found willing to give instruction for
nothing , is indeed considerably less than in smaller places , where a
compensation must be made for the lecturer's time and work .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.224

But it seems advisable , that , even where gratuitous assistance could
be obtained , something like an adequate remuneration should be afforded
, both to preserve the principle of independence among the working
classes , and to secure the more accurate and regular discharge of the
duty . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.225

We shall therefore suppose , that the lectures , as well as the current
expenses of the room , and where there are experiments , of the
apparatus , are to be paid for ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.226

and still it appears by no means an undertaking beyond the reach of
those classes . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.227

The most expensive courses of teaching will be those requiring apparatus
; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.228

but those are likewise the most directly profitable to the scholars .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.229

Contributions may be reckoned upon to begin the plan , including the
original purchase of apparatus ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.230

and then we may estimate the yearly cost , which alone will fall upon
the members of the Association . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.231

The hire of a room may be reckoned at 30 <font> l. <$$font> ; the
salary of a lecturer , 40 <font> l. <$$font> ; wear and tear of
apparatus , 20 <font> l. <$$font> ; assistant and servant , 10 <font>
l. <$$font> ; clerk or collector , 10 <font> l. <$$font> ; fire and
lamps , 5 <font> l. <$$font> ; printing and advertising , 15 <font> l.
<$$font> ; making in all 130 <font> l. <$$font> BROUGHAM2-1825-2,12.232

<P_13>

But if two , or three courses are delivered in the same room , the
expenses of each will be reduced in proportion .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.234

Suppose three ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.235

the room may probably be had for 50 <font> l. <$$font> , the printing
for 20 <font> l. <$$font> , and the servants for 30 <font> l. <$$font>
; so that the expense of each course will be reduced to about 100 <font>
l. <$$font> BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.236

Each course may occupy six months of weekly lectures ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.237

consequently , if only a_hundred artisans are to be found who can spare
a shilling a week , one lecture may be carried on for 130 <font> l.
<$$font> ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.238

and if 120 artisans can be found to spare a shilling a week , three
courses may be carried on during the year , and each person attend the
whole . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.239

This calculation , however , supposes a very inconsiderable town .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.240

If the families engaged in trade and handicrafts have , one with another
, a single person contributing , the number of 100 answers to a
population of only 770 , supposing the proportion , of persons engaged
in trade and handicrafts to be the same as in the West Riding of
Yorkshire ; and 710 , taking the proportion of Lancashire .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.241

If , indeed , we take the proportions in the manufacturing towns , it
will answer in some cases to a population of 5500 , and in others of
little more than 500 . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.242

But even taking the proportion from towns in the least manufacturing
counties , as Huntingdonshire , the population required to furnish 100
will not exceed 900 - which supposes a town of about 200 houses .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.243

One of three times the size is but an inconsiderable place ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.244

and yet in such a place , upon a very moderate computation , 200 persons
might easily be found to spare sixpence a week all the year round ;
which would be amply sufficient for two lectures .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.245

In the larger towns , where 500 or 600 persons might associate , five
shillings a quarter would be sufficient to carry on three or four
lectures , and leave between 150 <font> l. <$$font> and 200 <font> l.
<$$font> a year for the purchase of books . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.246

In estimating the expenses I have supposed a room to be hired and the
rent to be moderate . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.247

To make a beginning , the parties must make a shift with any public room
or other place that may be vacant ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.248

the great point is to begin : BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.249

the numbers are certain to increase , and the income with the numbers ,
as the plan becomes known and its manifold attractions operate upon the
people . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.250

For the same reason I reckon a small sum for apparatus .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.251

Great progress may be made in teaching with very cheap and simple
experiments . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.252

Indeed some of the most important , if not the most showy , are the
least costly and complicated . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.253

By far the grandest discoveries in natural science were made with hardly
any apparatus . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.254

A pan of water and two thermometers were the tools that in the skilful
hands of Black detected latent heat ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.255

a crown's worth of glass , threepenny-worth of salt , a little chalk ,
and a pair of scales , enabled the same great philosopher to found the
system of modern chemistry , by tracing the existence and the
combinations of fixed air ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,13.256

with little more <P_14> machinery the genius of Scheele created the
materials of which the fabric was built , BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.257

and anticipated some of the discoveries that have illustrated a later
age ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.258

a prism , a lens , and a sheet of pasteboard enabled Newton to unfold
the composition of light , and the origin of colours ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.259

Franklin ascertained the nature of lightning with a kite , a wire , a
bit of riband , and a key : - to say nothing of the great chemist of our
own day , of whose most useful , perhaps most philosophical discovery ,
the principle might have been traced with the help of a common wire
fire-guard . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.260

Even the elements of mechanics may be explained with apparatus almost as
cheap and simple . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.261

- To take one instance ; the fundamental property of the lever <paren>
and I may say of the whole science <$$paren> may be demonstrated by a
foot rule , a knife , and a few leaden balls of equal size .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.262

The other mechanical powers <paren> which are indeed for the most part
resolvable into the lever <$$paren> may be explained with almost equal
ease ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.263

and after all , it is those principles that practical men most require
to have unfolded , and their application to mechanism illustrated , by
figures and instruments . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.264

Machinery , even in its complicated form , is more easily understood by
them , because they are in practice familiar with its operations and
terms , and will follow the description of an engine and its working
without a model , or at most with a drawing , far more readily than the
learners of natural science in other conditions of life .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.265

The simplification of apparatus for teaching physical science is an
important object , and one to which learned men may most usefully direct
their attention . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.266

There can@ @not be a doubt , that a compendious set of machines may be
constructed to illustrate at a very cheap price a whole course of
lectures . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.267

Certain parts may be prepared capable of being formed into various
combinations , so as to present different engines ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.268

and where separate models are necessary , their construction may be
greatly simplified by omitting parts which are not essential to explain
the principle , and show the manner of working .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.269

The price , too , will be greatly reduced when a larger number being
required of each , they may be prepared by wholesale .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.270

A friend of mine is at present occupied in devising the best means of
simplifying apparatus for lectures upon the mechanical powers ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.271

and cheap chemical laboratories may then receive his consideration .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.272

It is likewise in contemplation at a great manufacturing establishment ,
where every part of the machinery is made upon the spot , to prepare a
number of sets of cheap apparatus for teaching , so that any Mechanics
Institution may on very moderate terms be furnished at least with what
is necessary for carrying on a course of dynamics .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.273

The drawings may be multiplied by the polygraphic methods generally in
use . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,14.274

The difficulty of obtaining a fit lecturer is one likely for some <P_15>
time to be much felt , especially in small towns .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.275

One method of removing it is by sending an experienced teacher from
place to place ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.276

and the man qualified for the task , who should fastidiously reject so
useful and so honourable an occupation , might be a man of science ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.277

but would little deserve to be called a philosopher .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.278

No talents and no acquirements are too great to be thus applied ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.279

and no use to which parts and learning can be put is more dignified .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.280

But another supply of instructors will soon be ready .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.281

Each Institution now established must in a short time form teachers .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.282

Among a great number of students , some must be found to make such
progress as will qualify them for the office . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.283

In the Edinburgh School of Arts a joiner has for some time past been
teaching mathematics , which he learnt there . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.284

At Glasgow , a person of the same trade , who had been taught at the
school established by Dr. Birkbeck , has lectured on geography ,
chemistry , and mechanics . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.285

These instances prove that the men will be able to teach ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.286

it is equally clear that the wages of a lecturer will make them turn
their attention to this business in places where one is wanted .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.287

After all , it may often happen that a lecture can@ @not be undertaken
on however moderate a plan ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.288

in that case it will be advisable to begin with a library , to which a
lecture may afterwards be added . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.289

- This was the course pursued at Kendal , where a " <font> Mechanics and
Apprentices Library <$$font> " was begun last spring , and in autumn a
course of lectures was delivered upon the Philosophy of Natural History
. BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.290

At Carlisle , and I believe at Hawick , the same method has been adopted
. BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.291

I have remarked , that in forming these Institutions , it is a
fundamental principle to make the expenses be mainly defrayed by the
mechanics themselves ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.292

it is another principle , in my opinion equally essential , that they
should have the principal share in the management .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.293

This seems necessary for securing both the success and the independence
of the system . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.294

Nor is there the least reason to apprehend mismanagement .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.295

If benefit societies are , upon the whole , well managed , we may rely
upon institutions being still better conducted , where the improvement
of the mind being the object , those only will ever take an active part
, who are desirous of their own advancement in knowledge , and of the
general instruction of the class to which they belong .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.296

Indeed there seems no better means of securing the continued attention
of the Directors , than placing the direction in the hands of those who
are alone interested in the prosperity of the concern .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.297

Neither is there any fear that the suggestions of persons in a higher
station , and of more ample information , may not be duly attended to .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,15.298

Gratitude for the assistance received , and the advice offered ,
together with a conviction that the only motive for interfering is the
good of the establishment , will give at least their just weight <P_16>
to the recommendations of patrons ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.299

and if it were not always so , far better would it be to see such
influence fail entirely , than to run the risk of the apathy which might
be occasioned among the men , and the abuse of the Institutions
themselves , which might frequently be produced by excluding from the
control of their affairs those whose interests are the only object in
view . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.300

The opinions of patrons are always sure to have influence as long as
their object plainly is to promote the good of those for whom the
Institution was founded ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.301

and as soon as they are actuated by any other views , it is very fit
that their influence should cease . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.302

There is nearly as little reason to apprehend , that the necessity of
discussing , at meetings of the members , the affairs of the Institution
, will give rise to a spirit of controversy and a habit of making
speeches . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.303

Those meetings for private business will of course be held very seldom ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.304

and a feeling may always be expected to prevail , that the continuance
of the establishment depends upon preserving union , notwithstanding any
diversity of opinion in matters of detail , and upon keeping the
discussion of rules and regulations subordinate to the attendance upon
the lectures , the main object of the establishment .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.305

The time when information and advice is most wanted , with other
assistance from the wealthy and the well informed , is at the beginning
of the undertaking ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.306

and at that time the influence of those patrons will necessarily be the
most powerful . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.307

Much depends upon a right course being taken at first ; proper rules
laid down ; fit subjects selected for lecture ; good teachers chosen ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.308

and upon all these matters the opinions and wishes of those who chiefly
contribute to found the several institutions , must receive great
attention . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.309

What I have now stated , is not merely that which seems likely to happen
by reasoning from the circumstances ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.310

it has in fact happened in the instances where the trial has been made
on the largest scale . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.311

We have never found any inconvenience from this plan during the twelve
months that our Mechanics Institution in London has been established .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.312

In Glasgow , there is a much longer experience in its favour ; with this
addition , that a contrary plan having at one time been pursued there ,
the men ceased to interest themselves in the lecture ; and the
Institution declined . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.313

The extraordinary success of the new Institution , which now places it
at the head of all such establishments , may chiefly be ascribed to its
administration being in the hands of the men themselves .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.314

I have said that the <font> independence <$$font> of these undertakings
, as well as their success , is to be considered ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.315

I really should be disposed to view any advantage in point of knowledge
gained by the body of the people , as somewhat equivocal , or at least
as much alloyed with evil , if purchased by the increase of their
dependence upon their superiors . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,16.316

They will always be abundantly thankful for <P_17> the help afforded
them in beginning such institutions , and quite ready to receive advice
from those who render them assistance . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.317

But if the latter keep the management entirely in their own hands , they
enforce the appeal to gratitude by something very like control ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.318

and they hurt the character of those whom they would serve .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.319

For this reason , as well as for promoting more effectually and
generally the establishment of these institutions , it is of the last
importance that the yearly expense should be reduced to such a sum as
can be wholly raised by the students . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.320

What they receive in money from their superiors will then be given once
for all at the outset ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.321

what they receive from time to time in good counsel , and in teaching ,
either by lectures or publications , shows much real kindness ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.322

confers a great benefit , BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.323

and ensures a grateful return , without bringing into action any of
those feelings alike painful and injurious , which arise from the
assumption of authority grounded on the mere differences of rank and
wealth . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.324

It is now fit that we advert to the progress that has already been made
in establishing this system of instruction . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.325

Its commencement was the work of Dr. Birkbeck , to whom the people of
this island owe a debt of gratitude , the extent of which it would not
be easy , perhaps in the present age not possible , to describe ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.326

for as , in most cases , the effective demand precedes the supply , it
would have been more in the ordinary course of things , that a teacher
should spring up at the call of the mechanics for instruction :
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.327

but long before any symptoms appeared of such an appetite on their part
, and with the avowed purpose of implanting the desire in them , or at
least of unfolding and directing it , by presenting the means of
gratification , that most learned and excellent person formed the design
, as enlightened as it was benevolent , of admitting the working classes
of his fellow-countrymen to the knowledge of sciences , till then almost
deemed the exclusive property of the higher ranks in society , and only
acquired accidentally and irregularly in a few rare instances of
extraordinary natural talents , by any of the working classes .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.328

Dr. Birkbeck , before he settled in London , where he has since reached
the highest station in the medical profession , resided for some time in
Glasgow as Professor in the Anderson College ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.329

and about the year 1800 , he announced a Course of Lectures on Natural
Philosophy , and its application to the Arts , for the instruction of
mechanics . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.330

But a few at the first availed themselves of this advantage ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.331

by degrees , however , the extraordinary perspicuity of the teacher's
method , the judicious selection of his experiments , and the natural
attractions of the subject , to men whose lives were spent in directing
or witnessing operations , of which the principles were now first
unfolded to them , proved successful in diffusing a general taste for
the study ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,17.332

<P_18>

and when he left Glasgow two or three years afterwards , about
seven_hundred eagerly and constantly attended the class .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.334

For some time after Dr. Birkbeck's departure , the lectures of his able
and worthy successor Dr. Ure were well frequented ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.335

and when the number of the students began to decline , probably from the
circumstance of their having no direct share in the management of the
Institution , the Professor happily thought of adding to it a library
for the use of the mechanics , and entrusting the direction of it
entirely to a committee chosen by themselves . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.336

This gave new life to the enterprise , BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.337

and the Gas Light Company having in return for some services rendered
them by the Professor , agreed to light the book-room two evenings in
the week , a custom arose among the men who came to change their books ,
of remaining to converse upon the subjects of their reading ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.338

and an extraordinary impulse was thus given to their spirit of inquiry .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.339

The Library Committee , too , being chosen by the whole body , became in
some sort its representative , BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.340

and claimed to interfere in the management of the Institution .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.341

It soon happened that some of their suggestions were not attended to ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.342

and a difference , at first to be regretted , led to consequences highly
beneficial ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.343

for a great number seceded from the lectures BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.344

and formed an Institution entirely under the management of the mechanics
themselves . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.345

It has been successful beyond all expectation ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.346

a_thousand working men attended it last winter , while the numbers of
the parent establishment were scarcely diminished .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.347

Out of these public associations has arisen one upon a more confined but
most useful plan , applicable to every large manufactory .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.348

The Gas Light Company's men , between 60 and 70 in number , have formed
themselves , on the suggestion of Mr. Nelson the foreman , into a club
for mutual instruction ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.349

laying by a small sum monthly , they have collected about 300 volumes ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.350

and the Company giving them a library room , which they light and heat ,
the men meet every evening , to converse upon literary and scientific
subjects , and once a week to lecture ; any one who chooses , giving a
fortnight's notice that he will treat on some subject which he has been
studying . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.351

The books are of all kinds , with the exception of theology , which from
the various sects the men belong to is of necessity excluded .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,18.352

It is somewhat singular , that although there are many towns in Scotland
, and some within a short distance of Glasgow , where hundreds of
artisans are collected , yet twenty years elapsed before the example was
followed , and men profited by an experiment , which , for so long a
period , was constantly before <P_19> their eyes , and attended with
such remarkable success . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.353

It was not till the year 1821 that Edinburgh adopted the plan with some
variations , a part of which appear to be improvements .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.354

The promoters of the measure began by drawing up a short sketch of the
proposed institution , and causing it to be circulated among the
principal master mechanics , with a request that they would read it in
their workshops , and take down the names of such of the men as were
desirous of being taught the principles of those sciences most useful to
artisans . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.355

In the course of ten days , between 70 and 80 names were entered ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.356

and a private meeting was held of a few gentlemen who were disposed to
encourage the experiment . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.357

These resolved to begin a subscription for the purpose .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.358

In April 1821 they circulated a prospectus among the mechanics ,
announcing the commencement of a Course of Lectures on Mechanics , and
another on Chemistry , in October following , - with the opening of a
Library of Books upon the same subjects , for perusal at home as well as
in the room ; the hours of lecture to be from eight to nine in the
evening , twice a week , for six months ; and the terms of admission to
the whole , both lectures and library , fifteen shillings a year .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.359

A statement was then issued to the public at large , announcing the
establishment of a " <font> School of Arts <$$font> , " with the
particulars of the plan ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.360

and so well was it received , by all classes , that in September ,
notice was given of 220 mechanics having entered as students , and such
a sum having been subscribed by the public , as enabled the Directors to
open the establishment in October . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.361

When 400 had purchased tickets , the two courses of lectures were
delivered by Dr. Forbes and Mr. Galbraith ; to which one on
architecture and one on farriery were added , with a class for
architectural and mechanical drawing during the summer recess .
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.362

The Mechanical Lectures had hardly begun , when some of the students ,
finding the want of mathematical knowledge , proposed to form themselves
into a class , under one of their own number , a joiner , who had agreed
to teach them gratuitously the Elements of Geometry and the higher
branches of Arithmetic . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.363

This suggestion was warmly approved of by the Directors ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.364

and some assistance in books being given , thirty met once a week for
Geometry , and once for Arithmetic ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.365

and adopting the plan of mutual instruction , they arranged the class in
five divisions , each under the best scholar as a Monitor , and going
over in one night lessons of the night before . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.366

The number of this class being limited to thirty , those who were
excluded formed another on the same plan , under a cabinet-maker , also
a student of the School of Arts . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.367

The joiner's name is James Yule ; the cabinet-maker's David Dewar ;
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.368

and their successful exertions to teach their fellow-workmen are
deserving of very great commendation . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,19.369

<P_20>

Mr. Galbraith , the Mechanical Professor , adopted the plan of setting
exercises to his pupils ; BROUGHAM2-1825-2,20.371

and a list has been published of those who chiefly distinguished
themselves by the number and accuracy of their solutions , being 25
persons . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,20.372

The average receipts of the two first years were , from subscriptions ,
448 <font> l. <$$font> yearly , and from the students 300 <font> l.
<$$font> BROUGHAM2-1825-2,20.373

The average expenditure was about 620 <font> l. <$$font> ,
BROUGHAM2-1825-2,20.374

and a saving of 300 <font> l. <$$font> was made towards building a
lecture-room . BROUGHAM2-1825-2,20.375

