<BEGIN_burney-1768-2>

<P_1,4>

{ED:FRANCES_BURNEY._JUVENILE_JOURNAL_Addressed_To_A_Certain_Miss_Nobody}

Poland Street , London , BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.4

March 27 . BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.5

To have some account of my thoughts , manners , acquaintance and actions
, when the hour arrives in which time is more nimble than memory , is
the reason which induces me to keep a Journal . A Journal in which I
must confess my <font> every <$$font> thought , must open my whole heart
! BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.6

But a thing of this kind ought to be addressed to somebody -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.7

I must imagine {TEXT:imagion} myself to be talking - talking to the most
intimate of friends - to one in whom I should take delight in confiding
, and remorse in concealment : - BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.8

but who must this friend be ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.9

to make choice of one in whom I can but <font> half <$$font> rely ,
would be to frustrate entirely the intention of my plan .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.10

The only one I could wholly , totally confide in , lives in the same
house with me , BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.11

and not only never <font> has , <$$font> but never <font> will ,
<$$font> leave me one secret to tell her . BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.12

To <font> whom , <$$font> then , <font> must <$$font> I dedicate my
wonderful , surprising and interesting Adventures ?
BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.13

- to <font> whom <$$font> dare I reveal my private opinion of my nearest
relations ? My secret thoughts of my dearest friends ? my own hopes ,
fears , reflections , and dislikes ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.14

- Nobody ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.15

To Nobody , then , will I write my Journal ! since to Nobody can I be
wholly unreserved - to Nobody can I reveal every thought , every wish of
my heart , with the most unlimited confidence , the most unremitting
sincerity to the end of my life ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.16

For what chance , what accident can end my connections with Nobody ?
BURNEY-1768-2,1,4.17

No secret <font> can <$$font> I conceal from <P_1,5> Nobody ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.18

and to Nobody can I be <font> ever <$$font> unreserved .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.19

Disagreement can@ @not stop our affection , BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.20

Time itself has no power to end our friendship . BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.21

The love , the esteem I entertain for Nobody , Nobody's self has not
power to destroy . BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.22

From Nobody I have nothing to fear , BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.23

the secrets sacred to friendship Nobody will not reveal when the affair
is doubtful , BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.24

Nobody will not look towards the side least favourable .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.25

I will suppose you , then , to be my best friend , <paren> tho' Heaven
forbid you ever should ! <$$paren> my dearest companion - and a
romantick girl , BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.26

for mere oddity may perhaps be more sincere - more tender - than if you
were a friend in propria persona - in as much as imagination
{TEXT:imagionation} often exceeds reality . BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.27

In your breast my errors may create pity without exciting contempt ;
BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.28

may raise your compassion , without eradicating your love .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.29

From this moment , then , my dear girl - but why , permit me to ask ,
must a <font> female <$$font> be made Nobody ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.30

Ah ! my dear , what were this world good for , <font> were <$$font>
Nobody a female ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.31

And now I have done with preambulation . BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.32

Monday Night , May 30 . BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.33

O my dear - such a charming day ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.34

and then last night - BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.35

well , you shall have it all in order - as well as I can recollect .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.36

Last night , while Hetty , Susey , - Charlotte and myself were at tea ,
mama and Miss Allen not being returned from Harrow , and Papa in his
study busy as usual , that lively , charming , spirited Mr. Young
enter'd the room . BURNEY-1768-2,1,5.37

O how glad we were <P_1,6> to see him . BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.38

He was in extreme good spirits . BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.39

Hetty sat down to the harpsichord BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.40

and sung to him - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.41

mama soon returned , BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.42

and then they left it . BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.43

<font> Well , and so <$$font> - upon the entrance of fathers and mothers
- we departed this life of anguish and misery , BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.44

and rested our weary souls in the Elysian fields - my Papa's study -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.45

there freed from the noise and bustle of the world , enjoy'd the
{COM:two_asterisks_omitted} <font> harmony <$$font> of chattering , and
the melody of musick ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.46

- there , burying each gloomy thought , each sad reflection , in the
hearse {COM:editor_puts_question_mark_after_preceding_word} of
dissipation , lost the remembrance of our woes , our cruel misfortunes ,
our agonizing sorrows - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.47

and graciously permitted them to glide along the stream of reviving
comfort , blown by the gentle gale of new-born hope , till they reposed
in the bosom of oblivion - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.48

then - No 't@ @is impossible ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.49

This style is too great , too noble to be supported with proper dignity
- the sublime and beautiful how charmingly blended !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.50

Yes ! I <font> will <$$font> desist - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.51

I <font> will <$$font> lay down my pen while I can with ...
BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.52

It would be miraculous had I power to maintain the same glowing
enthusiasm - the same - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.53

on my word I can <font> not <$$font> go on , BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.54

my imagination is rais'd <font> too <$$font> high , BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.55

it soars above this little dirty sphere , BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.56

it transports me beyond mortality - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.57

it conveys me to the Elysian fields - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.58

but my ideas grow confused - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.59

I fear you can@ @not comprehend my meaning - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.60

all I shall add , is to beg you would please to attribute your not
understanding the sublimity of my sentiments to your own stupidity and
dullness of apprehension , and not to my want of meaning - which is only
too fine to be clear . BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.61

After this beautiful flow of expression , refinement of sentiment and
exaltation of ideas , can I meanly descend to common life ?
BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.62

can I basely stoop to relate the particulars of common life ?
BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.63

can I condescendingly deign to recapitulate vulgar conversation ?
BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.64

I can ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.65

O what a falling off is here ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.66

- what a chatter there was ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.67

- however I was not engaged in it ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.68

and therefore , on a little consideration , a due sense of my own
superlative merit convinces me that to mention anything more of the
matter would be nonsense . BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.69

Adieu , then , most amiable - who ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.70

Nobody ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.71

Not so fast , good girl ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.72

Not so fast - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.73

't@ @is true , I have done with last night - BURNEY-1768-2,1,6.74

but I have all to-day - a charming one it is , <P_1,7> too - to relate .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.75

Last night , to my great satisfaction , Mama prevail'd on Mr. Y- to
promise to be of our party to-day to Greenwich . BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.76

Well , he slept here . BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.77

For my part , I could not sleep all night , BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.78

I was up before five o'clock - BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.79

Hetty and Susette were before six , - and Miss Allen soon after -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.80

while we were all adorning our sweet persons , - each at a looking-glass
- admiring the enchanting object it presented to our view , who should
rap at the chamber door but - <paren> my cheeks are crimsoned with the
blush of indignation while I write it <$$paren> - Mr. Young !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.81

I ran into a closet , BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.82

and lock'd myself up - BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.83

however he did not pollute <font> my <$$font> chamber with his
unhallow'd feet , BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.84

but poor Miss Allen was in a miserable condition - BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.85

her Journal , which he wanted to see , in full sight - on her open
bureau . BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.86

He said he had a right to it as her uncle . BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.87

She called Hetty into her room BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.88

and they were a long time ere they could turn him out of it .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.89

Well but , now for the Greenwich party . BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.90

We set out at about ten or eleven - BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.91

the company was , mama , Mr. Young , Miss Allen , Stephen , and your
most obsequious slave . BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.92

- The Conversation as we went was such as I would wish to remember -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.93

I will <font> try <$$font> if I can , BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.94

for I think it even worthy the perusal of <font> Nobody !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.95

- what <$$font> an honour ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.96

Well , I have rack'd my brains half-@ @an-@ @hour - in vain -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.97

and if you imagine I shall trouble myself with racking the dear
creatures any longer you are under a mistake . BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.98

One thing , however , which related to myself , I shall mention , as
<font> that <$$font> struck me too forcibly to be now , or perhaps
<font> ever , <$$font> forgot : BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.99

besides , it has been the occasion of my receiving so much raillery ,
&c. , that it is requisite for you to hear it , in order to observe the
decorum due to the Drama . BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.100

Talking of happiness and misery , sensibility and a total want of
feeling , my mama said , turning to me . " Here@ @'s a girl will <font>
never <$$font> be happy ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.101

<font> Never <$$font> while she lives ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.102

- for she possesses perhaps as feeling a heart as ever girl had ! "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.103

Some time after , when we were near the end of our journey , " and so ,
" said Mr. Young - " my friend Fanny possesses a very feeling heart ?
" BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.104

He harp'd on this some little time till at last he said he would call me
<font> feeling Fanny <$$font> , BURNEY-1768-2,1,7.105

it was <font> characteristick <$$font> , he said , and a great deal more
such nonsense , that put me out of all patience , which <P_1,8> same
virtue I have not yet sufficiently recovered to recount any more of our
conversation , charming as part of it was , <font> which <$$font> part
you may be sure <font> I <$$font> had my share in ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.106

how else <font> could <$$font> it be charming ? ...
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.107

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

From Lynn Regis . BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.109

I am reading the " Letters of Henry and Frances " BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.110

and like them prodigiously . BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.111

I have just finished Mrs. Rowe's Letters from the Dead to the Living -
and moral and entertaining , - BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.112

I had heard a great deal of them before I saw them ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.113

and am sorry to tell you I was much disappointed with them :
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.114

they are so very enthusiastick , that the religion she preaches rather
disgusts and cloys than charms and elevates - and so romantick , that
every word betrays improbability , instead of disguising fiction , and
displays the Author , instead of human nature . BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.115

For my own part , I can@ @not be much pleased without an appearance of
truth ; at least of possibility - BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.116

I wish the story to be natural tho' the sentiments are refined ; and the
characters to be probable tho' their behaviour is excelling .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.117

Well , I am going to bed - BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.118

Sweet dreams attend me - BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.119

and may you sympathize with me . BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.120

Heigh_ho ! I wonder when I shall return to London !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.121

- Not that we are very dull here - no , really - tolerably happy -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.122

I wish Kitty Cooke would write to me - BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.123

I long to hear how my dear , dear , beloved Mr. Crisp does .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.124

My papa always mentions him by the name of my <font> Flame . <$$font>
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.125

Indeed he is not mistaken - BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.126

himself is the <font> only <$$font> man on earth I prefer to him .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,8.127

Well - I must write a word <P_1,9> more - only to end my paper - so !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.128

- that@ @'s done - BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.129

and now good night to you ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.130

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Saturday . BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.132

Oh my dear I have received the <font> finest <$$font> letter !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.133

... while we were at dinner a packet came from London .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.134

Papa opened it , BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.135

and among other epistles was the following to me - BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.136

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<font> I offered some few words <$$font> in favour of my poor old abused
town - the land of <font> my <$$font> nativity - of the world's
happiness ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.138

We disputed a little time , and Hetty suddenly cried , " Hush , hush -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.139

Mama@ @'s in the next room - BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.140

If she hears us - we two shall be shipt , BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.141

and Fanny will have a sugar-plumb . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.142

" Ay , " cried A. , BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.143

" 't@ @is her defending Lynn which makes mama and my grandmama so fond
of her . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.144

" Fond of me ! " cried I , BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.145

" what makes you imagine Mrs. Allen fond of me ? "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.146

" What she said of you - " ... " BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.147

I am now writing in the pleasantest place belonging to this house .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.148

It is called sometimes " the <font> Look Out <$$font> " - as ships are
observed from hence , and at other times , the Cabin .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.149

... It is at the {TEXT:missing_"at_the"} end of a long garden that runs
along the house . BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.150

I am going to tell you something concerning myself , which , <paren> if
I have not chanced to mention it before <$$paren> will , I believe , a
little surprise you - BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.151

it is , that I scarce wish for anything so truly . Really , and greatly
, as to be <font> in love <$$font> - BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.152

upon my word I am serious - BURNEY-1768-2,1,9.153

and very gravely and sedately , assure you it is a <P_1,10> <font> real
<$$font> and <font> true <$$font> wish . BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.154

I can@ @not help thinking it is a great happiness to have a strong and
particular attachment to some one person , independent of duty ,
interest , relationship or pleasure ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.155

but I carry not my wish so far as for a <font> mutual tendresse .
<$$font> BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.156

No , I should be contented to love <font> Sola <$$font> - and let <font>
Dueto <$$font> be reserved for those who have a proper sense of their
superiority . BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.157

For my own part , I vow and declare that the mere pleasure of having a
great affection for some one person to which I was neither guided by
fear , hope of profit , gratitude , respect , or any motive but mere
<font> fancy , <$$font> would sufficiently satisfy me ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.158

and I should not at all wish a return . BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.159

Bless me how I run on ! Foolish and ill-judged !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.160

How despicable a picture have I drawn of an object of Love !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.161

mere giddiness , not inclination , I am sure , penn'd it -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.162

Love without respect or gratitude - that could only be felt for a person
wholly undeserving - BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.163

but indeed I write so much at random , that it is much more a chance if
I know what I am saying than if I do not . BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.164

I have just finish'd " Henry and Frances " - BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.165

They have left me in a very serious , very grave mood - almost
melancholy - BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.166

a bell is now tolling , most dreadfully loud and solemn , for the death
of some person of this town , which contributes not a little to add to
my seriousness - BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.167

indeed I never heard anything so dismal - BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.168

this bell is sufficient to lower to the highest spirits - and more than
sufficient to quite subdue those which are already low .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.169

The greatest part of the last volume of " Henry and Frances , " is wrote
by Henry - and on the gravest of grave subjects , and that which is most
dreadful to our thoughts - Eternal Misery . BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.170

Religion in general is the subject to all the latter part of these
Letters , BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.171

and this is particularly treated on . BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.172

I do@ @n't know that I ever read finer sentiments on pity and
Christianity , than the second vol. abounds with -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.173

indeed , most of the Letters might be call'd with very little alteration
- Essays on Religion . BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.174

I own I differ from him in many of his thoughts BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.175

but in far many more I am delighted with him . BURNEY-1768-2,1,10.176

His sentiments show him to be a man possessed of all the humanity which
dignifies his sex ; his observations , of all the penetration and
judgment which improves it , and his expressions , of <P_1,11> all the
ability , capacity and power which adorn it . BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.177

I can@ @not express how infinitely more I am charmed with him at the
conclusion than beginning . BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.178

Some of his opinions - I might say many of them - on divine subjects , I
think , would be worthy a sermon - and an excellent one too .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.179

It is a sweet , mild evening , BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.180

I will take a turn in the garden , and re-peruse in my thoughts these
genuine , interesting Letters . BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.181

This garden is very small , but very , very prettily laid out -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.182

the greatest part is quite a grove , BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.183

and three people might be wholly concealed from each other with ease in
it . BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.184

I scarce ever walk in it , without becoming grave ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.185

for it has the most private , lonely , shady , <font> melancholy
<$$font> look in the world . BURNEY-1768-2,1,11.186

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<P_1,12>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

I have this very moment finish'd reading a novel call'd the Vicar of
Wakefield . BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.190

It was wrote by Dr. Goldsmith , BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.191

His style is rational and sensible BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.192

and I knew it again immediately . BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.193

This book is of a very singular kind - BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.194

I own I began it with distaste and disrelish , having just read the
elegant Letters of Henry , BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.195

- the beginning of it , even disgusted me - BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.196

he mentions his wife with such indifference - such contempt -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.197

the contrast of Henry's treatment of Frances struck me - the more so ,
as it is real - while this tale is fictitious BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.198

and then the style of the latter is so elegantly natural , so tenderly
manly , so unassumingly rational , BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.199

- I own I was tempted to throw {TEXT:thro'} the book aside -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.200

but there was something in the situation of his family , which if it did
not interest me , at least drew me on - BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.201

and as I proceeded , I was better pleased . BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.202

- The description of his rural felicity , his simple , unaffected
contentment - and family domestic happiness , gave me much pleasure -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.203

but still , I was not satisfied , BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.204

a <font> something <$$font> was wanting to make the book satisfy me - to
make me feel for the Vicar in every line he writes ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.205

nevertheless , before I was half thro' the first volume , I was , as I
may truly express myself , <font> surprised into tears <$$font> -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.206

and in the second volume , I really sobb'd . BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.207

It appears to me , to be impossible any person could read this book
thro' with a dry eye BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.208

at the same time the best part of it is that which turns one's grief out
of doors , to open them to laughter . BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.209

He advances many very bold and singular opinions -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.210

for example , he avers that murder is the sole crime for which death
ought to be the punishment , BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.211

he goes even farther , BURNEY-1768-2,1,12.212

and ventures to affirm that our laws in regard to penalties and
punishments <P_1,13> are <font> all <$$font> too severe .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.213

This doctrine might be contradicted from the very essence of our
religion - Scripture BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.214

for {COM:erasure_in_original} in the Bible - in Exodus particularly ,
death is commanded by God himself , for many crimes besides murder .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.215

But this author shows in all his works a love of peculiarity and of
making {ED:sic,_but_probably_"marking"} originality of character in
others ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.216

and therefore I am not surprised he possesses it himself .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.217

This Vicar is a very venerable old man - BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.218

his distresses <font> must <$$font> move you . BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.219

There is but very little story , BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.220

the plot is thin , the incidents very rare , the sentiments uncommon ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.221

the vicar is contented , humble , pious , virtuous , quite a darling
character . BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.222

How far more was I pleased with the genuine productions of Mr.
Griffith's pen - BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.223

for that is the real name of Henry , BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.224

- I hear that more volumes are lately published .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.225

I wish I could get them , BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.226

I have read but two - BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.227

the elegance and delicacy of the manner - expressions - style of that
book are so superior ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.228

- How much I should like to be acquainted with the writers of it !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.229

- Those Letters are doubly pleasing , charming to me , for being genuine
- BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.230

they have increased my relish for <font> minute , heartfelt <$$font>
writing , and encouraged me in my attempt to give an opinion of the
books I read . BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.231

Cabin , Wednesday Afternoon . BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.232

I always spend the evening , sometimes all the afternoon , in this sweet
Cabin - except sometimes , when unusually thoughtful , I prefer the
garden ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.233

I can@ @not express the pleasure I have in writing down my thoughts , at
the very moment - my opinion of people when I first see them , and how I
alter , or how confirm myself in it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.234

and I am much deceived in my <font> fore_sight <$$font> , if I shall not
have very great delight in reading this <font> living proof <$$font> of
my manner of passing my time , my sentiments , my thoughts of people I
know , and a_thousand other things in future - BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.235

there is something to me very unsatisfactory in passing year after year
, without even a memorandum of what you did , &c.
BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.236

And then , all the happy hours I spend with particular friends and
favourites would fade from my recollection . BURNEY-1768-2,1,13.237

...

<P_1,14>

July 17 . BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.240

Such a set of tittle_tattle , prittle_prattle visitants !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.241

Oh dear ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.242

I am so sick of the ceremony and fuss of these fall_lall people !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.243

So much dressing - chit_chat - complimentary nonsense -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.244

In short , a Country Town is my detestation - BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.245

all the conversation is scandal , all the attention , dress , and <font>
almost <$$font> all the heart , folly , envy , and censoriousness .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.246

A City or a village are the only places which I think , can be
comfortable , BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.247

for a Country Town , I think has all the bad qualities , without one of
the good ones , of both . BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.248

We live here , generally speaking , in a very regular way -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.249

we breakfast always at 10 , BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.250

and rise as much before as we please - BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.251

we dine precisely at 2 , BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.252

drink tea about 6 - BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.253

and sup exactly at 9 . BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.254

I make a kind of rule , never to indulge myself in my two <font> most
<$$font> favourite pursuits , reading and writing , in the morning -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.255

no , like a very good girl I give that up wholly , accidental occasions
and preventions excepted , to needle work , by which means my reading
and writing in the afternoon is a pleasure I can@ @not be blamed for by
my mother , as it does not take up the time I ought to spend otherwise .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.256

I never pretend to be so superior a being as to be above having and
indulging a <font> Hobby Horse <$$font> , BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.257

and while I keep mine within due bounds and limits , nobody , I flatter
myself , would wish to deprive me of the poor animal :
BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.258

to be sure , he is not form'd for labour , BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.259

and is rather lame and weak , BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.260

but then the dear creature is faithful , constant and loving ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.261

and tho' he sometimes prances , would not kick anyone into the mire , or
hurt a single soul for the world - BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.262

and I would not part with him for one who could win the greatest prize
that ever <font> was <$$font> won at any Races . BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.263

Alas , alas ! my poor Journal ! how dull {COM:missing_comma}
unentertaining , uninteresting thou art ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.264

- oh what would I give for some Adventure worthy reciting - for
something which would surprise - astonish you ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.265

I have lately read the Prince of Abyssinia - BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.266

I am almost equally charm'd and shocked at it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.267

the style , the sentiments are inimitable - BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.268

but the subject is dreadful - BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.269

and handled as it is by Dr. Johnson , might make <font> any <$$font>
young , perhaps old , person tremble . BURNEY-1768-2,1,14.270

O , how dreadful , <P_1,15> how terrible is it to be told by a man of
his genius and knowledge , in so affectingly probable a manner , that
true , real , happiness is ever unattainable in this world !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.271

- Thro' all the scenes , publick or private , domestick or solitary ,
that Nekaya or Rasselas pass , real felicity eludes their pursuit
BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.272

and mocks their solicitude . BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.273

In high life , superiority , envy and haughtiness baffle the power of
preferment , favour and greatness - BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.274

and with or without them , all is animosity , suspicion , apprehension ,
and misery ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.275

- in private families , disagreement {COM:missing_comma} jealousy and
partiality , destroy all domestick felicities and all social
cheerfulness , BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.276

and all is peevishness , contradiction , ill-will and wretchedness !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.277

And in solitude , imagination paints the world in a new light ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.278

every bliss which was wanting when in it , appears easily attained when
away from it , BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.279

but the loneliness of retirement seems unsocial , dreary , savouring of
misanthropy and melancholy - BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.280

and all is anxiety , doubt , fear and anguish ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.281

In this manner does Mr. Johnson proceed in his melancholy conviction of
the impossibility of all human enjoyments and the impossibility of all
earthly happiness . BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.282

Wednesday , July , 10 in the morning . BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.283

We have just had a wedding - a <font> publick <$$font> wedding -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.284

and very fine it was I assure you . BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.285

The bride is Miss Case ; daughter of an alderman of Lynn , with a great
fortune - the bridegroom , Mr. Bagg - BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.286

the affair has long been <font> in agitation <$$font> on account of Mr.
Bagg's inferiority of fortune . BURNEY-1768-2,1,15.287

Our house is in the Church yard , and exactly opposite the great church
<P_1,16> door - so that we had a very good view of the <font> procession
<$$font> ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.288

The walk that leads up to the church was crowded almost incredibly a
prodigious mob indeed ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.289

- I@ @'m sure I trembled for the bride . BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.290

O what a <font> gauntlet <$$font> for any woman of delicacy to run !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.291

- Mr. Bagg handed the bride and her company out of their coach ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.292

and then Mr. Case took her hand BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.293

and led her to the church door , BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.294

and the bridegroom follow'd handing Mrs. Case . BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.295

O how short a time does it take to put an eternal end to a woman's
liberty ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.296

I do@ @n't think they were a quarter of an hour in the Church altogether
. BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.297

- Bless me ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.298

it would not be time enough , I should think , for a poor creature to
see where she was - BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.299

I verily believe I should insist on sitting an hour or two to recover my
spirits - BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.300

I declare my heart ach'd to think how terrible the poor Bride's feelings
must be to walk by such crowds of people , the occasion in itself so
awful ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.301

How little does it need the addition of that frightful mob !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.302

In my conscience I fear that if it had been me , I should never have had
courage to get out of the coach - BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.303

Indeed , I feel I should behave very foolishly . BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.304

When they had been in the Church about a quarter of an hour , the bells
began to ring , so merrily - so loud - BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.305

and the doors open'd - BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.306

we saw them walk down the Isle - the bride and bridegroom first , hand
in hand ... . BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.307

the bridegroom look'd <font> so <$$font> gay , <$$font> so <$$font>
happy ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.308

Surely it must be grateful to her heart to see his joy !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.309

it would to <font> mine <$$font> I know . BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.310

She looked grave , but not sad - BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.311

and , in short , all was happy and charming . BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.312

Well of all things in the world , I do@ @n't suppose any thing can be so
dreadful as a publick wedding - BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.313

my stars ! I should never be able to support it ! ...
BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.314

Mr. Bewly , a great and particular friend of my papa's - and a very
ingenious , clever man , is now here ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.315

At breakfast time , we had , as you may imagine , a long conversation on
Matrimony . BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.316

- Every body spoke against a <font> publick <$$font> wedding , as the
most shocking thing in the world - BURNEY-1768-2,1,16.317

papa said <P_1,17> he would not have gone thro' those people in such a
manner for 5000 a year - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.318

and Mr. Bewly said that when <font> he <$$font> was married , his lady
and self <font> stole <$$font> in to the church , privately as possible
, and ashamed of every step they took ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.319

Cabin , Saturday , July . BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.320

And so I suppose you are staring at the torn paper and unconnected
sentence - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.321

I do@ @n't much wonder - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.322

I@ @'ll tell you what happen'd . BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.323

Last Monday I was in the little parlour , which room my papa generally
dresses in - and writing a letter to my grandmama .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.324

You must know I always have the last sheet of my Journal in my pocket ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.325

and when I have wrote it half full I join it to the rest ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.326

and take another sheet - and so on . BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.327

Now I happen'd unluckily to take the last sheet out of my pocket with my
letter - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.328

and laid it on the piano_forte , BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.329

and there , negligent fool ! - I left it ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.330

Well as ill fortune would have it , papa went into the room -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.331

took my poor Journal - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.332

read , BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.333

and pocketted it . BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.334

Mama came up to me BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.335

and told me of it . BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.336

O Dear ! I was in a sad distress - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.337

I could not for the life of me ask for it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.338

and so <font> dawdled <$$font> and fretted the time away till Tuesday
evening . BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.339

Then gathering courage " Pray papa , " I said , " have you got - any
<font> papers <$$font> of mine ? " BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.340

" Papers of yours ? " said he - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.341

" how should <font> I <$$font> come by papers of yours ? "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.342

" I@ @'m sure - I do@ @n't know - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.343

but " - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.344

" Why do you leave your papers about the house ? " asked he , gravely .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.345

I could not say another word - BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.346

he went on playing on the piano_forte . BURNEY-1768-2,1,17.347

Well , to be sure , thought I , these same <P_1,18> dear Journals are
most shocking plaguing things - BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.348

I@ @'ve a good mind to resolve never to write a word more .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.349

However , I stayed still in the room , walking , and looking wistfully
at him for about an hour and half . BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.350

At last , he rose to dress - BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.351

Again I look'd wistfully at him - BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.352

He laughed - BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.353

" What , Fanny , " said he , kindly , " are you in sad distress ? "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.354

I half laugh'd . BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.355

" Well , - I@ @'ll give it you , now I see you are in such distress -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.356

but take care , my dear , of leaving your writings about the house again
- BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.357

suppose any body else had found it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.358

I declare I was going to read it loud - BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.359

Here , take it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.360

but if ever I find any more of your Journals , I vow I@ @'ll stick them
up in the market place . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.361

And then he kiss'd me <font> so <$$font> kindly - BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.362

never was parent so <font> properly <$$font> , so <font> well-judgedly
<$$font> {TEXT:font_change_around_"well"} affectionate !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.363

I was so frightened that I have not had the heart to write since , till
now , BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.364

I should not but that - in short , but that I can@ @not help it !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.365

As to the <font> paper , <$$font> I destroy'd it the moment I got it .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.366

... We have had several little parties of pleasure since I wrote last ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.367

but they are not worth mentioning . BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.368

My papa went on Thursday to Massingham , to Mr. Bewly's .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.369

... I have been having a long conversation with Miss Young on journals
. BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.370

She has very seriously and earnestly advised me to give mine up -
heigho-ho ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.371

Do you think I can bring myself to oblige her ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.372

What she says has great weight with me ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.373

but indeed , I should be very loath to <font> quite <$$font> give my
poor friend up . BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.374

She says that it is the most dangerous employment young persons can have
- that it makes them often record things which ought <font> not <$$font>
to be recorded but instantly forgot . BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.375

I told her , that as <font> my <$$font> Journal was <$$font> solely
<$$font> for my own perusal , nobody could in justice , or even in sense
, be angry or displeased at my writing any thing .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,18.376

<P_1,19>

" But how can you answer , " said she , " that it <font> is <$$font>
only for your own perusal ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.378

That very circumstance of your papa's finding it , shows you are not so
very careful as is necessary for such a work . BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.379

And if you drop it , and any improper person finds it , you know not the
uneasiness it may cost you . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.380

" Well but , dear ma'am , this is an ' if ' that may not happen once in
a century . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.381

" I beg your pardon ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.382

I know not how often it may happen ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.383

and even <font> once <$$font> might prove enough to give you more pain
than you are aware of . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.384

" Why , dear ma'am , papa never prohibited my writing ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.385

and he knows that I <font> do <$$font> write , and <font> what <$$font>
I do write . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.386

" I question that . BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.387

However , 't@ @is impossible for you to answer for the curiosity of
others . BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.388

And suppose any body finds a part in which they are extremely censured .
" BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.389

" Why then , they must take it for their pains . BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.390

It was not wrote for <font> them , <$$font> but <font> me , <$$font>
BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.391

and I can@ @not see any harm in writing to <font> myself . " <$$font>
BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.392

" It was very well whilst there were only your sisters with you to do
anything of this kind ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.393

but , depend upon it , when your connections are enlarged , your family
increased , your acquaintance multiplied , young and old <font> so
<$$font> apt to be curious - depend upon it , Fanny , 't@ @is the most
dangerous employment you can have . BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.394

Suppose now , for example , your favorite wish were granted , and you
were <font> to fall in love , <$$font> and then the object of your
passion were to get sight of some part which related to himself ? "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.395

" Why then Miss Young , I must take a little trip to Rosamond's Pond .
" BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.396

" Why , ay , I doubt it would be all you would have left . "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,19.397

<P_1,20>

" Dear Miss Young ! - But I@ @'m sure , by your earnestness , that you
think worse of my poor Journal than it deserves . "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.399

" I know very well the nature of these things . BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.400

I know that in journals , thoughts , actions , looks , conversations -
<font> all <$$font> go down ; do they not ? " BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.401

The conclusion of our debate was , that if I would show her some part of
what I had wrote she should be a better judge , and would then give me
her best advice whether to proceed or not . BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.402

I believe I shall accept her condition ; though I own I shall show it
with shame and fear , BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.403

for such nonsense is <font> so <$$font> unworthy her perusal .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.404

I@ @'m sure , besides , I know not what part to choose .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.405

Shall I take at random ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.406

Wednesday , August 10th . BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.407

... Well , my Nobody {TEXT:missing_"Nobody"} I <font> have <$$font>
read part of my Journal to Miss Young and what@ @'s more , let her
choose the day herself , which was our Journey , the day in which I have
mention'd our arrival , &c. BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.408

I assure you I quite triumph ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.409

Prejudic'd as she was , she is pleas'd to give it her sanction , -
<font> if it is equally harmless every where <$$font> -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.410

nay , says she even approves of it . BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.411

... For some time past , I have taken a walk in the fields near Lynn of
about an hour every morning before breakfast - BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.412

I have never yet got out before six , and never after seven .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,20.413

The fields <P_1,21> are , in my eyes , particularly charming at that
time in the morning - BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.414

the sun is warm and not sultry - BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.415

and there is scarce a soul to be seen . BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.416

Near the capital I should not dare indulge myself in this delightful
manner , for fear of robbers - BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.417

but here , everybody is known , BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.418

and one has nothing to apprehend . BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.419

I am reading Plutarch's Lives - BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.420

his own , wrote by Dryden has charm'd me beyond expression .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.421

I have just finish'd Lycurgus - BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.422

and am as much <font> pleased <$$font> with all his publick Laws , as
<font> displeased <$$font> with his private ones .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.423

There is scarce <font> one <$$font> of the former which is not noble and
praiseworthy , - and as I think <font> very <$$font> few of the latter
which are not the contrary - BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.424

the custom of only preserving healthy children , and destroying weak
<font> ones <$$font> how barbarous ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.425

- besides all his domestic family duties appear strange to me !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.426

- but you must consider how very , very , very , bad a judge I am , as I
read with nobody , and consequently have nobody to correct or guide my
opinion : BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.427

nevertheless , I can@ @not <paren> forbear , sometimes <$$paren> writing
what it is ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.428

I read Plutarch's Lives with more pleasure than I can express .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.429

I am charmed with them , BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.430

and rejoice exceedingly that I did not read them ere now ; as I every
day , certainly , am more able to enjoy them . ...
BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.431

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Wednesday - August . BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.433

We had a large party to the Assembly on Monday , which was <font>
so-so-so <$$font> - BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.434

I danced but one country dance - BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.435

the room was so hot , t'@ @was really fatiguing .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.436

Do@ @n't you laugh to hear a girl of fifteen complain of the <font>
fatigue <$$font> of dancing ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.437

Ca@ @n't be helped ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.438

If you will laugh , you must . BURNEY-1768-2,1,21.439

- My partner was a pretty youth <P_1,22> enough - and <font> quite
<$$font> a youth - younger than myself - poor dear creature ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.440

I really pitied him , BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.441

for he seem'd to long for another caper - in vain -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.442

I was inexorable - not that he quite <font> knelt <$$font> for my hand -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.443

if he had I <font> might <$$font> have been <font> moved <$$font> -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.444

for I have an uncommonly soft heart - BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.445

I am interrupted , BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.446

or else I am in an excellent humour to scribble nonsense . ...
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.447

Poland Street . BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.448

Mr. Greville supped here , BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.449

and talked of the <font> book fight <$$font> between Mr. Sharpe and
Signor Baretti - concerning Italy , of which country the former has
wrote an account ; which the latter has absolutely confuted .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.450

" I wish , " said Mr. Greville , " men would not pretend to write of
what they can@ @not be masters of , another country -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.451

It is impossible they can be judges ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.452

and they ought not to aim at it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.453

for they have different sensations , BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.454

are used to different laws , manners and things , BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.455

and consequently are habituated to different thoughts and ideas ;
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.456

't@ @is the same as if a cow was to write of a horse - or a horse of a
cow - BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.457

why they would proceed on quite different principles ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.458

and therefore certainly could be no judge of one another . "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.459

He asked papa if he play'd much on piano_fortes .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.460

- " If I was to be in town this winter , " said he , " I should
cultivate my old acquaintance with old Crisp . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.461

" Ah , " said papa , " he@ @'s truly worth it . "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.462

" Ay , indeed is he , " answered Mr. Greville , BURNEY-1768-2,1,22.463

<P_1,23>

" he@ @'s a most superior man . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.465

This one speech has gain'd him my heart for ever .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.466

This man is exceeding fond of my father . BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.467

Before he went to Germany he used to sup with him perpetually , in the
most familiar and comfortable style , BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.468

and now again he resumes this freedom . BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.469

His wife and daughter were and are the two greatest beautys in England ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.470

and Mrs. Greville is my godmother . BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.471

Her Ode to Indifference is so excessively pretty that it almost puts me
out of conceit with my desire to be favoured with a touch of the power
of Cupid , when I happen to recollect it . BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.472

How she would scorn me if she knew it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.473

but I suppose she did not begin with a passion for Indifference herself
- BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.474

I should not like to be Mr. Greville if he converted her to that side .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.475

Sunday Night , Sept. 11 . BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.476

My sweet brother Charles is come home for the holidays , full of spirits
, mirth , and good-humour . BURNEY-1768-2,1,23.477

My aunt Nanny who <P_1,24> went lately to see him at the Charter House ,
was assured there that he was the sweetest_temper'd boy in the school .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.478

Papa is gone to supper with Mr. Greville . BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.479

You must know this gentleman is the author of a book called <font>
Characters , Maxims , <font> and <font> Reflections - Serious , Moral ,
and Entertaining . <$$font> BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.480

I never read it thro' , BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.481

but what I have pleased me extremely . BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.482

Sept. 12 . BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.483

Mr. Smart the poet was here yesterday . BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.484

He is the author of the " Old Woman's Magazine " and of several poetical
productions ; some of which are sweetly elegant and pretty - for example
: " Harriet's Birthday , " " Care and Generosity , " - and many more .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.485

This ingenious writer is one of the most unfortunate of men -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.486

he has been twice confined in a mad-house - BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.487

and but last year sent a most affecting epistle to papa , to entreat him
to lend him half-@ @a-@ @guinea ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.488

- How great a pity so clever , so ingenious a man should be reduced to
such shocking circumstances . BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.489

He is extremely grave , BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.490

and has still great wildness in his manner , looks , and voice ;
BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.491

but 't@ @is impossible to <font> see <$$font> him and to <font> think
<$$font> of his works , without feeling the utmost pity and concern for
him ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,24.492

I am prodigiously surprised , <P_1,25> immensely astonish'd - indeed
absolutely petrified with amazement - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.493

and what do you imagine the cause ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.494

You can never guess ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.495

I shall pity your ignorance and incapacity , and , generous ,
noble_minded as I am , keep you no longer in suspense .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.496

Know then - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.497

Ha ! This frightful old watchman how he has startled me -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.498

past eleven o'clock ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.499

bless you , friend , BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.500

do@ @n't bawl so loud , - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.501

my nerves ca@ @n't possibly bear it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.502

no - I shall expire - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.503

this robust , gross creature will be the death of me -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.504

yes ! I feel myself going - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.505

my spirits fail - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.506

my blood chills - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.507

I am gone ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.508

To my eternal astonishment , I am recovered ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.509

- I really am alive - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.510

I have actually and truly survived this bawling .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.511

Well , and now that I have in some measure <font> recollected my
scattered spirits , <$$font> I will endeavour sufficiently to compose
myself to relate the cause of wonder the first . BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.512

Would you believe it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.513

but , now I think of it , you ca@ @n't well tell till you hear -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.514

well , have patience - all in good time - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.515

do@ @n't imagine I intend to cheat you - no - no -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.516

now attend . BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.517

Miss Tilson , a young lady of fashion , fortune , education , birth ,
accomplishments , and beauty has fallen in love with my cousin Charles
Burney . BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.518

She is about seventeen , BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.519

and she wrote her declaration to him on her glove , which she dropt for
him to pick up . BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.520

She is daughter to some Lady Kerry BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.521

and has a portion in her own hands of several thousands ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.522

but this worthy Charles , not liking her , is above the temptation .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.523

Well , I@ @'m so sleepy , I must ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.524

you may hear more anon . BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.525

10 o'clock . BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.526

I left off with a little account of Miss Tilson - BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.527

I shall only tell you that I heard of her passion and the amiable object
by Hetty , who was told it by Miss Sheffield , and had it afterwards
confirmed by the fair one's own mouth . BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.528

An Amorosa so forward in Cupid's cause makes me almost revolt from my
wishes for his darts , BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.529

and really I think upon the whole , the most dignified thing for an
exalted female must be to die an old maid . BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.530

Her mother married Mr. Tilson on the death of the Earl of Kerry .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.531

She is very short but Hetty says very pretty . ...
BURNEY-1768-2,1,25.532

<P_1,26>

Wednesday Sept. 21 . BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.534

I have not wrote you a line this age , my sweet Journal .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.535

Indeed I have no wonderful matters to scrawl , now -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.536

Is it not very perverse in Dame Fortune to deny me the least share in
any of her so much talk'd_of tricks ? especially as I should , by means
of my inimitable pen immortalize every favour she honour'd me with :
BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.537

but so it is , BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.538

and so it seems likely to be ; that I am to pass my days in the dullest
of dull things , insipid , calm , uninterrupted quiet .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.539

This life is by many desired - BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.540

so be it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.541

But it surely was design'd to give happiness after <paren> and not one
ounce before <$$paren> twenty <font> full <$$font> years are past ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.542

but till then - no matter what happens - the spirits - the health - the
never dying <font> hope <$$font> are too strong to be <font> much
<$$font> affected by whatever comes to pass - BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.543

Supper bell , as I live ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.544

- ... I@ @'ve finish'd the Iliad this age - BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.545

I never was so charm'd with a poem in my life - BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.546

I@ @'ve read the Odyssey since - and Dr. Hawkesworth's Translation of
Telemachus . BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.547

I am going now to read Mr. Hume's History of England , which I shall
begin to-morrow - BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.548

well now adieu at once . BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.549

Hetty and I are going out to tea this afternoon to Mrs. Pringle's , a
widow lady who lives in this street . BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.550

She is a most sensible , entertaining , clever ...
BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.551

Sunday , Noon . BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.552

We pass'd a very agreeable evening at Mrs. Pringle's yesterday -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.553

Mr. Seaton , a very sensible and clever man , and a prodigious admirer
of Hetty's ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,26.554

<P_1,27>

Tuesday , Oct. 4th . BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.556

Dinner bell , I declare ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.557

- O dear , O dear , the kindest letter from Mr. Crisp .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.558

If my papa has not the most obdurate , barbarous and inhuman heart in
the world , he <font> must <$$font> be moved by it to permit some of us
to accept his invitation . BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.559

We are all in agonies of fear and suspense - waiting with such
impatience for papa's return . BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.560

<font> If <$$font> he should refuse us ! - I verily believe I shall
play truant ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.561

- I wish he@ @'d come home BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.562

I shall be <font> so <$$font> happy to see that dearest of men again !
and then Miss Cooke - the good Mrs. Hamilton , too -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.563

in <font> short <$$font> , Chesington is all in all .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.564

I am going to console myself with reading the Iliad till his return .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.565

Achilles has just relented , BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.566

and hastes to the assistance and succour of the Grecians -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.567

is it not a fortunate part ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.568

- if my dear papa would <font> just <$$font> so relent too , I could
almost aver that he would give us equal joy , to that felt by the Greeks
at the yielding of Achilles . ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.569

Friday . BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.570

Mr. Crisp is come to town . ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.571

Mrs. Colman {TEXT:missing_"Mrs._Colman"} wife of the celebrated author
who is also chief manager of that house , is extremely kind and friendly
to us all - BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.572

we are to dine at her house on Tuesday . BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.573

Well , adieu for the present , BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.574

if I pass an agreeable evening , I shall write again at night - or early
to_morrow BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.575

- if not - your most obedient , very humble servant to command .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,27.576

<P_1,28>

Tuesday , Nov. 15th . BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.578

Monday morning , Mrs Pringle called here - to invite me to tea in the
afternoon , to meet <font> the Emperor Tamerlane , <$$font>
BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.579

however , I excused myself on the score of our having a little concert
to night - BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.580

" Well then , " said she , " Shall he come here ? "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.581

There was no saying No - BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.582

so she agreed that he should be introduced by her son in the evening to
papa - BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.583

for mama is at Lynn . BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.584

Cerveto , who plays the base very finely , and his son , came in and ,
to grace the whole set , Mr. Crisp . BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.585

We had a charming concert - BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.586

Hetty play'd the piano_forte , and Charles the violin , the two Cervetos
the base , and papa the organ : BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.587

and afterwards we had two solos on the violincello by young Cerveto ,
who plays delightfully - BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.588

and Charles shone in a Lesson of papa's on the harpsichord .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.589

Mr. Pringle and Mr. Mackenzie <paren> you must know he is grandson to
the unfortunate Earl of Cromartie , who lost his estates , etc. , in
the Rebellion <$$paren> came in during the performance ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.590

drank a dish of tea - and away again . BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.591

Well , now we come to Tuesday , that is - yesterday .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.592

At about five o'clock ; Hetty and I went to Mrs. Pringle's , where we
found to our great joy , Mr. Seaton was to be of the party -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.593

he is a charming man . BURNEY-1768-2,1,28.594

We all went <P_1,29> in our coach , Mrs. Pringle , her son , Mr.
Seaton , and our Ladyships to see the play of Tamerlane acted by young
gentlemen at an Academy in Soho Square . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.595

The play was much better perform'd than I expected ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.596

and the dresses were superb - made new for the purpose , by the members
of the society , and proper for the characters and country - that is
after the Turkish manner . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.597

The farce , too , was very well done . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.598

We were much entertain'd - BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.599

Mr. Seaton was so very clever , droll , and entertaining , you ca@ @n't
imagine . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.600

When the performance was over , <font> Tamerlane <$$font> came to me ,
to open the Ball ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.601

But I was frighten'd to death , BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.602

and beg'd and besought him not to begin - BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.603

he said one of the members always did - BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.604

however I prevail'd , after much fuss , to put Hetty and Andrew Pringle
first , BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.605

and we were second . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.606

I assure you I danced <font> like any thing <$$font> - and called the
second dance ... after which , I hopp'd about with the utmost ease and
cheerfulness . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.607

... They were very perfect in the play , except in one speech ;
BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.608

the young gentleman who perform'd Selima , suddenly stopp'd short ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.609

and forgot himself - BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.610

it was in a love scene , - between her - him I mean - and Axalla , who
was very tender . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.611

She - he - soon recovered tho' Andrew whisper'd us that when it was over
- " He@ @'d lick her ! " BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.612

- Stratocles , amused himself with no other action all the time but
beating , with one hand , his breast , BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.613

with the other he held his hat . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.614

I@ @'m sure , I was ready to die with laughter at some of them .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.615

Arpasia and Moneses we all thought were the best perform'd .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.616

Tamerlane was <font> middling ; <$$font> BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.617

he seems to be about twenty - neither handsome , ugly , agreeable or
disagreeable , and on the whole , very tolerable .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.618

Thursday , Nov. 16th . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.619

I have had to-day the first real conversation I ever had in my life ,
except with Mr. Crisp . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.620

... It was with Mr. Seaton . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.621

Hetty has seen him again BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.622

and she is quite charm'd with him . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.623

He called with a message from Mrs. Pringle this morning
BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.624

and I had the pleasure of a delightful <font> Tête_à_Tête <$$font> with
him - BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.625

for Hetty , unluckily , was out , BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.626

and Susette kept up stairs . BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.627

I am really half in love with him , BURNEY-1768-2,1,29.628

he is so sensible , clever , <P_1,30> entertaining -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.629

His person is very far from recommending him to favour -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.630

he is very little , and <font> far <$$font> from handsome ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.631

but he has a sensible countenance , BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.632

and appears quite an Adonis after half an hour's conversation .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.633

Do you know , he actually stay'd above three hours with me ?
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.634

I own to you that I am not a little flattered that a man of his superior
sense and cleverness , should think me worth so much of his time , which
is much more than ever I had reason to expect . BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.635

He ask'd me , if my sister and self were engaged to Mrs. Pringle's this
afternoon ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.636

" No - not that I know of , at least . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.637

" No ? why Mrs. Pringle promis'd me I should meet Miss Burney and you
there this evening . BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.638

But she@ @'s a strange woman ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.639

- she has an excellent heart , and understanding ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.640

but she is not well versed in real delicacy and good breeding .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.641

But , however , I wish I could know if you ladies were to be there -
because if I go at a venture , I may be disappointed , and then so much
time is thrown away . BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.642

I hope Miss Burney caught no cold last night , BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.643

for she came away , just after a dance . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.644

<font> F. <$$font> No Sir , I believe not . BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.645

But you fared worse , I fear , BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.646

it rain'd very hard , BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.647

and Hetty says you could not get a chair or coach .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.648

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Why , I could have managed that better !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.649

There were but two chairs to be had . BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.650

Miss Crawford , a young lady , who was with Mrs. Pringle , offered to
go in the same chair as herself - BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.651

and then Miss Burney could have taken me into her's .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.652

But she would not consent to it at all - BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.653

and I see you laugh too ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.654

- I am afraid I made an improper proposal - BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.655

<font> F. <$$font> Improper ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.656

why surely you only laugh'd yourself . BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.657

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> No indeed . It is very common in Scotland ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.658

and in truth I know nothing of the English punctilios
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.659

perhaps it was wrong . BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.660

I feared so at the time , when Miss Burney refused me ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.661

and you ca@ @n't imagine how much it chagrined me .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.662

But I see few young ladies , BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.663

and often fear I make myself either particular or ridiculous .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.664

<font> F. <$$font> Indeed , when my sister told me of it , I very
naturally concluded you could only have made such a proposal in jest .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.665

He caught up the words - <font> when my sister told me of it <$$font> -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.666

" O , " said he , " how much I would give to hear some of your private
conversations ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.667

I dare say they are very curious ; BURNEY-1768-2,1,30.668

and the <P_1,31> remarks you each make , I am sure must be very clever .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.669

I do@ @nt doubt but you sometimes take me to task ! "
BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.670

<font> F. <$$font> I see you are now <font> fishing , <$$font> to draw
out our sentiments : BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.671

but I shall be on my guard ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.672

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> O , When Mrs. Pringle trusted me with the
message , I hesitated some time , to know whether I should call or not .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.673

For it is customary in my country to do so many things which appear
singular here , that I am continually at a loss , and should esteem it a
most particular favour , if you would have the goodness to tell me
honestly , at once , when you see me making any of these gross mistakes
. BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.674

<font> F. <$$font> I@ @'m sure it would be highly vain and conceited in
<font> us <$$font> to pretend to advise <font> you <$$font> .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.675

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Quite the contrary . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.676

And if I had the pleasure of hearing some of <font> your <$$font>
private chats , I doubt not I should make myself quite another creature
: BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.677

for then , what you blamed , I would amend , BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.678

and what you were pleased to be contented with , I would confirm myself
in . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.679

<font> F. <$$font> But <font> correction <$$font> should come from a
superior - in character I mean - BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.680

for merely to hear that <font> we <$$font> either approved or condemned
does not make you either better or worse {TEXT:wose} , as it may most
likely , proceed from caprice , fancy , or want of judgment .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.681

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> I beg your pardon - BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.682

I doubt not your capacity to amend me at all . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.683

And as I am really a stranger to the manners of the English , it would
be great goodness . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.684

I am so little in company with young ladies <paren> I scarce know five
<$$paren> that I have not observed their little peculiarities , etc.
BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.685

The truth is , the young women here , are so mortally silly and insipid
, that I can@ @not bear them . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.686

- Upon my word , except you and your sister , I have scarce met with one
worthy being spoke to . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.687

Their chat is all on caps - balls - cards - dress - nonsense .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.688

<font> F. <$$font> Upon <font> my <$$font> word , you are unmercifully
severe . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.689

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Nay , it@ @'s truth . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.690

You <font> have <$$font> sensible women here , BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.691

but then , they are very devils ; - censorious , uncharitable ,
sarcastick . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.692

- The women in Scotland have twice - thrice their freedom , with <font>
all <$$font> their virtue - BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.693

and are very conversable and agreeable - BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.694

their educations are more finish'd . BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.695

In England , I was quite struck to see how forward the girls are made -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,31.696

A child of ten years old will chat and keep you company , while <P_1,32>
her parents are busy , or out , etc. , with the ease of a woman of
twenty-six - BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.697

But then , how does this education go on ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.698

Not at all : BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.699

it absolutely stops short . BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.700

Perhaps , I have been very unfortunate in my acquaintance ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.701

but so it is , that you and your sister are almost the only girls I have
met , who could keep up any conversation - BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.702

and I vow , if I had gone into almost any other house , and talk'd at
this rate to a young lady , - she would have been sound asleep by this
time . BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.703

Or at least , she would have amused me with gaping and yawning all the
time , BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.704

and certainly , she would not have understood a word I had uttered .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.705

<font> F. <$$font> And so , this is your opinion of our sex ?
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.706

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Ay ; and of <font> mine <$$font> , too .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.707

<font> F. <$$font> Why you are absolutely a man hater , a misanthrope .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.708

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Quite the contrary . BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.709

Nobody enjoys better spirits - or more happiness .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.710

<font> F. <$$font> Then assuredly you have advanced most of these
severe judgments , merely for argument , and not as your real thoughts .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.711

You know , we continually say things to support an opinion which we have
given , that in reality we do@ @n't above half mean .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.712

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> I grant you I may have exaggerated - but
nothing more . BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.713

Look at your ladies of quality - BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.714

Are they not forever parting with their husbands - forfeiting their
reputations - BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.715

and is their life aught but dissipation ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.716

In common genteel life , indeed , you may now and then meet with very
fine girls - who have politeness , sense , and conversation -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.717

but <font> these <$$font> are few . BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.718

And then , look at your tradesmen's daughters - BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.719

what are they ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.720

- poor creatures indeed ! All pertness , imitation and folly .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.721

I said a great deal in <font> defence <$$font> of our poor sex . And
<font> all <$$font> I could say , BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.722

but it sounds so poor compared to my <font> opponent , <$$font> that I
dare not write it . BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.723

" And what are you studying here ? " said he , BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.724

" O ho , ' Marianne ' ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.725

And did you ever read ' Le Paysan Parvenu ' ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,32.726

<P_1,33>

They are the two best novels that ever were wrote ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.728

for they are pictures of nature , BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.729

and therefore excel your Clarissas and Grandisons far away .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.730

Now , Sir Charles Grandison is all perfection , and consequently , the
last character we find in real life . BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.731

In truth there@ @'s no such thing . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.732

<font> F. <$$font> Indeed ! Do you really think a Sir Charles
Grandison <font> never <$$font> existed ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.733

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Certainly not . BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.734

He@ @'s too perfect for human nature . BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.735

<font> F. <$$font> It quite hurts me to hear anybody declare a really
and thoroughly good man never lived . BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.736

It is so <font> much <$$font> to the disgrace of mankind .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.737

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Ay - you are too young to conceive the truth .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.738

I own to you , you are therefore more happy . BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.739

I would give all I am worth to have the same innocence and credulity of
heart I had some years since ; and to be able to go through life with it
. BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.740

<font> F. <$$font> But if , as you assert , nobody around you would be
the same , would not <font> that <$$font> innocence rather expose you to
danger , than increase your happiness ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.741

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Faith , I do@ @n't know , since you <font> must
<$$font> be exposed to it at all events . BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.742

Besides , when once - which <font> every <$$font> body must be - you are
convinced of the wickedness and deceit of men , it is impossible to
preserve untainted your <font> own <$$font> innocence of heart .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.743

Experience <font> will <$$font> prove the depravity of mankind ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.744

and the conviction of it only serves to create distrust , suspicion ,
caution , and sometimes causelessly . BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.745

<font> F. <$$font> But surely this experience has its advantages as
well as its inconveniences , since without it you are liable to be
ensnared in every trap , which , according to <font> your <$$font>
account of mankind , they put in your way . BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.746

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Assuredly - BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.747

But depend upon it , no one need fear missing this experience !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.748

<font> F. <$$font> You seem to have a most shocking opinion of the
world in general . BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.749

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> Because the world in general merits it .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,33.750

The <P_1,34> <font> most <$$font> innocent time must be the rise of any
state , when they are unacquainted with vice . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.751

Now Rome , in it's infancy - BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.752

<font> F. <$$font> O , <font> that <$$font> was not the most
flourishing time of Rome , BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.753

for in its infancy it was inhabited merely by villains and ruffians .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.754

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> O but they soon forgot that , in forming their
State : BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.755

and established excellent Laws , BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.756

and became models of morality , liberty , virtue .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.757

<font> F. <$$font> Yes ; and the first proof they gave of their virtue
, was to murder their founder , to whom they were indebted for every
thing - and farther to rob the neighbouring states of their wives and
daughters , whom they forcibly detained . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.758

I ca@ @n't say you have hit on the best country to show the innocence of
it's first state . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.759

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> O you are too hard upon me !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.760

Well then the rise of the Grecian cities . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.761

They certainly were virtuous in their infancy . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.762

And so are all nations - in proportion to their poverty ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.763

for money is the source of the greatest vice , BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.764

and that nation which is most rich , is most wicked .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.765

<font> F. <$$font> But , Sir , this is saying , in reality , nothing
for virtue ; since if these people you mention were only virtuous thro'
necessity , and <font> as <$$font> wicked as they <font> could <$$font>
be , they are in fact full as vicious as <font> any <$$font> country
whatever . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.766

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> That@ @'s very true . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.767

In short I believe there was always the same degree of real <paren> tho'
there could not be of practical <$$paren> vice in mankind , in all
countrys , and all ages , as at present . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.768

<font> F. <$$font> You must give me leave again to repeat that I fancy
you inveigh thus violently against the world , <font> partly <$$font> at
least in order to support your own side of the question ;
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.769

for surely any person who really and truly <font> thought <$$font> so
like a misanthrope as you <font> talk , <$$font> must abhor mankind ,
and shut themselves up in a cave , away from them all .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.770

You absolutely appear to be the greatest satirist , and most severe
judge of the world - . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.771

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> O , no . I assure you , nobody lives happier
in it - or can have greater or more equal spirits ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.772

but I can see the faults of people nevertheless .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.773

<font> F. <$$font> Permit me to say one thing , Sir :
BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.774

You tell me that you are a stranger , that you know not the manners of
the ladies here ; that you do@ @n't know <font> this <$$font> - are
ignorant of <font> that <$$font> - <paren> a lady's going home after a
ball , for example ! <$$paren> . BURNEY-1768-2,1,34.775

Well , <P_1,35> Sir , give me leave to ask what you <font> have <$$font>
observed ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.776

Why even all our faults ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.777

You have not been very blind to <font> them , <$$font> or taken much
time to find them out ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.778

You seem to have taken the worst side of the question all the way .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.779

<font> Mr. S. <$$font> O , Ma'am your most obedient .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.780

... But , <paren> looking at his watch <$$paren> what a time have I
detained you from your employments by my tongue !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.781

But it is so seldom I can find ladies who , like you and your sister ,
can keep up a conversation , that I am loath to lose them when I do ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.782

and I do protest , that to talk with a young lady who will answer me
with the sense and reason that you do now , gives me far more pleasure
than all the plays , operas or diversions in the world :
BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.783

for none of them can be compared to a sensible , spirited conversation !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.784

I should be ashamed to write down these much {TEXT:missing_"much"}
undeserved <font> outré <$$font> compliments , BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.785

but they are made , as you see , only when they are unavoidable ,
BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.786

and consequently become no compliment at all . BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.787

I am quite surprised to find how much of his conversation I have
remembered , BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.788

but as there was only him and myself , it was not very difficult .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.789

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

Saturday , Nov. 18th . BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.791

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

We passed the most curious evening yesterday ... BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.793

Never sure did any conversation seem more like a scene in a comedy ...
BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.794

I must tell you something of what pass'd . BURNEY-1768-2,1,35.795

<P_1,36>

{ED:1769}

Saturday , Jan=y=. 7th . BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.798

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

O dear ! O dear ! how melancholy has been to us this last week , the
first of this year ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.800

Never during my life have I suffer'd more severely in my mind , I do
verily believe ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.801

- But God be praised ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.802

I hope it is now over ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.803

The poor Susette , who I told you was disappointed of her Lynn journey
by a violent cold , was just put to Bed somewhat better when I wrote to
you this day se'night - BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.804

I soon after went to her , BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.805

and found her considerably worse . BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.806

She talk'd to me in a most affecting style , BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.807

her voice and manner were peculiarly touching . BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.808

" My dear Fanny , " cried she , " I love you dearly -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.809

my <font> dear <$$font> sister ! - have I any <font> more <$$font>
sisters ? BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.810

" - O how I was terrified - shock'd - surprised !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.811

- " O yes ! " continued she , " I have sister Hetty -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.812

but I do@ @n't wish her to come to me now , because she@ @'ll want me to
drink my barley water , and I ca@ @n't - BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.813

but I will if <font> you <$$font> want me - BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.814

and where@ @'s papa ? " BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.815

For my life I could not speak a word , BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.816

and almost choak'd myself to prevent my sobbing .
BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.817

" O dear ! I shall die ! " BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.818

" My dear girl . " {COM:two_or_three_words_torn_away}
BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.819

" O but I must though ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.820

- But I ca@ @n't help it - BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.821

it is not my fault you know ! " BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.822

- Tho' I almost suffocated myself with smothering my grief , I believe
she perceived it , BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.823

for she kiss'd me , BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.824

and again said " How I love you ! my <font> dear <$$font> Fanny !
BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.825

- I love you dearly ! " BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.826

" My sweet Girl ! " cried I - " you - you <font> ca@ @n't <$$font> love
me so much as I do you ! " BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.827

" If I was Charly I should love you - indeed I should -
BURNEY-1768-2,1,36.828

Oh ! - I shall <P_1,37> die ! " BURNEY-1768-2,1,37.829

- " But not <font> yet <$$font> , my dear love - not <font> yet ! "
<$$font> BURNEY-1768-2,1,37.830

Oh yes - I shall ! BURNEY-1768-2,1,37.831

- I should like to see papa first tho' . " BURNEY-1768-2,1,37.832

