<BEGIN_burney-1792-2>

<P_5,51>

{ED:PART_XLVI._1792}

<font> January . <$$font> BURNEY-1792-2,5,51.4

- I had a very civil note from Mrs. Schwellenberg , telling me that
Miss Goldsworthy was ill , which made Miss Gomme necessary to the
<P_5,52> Princesses , and therefore , as Mlle. Jacobi was still lame ,
Her Majesty wished for my attendance on Wednesday noon .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.5

I received this little summons with very sincere pleasure ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.6

and sent a warm acknowledgment for its honour . BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.7

I was engaged for the evening to Mr. Walpole , now Lord Orford , by my
father , who promised to call for me at the Queen's house .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.8

At noon I went thither , BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.9

and saw , by the carriages , their Majesties were just arrived from
Windsor . BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.10

In my way upstairs I encountered the Princess Sophia .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.11

I really felt a pleasure at her sight , so great that I believe I
saluted her ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.12

I hardly know ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.13

but she came forward , with her hands held out , so good_humoured and so
sweetly , I was not much on my guard . BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.14

How do I wish I had gone that moment to my Royal Mistress , while my
mind was fully and honestly occupied with the most warm satisfaction in
being called again into her presence ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.15

The Princess Sophia desired me to send her Miss Gomme , whom she said I
should find in my own room . BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.16

Thither I went , BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.17

and we embraced very cordially ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.18

but she a little made me stare by saying " Do you sleep in your old bed
? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.19

" No , " I answered , BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.20

" I go home after dinner " ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.21

and she said no more , BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.22

but told me she must have two hours' conference alone with me , from the
multiplicity of things she had to discuss with me .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.23

We parted then , BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.24

and I proceeded to Mrs. Schwellenberg . BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.25

There I was most courteously received , and told I was to go at night to
the play . BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.26

I replied I was extremely sorry , but I was engaged .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.27

She looked deeply displeased , BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.28

and I was forced to offer to send an excuse . BURNEY-1792-2,5,52.29

Nothing , however , <P_5,53> was settled ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.30

she went to the Queen , whither I was most eager to follow ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.31

but I depended upon her arrangement , BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.32

and could not go uncalled . BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.33

I returned to my own room , as they all still call it ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.34

and Miss Gomme and Miss Planta both came to me . BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.35

We had a long discourse upon matters and things . BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.36

By_and_by Miss Gomme was called out to Princesses Mary and Amelia ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.37

she told them who was in the old apartment , BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.38

and they instantly entered it . BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.39

Princess Mary took my hand , BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.40

and said repeatedly , " My dear Miss Burney , how glad I am to see you
again ! " BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.41

and the lovely little Princess Amelia kissed me twice , with the
sweetest air of affection . BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.42

This was a very charming meeting to me , BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.43

and I expressed my real delight in being thus allowed to come amongst
them again , in the strongest and truest terms . BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.44

I had been but a short time alone , when Westerhaults came to ask me if
I had ordered my father's carriage to bring me from the play .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.45

I told him I was engaged , but would give up that engagement , and
endeavour to secure being fetched home after the play .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.46

Mrs. Schwellenberg then desired to see me . BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.47

" What do {TEXT:missing_"do"} you mean by going home ? " cried she ,
somewhat deridingly : BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.48

" know you not you might sleep here ? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.49

I was really thunderstruck ; so weak still , and so unequal as I feel to
undertake night and morning attendance , which I now saw expected .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.50

I was obliged , however , to comply ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.51

and I wrote a note to Sarah , and another note to be given to my father
, when he called to take me to Lord Orford . BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.52

But I desired we might go in chairs , and not trouble him for the
carriage . BURNEY-1792-2,5,53.53

This arrangement , and my dread of an old attendance I was so little
refitted for renewing , had <P_5,54> so much disturbed me before I was
summoned to the Queen , that I appeared before her without any of the
glee and spirits with which I had originally obeyed her commands .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.54

I am still grieved at this circumstance , as it must have made me seem
cold and insensible to herself , when I was merely chagrined at the
peremptory mismanagement of her agent . BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.55

Mr. de Luc was with her . BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.56

She was gracious , but by no means lively or cordial .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.57

She was offended , probably , BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.58

- and there was no reason to wonder , and yet no means to clear away the
cause . BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.59

This gave me much vexation , BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.60

and the more I felt it the less I must have appeared to merit her
condescension . BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.61

Nevertheless , after she was dressed she honoured me with a summons to
the White Closet , where I presently felt as much at home as if I had
never quitted the Royal residence . BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.62

She inquired into my proceedings , BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.63

and I began a little history of my south-west tour ; which she listened
to till word was brought the King was come from the Levee :
BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.64

dinner was then ordered , BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.65

and I was dismissed . BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.66

At our dinner , the party , in the old style , was Mr. de Luc , Miss
Planta , Mrs. Stainforth , and Miss Gomme ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.67

Mrs. Schwellenberg was not well enough to leave her own apartment ,
except to attend the Queen . BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.68

We were gay enough , I own ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.69

my spirits were not very low in finding myself a guest at that table ,
where I was so totally unfit to be at home , and whence , nevertheless ,
I should have been very much and deeply concerned to have found myself
excluded , since the displeasure of the Queen could alone have procured
such a banishment . BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.70

Besides , to visit , I like the whole establishment , however inadequate
I found them for supplying the place of all I quitted to live with them
. BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.71

Oh , who could succeed there ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,54.72

<P_5,55>

During the dessert the Princess Elizabeth came into the room .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.74

I was very glad , by this means , to see all this lovely female tribe .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.75

As soon as she was gone I made off to prepare for the play , with fan ,
cloak , and gloves . BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.76

At the door of my new old room who should I encounter but Mr. Stanhope
? BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.77

He was all rapture , in his old way , at the meeting ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.78

and concluded me , I believe , reinstated . BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.79

I got off as fast as possible , BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.80

and had just shut myself in , and him out , when I heard the voice of
the King , who passed my door to go to the dining-room .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.81

I was quite chagrined to have left it so unseasonably , as my whole
heart yearned to see him . BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.82

He stayed but a minute , BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.83

and I heard him stop close to my door , and speak with Mr. de Luc .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.84

The loudness of his voice assuring me he was saying nothing he meant to
be unheard , I could not resist softly opening my door .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.85

I fancy he expected this , BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.86

for he came up to me immediately , BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.87

and with a look of goodness almost amounting to pleasure - I believe I
may say quite - he inquired after my health , and its restoration ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.88

and said he was very glad to see me again . Then turning gaily to Mr.
de Luc , " And you , Mr. de Luc , " he cried , " are not you , too ,
very glad to see Miss Beurni again ? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.89

I told him , very truly , the pleasure with which I had re-entered his
roof . BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.90

He made me stand near a lamp , to examine me , BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.91

and pronounced upon my amended looks with great benevolence :
BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.92

and , when he was walking away , said aloud to Mr. de Luc , who
attended him , " I dare say she was very willing to come ! "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.93

I heard afterwards from Miss Gomme that the King came to the eating-room
purposely to see me , as he told the Princesses . BURNEY-1792-2,5,55.94

I can@ @not tell you how grateful I feel for such condescending goodness
; <P_5,56> and how invariably I experienced it during my whole residence
under his roof . BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.95

Our party in the box for the Queen's attendants consisted of Lady
Catherine Stanhope , Miss Planta , Major Price , Greville Upton , and
Mr. Frank Upton . BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.96

The King and Queen and six Princesses sat opposite .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.97

It was to me a lovely and most charming sight . BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.98

The Prince of Wales , and the Duke of York and his bride , with the Duke
of Clarence , sat immediately under us . BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.99

I saw the Duchess now and then , BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.100

and saw that she has a very sensible and marked countenance , but no
beauty . BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.101

She was extremely well received by the people , and smiled at in the
most pleasing manner by her opposite new relations .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.102

The play was <font> Cymon , <$$font> with alterations , etc.
BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.103

At night I once more attended the Queen , BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.104

and it seemed as strange to me as if I had never done it before .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.105

The next day , Thursday , the Queen gave up the drawing-room , on
account of a hurt on her foot . BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.106

I had the honour of another very long conference in the White Closet ,
in which I finished the account of my late travels , and during which ,
though she was very gracious , she was far less communicative than
heretofore , saying little herself , and making me talk almost all .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.107

When I attended the Queen again to-night , the strangeness was so
entirely worn away , that it seemed to me as if I had never left my
office ! And so again on Friday morning . BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.108

At noon the Royal Family set off for Windsor . BURNEY-1792-2,5,56.109

The Queen graciously sent for me before she <P_5,57> went , to bid me
good-bye , BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.110

and condescended to thank me for my little services .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.111

I would have offered repetition with all my heart ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.112

but I felt my frame unequal to such business . BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.113

Indeed I was half dead with only two days' and nights' exertion .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.114

'T@ @is amazing how I ever went through all that is passed .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.115

<font> February . <$$font> BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.116

- I shall begin this month at the 13th , the day I left my dearest
friends . BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.117

I found our small family at home in much the same state I had left it ;
my dear father , however , rather worse than better , and lower and more
depressed about himself than ever . BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.118

To see him dejected is , of all sights , to me the most melancholy , his
native cheerfulness having a character of such temperate sweetness ,
that there is no dispensing with any of it , as its utmost vigour never
a moment overpowers . BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.119

Among the tickets I found of visitors during my absence , I was much
pleased to see the name of Mr. Bryant . BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.120

Good and kind old man ! how much I should like to see him again !
BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.121

And I found also , waiting my return , a note from Mrs. Schwellenberg ,
with an offer of a ticket for Mr. Hastings's trial , the next day , if
I wished to go to it . BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.122

I did wish it exceedingly , no public subject having ever so deeply
interested me ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.123

but I could not recollect any party I could join ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.124

and therefore I proposed to Captain Phillips to call on his Court friend
, and lay before her my difficulty . BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.125

He readily declared he would do more , BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.126

for he would frankly ask her for a ticket for himself , and stay another
day , merely to accompany me . BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.127

You know well the kind pleasure and zeal with which he is always ready
to discover and propose expedients in distress . BURNEY-1792-2,5,57.128

<P_5,58>

His visit prospered , BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.130

and we went to Westminster Hall together . BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.131

All the managers attended at the opening , BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.132

but the attendance of all others was cruelly slack .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.133

To hear the attack , the people came in crowds ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.134

to hear the defence , they scarcely came in <font> tête-à-têtes <$$font>
! BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.135

'T@ @is barbarous there should be so much more pleasure given by the
recital of guilt than by the vindication of innocence !
BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.136

Mr. Law spoke the whole time ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.137

he made a general harangue in answer to the opening general harangue of
Mr. Burke , BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.138

and he spoke many things that brought forward conviction in favour of
Mr. Hastings ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.139

but he was terrified exceedingly , BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.140

and his timidity induced him to so frequently beg quarter from his
antagonists , both for any blunders and any deficiencies , that I felt
angry with even modest egotism , when I considered that it was rather
his place to come forward with the shield and armour of truth ,
undaunted , and to have defied , rather than deprecated , the force of
talents when without such support . BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.141

None of the managers quitted their box , BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.142

and I am uncertain whether or not any of them saw me .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.143

Mr. Windham , in particular , I feel satisfied either saw me not , or
was so circumstanced , as manager , that he could not come to speak with
me ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.144

for else , this my first appearance from that parental roof under which
he has so largely contributed to replace me would have been the last
time for his dropping my acquaintance . BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.145

Mr. Sheridan I have no longer any ambition to be noticed by ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.146

and Mr. Burke , at this place , I am afraid I have already displeased ,
so unavoidably cold and frigid did I feel myself when he came here to me
formerly . BURNEY-1792-2,5,58.147

Anywhere else , I should bound <P_5,59> forward to meet him , with
respect , and affection , and gratitude . BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.148

In the evening I went to the Queen's house . BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.149

I found Mrs. Schwellenberg , who instantly admitted me , at cards with
Mr. de Luc . BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.150

Her reception was perfectly kind ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.151

and when I would have given up the tickets , she told me they were the
Queen's , who desired , if I wished it , I would keep them for the
season . BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.152

This was a pleasant hearing upon every account , BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.153

and I came away in high satisfaction . BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.154

A few days after , I went again to the trial , BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.155

and took another Captain for my esquire - my good and ever-@
@affectionate James . BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.156

The Hall was still more empty , both of Lords and Commons , and of
ladies too , than the first day of this session .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.157

I am quite shocked at the little desire there appears to hear Mr.
Hastings's defence . BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.158

When the managers entered , James presently said , " Here@ @'s Mr.
Windham coming to speak to you . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.159

And he broke from the procession , as it was descending to its cell , to
give me that pleasure . BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.160

His inquiries about my health were not , as he said , <font> mere
<$$font> common inquiries ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.161

but , without any other answer to them than a bow , I interrupted their
course by quickly saying , " You have been excursioning and travelling
all the world o'er since I saw you last . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.162

He paid me in my own coin with only a bow , hastily going back to myself
: BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.163

" But your tour , " he cried , " to the West , after all that - "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.164

I saw what was following , BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.165

and , again abruptly stopping him , " But here you are returned , " I
cried , " to all your old labours and toils again . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.166

" No , no , " cried he , half laughing , " not labours and toils always
; BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.167

they are growing into pleasures now . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,59.168

" That@ @'s being very good , very liberal , indeed , " <P_5,60> quoth I
, supposing him to mean hearing the defence made the pleasure ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.169

but he stared at me with so little concurrence , that , soon
understanding he only meant bringing their charges home to the confusion
of the culprit , I stared again a little while , and then said , " You
sometimes accuse me of being ambiguous ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.170

I think you seem so yourself , now ! " BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.171

" To nobody but you , " cried he , with a rather reproachful accent .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.172

" Oh , now , " cried I , " you are not ambiguous ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.173

and I am all the less pleased . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.174

" People , " cried James , <font> bonnement <$$font> , " do@ @n't like
to be convinced . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.175

" Mr. Hastings , " said Mr. Windham , " does not convince ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.176

he does not bring conviction home . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.177

" Not to you , " quoth I , returning his accent pretty fully .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.178

" Why , true , " answered he very candidly ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.179

" there may be something in that . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.180

" How is it all to be ? " cried James . BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.181

" Is the defence to go on long , BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.182

and are they to have any evidence ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.183

or how ? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.184

" We do@ @n't know this part of the business , " said Mr. Windham ,
smiling a little at such an upright , downright question ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.185

" it is Mr. Hastings's affair now to settle it : BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.186

however , I understand he means to answer charge after charge as they
were brought against him , first by speeches , then by evidence :
BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.187

however , this is all conjecture . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.188

We then spoke of Mr. Law , Mr. Hastings's first counsel ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.189

and I expressed some dissatisfaction that such attackers should not have
had abler and more equal opponents . BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.190

" But do you not think Mr. Law spoke well ? " cried he ; " clear ,
forcible ? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.191

" Not forcible , " cried I . BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.192

I would not say not clear . BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.193

" He was frightened , " said Mr. Windham , BURNEY-1792-2,5,60.194

" he <P_5,61> might not do himself justice . BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.195

I have heard him elsewhere , and been very well satisfied with him ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.196

but he looked pale and alarmed , BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.197

and his voice trembled . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.198

" I was very well content with his materials , " quoth I , " which I
thought much better than the use he made of them ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.199

and , once or twice , he made an opening that , with a very little skill
, might most adroitly and admirably have raised a laugh against you all
. " BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.200

He looked a little askew , I must own , BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.201

but he could not help smiling : BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.202

and shall I now lose my privileged sincerity when I made it the basis of
speaking with him on this subject ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.203

Certainly not . BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.204

I gave him an instance in point , which was the reverse given by Mr.
Law to the picture drawn by Mr. Burke of Tamerlane , in which he said
those virtues and noble qualities bestowed upon him by the honourable
manager were nowhere to be found but on the British stage .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.205

Now this , seriously , with a very little ingenuity , might have placed
Mr. Burke at the head of a company of comedians .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.206

This last notion I did not speak , however ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.207

but enough was understood , BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.208

and Mr. Windham looked straight away from me , without answering ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.209

nevertheless , his profile , which he left me , showed much more
disposition to laugh than to be incensed . BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.210

Therefore I proceeded ; pointing out another lost opportunity that ,
well saved , might have proved happily ridiculous against them ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.211

and this was Mr. Law's description of the real state of India , even
from its first discovery by Alexander , opposed to Mr. Burke's
flourishing representation of its golden age , its lambs and tigers
associating , etc. , etc. BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.212

Still he looked askew ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,61.213

but I believe he is truth <P_5,62> itself , BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.214

for he offered no defence , though , of course , he would not enter into
the attack . BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.215

And surely at this critical period I must not spare pointing out all he
will submit to hear , on the side of a man of whose innocence I am so
fully persuaded . BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.216

" I must own , however , " continued I , finding him still attentive ,
though silent , " Mr. Law provoked me in one point - his apologies for
his own demerits . BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.217

Why should he contribute his humble mite to your triumphs ?
BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.218

and how little was it his place to extol your superior talents ! as if
you were not self-sufficient enough already , without his aid ! "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.219

Unless you had heard the speech of Mr. Law , you can hardly imagine
with what timid flattery he mixed every exertion he ventured to make in
behalf of his client ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.220

and I could not forbear this little observation , because I had taken
notice with what haughty derision the managers had perceived the fears
of their importance , which were felt even by the very counsel of their
prisoner . BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.221

Mr. Windham , too , who himself never looks either insolent or deriding
, must be sure what I meant BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.222

for his associates could not include himself . BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.223

He did not , however , perfectly welcome the remark ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.224

he still only gave me his profile , BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.225

and said not a word , - BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.226

so I went on . BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.227

Mr. Hastings little thinks what a pleader I am become in his cause ,
against one of his most powerful adversaries . BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.228

" There was still another thing , " quoth I , " in which I felt vexed
with Mr. Law : BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.229

how could he be so weak as to beg quarter from you , and to humbly hope
that , if any mistake , any blunder , any improvident word escaped him ,
you would have the indulgence to spare your ridicule ?
BURNEY-1792-2,5,62.230

Oh yes , to be sure ! when I took notice at the moment of his
supplication , and before any error committed , <P_5,63> that every
muscle of every face amongst you was at work from the bare suggestion .
" BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.231

He could not even pretend to look grave now , BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.232

but , turning frankly towards me , said , " Why , Mr. Fox most justly
observed upon that petition , that , if any man makes a blunder , a
mistake , 't@ @is very well to apologise : but it was singular to hear a
man gravely preparing for his blunders and mistakes , and wanting to
make terms for them beforehand . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.233

" I like him for this , " cried James again <font> bonnement <$$font> ,
" that he seems so much interested for his client . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.234

" Will you give me leave to inquire , " quoth I , " one thing ?
BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.235

You know my old knack of asking strange questions . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.236

He only bowed - archly enough , I assure you . BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.237

" Did I fancy , or was it fact , that you were a flapper to Mr. Burke ,
when Mr. Law charged him with disingenuity , in not having recanted the
accusation concerning Devy Sing ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.238

He appeared to me in much perturbation , BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.239

and I thought by his see-saw he was going to interrupt the speech :
BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.240

did you prevent him ? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.241

" No , no , " he answered , " I did not : BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.242

I did not think him in any danger . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.243

He rubbed his cheek , though , as he spoke , as if he did not much like
that circumstance . BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.244

Oh that Mr. Burke - so great , so noble a creature - can in this point
thus have been warped ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.245

I ran off to another scene , BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.246

and inquired how he had been amused abroad , and , in particular , at
the National Assembly ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.247

" Indeed , " he answered , " it was extremely curious for a short time ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.248

but there is little variety in it , BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.249

and therefore it will not do long . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,63.250

I was in a humour to be just as sincere here , as <P_5,64> about the
trial ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.251

so you democrats must expect no better . BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.252

" I understand , " quoth I , " there is a great dearth of abilities in
this new Assembly ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.253

how then should there be any variety ? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.254

" No , I can@ @not say that : BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.255

they do not want abilities ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.256

but they have no opportunity to make their way . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.257

" Oh ! " quoth I , shaking my wise head , " abilities , real abilities
, make their own way . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.258

" Why , that@ @'s true ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.259

but , in that Assembly , the noise , the tumult - "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.260

" Abilities , " again quoth I , " have power to quell noise and tumult .
" BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.261

" Certainly , in general ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.262

but not in France . BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.263

These new legislative members are so solicitous to speak , so anxious to
be heard , that they prefer uttering any tautology to listening to
others ; and when once they have begun , they go on with what speed they
may , and without selection , rather than stop . BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.264

They see so many ready to seize their first pause , they know they have
so little chance of a second hearing , that I never entered the Assembly
without being reminded of the famous old story of the man who patiently
bore hearing a tedious harangue , by saying the whole time to himself ,
' Well , well , 't@ @is his turn now ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.265

but let him beware how he sneezes . ' " BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.266

James now again asked some question of their intentions with regard to
the progress of the trial . BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.267

He answered , " We have nothing to do with its present state .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.268

We leave Mr. Hastings now to himself , and his own set .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.269

Let him keep to his cause , and he may say what he will .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.270

We do not mean to interfere , nor avail ourselves of our privileges . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.271

Mr. Hastings was just entered ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.272

I looked down at him , BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.273

and saw his half motion to kneel ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,64.274

I could <P_5,65> not bear it , BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.275

and , turning suddenly to my neighbour , " Oh , Mr. Windham , " I cried
, " after all , 't@ @is , indeed , a barbarous business ! "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.276

This was rather further than I meant to go , BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.277

for I said it with serious earnestness ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.278

but it was surprised from me by the emotion always excited at sight of
that unmerited humiliation . BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.279

He looked full at me upon this solemn attack , and with a look of
chagrin amounting to displeasure , saying , " It is a barbarous business
<font> we <$$font> have had to go through . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.280

I did not attempt to answer this , BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.281

for , except through the medium of sport and raillery , I have certainly
no claim upon his patience . BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.282

But , in another moment , in a tone very flattering , he said , " I do
not understand , nor can any way imagine , how you can have been thus
perverted ! " BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.283

" No , no ! " quoth I , " it is you who are perverted ! "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.284

Here Mr. Law began his second oration , BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.285

and Mr. Windham ran down to his cell . BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.286

I fancy this was not exactly the conversation he expected upon my first
enlargement . BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.287

However , though it would very seriously grieve me to hurt or offend him
, I can@ @not refuse my own veracity , nor Mr. Hastings's injuries ,
the utterance of what I think truth . BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.288

Mr. Law was far more animated and less frightened ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.289

and acquitted himself so as to merit almost as much <font> éloge
<$$font> as , in my opinion , he had merited censure at the opening .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.290

It was all in answer to Mr. Burke's general exordium and attack .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.291

I had the satisfaction some days after to see again the good , and
much-@ @injured , and most unfortunate Mr. Beckford .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.292

He is at length released from unjust confinement ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,65.293

but he has an air of <P_5,66> dejection , a look , a voice , a manner ,
that all speak the term of his sufferings to have been too long for his
spirits to recruit . BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.294

How hard a case ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.295

I wish to read his account of Jamaica ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.296

I hear it much commended . BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.297

He is now writing a History of France . BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.298

I understand both to have been compiled in his prison !
BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.299

How praiseworthy to have made such an exertion of his abilities , which
sorrow and resentment must else have soured and corroded for life !
BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.300

At Mrs. Ord's , one morning , I had the happiness to meet Mr. Smelt ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.301

he looks again very ill . BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.302

He supports , he told me , a fevered being , that will soon dissolve ,
to his ultimate joy . BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.303

No man could ever more completely devote his whole mind to the object of
his affection ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.304

his happiness was all centred in her life , BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.305

and is wholly buried with her ashes ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.306

I met , that same morning , Miss Fanshaw : BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.307

she had spent the preceding evening , she said , very singularly ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.308

she had heard the famous M. Lally Tolendahl read a French tragedy upon
an English subject , written by himself ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.309

The subject was the death of Strafford . BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.310

He read it to a large but chosen company , at Lady Herries's .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.311

I should much like to have heard it . BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.312

Upon the day of Sir Joshua Reynolds's death I was in my bed , with two
blisters , BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.313

and I did not hear of it till two days after . BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.314

I shall enter nothing upon this subject here ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,66.315

our current letters mentioned <P_5,67> the particulars ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.316

and I am not desirous to retrace them . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.317

His loss is as universally felt as his merit is universally acknowledged
, BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.318

and , joined to all public motives , I had myself private ones of regret
that can@ @not subside . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.319

He was always peculiarly kind to me , BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.320

and he had worked at my deliverance from a life he conceived too
laborious for me , as if I had been his own daughter ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.321

yet , from the time of my coming forth , I only twice saw him .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.322

I had not recovered strength for visiting before he was past receiving
me . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.323

I grieve inexpressibly never to have been able to pay him the small
tribute of thanks for his most kind exertions in my cause .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.324

I little thought the second time I saw him would be my last opportunity
, BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.325

and my intention was to wait some favourable opening .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.326

Miss Palmer is left heiress , BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.327

and her unabating attendance upon her inestimable uncle in his sickroom
makes everybody content with her great acquisition .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.328

I am sure she loved and admired him with all the warmth of her warm
heart . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.329

I wrote her a few lines of condolence , BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.330

and she has sent me a very kind answer . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.331

She went immediately to the Burkes , with whom she will chiefly , I
fancy , associate . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.332

<font> March . <$$font> BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.333

- Sad for the loss of Sir Joshua , and all of us ill ourselves , we
began this month . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.334

Upon its third day was his funeral . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.335

My dear father could not attend ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.336

but Charles was invited BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.337

and went . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.338

All the Royal Academy , professors and students , and all the Literary
Club , attended as family mourners . BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.339

Mr. Burke , Mr. Malone , and Mr. Metcalf , are executors .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.340

Miss Palmer has spared nothing , either in thought or expense , that
could render the last honours splendid and grateful .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,67.341

It <P_5,68> was a very melancholy day to us ; though it had the
alleviation and softening of a letter from our dear Charlotte ,
promising to arrive the next day . BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.342

<font> April . <$$font> BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.343

- This wayward month opened upon me with none of its smiles :
BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.344

sickness and depression pervaded our household . BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.345

I shall now pass from the 8th , when the combined forces of Mrs. Ord's
rhetoric and Charles's activity removed me from sickness and sinking to
the salubrious hills of Norbury , and the balsamic medicine of social
tenderness , to my return to my dear father , April 18 , when I found
him but little better , and far from such a state as could have made me
happy in absence . BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.346

Gradually , however , he has been recruiting , though I have no hope of
his entire restoration before the dog-days . BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.347

I paid my duty at the Queen's house , in inquiring after Her Majesty ,
where I was extremely well received by Mrs. Schwellenberg , and saw
Miss Planta and Mr. de Luc . BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.348

My next visiting opportunity carried me to Mrs. Montagu :
BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.349

she let me in , BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.350

and showed me her new room , which was a double gratification to me ,
from the elegant paintings by our ingenious Edward .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.351

You will have heard this fine room described by Mr. Lock ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.352

my Susanna , and you , my Fredy , I hope have seen it .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.353

'T@ @is a very beautiful house indeed , and now completely finished .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.354

There was a lady with Mrs. Montagu whose name I never gathered , but
who frequently addressed herself to me , in talking of my dearest Fredy
, and making inquiries about her health . BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.355

So I liked her very well , though else she was but a commonish ,
non-nothingish sort of a good-humoured and sensiblish woman !
BURNEY-1792-2,5,68.356

Then I went to Lady Mary Duncan , who was <P_5,69> grotesquely comic ,
and remarkably vulgar , and zealously kind , and ludicrously sarcastic ,
as usual . BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.357

Have you read Miss Knight's <font> Dinarbas , or Continuation of
Rasselas <$$font> ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.358

If you can forgive the presumption of the idea , I think you must be
pleased with the execution . BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.359

She has now just published a new work , <font> Marcus Flaminius , or the
Life of the Romans . <$$font> BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.360

She has much surprised me by sending me a very elegantly bound copy , by
Mr. Hoole , who has been her editor . BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.361

I think it a work of great merit , though wanting in variety , and not
very attractive from much interesting the feelings .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.362

But to Italian travellers , who are classic readers , I imagine it must
be extremely welcome , in reviving images of all they have seen , well
combined and contrasted with former times of which they have read .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.363

The sentiments interspersed are so good I wish for more ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.364

and the principles that are meant to be recommended are both pure and
lofty . BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.365

It is not a work which you will read quickly through , or with ardour ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.366

but it is one , I think , of which you will not miss a word .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.367

<font> April <$$font> 23 . BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.368

I thought myself equal to again going to the trial , which recommenced
after six or seven weeks' cessation , on account of the Judges going the
circuit . BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.369

Sarah went with me : BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.370

I am now so known in the Chamberlain's box that the door-keepers and
attendants make way for me without looking at my ticket .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.371

And to be sure , the Managers on one side , and Mr. Hastings's friends
and counsel on the other , must pretty well have my face by heart .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.372

I have the faces of all them , most certainly , in full mental
possession ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,69.373

and the figures of many whose names I know not are so familiar now to my
eyes , that should I chance <P_5,70> hereafter to meet them , I shall be
apt to take them for old acquaintances . BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.374

There was again a full appearance of Managers to accompany Mr. Burke in
his entry ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.375

and again Mr. Windham quitted the procession , as it descended to the
box , BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.376

and filed off to speak with me . BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.377

He made the most earnest inquiries after the health of my dearest father
, as well as after my own . BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.378

He has all the semblance of real regard and friendship for us ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.379

and I am given to believe he wears no semblance that has not a real and
sympathetic substance couched beneath . BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.380

His manner instantly revived in my mind my intent not to risk , with him
, the loss of making those poor acknowledgments for his kindness , that
I so much regret omitting to Sir Joshua Reynolds .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.381

In return to his inquiries about my renovating health , I answered that
I had again been very ill since I saw him last , BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.382

and added , " Indeed , I believe I did not come away too soon . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.383

" And now , " cried I , " I can@ @not resist giving myself the pleasure
of making my acknowledgments for what I owe to you upon this subject .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.384

I have been , indeed , very much obliged , by various things that have
come round to me , both to you and to Sir Joshua -
BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.385

Oh what a loss is that ! " BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.386

" What a wretched loss ! " cried he : BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.387

and we then united our warmest suffrages in his favour , with our
deepest regret for our deprivation . BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.388

Here I observed poor Mr. Hastings was brought in .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.389

I saw he was fixing him . BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.390

" And can you , " I cried , fixing <font> him , <$$font> " can you have
so much compassion for one captive , and still have none for another ?
" BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.391

" Have you , then , still , " cried he , " the same sentiments ? "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.392

" Have you , " cried I , " heard all thus far of the defence ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.393

and are you still unmoved ? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,70.394

<P_5,71>

" Unmoved ? " cried he , emphatically ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.396

" shall I be moved by a lion ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.397

You see him there in a cage , BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.398

and pity him ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.399

look back to when you might have seen him with a lamb in his claws ! "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.400

I could only look dismayed for a moment . BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.401

" But , at least , " I said , " I hope what I hear is not true , though
I now grow afraid to ask ? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.402

" If it is anything about me , " he answered , " it is certainly not
true . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.403

" I am extremely glad , indeed , " cried I , BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.404

" for it has been buzzed about in the world that you were to draw up the
final charge . BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.405

This I thought most cruel of all ; that you , who have held back all
this time - " BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.406

" Yes ! pretty completely , " interrupted he , laughing .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.407

" No , not completely , " I continued ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.408

" but yet you have made no direct formal speech , BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.409

nor have come forward in any positive and formidable manner ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.410

therefore , as we have now heard all the others , and - almost enough -
" BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.411

I was obliged to stop a moment , to see how this adventurous plainness
was taken ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.412

and he really , though my manner showed me only rallying , looked I do@
@n't know how , at such unexampled disrespect towards his
brother-orators . BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.413

But I soon went quietly on : " To come forth now , after all that has
passed , with the <font> éclat <$$font> of novelty , and , - for the
most cruel part of all , - that which can@ @not be answered . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.414

" You think , " cried he , " 't@ @is bringing a fresh courser into the
field of battle , just as every other is completely jaded ? "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.415

" I think , " cried I , " that I am very generous to wish against what I
should so much wish for , but for other considerations . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.416

" Oh , what a flattering way , " cried he , " of stating it !
BURNEY-1792-2,5,71.417

however , I can bear to allow you a <P_5,72> little waste of compliments
, which you know so well how to make ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.418

but I can@ @not bear to have you waste your compassion . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.419

Mr. Plomer now rose to speak , BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.420

and he only added , " Oh ! I must go down to help the show " :
BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.421

and away he ran . BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.422

Mr. Plomer spoke in a clear and manly manner , BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.423

and brought forward truths and facts in favour of Mr. Hastings , the
most satisfactory . BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.424

What amends can that persecuted man ever receive ?
BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.425

<font> May . <$$font> BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.426

- The first of this month I went again to Westminster Hall , with our
cousin Elizabeth . BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.427

Evidence was brought forward by the counsel for Mr. Hastings ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.428

and Lord Stormont was called upon as a witness . BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.429

This produced some curious debating among the Lords , and with the
Chancellor . BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.430

They spoke only for the ears of one another , as it was merely to settle
some ceremonial , whether he was to be summoned to the common place
where the witnesses stood , or had the claim of a peer to speak in his
place , robed . BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.431

This latter prevailed : BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.432

and then we expected his speech ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.433

but no , a new debate ensued , which , as we gathered from the rumour
about us , was that his Lordship should have the Prayer Book , for his
oath , belonging to the House of Peers . BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.434

Here , also , his dignity was triumphant , though it cost the whole
assembly a full quarter of an hour ; while another Prayer Book was
officially at hand , in the general post for plebeian witnesses .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.435

Well ! aristocrat as I am , compared with you , I laughed heartily at
all this mummery ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,72.436

and yet it was possibly wise , at this period of pulling down <P_5,73>
all law and order , all privilege and subordination , however frivolous
was its appearance . BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.437

His testimony was highly favourable to Mr. Hastings , with regard to
authenticating the intelligence he had received of an opening war with
France , upon which hung much justification of the measures Mr.
Hastings had pursued for raising supplies . BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.438

All the rest of the day was upon the same business , and bringing
forward the same clearing . BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.439

Thence I went to the Queen's house , where I have a most cordial general
invitation from Mrs. Schwellenberg to go by all opportunities ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.440

and there is none so good as after the trial , that late hour exactly
according with her dinner-time . BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.441

She is just as she was in respect to health ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.442

but in all other respects , oh how amended ! all civility , all
obligingness , all courtesy ! and so desirous to have me visit her ,
that she presses me to come incessantly . BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.443

Mr. de Luc and Miss Mawer were of the party . BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.444

During coffee , the Princess Royal came into the room .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.445

She condescended to profess herself quite glad to see me ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.446

and she had not left the room five minutes before , again returning ,
she said , " Mrs. Schwellenberg , I am come to plague you ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.447

for I am come to take away Miss Burney . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.448

I give you leave to guess whether this plagued me .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.449

<font> May <$$font> 2 . BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.450

The following week I again went to Westminster Hall .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.451

Mlle. Jacobi had made a point of accompanying me , that she might see
the show , as James called it to General Burgoyne ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.452

and I had great pleasure in taking her , BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.453

for she is a most ingenuous and good creature , though - alas ! - by no
means the same undaunted , gay , open character as she appeared at first
. BURNEY-1792-2,5,73.454

Sickness , confinement , <P_5,74> absence from her friends , submission
to her coadjutrix , and laborious watching , have much altered her .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.455

The trial of this day was all written evidence in favour of Mr.
Hastings , and violent quarrelling as to its admissibility on the part
of Mr. Burke . BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.456

Mr. Windham took his place , during some part of the controversy ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.457

and spoke ably and clearly as to the given point in dispute , but with
the most palpable tremor and internal struggle . BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.458

I wonder , so " tremblingly " as he is " alive all o'er , " how he ever
made the first effort to become a public speaker ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.459

but having conquered that opening horror , I wonder yet more , with such
ability , readiness , knowledge , facility , and command of language ,
he has not totally vanquished the difficulties of public exhibition .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.460

I can only suppose that by nature he is extremely diffident , and by
inclination equally ambitious ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.461

and if so , the conflict may last through life . BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.462

I attended Mlle. Jacobi to the Queen's house , where I dined ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.463

and great indeed was my pleasure , during coffee , to see the Princess
Elizabeth , who , in the most pleasing manner and the highest spirits ,
came to summon me to the Queen . BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.464

I found Her Majesty again with all her sweet daughters but the youngest
. BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.465

She was gracious and disposed to converse . BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.466

We had a great deal of talk upon public concerns ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.467

and she told me a friend of mine had spoken very well the day before ,
and so had Mr. Burke . BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.468

She meant Mr. Windham . BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.469

It was against the new societies , and in favour of the Proclamation .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.470

Mr. Burke , of course , would here come forth in defence of his own
predictions and opinions ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,74.471

but Mr. Windham , who had rather abided hitherto with <P_5,75> Charles
Fox , in thinking Mr. Burke too extreme , well as he loves him
personally , was a new convert highly acceptable .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.472

He does not , however , go all lengths with Mr. Burke ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.473

he is only averse to an unconstitutional mode of reform , and to
sanctioning club powers , so as to enable them , as in France , to
overawe the state and senate . BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.474

Soon after , to my infinite joy , the King entered .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.475

Oh , he spoke to me so kindly ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.476

- he congratulated me on the better looks which his own presence and
goodness gave me , repeatedly declaring he had never seen me in such
health . BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.477

He asked me after my father , BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.478

and listened with interest when I mentioned his depression , and told
him that all he had done of late to soothe his retirement and pain had
been making canons to solemn words , and with such difficulties of
composition as , in better health and spirits , would have rather proved
oppressive and perplexing than a relief to his feelings .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.479

" I , too , " said the King , after a very serious pause , " have myself
sometimes found , when ill or disturbed , that some grave and even
difficult employment for my thoughts has tended more to compose me than
any of the supposed usual relaxations . " BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.480

He also condescended to ask after little Norbury , taking off the eager
little fellow while he spoke , and his earnest manner of delivery .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.481

He then inquired about my friends Mr. and Mrs. Lock , and their
expectations of the return of Mr. William . BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.482

He inquired how I lived , whom I saw , what sort of neighbours I had in
the college , and many other particulars , that seemed to desire to know
how I went on , and whether I was comfortable . BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.483

His looks , I am sure , said so , and most kindly .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,75.484

They kept me till they went to the Japan Room , where they meet the
officers and ladies who attend <P_5,76> them in public .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.485

They were going to the Ancient Music . BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.486

This dear King , nobly unsuspicious where left to himself , and where he
has met no doubleness , spoke also very freely of some political matters
before me - of the new association in particular .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.487

It gratified me highly . BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.488

One day again , in the following week , I went to Mr. Hastings's
defence : BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.489

Sarah was with me . BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.490

Just before us sat Mrs. Kennedy , of Windsor , with whom I renewed a
meeting acquaintance , but evaded a visiting one .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.491

Soon after a grave man's voice behind me said , " Is not that Miss
Burney ? " BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.492

I twirled round BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.493

and saw the Bishop of Dromore , and Mrs. Percy and her two daughters .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.494

We immediately renewed our Bath acquaintance . BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.495

The defence to-day was by Mr. Markham , son of the Archbishop of York ,
who has repeatedly been summoned , and who bears most honourable
testimony to the character , the conduct , and the abilities of Mr.
Hastings . BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.496

Soon after I spent a day with Mrs. Ord , by invitation , for meeting
the Percy family . BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.497

She had also assembled Major Rennell , the Dickensons , Lady Herries ,
and Mr. Selwin . BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.498

Mr. Selwin I had not seen for many years . BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.499

Streatham and Mrs. Thrale , our constant themes , were uppermost ,
first and last , in all we said and all we thought .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,76.500

His most amiable behaviour in <P_5,77> poor Mr. Thrale's unhappy state
of health I shall never forget . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.501

I met him with a glad cordiality from its remembrance ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.502

and it was very apparently mutual . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.503

He still visits , occasionally , at Streatham ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.504

but he says the place , the inhabitants , the visitors , the way of life
, are all so totally changed , it would make me most melancholy again to
tread those boards . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.505

All the public talk was upon the East_India letters from Lord Cornwallis
, BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.506

and Major Rennell was there our oracle . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.507

He has a plain , unadorned way of giving information , that is both
pleasant and masterly . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.508

Mrs. Dickenson told me that Miss Palmer is certainly engaged to Lord
Inchiquin . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.509

He is sixty-nine ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.510

but they say he is remarkably pleasing in his manners , and soft and
amiable in his disposition . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.511

I am sure she has merited my wishes for her happiness , by her deep
interest , upon all occasions , in mine , BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.512

and I am sure she has them . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.513

Mrs. Bunbury was with her sister , and looking as beautiful as she
would let herself look ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.514

for she uses so much art , that , in my eyes , she loses more by such
assistance than she could do , with features so fine as hers , by the
fading of those years she means to conceal . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.515

The Colonel came in while we stayed , BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.516

and we had much old talk upon past services in common .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.517

I got home to dinner to meet Mrs. and Miss Mary Young , who are in town
for a few weeks . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.518

Miss Mary is sensible , and quick , and agreeable .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.519

They give a very unpleasant account of Madame de Genlis , or de Sillery
, or Brulard , as she is now called . BURNEY-1792-2,5,77.520

They say she has established herself at <P_5,78> Bury , in their
neighbourhood , with Mlle. la Princesse d'Orléans and Pamela , and a
<font> Circe , <$$font> another young girl under her care .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.521

They have taken a house , the master of which always dines with them ,
though Mrs. Young says he is such a low man he should not dine with her
daughter . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.522

They form twenty with themselves and household . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.523

They keep a botanist , a chemist , and a natural historian always with
them . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.524

These are supposed to have been common servants of the Duke of Orleans
in former days , as they always walk behind the ladies when abroad ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.525

but , to make amends in the new equalising style , they all dine
together at home . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.526

They visit at no house but Sir Thomas Gage's , where they carry their
harps , and frequently have music . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.527

They have been to a Bury ball , BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.528

and danced all night ; Mlle. d'Orléans with anybody , known or unknown
to Madame Brulard . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.529

What a woful change from that elegant , amiable , high-bred Madame de
Genlis I knew six years ago ! the apparent pattern of female perfection
in manners , conversation , and delicacy . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.530

There are innumerable democrats assembled in Suffolk ; among them the
famous Tom Paine , who herds with all the farmers that will receive him
, and there propagates his pernicious doctrines .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.531

The next time I went to Westminster I took Miss Mary Young .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.532

It was again upon the same evidence of Mr. Markham , which proves very
important indeed in Mr. Hastings's favour . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.533

<font> Friday , May . <$$font> 25 . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.534

This morning I went to a very fine public breakfast , given by Mrs.
Montagu . BURNEY-1792-2,5,78.535

The instant I came into the gallery I had the melancholy satisfaction of
being seen by Sir George <P_5,79> Howard . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.536

There is no affectation mixed with his sorrow for poor Lady Effingham .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.537

I had not met him since her loss . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.538

He had tears in his eyes immediately ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.539

but he spoke with cheerfulness , BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.540

and asked after my dear father very kindly . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.541

Mrs. Montagu I saw next , BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.542

and she was extremely courteous . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.543

They were all very sorry to miss my father , who , indeed , has
everywhere been missed this winter and spring . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.544

When I came into the Feather Room I was accosted by Mr. Seward ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.545

and he entered into a gay conversation upon all sorts of subjects ,
which detained me , agreeably enough , in a very pleasant station by one
of the windows . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.546

He had a gentleman with him , whom I half recollected , and whom he soon
introduced by the name of " my friend Mrs. Boscawen's son . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.547

It was Lord Falmouth , with whom I had dined at Commissioner La Forey's
, at Plymouth Dock . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.548

He was as entertaining here as he had been there .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.549

I then made for the dining-room , which was filled for a breakfast ,
upon this occasion , and very splendidly , though , to me , who have so
long been familiar to sights and decorations , no show of this sort is
new or striking . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.550

A sight that gave me far more pleasure was Mrs. Ord and her daughter ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.551

and I immediately joined them for the rest of the morning .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.552

The table was not a matter of indifference to the guests at large ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.553

and it was so completely occupied by company seated round it , that it
was long before one vacant chair could be seized ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.554

and this fell to the lot of Miss Ord . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.555

The crowd of company was such that we could only slowly make way in any
part . BURNEY-1792-2,5,79.556

There could <P_5,80> not be fewer than four or five_hundred people .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.557

It was like a full Ranelagh by daylight . BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.558

We now met Mrs. Porteus ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.559

and who should be with her but the poor pretty S. S. , whom so long I
had not seen , and who has now lately been finally given up by her
long-sought and very injurious lover , Dr. Vyse .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.560

She is sadly faded , BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.561

and looked disturbed and unhappy ; but still beautiful , though no
longer blooming ; and still affectionate , though absent and evidently
absorbed . BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.562

We had a little chat together about the Thrales .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.563

In mentioning our former intimacy with them , " Ah , those , " she cried
, " were happy times ! " BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.564

and her eyes glistened . BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.565

Poor thing ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.566

hers has been a lamentable story ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.567

- Imprudence and vanity have rarely been mixed with so much sweetness ,
and good-humour , and candour , and followed with more reproach and ill
success . BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.568

We agreed to renew acquaintance next winter ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.569

at present she will be little more in town . BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.570

We went then round the rooms , which were well worth examination and
admiration : BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.571

and we met friends and acquaintance every other step . Amongst them ,
Major Rennell , whom I always like to meet ; Miss Coussmaker ; Lady
Rothes , who has been to Chelsea , but whom I have not yet been able to
wait upon ; Dr. Russel , who was in high spirits , and laughed heartily
at seeing the prodigious meal most of the company made of cold chicken ,
ham , fish , etc. , and said he should like to see Mrs. Montagu make
the experiment of inviting all the same party to dinner at three o'clock
. BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.572

" Oh ! " they would cry , " three o'clock ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.573

What does she mean ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.574

- who can dine at three o'clock ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.575

- one has no appetite - BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.576

one ca@ @n't swallow a morsel - BURNEY-1792-2,5,80.577

<P_5,81>

it@ @'s altogether impossible ! " BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.579

- Yet , let her invite the same people , and give them a dinner , while
she calls it a breakfast , and see but how prettily they can find
appetites . BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.580

While we were examining the noble pillars in the new room , I heard an
exclamation of " <font> Est-ce possible ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.581

suis-je si heureuse ? BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.582

- Est-ce ma chère Mlle. Beurni que je vois ? ? <$$font> "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.583

Need I say this was Madame de la Fite ? or Mrs. Fitt , as , since the
French Revolution , of which she is a favourer , she is called by some
of the household to which I belonged . BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.584

I spoke so as to moderate this rapture into something less calling for
attention , which her voice and manner were engaging not unwillingly .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.585

I had not seen her since my retreat , BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.586

and , if she had been less pompous , I should have been glad of the
meeting , BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.587

she kept my hand close grasped between both her own <paren> though her
fan nipped one of my fingers till I was ready to make faces <$$paren> ,
with a most resolute <font> empressement , <$$font> to the great
inconvenience of those who wanted to pass , BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.588

for we were at one of the entrances into the great new room ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.589

and how long she might have continued this fond detention I know not ,
if a lady , whose appearance vied for show and parade with Madame de la
Fite's manner and words , had not called out aloud , " I am extremely
happy indeed to see Miss Burney ! " BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.590

This was Mrs. Hastings ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.591

and to answer her I was let loose . BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.592

I have always been very sorry that Mrs. Hastings , who is a pleasing ,
lively , and well-bred woman , with attractive manners and attentions to
those she wishes to oblige , should have an indiscretion so peculiarly
unsuited to her situation , as to aim always at being the most
conspicuous figure wherever she appears . BURNEY-1792-2,5,81.593

Her dress now was like <P_5,82> that of an Indian princess , according
to our ideas of such ladies , and so much the most splendid , from its
ornaments , and style , and fashion , though chiefly of muslin , that
everybody else looked under-dressed in her presence .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.594

It is for Mr. Hastings I am sorry when I see this inconsiderate vanity
, in a woman who would so much better manifest her sensibility of his
present hard disgrace , by a modest and quiet appearance and demeanour .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.595

I had a very good beau in Major Rennell , who took charge of any
catering and regale . BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.596

Dr. Russel also made up to our little coterie ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.597

and Lord Mulgrave surprised , and also frightened me , by his changed
appearance and more than ever hollow voice , when he suddenly came to
speak to me . BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.598

I had not seen him since an assembly at Mrs. Ord's , when he was there
with his sweet bride . BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.599

He looks quite ghastly . BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.600

He is in an atrophy , and fast , I doubt , quitting this world .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.601

<font> Wednesday , May <$$font> 30 . BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.602

To-day I went to Westminster Hall again , to hear the evidence of Mr.
Markham , which is so pleasantly in favour of Mr. Hastings , that all
the friends of that persecuted man are gratified by all he deposes .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.603

Miss Ord accompanied me . BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.604

When the impetuous and ungovernable Mr. Burke was interrupting the
Chancellor , in order to browbeat Mr. Hastings's evidence , Mr.
Windham involuntarily exclaimed , " Hist ! " just as if he had been at
his elbow , and playing the kind part of a flapper .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.605

I could not help laughing , and half joining him :
BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.606

he echoed back my laugh , and with a good-humour that took in all its
meaning and acknowledged its sympathy with regard to Mr. Burke ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.607

nevertheless , he spoke not a word . BURNEY-1792-2,5,82.608

Afterwards , however , he spoke when I had far <P_5,83> rather he had
been silent , BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.609

for he went to the assistance of Mr. Burke . BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.610

Michael Angelo Taylor spoke also ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.611

but I observed with pleasure a distinction the Chancellor made to Mr.
Windham ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.612

for , when he answered their arguments , he singled him out as the
person who had said what alone he meant upon that question to notice ,
by saying , " The honourable manager who spoke second . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.613

But I am sure - I think so , at least - Mr. Windham as little approves
the violence of Mr. Burke in this trial as I do myself .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.614

I see him evidently and frequently suffer great pain and mortification
when he is so obstreperous . BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.615

<font> June <$$font> 1 . BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.616

- This day had been long engaged for breakfasting with Mrs. Dickenson
and dining with Mrs. Ord . BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.617

The breakfast guests were Mr. Langton , Mr. Foote , Mr. Dickenson ,
jun. , a cousin , and a very agreeable and pleasing man ; Lady Herries
, Miss Dickenson , another cousin , and Mr. Boswell .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.618

This last was the object of the morning . BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.619

I felt a strong sensation of that displeasure which his loquacious
communications of every weakness and infirmity of the first and greatest
good man of these times have awakened in me , at his first sight ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.620

and , though his address to me was courteous in the extreme , and he
made a point of sitting next me , I felt an indignant disposition to a
nearly forbidding reserve and silence . BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.621

How many starts of passion and prejudice has he blackened into record ,
that else might have sunk , for ever forgotten , under the preponderance
of weightier virtues and excellences ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.622

Angry , however , as I have long been with him , he soon insensibly
conquered , though he did not soften me : BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.623

there is so little of ill design or ill nature in him ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,83.624

he is so open and forgiving for all that is <P_5,84> said in return ,
that he soon forced me to consider him in a less serious light , and
change my resentment against his treachery into something like
commiseration of his levity ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.625

and before we parted we became good friends . BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.626

There is no resisting great good-humour , be what will in the opposite
scale . BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.627

He entertained us all as if hired for that purpose , telling stories of
Dr. Johnson , and acting them with incessant buffoonery .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.628

I told him frankly that , if he turned him into ridicule by caricature ,
I should fly the premises : BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.629

he assured me he would not , BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.630

and indeed his imitations , though comic to excess , were so far from
caricature that he omitted a_thousand gesticulations which I distinctly
remember . BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.631

Mr. Langton told some stories himself in imitation of Dr. Johnson ;
BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.632

but they became him less than Mr. Boswell , BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.633

and only reminded me of what Dr. Johnson himself once said to me - "
Every man has , some time in his life , an ambition to be a wag . "
BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.634

If Mr. Langton had repeated anything from his truly great friend
quietly , it would far better have accorded with his own serious and
respectable character . BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.635

After this , I went to Mrs. Ord for the day . BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.636

I found there the charming Mrs. Garrick , whom I always cordially
delight to see ; BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.637

but she was not well , BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.638

and could not stay . BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.639

In the evening we had a large and pleasant party : Mrs. Montagu , Mrs.
Boscawen , Lady Hesketh , Mr. and Mrs. Pepys , Mr. and Mrs. Hawkins
Brown , Mrs. E. Hervey , Dr. Russel , Lady Herries , Mr. and Mrs.
Dickenson , Mr. Bardon , and Mr. Batt . BURNEY-1792-2,5,84.640

<P_5,85>

I had much very interesting and informing conversation with Mr. Batt ,
who is among my high favourites . BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.642

He is just returned from France , BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.643

and he gave me such an account of the situation and disposition of
things , and of the proceedings of the National Assembly , as , from his
authority , I should certainly write for the benefit of such democrats
as only hear and seek the presiding powers' account of themselves ; if I
had not a sinking within upon the subject , from the excess of horror
with which my informer made me look forward to probable consequences .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.644

<font> June <$$font> 4 . BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.645

- The birthday of our truly good King . BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.646

As His Majesty had himself given me , when I saw him after the Queen's
birthday , an implied reproach for not presenting myself at the palace
that day , I determined not to incur a similar censure on this ,
especially as I hold my admission on such a national festival as a real
happiness , as well as honour , when it is to see themselves .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.647

How different was my attire from every other such occasion the five
preceding years ! BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.648

It was a mere simple dressed undress , without feathers , flowers , hoop
, or furbelow . BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.649

When I alighted at the porter's lodge , I was stopped from crossing the
courtyard , by seeing the King , with his three sons , the Prince of
Wales , Duke of York , and Duke of Clarence , who were standing there
after alighting from their horses , to gratify the people who encircled
the iron rails . BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.650

It was a pleasant and goodly sight , BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.651

and I rejoiced in such a detention . BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.652

I had a terrible difficulty to find a friend who would make known to Her
Majesty that I was come to pay my devoirs . BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.653

At length , while watching in the passages to and fro , I heard a step
upon the Princesses' stairs , BURNEY-1792-2,5,85.654

<P_5,86>

and , venturing forward , I encountered the Princess Elizabeth .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,86.656

I paid my respectful congratulations on the day , which she most
pleasantly received , BURNEY-1792-2,5,86.657

and I intimated my great desire to see Her Majesty .
BURNEY-1792-2,5,86.658

I am sure the amiable Princess communicated my petition ,
BURNEY-1792-2,5,86.659

for Mr. de Luc came out in a few minutes BURNEY-1792-2,5,86.660

and ushered me into the Royal presence . BURNEY-1792-2,5,86.661

