<BEGIN_burton1-1762-1>

<P_1,1>

<heading>

Isai. XXII. 12 , 13 , 14 . BURTON1-1762-1,1,1.4

<font> And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping , and
to mourning , and to baldness , and to girding with sackcloth :
BURTON1-1762-1,1,1.5

- And behold , joy and gladness , slaying oxen , and killing sheep ,
eating flesh , and drinking wine <$$font> ; BURTON1-1762-1,1,1.6

<font> " let us eat and drink BURTON1-1762-1,1,1.7

for to_morrow we shall die . " BURTON1-1762-1,1,1.8

And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts , Surely this
iniquity shall not be purged from you , till ye die , saith the Lord God
of Hosts . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,1,1.9

<$$heading>

In this chapter we have before us a prophetick representation of the
calamities , which sooner or later should be brought upon the <font>
Jews <$$font> by a foreign invasion . BURTON1-1762-1,1,1.11

The design of this and other like prophesies was to awaken that proud
luxurious people out of a state of unwarranted <font> security <$$font>
- to make them apprehensive of their real <font> danger <$$font> - to
call off their trust from the arm of <font> flesh <$$font> , from means
merely <font> human <$$font> , their political wisdom and military power
- to direct their views to the <font> Lord God of Hosts : <$$font> to
the end that they might feel <P_1,2> the necessity of humbling
themselves under his mighty hand , and by the reformation of their
manners reconcile themselves to his favour , and engage his protection .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,2.12

The words of my Text contain several particulars which merit our serious
regard : and more especially , as the similitude of many circumstances
points out the application to our own case . BURTON1-1762-1,1,2.13

For the better understanding the whole , I shall briefly consider and
explain each clause ; and , as I pass on , occasionally offer some
reflexions - and lastly apply the Doctrine to its <font> moral <$$font>
uses , and the purposes of the present <font> Solemnity . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,1,2.14

The first point here asserted is a <font> matter of Fact <$$font> :
namely , that God did call the <font> Jews <$$font> to repentance .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,2.15

Now concerning the <font> manner <$$font> of this divine Call 't@ @is to
be observed , that this is either <font> ordinary <$$font> or <font>
extraordinary <$$font> . BURTON1-1762-1,1,2.16

Of the former sort is that which is convey'd to an attentive considerate
mind in the common dispensations of God's <font> Providence <$$font> ;
where the <font> notoriety <$$font> of the case it_self , as it points
out the interposition of the finger of <font> God <$$font> , does withal
suggest the moral duties required of men in such circumstances : so that
<font> when God's judgments are seen in the earth the inhabitants may
learn righteousness . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,1,2.17

To this head may also be referred <font> that <$$font> Call , which is
contained in God's <font> standing Word <$$font> , applied by his
Ministers for the instruction and admonition of the people , and is , as
it were , an occasional republication of the divine will .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,2.18

<P_1,3>

But the <font> latter <$$font> sort implies the <font> visible <$$font>
interposition of God himself upon some special and important occasions :
as when God raises up Prophets , the preachers of righteousness and
Heralds of his judgments empowered to declare to the people some
particular and interesting message . BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.20

Such we suppose <font> that <$$font> Call to be which is mentioned in my
Text . BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.21

It does not indeed appear from the Chapter that this extraordinary
message was delivered by <font> Isaiah <$$font> himself :
BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.22

yet though not expressly mentioned , it is by no means <font> improbable
<$$font> : since the general tenor {TEXT:tenour} of his preaching tended
to this point . BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.23

But this is certain , that there was a solemn expostulation and withal a
several denunciation of God's judgments delivered by a contemporary of
<font> Isaiah <$$font> , the Prophet <font> Micah . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.24

And we find it cited by <font> Jeremiah <$$font> 26. 18 .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.25

<font> Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah King of
Judah , BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.26

and spake to all the people of Judah . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.27

Now the purport of this is the same with that of <font> Isaiah <$$font>
's prophecies : BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.28

first there is an upbraiding representation of national wickedness ;
BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.29

and in consequence of that , there follows a threatning of national
punishment . BURTON1-1762-1,1,3.30

<P_1,4>

Now concerning the <font> manner <$$font> of the divine Call it may be
remarked : that in proportion to the notoriety of the Call , or the
extraordinary circumstances , by which the delivery of it is attended ,
being such as are best suited to excite mens' {TEXT:mens} regard and
command their reverence ; I say , in proportion to the means of
conviction thus offered , mens' {TEXT:mens} inattention , irreverence
and disobedience receive additional degrees of aggravation , and subject
them to the more severe inflictions of the divine judgments .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,4.32

The next particular to be observed is the circumstance of <font> Time
<$$font> , when this Call was made . BURTON1-1762-1,1,4.33

The terms , in which this is expressed , are not indeed precisely
determinate : BURTON1-1762-1,1,4.34

<font> in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call , &c. <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,1,4.35

there is no reference here expressly made to any particular <font>
transaction <$$font> , by which the date might be ascertained .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,4.36

But , from many internal evidences contained in this chapter , compared
with several circumstances mentioned in other parts of Scripture , we
may in general , upon good grounds , collect that this Call was made in
the reign of King <font> Hezekiah - after <$$font> the Reformation of
Religion in the <font> Jewish <$$font> Church , and the reestablishment
of the State - <font> after <$$font> his successful war with the
Philistines , - and <font> after <$$font> the recovery of the
territories , which , in the time of his father <P_1,5> <font> Ahaz
<$$font> , were torn away from <font> Judah - after <$$font> the
destruction and captivity of <font> Israel <$$font> by <font>
Shalmaneser <$$font> King of <font> Assyria - after <$$font> his shaking
off the yoke of Subjection to the <font> Assyrian <$$font> - <font>
after <$$font> the strengthening of <font> Jerusalem <$$font> in an
extraordinary manner by all kinds of military provision - <font> before
<$$font> the degradation and punishment of <font> Shebna <$$font> , the
Treasurer , who was over the House - <font> before <$$font> the
advancement of <font> Eliakim <$$font> into his Post - and therefore
<font> before <$$font> the advancing of <font> Sennacherib <$$font>
against <font> Jerusalem <$$font> after his success in other attempts -
<font> before <$$font> the Embassy of <$$font> Rabshakeh <$$font> in
defiance of the God of <font> Israel : <$$font> at which time we find
that <font> Eliakim <$$font> was in fact invested in the title and
office , which was before possessed by <font> Shebna : <$$font> so that
, upon the whole , it appears to have been in the <P_1,6> 14th year of
<font> Hezekiah <$$font> 's reign , that year in which <font>
Sennacherib <$$font> came up against the fenced cities of <font> Judah
<$$font> and took them - at which time <font> Hezekiah <$$font> , under
the apprehension of the common danger , did submit to pay three_hundred
talents of silver , and thirty talents of gold to the perfidious Prince
; who received the money , but broke his faith , and renewed the
invasion - <font> that year <$$font> in which <font> Hezekiah <$$font>
was sick unto death - in which he was favoured with a miraculous
assurance of his recovery and the deliverance of <font> Jerusalem
<$$font> from the <font> Assyrian <$$font> power .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,5.37

- I look upon <font> this <$$font> , as the critical juncture of time
implied in my Text . BURTON1-1762-1,1,5.38

It seems that <font> Sennacherib <$$font> had , upon advice that <font>
Hirhakah <$$font> King of <font> Ethiopia <$$font> was come forth to
make war with him , for a@ @while withdrawn his powers from <font> Judea
<$$font> , and marched out to give him battle : and having then defeated
the allied army , on which the <font> Jews <$$font> had placed no small
confidence , he resumed his attempt upon <font> Jerusalem . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,1,5.39

A siege was threatened and expected : BURTON1-1762-1,1,5.40

all manner of preparation was made for the defence of the City :
BURTON1-1762-1,1,5.41

King <font> Hezekiah <$$font> at the point <P_1,7> of death was
miraculously recovered , and at the same time comforted with the
assurance of blessings both personal and publick , the addition of
fifteen years to the term of his life , and the divine protection of
<font> Jerusalem <$$font> against the blasphemous invader .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,7.42

T@ @is not improbable that on these accounts both King and People ,
presuming on their present and future security , instead of expressing
their gratitude for the wonderful blessing received , and their just
sense of their dependency on the Author of their happiness , by some
solemn acts of piety and humiliation , grew intemperate in the
expressions of their ill-timed sensual joy ; BURTON1-1762-1,1,7.43

they wantonly triumphed in their present prosperity , unmindful of their
almighty Deliverer ; BURTON1-1762-1,1,7.44

and by this instance of ingratitude they incurred the displeasure of God
. whose goodness they abused . BURTON1-1762-1,1,7.45

This supposition , on the face of things , appears probable ; such
behaviour , by the common effect of propserity , being in general found
agreeable to the ordinary workings of mens' {TEXT:mens} perverse minds ;
BURTON1-1762-1,1,7.46

it was particularly so to the temper of the <font> Jews <$$font> , a
people not more distinguished by uncommon felicities , than by their
ingratitude : an untoward disposition ! which their inspired Lawgiver
foreseeing , endeavoured <P_1,8> to prevent and discourage by variety of
cautions and admonitions . BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.47

But further - the sacred history likewise countenances this supposition
: BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.48

for we read in 2 <font> Chron. <$$font> 32 . 25 , 26 , <font> that
Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him :
BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.49

for his heart was lifted up <$$font> ; BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.50

<font> therefore was there wrath upon him , and upon <$$font> Judah ,
<font> and upon <$$font> Jerusalem . BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.51

<font> Notwithstanding <$$font> , Hezekiah <font> humbled himself for
the pride of his heart , both he and the inhabitants of <$$font>
Jerusalem : <font> so that the wrath of the Lord came not upon them in
the days of <$$font> Hezekiah . BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.52

It appears from this passage that some benefit was done unto <font>
Hezekiah <$$font> , and that in a double respect , national as well as
personal : BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.53

for an assurance of <font> both <$$font> was given the Prophet at the
same time . BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.54

We here see the effect of the promised security , ingratitude and pride
of heart ; and , in consequence of this , the wrath of God denounced
both against the King and People ; and not improbably by the very same
Prophet , who had just before delivered the glad tidings of the common
safety ; - and lastly , the suspension of the threatened judgments upon
their humiliation : BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.55

- all these circumstances concur to support the probability of the
supposition above mentioned . BURTON1-1762-1,1,8.56

But after all , if the terms in <font> that day <$$font> be understood
as connected with the clause immediately preceding , then the time of
the Prophecy probably takes place , when the <font> Assyrian <$$font>
powers being for a while withdrawn , the <font> Jews <$$font> <P_1,9>
had improved the advantage of that calm interval , and having completed
{TEXT:compleated} the fortifications of <font> Jerusalem <$$font> , now
triumphed in their imaginary state of security : BURTON1-1762-1,1,9.57

accordingly we may conceive this to be the connexion of the Prophet's
discourse and expostulation with the <font> Jews : <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,1,9.58

" Ye have indeed used the best human means for the defence of your City
; BURTON1-1762-1,1,9.59

and I am far from blaming such necessary precautions :
BURTON1-1762-1,1,9.60

but herein I condemn your folly and wickedness , in that at the same
time you have not any respect unto your almighty Defender .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,9.61

Under these circumstances , acts of piety and humiliation would better
become you than these expressions of hasty joy and sensual pleasures ;
since hereby , as ye do not shew any sense of God's goodness , you most
assuredly provoke his displeasure . " BURTON1-1762-1,1,9.62

- Now all this may very well agree with the present supposition that
this transaction happened in the fourteenth year of <font> Hezekiah
<$$font> . So that , on the whole , we may consider the <font> day
<$$font> , in which the Lord God of Hosts called the <font> Jews
<$$font> to repentance , not as a day of immediate trouble and distress
, but rather as a day of publick ease and security , and therefore a day
of danger , of danger more real and certain as being less suspected and
foreseen , and , as such , worthy of some extraordinary interposition .
BURTON1-1762-1,1,9.63

<P_2,1>

<heading>

Isaiah LVIII. 5 , 6 . BURTON1-1762-1,2,1.66

<font> Is it such a fast that I have chosen ? a day for a man to
afflict his soul ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,1.67

is it to bow down his head as a bulrush , and to spread sackcloth , and
ashes under him ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,1.68

wilt thou call this a fast and an acceptable day to the Lord ?
BURTON1-1762-1,2,1.69

Is not this the fast that I have chosen ? to loose the bands of
wickedness - &c ? <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,1.70

<$$heading>

This day of publick Humiliation <paren> if I may be allowed to apply the
words of king <font> Hezekiah <$$font> on a like occasion <$$paren> is
to us a day of <font> trouble <$$font> , - of <font> rebuke <$$font> -
and <font> blasphemy : <$$font> - Of <font> trouble <$$font> , - as
suggesting uneasy apprehensions of various unknown dangers and
difficulties , incident in the course of a long-continued and far-@
@extended war : of <font> rebuke <$$font> to our sanguine hopes ,
disappointment of our premature expectations of victories , triumphs ,
and publick tranquillity : Of <font> blasphemy <$$font> , - as affording
matter of slander to our enemies from abroad , and of complaint and
murmurs at home . BURTON1-1762-1,2,1.72

- <font> " Wherefore lift <$$font> <P_2,2> <font> up thy prayer for the
remnant that is left . " <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.73

- In such circumstances of distress , where the interposition of divine
aid is evidently so much wanted , we are naturally led to make our
supplications for direction and support : BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.74

And the voice of publick authority , with great reason , now calls us
<font> to acts of humiliation , and prayer . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.75

And may the due performance of the religious services prescribed ,
render <font> this an acceptable day unto the Lord ! <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.76

It was indeed our wish - it was our earnest expectation , that the
occasion of our meeting in the house of God should have been different
from what we at present find : - that we should have come with our
peace-offerings - with sacrifices <font> eucharistical <$$font> , rather
than <font> expiatory <$$font> - with thanksgivings for blessings
received , rather than deprecations of those temporal evils which we
have reason to dread . BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.77

- But , since God's providence hath ordered things otherwise , it
behooves {TEXT:behoves} us to bring a frame of mind suited to our
present circumstances . BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.78

Severe admonitions are sometimes necessary to awaken the mind into a
serious sollicitude and consideration of our true state .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.79

<font> It is better to go to the house of mourning , than to go to the
house of feasting <$$font> , - to learn a lesson of wisdom in the school
of affliction , than riot in the abuse of God's mercies .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.80

We are too easily led into the latter by the common weakness of our
nature ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.81

and enjoy the pleasing delusion , 'till our prosperity becomes our ruin
: BURTON1-1762-1,2,2.82

<P_2,3>

To give due impressions of the former is the business of this day's
solemnity ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,3.84

and we are now , in a more especial manner , called upon to make proper
expressions of our religious principles , to acknowledge God's
sovereignty , and our dependency , to confess our demerits , to revere
his justice , to bewail our wickedness , and supplicate for his mercy ;
and to implore His blessing on his Majesty's arms , that , in the end ,
peace , safety and prosperity may be restored and perpetuated in these
kingdoms . BURTON1-1762-1,2,3.85

These are points of solemn importance ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,3.86

and accordingly demand our most serious regard : BURTON1-1762-1,2,3.87

And may the effects of these religious impressions be permanent in our
hearts ; and the exercise of this humiliation prove not merely
occasional , and formal , but constant and habitual !
BURTON1-1762-1,2,3.88

may it continue , so long as the reason of it subsists ; or in other
words , so long as we are sinners ! BURTON1-1762-1,2,3.89

while we continue such we ought to express our penitence , and <font>
bring forth fruits worthy of repentance <$$font> in the universal
reformation of our manners . BURTON1-1762-1,2,3.90

The doctrine contained in the text , and which I would chiefly recommend
to your consideration , is the <font> moral <$$font> purpose of Fasting
- that great end to which all acts of abstinence are subordinate , as
means ; shewing , that the <font> external <$$font> formality of
observance will little avail , when destitute of the <font> internal
<$$font> principles of piety towards God , and charity towards our
Neighbour . BURTON1-1762-1,2,3.91

<P_2,4>

The prophet introduces the expostulation of my text with a preface
setting forth his authority , as being a messenger from God .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.93

<font> Cry aloud , BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.94

spare not , BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.95

lift up thy voice like a trumpet <$$font> ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.96

<font> and shew my people their transgression , and the house of
<$$font> Jacob <font> their sins . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.97

In like manner , in extraordinary instances of this kind , the ministers
of the gospel are authorized to do , what , upon other occasions , the
people might be inclined to think less decent or seasonable , <font> to
shew the people their transgressions <$$font> ; to rebuke vice , and
denounce God's judgments against impenitent sinners ; not only without
dissimulation , or reserve , but with a peculiar degree of freedom .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.98

This is not only their priviledge , but also their duty .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.99

He then proceeds to remark the dissimulation and hypocrisy of the Jews
in their formal acts of religious worship ; while at the same time their
behaviour contradicted their professions . BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.100

<font> Yet they seek me daily , BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.101

and delight to know my ways , as a nation that did righteousness , and
forsook not the ordinance of their God : BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.102

they ask of me the ordinances of justice ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.103

they take delight in approaching to God . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.104

It seems , they kept up the outward appearances of piety , and made
specious professions of righteousness . BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.105

They punctually attended the temple-service ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.106

they offered the sacrifices appointed , BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.107

and boasted of their legal sanctity : BURTON1-1762-1,2,4.108

Yea , they even presumed to expostulate with their God <P_2,5> for not
doing justice to this their singular desert ; for not answering their
expectations ; or not distinguishing their ostentatious piety by some
eminent reward . BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.109

<font> Wherefore have we fasted <$$font> , say they ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.110

<font> and thou seest not ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.111

wherefore have we afflicted our soul , BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.112

and thou takest no knowledge ? <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.113

We here perceive a strong instance of their arrogance as well as folly .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.114

It seems they valued themselves upon the mere act of fasting , as a
matter of extraordinary merit in the sight of God , and thought God's
justice debtor to their claim of reward . BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.115

The motives and principle , upon which they proceeded , were
unwarrantable ; and such as would invalidate the effect of all religious
services . BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.116

To them may be applied what St. <font> James <$$font> says on a like
occasion ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.117

<font> They ask BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.118

and receive not , because they ask amiss , that they may consume it upon
their lusts . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.119

Like their perverse fathers in the wilderness <font> they required meat
for their lusts , BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.120

and grudged if they were not satisfied . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.121

They looked upon every disappointment of their expectations as an injury
done them ; whereas at the same time they were acting in direct
contradiction to the will of God , and industriously defeated the moral
purposes of this institution , which they pretended to observe .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.122

- <font> Behold in the day of your fast you find pleasure ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.123

and exact all your labours . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.124

Notwithstanding all the appearances of piety they still indulged their
vicious inclinations ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,5.125

notwithstanding <P_2,6> their shew of rigour and austerity , they did
not exercise any act of true self-denial ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.126

- in their dealings with their poor brethren they were still hardhearted
and oppressive ; hardhearted masters to their servants , oppressive
creditors to their necessitous debtors . BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.127

<font> Behold ye fast for strife and debate , and to smite with the fist
of wickedness : BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.128

Ye shall not fast as ye do this day , to make your voice to be heard on
high . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.129

Here was an aggravation of their crime , that they made religion an
instrument of their wickedness ; and under that pretence endeavoured to
justify and authorize every act of injustice : BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.130

They misunderstood and abused this religious ordinance .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.131

Hereupon the prophet proceeds to reprove their arrogance , and rectify
their mistakes ; and to convince them of the insufficiency of the
outward act without the true moral uses . BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.132

These he distinctly points out , as the only qualifications which could
recommend their religious services to the divine acceptance .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.133

<font> Is it such a fast that I have chosen ? a day for a man to
afflict his soul ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.134

it is to bow down his head as a bulrush , and to spread sackcloth and
ashes under him ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.135

wilt thou call this a fast , and an acceptable day to the Lord ?
<$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,6.136

There is in these words a peculiar force and elegance of the sacred
oratory <font> for reproof , - for <P_2,7> correction - for instruction
in righteousness . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,7.137

However , it can@ @not here be supposed , that the prophet in
expostulations of this kind absolutely condemns those rites , or
religious acts which God had enjoyned , or approved .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,7.138

He condemns only that abuse of sacred ordinances , which rendered them
the instruments of hypocrisy . BURTON1-1762-1,2,7.139

And indeed they become no other than a mere formality and mockery of
religion , when destitute of a true principle , and not accompanied with
those moral effects , in which all the real goodness of the performance
consists . BURTON1-1762-1,2,7.140

<font> Is not this the fast that I have chosen ? to loose the bands of
wickedness ; to undo the heavy burdens , and to let the oppressed go
free , and that ye break every yoke ? <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,7.141

Here several acts of negative virtue are pointed out , an abstinence
from those crimes to which they were most addicted :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,7.142

And withal , in the following clause , several positive duties are
enjoined . BURTON1-1762-1,2,7.143

<font> Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry ? and that thou bring
the poor that are cast out to thy house ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,7.144

when thou seest the naked that <P_2,8> thou cover him , and that thou
hide not thyself from thine own flesh ? <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.145

On the whole , they were taught that an outward conformity to the
ordinance would not answer the purposes of the institution without a
suitable principle of real piety : - that it was not the disfigured ,
sorrowful countenance - the hypocritical shew of a temporary piety -
<font> the appearing unto men to fast <$$font> - that it was not the
most superstitious punctuality in the performance of the external act
which would recommend those services to God - BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.146

<font> this is not the fast , which the Lord hath chosen : <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.147

That only is the true fast , which is so in a moral sense ; an
abstinence from every sort of wickedness ; more especially from that
<font> which doth more easily beset us <$$font> ; acts of denial to
ourselves , restraint of our favourite inclinations , sensuality ,
avarice , ambition , malice , and revenge , &c: - acts of benevolence to
others , of charity to the poor and distressed . BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.148

This is the true <font> fast which the Lord hath chosen <$$font> , as
proceeding from a principle of true piety , and directed to a good end :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.149

This is the fast which God hath promised to accept and reward .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.150

Accordingly the prophet by way of motive and encouragement subjoins the
following declaration : BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.151

<font> Then shall thy light break forth as the morning ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.152

and thine health shall spring forth speedily : BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.153

and thy righteousness shall go before thee ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.154

and the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward {TEXT:rereward} .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.155

Then shalt thou call , BURTON1-1762-1,2,8.156

and the Lord <P_2,9> shall answer ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.157

thou shalt cry , BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.158

and he shall say , here I am . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.159

In this and the following verses to the end of the chapter the prophet ,
recapitulating the moral duties he had before injoin'd , recommends them
to their practice by the promise of peculiar rewards , represented by
such images as convey ideas of whatever is most glorious or amiable :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.160

their piety is made the means and condition of their temporal prosperity
: BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.161

the same God who brought their fathers out of <font> Egypt <$$font> ,
and conducted them through the wilderness with a pillar of fire , shall
by his special providence guide and protect them in all dangers and
difficulties of life : BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.162

that God , whom they <font> worship in spirit and in truth <$$font> ,
will hear their prayer and answer their petitions ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.163

and He , <font> that seeth in secret , himself will reward them openly :
<$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.164

the Lord , who commanded to keep holy the sabbath-day , shall reward
their obedience to this command , when their observance proceeds from a
true principle of religion ; - when they <font> honour him , not doing
their own ways , nor finding their own pleasure , nor speaking their own
words . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.165

Such instances of self-denial and conformity to the divine will shall
intitle them to the divine favour ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.166

<font> then shall thy light rise in obscurity , BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.167

and thy darkness shall be as the noon-day . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.168

So much by way of comment upon the context , as containing useful matter
of instruction , suited to the present occasion .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,9.169

<P_2,10>

I can@ @not by way of application draw a complete parallel between our
case , and that of the <font> Jews <$$font> ; such is the disparity of
circumstances . BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.171

The <font> Jews <$$font> were censured by the prophet for their
dissimulation and hypocrisy in religion - for their vain pretensions ,
and external shew of piety , destitute of any real internal principle .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.172

Indeed we have no reason to think ourselves in general affected by this
imputation . BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.173

We are far from claiming any merit in the external observance of
religious ordinances ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.174

't@ @is rather to be feared our national character comes under a censure
of a different kind , from our aptness to abuse our boasted liberty , in
the contemptuous disregard of institutions human and divine .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.175

We indeed remember one extraordinary occasion , when a Fast appeared to
produce its proper moral effects . BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.176

<font> When the Lord arose to shake terribly the earth <$$font> , then
indeed all orders and degrees of men were alarmed with the apprehension
even of the distant danger . BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.177

They who were inattentive to every ordinary call , to the still small
voice of God , at once perceived His visible judgments in the terrors of
an earthquake BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.178

and were astonished into a fit of seriousness and piety .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.179

Then indeed their grand business of pleasure and diversion was for some
time suspended , BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.180

and their minds were possessed with an awful sollicitude ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.181

when God's judgments were seen abroad in the earth , they then began to
learn righteousness : BURTON1-1762-1,2,10.182

our churches were filled with unusual <P_2,11> numbers ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.183

even people of fashion and high rank expressed signs of a new-@ @felt
devotion , BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.184

and mixed with the vulgar in the common acts of humiliation and
penitence . BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.185

Such appearances of religious impressions in them were as extraordinary
as the occasion . BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.186

But it was soon found , that their piety gradually diminished , together
with their fears ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.187

and they quickly relapsed into their state of former ease and security .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.188

But what will our behaviour be found to have been with regard to the
present fast ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.189

And how might we suppose the prophet would expostulate with us on this
occasion ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.190

for disuse rather than abuse of the ordinance ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.191

for profaneness and irreligion rather than hypocrisy .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.192

Let us therefore thus reason with ourselves : BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.193

are we not dependent and sinful creatures ? a nation laden with
iniquity ? and as such , subject to the infliction of God's judgments ?
BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.194

And are we not called by authority to acts of publick humiliation and
penitence ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.195

Surely on this occasion any appearance of joy and gladness , gaiety and
pleasure , would be doubly criminal , not only unreasonable and indecent
, but also profane and impious . BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.196

Neither is there any among the sons of men too great to humble himself
before God ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.197

Yea , rather , the obligation to the duty rises in proportion to the
greatness of their station and character : BURTON1-1762-1,2,11.198

for as the divine favour is requisite to the preservation of national
prosperity , they , who by office , are most interested in the effects
of <P_2,12> publick administration , are most interested in promoting
the means necessary to this end ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.199

and accordingly ought to be most exemplary in the discharge of those
religious services . BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.200

I might add , that from a sense of decency , if not from the rules of
Christianity , and even on the foot of civil obedience to publick
authority , as friends to their country , or friends to the government
<paren> a character too often given without any determinate meaning
<$$paren> They stand more especially obliged to countenance and support
this institution , by their personal attendance , and by publick
expressions of piety , that <font> their light may shine before men
<$$font> ; and that the influence of their example , instead of
misleading into sin , may bring many to righteousness .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.201

We have on record in scripture an example even of an heathen nation
which may instruct , or upbraid our behaviour in this particular .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.202

<font> The men of Niniveh will rise in judgment with this generation ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.203

and will condemn it . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.204

How solemn and affecting were the circumstances of their whole
proceeding , even as it appears in the simple narrative of the sacred
Historian ! BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.205

- <font> They believed God , BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.206

and proclaimed a fast ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.207

and the King of Niniveh arose from his throne , BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.208

and laid his robe from him , BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.209

and covered him with sackcloth BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.210

and sat in ashes . BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.211

And God saw their works , that they turned from their evil way ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,12.212

and God repented <P_2,13> of the evil that He had said He would do unto
them ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.213

and He did it not . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.214

St. <font> Chrysostom's <$$font> reflexion on this passage deserves our
notice , as being applicable to our present purpose .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.215

" Let us consider , says He , what was the manner of their fast , which
was thus accepted by God ; and what were the circumstances of their
behaviour which diverted or suspended the inflictions of those divine
judgments which the prophet had denounced against them -
BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.216

Was it the simple act of fasting or putting sackcloth on their loins ?
BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.217

this can@ @not be said : BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.218

no , it was the universal reformation of their manners .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.219

And from whence doth this appear ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.220

from the express words of the Prophet ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.221

<font> and God saw their works . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.222

What works ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.223

what ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.224

that they fasted and put sackcloth on their loins ?
BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.225

no : not a word of this ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.226

the Prophet passing by these circumstances adds <font> that they turned
every one from his evil ways <$$font> ; <font> and the Lord repented him
of the evil which he said he would do and he did it not . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.227

So you see that not the mere act of fasting delivered them from the
threatened danger : but the reformation of their manners reconciled
these Barbarians to the divine mercy and favour . "
BURTON1-1762-1,2,13.228

<P_2,14>

We perceive in this instance what it was that reconciled a wicked people
to the divine favour ; not the formality of the outward act , but the
moral purpose ; not the mere act of fasting , but repentance and
reformation of manners . BURTON1-1762-1,2,14.230

Again , we have a most remarkable instance of the efficacy of repentance
to suspend the execution of God's judgments in the case of <font> Ahab
<$$font> , the most wicked among the kings of <font> Israel . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,14.231

The terrors of the Lord denounced by his prophet worked a temporary
conviction on his heart with the customary expressions of penitence and
humiliation ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,14.232

<font> when Ahab heard those words , he rent his clothes ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,14.233

and put sackcloth upon his flesh BURTON1-1762-1,2,14.234

and fasted , BURTON1-1762-1,2,14.235

and lay in sackcloth , BURTON1-1762-1,2,14.236

and went softly . BURTON1-1762-1,2,14.237

And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite saying , seest thou
how Ahab humbleth himself before <P_2,15> me ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.238

Because he humbleth himself before me , I will not bring the evil in his
days ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.239

but in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his house . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.240

In this example we have a lesson for our admonition and encouragement ;
since we may justly argue thus ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.241

if a repentance so imperfect could suspend the execution of God's
judgments , what good effects may not be expected from a sincere and
complete repentance ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.242

This case is likewise the more applicable to ourselves , as there was a
strong occasional call to repentance : which , though a general duty ,
derives an additional obligation and reverence from the appointment by
publick authority . BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.243

It appears in the case both of <font> Ahab <$$font> and of the <font>
Ninivites <$$font> that they not only fasted , but repented .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.244

A moral effect was produced , to which fasting was applied only as an
instrumental means . BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.245

And in vain did the Pharisee in our Saviour's parable boast of his
fasting twice a week ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.246

we find that the repenting publican went home to his house more
justified than this self-applauding hypocrite . BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.247

Final causes are the grand point , on which moral agents should fix
their view , and accordingly regulate their behaviour .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.248

Let fasting , and every ordinance of like kind be subservient to the
general end - the purposes of piety - the work of repentance and
reformation . BURTON1-1762-1,2,15.249

Let not then the <font> Libertine <$$font> , on the one hand , despise
this institution as useless and insignificant , which hath a natural
tendency <P_2,16> to introduce a serious frame of mind , and lead him to
repentance - An institution almost universally received , as the most
proper expression of publick humiliation and sorrow , and most
acceptable to the supreme Being , whose sovereignty is recognized by
this religious act in the deprecation of his judgments .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,16.250

On the other hand , let not the <font> superstitious <$$font> Christian
value himself on the supposed merit of such services .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,16.251

Let him not forget the end for which such severities are exercised .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,16.252

<font> Is it <$$font> merely <font> to bow down his head as a bulrush
<$$font> ; <font> and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him ?
<$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,16.253

Something more is required to make this a true fast .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,16.254

For in vain doth he humble his body by abstinence , if at the same time
he cherishes a spiritual pride : if with a pharisaical arrogance he , on
this account , <font> trusting in himself that he is righteous ,
despises <$$font> and condemns <font> others <$$font> , as not coming up
to the standard of his sanctity . BURTON1-1762-1,2,16.255

Surely in vain doth he affect the praise of being religious , who is
destitute of the characteristical christian virtues , humility and
charity ; humility before God , and charity towards his neighbour .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,16.256

The end of fasting then is spiritual mortification and the work of
repentance : BURTON1-1762-1,2,16.257

and wherein does this consist ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,16.258

Not in any transient act of occasional sorrow , proceeding , it may be ,
merely from the uneasy apprehensions of some impending evil , but in the
lasting effects of a sincere sorrow , <font> a repentance not to be
repented of <$$font> namely , a thorough change of mind , and
reformation <P_2,17> of manners . BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.259

To this end we must exercise an habitual government of our passions ,
and mortify every lust - <font> cut off our right hand <$$font> , if
need be , do violence to the most favorite inclinations of our corrupt
nature in obedience to the laws of God . BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.260

Without this our religious services will deservedly be esteemed the
<font> sacrifice of fools : <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.261

our almsgiving and fasting without this qualification will lose the very
name and nature of virtue . BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.262

And indeed , if there be any merit or praise in our virtue , it is
contained in the exercise of self-denial . BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.263

T@ @is vain to boast of continency where there is no temptation to lust
, of abstinence amidst scarcity of provisions , or of bravery when there
is no danger . BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.264

True christian fortitude is distinguished by the severity of the trial ,
where there are some dangers and difficulties to be overcome , which are
thrown in our way by the enemy of our spiritual state - by the lusts
that war against the soul . BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.265

Every instance of self-denial is a conquest over them ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.266

and its value rises in proportion to the difficulty of the struggle .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.267

On the whole ; <font> that <$$font> is not the true virtue which is such
outwardly in the eye of the world - the idol of the vulgar ; but that
which is inward , and <font> of the heart : <$$font> whose sincerity is
evidenced by acts of habitual self-denial - <font> whose praise is not
of men , but of God . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,17.268

So then from what hath been offered we collect the true <font> moral
<$$font> end of fasting ; with regard to what is past - <font>
Repentance <$$font> ; and <P_2,18> with regard to all gratifications
present or future , - <font> self-denial : <$$font> a complex virtue ,
truly and properly christian ; which flesh and blood was unable
sufficiently to reveal , as it is unwilling at all to bear .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,18.269

What then is that <font> self <$$font> which a christian is required to
<font> deny ? <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,18.270

It is the corrupt part of our compound nature ; which , because it is
generally predominant , gives a denomination to the whole ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,18.271

and accordingly , in it's formal notion , implies not only what relates
to the animal-life - to sensual pleasures , or temporal interests , but
also every kind of mental depravity , or in the Apostle's language ,
<font> all filthiness of the flesh and spirit . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,18.272

And in this view <font> lovers of themselves <$$font> stand opposed to
<font> lovers of God . BURTON1-1762-1,2,18.273

Self-denial <$$font> therefore is the restraint of all those irregular
inclinations and passions in obedience to the divine will - an obedience
universal and absolute - without any restriction or limitation .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,18.274

This is necessarily implied in the first and great commandment ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,18.275

and accordingly an indulgence given to any one vice is utterly
inconsistent with the character of a <font> christian . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,18.276

In the gospel-history we have the remarkable case of a young man , who
came to our Saviour , and thought himself justified by his punctual
observance of the commandments , imagining that <font> he lacked nothing
<$$font> further requisite to complete the character of legal and moral
holiness ; and on the whole , was not <font> far from <$$font> what
might entitle him to <font> the kingdom of <P_2,19> heaven . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.277

But He <font> who knew what was in man <$$font> , knew
BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.278

and shewed him his deficiency ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.279

<font> yet lackest thou one thing <$$font> ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.280

<font> sell all that thou hast and give unto the poor <$$font> ; <font>
and thou shalt have treasure in heaven <$$font> ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.281

<font> and come take up the cross , BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.282

and follow me . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.283

But what was {TEXT:what} the event ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.284

It seems this was an act of self-denial too severe and grievous to flesh
and blood ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.285

<font> he was sad at that saying , BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.286

and went away grieved ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.287

for he had great possessions . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.288

On which occasion our Saviour pronounced this alarming reflexion ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.289

<font> how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the
kingdom of God ! Matt. <$$font> XIX. <font> Mar. <$$font> X. <font>
Luk. <$$font> XVIII . BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.290

What is observed in this instance may by parity of reason be applied to
many other similar cases . BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.291

Look into the most plausible characters , and soon you will find some
one thing or other still lacking . BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.292

Many men keep up the decent appearances of religion ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.293

yet at the same time will not scruple to gratify some importunate
passion , - some favourite vice suited to their constitution or
inclination . BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.294

Thus under fasting and the exercise of bodily austerities we sometimes
see a malevolence and uncharitableness , the effects of a spiritual
pride . BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.295

In fact , men are apt to make favourable allowances to their own
particular case ; and to urge pretences , either political or religious
, to excuse every failing . BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.296

<font> Is it not a little one ? <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.297

or , <font> when I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon , the Lord
pardon thy servant in this thing . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,19.298

But after all , what is this but a <P_2,20> sort of prevarication and
hypocrisy censured in my text by the prophet ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.299

A wilful disobedience to any one command of God can never be reconciled
to the principles of Christianity ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.300

for <font> whosoever shall keep the whole law , and yet offend in one
point , he is guilty of all . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.301

An imperfect partial conformity is insufficient :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.302

He who <font> trieth the hearts and reins <$$font> will not accept such
a blemished sacrifice . BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.303

<font> Wherewith then shall we come before the Lord , and bow ourselves
before the high God ? <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.304

- With the internal principle , as well as the outward professions of
piety , - with purity of heart , as well as cleanness of hands , - with
the restraint of every inordinate lust - <font> the lust of the flesh ,
the lust of the eye <$$font> , and <font> the pride of life : <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.305

every branch of our fashionable follies , and our expensive luxuries
must be cut off ; and a thorough change of mind evidenced in the
universal reformation of our manners ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.306

<font> this is the fast which the Lord hath chosen . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.307

This true end and purpose of a Fast is what every one should keep in
view ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.308

and as the publick virtue of the community is contained in the good
behaviour of the several individual members , it behoveth every one to
apply this general duty of self-denial to his own particular case .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.309

Give me leave here to point out several instances in which the exercise
of the duty should take place . BURTON1-1762-1,2,20.310

Let the sensualist , or man of pleasure stop short in his career , do
violence <P_2,21> to his inclination , and , considering that he is a
Christian , direct his pursuits to a better end :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.311

- Let the adulterer and whoremonger withdraw from the harlots'
{TEXT:harlots} houses ; reflecting , that for <font> these things God
will bring them to judgment : <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.312

- Let the modern Gentleman of fashion be no longer misled into schemes
of false unmanly gallantry , nor murder his time , reputation , and
fortunes at gaming-tables : BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.313

- Let the private politician <font> study to be quiet , and do his own
business : <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.314

- Let the party-zealot learn to speak charitably and deal justly with
his neighbour tho' of a different denomination : BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.315

- Let the covetous prefer godliness to gain : BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.316

- Let the ambitious take the lowest seat - BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.317

let him renounce his views , his immoderate desires of secular interests
, and dishonourable methods of gratifying them .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.318

And let the man of business attend to the one thing needful , and <font>
seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.319

Let those who would be thought the only or the chief friends to
government be ready to verify their professions :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.320

let them ask their hearts , Will they , in times of common danger ,
offer themselves willingly for the publick service ?
BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.321

will they assist with their fortunes , and by their liberality
contribute to the relieving those necessities of the State , which
perhaps were in some measure occasioned by their rapine or luxury ?
BURTON1-1762-1,2,21.322

And with regard to those Patriots who distinguish themselves by a
clamorous zeal for the interests of their country , and on this <P_2,22>
principle as implicitly oppose the measures of government , as others
support them , let them also ask their hearts whether their opposition
proceeds from true publick spirit and disinterested views : - or whether
they are not influenced by resentment and hatred of the persons , whom
they oppose ; by envy of that power or honour , which they have in vain
laboured to acquire ; or by love of praise for they know not what , that
idol of popularity which vanisheth like a dream when one awaketh .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,22.323

- Should it appear that their behaviour is influenced by any of these or
the like sinister motives , we have reason to call upon them , as well
as those of the contrary party , for the exercise of self-denial in this
respect , to moderate their prejudices and refrain the violence of every
favorite passion and inclination ; to sacrifice what they esteem most
precious to the sense of duty ; to make all private and personal regards
give way to the publick good : BURTON1-1762-1,2,22.324

this is the strongest proof of integrity ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,22.325

and without this the most plausible pretensions may justly be called in
question . BURTON1-1762-1,2,22.326

And now perhaps <font> Scholars <$$font> may ask - <font> what shall we
do ? <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,22.327

What acts of self-denial are required from us ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,22.328

Submit cheerfully to that restraint of your natural liberty , which the
rules of your community have imposed : BURTON1-1762-1,2,22.329

conform your manners to the established scheme of discipline ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,22.330

refrain from the petulancy of wit , from all irreverence to your
superiors ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,22.331

avoid fashionable luxuries , and expensive vanities <P_2,23> in every
shape ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,23.332

preserve as much as may be the primitive simplicity of manners ,
frugality in the way of living , and that habitual seriousness which is
the ground-work , and preservative of every virtue .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,23.333

Let the sense of statutable obligations enforce that conformity of
behaviour in the University , which the rules of good manners and
decency would require of you as <font> Gentlemen <$$font> in assemblies
of less importance . BURTON1-1762-1,2,23.334

Not to point out more particular instances under this head , I shall
only enforce this general exhortation , that every one in their several
stations and capacities would faithfully watch over their own hearts in
the government of their passions and inclinations , by the exercise of
self-denial in its several branches : BURTON1-1762-1,2,23.335

so , would the good purposes of the present institution be most
effectually answered , BURTON1-1762-1,2,23.336

and this would be <font> such a Fast as the Lord hath chosen . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,23.337

I can@ @not here omit one reflexion suggested by the words that follow
my text ; in which the prophet censures the Jews for acts of cruelty to
their poor brethren , both positive and negative , in instances of
direct violence and oppression , and in withholding the due relief for
their necessities . BURTON1-1762-1,2,23.338

While we read this censure , we may with complacency reflect upon our
national character , as in neither respect affected by this imputation .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,23.339

As to the former , our liberties civil and religious are so well guarded
by wholesome laws , that they scarce <P_2,24> allow room for complaint
on any such account ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.340

and so far is the shew of religion from being made an instrument of
wickedness , that , thro' a general disregard of it , there seems scarce
any temptation left for hypocrisy , nor encouragement given to hope ,
under the pretence of piety , to sanctify acts of injustice .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.341

And as to the exercise of publick charity and beneficence in various
shapes for the relief of every necessity , scarce any age hath produced
more eminent examples than the present . BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.342

May this sacrifice prove acceptable to the Lord , and be a veil to
<font> cover the multitude of our sins ! <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.343

I wish that we could as easily disculpate ourselves in all other
articles : BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.344

but the very appointment of this solemnity proceeds with too much reason
upon a contrary supposition , - a supposition of national wickedness ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.345

and from thence enforces the necessity of a national repentance .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.346

Although we ought at all times to acknowledge our sins before God , yet
ought we most chiefly so to do on occasions extraordinary , - when we
are admonished by the voice of publick authority .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.347

Let us then endeavour to answer the moral purposes of this solemn
humiliation . BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.348

Let us under a conviction of our unworthiness , and , as deeply
interested in the consequences , seriously call our ways to remembrance
, - review the tenour of our behaviour , - and finally so judge
ourselves that we be not judged of the Lord . BURTON1-1762-1,2,24.349

<P_2,25>

Let us then judge our actions by the proper standard , the rule of God's
Laws ; not by the opinion of the world , or comparison with others .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.351

Estimates made in such a comparative view are very apt to deceive us :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.352

we become well enough satisfied if we think ourselves as good , or
better than our neighbours , or enemies . BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.353

But , surely , it is a sad ground of comfort , which arises merely from
the supposition that others are more wicked than ourselves .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.354

Perhaps too the supposition may be hastily made ; and without sufficient
warrant . BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.355

But , were it ever so well grounded , it would be of no use to us -
BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.356

it would not give us an exemption from punishment :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.357

for all sinners , as such , become debtors to the divine justice ,
BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.358

and must submit to its utmost demand . BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.359

Our Saviour's declaration in this case <font> <paren> Luk. <$$font> 13.
3 , 5 . <$$paren> is express and peremptory , BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.360

and extends to all persons , without any limitation or exception ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.361

<font> I say unto You , except Ye Repent , Ye shall all likewise perish
. <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.362

Moreover , let us not like the Jews flatter ourselves with false
pretences , and vain hopes . BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.363

- <font> The temple of the Lord , - the temple of the Lord <$$font> were
noisy sounds in the mouths of those , who had no regard for the Lord ,
or his temple . BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.364

Many also boasted of their national merit , or that some characters
among them were eminent for piety ; assuring themselves of safety , as
being the distinguished favourites of heaven <font> -
BURTON1-1762-1,2,25.365

The Lord will defend Jerusalem for his servant David@ @'s sake .
<$$font> A promise , which <P_2,26> would assuredly be made good , while
they kept themselves qualified to receive the benefit :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,26.366

but when they failed in that , the event shewed how vain and groundless
such presumptuous expectations were . BURTON1-1762-1,2,26.367

We also justly boast of our excellent constitution in Church and State ,
and the glory of our Reformation . BURTON1-1762-1,2,26.368

But after all , the mere name of a free people and of <font> Protestants
<$$font> will prove a weak protection of our liberties , civil and
religious . BURTON1-1762-1,2,26.369

And surely in vain do we boast of the liberty which we wantonly abuse ,
and of the <font> purity <$$font> of our <font> reformation <$$font> ,
while we dishonour that character by the degeneracy of our manners ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,26.370

in vain do we hope for God's favour , while we disregard his authority ,
and transgress his laws . BURTON1-1762-1,2,26.371

If then upon the just estimate of our national character it appears ,
that we have degenerated from that sense of dignity and sobriety which
becometh us as Men , as Christians , and as Englishmen - if we have
deviated into a strange levity of manners - a false unmanly politeness
and gaiety - the manners of that nation , with whose vices we ought ever
to wage war , and admit no manner of communication ; - let us stop short
in time , and correct this unaccountable infatuation :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,26.372

let us rather exert a manly spirit and vigour , most agreeable to our
constitutional character , - a serious sollicitude , proportioned to the
respective importance of our concerns . BURTON1-1762-1,2,26.373

<P_2,27>

Further ; have we misapplied our <font> riches <$$font> to wrong
purposes , and perverted the blessings of plenty into the nourishment of
luxury ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,27.375

let the discipline of this present Fast , which enjoins a temporary
abstinence , suggest the useful lesson of habitual temperance and
sobriety ; so that what should be for our <font> wealth <$$font> may
never <font> become to us the occasion of falling . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,27.376

If we find that we have <font> abused <$$font> our liberty , -
perverting it into licenciousness - if emboldened by impunity , and
misled by example , we have indulged our passions , unawed by any
restraint of laws human or divine , let us take this seasonable
admonition , and <font> apply our hearts unto wisdom <$$font> , while we
reflect upon the mischievous consequences of our behaviour ; that it
really tends to weaken and overturn that constitution in which we glory
. BURTON1-1762-1,2,27.377

And with regard to our <font> religious <$$font> liberties , as there is
a peculiar danger of abuse , so there is a special reason of caution .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,27.378

We are indeed free from that yoke which neither we nor our fathers could
bear , the tyranny of the church of <font> Rome . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,27.379

But still we are subject to the yoke of Christ , and the rules of
Christianity . BURTON1-1762-1,2,27.380

Our character , as <font> Protestants <$$font> , is relative ; - in
opposition to the corruptions of that church , which we have renounced .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,27.381

And the liberty of conscience in the choice , is far from implying the
liberty of having no religion ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,27.382

- it rather supposes the contrary ; and that to a degree of more than
ordinary sollicitude . BURTON1-1762-1,2,27.383

Under the notion of Protestants we should rather <P_2,28> consider
ourselves as Christians <font> reformed <$$font> ; and as such , under
more especial obligations to purity of doctrine and manners .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.384

Let not our abhorrence of bigotry and superstition mislead us into
profaneness and irreligion . BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.385

Such an aversion from Popery is the most likely means to betray us into
it : BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.386

the transition from one extreme to another , however distant it may seem
, is most obvious and easy : BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.387

for the principles of the most corrupt religion will ever be most easily
admitted by those , who are unsettled in religious notions , or have no
principles at all . BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.388

Let us then in this instance , act with all that discretion and
moderation which our Christian character implies , <font> as free , and
not using our liberty as a cloak of maliciousness , but as the servants
of God . <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.389

We should consider , that the liberty which we enjoy is a rational ,
legal liberty ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.390

and though it implies a freedom of action , yet it is such as is
prescribed and limited by law ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.391

and therefore from a regard to the order of that government in which we
make our boast , we should refrain from every exorbitancy , and learn to
reverence and obey the laws by which our liberty is regulated and
defended . BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.392

Again , have we been too much elated by our success in war ?
BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.393

have we been betrayed into presumption on the opinion of our superior
strength ? BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.394

Let reflexion here come in to our aid , and check the premature joy of
triumph , by pointing out that latent danger , which is the ordinary
effect of security - BURTON1-1762-1,2,28.395

<P_2,29>

Amidst our highest hopes we must still remember - that <font> the race
is not always to the swift , nor the battle to the strong ; but it is
the Lord who giveth the victory in the battle . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,29.397

And on this head we can@ @not but acknowledge visible marks of the
divine favour to these kingdoms in a series of extraordinary events :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,29.398

And accordingly , amidst the present acts of humiliation , in which we
confess our own unworthiness ; we at the same time offer our tribute of
praise and thanksgiving for the manifold goodness of the Lord , <font>
who hath done so great things for us already ; whereof we rejoice .
<$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,29.399

Among other instances give me leave to mention that wonderful revolution
and total change of our national spirit - a change from a state of
slumber and supineness , of timidity and almost self-desertion , to a
state of activity and vigour - of sound policy both military and civil -
of bravery and intrepidity , and that glorious exertion of our natural
powers , which hath proved under God the defence of our own country , -
the envy of our neighbours , - the terror of our enemies , and the
admiration of all the world . BURTON1-1762-1,2,29.400

But moreover , with the most devout thankfulness we must acknowledge the
interposition of the divine power , which turneth the hearts of Princes
, and controlleth {TEXT:controuleth} the unruly wills and affections of
sinful men , so signally evidenced in extinguishing the evil spirit of
discord and faction - in exciting a new spirit of publick virtue and
integrity - in effecting <P_2,30> the union of contending parties , and
the universal concurrence of all orders and denominations in the common
cause - the true interest of their country . BURTON1-1762-1,2,30.401

'T@ @is this union which gives health and vigour to the national
constitution , and inspires a courage and strength , which , before some
late tryals , we scarce knew how to exert . BURTON1-1762-1,2,30.402

May we ever preserve a due sensibility of the important benefit ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,30.403

let us never , through neglect or abuse , disappoint it's good effects !
BURTON1-1762-1,2,30.404

Lastly ; with regard to the circumstances of this present war - while we
reflect on the motives which gave the occasion and the manner in which
it hath been conducted , - in each of these views we find matter of
consolation and satisfaction ; that the bloodguiltiness of the war is
not to be laid to our charge - that neither ambition , avarice or
revenge prompted us to act offensively , without any just provocation :
but self-preservation called us to arms against the invasion and
encroachments of an ambitious , insidious enemy .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,30.405

Our generous behaviour hath shewn , that we are not a people which
<font> delight in war <$$font> , and sport in the miseries of mankind .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,30.406

No additional acts of cruelty have aggravated the distresses of our
conquered enemies ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,30.407

yea rather we have gained a double conquest over them , first by our
superior valour , and then by signal acts of unmerited clemency and
generosity . BURTON1-1762-1,2,30.408

Nay farther , while his Majesty's arms were thus universally successful
in every quarter of <P_2,31> the world , to the astonishment and
confusion of our enemies - and even beyond our own expectations - even
amidst this full career of prosperity and triumph , we have seen a most
pleasing instance of royal condescension and generosity , in restraining
the insolence of victory , and offering peace to the vanquished on
equitable terms . BURTON1-1762-1,2,31.409

But in vain are such overtures made to those treacherous dealers in
policy ; who , while they speak friendly with their mouths , have war in
their heart : BURTON1-1762-1,2,31.410

- in vain do we labour for peace . BURTON1-1762-1,2,31.411

- For what hope of this desirable blessing is there in the present state
of things ? <font> What Peace ! so long as the whoredoms and
witchcrafts of this Jezebel are so many ? <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,31.412

The ambition and intrigues of such perfidious enemies admit no
honourable terms of pacification ; who make the very negotiation for
peace the means of prolonging the war ; while they artfully delude a
proud infatuated nation into their alliance under their specious
pretence of a family-compact - that formidable confederacy of the House
of <font> Bourbon <$$font> , which may justly give an alarm to the
neighbouring kingdoms , as it hath often embroiled the Powers , and
endangered the Liberties of <font> Europe . <$$font>
BURTON1-1762-1,2,31.413

Be it then the glory and disgrace of our enemies to disturb the peace of
kingdoms ! BURTON1-1762-1,2,31.414

It was foretold , that offences of this kind must come ;
BURTON1-1762-1,2,31.415

but woe unto them by whom they come . BURTON1-1762-1,2,31.416

Be our praise of a different complexion - the praise of true magnanimity
; <P_2,32> which is ever consistent with the rules of humanity , and our
christian character - to relieve the oppressed - to repel {TEXT:repell}
the oppressor - to shew patience , and forbearance under the provocation
of injuries - to shew as much lenity and moderation amidst the pride of
triumph , as bravery and courage in the heat of battle .
BURTON1-1762-1,2,32.417

Be this our unenvied honour . BURTON1-1762-1,2,32.418

Let us above all things proceed in that still more interesting conquest
- the subduing our corrupt inclinations by an universal reformation of
manners ; BURTON1-1762-1,2,32.419

let us prove the sincerity of our religious professions , by <font>
loosing the bands of wickedness <$$font> in every shape , and by the
practice of every possible virtue . BURTON1-1762-1,2,32.420

So shall we make this an acceptable day unto the Lord :
BURTON1-1762-1,2,32.421

so shall the Lord be further favourable and gracious unto our <font>
Sion <$$font> ; - in all circumstances of difficulty and danger become
our sun and shield - our director and defender - cover our head in the
day of battle , and give us the long desired blessing of peace ; so ,
<font> " that being delivered from our enemies we may serve him without
fear , in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life
. " <$$font> BURTON1-1762-1,2,32.422

Finis . BURTON1-1762-1,2,32.423

