<BEGIN_burton2-1857-2>

<P_378>

They are the {TEXT:The} Prophet's Mosque in the Munakhah .
BURTON2-1857-2,378.3

Abubekr's near the Ayn el Zarka . BURTON2-1857-2,378.4

Ali's Mosque in the Zukak el Tayyar of the Munakhah .
BURTON2-1857-2,378.5

Some authors call this the " Musalla el Eed , " because the Prophet here
prayed the Festival Prayer . BURTON2-1857-2,378.6

Omar's Mosque , near the Bab Kuba of the Munakhah , and close to the
little torrent called El Sayh . BURTON2-1857-2,378.7

Belal's Mosque , celebrated in books ; BURTON2-1857-2,378.8

I did not see it , BURTON2-1857-2,378.9

and some Madani assured me that it no longer exists .
BURTON2-1857-2,378.10

A description of one of these buildings will suffice ,
BURTON2-1857-2,378.11

for they are all similar . BURTON2-1857-2,378.12

Moahammed's Mosque in the Munakhah stands upon a spot formerly occupied
, some say , by the Jami Ghamamah . BURTON2-1857-2,378.13

Others believe it to be founded upon the Musalla el Nabi , a place where
the Prophet recited the first Festival prayers after his arrival at El
Medinah , and used frequently to pray , and to address <P_379> those of
his followers who lived far from the Haram . BURTON2-1857-2,379.14

It is a trim modern building of cut stone and lime in regular layers ,
of parallelogrammic shape , surmounted by one large and four smaller
cupolas . BURTON2-1857-2,379.15

These are all white-washed , BURTON2-1857-2,379.16

and the principal is capped with a large crescent , or rather a trident
rising from a series of gilt globes : BURTON2-1857-2,379.17

the other domes crown the several corners . BURTON2-1857-2,379.18

The minaret is of the usual Turkish shape , with a conical roof , and a
single gallery for the Muezzin . BURTON2-1857-2,379.19

An Acacia tree or two on the eastern side , and behind it a wall-like
line of mud-houses , finish the coup-d'oeil ; BURTON2-1857-2,379.20

the interior of this building is as simple as the exterior .
BURTON2-1857-2,379.21

And here I may remark that the Arabs have little idea of splendor ,
either in their public or in their private architecture .
BURTON2-1857-2,379.22

Whatever strikes the traveller's eye in El Hejaz is always either an
importation or the work of foreign artists . BURTON2-1857-2,379.23

This arises from the simple tastes of the people , combined , doubtless
, with their notable thriftiness . BURTON2-1857-2,379.24

If strangers will build for them , they argue , why should they build
for themselves ? BURTON2-1857-2,379.25

Moreover , they have scant inducement to lavish money upon grand
edifices . BURTON2-1857-2,379.26

Whenever a disturbance takes place , domestic or from without , the
principal buildings are sure to suffer . BURTON2-1857-2,379.27

And the climate is inimical to their enduring . BURTON2-1857-2,379.28

Both ground and air at Meccah , as well as at El Medinah , are damp and
nitrous in winter , in summer dry and torrid : BURTON2-1857-2,379.29

the lime is poor ; BURTON2-1857-2,379.30

palm-timber soon decays ; BURTON2-1857-2,379.31

even foreign wood-work suffers , BURTON2-1857-2,379.32

and a few years suffice to level the proudest pile with the dust .
BURTON2-1857-2,379.33

The suburbs to the S. of El Medinah are a collection of walled villages
, with plantations , and gardens between . BURTON2-1857-2,379.34

They are laid out in the form , called here as in Egypt , <P_380> Hosh -
court-yards , with single-storied buildings opening into them .
BURTON2-1857-2,380.35

These enclosures contain the cattle of the inhabitants ;
BURTON2-1857-2,380.36

they have strong wooden doors , shut at night to prevent " lifting , "
BURTON2-1857-2,380.37

and are capable of being stoutly defended . BURTON2-1857-2,380.38

The inhabitants of the suburb are for the most part Bedouin settlers ,
and a race of schismatics who will be noticed in another chapter .
BURTON2-1857-2,380.39

Beyond these suburbs , to the S. , as well as to the N. and N.E. ,
lie gardens and extensive plantations of palm-trees .
BURTON2-1857-2,380.40

<P_381>

<heading>

Chap. XIX . BURTON2-1857-2,381.43

A ride to the mosque of Kuba . BURTON2-1857-2,381.44

<$$heading>

The principal places of pious visitation in the vicinity of El Medinah ,
are the Mosques of Kuba , the Cemetery El Bakia , and the martyr
Hamzah's tomb , at the foot of Mount Ohod . BURTON2-1857-2,381.46

These the Zair is directed by all the Olema to visit , and on the holy
ground to pray Allah for a blessing upon himself , and upon his brethren
of the faith . BURTON2-1857-2,381.47

Early one Saturday morning , I started for Kuba with a motley crowd of
devotees . BURTON2-1857-2,381.48

Shaykh Hamid , my Muzawwir , was by my side , mounted upon an ass more
miserable than I had yet seen . BURTON2-1857-2,381.49

The boy Mohammed had procured for me a Meccan dromedary , with splendid
trappings , a saddle with burnished metal peaks before and behind ,
covered with a huge sheepskin dyed crimson , and girthed over fine
saddle-bags , whose enormous tassels hung almost to the ground .
BURTON2-1857-2,381.50

The youth himself , being too grand to ride a donkey , and unable to
borrow a horse , preferred walking . BURTON2-1857-2,381.51

He was proud as a peacock , being habited in a style somewhat resembling
the plume of that gorgeous bird , in the coat of many colours - yellow ,
red , and golden flowers , apparently sewed on a field of bright_green
silk - which cost me so dear in the Haram . BURTON2-1857-2,381.52

He was armed , as indeed all of us were , in readiness for the Bedouins
, BURTON2-1857-2,381.53

and he anxiously awaited opportunities of discharging his pistol .
BURTON2-1857-2,381.54

Our course lay from Shaykh Hamid's house in the Munakkah , along and up
the Fiumara , " El <P_382> Sayh , " and through the Bab Kuba , a little
gate in the suburb wall , where , by the bye , my mounted companion was
nearly trampled down by a rush of half wild camels .
BURTON2-1857-2,382.55

Outside the town , in this direction , southward , is a plain of clay ,
mixed with chalk , and here and there with sand , whence protrude blocks
and little ridges of basalt . BURTON2-1857-2,382.56

As far as Kuba , and the Harrah ridge to the west , the earth is sweet
BURTON2-1857-2,382.57

and makes excellent gugglets . BURTON2-1857-2,382.58

Immediately outside the gate I saw a kiln , where they were burning
tolerable bricks . BURTON2-1857-2,382.59

Shortly after leaving the suburb , an Indian , who joined our party upon
the road , pointed out on the left of the way what he declared was the
place of the celebrated Khandak , or Moat , the Torres Vedras of Arabian
History . BURTON2-1857-2,382.60

Presently the Nakhil , or palm plantations , began .
BURTON2-1857-2,382.61

Nothing lovelier to the eye , weary with hot red glare , than the rich
green waving crops and cool shade - BURTON2-1857-2,382.62

for hours I could have sat and looked at it , requiring no other
occupation - the " food of vision , " as the Arabs call it , and " pure
water to the parched throat . " BURTON2-1857-2,382.63

The air was soft and balmy , BURTON2-1857-2,382.64

a perfumed breeze , strange luxury in El Hejaz , wandered amongst the
date fronds ; BURTON2-1857-2,382.65

there were fresh flowers and bright foliage , in fact , at midsummer ,
every beautiful feature of spring . BURTON2-1857-2,382.66

Nothing more delightful to the ear than the warbling of the small birds
, that sweet <P_383> familiar sound , the splashing of tiny cascades
from the wells into the wooden troughs , and the musical song of the
water-wheels . BURTON2-1857-2,383.67

Travellers - young travellers - in the East talk of the " dismal grating
, " the " mournful monotony , " and the " melancholy creaking of these
dismal machines . " BURTON2-1857-2,383.68

To the veteran wanderer their sound is delightful from association ,
reminding him of green fields , cool water-courses , hospitable
villagers , and plentiful crops . BURTON2-1857-2,383.69

The expatriated Nubian , for instance , listens to the water-wheel with
as deep emotion as the Ranz des Vaches ever excited in the hearts of
Switzer mercenary at Naples , or " Lochaber no more , " among a regiment
of Highlanders in the West_Indies . BURTON2-1857-2,383.70

The date-trees of El Medinah merit their celebrity .
BURTON2-1857-2,383.71

Their stately columnar stems , here , seem higher than in other lands ,
BURTON2-1857-2,383.72

and their lower fronds are allowed to tremble in the breeze without
mutilation . BURTON2-1857-2,383.73

These enormous palms were loaded with ripening fruit ,
BURTON2-1857-2,383.74

and the clusters , carefully tied up , must often have weighed upwards
of eighty pounds . BURTON2-1857-2,383.75

They hung down between the lower branches by a bright_yellow stem , as
thick as a man's ancle . BURTON2-1857-2,383.76

Books enumerate 139 varieties of trees ; BURTON2-1857-2,383.77

of these between sixty and seventy are well-known ,
BURTON2-1857-2,383.78

and each is distinguished , as usual among Arabs , by its peculiar name
. BURTON2-1857-2,383.79

The best kind is El Shelebi ; BURTON2-1857-2,383.80

it is packed in skins , or in flat round boxes covered with paper ,
somewhat in the manner of French prunes , and sent as presents to the
remotest parts of the Moslem world . BURTON2-1857-2,383.81

The fruit is about <P_384> two inches long , with a small stone , and
what appeared to me a peculiar aromatic flavour and smell ;
BURTON2-1857-2,384.82

it is seldom eaten by the citizens on account of the price , which
varies from two to ten piastres the pound . BURTON2-1857-2,384.83

The tree , moreover , is rare , and said to be not so productive as the
other species . BURTON2-1857-2,384.84

The Ajwah is eaten , but not sold , because a tradition of the Prophet
declares , that whoso breaketh his fast every day with six or seven of
the Ajwah-date need fear neither poison , nor magic .
BURTON2-1857-2,384.85

The third kind , El Hilwah , also a large date , derives a name from its
exceeding sweetness : BURTON2-1857-2,384.86

of this tree the Moslems relate that the Prophet planted a stone , which
in a few minutes grew up and bore fruit . BURTON2-1857-2,384.87

Next comes El Birni , of which was said , " It causeth sickness to
depart , BURTON2-1857-2,384.88

and there is no sickness in it . " BURTON2-1857-2,384.89

The Wahshi on one occasion bent its head , BURTON2-1857-2,384.90

and salamed to Mohammed as he ate its fruit , for which reason even now
its lofty tuft turns earthwards . BURTON2-1857-2,384.91

The Sayhani is so called , because when the founder of El Islam ,
holding Ali's hand , happened to pass beneath , it cried , " This is
Mohammed the Prince of Prophets , BURTON2-1857-2,384.92

and this is Ali the Prince of the Pious , and the progenitor of the
immaculate Imams . " BURTON2-1857-2,384.93

Of course the descendants of so intelligent a vegetable hold high rank
in the kingdom of palms , BURTON2-1857-2,384.94

and the vulgar were in the habit of eating the Sayhani and of throwing
the stones about the Haram . BURTON2-1857-2,384.95

The Khuzayriyah is called so , because it preserves its green colour ,
even when perfectly ripe ; BURTON2-1857-2,384.96

it is dried and preserved as a curiosity . BURTON2-1857-2,384.97

The Jebeli is that most usually eaten : BURTON2-1857-2,384.98

<P_385>

the poorest kinds are the Laun and the Hilayah , costing from 4 to 7
piastres per mudd . BURTON2-1857-2,385.100

I can@ @not say that the dates of El Medinah are finer than those of
Meccah , although it be highly heretical to hold such tenet .
BURTON2-1857-2,385.101

The produce of the former city was the favorite food of the Prophet ,
who invariably broke his fast with this food : a circumstance which
invests it with a certain degree of relic-sanctity .
BURTON2-1857-2,385.102

The citizens delight in speaking of dates as an Irishman does of
potatoes , with a manner of familiar fondness : BURTON2-1857-2,385.103

they eat them for medicine as well as food ; " Rutab , " or wet dates ,
being held to be the most saving . BURTON2-1857-2,385.104

It is doubtless the most savoury of remedies . BURTON2-1857-2,385.105

The fruit is prepared in a great variety of ways :
BURTON2-1857-2,385.106

perhaps the most favorite dish is a broil with clarified butter ,
extremely distasteful to the European palate . BURTON2-1857-2,385.107

The date is also left upon the tree to dry , and then called " Balah : "
BURTON2-1857-2,385.108

this is eaten at dessert as the " Nukliyat " - the " quatre mendiants "
of Persia . BURTON2-1857-2,385.109

Amongst peculiar preparations must be mentioned the Kulladat el Sham .
BURTON2-1857-2,385.110

The unripe fruit is dipped in boiling water to preserve its gamboge
color , strung upon a thick thread and hung out in the air to dry .
BURTON2-1857-2,385.111

These strings are worn all over El Hejaz as necklaces by children , who
seldom fail to munch the <P_386> ornament when not in fear of slappings
; BURTON2-1857-2,386.112

and they are sent as presents to distant countries .
BURTON2-1857-2,386.113

January and February are the time for the masculation of the palm .
BURTON2-1857-2,386.114

The " Nakhwali , " as he is called , opens the female flower ,
BURTON2-1857-2,386.115

and having inserted the inverted male flowers , binds them together :
BURTON2-1857-2,386.116

this operation is performed , as in Egypt , upon each cluster .
BURTON2-1857-2,386.117

The fruit is ripe about the middle of May , BURTON2-1857-2,386.118

and the gathering of it forms the Arabs' " vendemmia . "
BURTON2-1857-2,386.119

The people make merry the more readily because their favorite fruit is
liable to a variety of accidents : BURTON2-1857-2,386.120

droughts injure the tree , BURTON2-1857-2,386.121

locusts destroy the produce , BURTON2-1857-2,386.122

and the date crop , like most productions which men are imprudent enough
to adopt singly as the staff of life , is subject to failure .
BURTON2-1857-2,386.123

One of the reasons for the excellence of Medinah dates is the quantity
of water they obtain : BURTON2-1857-2,386.124

each garden or field has its well , BURTON2-1857-2,386.125

and even in the hottest weather the Persian wheel floods the soil every
third day . BURTON2-1857-2,386.126

It has been observed that the date-tree can live in dry and barren spots
; BURTON2-1857-2,386.127

but it loves the beds of streams and places where moisture is procurable
. BURTON2-1857-2,386.128

The palms scattered over the other parts of the plain , and depending
solely upon rain water , produce less fruit , and that too of an
inferior quality . BURTON2-1857-2,386.129

Verdure is not usually wholesome in Arabia , BURTON2-1857-2,386.130

yet invalids leave the close atmosphere of El Medinah to seek health
under the cool shades of Kuba . BURTON2-1857-2,386.131

The gardens are divided by what might almost be called lanes , long
narrow lines with tall reed fences on both sides .
BURTON2-1857-2,386.132

The graceful branches of the Tamarisk , pearled with manna , and
cottoned over with dew , and the broad leaves of the castor plant ,
glistening in <P_387> the sun , protected us from the morning rays .
BURTON2-1857-2,387.133

The ground on both sides of the way was sunken , the earth being
disposed in heaps at the foot of the fences , an arrangement which
facilitates irrigation , by giving a fall to the water , and in some
cases affords a richer soil than the surface . BURTON2-1857-2,387.134

This part of the Medinah plain , however , being higher than the rest ,
is less subject to the disease of salt and nitre .
BURTON2-1857-2,387.135

On the way here and there the earth crumbles BURTON2-1857-2,387.136

and looks dark under the dew of morning , BURTON2-1857-2,387.137

but nowhere has it broken out into that glittering efflorescence which
notes the last stage of the attack . BURTON2-1857-2,387.138

The fields and gardens are divided into small oblongs separated from one
another by little ridges of mould which form diminutive water-courses .
BURTON2-1857-2,387.139

Of the cereals there are luxuriant maize , wheat , and barley ,
BURTON2-1857-2,387.140

but the latter two are in small quantities . BURTON2-1857-2,387.141

Here and there patches of " Barsim , " or Egyptian clover , glitter
brightly in the sun . BURTON2-1857-2,387.142

The principal vegetables are Badanjan <paren> Egg plant <$$paren> , the
Bamiyah <paren> a kind of esculent hibiscus , called Bhendi in India
<$$paren> , and Mulukhiyah <paren> Corchoris olitorius <$$paren> , a
mucilaginous spinage common throughout this part of the East .
BURTON2-1857-2,387.143

These three are eaten by citizens of every rank ; BURTON2-1857-2,387.144

they are in fact the greens and the potatoes of Arabia .
BURTON2-1857-2,387.145

I remarked also onions and leeks in fair quantities , a few beds of
carrots and beans , some Fijl <paren> radishes <$$paren> , Lift <paren>
turnips <$$paren> , gourds , cucumbers , and similar plants .
BURTON2-1857-2,387.146

Fruit trees abound . BURTON2-1857-2,387.147

There are five descriptions of vines , the best of which is El Sherifi ,
a long white grape of a flavour somewhat resembling the produce of
Tuscany . BURTON2-1857-2,387.148

Next to it , and very similar , is El Birni . BURTON2-1857-2,387.149

The Hejazi is a round fruit , sweet , but insipid , which is also the
reproach of the Sawadi , or black grapes . BURTON2-1857-2,387.150

And lastly , the Raziki is a small white <P_388> fruit , with a
diminutive stone . BURTON2-1857-2,388.151

The Nebek , or Jujube , is here a fine large tree with a dark_green leaf
, roundish and polished like the olive ; BURTON2-1857-2,388.152

it is armed with a short , curved , and sharp thorn ,
BURTON2-1857-2,388.153

and bears a pale straw-colored berry , about the size of a gooseberry ,
with red streaks on the side next the sun . BURTON2-1857-2,388.154

Little can be said in favor of the fruit , which has been compared
successively by disappointed " Lotus eaters " to a bad plum , an unripe
cherry , and an insipid apple . BURTON2-1857-2,388.155

It is , however , a favorite with the people of El Medinah , who have
reckoned many varieties of the fruit : Hindi <paren> Indian <$$paren> ,
Baladi <paren> " native " <$$paren> , Tamri <paren> date-like <$$paren>
, &c. BURTON2-1857-2,388.156

There are a few peaches , hard like the Egyptian , and almost tasteless
, fit only for stewing , but greedily eaten in a half-ripe state , large
coarse bananas , lime trees , a few water melons , figs , and apples ,
but neither apricots nor pears . BURTON2-1857-2,388.157

There are three kinds of pomegranates : BURTON2-1857-2,388.158

the best is the Shami <paren> Syrian <$$paren> ; BURTON2-1857-2,388.159

it is red outside , very sweet , BURTON2-1857-2,388.160

and costs one piastre ; BURTON2-1857-2,388.161

the Turki is large , and of a white color ; BURTON2-1857-2,388.162

and the Misri has a greenish rind , and a somewhat subacid and harsh
flavour : BURTON2-1857-2,388.163

the latter are sold four times as cheap as the best .
BURTON2-1857-2,388.164

I never saw in the East , except at Meccah , a finer fruit than the
Shami : BURTON2-1857-2,388.165

almost stoneless , like those of Muscat , they are delicately perfumed ,
and as large as an infant's head . BURTON2-1857-2,388.166

El Medinah is celebrated , like Taif , for its " Rubb Rumman , " a thick
pomegranate syrup , <P_389> drunk with water during the hot weather ,
and esteemed cooling and wholesome . BURTON2-1857-2,389.167

After threading our way through the gardens , an operation requiring
less time than to describe them , we saw , peeping through the groves ,
Kuba's simple minaret . BURTON2-1857-2,389.168

Then we came in sight of a confused heap of huts and dwelling-houses ,
chapels and towers with trees between , and foul lanes , heaps of
rubbish , and barking dogs , - the usual material of a Hejazi village .
BURTON2-1857-2,389.169

Having dismounted , we gave our animals in charge of a_dozen infant
Bedouins , the produce of the peasant gardeners , who shouted "
Bakhshish " the moment they saw us . BURTON2-1857-2,389.170

To this they were urged by their mothers , BURTON2-1857-2,389.171

and I willingly parted with a few paras for the purpose of establishing
an intercourse with fellow-creatures so fearfully and wonderfully
resembling the tail-less baboon . BURTON2-1857-2,389.172

Their bodies , unlike those of Egyptian children , were slim and
straight , BURTON2-1857-2,389.173

but their ribs stood out with a curious distinctness ,
BURTON2-1857-2,389.174

the color of the skin was that oily lamp-black seen upon the face of a
European sweep , BURTON2-1857-2,389.175

and the elf-locks , thatching the cocoanut heads , had been stained by
the sun , wind , and rain to that reddish-brown hue which Hindu romances
have appropriated to their Rakshasas or demons . BURTON2-1857-2,389.176

Each anatomy carried in his arms a stark-naked miniature of himself ,
fierce-looking babies with faces all eyes , BURTON2-1857-2,389.177

and the strong little wretches were still able to extend the right hand
and exert their lungs with direful clamor . BURTON2-1857-2,389.178

Their mothers were fit progenitors for such progeny : long , gaunt ,
with emaciated limbs , wall-sided , high-shouldered , and
straight-backed , with pendulous bosoms , spider-like arms , and splay
feet . BURTON2-1857-2,389.179

Their long elf-locks , wrinkled faces , and high cheek-bones , their
lips darker than the epidermis , hollow <P_390> staring eyes , sparkling
as if to light up the extreme ugliness around , and voices screaming as
if in a perennial rage , invested them with all the " charms of Sycorax
. " BURTON2-1857-2,390.180

These " Houris of Zetannum " were habited in long night-gowns dyed blue
to conceal want of washing , BURTON2-1857-2,390.181

and the squalid children had about a yard of the same material wrapped
round their waist for all toilette . BURTON2-1857-2,390.182

This is not an overdrawn portrait of the farmer race of Arabs , the most
despised by their fellow-countrymen , and the most hard-favored ,
morally as well as physically , of all the breed .
BURTON2-1857-2,390.183

Before entering the Mosque of El Kuba it will be necessary to call to
mind some passages of its past history . BURTON2-1857-2,390.184

When the Prophet's she-camel , El Kaswa , as he was approaching El
Medinah after the flight from Meccah , knelt down here , he desired his
companions to mount the animal . BURTON2-1857-2,390.185

Abubekr and Omar did so ; BURTON2-1857-2,390.186

still she sat upon the ground , BURTON2-1857-2,390.187

but when Ali obeyed the order , she arose . BURTON2-1857-2,390.188

The Prophet bade him loose her halter , BURTON2-1857-2,390.189

for she was directed by Allah , BURTON2-1857-2,390.190

and the Mosque walls were built upon the line over which she trod .
BURTON2-1857-2,390.191

It was the first place of public prayer in El Islam .
BURTON2-1857-2,390.192

Mohammed laid the first brick , BURTON2-1857-2,390.193

and with an " Anzah " or iron-shod javelin , marked out the direction of
prayer , BURTON2-1857-2,390.194

each of his successors followed his example . BURTON2-1857-2,390.195

According to most historians , the land belonged to Abu Ayyub <P_391>
the Ansari ; for which reason the " Bayt Ayyub , " his descendants ,
still perform the service of the Mosque , keep the key , and share with
the Bawwabs or porters the alms and fees here offered by the Faithful .
BURTON2-1857-2,391.196

Others declared that the ground was the property of one Linah , a woman
who was in the habit of tethering her ass there .
BURTON2-1857-2,391.197

The Prophet used to visit it every Saturday on foot ,
BURTON2-1857-2,391.198

and always made a point of praying the dawn-prayer there on the 17th
Ramazan . BURTON2-1857-2,391.199

A number of traditions testify to its dignity : BURTON2-1857-2,391.200

of these two are especially significant . BURTON2-1857-2,391.201

The first assures all Moslems that a prayer at Kuba is equal to a Lesser
Pilgrimage at Meccah in religious efficacy ; BURTON2-1857-2,391.202

and the second declares that such devotion is more acceptable to the
Deity than prostrations at the Bayt el Mukaddas <paren> Jerusalem
<$$paren> . BURTON2-1857-2,391.203

Moreover sundry miracles took place here , BURTON2-1857-2,391.204

and a verset of the Koran descended from heaven . For which reasons the
Mosque was much respected by Omar , who , once finding it empty , swept
it himself with a broom of thorns , and expressed his wonder at the
lukewarmness of Moslem piety . BURTON2-1857-2,391.205

It was originally a square building of very small size ;
BURTON2-1857-2,391.206

Osman enlarged it in the direction of the minaret , making it sixty-six
cubits each way . BURTON2-1857-2,391.207

It is no longer " mean and decayed " as in Burckhardt's time :
BURTON2-1857-2,391.208

the Sultan Abd el Hamid , father of Mahmud , erected a neat structure of
cut stone , whose <P_392> crenelles make it look more like a place of
defence than of prayer . BURTON2-1857-2,392.209

It has , however , no pretensions to grandeur . BURTON2-1857-2,392.210

The minaret is of the Turkish shape . BURTON2-1857-2,392.211

To the south a small and narrow Riwak , or raised hypo-style , with
unpretending columns , looks out northwards upon a little open area
simply sanded over ; BURTON2-1857-2,392.212

and this is the whole building . BURTON2-1857-2,392.213

The large Mastabah or stone bench at the entrance of the Mosque , was
crowded with sitting people : BURTON2-1857-2,392.214

we therefore lost no time , after ablution and the Niyat <paren> " the
Intention " <$$paren> peculiar to this visitation , in ascending the
steps , in pulling off our slippers , and in entering the sacred
building . BURTON2-1857-2,392.215

We stood upon the Musalla el Nabi <paren> the Prophet's place of prayer
<$$paren> : BURTON2-1857-2,392.216

after Shaykh Nur and Hamid had forcibly cleared that auspicious spot of
a devout Indian , and had spread a rug upon the dirty matting , we
performed a two-bow prayer , in front of a pillar into which a
diminutive marble Mihrab or niche had been inserted by way of memento .
BURTON2-1857-2,392.217

Then came the Dua , or supplication {TEXT:suplication} , which was as
follows : BURTON2-1857-2,392.218

" O Allah ! bless and preserve , and increase , and perpetuate , and
benefit , and be propitious to , our lord Mohammed , and to his family ,
and to his companions , BURTON2-1857-2,392.219

and be thou their Preserver ! BURTON2-1857-2,392.220

O Allah ! this is the Mosque Kuba , and the place of the Prophet's
prayers . BURTON2-1857-2,392.221

O Allah ! pardon our sins , BURTON2-1857-2,392.222

and veil our faults , BURTON2-1857-2,392.223

and place not over us one who feareth not thee , and who pitieth not us
, BURTON2-1857-2,392.224

and pardon us , and the true believers , men and women , the quick of
them and the dead ; BURTON2-1857-2,392.225

for verily thou , O Lord , art the hearer , the near to us , the
answerer of our supplications . " After which we recited the
Testification and the Fatihah , and we drew our palms as usual down our
faces . BURTON2-1857-2,392.226

<P_393>

We then moved away to the south-eastern corner of the edifice ,
BURTON2-1857-2,393.228

and stood before a Mihrab in the southern wall . BURTON2-1857-2,393.229

It is called " Takat el Kashf " or " Niche of Disclosure , " by those
who believe that as the Prophet was standing undecided about the
direction of Meccah , the Archangel Gabriel removed all obstructions to
his vision . BURTON2-1857-2,393.230

There again we went through the two-bow prayer , the Supplication , the
Testification , and the Fatihah , under difficulties ,
BURTON2-1857-2,393.231

for people crowded us excessively . BURTON2-1857-2,393.232

During our devotions , I vainly attempted to decypher a Cufic
inscription fixed in the wall above and on the right of the Mihrab ,
BURTON2-1857-2,393.233

- my regret , however , at this failure was transitory , the character
not being of an ancient date . BURTON2-1857-2,393.234

Then we left the Riwak , BURTON2-1857-2,393.235

and despite the morning sun which shone fiercely with a sickly heat , we
went to the open area where stands the " Mabrak el Nakah , " or the "
Place of kneeling of the she_Dromedary . " BURTON2-1857-2,393.236

This , the exact spot where El Kaswa sat down , is covered with a
diminutive dome of cut stone , supported by four stone pillars :
BURTON2-1857-2,393.237

the building is about eight feet high and a little less in length and
breadth . BURTON2-1857-2,393.238

It has the appearance of being modern . BURTON2-1857-2,393.239

On the floor , which was raised by steps above the level of the ground ,
lay , as usual , a bit of dirty matting , upon which we again went
through the ceremonies above detailed . BURTON2-1857-2,393.240

Then issuing from the canopy into the sun , a little outside the Riwak
and close to the Mabrak , we prayed upon the " Makan el Ayat , " or the
" Place of Signs . " BURTON2-1857-2,393.241

Here was revealed to Mohammed a passage in the Koran <P_394> especially
alluding to the purity of the place and of the people of Kuba , " a
temple founded in purity from its first day ; " BURTON2-1857-2,394.242

and again ; " there men live who love to be cleansed ,
BURTON2-1857-2,394.243

and verily Allah delights in the clean . " BURTON2-1857-2,394.244

The Prophet exclaimed in admiration , " O ye sons of Amr ! what have ye
done to deserve all this praise and beneficence ? " when the people
offered him an explanation of their personal cleanliness which I do not
care to repeat . BURTON2-1857-2,394.245

The temple of Kuba from that day took a fresh title - Masjid el Takwa ,
or the " Mosque of Piety . " BURTON2-1857-2,394.246

Having finished our prayers and ceremonies at the Mosque of Piety , we
fought our way out through a crowd of importunate beggars ,
BURTON2-1857-2,394.247

and turning a few paces to the left , halted near a small chapel
adjoining the south-west angle of the larger temple .
BURTON2-1857-2,394.248

We there stood at a grated window in the western wall ,
BURTON2-1857-2,394.249

and recited a supplication looking the while most reverently at a dark
dwarf archway under which the Lady Fatimah used to sit grinding grain in
a hand mill . BURTON2-1857-2,394.250

The Mosque in consequence bears the name of Sittna Fatimah .
BURTON2-1857-2,394.251

A surly-looking Khadim , or guardian , stood at the door demanding a
dollar in the most authoritative Arab tone - BURTON2-1857-2,394.252

we therefore did not enter . BURTON2-1857-2,394.253

At El Medinah and at Meccah the traveller's hand must be perpetually in
his pouch : BURTON2-1857-2,394.254

no stranger in Paris or London is more surely or more severely taken in
. BURTON2-1857-2,394.255

Already I began to fear that my eighty pounds would not suffice for all
the expenses of sight-seeing , BURTON2-1857-2,394.256

and the apprehension was justified by the sequel .
BURTON2-1857-2,394.257

My only friend was the boy Mohammed , who displayed a fiery economy that
brought him into considerable disrepute with his countrymen .
BURTON2-1857-2,394.258

They saw with emotion that he was preaching parsimony to me solely that
I might have more money to spend at Meccah under his auspices .
BURTON2-1857-2,394.259

This being palpably the case , I threw all the blame of penuriousness
upon the young Machiavel's shoulders , BURTON2-1857-2,394.260

and resolved , as he had taken charge of my <P_395> finances at El
Medinah , so at Meccah to administer them myself .
BURTON2-1857-2,395.261

After praying at the window , to the great disgust of the Khadim , who
openly asserted that we were " low fellows , " we passed through some
lanes lined with beggars and Bedouin children , till we came to a third
little Mosque situated due south of the larger one .
BURTON2-1857-2,395.262

This is called the Masjid Arafat , BURTON2-1857-2,395.263

and is erected upon a mound also named Tall Arafat , because on one
occasion the Prophet , being unable to visit the Holy mountain at the
pilgrimage season , stood there , saw through the intervening space ,
and in spirit performed the ceremony . BURTON2-1857-2,395.264

Here also we looked into a window instead of opening the door with a
silver key , BURTON2-1857-2,395.265

and the mesquin appearance of all within prevented my regretting the
necessity of economy . BURTON2-1857-2,395.266

In India or Sindh every village would have a better mosque .
BURTON2-1857-2,395.267

Our last visit was to a fourth chapel , the Masjid Ali , so termed
because the Prophet's son-in-law had a house upon this spot .
BURTON2-1857-2,395.268

After praying there - and terribly hot the little hole was ! - we
repaired to the last place of visitation at Kuba - a large deep well
called the Bir El Aris , in a garden to the west of the Mosque of Piety
, with a little oratory adjoining it . BURTON2-1857-2,395.269

A Persian wheel was going drowsily round , BURTON2-1857-2,395.270

and the cool water fell into a tiny pool , whence it whirled and bubbled
away in childish mimicry of a river . BURTON2-1857-2,395.271

The music sounded sweet in my ears , BURTON2-1857-2,395.272

I stubbornly refused to do any more praying - though Shaykh Hamid , for
form's sake , reiterated , with parental emphasis , " how very wrong it
was , " - and sat down , as the Prophet himself did not disdain to do ,
with the resolution of enjoying on the brink of the well a few moments
of unwonted " Kayf . " BURTON2-1857-2,395.273

The heat was overpowering , though it was only nine <P_396> o'clock ,
BURTON2-1857-2,396.274

the sound of the stream was soothing , BURTON2-1857-2,396.275

that water wheel was creaking a lullaby , BURTON2-1857-2,396.276

and the limes and pomegranates , gently rustling , shed voluptuous
fragrance through the morning air . BURTON2-1857-2,396.277

I fell asleep - BURTON2-1857-2,396.278

and wondrous the contrast ! - dreamed that I was once more standing "
By the wall whereon hangeth the crucified vine , " looking upon the
valley of the Lianne , with its glaucous seas and grey skies , and banks
here and there white with snow . BURTON2-1857-2,396.279

The Bir el Aris , so called after a Jew of El Medinah , is one which the
Prophet delighted to visit . BURTON2-1857-2,396.280

He would sit upon its brink with his bare legs hanging over the side ,
BURTON2-1857-2,396.281

and his companions used to imitate his example . BURTON2-1857-2,396.282

This practice caused a sad disaster ; BURTON2-1857-2,396.283

in the sixth year of his caliphate , Osman , according to Abulfeda and
Yakut , dropped from his finger Mohammed's seal ring , which , engraved
in three lines with " Mohammed - Apostle - <paren> of <$$paren> Allah ,
" had served to seal the letters sent to neighboring kings , and had
descended to the first three successors . BURTON2-1857-2,396.284

The precious article was not recovered after three days' search ,
BURTON2-1857-2,396.285

and the well was thenceforward called Bir el Khatim - of the Seal Ring .
BURTON2-1857-2,396.286

It is also called the Bir el Taflat - of Saliva - because the Prophet
honored <P_397> it by expectoration , which , by the bye , he seems to
have done to almost all the wells in El Medinah .
BURTON2-1857-2,397.287

The effect of the operation upon the Bir el Aris , say the historians ,
was to sweeten the water , which before was salt .
BURTON2-1857-2,397.288

Their testimony , however , did not prevent my detecting a pronounced
medicinal taste in the luke-warm draught drawn for me by Shaykh Hamid .
BURTON2-1857-2,397.289

In Mohammed's day the total number of wells is recorded to have been
twenty : BURTON2-1857-2,397.290

most of them have long since disappeared ; BURTON2-1857-2,397.291

but there still remain seven , whose waters were drunk by the Prophet ,
and which , in consequence , the Zair is directed to visit .
BURTON2-1857-2,397.292

They are known by the classical title of Saba Abar , or the seven wells
, BURTON2-1857-2,397.293

and their names are included in this couplet , " Aris and Ghars , and
Rumah and Buzaat And Busat , with Bayruha and Ihn . "
BURTON2-1857-2,397.294

<P_398>

After my sleep , which was allowed to last until a pipe or two of
Latakia had gone round the party , we remounted our animals .
BURTON2-1857-2,398.296

On the left of the village returning towards El Medinah , my companions
pointed out to me a garden , called El Madshuniyah .
BURTON2-1857-2,398.297

It contains a quarry of the yellow loam or bole-earth , called by the
Arabs Tafl , the Persians Gil i Sarshui and the Sindhians Met .
BURTON2-1857-2,398.298

It is used as soap in many parts of the East , BURTON2-1857-2,398.299

and , mixed with oil , it is supposed to cool the body , and to render
the skin fresh and supple . BURTON2-1857-2,398.300

It is related that the Prophet cured a Bedouin of the Beni Haris tribe
of fever by washing him with a pot of Tafl dissolved in water ,
BURTON2-1857-2,398.301

and hence the earth of El Medinah derived its healing fame .
BURTON2-1857-2,398.302

As far as I could learn from the Madani , this clay is no longer valued
by them , either medicinally or cosmetically ; BURTON2-1857-2,398.303

the only use they could mention was its being eaten by the fair sex ,
when in the peculiar state described by " chlorosis . "
BURTON2-1857-2,398.304

<P_399>

<heading>

Chap. XX . BURTON2-1857-2,399.307

The visitation of Hamzah's tomb . BURTON2-1857-2,399.308

<$$heading>

On the morning of Sunday , the twenty-third Zu'l Kaadah <paren> 28th
August , 1853 <$$paren> , arrived the great Caravan from El Sham or
Damascus . BURTON2-1857-2,399.310

It is popularly called Hajj El Shami , the " Damascus pilgrimage , " as
the Egyptian Cafila is El Misri , or the Cairo pilgrimage .
BURTON2-1857-2,399.311

It is the main stream which carries off all the small currents that at
this season of general movement flow from central Asia towards the great
centre of the Islamitic world , and in 1853 amounted to about 7000 souls
. BURTON2-1857-2,399.312

It was anxiously expected by the people for several reasons .
BURTON2-1857-2,399.313

In the first place , it brought with it a new curtain for the Prophet's
Hujrah , the old one being in a tattered condition ;
BURTON2-1857-2,399.314

secondly , it had charge of the annual stipends and pensions of the
citizens ; BURTON2-1857-2,399.315

and thirdly , many families expected members returning under its escort
to their homes . BURTON2-1857-2,399.316

The popular anxiety was greatly increased by the disordered state of the
country round about ; BURTON2-1857-2,399.317

and , moreover , the great caravan had been one day late , generally
arriving on the morning of the 22nd Zu'l Kaadah .
BURTON2-1857-2,399.318

During the night three of Shaykh Hamid's brothers , who had entered as
Muzawwirs with the Hajj , came suddenly to the house :
BURTON2-1857-2,399.319

they leaped off their camels , BURTON2-1857-2,399.320

and lost not a moment in going through the usual scene of kissing ,
<P_400> embracing , and weeping bitterly for joy .
BURTON2-1857-2,400.321

I arose in the morning , BURTON2-1857-2,400.322

and looked out from the windows of the Majlis : BURTON2-1857-2,400.323

the Barr el Munakhah , from a dusty waste dotted with a few Bedouins and
hair tents , had assumed all the various shapes and the colors of a
kaleidescope . BURTON2-1857-2,400.324

The eye was bewildered by the shifting of innumerable details , in all
parts totally different from one another , thrown confusedly together in
one small field ; BURTON2-1857-2,400.325

and , however jaded with sight-seeing , it dwelt with delight upon the
vivacity , the variety , and the intense picturesqueness of the scene .
BURTON2-1857-2,400.326

In one night had sprung up a town of tents of every size , color , and
shape , - round , square and oblong , - open and closed , - from the
shawl-lined and gilt-topped pavilion of the Pacha , with all the
luxurious appurtenances of the Harem , to its neighbour the little dirty
green " rowtie " of the tobacco-seller . BURTON2-1857-2,400.327

They were pitched in admirable order : here ranged in a long line ,
where a street was required ; there packed in dense masses , where
thoroughfares were unnecessary . BURTON2-1857-2,400.328

But how describe the utter confusion in the crowding , the bustling ,
and the vast variety and volume of sound ? BURTON2-1857-2,400.329

Huge white Syrian dromedaries , compared with which those of El Hejaz
appeared mere pony-camels , jingling large bells , and bearing Shugdufs
like miniature green tents , swaying and tossing upon their backs ;
gorgeous Takhtrawan , or litters carried between camels or mules with
scarlet and brass trappings ; Bedouins bestriding naked-backed " Daluls
, " and clinging like apes to the hairy <P_401> humps ; Arnaut , Turkish
, and Kurd Irregular Cavalry , fiercer looking in their mirth than Roman
peasants in their rage ; fainting Persian pilgrims , forcing their
stubborn dromedaries to kneel , or dismounted grumbling from jaded
donkeys ; Kahwajis , sherbet sellers , and ambulant tobacconists crying
their goods ; country-people driving flocks of sheep and goats with
infinite clamor through lines of horses fiercely snorting and rearing ;
towns-people seeking their friends ; returned travellers exchanging
affectionate salutes ; devout Hajis jolting one another , running under
the legs of camels , and tumbling over the tents' ropes in their hurry
to reach the Haram ; cannon roaring from the citadel ; shopmen ,
water-carriers and fruit vendors fighting over their bargains ; boys
bullying heretics with loud screams ; a well-mounted party of fine old
Arab Shaykhs of Hamidah clan , preceded by their varlets , performing
the Arzah or war dance , - compared with which the Pyrenean bear's
performance is grace itself , - firing their duck-guns upwards , or
blowing the powder into the calves of those before them , brandishing
their swords , leaping frantically the while , with their bright-colored
rags floating in the wind , tossing their long spears tufted with
ostrich feathers high in the air , reckless where they fall ; servants
seeking their masters , and masters their tents with vain cries of Ya
Mohammed ; grandees riding mules or stalking on foot , preceded by their
crowd-beaters , shouting to clear the way ; - here the loud shrieks of
women and children , whose litters are bumping and rasping against one
another ; - there the low moaning of some poor wretch that is seeking a
shady corner to die in : BURTON2-1857-2,401.330

- add a thick dust which blurs the outlines like a London fog , with a
flaming sun that draws sparkles of fire from the burnished weapons of
the crowd , <P_402> and the brass balls of tent and litter ; and - I
doubt , gentle reader , that even the length , the jar , and the
confusion of this description is adequate to its subject , or that any "
word-painting " of mine can convey a just idea of the scene .
BURTON2-1857-2,402.331

This was the day appointed for our visiting the martyrs of Ohod .
BURTON2-1857-2,402.332

After praying the dawn-prayers as directed at the Haram , we mounted our
donkeys , BURTON2-1857-2,402.333

and , armed with pistols and knives , set out from the city .
BURTON2-1857-2,402.334

Our party was large . BURTON2-1857-2,402.335

Saad the Devil had offered to accompany us , BURTON2-1857-2,402.336

and the bustle around kept him in the best of humours ;
BURTON2-1857-2,402.337

Umar Effendi was also there , quiet-looking and humble as usual ,
leading his ass to avoid the trouble of dismounting every second minute
. BURTON2-1857-2,402.338

I had the boy Mohammed and my " slave , " BURTON2-1857-2,402.339

and Shaykh Hamid was attended by half_a_dozen relations .
BURTON2-1857-2,402.340

To avoid the crush of the Barr el Munakhah , we made a detour westwards
, over the bridge and down the course of the torrent-bed " el Sayh . "
BURTON2-1857-2,402.341

We then passed along the southern wall of the castle ,
BURTON2-1857-2,402.342

traversed its eastern outwork , BURTON2-1857-2,402.343

and issued from the Bab el Shami . BURTON2-1857-2,402.344

During the greater part of the time we were struggling through a living
tide ; BURTON2-1857-2,402.345

and among dromedaries and chargers a donkey is by no means a pleasant
monture . BURTON2-1857-2,402.346

With some difficulty , but without any more serious accident than a fall
or two , we found ourselves in the space beyond and northward of the
city . BURTON2-1857-2,402.347

This also was covered with travellers and tents , amongst which , on an
eminence to the left of the road , rose conspicuous the bright_green
pavilion of the Emir El Hajj , the commandant of the Caravan .
BURTON2-1857-2,402.348

Hard by , half <P_403> its height surrounded by a Kanat or tent wall ,
stood the Syrian or Sultan's Mahmal , all glittering with green and
gilding and gold , BURTON2-1857-2,403.349

and around it were pitched the handsome habitations of the principal
officers and grandees of the pilgrimage . BURTON2-1857-2,403.350

On the right hand lay extensive palm plantations ,
BURTON2-1857-2,403.351

and on the left , strewed over the plain , were signs of wells and tanks
, built to supply the Hajj with water . BURTON2-1857-2,403.352

We pass two small buildings , - one the Kubbat El Sabak , or Dome of
Precedence , where the Prophet's warrior friends used to display their
horsemanship ; the second the Makan , or burial-place of Sayyidna Zaki
el Din , one of Mohammed's multitudinous descendants .
BURTON2-1857-2,403.353

Then we fall into a plain , resembling that of Kuba , but less fertile .
BURTON2-1857-2,403.354

While we are jogging over it , a few words concerning Mount Ohod may not
be misplaced . BURTON2-1857-2,403.355

A popular distich says , " Verily there is healing to the eye that looks
Unto Ohod and the two Harrahs near . " BURTON2-1857-2,403.356

<P_404>

And of this holy hill the Prophet declared , " Ohod is a mountain which
loves us and which we love : BURTON2-1857-2,404.358

it is upon the gate of Heaven " ; BURTON2-1857-2,404.359

adding , " and Ayrf is a place which hates us and which we hate :
BURTON2-1857-2,404.360

it is upon the gate of Hell . " BURTON2-1857-2,404.361

The former sheltered Mohammed in the time of danger ,
BURTON2-1857-2,404.362

therefore , on Resurrection Day it will be raised to Paradise : whereas
Jebel Ayr , its neighbour , having been so ill-judged as to refuse the
Prophet water on an occasion while he thirsted , will be cast
incontinently into Hell . BURTON2-1857-2,404.363

Moslem divines , be it observed , ascribe to Mohammed miraculous
authority over animals , vegetables , and minerals , as well as over men
, angels , and jinns . BURTON2-1857-2,404.364

Hence the speaking wolf , the weeping post , the oil-stone , and the
love and hate of these two mountains . BURTON2-1857-2,404.365

It is probably one of the many remains of ancient paganism pulled down
and afterwards used to build up the edifice of El Islam .
BURTON2-1857-2,404.366

According to the old Persians , the sphere hath an active soul .
BURTON2-1857-2,404.367

Some <P_405> sects of Hindus believe " mother earth , " upon whose bosom
we little parasites crawl , to be a living being .
BURTON2-1857-2,405.368

This was a dogma also amongst the ancient Egyptians , who denoted it by
a peculiar symbol , - the globe with human legs .
BURTON2-1857-2,405.369

Hence the " Makrokosmos " of the plagiaristic Greeks , the animal on a
large scale , whose diminutive was the " Mikrokosmos " - man .
BURTON2-1857-2,405.370

" Tota natura , " repeats Malpighi , " existit in minimis . "
BURTON2-1857-2,405.371

Amongst the Romans , Tellus or Terra was a female deity ,
anthropomorphised according to their syncretic system , which furnished
with strange gods their Pantheon , but forgot to append the scroll
explaining the inner sense of the symbol . BURTON2-1857-2,405.372

And some modern philosophers , Kepler , Blackmore , and others , have
not scrupled to own their belief in a doctrine which as long as " Life "
is a mere word on man's tongue , can neither be disproved nor proved .
BURTON2-1857-2,405.373

The Mohammedans , as usual , exaggerate the dogma ,
BURTON2-1857-2,405.374

- a Hadis related by Abu Hurayrah casts on the day of judgment the sun
and the moon into hell fire . BURTON2-1857-2,405.375

Jebel Ohod owes its present reputation to a cave which sheltered the
Prophet when pursued by his enemies , to certain springs of which he
drank , and especially to its being the scene of a battle celebrated in
El Islam . BURTON2-1857-2,405.376

On Saturday , the 11th Shawwal , in the 3rd year of the Hijrah <paren>
26th January A.D. 625 <$$paren> Mohammed with 700 men engaged 3000
infidels under the command of Abu Sufiyan , BURTON2-1857-2,405.377

ran great personal danger , BURTON2-1857-2,405.378

and lost his uncle Hamzah , the " Lord of Martyrs . "
BURTON2-1857-2,405.379

On the topmost pinnacle , also , is the Kubbat Harun , the dome erected
over Aaron's remains . BURTON2-1857-2,405.380

It is now , I was told , in a ruinous condition , BURTON2-1857-2,405.381

and <P_406> is placed upon the " pinnacle of seven hills " in a position
somewhat like that of certain buildings on St. Angelo in the bay of
Naples . BURTON2-1857-2,406.382

Alluding to the toil of reaching it , the Madani quote a facetious rhyme
inscribed upon the wall by one of their number who had wasted his breath
: - " Malun ibn Malun Man talaa Kubbat Harun ! BURTON2-1857-2,406.383

" Anglice , " The man must be a ruffian who climbs up to Aaron's Dome .
" BURTON2-1857-2,406.384

Devout Moslems visit Ohod every Thursday morning after the dawn
devotions in the Haram , BURTON2-1857-2,406.385

pray for the Shuhada of Ohod , BURTON2-1857-2,406.386

and , after going through the ceremonies , return to the Haram in time
for mid-day worship . BURTON2-1857-2,406.387

On the 12th of Rajab , Zairs come out in large bodies from the city ,
BURTON2-1857-2,406.388

encamp here for three or four days , BURTON2-1857-2,406.389

pass the time in feasting , jollity , and devotion , as usual at saints'
festivals and pilgrimages in general . BURTON2-1857-2,406.390

After half an hour's ride we came to the Mustarah or resting place , so
called because the Prophet sat here for a few minutes on his way to the
battle of Ohod . BURTON2-1857-2,406.391

It is a newly-@ @built square enclosure of dwarf whitewashed walls ,
within which devotees pray . BURTON2-1857-2,406.392

On the outside fronting El Medinah is a seat like a chair of rough
stones . BURTON2-1857-2,406.393

Here I was placed by my Muzawwir , who recited an insignificant
supplication to be repeated after him . BURTON2-1857-2,406.394

At its end with the Fatihah and accompaniments , we remounted our asses
BURTON2-1857-2,406.395

and resumed our way . BURTON2-1857-2,406.396

Travelling onwards , we came in sight of the second Harrah or ridge .
BURTON2-1857-2,406.397

It lies to the right and left of the road , BURTON2-1857-2,406.398

and resembles lines of lava , BURTON2-1857-2,406.399

but I had not one {TEXT:on} opportunity to examine it narrowly ,
BURTON2-1857-2,406.400

Then we <P_407> reached the gardens of Ohod , which reflect in miniature
those of Kuba , BURTON2-1857-2,407.401

and presently we arrived at what explained the presence of verdure and
vegetable life , - a deep Fiumara full of loose sand and large stones
denoting an impetuous stream . BURTON2-1857-2,407.402

It flows along the southern base of Ohod , said to be part of the
Medinah plain , BURTON2-1857-2,407.403

and collects the drainage of the high lands to the S. and S.E .
BURTON2-1857-2,407.404

The bed becomes impassable after rain , BURTON2-1857-2,407.405

and sometimes the torrents overflow the neighbouring gardens .
BURTON2-1857-2,407.406

By the direction of this Fiumara I judged that it must supply the
Ghabbah or " basin " in the hills north of the plain .
BURTON2-1857-2,407.407

Good authorities , however , informed me that a large volume of water
will not stand there , but flows down the beds that wind through the
Ghauts westward of El Medinah and falls into the sea near the harbour of
Wijh . BURTON2-1857-2,407.408

To the south of the Fiumara is a village on an eminence , containing
some large brick houses now in a ruinous state ; BURTON2-1857-2,407.409

these are the villas of opulent and religious citizens who visited the
place for change of air , recreation , and worship at Hamzah's tomb .
BURTON2-1857-2,407.410

Our donkeys sank fetlock-deep in the loose sand of the torrent-bed .
BURTON2-1857-2,407.411

Then reaching the northern side and ascending a gentle slope , we found
ourselves upon the battle-field . BURTON2-1857-2,407.412

This spot , so celebrated in the annals of El Islam , is a shelving
strip of land , close to the southern base of Mount Ohod .
BURTON2-1857-2,407.413

The army of the Infidels advanced from the Fiumara in crescent shape ,
with Abu Sufiyan , the general , and his idols in the centre .
BURTON2-1857-2,407.414

It is distant about three miles from El Medinah , in a northerly
direction . BURTON2-1857-2,407.415

All the <P_408> visitor sees is hard gravelly ground , covered with
little heaps of various colored granite , red sandstone , and bits of
porphyry , to denote the different places where the martyrs fell , and
were buried . BURTON2-1857-2,408.416

Seen from this point , there is something appalling in the look of the
Holy Mountain . BURTON2-1857-2,408.417

Its seared and jagged flanks rise like masses of iron from the plain ,
BURTON2-1857-2,408.418

and the crevice into which the Moslem host retired , when the
disobedience of the archers in hastening to plunder enabled Khalid bin
Walid to fall upon Mohammed's rear , is the only break in the grim wall
. BURTON2-1857-2,408.419

Reeking with heat , its surface produces not one green shrub or stunted
tree ; BURTON2-1857-2,408.420

not a bird or beast appeared upon its inhospitable sides ,
BURTON2-1857-2,408.421

and the bright_blue sky glaring above its bald and sullen brow , made it
look only the more repulsive . BURTON2-1857-2,408.422

I was glad to turn my eyes away from it . BURTON2-1857-2,408.423

To the left of the road N. of the Fiumara , and leading to the
mountains , stands Hamzah's Mosque , which , like the Haram of El
Medinah , is a mausoleum as well as a fane . BURTON2-1857-2,408.424

It is a small square strongly-built edifice of hewn
{COM:diagram_omitted} stone , with a dome covering the solitary
hypostyle to the south , and the usual minaret . BURTON2-1857-2,408.425

The westward wing is a Zawiyah or oratory , frequented by the celebrated
Sufi and Saint , Mohammed el Samman , the " clarified butter-seller , "
one of whose blood , the reader will remember , stood by my side in the
person of Shaykh Hamid . BURTON2-1857-2,408.426

On the eastern side of the building a half wing projects ,
BURTON2-1857-2,408.427

and opens to the south , with a small door upon a Mustabah or stone
bench five or <P_409> six feet high , which completes the square of the
edifice . BURTON2-1857-2,409.428

On the right of the road opposite Hamzah's Mosque , is a large erection
, now in ruins , containing a deep hole leading to a well , and huge
platforms for the accommodation of travellers , BURTON2-1857-2,409.429

and beyond , towards the mountains , are the small edifices presently to
be described . BURTON2-1857-2,409.430

Some Turkish women were sitting veiled upon the shady platform opposite
the Martyrs' Mosque . BURTON2-1857-2,409.431

At a little distance their husbands , and the servants holding horses
and asses , lay upon the ground , BURTON2-1857-2,409.432

and a large crowd of Bedouins , boys , girls , and old women , had
gathered around to beg , draw water , and sell dry dates .
BURTON2-1857-2,409.433

They were awaiting the guardian , who had not yet acknowledged the
summons . BURTON2-1857-2,409.434

After half an hour's vain patience , we determined to proceed with the
ceremonies . BURTON2-1857-2,409.435

Ascending by its steps the Mastabah subtending half the eastern wall ,
Shaykh Hamid placed me so as to front the tomb . BURTON2-1857-2,409.436

There , standing in the burning sun , we repeated the following prayer :
BURTON2-1857-2,409.437

" Peace be upon thee , O our lord Hamzah ! O paternal uncle of Allah's
messenger ! O paternal uncle of Allah's Prophet !
BURTON2-1857-2,409.438

Peace be upon thee , O paternal uncle of Mustafa !
BURTON2-1857-2,409.439

Peace be upon thee , O Prince of the Martyrs ! O Prince of the Happy !
BURTON2-1857-2,409.440

Peace be upon thee , O Lion of Allah ! O Lion of his Prophet ! "
BURTON2-1857-2,409.441

After which , we asked Hamzah and his companions to lend us their aid ,
in obtaining for us and ours pardon , worldly prosperity , and future
happiness . BURTON2-1857-2,409.442

Scarcely had we finished when , mounted on a high-@ @trotting dromedary
, appeared the emissary of Mohammed Khalifah , descendant of El Abbas ,
who keeps the key of the Mosque , and receives the fees and donations of
the devout . BURTON2-1857-2,409.443

It was to be opened for the Turkish pilgrims . BURTON2-1857-2,409.444

I waited to see the interior . BURTON2-1857-2,409.445

The Arab drew forth from his pouch , with abundant solemnity , a bunch
of curiously made keys , BURTON2-1857-2,409.446

and sharply directed me to stand away from and out of sight <P_410> of
the door . BURTON2-1857-2,410.447

When I obeyed , grumblingly , he began to rattle the locks , and to snap
the padlocks , opening them slowly , shaking them , and making as much
noise as possible . BURTON2-1857-2,410.448

The reason of the precaution - it sounded like poetry if not sense - is
this . BURTON2-1857-2,410.449

It is believed that the souls of martyrs , leaving the habitations of
their senseless clay , are fond of sitting together in spiritual
converse , BURTON2-1857-2,410.450

and profane eye must not fall upon the scene . BURTON2-1857-2,410.451

What grand pictures these imaginative Arabs see !
BURTON2-1857-2,410.452

Conceive the majestic figures of the saints - for the soul with
Mohammedans is like the old European spirit , a something immaterial in
the shape of the body - with long grey beards , earnest faces , and
solemn eyes , reposing beneath the palms , and discussing events now
buried in the darkness of a_thousand years . BURTON2-1857-2,410.453

I would fain be hard upon this superstition , BURTON2-1857-2,410.454

but shame prevents . BURTON2-1857-2,410.455

When in Nottingham , eggs may not be carried out after sunset ;
BURTON2-1857-2,410.456

when Ireland hears Banshees , or apparitional old women , with streaming
hair , and dressed in blue mantles ; when Scotland sees a shroud about a
person , showing his approaching death ; when France has her loup-garous
, revenants , and poules du Vendredi Saint <paren> <font> i.e. <$$font>
hens hatched on Good Friday supposed to change color every year
<$$paren> : as long as the Holy Coat cures devotees at Trèves , Madonnas
wink at Rimini , San Gennaro melts at Naples , and Addolorate and
Estatiche make converts to hysteria at Rome - whilst the Virgin
manifests herself to children on the Alps , whilst Germany sends forth
Psychography , <P_411> whilst Europe , the civilised , the enlightened ,
the sceptical , dotes over such puerilities as clairvoyance and
table-turning ; and whilst even hard-headed America believes in "
mediums , " in " snail-telegraphs , " and " spirit-rappings , " - I must
hold the men of El Medinah to be as wise , and their superstition to be
as respectable as others . BURTON2-1857-2,411.457

But the realities of Hamzah's Mosque have little to recommend them .
BURTON2-1857-2,411.458

The building is like that of Kuba , only smaller ,
BURTON2-1857-2,411.459

and the hypostyle is hung with oil lamps and ostrich eggs , the usual
paltry furniture of an Arab mausoleum . BURTON2-1857-2,411.460

On the walls are a few modern inscriptions and framed poetry , written
in a caligraphic hand . BURTON2-1857-2,411.461

Beneath the Riwak lies Hamzah , under a mass of black basaltic stone ,
resembling that of Aden , only more porous and scoriaceous , convex at
the top , like a heap of earth , without the Kiswah , or cover of a
saint's tomb , and railed round with wooden bars .
BURTON2-1857-2,411.462

At his head , or westward , lies Abdullah bin Jaysh , a name little
known to fame , under a plain whitewashed tomb , also convex ;
BURTON2-1857-2,411.463

and in the courtyard is a similar pile , erected over the remains of
Shammas bin Usman , another obscure companion . BURTON2-1857-2,411.464

We then passed through a door in the northern part of the western wall ,
BURTON2-1857-2,411.465

and saw a diminutive palm plantation and a well . After which we left
the Mosque , and I was under the " fatal necessity " of paying a dollar
for the honor of entering it . BURTON2-1857-2,411.466

But the guardian promised that the chapters Y. S. and El Ikhlas should
be recited for my benefit - the latter <P_412> forty times -
BURTON2-1857-2,412.467

and if their efficacy be one-twentieth part of what men say it is , the
reader can@ @not quote against me a certain popular proverb , concerning
an order of men easily parted from their money . BURTON2-1857-2,412.468

Issuing from the Mosque , we advanced a few paces towards the mountain .
BURTON2-1857-2,412.469

On our left we passed by - at a respectful distance , for the Turkish
Hajis cried out that their women were engaged in ablution - a large
Sehrij or tank , built of cut stone with steps , and intended to detain
the overflowing waters of the torrent . BURTON2-1857-2,412.470

The next place we prayed at was a small square , enclosed with dwarf
whitewashed walls , containing a few graves denoted by ovals of loose
stones thinly spread upon the ground . BURTON2-1857-2,412.471

This is primitive Arab simplicity . BURTON2-1857-2,412.472

The Bedouins still mark the places of their dead with four stones
planted at the head , the feet , and the sides ; BURTON2-1857-2,412.473

in the centre the earth is either heaped up Musannam <paren> <font> i.e.
<$$font> like the hump of a camel <$$paren> , or more generally left
Musattah - level . BURTON2-1857-2,412.474

I therefore suppose that the latter was the original shape of the
Prophet's tomb . BURTON2-1857-2,412.475

Within the enclosure certain martyrs of the holy army were buried .
BURTON2-1857-2,412.476

After praying there , we repaired to a small building still nearer to
the foot of the mountain . BURTON2-1857-2,412.477

It is the usual cupola springing from four square walls , not in the
best preservation . BURTON2-1857-2,412.478

Here the Prophet prayed , BURTON2-1857-2,412.479

and it is called the Kubbat el Sanaya , " Dome of the Front Teeth , "
from the following circumstance . BURTON2-1857-2,412.480

Five Infidels were bound by oath to slay Mohammed at the battle of Ohod
: BURTON2-1857-2,412.481

one of these , Ibn Kumayyah , threw so many stones , and with such good
will that two rings of the Prophet's helmet were driven into his cheek ,
and blood poured from his brow down his mustachios , which he wiped with
a cloak to prevent the drops falling to the ground .
BURTON2-1857-2,412.482

Then Utbah bin Abi Wakkas hurled a stone at him , which , splitting his
lower lip , <P_413> knocked out one of his front teeth .
BURTON2-1857-2,413.483

On the left of the Mihrab , inserted low down in the wall , is a square
stone , upon which Shaykh Hamid showed me the impression of a tooth :
BURTON2-1857-2,413.484

he kissed it with peculiar reverence , BURTON2-1857-2,413.485

and so did I . BURTON2-1857-2,413.486

But the boy Mohammed being by me objurgated - for I remarked in him a
jaunty demeanour combined with neglectfulness of ceremonies - saluted it
sulkily , muttering the while hints about the holiness of his birthplace
exempting him from the trouble of stooping . BURTON2-1857-2,413.487

Already he had appeared at the Haram without his Jubbah , and with
ungirt loins , - in waistcoat and shirt sleeves .
BURTON2-1857-2,413.488

Moreover he had conducted himself indecorously by nudging Shaykh Hamid's
sides during divine service . BURTON2-1857-2,413.489

Feeling that the youth's " moral man " was , like his physical , under
my charge , and determined to arrest a course of conduct which must have
ended in obtaining for me , the master , the reputation of a " son of
Belial , " I insisted upon his joining us in the customary two-bow
prayers . BURTON2-1857-2,413.490

And Saad the Devil taking my side of the question with his usual
alacrity when a disturbance was in prospect , the youth found it
necessary to yield . BURTON2-1857-2,413.491

After this little scene , Shaykh Hamid pointed out a sprawling
inscription blessing the companions of the Prophet .
BURTON2-1857-2,413.492

The unhappy Abubekr's name had been half effaced by some fanatic Shiah ,
a circumstance which seemed to arouse all the evil in my companions'
nature , BURTON2-1857-2,413.493

and looking close at the wall I found a line of Persian verse to this
effect : " I am weary of my life <paren> Umr <$$paren> , because it
bears the name of Umar . " BURTON2-1857-2,413.494

<P_414>

We English wanderers are beginning to be shamed out of our habit of
scribbling names and nonsense in noted spots . BURTON2-1857-2,414.496

Yet the practice is both classical and oriental .
BURTON2-1857-2,414.497

The Greeks and Persians left their marks everywhere , as Egypt shows ,
BURTON2-1857-2,414.498

and the paws of the Sphinx bear scratches which , being interpreted ,
are found to be the same manner of trash as that written upon the
remains of Thebes in A.D. 1853 . BURTON2-1857-2,414.499

And Easterns appear never to enter a building with a white wall without
inditing upon it platitudes in verse and prose . BURTON2-1857-2,414.500

Influenced by these considerations , I drew forth a pencil
BURTON2-1857-2,414.501

and inscribed in the Kubbat el Sanaya , {COM:arabic_omitted} " Abdullah
, the servant of Allah . " BURTON2-1857-2,414.502

<paren> A.H. 1269 . <$$paren> BURTON2-1857-2,414.503

Issuing from the dome we turned a few paces to the left ,
BURTON2-1857-2,414.504

passed northwards , BURTON2-1857-2,414.505

and thus blessed the Martyrs of Ohod : BURTON2-1857-2,414.506

" Peace be upon ye , O Martyrs ! BURTON2-1857-2,414.507

Peace be upon ye , O blessed ! ye pious ! ye pure ! who fought upon
Allah's path the good fight , who worshipped your Lord until He brought
you to certainty . BURTON2-1857-2,414.508

Peace be upon you of whom Allah said <paren> viz. in the Koran
<$$paren> ' Verily repute not them slain on God's path <paren> <font>
i.e. <$$font> warring with Infidels <$$paren> ; BURTON2-1857-2,414.509

nay , rather they are alive , BURTON2-1857-2,414.510

and there is no fear upon them , BURTON2-1857-2,414.511

nor are they sorrowful ! ' BURTON2-1857-2,414.512

Peace be upon ye , O Martyrs <P_415> of Ohod ! one and all , and the
mercy of Allah and his blessings . " BURTON2-1857-2,415.513

Then again we moved a few paces forward BURTON2-1857-2,415.514

and went through a similar ceremony , supposing ourselves to be in the
cave that sheltered the Prophet . After which , returning towards the
torrent-bed by the way we came , we stood a small distance from a cupola
called Kubbat el Masra . BURTON2-1857-2,415.515

It resembles that of the " Front-@ @teeth , " BURTON2-1857-2,415.516

and notes , as its name proves , the place where the gallant Hamzah fell
by the spear of Wahshi the slave . BURTON2-1857-2,415.517

We faced towards <P_416> it BURTON2-1857-2,416.518

and finished the ceremonies of this Ziyarat by a Supplication , the
Testification , and the Fatihah . BURTON2-1857-2,416.519

In the evening I went with my friends to the Haram .
BURTON2-1857-2,416.520

The minaret galleries were hung with lamps , BURTON2-1857-2,416.521

and the inside of the temple was illuminated . BURTON2-1857-2,416.522

It was crowded with Hajis , amongst whom were many women , a
circumstance which struck me from its being unusual .
BURTON2-1857-2,416.523

Some pious pilgrims , who had duly paid for the privilege , were perched
upon ladders trimming wax candles of vast dimensions ,
BURTON2-1857-2,416.524

others were laying up for themselves rewards in Paradise , by performing
the same office to the lamps ; BURTON2-1857-2,416.525

many were going through the ceremonies of Ziyarat ,
BURTON2-1857-2,416.526

and not a few were sitting in different parts of the Mosque apparently
overwhelmed with emotion . BURTON2-1857-2,416.527

The boys and the beggars were inspired with fresh energy ,
BURTON2-1857-2,416.528

the Aghawat were gruffer and surlier than I had ever seen them ,
BURTON2-1857-2,416.529

and the young men about town walked and talked with a freer and an
easier demeanour than usual . BURTON2-1857-2,416.530

My old friends the Persians - there were about 1200 of them in the Hajj
caravan - attracted my attention . BURTON2-1857-2,416.531

The doorkeepers stopped them with curses as they were about to enter ,
BURTON2-1857-2,416.532

and all claimed from each the sum of five piastres , whilst other
Moslems are allowed to enter the Mosque free . BURTON2-1857-2,416.533

Unhappy men ! they had lost all the Shiraz swagger ,
BURTON2-1857-2,416.534

their mustachios drooped pitiably , BURTON2-1857-2,416.535

their eyes would not look any one in the face , BURTON2-1857-2,416.536

and not a head bore a cap stuck upon it crookedly .
BURTON2-1857-2,416.537

Whenever an " Ajami , " whatever might be his rank , stood in the way of
an Arab or a Turk , he was rudely thrust aside , with abuse muttered
loud enough to be heard by all around . BURTON2-1857-2,416.538

All eyes followed them as they went through the ceremonies of Ziyarat ,
especially as they <P_417> approached the tombs of Abubekr and Omar , -
which every man is bound to defile if he can , - and the supposed place
of Fatimah's burial . BURTON2-1857-2,417.539

Here they stood in parties , after praying before the Prophet's window :
BURTON2-1857-2,417.540

one read from a book the pathetic tale of the Lady's life , sorrows ,
and mourning death , whilst the others listened to him with breathless
attention . BURTON2-1857-2,417.541

Sometimes their emotion was too strong to be repressed .
BURTON2-1857-2,417.542

" Ay Fatimah ! Ay Mazlumah ! Way ! way ! - O Fatimah ! O thou
injured one ! Alas ! alas ! " - burst involuntarily from their lips ,
despite the danger of such exclamations , BURTON2-1857-2,417.543

tears trickled down their hairy cheeks , BURTON2-1857-2,417.544

and their brawny bosoms heaved with sobs . BURTON2-1857-2,417.545

A strange sight it was to see rugged fellows , mountaineers perhaps , or
the fierce Iliyat of the plains , sometimes weeping silently like
children , sometimes shrieking like hysteric girls , and utterly
careless to conceal a grief so coarse and grisly , at the same time so
true and real , that we knew not how to behold it .
BURTON2-1857-2,417.546

Then the Satanic scowls with which they passed by or pretended to pray
at the hated Omar's tomb ! BURTON2-1857-2,417.547

With what curses their hearts are belying those mouths full of blessings
! BURTON2-1857-2,417.548

How they are internally canonising Fayruz , and praying for his eternal
happiness in the presence of the murdered man ! BURTON2-1857-2,417.549

Sticks and stones , however , and not unfrequently the knife and the
sabre , have taught them the hard lesson of disciplining their feelings
, BURTON2-1857-2,417.550

and nothing but a furious contraction of the brow , a roll of the eye ,
intensely vicious , and a twitching of the muscles about the region of
the mouth , denotes the wild storm of wrath within .
BURTON2-1857-2,417.551

They generally , too , manage to discharge some part of their passion in
words . BURTON2-1857-2,417.552

" Hail Omar thou hog ! " exclaims some fanatic Madani as he passes by
the heretic - a demand more outraging than requiring a red-hot ,
black-north Protestant to bless the <P_418> Pope .
BURTON2-1857-2,418.553

" O Allah ! <font> hell <$$font> him ! " meekly responds the Persian ,
changing the benediction to a curse most intelligible to , and most
delicious in , his fellows' ears . BURTON2-1857-2,418.554

I found an evening hour in the steamy heat of the Haram equal to
half_a_dozen afternoons ; BURTON2-1857-2,418.555

and left it resolved never to revisit it till the Hajj departed from El
Medinah . BURTON2-1857-2,418.556

It was only prudent not to see much of the Ajamis ;
BURTON2-1857-2,418.557

and as I did so somewhat ostentatiously , my companions discovered that
the Hajj Abdullah , having slain many of those heretics in some war or
other , was avoiding them to escape retaliation .
BURTON2-1857-2,418.558

In proof of my generalistic qualities , the rolling down of the water
jar upon the heads of the Maghribi pilgrims in the " Golden Thread " was
quoted , BURTON2-1857-2,418.559

and all offered to fight for me à l'outrance . BURTON2-1857-2,418.560

I took care not to contradict the report . BURTON2-1857-2,418.561

