<BEGIN_butler-1726-1>

<P_227>

<heading>

Sermon XII . BUTLER-1726-1,227.4

<font> Upon the Love of our Neighbour . BUTLER-1726-1,227.5

Rom. xiii. 9 . BUTLER-1726-1,227.6

And if there be any other Commandment , it is briefly comprehended in
this Saying , namely , Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self .
<$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,227.7

<$$heading>

Having already removed the Prejudices against publick Spirit , or the
Love of our Neighbour , on the Side of private Interest and Self-love ;
I proceed to the particular Explanation of the Precept before us , by
shewing , <font> Who is our Neighbour : In what Sense we are required to
love him as ourselves : The Influence such Love would have upon our
Behaviour in Life : <$$font> And lastly , <font> How this Commandment
comprehends in it all others . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,227.9

<P_228>

I. The Objects and due Extent of this Affection will be understood by
attending to the Nature of it , and to the Nature and Circumstances of
Mankind in this World . BUTLER-1726-1,228.11

The Love of our Neighbour is the same with Charity , Benevolence , or
Good-will : BUTLER-1726-1,228.12

It is an Affection to the Good and Happiness of our Fellow-creatures .
BUTLER-1726-1,228.13

This implies in it a Disposition to produce Happiness :
BUTLER-1726-1,228.14

And this is the simple Notion of Goodness , which appears so amiable
{TEXT:aimable} wherever we meet with it . BUTLER-1726-1,228.15

From hence it is easy to see , that the Perfection of Goodness consists
in Love to the whole Universe . BUTLER-1726-1,228.16

Thus we are commanded to be <font> perfect , as our Father which is in
Heaven is perfect <$$font> ; <font> i.e. <$$font> perfect in Goodness
or Benevolence , as the preceding Words determine the Sense to be ; to
make the Object of this Affection as general and extensive , as we are
able . BUTLER-1726-1,228.17

But as Man is so much limited in his Capacity , as so small a Part of
the Creation comes under his Notice and Influence , and as we are not
used to consider things in so general a Way ; it is not to be thought of
, that the Universe should be the Object of <P_229> Benevolence to such
Creatures as we are . BUTLER-1726-1,229.18

Moral Writers have therefore substituted one less general , Mankind .
BUTLER-1726-1,229.19

But this likewise is an Object too general , and very much out of our
View . BUTLER-1726-1,229.20

Therefore Persons more practical have , instead of Mankind , put our
Country ; and made the Principle of Virtue , of Humane Virtue , to
consist in the entire {TEXT:intire} uniform Love of our Country :
BUTLER-1726-1,229.21

And this is what we call a publick Spirit ; which in Men of publick
Stations is the Character of a Patriot . BUTLER-1726-1,229.22

But this is speaking to the upper Part of the World .
BUTLER-1726-1,229.23

Kingdoms and Governments are large ; BUTLER-1726-1,229.24

and the Sphere of Action of far the greatest Part of Mankind is much
narrower than the Government they live under : BUTLER-1726-1,229.25

Or however , common Men do not consider their Actions as affecting the
whole Community of which they are Members . BUTLER-1726-1,229.26

There plainly is wanting a less general and nearer Object of Benevolence
for the Bulk of Men , than that of their Country . BUTLER-1726-1,229.27

Therefore the Scripture , not being a Book of Theory and Speculation ,
but a plain Rule of Life for Mankind , has with the utmost possible
Propriety put the Principle of Virtue upon the Love of our Neighbour ;
which is that Part of the <P_230> Universe , that Part of Mankind , that
Part of our Country , which comes under our immediate Notice ,
Acquaintance and Influence , and with which we have to do .
BUTLER-1726-1,230.28

This is plainly the true Account or Reason , why our Saviour places the
Principle of Virtue in the Love of our <font> Neighbour <$$font> ;
BUTLER-1726-1,230.29

and the Account itself shows who are comprehended under that Relation .
BUTLER-1726-1,230.30

II. Let us now consider in what Sense we are commanded to love our
Neighbour <font> as ourselves . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,230.31

This Precept , in its first Delivery by our Saviour , is thus introduced
: BUTLER-1726-1,230.32

<font> Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart , with all
thy Soul , and with all thy Strength ; and thy Neighbour as thy self .
<$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,230.33

These very different Manners of Expression do not lead our Thoughts to
the same Measure or Degree of Love , common to both Objects ; but to one
, peculiar to each . BUTLER-1726-1,230.34

Supposing then , which is to be supposed , a distinct Meaning and
Propriety in the Words , <font> as thyself <$$font> ; the Precept we are
considering will admit of any of these Senses : That we bear the <font>
same Kind <$$font> of Affection to our Neighbour , as we do to ourselves
: Or , that the Love we bear to our Neighbour should have <font> some
certain Proportion or other <$$font> to Self-love : <P_231> Or , lastly
, that it should bear the particular Proportion of <font> Equality
<$$font> , that <font> it be in the same Degree . <$$font>
BUTLER-1726-1,231.35

<font> First , <$$font> The Precept may be understood as requiring only
, that we have the <font> same Kind <$$font> of Affection to our
Fellow-creatures , as to ourselves : That , as every Man has the
Principle of Self-love , which disposes him to avoid Misery , and
consult his own Happiness ; so we should have the Affection of Good-will
to our Neighbour , and that it should influence us to have the same Kind
of Regard to him . BUTLER-1726-1,231.36

This at least must be commanded : BUTLER-1726-1,231.37

And this will not only prevent our being injurious to him ,
BUTLER-1726-1,231.38

but will also put us upon promoting his Good . BUTLER-1726-1,231.39

There are Blessings in Life , which we share in common with others ;
Peace , Plenty , Freedom , healthful Seasons . BUTLER-1726-1,231.40

But real Benevolence to our Fellow-creatures would give us the Notion of
a common Interest in a stricter Sense : BUTLER-1726-1,231.41

For in the Degree we love another , his Interest , his Joys and Sorrows
, are our own . BUTLER-1726-1,231.42

It is from Self-love that we form the Notion of private Good , and
consider it as our own : BUTLER-1726-1,231.43

Love of our Neighbour would teach us thus to appropriate to ourselves
his Good and Well-fare ; to consider ourselves as having <P_232> a real
Share in his Happiness . BUTLER-1726-1,232.44

Thus the Principle of Benevolence would be an Advocate within our own
Breasts , to take care of the Interests of our Fellow-Creatures in all
the interfering and Competitions which can@ @not but be , from the
Imperfection of our Nature , and the State we are in .
BUTLER-1726-1,232.45

It would likewise , in some Measure , lessen that interfering ; and
hinder Men from forming so strong a Notion of private Good , exclusive
of the Good of others , as we commonly do . BUTLER-1726-1,232.46

Thus , as the private Affection makes us in a peculiar Manner sensible
of Humanity , Justice , or Injustice , when exercised towards ourselves
; Love of our Neighbour would give us the same Kind of Sensibility in
his Behalf . BUTLER-1726-1,232.47

This would be the greatest Security of our uniform Obedience to that
most equitable Rule ; <font> Whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto
you , do ye even so unto them . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,232.48

All this is indeed no more than that we should have a real Love to our
Neighbour : BUTLER-1726-1,232.49

But then , which is to be observed , the Words , <font> as thy self ,
<$$font> express this in the most distinct Manner , BUTLER-1726-1,232.50

and determine the Precept to relate to the Affection itself .
BUTLER-1726-1,232.51

The Advantage , which this Principle of Benevolence has over <P_233>
other remote Considerations , is that it is itself the Temper of Virtue
; and likewise , that it is the chief , nay the only effectual Security
of our performing the several Offices of Kindness , we owe to our
Fellow-creatures . BUTLER-1726-1,233.52

When from distant Considerations Men resolve upon any thing to which
they have no liking , or perhaps an Averseness , they are perpetually
finding out Evasions and Excuses ; which need never be wanting , if
People look for them : BUTLER-1726-1,233.53

And they equivocate with themselves in the plainest Cases in the World .
BUTLER-1726-1,233.54

This may be in respect to single determinate Acts of Virtue :
BUTLER-1726-1,233.55

But it comes in much more , where the Obligation is to a general Course
of Behaviour ; and most of all , if it be such as can@ @not be reduced
to fixed determinate Rules . BUTLER-1726-1,233.56

This Observation may account for the Diversity of the Expression , in
that known passage of the Prophet <font> Micah : To do justly , and to
love Mercy . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,233.57

A Man's Heart must be formed to Humanity and Benevolence ,
BUTLER-1726-1,233.58

he must <font> love Mercy , <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,233.59

otherwise he will not act mercifully in any settled Course of Behaviour
. BUTLER-1726-1,233.60

As Consideration of the future Sanctions of Religion is our only
Security of persevering in our Duty , in Cases of great Temptation ;
<P_234> so to get our Heart and Temper formed to a Love and Liking of
what is Good , is absolutely necessary in order to our behaving rightly
in the familiar and daily Intercourses amongst Mankind .
BUTLER-1726-1,234.61

<font> Secondly <$$font> , The Precept before us may be understood to
require , that we love our Neighbour in some certain <font> Proportion
<$$font> or other , <font> according as <$$font> we love ourselves .
BUTLER-1726-1,234.62

And indeed a Man's Character can@ @not be determined by the Love he
bears to his Neighbour , considered absolutely : BUTLER-1726-1,234.63

But the Proportion which this bears to Self-love , whether it be
attended to or not , is the chief thing which forms the Character , and
influences the Actions . BUTLER-1726-1,234.64

For , as the Form of the Body is a Composition of various Parts ; so
likewise our inward Structure is not simple or uniform , but a
Composition of various Passions , Appetites , Affections , together with
Rationality ; including in this last both the Discernment of what is
right , and a Disposition to regulate ourselves by it .
BUTLER-1726-1,234.65

There is greater Variety of Parts in what we call a Character , than
there are Features in a Face ; BUTLER-1726-1,234.66

and the Morality of That is no more determined by one Part , than the
Beauty or Deformity of This is by one single Feature :
BUTLER-1726-1,234.67

<P_235>

Each is to be judged of by all the Parts or Features , not taken singly
, but together . BUTLER-1726-1,235.69

In the inward Frame the various Passions , Appetites , Affections ,
stand in different Respects to each other . BUTLER-1726-1,235.70

The Principles in our Mind may be contradictory , or Checks and Allays
only , or Incentives and Assistants to each other .
BUTLER-1726-1,235.71

And Principles , which in their Nature have no Kind of Contrariety or
Affinity , may yet accidentally be each other's Allays or Incentives .
BUTLER-1726-1,235.72

From hence it comes to pass , that though we were able to look into the
inward Contexture of the Heart , and see with the greatest Exactness in
what Degree any one Principle is in a particular Man ; we could not from
thence determine , how far that Principle would go towards forming the
Character , or what Influence it would have upon the Actions ; unless we
could likewise discern what other Principles prevailed in him , and see
the Proportion which that one bears to the others .
BUTLER-1726-1,235.73

Thus , though two Men should have the Affection of Compassion in the
same Degree exactly ; yet one may have the Principle of Resentment , or
of Ambition so strong in him , as to prevail over that of Compassion ,
and prevent its having any Influence upon his Actions ; <P_236> so that
he may deserve the Character of an hard or cruel Man : Whereas the other
, having Compassion in just the same Degree only , yet having Resentment
or Ambition in a lower Degree , his Compassion may prevail over them ,
so as to Influence his Actions , and to denominate his Temper
compassionate . So that , how strange soever it may appear to People
who do not attend to the thing , yet it is quite manifest , that , when
we say one Man is more Resenting or Compassionate than another , this
does not necessarily imply that one has the Principle of Resentment or
of Compassion stronger than the other . BUTLER-1726-1,236.74

For if the Proportion , which Resentment or Compassion bears to other
inward Principles , is greater in one than in the other ; this is itself
sufficient to denominate one more Resenting or Compassionate than the
other . BUTLER-1726-1,236.75

Further , the whole System as I may speak , of Affections <paren>
including Rationality <$$paren> which constitute the Heart , as this
Word is used in Scripture and on moral Subjects , are each and all of
them stronger in some than in others . BUTLER-1726-1,236.76

Now the Proportion which the two general Affections , Benevolence and
Self-love , bear to each other , according to this Interpretation of the
Text , <P_237> denominates Men's Character as to Virtue .
BUTLER-1726-1,237.77

Suppose then one Man to have the Principle of Benevolence in an higher
Degree than another ; BUTLER-1726-1,237.78

It will not follow from hence , that his general Temper or Character or
Actions will be more Benevolent than the others . BUTLER-1726-1,237.79

For he may have Self-love , as well as other Passions , in such a Degree
as quite to prevail over Benevolence ; so that it may have no Influence
at all upon his Actions : Whereas Benevolence in the other Person ,
though in a lower Degree , may yet be the strongest Principle in his
Heart ; and strong enough to be the Guide of his Actions , so as to
denominate him a good and virtuous Man . BUTLER-1726-1,237.80

The Case is here as in Scales : BUTLER-1726-1,237.81

It is not one Weight , considered in itself , which determines whether
the Scale shall ascend or descend ; BUTLER-1726-1,237.82

but this depends upon the Proportion , which that one Weight hath to the
other . BUTLER-1726-1,237.83

Love of our Neighbour then must bear some Proportion to Self-love ,
BUTLER-1726-1,237.84

and Virtue to be sure consists in the due Proportion .
BUTLER-1726-1,237.85

What this due Proportion is , whether as a Principle in the Mind , or as
exerted in Actions , can be judged of only from our Nature and Condition
in this World . BUTLER-1726-1,237.86

Of the Degree in which Affections and the Principles <P_238> of Action ,
considered in themselves , prevail , we have no Measure :
BUTLER-1726-1,238.87

Let us then proceed to the Course of Behaviour , the Actions they
produce . BUTLER-1726-1,238.88

Both our Nature and Condition require , that each particular Man should
make particular Provision for himself : BUTLER-1726-1,238.89

And the Inquiry , what Proportion Benevolence should have to Self-love ,
when brought down to Practice , will be , what is a competent Care and
Provision for ourselves . BUTLER-1726-1,238.90

And how certain soever it be , that each Man must determine this for
himself ; and how ridiculous soever it would be , for any to attempt to
determine it for another ; yet it is to be observed , that the
Proportion is real ; and that a competent Provision has a Bound ; and
that it can@ @not be all which we can possibly get and keep within our
Grasp , without legal Injustice . BUTLER-1726-1,238.91

Mankind almost universally bring in , Vanity , Supplies for what is
called a Life of Pleasure , Covetousness , or imaginary Notions of
Superiority over others , to determine this Question :
BUTLER-1726-1,238.92

But every one , who desires to act a proper Part in Society , would do
well to consider , how far any of them come in to determine it , in the
Way of Moral Consideration . BUTLER-1726-1,238.93

All <P_239> that can be said is , supposing , what , as the World goes ,
is so much to be supposed that 't@ @is scarce to be mentioned , that
Persons do not neglect what they really owe to Themselves ; the more of
their Care and Thought , and of their Fortune they employ in doing Good
to their Fellow-creatures , the nearer they come up to the Law of
Perfection , BUTLER-1726-1,239.94

<font> Thou Shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self . <$$font>
BUTLER-1726-1,239.95

A Comparison being made in the Text between Self-love and the Love of
our Neighbour ; and it being evident , that the Love of Others which
includes in it all Virtues , must necessarily be in due Proportion to
the Love of ourselves ; these joint Considerations afforded sufficient
Occasion for treating here of that Proportion : BUTLER-1726-1,239.96

It is plainly implied in the Precept , though it should not be thought
the exact Sense of the Words , <font> as thy self . <$$font>
BUTLER-1726-1,239.97

<font> Thirdly , <$$font> If the Words , <font> as thy self , <$$font>
were to be understood of an Equality of Affection ; it wou'd not be
attended with those Consequences , which perhaps may be thought to
follow from it . BUTLER-1726-1,239.98

Suppose a Person to have the same settled Regard to Others , as to
Himself ; that in every deliberate Scheme or Pursuit He took their
Interest into the Account <P_240> in the same Degree as his own , so far
as an Equality of Affection would produce this : BUTLER-1726-1,240.99

Yet He would in fact , and ought to be , much more taken up and employed
about Himself , and his own Concerns ; than about Others , and their
Interests . BUTLER-1726-1,240.100

For , besides the one common Affection toward Himself and his Neighbour
, He would have several other particular Affections , Passions ,
Appetites ; which he could not possibly feel in common both for Himself
and others : BUTLER-1726-1,240.101

Now these Sensations themselves very much employ us ;
BUTLER-1726-1,240.102

and have perhaps as great Influence , as Self-love .
BUTLER-1726-1,240.103

So far indeed as Self-love , and cool Reflection upon what is for our
Interest , would set us on work to gain a Supply of our own several
Wants ; so far the Love of our Neighbour would make us do the same for
him : BUTLER-1726-1,240.104

But the Degree in which we are put upon seeking and making use of the
Means of Gratification , by the feeling of those Affections , Appetites
and Passions , must necessarily be peculiar to ourselves .
BUTLER-1726-1,240.105

That there are particular Passions , <paren> suppose Shame , Resentment
<$$paren> which Men seem to have , and feel in common both for
Themselves and Others , makes no Alteration in Respect to those Passions
and Appetites <P_241> which can@ @not possibly be thus felt in common .
BUTLER-1726-1,241.106

From hence , <paren> and perhaps more things of the like Kind might be
mentioned , <$$paren> it follows , that though there were an Equality of
Affection to both , yet Regards to Ourselves would be more prevalent
than Attention to the Concerns of Others . BUTLER-1726-1,241.107

And from moral Considerations it ought to be so , supposing still the
Equality of Affection commanded ; because we are in a peculiar manner ,
as I may speak , entrusted with ourselves ; and therefore Care of our
own Interests , as well as of our Conduct , particularly belongs to us .
BUTLER-1726-1,241.108

To these things must be added , that moral Obligations can extend no
further than to natural Possibilities . BUTLER-1726-1,241.109

Now we have a Perception of our own Interests , like Consciousness of
our own Existence , which we always carry about with us ; and which , in
its Continuation , Kind , and Degree , seems impossible to be felt in
respect to the Interests of others . BUTLER-1726-1,241.110

From all these Things it fully appears , that though we were to love our
Neighbour in the same Degree , as we love ourselves , so far as this is
possible ; yet the Care of ourselves , of the Individual , would not be
neglected ; <P_242> the apprehended Danger of which seems to be the only
Objection against understanding the Precept in this strict Sense .
BUTLER-1726-1,242.111

III. The general Temper of Mind which the due Love of our Neighbour
would form us to , and the Influence it would have upon our Behaviour in
Life , is now to be considered . BUTLER-1726-1,242.112

The Temper and Behaviour of Charity is explained at large , in that
known Passage of St. <font> Paul : BUTLER-1726-1,242.113

Charity suffereth long , BUTLER-1726-1,242.114

and is kind ; BUTLER-1726-1,242.115

Charity envieth not , BUTLER-1726-1,242.116

doth not behave itself unseemly , BUTLER-1726-1,242.117

seeketh not her own , BUTLER-1726-1,242.118

thinketh no evil , BUTLER-1726-1,242.119

beareth all things , BUTLER-1726-1,242.120

believeth all things , BUTLER-1726-1,242.121

hopeth all things . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,242.122

As to the Meaning of the Expressions , <font> seeketh not her own ,
thinketh no evil , believeth all things ; <$$font> however those
Expressions may be explained away , this Meekness , and , in some Degree
, Easiness of Temper , Readiness to forego our Right for the Sake of
Peace as well as in the Way of Compassion , Freedom from Mistrust , and
Disposition to believe well of our Neighbour , this general Temper , I
say , accompanies and is plainly the Effect of Love and Good-will .
BUTLER-1726-1,242.123

And though such is the World in which we live , <P_243> that Experience
and Knowledge of it , not only may , but must beget in us greater Regard
to ourselves , and Doubtfulness of the Characters of others , than is
natural to Mankind ; yet these ought not to be carried further than the
Nature and Course of things make necessary . BUTLER-1726-1,243.124

It is still true , even in the present State of things , bad as it is ,
that a real good Man had rather be deceived , than be suspicious ; had
rather forego his known Right , than run the Venture of doing even a
hard thing . BUTLER-1726-1,243.125

This is the general Temper of that Charity , of which the Apostle
asserts , that if he had it not , giving his <font> Body to be burned
would avail him nothing <$$font> ; and which , he says , <font> shall
never fail . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,243.126

The happy Influence of this Temper extends to every different Relation
and Circumstance in Humane Life . BUTLER-1726-1,243.127

It plainly renders a Man better , more to be desired , as to all the
Respects and Relations we can stand in to each other .
BUTLER-1726-1,243.128

The benevolent Man is disposed to make use of all external Advantages in
such a Manner , as shall contribute to the Good of others , as well as
to his own Satisfaction . BUTLER-1726-1,243.129

His own Satisfaction consists in this . BUTLER-1726-1,243.130

He will be easy and kind <P_244> to his Dependents {TEXT:Dependants} ,
compassionate to the Poor and Distressed , friendly to all with whom he
has to do . BUTLER-1726-1,244.131

This includes the good Parent , Master , Magistrate :
BUTLER-1726-1,244.132

And such a Behaviour would plainly make Dependence {TEXT:Dependance} ,
Inferiority , and even Servitude , easy . So that a good or charitable
Man of Superior Rank in Wisdom , Fortune , Authority , is a common
Blessing to the Place he lives in ; BUTLER-1726-1,244.133

Happiness grows under his Influence . BUTLER-1726-1,244.134

This good Principle in Inferiors {TEXT:Inferiours} would discover itself
in paying Respect , Gratitude , Obedience , as due .
BUTLER-1726-1,244.135

It were therefore me@ @thinks one just way of trying one's own Character
, to ask ourselves , Am I in reality a better Master or Servant , a
better Friend , a better Neighbour , than such and such Persons ; whom ,
perhaps I may think , not to deserve the Character of Virtue and
Religion so much as my self ? BUTLER-1726-1,244.136

And as to the Spirit of Party , which unhappily prevails amongst Mankind
, whatever are the Distictions which serve for a Supply to it , some or
other of which have obtained in all Ages and Countries ; one , who is
thus friendly to his Kind , will immediately make due Allowances for it
, as what can@ @not but be amongst such Creatures <P_245> as Men , in
such a World as this . BUTLER-1726-1,245.137

And as Wrath and Fury and Overbearing upon these Occasions proceed , as
I may speak , from Men's feeling only on their own Side ; so a common
Feeling , for others as well as for ourselves , would render us sensible
to this Truth , which it is strange can have so little Influence ; that
we ourselves differ from others , just as much as they do from us .
BUTLER-1726-1,245.138

I put the Matter in this Way , because it can scarce be expected that
the Generality of Men should see , that those things , which are made
the Occasions of Dissention and fomenting the Party-Spirit , are really
nothing at all : BUTLER-1726-1,245.139

But it may be expected from all People , how much soever they are in
earnest about their respective Peculiarities , that Humanity , and
common Good-will to their Fellow-creatures , should moderate and
restrain that wretched Spirit . BUTLER-1726-1,245.140

This good Temper of Charity likewise would prevent Strife and Enmity
arising from other Occasions : BUTLER-1726-1,245.141

It would prevent our giving just Cause of Offence , and our taking it
without Cause . BUTLER-1726-1,245.142

And in Cases of real Injury , a good Man will make all the Allowances
which are to be made ; BUTLER-1726-1,245.143

and , without any Attempts of Retaliation , he will only <P_246> consult
his own Security for the future , against Injustice and Wrong .
BUTLER-1726-1,246.144

IV. I proceed to consider lastly , what is affirmed of the Precept now
explained , that it comprehends in it all others ; <font> i.e. <$$font>
that to love our Neighbour as ourselves includes in it all Virtues .
BUTLER-1726-1,246.145

Now the Way in which every Maxim of Conduct , or general Speculative
Assertion , when it is to be explained at large , should be treated , is
, to show what are the particular Truths which were designed to be
comprehended under such a general Observation , how far it is strictly
true ; and then the Limitations , Restrictions , and Exceptions , if
there be Exceptions , with which it is to be understood .
BUTLER-1726-1,246.146

But it is only the former of these , namely , how far the Assertion in
the Text holds , and the Ground of the Pre-eminence assigned to the
Precept of it , which in strictness comes into our Present Consideration
. BUTLER-1726-1,246.147

However , in almost every thing that is said , there is somewhat to be
understood beyond what is explicitly laid down , and which we of Course
supply ; somewhat , I mean , which would not be commonly called a
Restriction or Limitation . BUTLER-1726-1,246.148

Thus , when Benevolence is said to be the Sum of Virtue , it is not
<P_247> spoken of as a blind Propension , but as a Principle in
reasonable Creatures , and so to be directed by their Reason :
BUTLER-1726-1,247.149

For Reason and Reflection comes into our Notion of a moral Agent .
BUTLER-1726-1,247.150

And That will lead us to consider distant Consequences , as well as the
immediate Tendency of an Action : BUTLER-1726-1,247.151

It will teach us , that the Care of some Persons , suppose Children and
Families , is particularly committed to our Charge by Nature and
Providence ; as also that there are other Circumstances , suppose
Friendship or former Obligations , which require that we do good to some
, preferably to others . BUTLER-1726-1,247.152

Reason , considered merely {TEXT:meerly} as subservient to Benevolence ,
as assisting to produce the greatest Good , will teach us to have
particular Regard to these Relations and Circumstances ; because it is
plainly for the Good of the World that they should be regarded .
BUTLER-1726-1,247.153

And as there are numberless Cases , in which , notwithstanding
Appearances , we are not competent Judges , whether a particular Action
will upon the Whole do Good or Harm ; Reason in the same Way will teach
us to be cautious how we act in these Cases of Uncertainty .
BUTLER-1726-1,247.154

It will suggest to our Consideration , which is the safer Side ; how
liable <P_248> we are to be led wrong by Passion and private Interest ;
and what Regard is due to Laws , and the Judgment of Mankind .
BUTLER-1726-1,248.155

All these things must come into Consideration , were it only in order to
determine which way of acting is likely to produce the greatest Good .
BUTLER-1726-1,248.156

Thus , upon Supposition that it were in the strictest Sense true ,
without Limitation , that Benevolence includes in it all Virtues ; yet
Reason must come in as its Guide and Director , in order to attain its
own End , the End of Benevolence , the greatest publick Good .
BUTLER-1726-1,248.157

Reason then being thus included , let us now consider the Truth of the
Assertion itself . BUTLER-1726-1,248.158

<font> First <$$font> , It is manifest that nothing can be of
Consequence to Mankind or any Creature , but Happiness .
BUTLER-1726-1,248.159

This then is all which any Person can , in strictness of speaking , be
said to have a Right to . BUTLER-1726-1,248.160

We can therefore <font> owe no Man any thing , <$$font> but only to
further and promote his Happiness , according to our Abilities .
BUTLER-1726-1,248.161

And therefore a Disposition and Endeavour to do Good to all with whom we
have to do , in the Degree and Manner which the different Relations we
stand in to them require , is a Discharge <P_249> of all the Obligations
we are under to them . BUTLER-1726-1,249.162

As Humane Nature is not one simple uniform Thing , but a Composition of
various Parts ; Body , Spirit , Appetites , particular Passions and
Affections ; for each of which reasonable Self-love would lead Men to
have due Regard , and make suitable Provision : So Society consists of
various Parts , to which we stand in different Respects and Relations ;
BUTLER-1726-1,249.163

and just Benevolence would as surely lead us to have due Regard to each
of these , and behave as the respective Relations require .
BUTLER-1726-1,249.164

Good-will and right Behaviour towards our Fellow-creatures , are in a
Manner the same : Only that the former expresseth the Principle as it is
in the Mind ; the latter , the Principle as it were become external ,
<font> i.e. <$$font> exerted in Actions . BUTLER-1726-1,249.165

And so far as Temperance , Sobriety , and Moderation in sensual
Pleasures , and the contrary Vices , have any Respect to our
Fellow-creatures , any Influence upon their Quiet , Welfare , and
Happiness ; <paren> as they always have a real , and often a near
Influence upon it ; <$$paren> so far it is manifest those Virtues may be
produced by the Love of our Neighbour , and that the contrary Vices
<P_250> would be prevented by it . BUTLER-1726-1,250.166

Indeed , if Men's Regard to themselves will not restrain them from
Excess ; it may be thought little probable , that their Love to others
will be sufficient : BUTLER-1726-1,250.167

But the Reason is , that their Love to others is not , any more than
their Regard to themselves , just , and in its due Degree .
BUTLER-1726-1,250.168

There are manifest Instances of Persons kept sober and temperate from
Regard to their Affairs , and the Welfare of those who depend upon them
. BUTLER-1726-1,250.169

And it is obvious to every one , that habitual Excess , a dissolute
Course of Life , implies a general neglect of the Duties we owe to our
Friends , our Families and our Country . BUTLER-1726-1,250.170

From hence it is manifest that the common Virtues , and the common Vices
of Mankind , may be traced up to Benevolence , or the want of it .
BUTLER-1726-1,250.171

And this intitles the Precept , <font> Thou Shalt love thy Neighbour as
thy self <$$font> , to the Preeminence given to it ;
BUTLER-1726-1,250.172

and is a Justification of the Apostle's {TEXT:Apostles} Assertion , that
all other Commandments are comprehended in it ; whatever Cautions and
Restrictions there are , which might <P_251> require to be considered ,
if we were to state particularly and at length , what is <P_252> Virtue
and right Behaviour in Mankind . BUTLER-1726-1,251.173

But , <font> Secondly <$$font> , It might be added , that in a higher
and more general Way of Consideration , leaving out the particular
Nature of Creatures , and the particular Circumstances in which they are
placed , Benevolence in the strictest Sense includes in it all that is
Good and Worthy ; all that is Good , which we have any Notion of .
BUTLER-1726-1,251.174

We have no Conception of any moral Attribute in the supreme
{TEXT:supream} Being , but what may be resolved up into Goodness .
BUTLER-1726-1,251.175

And if we consider a reasonable Creature or moral Agent , without Regard
to the particular Relations and Circumstances in which he is placed ; we
can@ @not conceive any thing else to come in , towards determining
whether he is to be ranked in an higher or lower Class of virtuous
Beings , but the higher or lower Degree in which that Principle , and
what is manifestly connected with it , prevail in him .
BUTLER-1726-1,251.176

That which we more strictly call Piety , or the Love of God , and which
is an essential <P_253> Part of a right Temper , some may perhaps
imagine no Way connected with Benevolence : BUTLER-1726-1,253.177

Yet surely they must be connected , if there be indeed in Being an
Object infinitely Good . BUTLER-1726-1,253.178

Humane Nature is so constituted , that every good Affection implies the
Love of itself ; <font> i.e. <$$font> becomes the Object of a new
Affection in the same Person . BUTLER-1726-1,253.179

Thus , to be righteous implies in it the Love of Righteousness ; to be
benevolent the Love of Benevolence ; to be good the Love of Goodness ;
whether this Righteousness , Benevolence , or Goodness , be viewed as in
our own Mind , or in another's : BUTLER-1726-1,253.180

And the Love of God as a Being perfectly Good , is the Love of perfect
Goodness contemplated in a Being or Person . BUTLER-1726-1,253.181

Thus Morality and Religion , Virtue and Piety , will at last necessarily
co-incide , run up into one and the same Point , BUTLER-1726-1,253.182

and <font> Love <$$font> will be in all Senses <font> the End of the
Commandment . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,253.183

<font> O Almighty God , inspire us with this divine Principle ;
BUTLER-1726-1,253.184

kill in us all the Seeds of Envy and Ill-will ; BUTLER-1726-1,253.185

and help us , by cultivating within ourselves the Love of our Neighbour
, to improve in the Love of Thee . BUTLER-1726-1,253.186

<P_254>

Thou hast placed us in various Kindreds , Friendships , and Relations ,
as the School of Discipline for our Affections : BUTLER-1726-1,254.188

Help us , by the due Exercise of them , to improve to Perfection ; till
all partial Affection be lost in that intire universal one , and Thou ,
O God , Shalt <$$font> be all in all . BUTLER-1726-1,254.189

<P_255>

<heading>

Sermon XIII . BUTLER-1726-1,255.192

<font> Upon the Love of God . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,255.193

Matth. xxii. 37 . BUTLER-1726-1,255.194

<font> Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart , and with
all thy Soul , and with all thy Mind . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,255.195

<$$heading>

Every Body knows , you therefore need only just be put in Mind , that
there is such a Thing , as having so great Horror of one Extream , as to
run insensibly and of Course into the contrary ; and that a Doctrine's
having been a Shelter for Enthusiasm , or made to serve the Purposes of
Superstition , is no Proof of the Falsity of it : Truth or Right being
somewhat real in itself , and so not to be judged of by its <P_256>
Liableness to Abuse , or by its supposed Distance from or Nearness to
Error . BUTLER-1726-1,256.197

It may be sufficient to have mentioned this in general , without taking
Notice of the particular Extravagancies , which have been vented under
the Pretence or Endeavour of explaining the Love of God ; or how
manifestly we are got into the contrary Extream , under the Notion of a
reasonable Religion ; so very reasonable , as to have nothing to do with
the Heart and Affections , if these Words signify any thing but the
Faculty by which we discern Speculative Truth . BUTLER-1726-1,256.198

By the Love of God , I would understand all those Regards , all those
Affections of Mind , which are due immediately to him from such a
Creature as Man , and which rest in him as their End .
BUTLER-1726-1,256.199

As this does not include servile Fear ; so neither will any other
Regards , how reasonable soever , which respect any thing out of or
besides the Perfection of the divine Nature , come into Consideration
here . BUTLER-1726-1,256.200

But all Fear is not excluded , because his Displeasure is itself the
natural proper Object of Fear . BUTLER-1726-1,256.201

Reverence , Ambition of his Love and Approbation , Delight in the Hope
or Consciousness of it , come likewise into this Definition of the
<P_257> Love of God ; because he is the natural Object of all those
Affections or Movements of Mind , as really as he is the Object of the
Affection , which is in the strictest Sense called Love ;
BUTLER-1726-1,257.202

and all of them equally rest in him , as their End .
BUTLER-1726-1,257.203

And they may all be understood to be implied in these Words of our
Saviour , without putting any Force upon them ; BUTLER-1726-1,257.204

for he is speaking of the Love of God and our Neighbour , as containing
the whole of Piety and Virtue . BUTLER-1726-1,257.205

It is plain that the Nature of Man is so constituted , as to feel
certain Affections upon the Sight or Contemplation of certain Objects .
BUTLER-1726-1,257.206

Now the very Notion of Affection implies resting in its Object as an End
. BUTLER-1726-1,257.207

And the particular Affection to good Characters , Reverence and moral
Love of them , is natural to all those who have any Degree of real
Goodness in themselves . BUTLER-1726-1,257.208

This will be illustrated by the Description of a perfect Character in a
Creature ; and by considering the Manner , in which a good Man in his
Presence would be affected towards such a Character .
BUTLER-1726-1,257.209

He would of Course feel the Affections of Love , Reverence , Desire of
his Approbation , Delight in the Hope or Consciousness of it .
BUTLER-1726-1,257.210

And surely all this is applicable , BUTLER-1726-1,257.211

<P_258>

and may be brought up to that Being , who is infinitely more than an
adequate Object of all those Affections ; whom we are commanded to
<font> Love with all our Heart , with all our Soul , and with all our
Mind . <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,258.213

And of these Regards towards Almighty God , some are more particularly
suitable to and becoming so imperfect a Creature as Man , in this mortal
State we are passing through ; BUTLER-1726-1,258.214

and some of them , and perhaps other Exercises of the Mind , will be the
Employment and Happiness of good Men in a State of Perfection .
BUTLER-1726-1,258.215

This is a general View of what the following Discourse will contain .
BUTLER-1726-1,258.216

And it is manifest the Subject is a real one : BUTLER-1726-1,258.217

There is nothing in it enthusiastical or unreasonable .
BUTLER-1726-1,258.218

And if it be indeed at all a Subject , it is one of the utmost
Importance . BUTLER-1726-1,258.219

As Mankind have a Faculty by which they discern speculative Truth ; so
we have various Affections towards external Objects .
BUTLER-1726-1,258.220

Understanding and Temper , Reason and Affection , are as distinct Ideas
, as Reason and Hunger ; BUTLER-1726-1,258.221

and one would think could no more be confounded . BUTLER-1726-1,258.222

It is by Reason that we get the Ideas of several Objects of our
Affections : BUTLER-1726-1,258.223

But in these Cases Reason and <P_259> Affection are no more the same ,
than Sight of a particular Object , and the Pleasure or Uneasiness
consequent thereupon , are the same . BUTLER-1726-1,259.224

Now as Reason tends to and rests in the Discernment of Truth , the
Object of it ; so the very Nature of Affection consists in tending
towards , and resting in , its Object as an End . BUTLER-1726-1,259.225

We do indeed often in common Language say , that things are loved ,
desired , esteemed , not for themselves , but for somewhat further ,
somewhat out of and beyond them : BUTLER-1726-1,259.226

Yet , in these Cases , whoever will attend will see , that these Things
are not in Reality the Objects of the Affections <font>
{COM:sic_font_change} , i.e. <$$font> are not loved , desired ,
esteemed , but the somewhat further and beyond them .
BUTLER-1726-1,259.227

If we have no Affections which rest in what are called their Objects ,
then what is called Affection , Love , Desire , Hope , in Humane Nature
, is only an uneasiness in being at Rest ; and unquiet Disposition to
Action , Progress , Pursuit , without End or Meaning .
BUTLER-1726-1,259.228

But if there be any such thing as Delight in the Company of one Person ,
rather than of another ; whether in the Way of Friendship , or Mirth and
Entertainment , it is all one , if it be without respect to Fortune ,
Honour , or increasing our Stores <P_260> of Knowledge , or anything
beyond the present time ; BUTLER-1726-1,260.229

here is an Instance of an Affection absolutely resting in its Object as
its End , and being gratified , in the same Way as the Appetite of
Hunger is satisfied with Food . BUTLER-1726-1,260.230

Yet nothing is more common than to hear it asked , What Advantage a Man
hath in such a Course , suppose of Study , particular Friendships , or
in any other ; BUTLER-1726-1,260.231

nothing , I say , is more common than to hear such a Question put in a
Way which supposes no Gain , Advantage or Interest , but as a Means to
somewhat further : BUTLER-1726-1,260.232

And if so , then there is no such thing at all as real Interest , Gain
or Advantage . BUTLER-1726-1,260.233

This is the same Absurdity with respect to Life , as an infinite Series
of Effects without a Cause is in Speculation . BUTLER-1726-1,260.234

The Gain , Advantage or Interest consists in the Delight itself ,
arising from such a Faculty's {TEXT:Faculties} having its Object :
BUTLER-1726-1,260.235

Neither is there any such thing as Happiness or Enjoyment , but what
arises from hence . BUTLER-1726-1,260.236

The Pleasures of Hope and of Reflection are not Exceptions : The former
being only this Happiness anticipated ; the latter , the same Happiness
enjoyed over again after its Time . BUTLER-1726-1,260.237

And even the general Expectation of future Happiness <P_261> can afford
Satisfaction , only as it is a present Object to the Principle of
Self-love . BUTLER-1726-1,261.238

It was doubtless intended , that Life should be very much a Pursuit to
the Gross of Man_kind : BUTLER-1726-1,261.239

But this is carried so much further than is reasonable , that what gives
immediate Satisfaction , <font> i.e. <$$font> our present Interest , is
scarce considered as our Interest at all . BUTLER-1726-1,261.240

It is Inventions which have only a remote Tendency towards Enjoyment ,
perhaps but a remote Tendency towards gaining the Means only of
Enjoyment , which are chiefly spoken of as useful to the World .
BUTLER-1726-1,261.241

And though this way of thinking were just with respect to the imperfect
State we are now in , where we know so little of Satisfaction without
Satiety ; yet it must be guarded against , when we are considering the
Happiness of a State of Perfection ; which Happiness being Enjoyment and
not Hope , must necessarily consist in this , that our Affections have
their Objects , and rest in those Objects as an End , <font> i.e.
<$$font> be satisfied with them . BUTLER-1726-1,261.242

This will further appear in the Sequel of this Discourse .
BUTLER-1726-1,261.243

Of the several Affections , or inward Sensations , which particular
Objects excite in Man , there are some , the having of which implies the
Love of them , when they are <P_262> reflected upon .
BUTLER-1726-1,262.244

This can@ @not be said of all our Affections , Principles , and Motives
of Action . BUTLER-1726-1,262.245

It were ridiculous to assert , that a Man upon Reflection hath the same
Kind of Approbation of the Appetite of Hunger , or the Passion of Fear ,
as he hath of Good-will to his Fellow-creatures . BUTLER-1726-1,262.246

To be a just , a good , a righteuos Man , plainly carries with it a
peculiar Affection to , or Love of Justice , Goodness , Righteousness ,
when these Principles are the Objects of Contemplation .
BUTLER-1726-1,262.247

Now if a Man approves of , or hath an Affection to , any Principle in
and for itself ; incidental things allowed for , it will be the same
whether he views it in his own Mind or in another ; in himself , or in
his Neighbour . BUTLER-1726-1,262.248

This is the Account of our Approbation of , our moral Love and Affection
to good Characters ; which can@ @not but be in those who have any
Degrees of real Goodness in themselves , and who discern and take Notice
of the same Principle in others . BUTLER-1726-1,262.249

From Observation of what passeth within ourselves , our own Actions ,
and the Behaviour of others , the Mind may carry on its Reflections as
far as it pleases ; much beyond what we experience in ourselves , or
discern in our Fellow-creatures . BUTLER-1726-1,262.250

It may go <P_263> on , and consider Goodness as become an uniform
continued Principle of Action , as conducted by Reason , and forming a
Temper and Character absolutely good and perfect , which is in a higher
Sense excellent , and proportionably the Object of Love and Approbation
. BUTLER-1726-1,263.251

Let us then suppose a Creature perfect according to his created Nature :
BUTLER-1726-1,263.252

Let his Form be Humane , and his Capacities not more than equal to those
of the Chief of Men : BUTLER-1726-1,263.253

Goodness shall be his proper Character ; with Wisdom to direct it , and
Power within some certain determined Sphere of Action to exert it .
BUTLER-1726-1,263.254

But Goodness must be the simple actuating Principle within him ; this
being the moral Quality which is amiable , or the immediate Object of
Love as distinct from other Affections of Approbation .
BUTLER-1726-1,263.255

Here then is a finite Object for our Mind to tend towards , to exercise
itself upon : A Creature , perfect according to his Capacity , fixt ,
steady , equally unmoved by weak Pity or more weak Fury and Resentment ;
forming the justest Scheme of Conduct ; going on undisturbed in the
Execution of it , through the several Methods of Severity and Reward ,
towards his End , namely , the general Happiness of all with whom he
hath to do , as <P_264> in itself right and valuable .
BUTLER-1726-1,264.256

This Character , though uniform in itself , in its Principle , yet
exerting itself in different Ways , or considered in different Views ,
may by its appearing Variety move different Affections .
BUTLER-1726-1,264.257

Thus , the Severity of Justice would not affect us in the same Way , as
an Act of Mercy : BUTLER-1726-1,264.258

The adventitious Qualities of Wisdom and Power may be considered in
themselves : BUTLER-1726-1,264.259

And even the Strength of Mind , which this immoveable Goodness supposes
, may likewise be viewed as an Object of Contemplation , distinct from
the Goodness itself . BUTLER-1726-1,264.260

Superior {TEXT:Superiour} Excellence of any Kind , as well as superior
Wisdom and Power , is the Object of Awe and Reverence to all Creatures ,
whatever their moral Chracter be : BUTLER-1726-1,264.261

But so far as Creatures of the lowest Rank were good , so far the View
of this Character , as simply good , must appear amiable to them , be
the Object of , or beget Love . BUTLER-1726-1,264.262

Further , suppose we were conscious , that this superior Person so far
approved of us , that we had nothing servilely to fear from him ; that
he was really our Friend , and kind and good to us in particular , as he
had occasionally Intercourse with us : BUTLER-1726-1,264.263

We must be other Creatures than we are , BUTLER-1726-1,264.264

or we could not but feel the same <P_265> Kind of Satisfaction and
Enjoyment <paren> whatever would be the Degree of it <$$paren> from this
higher Acquaintance , as we feel from common Friendships ; the
Intercourse being real , and the Persons equally present , in both Cases
. BUTLER-1726-1,265.265

We should have a more ardent Desire to be approved by his better
Judgment , and a higher Satisfaction in that Approbation , than any
thing of this Sort which could be felt in respect to common Persons , or
be wrought in us by their Presence . BUTLER-1726-1,265.266

Let us now raise the Character , and suppose this Creature , for we are
still going on with the Supposition of a Creature , our proper Guardian
and Governor {TEXT:Governour} ; that we were in a Progress of Being
towards somewhat further ; and that his Scheme of Government was too
vast for our Capacities to comprehend ; remembering {TEXT:remembring}
still that he is perfectly Good . BUTLER-1726-1,265.267

Wisdom , Power , Goodness , accidentally viewed any_where , would
inspire Reverence , Awe , Love : BUTLER-1726-1,265.268

And as these Affections would be raised in higher or lower Degrees , in
Proportion as we had occasionally more or less Intercourse with the
Creature endued with those Qualities ; so this further Consideration and
Knowledge , that he was our proper Guardian and Governor , would much
more bring <P_266> these Objects and Qualities home to ourselves , teach
us they had a greater respect to us in particular , that we had an
higher Interest in that Wisdom and Power and Goodness .
BUTLER-1726-1,266.269

We should , with Joy , Gratitude , Reverence , Love , Trust , and
Dependence {TEXT:Dependance} , appropriate the Character , as what we
had a right in ; and make our Boast in such our Relation to it .
BUTLER-1726-1,266.270

And the Conclusion of the whole would be , that we should refer
ourselves implicitly to him , and cast ourselves intirely upon him .
BUTLER-1726-1,266.271

As the whole Attention of Life should be to obey his Commands ; so the
highest Enjoyment of it must arise from a Consciousness of his Favour
and Approbation ; from the Contemplation of this Character , and our
Relation to it . BUTLER-1726-1,266.272

A Being who hath these Attributes , who stands in this Relation , and is
thus sensibly present to the Mind , must necessarily be the Object of
these Affections : BUTLER-1726-1,266.273

There is as real a Correspondence between them , as between the lowest
Appetite of Sense and its Object . BUTLER-1726-1,266.274

That this Being is not a Creature , but the Almighty God ; that he is of
infinite Power and Wisdom and Goodness , does not render him less the
Object of Reverence and Love , than he would be if he had those
Attributes <P_267> only in a limited Degree . BUTLER-1726-1,267.275

The Being who made us , and upon whom we intirely depend , is the Object
of some Regards . BUTLER-1726-1,267.276

He hath given us certain Affections of Mind , which correspond to Wisdom
, Power , Goodness , <font> i.e. <$$font> which are raised upon View of
those Qualities . BUTLER-1726-1,267.277

If then he be indeed wise , powerful , good ; he is the natural Object
of those Affections , which he hath endued us with , and which
correspond to those Attributes . BUTLER-1726-1,267.278

That he is infinite in Power , perfect in Wisdom and Goodness , makes no
Alteration , but only that he is the object of those Affections raised
to the highest Pitch . BUTLER-1726-1,267.279

He is not indeed to be discerned by any of our Senses .
BUTLER-1726-1,267.280

<font> I go forward , BUTLER-1726-1,267.281

but he is not there ; BUTLER-1726-1,267.282

and backward , BUTLER-1726-1,267.283

but I can@ @not perceive him : BUTLER-1726-1,267.284

On the left hand where he doth work , BUTLER-1726-1,267.285

but I can@ @not behold him : BUTLER-1726-1,267.286

He hideth himself on the right hand , that I can@ @not see him .
BUTLER-1726-1,267.287

O that I knew where I might find him ! that I might come even to his
Seat ! <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,267.288

But is He indeed afar off ? BUTLER-1726-1,267.289

Does he not fill Heaven and Earth with his Presence ?
BUTLER-1726-1,267.290

The Presence of our Fellow-creatures affects our Senses ,
BUTLER-1726-1,267.291

and our Senses give us the Knowledge of their Presence ; which hath
different <P_268> Kinds of Influence upon us ; Love , Joy , Sorrow ,
Restraint , Encouragement , Reverence . BUTLER-1726-1,268.292

However this Influence is not immediately from our Senses , but from
that Knowledge . BUTLER-1726-1,268.293

Thus suppose a Person neither to see nor hear Another , not {COM:sic} to
know by any of his Senses , but yet certainly to know , that Another was
with him ; BUTLER-1726-1,268.294

this Knowledge might , and in many Cases would , have one or more of the
Effects before-@ @mention'd . BUTLER-1726-1,268.295

It is therefore not only reasonable , but also natural , to be affected
with a Presence , though it be not the Object of our Senses :
BUTLER-1726-1,268.296

Whether it be , or be not , is merely an accidental Circumstance , which
need {TEXT:needs} not come into Consideration : BUTLER-1726-1,268.297

It is the Certainty that He is with us , and we with him , which hath
the Influence . BUTLER-1726-1,268.298

We consider Persons then as present , not only when they are within
Reach of our Senses , but also when we are assured by any other Means
that They are within such a Nearness ; BUTLER-1726-1,268.299

nay , if they are not , we can recall them to our Mind , and be moved
towards them as present : BUTLER-1726-1,268.300

And must He , who is so much more intimately with us , that <font> in
Him we live and move and have our Being , <$$font> be thought too
distant to be the Object of our Affections ? BUTLER-1726-1,268.301

We own and feel the Force <P_269> of amiable and worthy Qualities in our
Fellow-creatures : BUTLER-1726-1,269.302

And can we be insensible to the Contemplation of perfect Goodness ?
BUTLER-1726-1,269.303

Do we reverence the Shadows of Greatness here below ,
BUTLER-1726-1,269.304

are we solicitous {TEXT:sollicitous} about Honour and Esteem and the
Opinion of the World : BUTLER-1726-1,269.305

And shall we not feel the same with respect to Him , whose are Wisdom
and Power in their Original , who <font> is the God of Judgment by whom
Actions are weighed ? <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,269.306

Thus Love , Reverence , Desire of Esteem , every Faculty , every
Affection , tends towards , and is employed about its respective Object
in common Cases : BUTLER-1726-1,269.307

And must the Exercise of them be suspended with Regard to Him alone ,
who is an Object , an infinitiely more than adequate Object , to our
most exalted Faculties ; Him , <font> of whom , and through whom , and
to whom are all things ? <$$font> BUTLER-1726-1,269.308

As we can@ @not remove from this Earth , or change our general Business
on it ; so neither can we alter our real Nature . BUTLER-1726-1,269.309

Therefore no Exercise of the Mind can be recommended , but only the
Exercise of those Faculties you are conscious of .
BUTLER-1726-1,269.310

Religion does not demand new Affections , BUTLER-1726-1,269.311

but only claims the Direction of those you already have , those
Affections you daily feel , though unhappily <P_270> confined to Objects
, not altogether unsuitable , but altogether unequal to them .
BUTLER-1726-1,270.312

We only represent to you the higher , the adequate Objects of those very
Faculties and Affections . BUTLER-1726-1,270.313

Let the Man of Ambition go on still to consider Disgrace as the greatest
Evil ; Honour , as his chief Good . BUTLER-1726-1,270.314

But Disgrace , in whose Estimation ? Honour , in whose Judgment
{COM:missing_punctuation} That is the only Question .
BUTLER-1726-1,270.315

If Shame and Delight in Esteem be spoken of as real , as any settled
Ground of Pain or Pleasure ; both these must be in Proportion to the
supposed Wisdom and Worth of him , by whom we are contemned or esteemed
. BUTLER-1726-1,270.316

Must it then be thought enthusiastical , to speak of a Sensibility of
this Sort , which shall have respect to an unerring Judgment
{TEXT:Judment} , to infinite Wisdom ; when we are assured That unerring
Judgment , This infinite Wisdom does observe upon our Actions ?
BUTLER-1726-1,270.317

'T@ @is the same with respect to the Love of God in the strictest and
most confined Sense . BUTLER-1726-1,270.318

We only offer and represent the highest Object of an Affection ,
supposed already in your Mind . BUTLER-1726-1,270.319

Some Degree of Goodness must be previously supposed ;
BUTLER-1726-1,270.320

This always implies the Love of itself , an Affection to Goodness :
BUTLER-1726-1,270.321

The highest , the adequate Object <P_271> of this Affection , is perfect
Goodness ; which therefore we are to <font> love with all our Heart ,
with all our Soul , and with all our Strength . <$$font>
BUTLER-1726-1,271.322

" Must we then , forgetting our own Interest , as it were go out of
our_selves , and love God for his own Sake ? " BUTLER-1726-1,271.323

No more forget your own Interest , no more go out of yourselves , than
when you prefer one Place , one Prospect , the Conversation of one Man
to that of Another . BUTLER-1726-1,271.324

Does not every Affection necessarily imply , that the Object of it be
itself loved ? BUTLER-1726-1,271.325

If it be not , 't@ @is not the Object of the Affection .
BUTLER-1726-1,271.326

You may and ought if you can , but it is a great Mistake to think you
can , love or fear or hate any Thing , from Consideration that such Love
or Fear or Hatred may be a Means of obtaining Good or avoiding Evil .
BUTLER-1726-1,271.327

But the Question , whether we ought to love God for his Sake or for our
own , being a mere Mistake in Language ; the real Question , which this
is mistaken for , will , I suppose , be answered by observing , that the
Goodness of God already exercised towards us , our present Dependence
{TEXT:Dependance} upon him , and our Expectation of future Benefits ,
ought , and have a natural Tendency , to beget in us the Affection of
Gratitude , and greater Love towards Him , than the same Goodness
<P_272> exercised towards others ; were it only for this Reason , that
every Affection is moved in Proportion to the Sense we have of the
Object of it ; BUTLER-1726-1,272.328

and we can@ @not but have a more lively Sense of Goodness , when
exercised towards ourselves , than when exercised towards others .
BUTLER-1726-1,272.329

I added Expectation of future Benefits , because the Ground of that
Expectation is present Goodness . BUTLER-1726-1,272.330

Thus Almighty God is , and must necessarily be , the Object of different
Affections to all Creatures who can@ @not but consider Him in partial
and different Views . BUTLER-1726-1,272.331

He is in Himself one uniform Being ; simply one , and for ever the same
without <font> Variableness or Shadow of Turning : <$$font>
BUTLER-1726-1,272.332

But his infinite Greatness , His Goodness , His Wisdom , are different
Objects to our Mind . To which is to be added , that from the Changes
in our own Characters together with his Unchangeableness , we can@ @not
but consider ourselves as more or less the Objects of His Approbation ,
and really be so . BUTLER-1726-1,272.333

For if He approves what is Good ; He can@ @not , merely {TEXT:meerly}
from the Unchangeableness of his Nature , approve what is Evil .
BUTLER-1726-1,272.334

Hence must arise more various Movements of Mind , more different Kinds
of Affections : BUTLER-1726-1,272.335

And this greater Variety also <P_273> is just and reasonable in such
Creatures as we are , though it respects a Being simply one , good and
perfect . BUTLER-1726-1,273.336

As some of these Affections are most particularly suitable to so
imperfect a Creature as Man , in this mortal State we are passing
through ; so there may be other Exercises of Mind , or some of these in
higher Degrees , our Employment and Happiness in a State of Perfection .
BUTLER-1726-1,273.337

Consider then our Ignorance , the Imperfection of our Nature , our
Virtue and our Condition in this World , with respect to an infinitely
good and just Being , our Creator and Governor {TEXT:Governour} ; and
you will see what religious Affections of Mind are most particularly
suitable to this mortal State we are passing through .
BUTLER-1726-1,273.338

Though we are not affected with any thing so strongly , as what we
discern with our Senses ; and though our Nature and Condition require ;
that we be much taken up about sensible things ; yet our Reason
convinces us that God is present with us , BUTLER-1726-1,273.339

and we see and feel the Effects of his Goodness : BUTLER-1726-1,273.340

He is therefore the Object of some Regards . BUTLER-1726-1,273.341

The Imperfection of our Virtue , joined with Consideration of his
absolute Rectitude <P_274> or Holiness , will scarce permit that
Perfection of Love , which intirely casts out all Fear :
BUTLER-1726-1,274.342

Yet Consciousness of a real Endeavour to approve ourselves to Him ,
joined with the Consideration of his Goodness , as it quite excludes
servile Dread and Horror , so it is plainly a reasonable Ground for Hope
of his Favour ; BUTLER-1726-1,274.343

and That Goodness is the Object of Love . BUTLER-1726-1,274.344

Neither Fear , nor Hope , nor Love then are excluded :
BUTLER-1726-1,274.345

And one or another of these will prevail , according to the different
views we have of God ; BUTLER-1726-1,274.346

and ought to prevail , according to the Changes we find in our own
Character . BUTLER-1726-1,274.347

There is a Temper of Mind made up of , or which follows from all three ,
Fear , Hope , Love ; namely , Resignation to the Divine Will , which is
the general Temper belonging to this State ; which ought to be the
habitual Frame of our Mind and Heart , and to be exercised at proper
Seasons more distinctly , in Acts of Devotion . BUTLER-1726-1,274.348

