<BEGIN_carlyle-1837-1>

<P_1,137>

<heading>

Chapter II . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.4

Mercury de Brézé . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.5

<$$heading>

Now surely were the time for a ' god from the machine ; '
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.7

there is a <font> nodus <$$font> worthy of one . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.8

The only question is , Which god ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.9

Shall it be Mars de Broglie , with his hundred pieces of cannon ?
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.10

- Not yet , answers prudence ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.11

so soft , irresolute is King Louis . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.12

Let it be Messenger <font> Mercury <$$font> , our Supreme Usher de Brézé
! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.13

On the morrow , which is the 20th of June , these Hundred_and_Forty-nine
false Curates , no longer restrainable by his Grace of Paris , will
desert in a body : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.14

let De Brézé intervene , and produce - closed doors !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.15

Not only shall there be Royal Session , in that Salle des Menus ; but no
meeting , nor working <paren> except by carpenters <$$paren> , till then
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.16

Your Third Estate , self-styled ' National Assembly , ' shall suddenly
see itself extruded from its Hall , by carpenters , in this dexterous
way ; and reduced to do nothing , not even to meet , or articulately
lament , - till Majesty , with <font> Séance_Royale <$$font> and new
miracles , be ready ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.17

In this manner shall De Brézé , as Mercury <font> ex machinä <$$font> ,
intervene ; and , if the Oeil-de-Boeuf mistake not , work deliverance
from the <font> nodus . <$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.18

Of poor De Brézé we can remark that he has yet prospered in none of his
dealings with these Commons . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.19

Five weeks ago , when they kissed the hand of Majesty , the mode he took
got nothing but censure ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.20

and then his ' sincere attachment , ' how was it scornfully whiffed
aside ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.21

Before supper , this night , he writes to President Bailly , a new
Letter , to be delivered shortly after dawn tomorrow , in the King's
name . Which Letter , however , Bailly , in the pride of office , will
merely crush together into his pocket , like a bill he does not mean to
pay . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.22

Accordingly on Saturday morning the 20th of June , shrill-sounding
heralds proclaim , through the streets of Versailles , that there is to
be <font> Séance_Royale <$$font> next Monday ; and no meeting of the
States-General till then . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,137.23

And yet , we observe , President Bailly , in sound of this , and with De
Brézé's Letter in his pocket , is proceeding , with National Assembly at
his heels , to the accustomed <P_1,138> Salle des Menus ; as if De Brézé
and heralds were mere wind . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.24

It is shut , this Salle ; occupied by Gardes Françaises .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.25

" Where is your Captain ? " CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.26

The Captain shows his royal order : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.27

workmen , he is grieved to say , are all busy setting up the platform
for his Majesty's <font> Séance ; <$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.28

most unfortunately , no admission ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.29

admission , at furthest , for President and Secretaries to bring away
papers , which the joiners might destroy ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.30

- President Bailly enters with Secretaries ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.31

and returns bearing papers : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.32

alas , within doors , instead of patriotic eloquence , there is now no
noise but hammering , sawing , and operative screeching and rumbling !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.33

A profanation without parallel . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.34

The Deputies stand grouped on the Paris Road , on this umbrageous <font>
Avenue de Versailles ; <$$font> complaining aloud of the indignity done
them . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.35

Courtiers , it is supposed , look from their windows ,
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.36

and giggle . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.37

The morning is none of the comfortablest : raw ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.38

it is even drizzling a little . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.39

But all travellers pause ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.40

patriot gallery-men , miscellaneous spectators increase the groups .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.41

Wild counsels alternate . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.42

Some desperate Deputies propose to go and hold session on the great
outer Staircase at Marly , under the King's windows ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.43

for his Majesty , it seems , has driven over thither .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.44

Others talk of making the Château Forecourt , what they call <font>
Place d' Armes <$$font> , a Runnymede and new <font> Champ de Mai
<$$font> of free Frenchmen : nay of awakening , to sounds of indignant
Patriotism , the echoes of the Oeil-de-Boeuf itself .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.45

- Notice is given that President Bailly , aided by judicious Guillotin
and others , has found place in the Tennis-Court of the Rue St.
François . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.46

Thither , in long-drawn files , hoarse-@ @jingling , like cranes on wing
, the Commons Deputies angrily wend . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.47

Strange sight was this in the Rue St. François , Vieux Versailles !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.48

A naked Tennis-Court , as the pictures of that time still give it :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.49

four walls ; naked , except aloft some poor wooden penthouse , or roofed
spectators'-gallery , hanging round them : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.50

- on the floor not now an idle teeheeing , a snapping of balls and
rackets ; but the bellowing din of an indignant National Representation
, scandalously exiled hither ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.51

However , a cloud of witnesses looks down on them , from wooden
penthouse , from wall-top , from adjoining roof and chimney ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.52

rolls towards them from all quarters , with passionate spoken blessings
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.53

Some table can be procured to write on ; some chair , if not to sit on ,
then to stand on . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.54

The Secretaries undo their tapes ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.55

Bailly has constituted the Assembly . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,138.56

<P_1,139>

Experienced Mounier , not wholly new to such things , in Parlementary
revolts , which he has seen or heard of , thinks that it were well , in
these lamentable threatening circumstances , to unite themselves by an
Oath . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.58

- Universal acclamation , as from smouldering bosoms getting vent !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.59

The Oath is redacted ; pronounced aloud by President Bailly , - and
indeed in such a sonorous tone , that the cloud of witnesses , even
outdoors , hear it , and bellow response to it .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.60

Six_hundred right-hands rise with President Bailly's , to take God above
to witness that they will not separate for man below , but will meet in
all places , under all circumstances , wheresoever two or three can get
together , till they have made the Constitution .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.61

Made the Constitution , Friends ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.62

That is a long task . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.63

Six_hundred hands , meanwhile , will sign as they have sworn :
six_hundred save <font> one ; <$$font> one Loyalist Abdiel , still
visible by this sole light-point , and namable , poor ' M. Martin
d'Auch , from Castelnaudary , in Languedoc . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.64

Him they permit to sign or signify refusal ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.65

they even save him from the cloud of witnesses , by declaring ' his head
deranged . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.66

At four o'clock , the signatures are all appended ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.67

new meeting is fixed for Monday morning , earlier than the hour of the
Royal Session ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.68

that our Hundred_and_Forty-nine Clerical deserters be not balked : we
will meet ' at the Recollets Church or elsewhere , ' in hope that our
Hundred_and_Forty-nine will join us ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.69

- and now it is time to go to dinner . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.70

This , then , is the Session of the Tennis-Court , famed <font> Séance
du Jeu de Paume ; <$$font> the fame of which has gone forth to all lands
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.71

This is Mercurius de Brézé's appearance as <font> Deus_ex_machinâ ;
<$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.72

this is the fruit it brings ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.73

The giggle of Courtiers in the Versailles Avenue has already died into
gaunt silence . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.74

Did the distracted Court , with Garde-des-Sceaux Barentin , Triumvirate
and Company , imagine that they could scatter six_hundred National
Deputies , big with a National Constitution , like as much barndoor
poultry , big with next to nothing , - by the white or black rod of a
Supreme Usher ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.75

Barndoor poultry fly cackling : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.76

but National Deputies turn round , lion-faced ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.77

and , with uplifted right-hand , swear an Oath that makes the four
corners of France tremble . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.78

President Bailly has covered himself with honour ; which shall become
rewards . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.79

The National Assembly is now doubly and trebly the Nation's Assembly ;
not militant , martyred only , but triumphant ; insulted , and which
could not <font> be <$$font> insulted . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,139.80

Paris disembogues itself once more , to witness , ' with grim looks , '
the <P_1,140> <font> Séance_Royale : <$$font> which , by a new felicity
, is postponed till Tuesday . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.81

The Hundred_and_Forty-nine , and even with Bishops among them , all in
processional mass , have had free leisure to march off ,
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.82

and solemnly join the Commons sitting waiting in their Church .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.83

The Commons welcomed them with shouts , with embracings , nay with tears
; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.84

for it is growing a life-and-death matter now . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.85

As for the <font> Séance <$$font> itself , the Carpenters seem to have
accomplished their platform ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.86

but all else remains unaccomplished . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.87

Futile , we may say fatal , was the whole matter .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.88

King Louis enters , through seas of people , all grim-silent , angry
with many things , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.89

- for it is a bitter rain too . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.90

Enters , to a Third Estate , likewise grim-silent ; which has been
wetted waiting under mean porches , at back-doors , while Court and
Privileged were entering by the front . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.91

King and Garde-des-Sceaux <paren> there is no Necker visible <$$paren>
make known , not without longwindedness , the determinations of the
royal breast . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.92

The Three Orders <font> shall <$$font> vote separately .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.93

On the other hand , France may look for considerable constitutional
blessings ; as specified in these Five-and-thirty Articles , which
Garde-des-Sceaux is waxing hoarse with reading . Which Five-and-thirty
Articles , adds his Majesty again rising , if the Three Orders most
unfortunately can@ @not agree together to effect them , I myself will
effect : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.94

" <font> seul je ferai le bien de mes peuples <$$font> , " - which being
interpreted may signify , You , contentious Deputies of the
States-General , have probably not long to be here !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.95

But , in fine , all shall now withdraw for this day ; and meet again ,
each Order in its separate place , tomorrow morning , for despatch of
business . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.96

<font> This <$$font> is the determination of the royal breast : pithy
and clear . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.97

And herewith King , retinue , Noblesse , majority of Clergy file out ,
as if the whole matter were satisfactorily completed .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.98

These file out ; through grim-silent seas of people .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.99

Only the Commons Deputies file not out ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.100

but stand there in gloomy silence , uncertain what they shall do .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.101

One man of them is certain ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.102

one man of them discerns CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.103

and dares ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.104

It is now that King Mirabeau starts to the Tribune , and lifts up his
lion-voice . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.105

Verily a word in season ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.106

for , in such scenes , the moment is the mother of ages !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,140.107

Had not Gabriel Honoré been there , - one can well fancy , how the
Commons Deputies , affrighted at the perils which now yawned dim all
round them , and waxing ever paler in each other's paleness , <P_1,141>
might very naturally , one after one , have <font> glided off ; <$$font>
and the whole course of European History have been different !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.108

But he is there . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.109

List to the <font> brool <$$font> of that royal forest-voice ; sorrowful
, low ; fast swelling to a roar ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.110

Eyes kindle at the glance of his eye : - CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.111

National Deputies were missioned by a Nation ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.112

they have sworn an Oath ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.113

they - CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.114

But lo ! while the lion's voice roars loudest , what Apparition is this
? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.115

Apparition of Mercurius de Brézé , muttering somewhat !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.116

- " Speak out , " cry several . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.117

- " Messieurs , " shrills De Brézé , repeating himself , " You have
heard the King's orders ! " CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.118

- Mirabeau glares on him with fire-flashing face ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.119

shakes the black lion's mane : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.120

" Yes , Monsieur , we have heard what the King was advised to say :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.121

and you , who can@ @not be the interpreter of his orders to the
States-General ; you , who have neither place nor right of speech here ;
<font> you <$$font> are not the man to remind us of it .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.122

Go , Monsieur , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.123

tell those who sent you that we are here by the will of the People , and
that nothing but the force of bayonets shall send us hence ! "
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.124

And poor De Brézé shivers forth from the National Assembly ; - and also
<paren> if it be not in one faintest glimmer , months later <$$paren>
finally from the page of History ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.125

- Hapless De Brézé ; doomed to survive long ages , in men's memory , in
this faint way , with tremulent white rod ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.126

He was true to Etiquette , which was his Faith here below ; a martyr to
respect of persons . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.127

Short woollen cloaks could not kiss Majesty's hand as long velvet ones
did . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.128

Nay lately , when the poor little Dauphin lay dead , and some ceremonial
Visitation came , was he not punctual to announce it even to the
Dauphin's <font> dead body : <$$font> " Monseigneur , a Deputation of
the States-General ! " CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.129

<font> Sunt lachrymae rerum . <$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.130

But what does the Oeil-de-Boeuf , now when De Brézé shivers back thither
? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.131

<font> Despatch <$$font> that same force of bayonets ?
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.132

Not so : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.133

the seas of people still hang multitudinous , intent on what is passing
; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.134

nay rush and roll , loud-billowing , into the Courts of the Château
itself ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.135

for a report has risen that Necker is to be dismissed .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.136

Worst of all , the Gardes Françaises seem indisposed to act :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.137

' two Companies of them <font> do not fire <$$font> when ordered ! '
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.138

Necker , for not being at the <font> Séance <$$font> , shall be shouted
for , carried home in triumph ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.139

and must not be dismissed . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.140

His Grace of Paris , on the other hand , has to fly with broken
coach-panels , and owe his life to furious driving .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,141.141

The <font> Gardes-du-Corps <$$font> <paren> Body-Guards <$$paren> ,
which you <P_1,142> were drawing out , had better be drawn in again .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.142

There is no sending of bayonets to be thought of .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.143

Instead of soldiers , the Oeil-de-Boeuf sends - carpenters , to take
down the platform . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.144

Ineffectual shift ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.145

In few instants , the very carpenters cease wrenching and knocking at
their platform ; standing on it , hammer in hand ,
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.146

and listen open-mouthed . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.147

The Third Estate is decreeing that it is , was , and will be , nothing
but a National Assembly ; and now , moreover , an inviolable one , all
members of it inviolable : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.148

' infamous , traitorous , towards the Nation , and guilty of capital
crime , is any person , body-corporate , tribunal , court or commission
that now or henceforth , during the present session or after it , shall
dare to pursue , interrogate , arrest , or cause to be arrested , detain
or cause to be detained , any ' &c. &c. ' on <font> whose part soever
<$$font> the same be commanded . ' Which done , one can wind up with
this comfortable reflection from Abbé Sieyes : " Messieurs , you are
today what you were yesterday . " CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.149

Courtiers may shriek ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.150

but it is , and remains , even so . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.151

Their well-@ @charged explosion has exploded <font> through the
touch-hole ; <$$font> covering themselves with scorches , confusion ,
and unseemly soot ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.152

Poor Triumvirate , poor Queen ; and above all , poor Queen's Husband ,
who means well , had he any fixed meaning ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.153

Folly is that wisdom which is wise only behindhand .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.154

Few months ago these Thirty-five Concessions had filled France with a
rejoicing , which might have lasted for several years .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.155

Now it is unavailing , the very mention of it slighted ; Majesty's
express orders set at nought . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.156

All France is in a roar ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.157

a sea of persons , estimated at ' ten_thousand , ' whirls ' all this day
in the Palais Royal . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.158

The remaining Clergy , and likewise some Forty-eight Noblesse ,
D'Orléans among them , have now forthwith gone over to the victorious
Commons ; - by whom , as is natural , they are received ' with
acclamation . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.159

The Third Estate triumphs ; Versailles Town shouting round it ;
ten_thousand whirling all day in the Palais Royal ; and all France
standing a-tiptoe , not unlike whirling ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.160

Let the Oeil-de-Boeuf look to it . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.161

As for King Louis , he will swallow his injuries ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.162

will temporise , keep silence ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.163

will at all costs have present peace . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.164

It was Tuesday the 23d of June , when he spoke that peremptory royal
mandate ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,142.165

and the week is not done till he has written to the <P_1,143> remaining
obstinate Noblesse , that they also must oblige him , and give in .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.166

D'Espréménil rages his last ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.167

Barrel Mirabeau ' breaks his sword , ' making a vow , - which he might
as well have kept . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.168

The ' Triple Family ' is now therefore complete ; the third erring
brother , the Noblesse , having joined it ; - erring but pardonable ;
soothed , so far as possible , by sweet eloquence from President Bailly
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.169

So triumphs the Third Estate ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.170

and States-General are become National Assembly ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.171

and all France may sing <font> Te Deum . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.172

By wise inertia , and wise cessation of inertia , great victory has been
gained . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.173

It is the last night of June : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.174

all night you meet nothing on the streets of Versailles but ' men
running with torches , ' with shouts and jubilation .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.175

From the 2d of May when they kissed the hand of Majesty , to this 30th
of June when men run with torches , we count eight weeks and three days
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.176

For eight weeks the National Carroccio has stood far-seen , ringing many
a signal ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.177

and , so much having now gathered round it , may hope to stand .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.178

<heading>

Chapter III . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.180

Broglie the War-god . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.181

<$$heading>

The Court feels indignant that it is conquered ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.183

but what then ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.184

Another time it will do better . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.185

Mercury descended in vain ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.186

now has the time come for Mars . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.187

- The gods of the Oeil-de-Boeuf have withdrawn into the darkness of
their cloudy Ida ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.188

and sit there , shaping and forging what may be needful , be it '
billets of a new National Bank , ' munitions of war , or things forever
inscrutable to men . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.189

Accordingly , what means this ' apparatus of troops ' ?
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.190

The National Assembly can get no furtherance for its Committee of
Subsistences ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.191

can hear only that , at Paris , the Bakers' shops are besieged ; that ,
in the Provinces , people are ' living on meal-husks and boiled grass .
' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,143.192

But on all highways there hover dust-clouds , with the march of
regiments , with the trailing of cannon : foreign Pandours , of fierce
aspect ; Salis-Samade , Esterhazy , Royal-Allemand ; so many of them
foreign ; to the number of thirty_thousand <P_1,144> , - which fear can
magnify to fifty : all wending towards Paris and Versailles !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.193

Already , on the heights of Montmartre , is a digging and delving ; too
like a scarping and trenching . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.194

The effluence of Paris is arrested Versailles-ward by a barrier of
cannon at Sèvres Bridge . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.195

From the Queen's Mews , cannon stand pointed on the National-Assembly
Hall itself . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.196

The National Assembly has its very slumbers broken by the tramp of
soldiery , swarming and defiling , endless , or seemingly endless , all
round those spaces , at dead of night , ' without drum-music , without
audible word of command . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.197

What means it ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.198

Shall eight , or even shall twelve Deputies , our Mirabeaus , Barnaves
at the head of them , be whirled suddenly to the Castle of Ham ; the
rest ignominiously dispersed to the winds ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.199

No National Assembly can make the Constitution with cannon levelled on
it from the Queen's Mews ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.200

What means this reticence of the Oeil-de-Boeuf , broken only by nods and
shrugs ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.201

In the mystery of that cloudy Ida , what is it that they forge and shape
? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.202

- Such questions must distracted Patriotism keep asking , and receive no
answer but an echo . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.203

Questions and echo bad enough in themselves : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.204

- and now , above all , while the hungry food-year , which runs from
August to August , is getting older ; becoming more and more a
famine-year ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.205

With ' meal-husks and boiled grass , ' Brigands may actually collect ;
and , in crowds , at farm and mansion , howl angrily , <font> Food !
Food ! <$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.206

It is in vain to send soldiers against them : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.207

at sight of soldiers they disperse , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.208

they vanish as under_ground ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.209

then directly reassemble elsewhere for new tumult and plunder .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.210

Frightful enough to look upon ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.211

but what to <font> hear <$$font> of , reverberated through Twenty-five
Millions of suspicious minds ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.212

Brigands and Broglie , open Conflagration , preternatural Rumour are
driving mad most hearts in France . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.213

What will the issue of these things be ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.214

At Marseilles , many weeks ago , the Townsmen have taken arms ; for '
suppressing of Brigands , ' and other purposes :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.215

the military Commandant may make of it what he will .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.216

Elsewhere , everywhere , could not the like be done ?
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.217

Dubious , on the distracted Patriot Imagination , wavers , as a last
deliverance , some foreshadow of a <font> National Guard . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.218

But conceive , above all , the Wooden Tent in the Palais Royal !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.219

A universal hubbub there , as of dissolving worlds :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,144.220

there loudest bellows the mad , mad-making <P_1,145> voice of Rumour ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.221

there sharpest gazes Suspicion into the pale dim World-Whirlpool ;
discerning shapes and phantasms : imminent bloodthirsty Regiments camped
on the Champ-de-Mars ; dispersed National Assembly ; redhot cannon-balls
<paren> to burn Paris <$$paren> : - the mad War-god and Bellona's
sounding thongs . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.222

To the calmest man it is becoming too plain that battle is inevitable .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.223

Inevitable , silently nod Messeigneurs and Broglie : Inevitable and
brief ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.224

Your National Assembly , stopped short in its Constitutional labours ,
may fatigue the royal ear with addresses and remonstrances :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.225

those cannon of ours stand duly levelled ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.226

those troops are here . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.227

The King's Declaration , with its Thirty-five too generous Articles ,
was spoken , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.228

was not listened to ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.229

but remains yet unrevoked : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.230

he himself shall effect it , <font> seul il fera ! <$$font>
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.231

As for Broglie , he has his headquarters at Versailles , all as in a
seat of war : clerks writing ; significant staff-officers , inclined to
taciturnity ; plumed aides-de-camp , scouts , orderlies flying or
hovering . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.232

He himself looks forth , important , impenetrable ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.233

listens to Besenval Commandant of Paris , and his warning and earnest
counsels <paren> for he has come out repeatedly on purpose <$$paren> ,
with a silent smile . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.234

The Parisians resist ? scornfully cry Messeigneurs .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.235

As a meal-mob may ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.236

They have sat quiet , these five generations , submitting to all .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.237

Their Mercier declared , in these very years , that a Parisian revolt
was henceforth ' impossible . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.238

Stand by the royal Declaration , of the Twenty-third of June .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.239

The Nobles of France , valorous , chivalrous as of old , will rally
round us with one heart ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.240

- and as for this which you call Third Estate , and which we call <font>
canaille <$$font> of unwashed Sansculottes , of Patelins , Scribblers ,
factious Spouters , - brave Broglie , ' with a whiff of grapeshot <font>
<paren> salve de canons <$$paren> , ' <$$font> if need be , will give
quick account of it . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.241

Thus reason they : on their cloudy Ida ; hidden from men , - men also
hidden from them . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.242

Good is grapeshot , Messeigneurs , on one condition : that the shooter
also were made of metal ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.243

But unfortunately he is made of flesh ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.244

under his buffs and bandoleers your hired shooter has instincts ,
feelings , even a kind of thought . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.245

It is his kindred , bone of his bone , this same <font> canaille
<$$font> that shall be whiffed ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.246

he has brothers in it , a father and mother , - living on meal-husks and
boiled grass . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.247

His very doxy , not yet ' dead i' the spital , ' drives him into
military heterodoxy ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,145.248

declares that if he shed Patriot <P_1,146> blood , he shall be accursed
among men . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.249

The soldier , who has seen his pay stolen by rapacious Foulons , his
blood wasted by Soubises , Pompadours , and the gates of promotion shut
inexorably on him if he were not born noble , - is himself not without
griefs against you . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.250

Your cause is not the soldier's cause ; but , as would seem , your own
only , and no other god's nor man's . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.251

For example , the world may have heard how , at Béthune lately , when
there rose some ' riot about grains , ' of which sort there are so many
, and the soldiers stood drawn out , and the word ' Fire ! ' was given
, - not a trigger stirred ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.252

only the butts of all muskets rattled angrily against the ground ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.253

and the soldiers stood glooming , with a mixed expression of countenance
; - till clutched ' each under the arm of a patriot householder , ' they
were all hurried off , in this manner , to be treated and caressed , and
have their pay increased by subscription ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.254

Neither have the Gardes Françaises , the best regiment of the line ,
shown any promptitude for street-firing lately .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.255

They returned grumbling from Réveillon's ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.256

and have not burnt a single cartridge since ; nay , as we saw , not even
when bid . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.257

A dangerous humour dwells in these Gardes . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.258

Notable men too , in their way ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.259

Valadi the Pythagorean was , at one time , an officer of theirs .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.260

Nay , in the ranks , under the three-cornered felt and cockade , what
hard heads may there not be , and reflections going on , - unknown to
the public ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.261

One head of the hardest we do now discern there : on the shoulders of a
certain Sergeant Hoche . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.262

Lazare Hoche , that is the name of him ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.263

he used to be about the Versailles Royal Stables , nephew of a poor
herbwoman ; a handy lad ; exceedingly addicted to reading .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.264

He is now Sergeant Hoche , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.265

and can rise no farther : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.266

he lays out his pay in rushlights , and cheap editions of books .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.267

On the whole , the best seems to be : Consign these Gardes Françaises to
their Barracks . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.268

So Besenval thinks , and orders . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.269

Consigned to their barracks , the Gardes Françaises do but form a '
Secret Association , ' an Engagement not to act against the National
Assembly . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.270

Debauched by Valadi the Pythagorean ; debauched by money and women !
cry Besenval and innumerable others . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,146.271

Debauched by what you will , or in need of no debauching , behold them ,
long files of them , their consignment broken , arrive , headed by their
Sergeants , on the 26th day of June , at the <P_1,147> Palais Royal !
Welcomed with vivats , with presents , and a pledge of patriot liquor ;
embracing and embraced ; declaring in words that the cause of France is
their cause ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.272

Next day and the following days the like . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.273

What is singular too , except this patriot humour , and breaking of
their consignment , they behave otherwise with ' the most rigorous
accuracy . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.274

They are growing questionable , these Gardes ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.275

Eleven ringleaders of them are put in the Abbaye Prison .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.276

It boots not in the least . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.277

The imprisoned Eleven have only , ' by the hand of an individual , ' to
drop , towards nightfall , a line in the Café de Foy ; where Patriotism
harangues loudest on its table . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.278

Two_hundred young persons , soon waxing to four_thousand , ' with fit
crowbars , roll towards the Abbaye ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.279

smite asunder the needful doors ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.280

and bear out their Eleven , with other military victims : - to supper in
the Palais Royal Garden ; to board , {COM:sic} and lodging ' in
camp-beds , in the <font> Théâtre des Variétés ; ' <$$font> other
national <font> Prytaneum <$$font> as yet not being in readiness .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.281

Most deliberate ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.282

Nay so punctual were these young persons , that finding one military
victim to have been imprisoned for real civil crime , they returned him
to his cell , with protest . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.283

Why new military force was {COM:sic_word_order} not called out ?
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.284

New military force was called out . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.285

New military force did arrive , full gallop , with drawn sabre :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.286

but the people gently ' laid hold of their bridles ; '
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.287

the dragoons sheathed their swords ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.288

lifted their caps by way of salute , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.289

and sat like mere statues of dragoons , - except indeed that a drop of
liquor being brought them , they ' drank to the King and Nation with the
greatest cordiality . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.290

And now , ask in return , why Messeigneurs and Broglie the great god of
war , on seeing these things , did not pause , and take some other
course , any other course ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.291

Unhappily , as we said , they could see nothing .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.292

Pride , which goes before a fall ; wrath , if not reasonable , yet
pardonable , most natural , had hardened their hearts and heated their
heads : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.293

so , with imbecility and violence <paren> ill-matched pair <$$paren> ,
they rush to seek their hour . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.294

All Regiments are not Gardes Françaises , or debauched by Valadi the
Pythagorean : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.295

let fresh undebauched Regiments come up ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.296

let Royal-Allemand , Salis-Samade , Swiss Château-Vieux come up , -
which can fight , but can hardly speak except in German gutturals ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.297

let soldiers march , and highways thunder with artillery-wagons :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.298

Majesty has a <font> new <$$font> Royal Session to hold , - and miracles
to work there ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,147.299

<P_1,148>

The whiff of grapeshot can , if needful , become a blast and tempest .
In which circumstances , before the redhot balls begin raining , may not
the Hundred-and-twenty Paris Electors , though their <font> Cahier
<$$font> is long since finished , see good to meet again daily , as an '
Electoral Club ' ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.301

They meet first ' in a Tavern ; ' - where ' a large wedding-party '
cheerfully gives place to them . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.302

But latterly they meet in the <font> Hôtel-de-Ville <$$font> , in the
Townhall itself . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.303

Flesselles , Provost of Merchants , with his Four Echevins <paren>
<font> Scabins <$$font> , Assessors <$$paren> , could not prevent it ;
such was the force of public opinion . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.304

He , with his Echevins , and the Six-and-Twenty Town-Councillors , all
appointed from Above , may well sit silent there , in their long gowns ;
and consider , with awed eye , what prelude this is of convulsion coming
from Below , and how they themselves shall fare in that !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.305

<heading>

CHAPTER IV . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.307

To arms ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.308

<$$heading>

So hangs it , dubious , fateful , in the sultry days of July .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.310

It is the passionate printed <font> advice <$$font> of M. Marat , to
abstain , of all things , from violence . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.311

Nevertheless the hungry poor are already burning Town Barriers , where
Tribute on eatables is levied ; getting clamorous for food .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.312

The twelfth July morning is Sunday : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.313

the streets are all placarded with an enormous-@ @sized <font> De par le
Roi <$$font> , ' inviting peaceable citizens to remain within doors , '
to feel no alarm , to gather in no crowd . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.314

Why so ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.315

What mean these ' placards of enormous size ' ?
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,148.316

Above all , what means this clatter of military ; dragoons , hussars ,
rattling in from all points of the compass towards the Place Louis
Quinze ; with a staid gravity of face , though saluted with mere
<P_1,149> nicknames , hootings and even missiles ?
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.317

Besenval is with them . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.318

Swiss Guards of his are already in the Champs Elysées , with four pieces
of artillery . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.319

Have the destroyers descended on us , then ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.320

From the Bridge of Sèvres to utmost Vincennes , from Saint-Denis to the
Champ-de-Mars , we are begirt ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.321

Alarm , of the vague unknown , is in every heart .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.322

The Palais Royal has become a place of awestruck interjections , silent
shakings of the head : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.323

one can fancy with what dolorous stound {COM:roar,_violent_noise} the
noon-tide cannon <paren> which the Sun fires at crossing of his meridian
<$$paren> went off there ; bodeful , like an inarticulate voice of doom
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.324

Are these troops verily come out ' against Brigands ' ?
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.325

Where are the Brigands ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.326

What mystery is in the wind ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.327

- Hark ! a human voice reporting articulately the Job's-news :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.328

<font> Necker , People's Minister , Saviour of France , is dismissed .
<$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.329

Impossible ; incredible ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.330

Treasonous to the public peace ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.331

Such a voice ought to be choked in the water-works ; - had not the
news-bringer quickly fled . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.332

Nevertheless , friends , make of it what you will , the news is true .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.333

Necker is gone . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.334

Necker hies north-ward incessantly , in obedient secrecy , since
yesternight . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.335

We have a new Ministry : Broglie the War-god ; Aristocrat Breteuil ;
Foulon who said the people might eat grass ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.336

Rumour , therefore , shall arise ; in the Palais Royal , and in broad
France . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.337

Paleness sits on every face ; confused tremor and fremescence ; waxing
into thunder-peals , of Fury stirred on by Fear .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.338

But see Camille Desmoulins , from the Café de Foy , rushing out ,
sibylline in face ; his hair streaming , in each hand a pistol !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.339

He springs to a table : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.340

the Police satellites are eyeing him ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.341

alive they shall not take him , not they alive him alive .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.342

This time he speaks without stammering : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.343

- Friends ! shall we die like hunted hares ? Like sheep hounded into
their pinfold ; bleating for mercy , where is no mercy , but only a
whetted knife ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.344

The hour is come ; the supreme hour of Frenchman and Man ; when
Oppressors are to try conclusions with Oppressed ; and the word is ,
swift Death , or Deliverance forever . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.345

Let such hour be <font> well-come {COM:font_change_around_"well"} !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.346

Us , me@ @seems , one cry only befits : To Arms !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.347

Let universal Paris , universal France , as with the throat of the
whirlwind , sound only : To arms ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.348

- " To arms ! " yell responsive the innumerable voices ; like one great
voice , as of a Demon yelling from the air : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,149.349

for all faces wax <P_1,150> fire-eyed , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.350

all hearts burn up into madness . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.351

In such , or fitter words , does Camille evoke the Elemental Powers , in
this great moment . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.352

- Friends , continues Camille , some rallying-sign ! Cockades ; green
ones ; - the colour of Hope ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.353

- As with the flight of locusts , these green tree-leaves ; green
ribands from the neighbouring shops ; all green things are snatched ,
and made cockades of . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.354

Camille descends from his table , ' stifled with embraces , wetted with
tears ; ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.355

has a bit of green riband handed him ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.356

sticks it in his hat . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.357

And now to Curtius' Image-shop there ; to the Boulevards ; to the four
winds ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.358

and rest not till France be on fire ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.359

France , so long shaken and wind-parched , is probably at the right
inflammable point . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.360

- As for poor Curtius , who , one grieves to think , might be but
imperfectly paid , - he can@ @not make two words about his Images .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.361

The Wax-bust of Necker , the Wax-bust of D'Orléans , helpers of France :
these , covered with crape , as in funeral procession , or after the
manner of suppliants appealing to Heaven , to Earth , and Tartarus
itself , a mixed multitude bears off . For a sign ! As indeed man ,
with his singular imaginative faculties , can do little or nothing
without signs : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.362

thus Turks look to their Prophet's Banner ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.363

also Osier <font> Mannikins <$$font> have been burnt ,
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.364

and Necker's Portrait has erewhile figured , aloft on its perch .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.365

In this manner march they , a mixed , continually increasing multitude ;
armed with axes , staves and miscellanea ; grim , many-sounding ,
through the streets . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.366

Be all Theatres shut ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.367

let all dancing , on planked floor , or on the natural greensward ,
cease ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.368

Instead of a Christian Sabbath , and feast of <font> guinguette <$$font>
tabernacles , it shall be a Sorcerer's Sabbath ; and Paris , gone rabid
, dance , - With the Fiend for piper ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.369

However , Besenval , with horse and foot , is in the Place Louis Quinze
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.370

Mortals promenading homewards , in the fall of the day , saunter by ,
from Chaillot or Passy , from flirtation and a little thin wine ; with
sadder step than usual . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.371

Will the Bust-Procession pass that way ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.372

Behold it ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.373

behold also Prince Lambesc dash forth on it , with his Royal-Allemands !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.374

Shots fall , and sabre-strokes ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.375

Busts are hewed asunder ; and , alas , also heads of men .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.376

A sabred Procession has nothing for it but to <font> explode <$$font> ,
along what streets , alleys , Tuileries Avenues it finds ; and disappear
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.377

One unarmed man lies hewed down ; a Garde Française by his uniform :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,150.378

<P_1,151>

bear him <paren> or bear even the report of him <$$paren> dead and gory
to his Barracks ; - where he has comrades still alive !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.380

But why not now , victorious Lambesc , charge through that Tuileries
Garden itself , where the fugitives are vanishing ? Not show the Sunday
promenaders too , how steel glitters , besprent with blood ; that it be
told of , and men's ears tingle ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.381

- Tingle , alas , they did ; but the wrong way .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.382

Victorious Lambesc , in this his second or Tuileries charge , succeeds
but in overturning <paren> call it not slashing , for he struck with the
flat of his sword <$$paren> one man , a poor old schoolmaster , most
pacifically tottering there ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.383

and is driven out , by barricade of chairs , by flights of ' bottles and
glasses , ' by execrations in bass voice and treble .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.384

Most delicate is the mob-queller's vocation ; wherein Too-@ @much may be
as bad as Not-@ @enough . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.385

For each of these bass voices , and more each treble voice , borne to
all parts of the City , rings now nothing but distracted indignation ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.386

will ring all night . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.387

The cry , <font> To arms ! <$$font> roars tenfold ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.388

steeples with their metal storm-voice boom out , as the sun sinks ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.389

armorers' shops are broken open , plundered ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.390

the streets are a living foam-sea , chafed by all the winds .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.391

Such issue came of Lambesc's charge on the Tuileries Garden : no
striking of salutary terror into Chaillot promenaders ; a striking into
broad wakefulness of Frenzy and the three Furies , - which otherwise
were not asleep ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.392

For they lie always , those subterranean Eumenides <paren> fabulous and
yet so true <$$paren> , in the dullest existence of man ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.393

- and can dance , brandishing their dusky torches , shaking their
serpent hair . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.394

Lambesc with Royal-Allemand may ride to his barracks , with curses for
his marching-music ; then ride back again , like one troubled in mind :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.395

vengeful Gardes Françaises , sacreing {COM:font_change_around_"sacre"} ,
with knit brows , start out on him , from their barracks in the Chaussé
d'Antin ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.396

pour a volley into him <paren> killing and wounding <$$paren> ; which he
must not answer , but ride on . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.397

Counsel dwells not under the plumed hat . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.398

If the Eumenides awaken , and Broglie has given no orders , what can a
Besenval do ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.399

When the Gardes Françaises , with Palais-Royal volunteers , roll down ,
greedy of more vengeance , to the Place Louis Quinze itself , they find
neither Besenval , Lambesc , Royal-Allemand , nor any soldier now there
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.400

Gone is military order . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.401

On the far Eastern Boulevard , of Saint-Antoine , the Chasseurs
Normandie arrive , dusty , thirsty , after a hard day's ride ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.402

but can find no billet-master , see no course in this City of confusions
; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,151.403

can@ @not get to <P_1,152> Besenval , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.404

can@ @not so much as discover where he is : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.405

Normandie must even bivouac there , in its dust and thirst , - unless
some patriot will treat it to a cup of liquor , with advices .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.406

Raging multitudes surround the Hôtel-de-Ville , crying : Arms ! Orders
! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.407

The Six-and-twenty Town-Councillors , with their long gowns , have
ducked under <paren> into the raging chaos <$$paren> ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.408

- shall never emerge more . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.409

Besenval is painfully wriggling himself out , to the Champ-de-Mars ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.410

he must sit there ' in the cruelest uncertainty : '
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.411

courier after courier may dash off for Versailles ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.412

but will bring back no answer , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.413

can hardly bring himself back . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.414

For the roads are all blocked with batteries and pickets , with floods
of carriages arrested for examination : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.415

such was Broglie's one sole order ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.416

the Oeil-de-Boeuf , hearing in the distance such mad din , which sounded
almost like invasion , will before all things keep its own head whole .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.417

A new Ministry , with , as it were , but one foot in the stirrup , can@
@not take leaps . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.418

Mad Paris is abandoned altogether to itself . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.419

What a Paris , when the darkness fell ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.420

A European metropolitan City hurled suddenly forth from its old
combinations and arrangements ; to crash tumultuously together , seeking
new . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.421

Use and wont will now no longer direct any man ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.422

each man , with what of originality he has , must begin thinking ; or
following those that think . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.423

Seven_hundred_thousand individuals , on the sudden , find all their old
paths , old ways of acting and deciding , vanish from under their feet .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.424

And so there go they , with clangour and terror , they know not as yet
whether running , swimming or flying , - headlong into the New Era .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.425

With clangour and terror : from above , Broglie the war-god impends ,
preternatural , with his redhot cannon-balls ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.426

and from below , a preternatural Brigand-world menaces with dirk and
firebrand : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.427

madness rules the hour . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.428

Happily , in place of the submerged Twenty-six , the Electoral Club is
gathering ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.429

has declared itself a ' Provisional Municipality . '
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.430

On the morrow it will get Provost Flesselles , with an Echevin or two ,
to give help in many things . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.431

For the present it decrees one most essential thing : that forthwith a '
Parisian Militia ' shall be enrolled . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.432

Depart , ye heads of Districts , to labour in this great work ; while we
here , in Permanent Committee , sit alert . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.433

Let fencible men , each party in its own range of streets , keep watch
and ward , all night . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,152.434

Let Paris court a little fever-sleep ; confused by such fever-dreams ,
of ' violent motions at the Palais Royal ; ' - <P_1,153> or from time to
time start awake , and look out , palpitating , in its nightcap , at the
clash of discordant mutually-@ @unintelligible Patrols ; on the gleam of
distant Barriers , going up all-@ @too ruddy towards the vault of Night
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.435

<heading>

Chapter V . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.437

Give Us Arms . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.438

<$$heading>

On Monday the huge City has awoke , not to its week-day industry :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.440

to what a different one ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.441

The working man has become fighting man ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.442

has one want only : that of arms . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.443

The industry of all crafts has paused ; - except it be the smith's ,
fiercely hammering pikes ; and , in a faint degree , the kitchener's ,
cooking offhand victuals ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.444

for <font> bouche va toujours . <$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.445

Women too are sewing cockades ; - not now of <font> green <$$font> ,
which being D'Artois colour , the Hôtel-de-Ville has had to interfere in
it ; but of <font> red <$$font> and <font> blue <$$font> , our old Paris
colours : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.446

these , once based on a ground of constitutional <font> white <$$font> ,
are the famed Tricolor , - which <paren> if Prophecy err not <$$paren> '
will go round the world . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.447

All shops , unless it be the Bakers' and Vintners' , are shut :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.448

Paris is in the streets ; - rushing , foaming like some Venice
wine-glass into which you had dropped poison . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.449

The tocsin , by order , is pealing madly from all steeples .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.450

Arms , ye Elector Municipals ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.451

thou Flesselles with thy Echevins , give us arms !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.452

Flesselles gives what he can : fallacious , perhaps insidious promises
of arms from Charleville ; order to seek arms here , order to seek them
there . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.453

The new Municipals give what they can ; some three_hundred_and_sixty
indifferent firelocks , the equipment of the City-Watch :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.454

' a man in wooden shoes , and without coat , directly clutches one of
them , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.455

and mounts guard . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.456

Also as hinted , an order to all Smiths to make pikes with their whole
soul . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.457

Heads of Districts are in fervent consultation ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.458

subordinate Patriotism roams distracted , ravenous for arms .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.459

Hitherto at the Hôtel-de-Ville was only such modicum of indifferent
fire-locks as we have seen . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,153.460

At the so-called Arsenal , there lies nothing but <P_1,154> rust ,
rubbish and saltpetre , - overlooked too by the guns of the Bastille .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.461

His Majesty's Repository , what they call <font> Garde-Meuble <$$font>
is forced and ransacked : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.462

tapestries enough , and gauderies ; but of serviceable fighting-gear
small stock ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.463

Two silver-mounted cannons there are ; an ancient gift from his Majesty
of Siam to Louis Fourteenth : gilt sword of the Good Henri ; antique
Chivalry arms and armour . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.464

These , and such as these , a necessitous Patriotism snatches greedily ,
for want of better . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.465

The Siamese cannons go trundling , on an errand they were not meant for
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.466

Among the indifferent firelocks are seen tourney-lances ; the princely
helm and hauberk glittering amid ill-hatted heads , - as in a time when
all times and their possessions are suddenly sent jumbling !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.467

At the <font> Maison de Saint-Lazare <$$font> , Lazar-House once , now a
Correction-House with Priests , there was no trace of arms ; but , on
the other hand , corn , plainly to a culpable extent .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.468

Out with it , to market ; in this scarcity of grains !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.469

- Heavens , will ' fifty-two carts , ' in long row , hardly carry it to
the <font> Halle aux Bleds {COM:sic} ? <$$font>
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.470

Well , truly , ye reverend Fathers , was your pantry filled ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.471

fat are your larders ; over-generous your wine-bins , ye plotting
exasperators of the Poor ; traitorous forestallers of bread !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.472

Vain is protesting , entreaty on bare knees : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.473

the House of Saint-Lazarus has that in it which comes not by protesting
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.474

Behold , how , from every window , it <font> vomits : <$$font> mere
torrents of furniture , of bellowing and hurlyburly ; - the cellars also
leaking wine . Till , as was natural , smoke rose , - kindled , some
say , by the desperate Saint-Lazaristes themselves , desperate of other
riddance ; and the Establishment vanished from this world in flame .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.475

Remark nevertheless that ' a thief ' <paren> set on or not by
Aristocrats <$$paren> , being detected there , is ' instantly hanged .
' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.476

Look also at the Châtelet Prison . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.477

The Debtors' Prison of La Force is broken from without ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.478

and they that sat in bondage to Aristocrats go free : hearing of which
the Felons at the Châtelet do likewise ' dig up their pavements , ' and
stand on the offensive ; with the best prospects , - had not Patriotism
, passing that way , ' fired a volley ' into the Felon world ; and
crushed it down again under hatches . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.479

Patriotism consorts not with thieving and felony :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.480

surely also Punishment , this day , hitches <paren> if she still hitch
<$$paren> after Crime , with frightful shoes-of-swiftness !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.481

' Some score or two ' of wretched persons , found prostrate with drink
in the Cellars of that Saint-Lazare , are indignantly haled to prison ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,154.482

the Jailor has no room ; whereupon , other place of security not
suggesting itself , it is <P_1,155> written , ' <font> on les pendit
<$$font> , they hanged them . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.483

Brief is the word ; not without significance , be it true or untrue !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.484

In such circumstances , the Aristocrat , the unpatriotic rich man is
packing-@ @up for departure . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.485

But he shall not get departed . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.486

A wooden-shod force has seized all Barriers , burnt or not :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.487

all that enters , all that seeks to issue , is stopped there , and
dragged to the Hôtel-de-Ville : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.488

coaches , tumbrils , plate , furniture , ' many meal-sacks , ' in time
even ' flocks and herds ' encumber the Place de Grève .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.489

And so it roars , and rages , and brays ; drums beating , steeples
pealing ; criers rushing with hand-bells : " Oyez , oyez , All men to
their Districts to be enrolled ! " CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.490

The Districts have met in gardens , open squares ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.491

are getting marshalled into volunteer troops . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.492

No redhot ball has yet fallen from Besenval's Camp ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.493

on the contrary , Deserters with their arms are continually dropping in
: CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.494

nay now , joy of joys , at two in the afternoon , the Gardes Françaises
, being ordered to Saint-Denis , and flatly declining , have come over
in a body ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.495

It is a fact worth many . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.496

Three_thousand_six_hundred of the best fighting men , with complete
accoutrement ; with cannoneers even , and cannon !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.497

Their officers are left standing alone ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.498

could not so much as succeed in ' spiking the guns . '
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.499

The very Swiss , it may now be hoped , Château-Vieux and the others ,
who have doubts about fighting . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.500

Our Parisian Militia , - which some think it were better to name
National Guard , - is prospering as heart could wish .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.501

It promised to be forty-eight_thousand ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.502

but will in few hours double and quadruple that number :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.503

invincible , if we had only arms ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.504

But see , the promised Charleville Boxes , marked <font> Artillerie !
<$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.505

Here , then , are arms enough ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.506

- Conceive the blank face of Patriotism , when it found them filled with
rags , foul linen , candle-ends , and bits of wood !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.507

Provost of the Merchants , how is this ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.508

Neither at the Chartreux Convent , whither we were sent with signed
order , is there or ever was there any weapon of war .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.509

Nay here , in this Seine Boat , safe under tarpaulings <paren> had not
the nose of Patriotism been of the finest <$$paren> , are ' five
thousand-weight of gunpowder ; ' not coming <font> in <$$font> , but
surreptitiously going out ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.510

What meanest thou , Flesselles ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,155.511

'T@ @is a ticklish game , that of ' amusing ' <P_1,156> us .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.512

Cat plays with captive mouse : but mouse with enraged cat , with enraged
National Tiger ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.513

Meanwhile , the faster , O ye black-aproned Smiths , smite ; with strong
arm and willing heart . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.514

This man and that , all stroke from head to heel , shall thunder
alternating , and ply the great forge-hammer , till stithy {COM:anvil}
reel and ring again ; while ever and anon , overhead , booms the
alarm-cannon , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.515

- for the City has now got gunpowder . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.516

Pikes are fabricated ; fifty_thousand of them , in six-and-thirty hours
: CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.517

judge whether the Black-aproned have been idle .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.518

Dig trenches , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.519

unpave the streets , ye others , assiduous , man and maid ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.520

cram the earth in barrel-barricades , at each of them a volunteer sentry
; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.521

pile the whinstones in window-sills and upper rooms .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.522

Have scalding pitch , at least boiling water ready , ye weak old women ,
to pour it and dash it on Royal-Allemand , with your old skinny arms :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.523

your shrill curses along with it will not be wanting !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.524

- Patrols of the newborn National Guard , bearing torches , scour the
streets , all that night ; which otherwise are vacant , yet illuminated
in every window by order . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.525

Strange-looking ; like some naphtha-lighted City of the Dead , with here
and there a flight of perturbed Ghosts . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.526

O poor mortals , how ye make this Earth bitter for each other ; this
fearful and wonderful Life fearful and horrible ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.527

and Satan has his place in all hearts ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.528

Such agonies and ragings and wailings ye have , and have had , in all
times : - to be buried all , in so deep silence ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.529

and the salt sea is not swoln with your tears .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.530

Great meanwhile is the moment , when tidings of Freedom reach us ; when
the long-@ @enthralled soul , from amid its chains and squalid stagnancy
, arises , were it still only in blindness and bewilderment , and swears
by Him that made it , that it will be <font> free ! <$$font>
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.531

Free ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.532

Understand that well , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.533

it is the deep commandment , dimmer or clearer , of our whole being , to
be <font> free . <$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.534

Freedom is the one purport , wisely aimed at , or unwisely , of all
man's struggles , toilings and sufferings , in this Earth .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.535

Yes , supreme is such a moment <paren> if thou have known it <$$paren> :
first vision as of a flame-girt Sinai , in this our waste Pilgrimage , -
which thenceforth wants not its pillar of cloud by day , and pillar of
fire by night ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.536

Something it is even , - nay , something considerable , when the chains
have grown <font> corrosive <$$font> , poisonous , - to be free ' from
oppression by our fellow-man . ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.537

Forward , ye maddened sons of France ; be it towards this destiny or
towards that ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.538

Around you is but starvation , falsehood , corruption and the clam of
death . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.539

Where ye are is no abiding . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,156.540

<P_1,157>

Imagination may , imperfectly , figure how Commandant Besenval , in the
Champ-de-Mars , has worn out these sorrowful hours . Insurrection
raging all round ; his men melting away ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.542

From Versailles , to the most pressing messages , comes no answer ; or
once only some vague word of answer which is worse than none .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.543

A Council of Officers can decide merely that there is no decision :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.544

Colonels inform him , ' weeping , ' that they do not think their men
will fight . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.545

Cruel uncertainty is here : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.546

war-god Broglie sits yonder , inaccessible in his Olympus ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.547

does not descend terror-clad , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.548

does not produce his whiff of grapeshot ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.549

sends no orders . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.550

Truly , in the Château of Versailles all seems mystery :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.551

in the Town of Versailles , were we there , all is rumour , alarm and
indignation . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.552

An august National Assembly sits , to appearance , menaced with death ;
endeavouring to defy death . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.553

It has resolved ' that Necker carries with him the regrets of the Nation
. ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.554

It has sent solemn Deputation over to the Château , with entreaty to
have these troops withdrawn . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.555

In vain : his Majesty , with a singular composure , invites us to be
busy rather with our own duty , making the Constitution !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.556

Foreign Pandours , and suchlike , go pricking and prancing , with a
swashbuckler air ; with an eye too probably to the <font> Salle des
Menus <$$font> , - were it not for the ' grim-looking countenances '
that crowd all avenues there . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.557

Be firm , ye National Senators ; the cynosure of a firm , grim-looking
people ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.558

The august National Senators determine that there shall , at least , be
Permanent Session till this thing end . Wherein however , consider that
worthy Lafranc de Pompignan , our new President , whom we have named
Bailly's successor , is an old man , wearied with many things .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.559

He is the Brother of that Pompignan who meditated lamentably on the Book
of <font> Lamentations : <$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.560

{COM:french_verse_omitted}

Poor Bishop Pompignan withdraws ; having got Lafayette for helper or
substitute : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.562

this latter , as nocturnal Vice-President , with a thin house in
disconsolate humour , sits sleepless , with lights unsnuffed ; - waiting
what the hours will bring . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.563

So at Versailles . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,157.564

But at Paris , agitated Besenval , before retiring for the night , has
stept over to old M. de Sombreuil , of the <font> Hôtel <P_1,158> des
Invalides <$$font> hard by . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.565

M. de Sombreuil has , what is a great secret , some
eight-and-twenty_thousand stand of muskets deposited in his cellars
there ; but no trust in the temper of his Invalides .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.566

This day , for example , he sent twenty of the fellows down to unscrew
those muskets ; lest Sedition might snatch at them :
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.567

but scarcely , in six hours , had the twenty unscrewed twenty gun-locks
, or dogs-heads <font> <paren> chiens <$$paren> <$$font> of locks , -
each Invalide his dogshead ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.568

If ordered to fire , they would , he imagines , turn their cannon
against himself . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.569

Unfortunate old military gentlemen , it is your hour , not of glory !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.570

Old Marquis de Launay too , of the Bastille , has pulled up his
drawbridges long since , ' and retired into his interior ; ' with
sentries walking on his battlements , under the midnight sky , aloft
over the glare of illuminated Paris ; - whom a National Patrol , passing
that way , takes the liberty of firing at : ' seven shots towards twelve
at night , ' which do not take effect . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.571

This was the 13th day of July 1789 ; a worse day , many said , than the
last 13th was , when only hail fell out of Heaven , not madness rose out
of Tophet , ruining worse than crops ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.572

In these same days , as Chronology will teach us , hot old Marquis
Mirabeau lies stricken down , at Argenteuil , - <font> not <$$font>
within sound of these alarm-guns ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.573

for <font> he <$$font> properly is not there , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.574

and only the body of him now lies , deaf and cold forever .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.575

It was on Saturday night that he , drawing his last life-breaths , gave
up the ghost there ; - leaving a world , which would never go to his
mind , now broken out , seemingly , into deliration and the <font>
culbute générale . <$$font> CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.576

What is it to him , departing elsewhither , on his long journey ?
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.577

The old Château Mirabeau stands silent , far off , on its scarped rock ,
in that ' gorge of two windy valleys ; ' the pale-fading spectre now of
a Château : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.578

this huge World-riot , and France , and the World itself , fades also ,
like a shadow on the great still mirror-sea ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.579

and all shall be as God wills . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.580

Young Mirabeau , sad of heart , for he loved this crabbed brave old
Father ; sad of heart , and occupied with sad cares , - is withdrawn
from Public History . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.581

The great crisis transacts itself without him .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,158.582

<P_1,159>

<heading>

Chapter VI . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.585

Storm and Victory . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.586

<$$heading>

But , to the living and the struggling , a new , Fourteenth morning
dawns . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.588

Under all roofs of this distracted City is the nodus of a drama , not
untragical , crowding towards solution . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.589

The bustlings and preparings , the tremors and menaces ; the tears that
fell from old eyes ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.590

This day , my sons , ye shall quit you like men . By the memory of your
fathers' wrongs , by the hope of your children's rights !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.591

Tyranny impends in red wrath : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.592

help for you is none , if not in your own right hands .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.593

This day ye must do or die . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.594

From earliest light , a sleepless Permanent Committee has heard the old
cry , now waxing almost frantic , mutinous : Arms ! Arms !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.595

Provost Flesselles , or what traitors there are among you , may think of
those Charleville Boxes . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.596

A hundred-and-fifty-thousand of us ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.597

and but the third man furnished with so much as a pike !
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.598

Arms are the one thing needful : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.599

with arms we are an unconquerable man-defying National Guard ; without
arms , a rabble to be whiffed with grapeshot . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.600

Happily the word has arisen , for no secret can be kept , - that there
lie muskets at the <font> Hôtel des Invalides . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.601

Thither will we : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.602

King's Procureur M. Ethys de Corny , and whatsoever of authority a
Permanent Committee can lend , shall go with us .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.603

Besenval's Camp is there ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.604

perhaps he will not fire on us ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.605

if he kill us , we shall but die . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.606

Alas , poor Besenval , with his troops melting away in that manner , has
not the smallest humour to fire ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.607

At five o'clock this morning , as he lay dreaming , oblivious in the
<font> Ecole Militaire <$$font> , a ' figure ' stood suddenly at his
bedside ; ' with face rather handsome ; eyes inflamed , speech rapid and
curt , air audacious : ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.608

such a figure drew Priam's curtains ! CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.609

The message and monition of the figure was , that resistance would be
hopeless ; that if blood flowed , wo to him who shed it .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.610

Thus spoke the figure : CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.611

and vanished . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.612

' Withal there was a kind of eloquence that struck one . '
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,159.613

Besenval admits that he <P_1,160> should have arrested him , but did not
. CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.614

Who this figure with inflamed eyes , with speech rapid and curt , might
be ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.615

Besenval knows , CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.616

but mentions not . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.617

Camille Desmoulins ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.618

Pythagorean Marquis Valadi , inflamed with ' violent motions all night
at the Palais Royal ' ? CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.619

Fame names him ' Young M. Meillar ; ' CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.620

then shuts her lips about him forever . CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.621

In any case , behold , about nine in the morning , our National
Volunteers rolling in long wide flood south-westward to the <font> Hôtel
des Invalides ; <$$font> in search of the one thing needful .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.622

King's Procureur M. Ethys de Corny and officials are there ;
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.623

the Curé of Saint-Etienne du Mont marches unpacific at the head of his
militant Parish ; CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.624

the Clerks of the Basoche in red coats we see marching , now Volunteers
of the Basoche ; the Volunteers of the Palais Royal : - National
Volunteers , numerable by tens of thousands ; of one heart and mind .
CARLYLE-1837-1,1,160.625

