<BEGIN_carlyle-1835-1>

<P_2,254>

{ED:CXXXV._To_Mrs._Aitken,_Dumfries}

5 Cheyne Row , Chelsea , London , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.4

<font> 28th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} January <$$font> 1835 .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.5

My dear Sister - I have been in your debt for a Letter , which came most
acceptably , and which I did not at the time mean to owe you for so long
: CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.6

my delay , as I hope you have never doubted , arose from occupation ,
from want of news , from anything but want of care about you .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.7

I have an evening to myself just now , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.8

and , as I can hope also for a frank , you shall have the benefit of
such opportunity . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.9

It gave us great satisfaction to hear that you were safe , and had
realised a little Boy , of whom we have learnt since from various
quarters to entertain a hopeful opinion . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.10

Nourish up the little Alick with all diligence ; that he grow to be a
man profitable in his day and generation ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.11

Our work in it will be over by_and_by ; and his be beginning .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.12

Mrs. Welsh saw you and him and James , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,254.13

and sent us word <P_2,255> about it ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.14

she subsequently also sent to you for news CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.15

<paren> she told us <$$paren> , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.16

but your own Letter was just coming off . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.17

Or perhaps I am confusing all manner of dates here ?
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.18

For the truth is , I have sat so chained to my writing-table these many
weeks , {TEXT:;} that much of the outer world often seems to me almost
like a dream . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.19

James , I think , has very likely done well to purchase himself a house
. CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.20

You will find yourself much more comfortable in a " bit <font> haddin
<$$font> {COM:holding,_house} of your ain for a' that " ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.21

indeed , I imagine the house is of itself far better than your present
one : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.22

besides it tends to give the Goodman a kind of consistency in his Trade
; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.23

and so I hope every way will turn to good . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.24

He has a fair proportion of business , I understand :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.25

" the hand of the diligent " had long ago the best word ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.26

and even in these times shall not be altogether foiled .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.27

I hope all that is favourable of you both ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.28

to hear that you live not as fools but as wise : that is the grand
blessing for this world and for the next . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,255.29

As to myself , having already told you of <P_2,256> sitting over my
papers , and struggling with my evil genius there , I have hardly
anything more to say that is important . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.30

My health stands out very tolerably , though it is the most unwholesome
craft : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.31

it is true , I am faithful in walking and so forth ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.32

and we have generally weather one can walk in . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.33

I do not think I ever saw a year with less than <font> six <$$font>
times as much rain : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.34

this is a far drier climate than yours , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.35

and the present season , moreover , has been unusually dry .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.36

In other respects , all goes as it was wont , or nearly so .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.37

We have a few friends that come about us , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.38

and might very easily have more <font> visitors <$$font> if not friends
; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.39

but find no profit in that : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.40

the good are <font> thin-@ @sawn {COM:thin-sown} <$$font> everywhere ,
and perhaps not thicker here than elsewhere , though there are <font>
more <$$font> to choose among . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.41

The quantity of <font> folly <$$font> in all shapes that one finds here
is really amazing . Gabble-gabble in every kind under the sun except
the <font> wise <$$font> kind : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.42

the reasons are " like two wheat-grains in the bushel of chaff . "
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.43

We must even let it go on , as it has done , and will do ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,256.44

it can , on the whole , " da' tha naither <P_2,257> ill na' guid . "
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.45

At lowest it is my happiness , as it was of that joiner friend of
James's <paren> whose name I think was Thomson <$$paren> , that if
contradiction is like to drive one mad at any time , one can " take gey
guid care ; and aye mostly work in <font> a place by himsel ' !
<$$font> " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.46

I , by the nature of the case , mostly aye work in just such a place .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.47

- What the fruit of my working is to be we shall not begin to know yet
for seven or eight months ; or perhaps for not as many years :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.48

that is the law of the trade , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.49

and one must just abide by it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.50

I do the best I can , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.51

and shall pray to be thankful for such reward , or such punishment , as
is appointed . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.52

One thing alone I am sure of , that if I live I shall <font> have done
<$$font> with the weary job ; - and then hope for another that may be
easier and more profitable . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.53

Probably some of them have told you that the thing was growing on my
hands , and threatened to become three volumes !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.54

I was to be done in February or March ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.55

and so , if I have it all fairly off my hands by the end of May I shall
think it very tolerable . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,257.56

But <font> then <$$font> <P_2,258> indeed , if the guiding Powers
continue kind , Jack will be coming homewards , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.57

and we shall have a <font> gliff <$$font> {COM:glimpse} of Scotland
again ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.58

It is by toil , and the vanquishing of trouble and obstruction , that
man lives here below . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.59

I need not tell you about our Elections and public matters ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.60

men have been parading all streets with Election Placards on long poles
, or with two <font> poleless <$$font> Placards , one on breast and one
on back , fastened with string ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.61

others have been busy singing Ballads , hawking Political squibs , etc.
etc. , of the like purport ; to all which , I have said : Behold I have
no care for thee ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.62

You too , I find , have had the pleasure of an Election ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.63

and Sharpe has got once more returned , though with difficulty .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.64

It seems to me there are confused times coming ; times that can@ @not be
furthersome to peaceable men . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.65

For these also , however , one must be ready . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.66

Meanwhile , they that are called to mingle in such work are not the
enviablest ; but rather they that can say to it , Go thou thy way , I go
mine . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,258.67

<P_2,259>

Allan Cunningham has been unwell , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.69

and I have not seen him for a great while , though often purposing to do
it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.70

He lost a brother here in Autumn , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.71

and seemed to suffer from it : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.72

his wife also has lost a brother resident here .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.73

They are <font> canny <$$font> people ; of whom one gets , with some
good , no chance of hurt . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.74

" There is a Dumfries Mason , " Jane said , the first time she saw him ;
" better such , very considerably , than many a Cockney Literary
Gentleman ! " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.75

My Mother has written me a Letter since yours , with nothing but good
news in it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.76

I fear always she leans to the <font> favourable side . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.77

Your accounts of her way of doing , the look of her rooms , etc. , are
very interesting to me , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.78

and form the best of what picture I have made out respecting it .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.79

She says , last time , you had sent her a cake for New-year's gift .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.80

That was right . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.81

O be good to her : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.82

I need not bid you , I do believe . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.83

She has been a blessing to us ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.84

and , I trust in God , will long continue so . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.85

When I look over the world , and see what Mothers and Fathers the
average have , I feel thankful for mine . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,259.86

She said they had been singing <P_2,260> at Scotsbrig ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.87

" Johnnie o' Cox " was sung too : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.88

I am right glad to hear of a song there . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.89

But now , <font> Missus <$$font> , I have a commission for you about
that . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.90

Will you go over to any Stationer's shop , and buy half a quire <paren>
12 sheets <$$paren> of <font> ruled <$$font> Paper
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.91

<paren> they have it ruled with blue ink , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.92

or can soon rule it <$$paren> ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.93

or if one has it not , go to another , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.94

and on the whole <font> get <$$font> it ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.95

and send it to my Mother for writing to me on . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.96

She wants nothing but straight lines to write a most sufficient slow
hand ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.97

and unless you bestir yourself in that way , I see no chance of her
securing it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.98

Now will you look to that ? CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.99

See in packing it , that you wrap it well , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.100

and if possible lay it <font> flat <$$font> <paren> in some Book if
there be such a thing ; or between two pasteboards <$$paren> ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.101

for otherwise it gets creased , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.102

and " becomes unpleasant . " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.103

I must write some more letters than this ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.104

and will not seal till to-morrow : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.105

you shall then have " time of day " again , - unless I am too hurried .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,260.106

We are going to dine with the Bullers , who have all taken up their
abode in Town , and are very kindly disposed towards <P_2,261> us .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.107

It is there that I expect a frank ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.108

for there will likely be a Radical Member or two present .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.109

Charles is becoming a notable in that department ; a <font> liesh
<$$font> {COM:brisk_effectual} fellow , were he not so loose in the
hinges ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.110

- Jane is sitting sewing here ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.111

she sends you both her kind New-year's wishes .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.112

Be happy in your quiet circle there ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.113

be faithful , diligent , undaunted . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.114

Love one another ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.115

bear one another's burdens : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.116

how much is there in that ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.117

Alas , we have all our faults , our infirmities , our blindnesses ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.118

and have much to forgive and be forgiven . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.119

God bless you , dear <font> Craw ! <$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.120

- Your affectionate Brother , T. Carlyle . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,261.121

<P_2,262>

{ED:CXXXVI._To_Alexander_Carlyle,_Catlinns,_Lockerbie}

5 Cheyne Row , Chelsea , London , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.124

<font> 28th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} January <$$font> 1835 .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.125

My dear Alick - It is long since I got you written to with any
deliberation ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.126

I know not how long . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.127

I have been so busy ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.128

nothing but flying slips of paper , and blotting and scribbling all
round me for week after week . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.129

However , now for the last eight days , I have been making a sort of
pause ; occupied only with reading and reflecting :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.130

so before falling-@ @to again , I will send you a small word .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.131

You may well fancy , judging no doubt by yourself , that I am often ,
often thinking of you while no writing goes between us :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.132

indeed whither should my mind turn , when it has leisure to meditate ,
if <font> not <$$font> towards Annandale , where so much of my
possession in this lower world lies ? ... CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.133

My Mother's last letter came the very day I had sent off a hasty scrap
to her . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,262.134

The various postscripts and notices contained in that welcome sheet gave
me a clear notion of <P_2,263> Scotsbrig , with the winter work you were
all busy in : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.135

I was particularly glad to hear you had been down shortly before , and
that " singing " had been going on among you . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.136

Long be the like among us ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.137

You can@ @not imagine how quiet and cheery all that looks from amid the
confused din of this Metropolitan Monstrosity !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.138

Here , least of all places on Earth's surface , quiet never is ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.139

a raging and a roaring ; all men hunted or hunting ; all things " made
like unto a <font> wheel <$$font> " - that turns and turns .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.140

I have grown greatly used to it now ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.141

and for most part walk the London streets as if they were peopled only
with Images , and the noise were that of some Niagara Waterfall , or
distracted universal carding-mill . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.142

There is something animating in it too ; so that in my walks I generally
turn Townwards , and go up through a larger or shorter circuit of real
London Tumult CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.143

<paren> hereabouts we are not much noisier than in the stiller parts of
Edinburgh , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.144

and in <font> our street <$$font> at ten at night and later there is no
noise at all <$$paren> : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.145

for " man likes to see the face of man ; " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,263.146

one's very dispiritment in these peopled spaces is <P_2,264> nothing to
the gloom of Puttock . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,264.147

My shortest turn <paren> for I have various of various lengths <$$paren>
is to Hyde Park Corner ; where I see quality carriages , six-horse
waggons <paren> horses all jingling with little bells <$$paren> , mail
coaches , etc. etc. ; and the Duke of Wellington@ @'s House , the
windows all barred with iron <paren> since the Reform Bill time
<$$paren> , and huge iron railing twenty feet high between him and the
street , which , as the railing is lined with wood too , he does not
seem to <font> like : <$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,264.148

there are carriages sometimes about his gate now ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,264.149

and I bless myself that I am not he . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,264.150

Let me mention also that a waggoner occasionally passes this door
<paren> of Cheyne Row <$$paren> , whose voice to his horses , " wey-ho !
" infallibly brings me in mind of one I have heard 300 miles off and
more . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,264.151

- Alas , <font> this <$$font> will never do ; the sheet almost done !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,264.152

Has the Catlinns business got itself settled yet ?
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,264.153

I was very glad to learn that there was some prospect of its soon being
settled ; and , on the whole , not sorry that you expected they might
make it eligible for you to stay there . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,264.154

Staying is always best , if one can stay ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,264.155

there <P_2,265> is such waste every way in removing ; waste of time , of
money , of habit and connections : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.156

" three flittings are equal to a fire . " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.157

But anyway you seem to take it in the right mood : that of courage and
patient faith . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.158

There is no fear in that case . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.159

The world is wide , as you say ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.160

and there is a Heaven above us go where we will .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.161

- Make my respects to little Tom ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.162

and have him speaking a mouthful of Annandale Scotch when I come back :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.163

Jane I fancy is a strapping <font> hizzy <$$font> by this time , and
able to bear her share in any dialogue . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.164

Be careful of them , poor Creatures ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.165

and above and before all things , study to train them in the way that
they should go . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.166

My own history here may be summed up in very few words .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.167

I have finished my " First Part , " which may possibly make a First
Volume ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.168

and am about beginning the Second and then the Third .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.169

On the whole , I am about <font> half <$$font> done ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.170

for a great deal of the stuff is laid in . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.171

I shall have a tough struggle however ; all the way till the summer be
come . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,265.172

Other work or thought I do not much occupy <P_2,266> myself with :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.173

this is the day's task CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.174

and is sufficient for the day . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.175

The hopes I have of it are not very high ; though I piously believe with
old Johnson that " useful diligence will at last prevail ; " and
calculate that several other shifts may open before then .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.176

... By God's blessing I calculate that the Spirit of Dishonesty <font>
shall not <$$font> get dominion over me ; nor the Spirit of Despondency
, nor any other evil spirit ; in which case all will and must be <font>
well . <$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.177

There are many people kind to me , and many that seem to think far more
of me than I merit ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.178

but it is not in them I trust . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.179

On the whole , I do often feel as if all that hindered one were in
reality a blessed furtherance towards something better .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.180

Let a man toil diligently ; cast his bread upon the waters , he shall
find it after many days . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.181

- But , alas , my dear Boy , the sheet is done .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.182

I will hope for another chance soon ; and in the meantime pray you to
bear in mind that <font> you <$$font> are now clearly my debtor , and
that before the ploughing get too hot , you are actually bound to write
to me . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,266.183

Send <font> all <$$font> manner of news , about yourself and household ,
<P_2,267> about my Mother , about every one dear to me .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.184

My Mother said you had got her a " cask of good ale . "
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.185

It was right well done : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.186

I thank you as if you had given myself a puncheon .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.187

I hope you go and see her often ; and will get her in motion again now
when the days are lengthening . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.188

This spring weather brings me in mind of many things .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.189

Jane is gone to bed ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.190

or she would <font> expressly <$$font> send her love .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.191

She had a baddish time of it with that foot CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.192

but is better now . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.193

- We have not seen Leigh Hunt for almost three months !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.194

There was no quarrel either : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.195

but I believe the poor man is very miserable , and feels shocked at my
rigorous Presbyterian principles ; in short is afraid of me !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.196

I pity him much ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.197

but think too , he is perhaps as well where he <font> is <$$font> , and
I where I am . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.198

Good-night , my dear Alick ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.199

Love to Jenny and the Bairns . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.200

- Ever your affectionate Brother , T. Carlyle .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,267.201

<P_2,268>

{ED:CXXXVII._To_his_Mother,_Scotsbrig}

Chelsea , London , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.204

<font> 29th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} January <$$font> 1835 .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.205

My dear Mother - ... I have told Jean to get you twelve <font> ruled
<$$font> sheets of Paper at Dumfries , and send them out for my benefit
: CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.206

it appears to me , you need nothing but straight courses laid out for
you to write as well as need be ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.207

you will be slower than some of us ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.208

but you can begin in time always , and fill your sheet independently of
any of them . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.209

I have strictly charged Jean to look to the paper ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.210

so now it will depend on yourself . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.211

- The Letter you sent was very gratifying and cheerful :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.212

I could fancy you all there , assembled in peace and goodwill , and see
all the marketing , beef-salting and other winter work going on .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.213

... My own work here gets forward as well as it can .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.214

I am very anxious to be perfectly accurate <paren> which I find to have
been exceedingly neglected by my forerunners <$$paren> ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.215

the consequence of that is great searching and trouble ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.216

yet the thing when one is doing it ought to <font> be done . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,268.217

Hollow work always shows its hollowness one <P_2,269> day or other :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.218

all men in all places at all times ought to <font> decline <$$font>
working hollow . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.219

As to the reception I shall meet with , there is no calculating ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.220

nor indeed does it give me almost any anxiety whatever .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.221

The people that judge of Books and Men in these days are a wretched
people , without wisdom , nay , without sincerity , which is the first
chance for having wisdom ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.222

one is under the necessity of letting them babble out their foolish say
, and heeding it no more than the cawing of rooks , - in whose sound ,
guidance is <font> not <$$font> for man or woman .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.223

If I write anything that has meaning in {TEXT:missing_"in"} it such
meaning <font> can@ @not <$$font> be lost , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.224

He that <font> gave <$$font> me the meaning will care fitly for it .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.225

I wish , however , I were done with it ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.226

But I must stand to my tools first ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.227

there is no other way . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.228

The trees will be all leafy , and the fields all <font> gowany <$$font>
before I even see the end afar off ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.229

nevertheless through it I will be , if life and strength are left me .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.230

For the rest , dear Mother , be not concerned about my health suffering
: CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.231

I find it from day to day the <font> thriftiest <$$font> way not to
overwork myself ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.232

and really my health stands wonderfully well . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,269.233

You see I am at this very <P_2,270> time giving myself a half-recreation
of ten days . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.234

By the time you read this , I hope to be in full activity again .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.235

The Bullers are come to live in London ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.236

Mrs. Buller thinks Charles's health will fare better , were she here to
look after it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.237

She is almost fearfully bound up in Charles ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.238

and I think if he were to die , would almost die too :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.239

it is not safe to lean so on aught earthly . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.240

Charlie , however , is really a good fellow , and rising in his sphere
of life ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.241

yet one can@ @not well prophesy much of him , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.242

he is so flighty , not in his purposes , but in his fits of application
. CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.243

He and his mother and the whole of them are Radically given , to a very
decided degree . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.244

That also is my humour , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.245

but I find little profit in speaking it out ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.246

<font> rebellion <$$font> , against authority of any kind , is always a
barren matter , full of irritancy , of poor painful feelings which are
more of the Devil than of God . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.247

We are to dine with the Bullers to-night . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.248

I have not been in the Town these three days , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.249

but took my exercise in delving the garden , of which I have got a
quarter put in order again . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,270.250

You will judge what a <P_2,271> dry soil we have by my delving at this
season . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.251

It is indeed CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.252

and has been the finest winter I can remember . ...
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.253

{ED:CXXXVIII._To_his_Mother,_Scotsbrig}

Chelsea , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.255

<font> 17th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} February <$$font> 1835 .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.256

My dear Mother - I am afraid I do not keep my promise and purpose to you
so well as I ought in the writing way ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.257

it is the weakness of the ability not of the will .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.258

I sit here of late so very motionless over my task-sheet , that the
world is almost foreign to me : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.259

I take no note of its ways ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.260

the flight of days and of weeks goes on unmarked ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.261

and I am astonished to find them departed . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.262

You get the Newspaper , happily still with its <font> two strokes ;
<$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.263

and will not be uneasy about me . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.264

Besides I think you know so much of my old punctuality as to be pretty
sure that if anything really bad were happening , I would not keep you
in ignorance . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.265

As to the <font> fash <$$font> of putting the Newspaper into the
Post-office , that is literally nothing ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.266

I go out to walk daily , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.267

and nearly always from choice go up towards the press of the Town
<paren> close <font> past <$$font> the Post-office <$$paren> ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,271.268

<P_2,272>

the tumult of these , my brethren , sons of Adam , amuses me .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.270

How different from the lone musing stroll along the Glaisters Hill-side
! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.271

I never think of that now without a kind of shudder at it ; of
thankfulness that I am away from it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.272

- But indeed I ought to write to you more deliberately , and will
<paren> were this villainous Book once done <$$paren> :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.273

nay , there is hope that I shall see you again before very long , which
will be far better ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.274

Jack's letter when it came in reminded me that I had heard nothing from
Annandale since the last time of writing to him ; also that I had not
written to you again as I meant . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.275

- He is well , the worthy Doctor , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.276

and talks of home-coming ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.277

That late illness of Lady Clare's seems to have been a trying kind of
predicament for him ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.278

and I think he managed with great honesty and discretion ; really very
<font> well . <$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.279

The " Homoeopathic Medicine " he talks of is a thing the poor <font>
Gomerals <$$font> are making a noise about here too :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.280

it is probably among the most perfect delusions of its day , as far as I
can see into it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.281

Neither for love nor for money let a man have <font> any <$$font> thing
to do with delusions in any place or at any time !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,272.282

<P_2,273>

Jack , I trust , will come back to us <font> grown <$$font> in many
respects ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.284

I hope we shall all meet again , for the better and not for the worse .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.285

As to my own proceedings here , they amount to almost nothing , except
the slow but determined progress my poor Book is making .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.286

I <font> can@ @not <$$font> write it fast ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.287

I could write it fast enough , if I would write it ill :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.288

but that I have determined not to do - wilfully .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.289

It will be bad enough <font> against <$$font> one's will .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.290

O that I were done with it ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.291

But Patience ! Patience ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.292

One must <font> go <$$font> on , - as we did at the Cressfield shearing
: CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.293

were it but a sheaf cut , it will not " <font> loup in again . <$$font>
" CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.294

Hurry after all is of no use ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.295

one does nothing of any weight by <font> hurrying . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.296

Many a time I think of my good Father's method of working , how he went
on " without haste , without rest ; " and did in that way the very most
, I must believe , that he <font> could <$$font> do .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.297

I am not so wise in my trade ; which , indeed , is more difficult to
manage wisely . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.298

However , you are not to suppose that I work myself into ill health .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,273.299

No ; I really am not under my usual condition in that particular ;
<P_2,274> rather above , I should say ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.300

for I take <font> no <$$font> drugs now ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.301

and , for example , yesterday I walked upwards of eight miles <paren> to
and from the Bullers' old house ; they are in a new one now , a mile and
half nearer us <$$paren> before dinner , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.302

and was not a whit exhausted . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.303

I am still in a <font> new <$$font> sort of health , not as I used to be
; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.304

nay I sometimes think , I shall get heartily healthy once more , and be
a young brisk man - turned of forty ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.305

In my mind , I feel quite young yet ; and <font> growing <$$font> , as
when I was eighteen : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.306

this is the greatest blessing . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.307

As to my outlooks here , and indeed as to the world and the ways of it ,
and <font> its <$$font> usage of me better or worse , I can@ @not say
that my heart is distressed , or will distress itself about it :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.308

it is God's world , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.309

and I am God's worker in it ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.310

well for me if I can <font> be <$$font> that ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.311

I seem to see better and better that I have not wholly mistaken my
calling , in that point of view ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.312

and as to the rest - <font> Good <$$font> is our Maker ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.313

He will give us strength according to our burden .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.314

- Hitherto the look of Literature as a trade is full of the wretchedest
contradictions ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,274.315

nor do I see how any man that has more than meat to look for , <P_2,275>
and would <font> keep <$$font> , not a carriage , but a conscience , can
do much good in it as a getter of money . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.316

I have not found it very blessed in the way of <font> ease <$$font>
either as I worked at it : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.317

on the whole , if it do not show a fairer side , I will fling it from me
, and seek bread <font> otherwise : <$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.318

there is bread to be had elsewhere ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.319

and I will think my thought , and write it down <paren> as the Heavens
enable me <$$paren> , and ask only Heaven's permission to do that .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.320

Accordingly , I question if there is any man in London with as small a "
fixed capital , " who carries his head as free , and will take fewer
<font> dunts <$$font> from man or thing than " one Carlyle
{COM:font_change_around_"y"} of Craigenputtock , " worthy man , - one of
whose <font> toes <$$font> is sore at this moment ; which is his grand
grievance . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.321

The truth is , dear Mother , I am <font> full <$$font> of my task , and
see it getting on ; and think that is more than perhaps His Majesty can
say : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.322

for me it ought to be enough . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.323

The Book will probably bring me no money ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.324

but I can do without that ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.325

and were it done and my hands free , I can write an " Article " or two
again . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,275.326

They say it is going to be a tolerable <P_2,276> enough Book ; a queer
Book , yes , a <font> very <$$font> queer Book .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.327

- Jane's foot is quite whole , and her health , I think , as good as it
has been for long . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.328

We go on very quietly here : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.329

" indulge " in a cup of hot coffee at eight o'clock by way of breakfast
: CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.330

she then goes downstairs , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.331

and leaves me the room to scribble in till one or two ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.332

then I walk or dig till four : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.333

dinner next of simple mutton chop and <font> 'tatie ; <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.334

a little music , reading , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.335

or by a time some solid friendly visitor CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.336

<paren> no <font> quack <$$font> is at the pains to come so far
<$$paren> , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.337

and so at ten our porridge comes in , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.338

and " all is by " in a very innocent manner . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.339

... Now , when is the ruled sheet to come ? CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.340

I long to know all about you , how you are , what you are doing .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.341

... O what a blessing that you are still able to go on so well . That
you have a reasonable , acquiescing , hoping spirit !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.342

I thank you , dear Mother , a_thousand times for the lessons you and my
Father taught me ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.343

they are more precious than fine gold . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.344

... Jane's love to you all . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.345

Good - night , dear Mother . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.346

- Ever your affectionate , T. Carlyle . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,276.347

<P_2,277>

The <font> Examiner <$$font> comes irregularly to poor Hunt ; sometimes
<paren> as last week <$$paren> not at all : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.349

<font> that <$$font> is the reason , and not my neglect .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.350

Almost always you will get something on Sabbath ; and sometimes on
another day too . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.351

They can ask when they are at the village . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.352

All are talking politics here ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.353

not I : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.354

it is <font> nothing <$$font> to me . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.355

{ED:CXXXIX._To_Alexander_Carlyle,_Catlinns,_Lockerbie}

Chelsea , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.357

<font> 27th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} February <$$font> 1835 .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.358

... The Proverb says , ' Better a finger off than ay' wagging . '
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.359

I will not regret that you are done with that <font> glarry
{COM:miry,_muddy} <$$font> business of Catlinns ; that now all the world
is all before you where to choose . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.360

There is a probability that farm-stock will not be much <font> lower
<$$font> , at any rate , about Whitsunday ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.361

so your calculation , favourable for the present , may be found to hold
good then : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.362

and thus with " private capital " rather increased , with health , and a
free heart and conscience , you can <font> take the bent <$$font>
{COM:take_the_open_field,_set_out_on_new_adventures} again .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,277.363

I wish I knew <P_2,278> what were really wisest for you .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.364

For a <font> wisest <$$font> thing there indubitably is ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.365

only we with our poor eyes can@ @not always discern it .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.366

I , in particular , so far off , so inexperienced in the whole matter ,
can give you no counsel that has more to recommend it than best
intention . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.367

You do well to ask counsel of the Heavens , and man's Great Guide there
. CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.368

New enterprises are always best entered on in that solemn feeling of
dependence : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.369

in various senses that I can see , it is truly written , " He that
seeketh <font> findeth . <$$font> " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.370

- On the whole , however , you are not to take gloomy views ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.371

for there is nothing to mourn at , to despair at :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.372

a serious cheerfulness ; that is the right mood in this as in all cases
. CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.373

It is my impression that you ought not to meddle again with farms , at
least not this year , when the season is spent , and so much is
discouraging in that direction . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.374

In fact , I rather still incline to conjecture that Farming is
henceforth no good trade in Scotland or Britain ; not a better trade
than others ; a worse than several . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,278.375

We have often talked over that matter : high <P_2,279> rents , low
prices ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.376

a hungry set of Landlords <paren> for I believe they too are sunk in
debt <$$paren> , a population which , whatever Newspaper " Prosperities
of trade " and so forth may say , is <paren> and ever must be <$$paren>
struggling deeper and deeper into destitution , and inability to
purchase anything but Potatoes ; - these , with the enormous competition
, are fatal circumstances for farming . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.377

Farming in America were something , - on your own land !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.378

For the sky is bounteous there as here , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.379

and the sky's bounty is not there whisked away , as by art magic , into
hands that have not toiled for it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.380

At the worst I always look to America . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.381

Perhaps , as to Scottish farming , it is well that you are rid of that .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.382

Nothing else suggests itself to me as so likely for you as going down to
Annan . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.383

There is always , and must always be , a good deal of trading in grain
and farm-produce ; in the management of which , a man that <font> can
<$$font> manage it with discretion , punctuality , energy , must find
some sort of reward . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.384

What degree of reward it is at present , I know not at all ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.385

but you do CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.386

or can learn ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,279.387

and as for your fitness to work in that way , I have <P_2,280> always
understood it to be very considerable , and that , if you would improve
more and more in <font> Punctuality <$$font> <paren> which is the soul
of all commerce <$$paren> it might decidedly become superior ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,280.388

and I know not how much so . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,280.389

But the danger all over Annandale <paren> perhaps less in Annan than
elsewhere <$$paren> is that miserable habit of <font> maffling <$$font>
{COM:trifling} , in all senses of the word : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,280.390

you must guard sternly and continually against that .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,280.391

I have also noticed that you are too sanguine or vehement <paren> which
is also a fault of my own <$$paren> , and take in more work than you can
accomplish : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,280.392

this is a great enemy to Punctuality <paren> one so often fails , and
gets into the habit of failing <$$paren> , an " enemy to verta
{COM:virtue} " in general . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,280.393

Lastly the whole breed of us have " a dibble of a temper . "
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,280.394

These , my dear Brother , are the things to be striven with , to be
better and better subdued : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,280.395

it is really my opinion that you were then <font> well qualified
<$$font> for that kind of industry , and might find yourself more at
home thereby in Annan than anywhere you have yet been .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,280.396

There are really some trustworthy and regular-@ @working substantial
characters <P_2,281> there ; with whom by degrees you would get into the
proper footing , and find it profitable every way .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.397

I think they are the best people I know about in our county .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.398

The loose , the vague , the irregular that have no rule or plan of
conducting themselves <paren> of whom also there are plenty <$$paren> ,
you will naturally shun : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.399

there may be profit away from such ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.400

<font> with <$$font> such it is not possible that profit can be .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.401

- Think therefore what you might earn by trading in <paren> say
<$$paren> corn and meal , no farther than you already see and understand
such trade . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.402

If it would suffice to support you , I think you might go with no
hesitation , with alacrity . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.403

A house and park <paren> cow's grass , at any rate <$$paren> can@ @not
cost very much ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.404

and with no servant , and a wife faithfully disposed to do the best ,
and who will learn better and better to do it , you can be far more
comfortable than heretofore <paren> with such a set of <font> gillenyers
<$$font> {COM:great,_lazy_gluttons} <$$paren> ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.405

you may live there in a still but assiduously industrious way , putting
your hand no farther than the sleeve will let : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,281.406

I think there <P_2,282> is a fair prospect , that <font> fitness
<$$font> for your employment would really bring recompense in it ;
better and better recompense as you grew fitter .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.407

- You see I have it all cut and dry for you , as if I knew it all .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.408

But you will not forget that I properly know nothing of it , as it
practically , at the moment <font> is : <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.409

you will correct my theory when you find it and the reality part company
. CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.410

... I may say truly , Clow of Land@ @'s liking to <font> Teufelsdröckh
<$$font> is a real satisfaction to me ; among the more genuine I have
had from that Book . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.411

That it comes home to an earnest mind , so far away from it in every
sense , is proof that there is earnest stuff in it ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.412

and should and does please me much more than any flimsy Review-praise it
could have got from any Critic now going . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.413

I unluckily have not one other copy , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.414

or the worthy neighbour should have it : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.415

perhaps it may be reprinted as a Book one day , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.416

and then <paren> if it be in our time <$$paren> we may have another
chance . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,282.417

I feel pretty much inclined to believe that had it been published in
that fashion at <P_2,283> first , it might actually have <font> done .
<$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.418

Several persons do more than like it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.419

My last Copy was solicited from me <paren> through the Bullers <$$paren>
very lately by a Sir W. Molesworth , a young Squire , of
Radical-Utilitarian temper , but solid English material ; much to my
surprise ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.420

for of <font> his <$$font> whole Philosophy <font> it <$$font> is
subversive . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.421

He is the man who has given , to Mill's charge , 2000 +L {TEXT:+L2000}
<paren> for he is rich enough <$$paren> to set a going that <font>
Review <$$font> of theirs . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.422

The first number of it is coming out soon . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.423

As for the <font> French Revolution <$$font> , the worst fault of it is
, it gets on so dreadfully <font> slowly . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.424

I think otherwise it is better than anything I have done ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.425

for it rests upon a <font> truth <$$font> , upon truths ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.426

and if I had done <font> my best <$$font> with it , I will very
cheerfully tumble it forth to let the world do <font> its <$$font> best
or its worst : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.427

Fraser has it advertised as " getting ready " in his next <font>
Magazine <$$font> number . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.428

The party we had at the Taylors' was most brisk , and the cleverest
<paren> best gifted <$$paren> I have been at for years :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,283.429

Mill , Charles Buller <paren> one of the gayest , lightly-@ @sparkling ,
lovable souls in the world <$$paren> , <font> Repository <$$font> Fox
<paren> who <font> hotches <$$font> {COM:fidgets} and laughs <P_2,284>
at least <$$paren> , Fonblanque , the <font> Examiner <$$font> Editor ,
- were the main men . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.430

It does one good ; though I buy it dear , dining so late : towards eight
o'clock ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.431

- I have also seen Southey the Poet <paren> at another Taylor's , where
is one of the finest old women ever discovered : a Miss Fenwick from
Northumberland <$$paren> : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.432

Southey is lean as a harrow ; <font> dun <$$font> as a tobacco-spluchan
{COM:font_change_around_"spluchan",_meaning_"pouch"} ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.433

<font> no <$$font> chin <paren> I mean the smallest <$$paren> , <font>
snubbed <$$font> Roman nose , vehement brown eyes , huge <font> white
<$$font> head of hair ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.434

when he rises , all legs together . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.435

We had considerable talk together : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.436

he is a man positive in his own Tory Church of England way ; well
informed , rational ; a good man : but perhaps so striking for nothing
as for his excitability and irritability , which I should judge to be
pre-eminent even among Poets . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.437

We parted kindly ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.438

and might be ready to meet again . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.439

He lives at Keswick <paren> in Cumberland there <$$paren> ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.440

thinks the world is sinking to ruin , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.441

and writes diligently . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.442

There are few sensible mortals anywhere : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,284.443

I suppose the best stock of them might be looked for <P_2,285> here .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.444

We do not see many people ; yet enough for our purposes ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.445

and could see more . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.446

The Bullers are very agreeable ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.447

<font> old <$$font> Charles was down yesterday ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.448

and played a game at chess with Jane : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.449

I like him ever the better were he not so <font> deaf . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.450

But , on the whole , there is nothing I find more profitable than to be
left alone with my <font> French Revolution . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.451

" They can da' tha naither ill na' guid ! " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.452

You can fancy me sitting there in the old scribbling way , as you have
seen me at Puttock ; except that the <font> outrake <$$font>
{COM:airing,_walk} is so inexpressibly different and cheerfuller here :
into the very throng of the sons of Adam and the business they have .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.453

The <font> noise <$$font> long since has become indifferent to me :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.454

<font> here <$$font> at any rate we have no noise ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.455

but at night are as still as you . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.456

... Good night , my dear Brother ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.457

may God guide you and bless you ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.458

My love to little mute Tom , to talking Jane , and to the Mother who
lovingly watches them , - and shall make tea for me yet .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.459

- I remain , ever your affectionate Brother , T. Carlyle .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,285.460

<P_2,286>

{ED:CXL._To_Dr._Carlyle,_Rome}

Cheyne Row , Chelsea , London , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.463

<font> 23d {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} March <$$font> 1835 .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.464

My dear Brother - Your Letter came in this morning <paren> after sixteen
days from Rome <$$paren> ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.465

and , to-morrow being post-day , I have shoved my writing-table into the
corner , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.466

and sit <paren> with my back to the fire and Jane , who is busy sewing
at my old jupe of a Dressing-gown <$$paren> , forthwith making answer .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.467

It was somewhat longed for ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.468

yet I felt , in other respects , that it was better you had not written
sooner ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.469

for I had a thing to dilate upon , of a most ravelled character , that
was better to be knit up a little first . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.470

You shall hear . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.471

But do not be alarmed ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.472

for it is " neither death nor men's lives " : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.473

we are all well , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.474

and I heard out of Annandale within these three weeks ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.475

nay , Jane's Newspaper came with the customary " two strokes , " only
five days ago . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.476

I meant to write to our Mother last night ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.477

but shall now do it to-morrow . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,286.478

<P_2,287>

Mill had borrowed that first Volume of my poor <font> French Revolution
<$$font> <paren> pieces of it more than <font> once <$$font> <$$paren>
that he might have it all before him , and write down some observations
on it , which perhaps I might print as Notes . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.480

I was busy meanwhile with Volume Second ; toiling along like a <font>
Nigger <$$font> , but with the heart of a free Roman :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.481

indeed , I know not how it was , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.482

I had not felt so clear and independent , sure of myself and of my task
for many long years . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.483

Well , one night about three weeks ago , we sat at tea ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.484

and Mill's short rap was heard at the door : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.485

Jane rose to welcome him ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.486

but he stood there unresponsive , pale , the very picture of despair ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.487

said , half-articulately gasping , that she must go down and speak to "
Mrs. Taylor . " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.488

... After some considerable additional gasping , I learned from Mill
this fact : that my poor Manuscript , all except some four tattered
leaves , was <font> annihilated ! <$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.489

He had left it out <paren> too carelessly <$$paren> ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.490

it had been taken for waste-paper : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.491

and so five months of as tough labour as I could remember of , were as
good as vanished , gone like a whiff of smoke .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,287.492

- There never in my life had come <P_2,288> upon me any other <font>
accident <$$font> of much moment ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.493

but this I could not but feel to be a sore one .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.494

The thing was <font> lost <$$font> , and perhaps worse ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.495

for I had not only forgotten all the structure of it ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.496

but the spirit it was written with was past ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.497

only the general impression seemed to remain , and the recollection that
I was on the whole well satisfied with that , and could now hardly hope
to equal it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.498

Mill whom I had to comfort and speak peace to remained injudiciously
enough till almost midnight , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.499

and my poor Dame and I had to sit talking of indifferent matters ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.500

and could not till then get our lament freely uttered .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.501

<font> She <$$font> was very good to me ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.502

and the thing did not beat us . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.503

I felt in general that I was as a little Schoolboy , who had laboriously
written out his <font> Copy <$$font> as he could , and was showing it
not without satisfaction to the Master : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.504

but lo ! the Master had suddenly torn it , saying : " No , boy , thou
must go and write it <font> better . <$$font> "
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.505

What could I do but sorrowing go and try to obey .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,288.506

That night was a hard one ; something from time to time tying me tight
as it were all round the region of the heart , and strange dreams
haunting <P_2,289> me : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,289.507

however , I was not without good thoughts too that came like healing
life into me ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,289.508

and I got it somewhat reasonably crushed down , not abolished , yet
subjected to me with the resolution and prophecy of abolishing .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,289.509

Next morning accordingly I wrote to Fraser <paren> who had <font>
advertised <$$font> the Book as " preparing for publication " <$$paren>
that it was all gone back ; that he must not <font> speak of it <$$font>
to any one <paren> till it was made good again <$$paren> ; finally that
he must send me some <font> better paper <$$font> , and also a <font>
Biographie Universelle <$$font> , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,289.510

for I was determined to risk ten pounds more upon it .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,289.511

Poor Fraser was very assiduous : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,289.512

I got Bookshelves put up <paren> for the whole House was <font> flowing
<$$font> with Books <$$paren> , where the <font> Biographie <$$font>
<paren> not Fraser's , however , which was countermanded , but Mill's
<$$paren> , with much else stands all ready , much readier than before :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,289.513

and so , having first finished out the Piece I was actually upon , I
began <font> again <$$font> at the beginning . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,289.514

Early the day after to-morrow <paren> after a hard and quite novel kind
of battle <$$paren> I count on having the First Chapter on paper a
second time , no worse than it was , though considerably different .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,289.515

The <P_2,290> bitterness of the business is past therefore ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.516

and you must conceive me toiling along in that new way for many weeks to
come . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.517

As for Mill I must yet tell you the best side of him .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.518

Next day after the accident he writes me a passionate Letter requesting
with boundless earnestness to be allowed to make the loss good as far as
<font> money <$$font> was concerned in it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.519

I answered : Yes , since he so desired it ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.520

for in our circumstances it was not unreasonable :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.521

in about a week he accordingly transmits me a draft for 200 +L
{TEXT:+L200} ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.522

I had computed that my five months' housekeeping , etc. , had cost me
100 +L {TEXT:+L100} ; which sum therefore and not two_hundred was the
one , I told him , I could take . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.523

He has been here since then ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.524

but has not sent the 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} , though I suppose he will soon
do it , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.525

and so the thing will end , - more handsomely than one could have
expected . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.526

I ought to draw from it various practical " uses of improvement "
<paren> among others not to lend manuscripts again <$$paren> ; and above
all things try to do the work <font> better <$$font> than it was ; in
which case I shall never grudge the labour , but reckon it a goodhap .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,290.527

- It really seemed to me a <P_2,291> Book of considerable significance ;
and not unlikely even to be of some interest at present :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.528

but that latter , and indeed all economical and other the like
considerations had become profoundly indifferent to me ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.529

I felt that I was honestly writing down and delineating a World-Fact
<paren> which the Almighty had brought to pass in the world <$$paren> ;
that it was an <font> honest <$$font> work for me , and all men might do
and say of it simply what seemed good to <font> them . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.530

- Nay I have got back my spirits again <paren> after this first Chapter
<$$paren> , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.531

and hope I shall go on tolerably . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.532

I will struggle assiduously to be done with it by the time you are to be
looked for <paren> which meeting may God bring happily to pass <$$paren>
; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.533

and in that case I will cheerfully throw the business down a while , and
walk off with you to Scotland ; hoping to be ready for the <font> next
<$$font> publishing season . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.534

- This is my ravelled concern , dear Jack ; which you see is in the way
to knit itself up again , before I am called to tell you of it
{COM:missing_period} CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.535

And now for something else . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.536

I was for writing to you of it next day after it happened :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,291.537

but Jane suggested , it would only grieve you , till I <P_2,292> could
say it was in the way towards adjustment ; which counsel I saw to be
right . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.538

Let us hope assuredly that the whole will be for <font> good . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.539

I told you there had been a Letter from Dumfriesshire .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.540

Mrs. Welsh writes to us oftener , with full news of everything
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.541

<paren> our Mother <font> was <$$font> at Templand ,
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.542

did I tell you ? <$$paren> : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.543

but she is still in Edinburgh , though soon returning now .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.544

Alick on this occasion was the correspondent : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.545

I had written to him just three days before , so that his Letter would
be put into the Post-office and mine taken <font> out <$$font> by the
same messenger ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.546

I wrote again very soon after . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.547

He has actually done with Catlinns . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.548

It was let by auction on the day advertised ; to somebody for 12 +L
{TEXT:+L12} less than his rent : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.549

that somebody I suppose is <font> glarring <$$font> and ploughing over
it <paren> poor fellow <$$paren> in these very days ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.550

and Alick marches at Whitsunday <font> first . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.551

He wanted much to have counsel : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.552

I could give him little except in general ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.553

farming seemed to me also a thing he was probably as well done with ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.554

Annan and some kind of grain-dealing there looked the likeliest .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,292.555

It seems to me not improbable that <P_2,293> he will try himself there :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.556

he was to see Ben Nelson about it , he said ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.557

his tone of temper was good ; cheerful , and <font> determined <$$font>
to have another fly at it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.558

He will perhaps find himself much better situated in that way of life ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.559

there is better society to be had there ; more of interest ; a freer
field in several respects . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.560

He seemed very grateful for your Letter ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.561

charged me to send you his thanks over and over again .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.562

I hope we shall see him in Summer , doing better .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.563

- Our good Mother added a little postscript ; in the same meek cheery
temper they are all in : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.564

Jean was to get her some ruled paper at Dumfries ; with the aid of which
she might really write a very reasonable Letter .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.565

- I get a daily <font> Globe <$$font> Newspaper from Mill
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.566

<paren> he leaves it in masses , every two or three days , at a shop in
Knightsbridge <$$paren> : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.567

copies of this I circulate among them far and wide : one or two weekly
to my Mother ; who also pretty regularly gets the <font> Examiner
<$$font> , furnished me by Hunt <paren> whom for the rest I do not
<font> see <$$font> once in the month <$$paren> , though I myself
sometimes <font> omit <$$font> to read it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,293.568

The aspect of Politics seems to me <P_2,294> the wretchedest ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.569

and happily there are several people here who never open their mouths on
that subject . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.570

I have sent a Newspaper or two to poor Johnstone at Haddington ; to
Arbuckle , to Glen , etc. etc. CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.571

There is little other good in them : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.572

only we felt rather ashamed that Whiggism was all out a week before we
knew it , down here in our village stillness ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.573

- Peel apparently will be out soon too : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.574

and then ? CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.575

<font> Des Sottises ! <$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.576

Your practice at Rome is literally of the profitableness that all good
work is of : for this world , Nothing . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.577

Never mind , my boy ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.578

take more of it if it offer . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.579

... I believe Doctorship here to be at as miserable a pass as well
could be : " Homoeopathy " the ready road to fortune in it ; <font>
quackery <$$font> as from of old abounding . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.580

There are two grand Homoeopathists I find : Doctor Quin , and Doctor
Bel'uomo <paren> Beautiful Man ! <$$paren> an Italian .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.581

Mrs. Buller has taken into it : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.582

finds the most <font> astonishing <$$font> relief etc. etc. :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.583

Austin has paid off Quin . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,294.584

I could interpret all Mrs. Buller's wondrous cases-in-point : <P_2,295>
the old story of imagination and nerves , <font> Fantasiestücke !
<$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,295.585

Dow of Irongray worked a <font> miracle <$$font> even :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,295.586

it is the <font> food <$$font> of quacks . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,295.587

- This , however , I fancy is the thing to be striven against everywhere
by the true man of every craft . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,295.588

I trust <paren> if God will <$$paren> we shall meet " before June be
done " : I with my Volume finished , you with your Travel ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,295.589

and then we shall do our very best to decide on something wise . A
journey to Scotland among the first things , - on foot !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,295.590

... Our visitors and visitings are what I can@ @not give you account of
this time : not that they are many ; but that the sheet is so near full
. CARLYLE-1835-1,2,295.591

One Taylor <paren> Henry Taylor , who has written a <font> Philip van
Artevelde <$$font> , a good man , whose <font> laugh <$$font> reminds me
of poor Irving's <$$paren> invited me to meet Southey some weeks ago .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,295.592

I went CARLYLE-1835-1,2,295.593

and met Southey . A man of clear brown complexion , large nose , <font>
no <$$font> chin , or next to none ; care-lined and thought-lined brow ,
vehement hazel eyes ; huge mass of white hair surmounting it : a
strait-laced , limited , <P_2,296> well-instructed , well-conditioned ,
excessively sensitive {COM:missing_comma} even irritable-looking man .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.594

His irritability I think is his grand spiritual feature ; as his grand
bodily is perhaps leanness and long legs : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.595

a nervous female might shriek when he rises for the first time , and
stretches to such unexpected length - like a lean pair of tongs !
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.596

We parted good friends ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.597

and may meet again , or not meet , as Destiny orders .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.598

At the same house , since that , Jane and I went to meet Wordsworth .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.599

I did not expect much ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.600

but got mostly what I expected . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.601

The old man has a fine shrewdness and naturalness in his expression of
face <paren> a long Cumberland figure <$$paren> ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.602

one finds also a kind of <font> sincerity <$$font> in his speech :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.603

but for prolixity , thinness , endless dilution it excels all the other
speech I had heard from mortal . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.604

A genuine man <paren> which is much <$$paren> , but also essentially a
<font> small <$$font> genuine man : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.605

nothing perhaps is sadder <paren> of the glad kind <$$paren> than the
<font> unbounded <$$font> laudation of such a man ; sad proof of the
<font> rarity <$$font> of such . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,296.606

I fancy , however , he has fallen into the garrulity of age , and is not
what he was : also that his environment <paren> and rural Prophethood
<$$paren> <P_2,297> has hurt him much . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.607

He seems impatient that even Shakespear should be admired : " so much
out of my own pocket " ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.608

The shake of hand he gives you is feckless , egoistical ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.609

I rather fancy he <font> loves <$$font> nothing in the world so much as
one could wish . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.610

When I compare that man with a great man , - alas , he is like dwindling
into a contemptibility . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.611

Jean Paul <paren> for example <$$paren> , neither was he <font> great
<$$font> , could have worn him as a finger-ring .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.612

However when " I go to Cumberland , " Wordsworth will still be a glad
sight . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.613

- I have not been fortunate in my Pen to-night ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.614

indeed for the last page I have been writing with the back of it .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.615

This and my speed will account for the confusion .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.616

Porridge has just come in . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.617

I will to bed without writing more ; and finish to-morrow .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.618

Good night , dear Brother ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.619

- Ever yours ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.620

<font> Tuesday <$$font> , 3 <font> o'clock . <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.621

- My dear Jack , I have not gone out , being so busy with this First
Chapter : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.622

congratulate me , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.623

I am <font> done <$$font> with it already ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.624

I will now walk with this up to Charing Cross after dinner ; which will
still do . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,297.625

<P_2,298>

Jane has been out all morning , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.627

and could not write a postscript : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.628

she is in now , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.629

and sends you her sisterly affection , - CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.630

would like heartily , I do know , to read <font> Manzoni <$$font> with
you again . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.631

- ... Mill also has written this morning to say that he can@ @not think
of so little as 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.632

we must abide by that nevertheless , I fancy . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.633

... Lord Jeffrey , most likely , is in Town at present :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.634

he will probably call here , but <font> not <$$font> , surely , with
much rapidity . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.635

He has my true wishes ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.636

and I <paren> theoretically <$$paren> have his :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.637

but we <font> can@ @not <$$font> help one another .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.638

Our Mother has never said anything of Teufelsdröckh ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.639

but I learn from Alick that Clow of Land is <font> very <$$font> fond of
him ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.640

A certain Sir W. Molesworth <paren> a Radical Utilitarian M.P.
<$$paren> also " sent for a copy . " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.641

Oh that I had more paper ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.642

But we shall <font> meet <$$font> if Heaven please .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.643

... Adieu , dear Jack ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.644

finis here . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.645

Will you and Dr. Brunn walk to <font> Pasquin <$$font>
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.646

<paren> do actually <$$paren> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.647

and make my compliments to him . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,298.648

<P_2,299>

{ED:CXLI._To_his_Mother,_Scotsbrig}

Chelsea , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.651

<font> 25th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} March <$$font> 1835 .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.652

My dear Mother - I purposed writing to you two nights ago , as you might
perhaps notice on the Newspaper ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.653

but a little man came in , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.654

and occupied the whole evening I designed for you .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.655

It turned out , however , to be " probably just as well " :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.656

for next day there arrived Jack's Roman Letter ; which now can go along
with mine to make the bargain better . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.657

We are as Jack says , very lucky ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.658

and should be thankful that we hear from one another so regularly .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.659

I will only wish now , since <font> you <$$font> have delayed so long ,
that our Letters may not again <font> run into one another's mouth :
<$$font> CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.660

however , in that case too , I will send you an answer the sooner , and
make matters straight again . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.661

Jack , as you will see , has nothing but good news for us :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.662

the best is that he is <paren> we can hope <$$paren> on the way to see
us all again , " by the end of June . " CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.663

I answered him last night ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,299.664

and could not but , among other things , agree with him that it were as
well if his Travels ceased <P_2,300> after that :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.665

he will have funds for attempting a settlement somewhere ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.666

and , if he see any feasibility , ought to do it .
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.667

The money he speaks of will be sent forward as the last was ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.668

I will give you notice of it , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.669

and you will have to go to Dumfries ; which , if Harry be in any
condition , will perhaps do you no harm . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.670

As for that question about whether you got the <font> annual <$$font>
<paren> or interest <$$paren> regularly , I could make no answer ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.671

but hope you do . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.672

If you do not , pray apply , CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.673

and make the people pay up . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.674

I never learned either whether the houses at Ecclefechan were got
satisfactorily repaired , or how the rents come in
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.675

you complain of nothing ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.676

- but have doubtless complaints that you <font> might <$$font> make ;
and which I ought to know of . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.677

In the meanwhile , dear Mother , what a satisfaction for me is it
{COM:sic} to know that you are one of these that look not either to
Houses in Ecclefechan , or any House or Possession on this poor Earth
for your comfort and stronghold ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.678

I know well that there is nothing but <font> such <$$font> a faith that
can render this Earth and her stinted allowances endurable , nay matters
of thankfulness for one . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,300.679

The cheerful <P_2,301> wise way in which you adjust yourself to so many
vicissitudes , and are always seen to be yourself in the midst of them ,
should be a lesson to me and all of us . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.680

I had some occasion lately for a portion of your faith ; in a most
unexpected <font> accident <$$font> <paren> what we call <font> accident
<$$font> <$$paren> that befell {TEXT:befel} me ; of which I delayed
writing till I could not only say that I <font> would <$$font> get over
it , but that I had got over it . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.681

Be of good cheer , therefore , as to that : CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.682

it is all right <paren> and for the best , I am persuaded <$$paren> ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.683

and you shall now hear about it fully . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.684

To sum up all in a word : the <font> First Volume <$$font> of my poor
Book is utterly destroyed ! CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.685

Mill , to whom I had lent it to read , and write Notes upon <paren> for
he is skilled in that subject <$$paren> , and who was full of admiration
for the bit of work , had left it carelessly out in his house :
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.686

some of the people saw it lying ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.687

tore it up as waste paper ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.688

and when he noticed it , there were only some three or four fractions of
leaves remaining . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.689

He came hither to me , in a state looking not unlike insanity ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.690

and gasped out <paren> for he could hardly speak <$$paren> his Job's
news . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,301.691

I am very glad that got it borne <P_2,302> so well ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,302.692

for it was a hard thing . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,302.693

It never got the better of me ; CARLYLE-1835-1,2,302.694

and by next morning the bitterness of it was all over ;
CARLYLE-1835-1,2,302.695

and I had determined that there must be a finger of Providence in it ;
that it meant simply I was to write the thing over again <font> truer
<$$font> than it was . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,302.696

My little Dame stood faithfully by me too CARLYLE-1835-1,2,302.697

and was very good and brave . CARLYLE-1835-1,2,302.698

