<BEGIN_carlyle-1858-2>

<P_19>

<heading>

Chapter II . CARLYLE-1858-2,19.4

Friedrich's Birth . CARLYLE-1858-2,19.5

<$$heading>

Friedrich of Brandenburg-Hohenzollern , who came by course of natural
succession to be Friedrich II. of Prussia , and is known in these ages
as Frederick the Great , was born in the palace of Berlin , about noon ,
on the 24th of January , 1712 . CARLYLE-1858-2,19.7

A small infant , but of great promise or possibility ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,19.8

and thrice and four times welcome to all sovereign and other persons in
the Prussian Court , and Prussian realms , in those cold winter days .
CARLYLE-1858-2,19.9

His Father , they say , was like to have stifled him with his caresses ,
so overjoyed was the man ; or at least to have scorched him in the blaze
of the fire ; when happily some much suitabler female nurse snatched
this little creature from the rough paternal paws , - and saved it for
the benefit of Prussia and mankind . If Heaven will but please to grant
it length of life ! CARLYLE-1858-2,19.10

For there have already been two little Princekins , who are both dead ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,19.11

this Friedrich is the fourth child ; CARLYLE-1858-2,19.12

and only one little girl , wise Wilhelmina , of almost too sharp wits ,
and not too vivacious aspect , is otherwise yet here of royal progeny .
CARLYLE-1858-2,19.13

It is feared the Hohenzollern lineage , which has flourished here with
such beneficent effect for three centuries now , and been in truth the
very making of the Prussian Nation , may be about to fail , or pass into
some side branch . Which change , or any change in that respect , is
questionable , and a thing desired by nobody . CARLYLE-1858-2,19.14

Five years ago , on the death of the first little Prince , there had
surmises risen , obscure rumors and hints , that the Princess Royal ,
mother of the lost baby , never would have healthy children , or even
never have a child more : upon which , as there was but one other
resource , - a widowed Grandfather , namely , and except the Prince
Royal no son to him , - said Grandfather , still only about fifty , did
take the necessary steps : CARLYLE-1858-2,19.15

but they have been entirely unsuccessful ; CARLYLE-1858-2,19.16

no new son or child , only new affliction , new disaster has resulted
from that third marriage of his . CARLYLE-1858-2,19.17

And though the Princess Royal has had another little Prince , that too
has died <P_20> within the year ; - killed , some say on the other hand
, by the noise of the cannon firing for joy over it !
CARLYLE-1858-2,20.18

Yes ; and the first baby Prince , these same parties farther say , was
crushed to death by the weighty dress you put upon it at christening
time , especially by the little crown it wore , which had left a visible
black mark upon the poor soft infant's brow ! CARLYLE-1858-2,20.19

In short , it is a questionable case ; undoubtedly a questionable
outlook for Prussian mankind ; CARLYLE-1858-2,20.20

and the appearance of this little Prince , a third trump-card in the
Hohenzollern game , is an unusually interesting event .
CARLYLE-1858-2,20.21

The joy over him , not in Berlin Palace only , but in Berlin City , and
over the Prussian Nation , was very great and universal ; - still
testified in manifold dull , unreadable old pamphlets , records official
and volunteer , - which were then all ablaze like the bonfires , and are
now fallen dark enough , and hardly credible even to the fancy of this
new Time . CARLYLE-1858-2,20.22

The poor old Grandfather , Friedrich I. <paren> the first <font> King
<$$font> of Prussia <$$paren> , - for , as we intimate , he was still
alive , and not very old , though now infirm enough , and laden beyond
his strength with sad reminiscences , disappointments and chagrins , -
had taken much to Wilhelmina , as she tells us ; CARLYLE-1858-2,20.23

and would amuse himself whole days with the pranks and prattle of the
little child . CARLYLE-1858-2,20.24

Good old man : he , we need not doubt , brightened up into unusual
vitality at sight of this invaluable little Brother of hers ; through
whom he can look once more into the waste dim future with a flicker of
new hope . CARLYLE-1858-2,20.25

Poor old man : he got his own back half-broken by a careless nurse
letting him fall ; CARLYLE-1858-2,20.26

and has slightly stooped ever since , some fifty and odd years now :
much against his will ; CARLYLE-1858-2,20.27

for he would fain have been beautiful ; CARLYLE-1858-2,20.28

and has struggled all his days , very hard if not very wisely , to make
his existence beautiful , - to make it magnificent at least , and
regardless of expense ; CARLYLE-1858-2,20.29

- and it threatens to come to little . CARLYLE-1858-2,20.30

Courage , poor Grandfather : CARLYLE-1858-2,20.31

here is a new second edition of a Friedrich , the first having gone off
with so little effect : CARLYLE-1858-2,20.32

this one's back is still unbroken , his life's seedfield not yet filled
with tares and thorns : CARLYLE-1858-2,20.33

who knows but Heaven will be kinder to this one ? CARLYLE-1858-2,20.34

Heaven was much kinder to this one . CARLYLE-1858-2,20.35

Him Heaven had <P_21> kneaded of more potent stuff :
CARLYLE-1858-2,21.36

a mighty fellow this one , and a strange ; related not only to the
Upholsteries and Heralds' Colleges , but to the Sphere-harmonies and the
divine and demonic powers ; CARLYLE-1858-2,21.37

of a swift far-darting nature this one , like an Apollo clad in sunbeams
and in lightnings <paren> after his sort <$$paren> ; and with a back
which all the world could not succeed in breaking !
CARLYLE-1858-2,21.38

- Yes , if , by most rare chance , this were indeed a new man of genius
, born into the purblind rotting Century , in the acknowledged rank of a
king there , - man of genius , that is to say , man of originality and
veracity ; capable of seeing with his eyes , and incapable of not
believing what he sees ; - then truly ! CARLYLE-1858-2,21.39

- But as yet none knows ; CARLYLE-1858-2,21.40

the poor old Grandfather never knew . CARLYLE-1858-2,21.41

Meanwhile they christened the little fellow , with immense magnificence
and pomp of apparatus ; Kaiser Karl , and the very Swiss Republic being
there <paren> by proxy <$$paren> , among the gossips ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,21.42

and spared no cannon-volleyings , kettle-drummings , metal crown , heavy
cloth-of-silver , for the poor soft creature's sake ; all of which ,
however , he survived . CARLYLE-1858-2,21.43

The name given him was Karl Friedrich <paren> Charles Frederick
<$$paren> ; <font> Karl <$$font> perhaps , and perhaps also not , in
delicate compliment to the chief gossip , the above-mentioned . Kaiser
, Karl or Charles VI. ? CARLYLE-1858-2,21.44

At any rate , the <font> Karl , <$$font> gradually or from the first ,
dropped altogether out of practice , CARLYLE-1858-2,21.45

and went as nothing : CARLYLE-1858-2,21.46

he himself , or those about him , never used it ; CARLYLE-1858-2,21.47

nor , except in some dim English pamphlet here and there , have I met
with any trace of it . CARLYLE-1858-2,21.48

Friedrich <paren> <font> Rich <$$font> - in - <font> Peace , <$$font> a
name of old prevalence in the Hohenzollern kindred <$$paren> , which he
himself wrote <font> Frédéric <$$font> in his French way , and at last
even <font> Fédéric <$$font> <paren> with a very singular sense of
euphony <$$paren> , is throughout , and was , his sole designation .
CARLYLE-1858-2,21.49

Sunday 31st January 1712 , age then precisely one week : then , and in
this manner , was he ushered on the scene , and labelled among his
fellow-creatures . CARLYLE-1858-2,21.50

We must now look round a little ; and see , if possible by any method or
exertion , what kind of scene it was . CARLYLE-1858-2,21.51

<P_22>

<heading>

Chapter III . CARLYLE-1858-2,22.54

Father And Mother : The Hanoverian Connection . CARLYLE-1858-2,22.55

<$$heading>

Friedrich Wilhelm , Crown-Prince of Prussia , son of Friedrich I. and
Father of this little infant who will one day be Friedrich II. , did
himself make some noise in the world as second King of Prussia ; notable
not as Friedrich's father alone ; CARLYLE-1858-2,22.57

and will much concern us during the rest of his life .
CARLYLE-1858-2,22.58

He is , at this date , in his twenty-fourth year : a thick-set , sturdy
, florid , brisk young fellow ; with a jovial laugh in him , yet of
solid grave ways , occasionally somewhat volcanic ; much given to
soldiering , and out-of-door exercises , having little else to do at
present . CARLYLE-1858-2,22.59

He has been manager , or , as it were , Vice-King , on an occasional
absence of his Father ; CARLYLE-1858-2,22.60

he knows practically what the state of business is ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,22.61

and greatly disapproves of it , as is thought . CARLYLE-1858-2,22.62

But being bound to silence on that head , he keeps silence ,
CARLYLE-1858-2,22.63

and meddles with nothing political . CARLYLE-1858-2,22.64

He addicts himself chiefly to mustering , drilling and practical
military duties , while here at Berlin ; CARLYLE-1858-2,22.65

runs out , often enough , wife and perhaps a comrade or two along with
him , to hunt , and take his ease , at Wusterhausen <paren> some fifteen
or twenty miles southeast of Berlin <$$paren> , where he has a residence
amid the woody moorlands . CARLYLE-1858-2,22.66

But soldiering is his grand concern . CARLYLE-1858-2,22.67

Six years ago , summer 1706 , at a very early age , he went to the wars
, - grand Spanish-Succession War , which was then becoming very fierce
in the Netherlands ; Prussian troops always active on the
Marlborough-Eugene side . CARLYLE-1858-2,22.68

He had just been betrothed , CARLYLE-1858-2,22.69

was not yet wedded ; CARLYLE-1858-2,22.70

thought good to turn the interim to advantage in that way .
CARLYLE-1858-2,22.71

Then again , spring 1709 , after his marriage and after his Father's
marriage , " the Court being full of intrigues , " and nothing but
silence recommendable {TEXT:recommendáble} there , a certain renowned
friend of his , Leopold , Prince of Anhalt-Dessau , of whom we shall yet
hear a <P_23> great deal , - who , still only about thirty , had already
covered himself with laurels in those wars <paren> Blenheim , Bridge of
Casano , Lines of Turin , and other glories <$$paren> , but had now got
into intricacies with the weaker sort , and was out of command , -
agreed with Friedrich Wilhelm that it would be well to go and serve
there as volunteers , since not otherwise . CARLYLE-1858-2,23.72

A Crown-Prince of Prussia , ought he not to learn soldiering , of all
things ; by every opportunity ? Which Friedrich Wilhelm did , with
industry ; serving zealous apprenticeship under Marlborough and Eugene ,
in this manner ; plucking knowledge , as the bubble reputation , and all
else in that field has to be plucked , from the cannon's mouth .
CARLYLE-1858-2,23.73

Friedrich Wilhelm kept by Marlborough , now as formerly ; friend Leopold
being commonly in Eugene's quarter , who well knew the worth of him ,
ever since Blenheim and earlier . CARLYLE-1858-2,23.74

Friedrich Wilhelm saw hot service , that campaign of 1709 ; siege of
Tournay , and far more ; CARLYLE-1858-2,23.75

- stood , among other things , the fiery Battle of Malplaquet , one of
the terriblest and deadliest feats of war ever done .
CARLYLE-1858-2,23.76

No want of intrepidity and rugged soldier-virtue in the Prussian troops
or their Crown-Prince ; least of all on that terrible day , 11th
September , 1709 ; - of which he keeps the anniversary ever since , and
will do all his life , the doomsday of Malplaquet always a memorable day
to him . CARLYLE-1858-2,23.77

He is more and more intimate with Leopold , CARLYLE-1858-2,23.78

and loves good soldiering beyond all things . CARLYLE-1858-2,23.79

Here at Berlin he has already got a regiment of his own , tallish fine
men ; CARLYLE-1858-2,23.80

and strives to make it in all points a very pattern of a regiment .
CARLYLE-1858-2,23.81

For the rest , much here is out of joint , and far from satisfactory to
him . CARLYLE-1858-2,23.82

Seven years ago he lost his own brave Mother and her love ; of which we
must speak farther by_and_by . CARLYLE-1858-2,23.83

In her stead he has got a fantastic , melancholic , ill-natured
Stepmother , with whom there was never any good to be done ; who in fact
is now fairly mad , and kept to her own apartments .
CARLYLE-1858-2,23.84

He has to see here , and say little , a chagrined heartworn Father
flickering painfully amid a scene much filled with expensive futile
persons , and their extremely pitiful cabals and mutual rages ; scene
chiefly of pompous inanity , and the art of solemnly and with great
labour doing nothing . CARLYLE-1858-2,23.85

Such waste of labour and of means : what can one do but be <P_24> silent
? CARLYLE-1858-2,24.86

The other year , Preussen <paren> <font> Prussia <$$font> Proper ,
province lying far eastward , out of sight <$$paren> was sinking under
pestilence and black ruin and despair : CARLYLE-1858-2,24.87

the Crown-Prince , contrary to wont , broke silence ,
CARLYLE-1858-2,24.88

and begged some dole or subvention for these poor people ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,24.89

but there was nothing to be had , Nothing in the treasury , your Royal
Highness : CARLYLE-1858-2,24.90

- Preussen will shift for itself ; CARLYLE-1858-2,24.91

sublime dramaturgy , which we call his Majesty's Government , costs so
much ! CARLYLE-1858-2,24.92

And Preussen , mown away by death , lies much of it vacant ever since ;
which has completed the Crown-Prince's disgust ; and , I believe , did
produce some change of ministry , or other ineffectual expedient , on
the old Father's part . Upon which the Crown-Prince locks up his
thoughts again . CARLYLE-1858-2,24.93

He has confused whirlpools , of Court intrigues , ceremonials , and
troublesome fantasticalities , to steer amongst ; which he much dislikes
, no man more ; having an eye and heart set on the practical only , and
being in mind as in body something of the genus <font> robustum ,
<$$font> of the genus <font> ferox <$$font> withal .
CARLYLE-1858-2,24.94

He has been wedded six years ; lost two children , as we saw ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,24.95

and now again he has two living . CARLYLE-1858-2,24.96

His wife , Sophie Dorothee of Hanover , is his cousin as well .
CARLYLE-1858-2,24.97

She is brother's-@ @daughter of his Mother , Sophie Charlotte :
CARLYLE-1858-2,24.98

let the reader learn to discriminate these two names .
CARLYLE-1858-2,24.99

Sophie Charlotte , late Queen of Prussia , was also of Hanover :
CARLYLE-1858-2,24.100

she probably had sometimes , in her quiet motherly thought , anticipated
this connexion for him , while she yet lived . CARLYLE-1858-2,24.101

It is certain Friedrich Wilhelm was carried to Hanover in early
childhood : CARLYLE-1858-2,24.102

his Mother , - that Sophie Charlotte , a famed Queen and lady in her day
, Daughter of Electress Sophie , and Sister of the George who became
George I. of England by_and_by , - took him thither ; some time about
the beginning of 1693 , his age then five ; CARLYLE-1858-2,24.103

and left him there on trial ; alleging , and expecting , he might have a
better breeding there . CARLYLE-1858-2,24.104

And this , in a Court where Electress Sophie was chief lady , and
Elector Ernst , fit to be called Gentleman Ernst , the politest of men ,
was chief lord , - and where Leibnitz , to say nothing of lighter <P_25>
notabilities , was flourishing , - seemed a reasonable expectation .
CARLYLE-1858-2,25.105

Nevertheless , it came to nothing , this articulate purpose of the visit
; though perhaps the deeper silent purposes of it might not be quite
unfulfilled . CARLYLE-1858-2,25.106

Gentleman Ernst had lately been made ' Elector ' <paren> <font> Kurfürst
, <$$font> instead of <font> Herzog <$$font> <$$paren> , - his Hanover
no longer a mere Sovereign Duchy , but an Electorate henceforth , new '
<font> Ninth <$$font> Electorate , ' by Ernst's life-long exertion and
good luck ; - which has spread a fine radiance , for the time , over
court and people in those parts ; and made Ernst a happier man than ever
, in his old age . CARLYLE-1858-2,25.107

Gentleman Ernst and Electress Sophie , we need not doubt , were glad to
see their burly Prussian grandson , - a robust , rather mischievous boy
of five years old ; CARLYLE-1858-2,25.108

- and anything that brought her Daughter oftener about her <paren> an
only Daughter too , and one so gifted <$$paren> was sure to be welcome
to the cheery old Electress , and her Leibnitz and her circle .
CARLYLE-1858-2,25.109

For Sophie Charlotte was a bright presence , and a favorite with sage
and gay . CARLYLE-1858-2,25.110

Uncle George again , ' <font> Kurprinz <$$font> Georg Ludwig ' <paren>
Electoral Prince and Heir-Apparent <$$paren> , who became George I. of
England ; he , always a taciturn , saturnine , somewhat grim-visaged man
, not without thoughts of his own but mostly inarticulate thoughts , was
, just at this time , in a deep domestic intricacy .
CARLYLE-1858-2,25.111

Uncle George the Kurprinz was painfully detecting , in these very months
, that his august Spouse and cousin , a brilliant <font> not <$$font>
uninjured lady , had become an indignant injuring one ; that she had
gone , and was going , far astray in her walk of life !
CARLYLE-1858-2,25.112

Thus all is not radiance at Hanover either , Ninth Elector though we are
; CARLYLE-1858-2,25.113

but , in the soft sunlight , there quivers a streak of the blackness of
very Erebus withal . CARLYLE-1858-2,25.114

Kurprinz George , I think , though he too is said to have been good to
the boy , could not take much interest in this burly Nephew of his just
now ! CARLYLE-1858-2,25.115

Sure enough , it was in this year 1693 , that the famed Königsmark
tragedy came ripening fast towards a crisis in Hanover :
CARLYLE-1858-2,25.116

and next year the catastrophe arrived . CARLYLE-1858-2,25.117

A most tragic business ; of which the little Boy , now here , will know
more one day . CARLYLE-1858-2,25.118

Perhaps it was on this very visit , on one visit it credibly was , that
Sophie Charlotte witnessed a sad scene in the Schloss of Hanover high
words rising , where low cooings had been more appropriate ; harsh words
, mutually recriminative , rising ever higher ; ending , it is thought ,
in <font> things , <$$font> or menaces and motions towards things
<paren> actual box on the ear , some call it <$$paren> , - never to be
forgotten or forgiven ! CARLYLE-1858-2,25.119

<P_26>

And on Sunday 1st of July , 1694 , Colonel Count Philip Königsmark ,
Colonel in the Hanover Dragoons , was seen for the last time in this
world . CARLYLE-1858-2,26.121

From that date , he has vanished suddenly underground , in an
inscrutable manner : CARLYLE-1858-2,26.122

never more shall the light of the sun , or any human eye behold that
handsome blackguard man . CARLYLE-1858-2,26.123

Not for a_hundred_and_fifty years shall human creatures know , or guess
with the smallest certainty , what has become of him .
CARLYLE-1858-2,26.124

And shortly after Königsmark's disappearance , there is this sad
phenomenon visible : A once very radiant Princess <paren> witty ,
haughty-minded , beautiful , not wise or fortunate <$$paren> now gone
all ablaze into angry tragic conflagration ; getting locked into the old
Castle of Ahlden , in the moory solitudes of Lüneburg Heath : to stay
there till she die , - thirty years as it proved , - and go into ashes
and angry darkness as she may . CARLYLE-1858-2,26.125

Old peasants , late in the next century , will remember that they used
to see her sometimes driving on the Heath , - beautiful lady , long
black hair , and the glitter of diamonds in it ; sometimes the reins in
her own hand , but always with a party of cavalry round her , and their
swords drawn . CARLYLE-1858-2,26.126

' Duchess of Ahlden , ' that was her title in the eclipsed state .
CARLYLE-1858-2,26.127

Born Princess of Zelle ; by marriage , Princess of Hanover <paren>
<font> Kurprinzessin <$$font> <$$paren> ; would have been Queen of
England , too , had matters gone otherwise than they did .
CARLYLE-1858-2,26.128

- Her name , like that of a little Daughter she had , is Sophie Dorothee
: CARLYLE-1858-2,26.129

she is Cousin and Divorced Wife of Kurprinz George ; divorced , and as
it were abolished alive , in this manner . CARLYLE-1858-2,26.130

She is little Friedrich Wilhelm's Aunt-in-law ; CARLYLE-1858-2,26.131

and her little Daughter comes to be his Wife in process of time .
CARLYLE-1858-2,26.132

Of him , or of those belonging to him , she took small notice , I
suppose , in her then mood , the crisis coming on so fast .
CARLYLE-1858-2,26.133

In her happier innocent days she had two children , a King that is to be
, and a Queen ; George II. of England , Sophie Dorothee of Prussia ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,26.134

but must not now call them hers , or ever see them again .
CARLYLE-1858-2,26.135

This was the Königsmark tragedy at Hanover ; fast ripening towards its
catastrophe while little Friedrich Wilhelm was there .
CARLYLE-1858-2,26.136

It has been , ever since , a rumour and dubious frightful mystery to
mankind : CARLYLE-1858-2,26.137

but within these few years , by curious accidents <paren> thefts ,
discoveries of written documents , in various countries , and diligent
study of them <$$paren> , it has at length become a certainty and clear
fact , to those who are curious about it . Fact surely of a <P_27>
rather horrible sort ; - yet better , I must say , than was suspected :
not quite so bad in the state of fact as in that of rumour .
CARLYLE-1858-2,27.138

Crime enough is in it , sin and folly on both sides ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,27.139

there is killing too , but <font> not <$$font> assassination <paren> as
it turns out <$$paren> ; CARLYLE-1858-2,27.140

on the whole there is nothing of atrocity , or nothing that was not
accidental , unavoidable ; CARLYLE-1858-2,27.141

- and there is a certain greatness of <font> decorum <$$font> on the
part of those Hanover Princes and official gentlemen , a depth of
silence , of polite stoicism , which deserves more praise than it will
get in our times . CARLYLE-1858-2,27.142

Enough now of the Königsmark tragedy ; contemporaneous with Friedrich
Wilhelm's stay at Hanover , but not otherwise much related to him or his
doings there . CARLYLE-1858-2,27.143

He got no improvement in breeding , as we intimated ; none at all ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,27.144

fought , on the contrary , with his young Cousin <paren> afterwards our
George II. <$$paren> , a boy twice his age , though of weaker bone ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,27.145

and gave him a bloody nose . To the scandal and consternation of the
French Protestant gentlewomen and court-dames in their stiff silks :
CARLYLE-1858-2,27.146

" Ahee , your Electoral Highness ! " CARLYLE-1858-2,27.147

This had been a rough unruly boy from the first discovery of him .
CARLYLE-1858-2,27.148

At a very early stage , he , one morning while the nurses were dressing
him , took to investigating one of his shoe buckles ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,27.149

would , in spite of remonstrances , slobber it about in his mouth ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,27.150

and at length swallowed <P_28> it down , - beyond mistake ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.151

and the whole world can@ @not get it up ! CARLYLE-1858-2,28.152

Whereupon , wild wail of nurses ; and his " Mother came screaming , "
poor mother : CARLYLE-1858-2,28.153

- It is the same small shoe-buckle which is still shown , with a ticket
and date to it , '31 December , 1692 , ' in the Berlin <font>
Kunstkammer ; <$$font> CARLYLE-1858-2,28.154

for it turned out harmless , after all the screaming ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.155

and a few grains of rhubarb restored it safely to the light of day ;
henceforth a thrice-memorable shoe-buckle . CARLYLE-1858-2,28.156

Another time , it is recorded , though with less precision of detail ,
his Governess the Dame Montbail having ordered him to do something which
was intolerable to the princely mind , the princely mind resisted in a
very strange way : CARLYLE-1858-2,28.157

the princely body , namely , flung itself suddenly out of a third-story
window , nothing but the <font> hands <$$font> left within ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.158

and hanging on there by the sill , and fixedly resolute to obey
gravitation rather than Montbail , soon brought the poor lady to terms .
Upon which , indeed , he had been taken from her , and from the women
altogether , as evidently now needing rougher government .
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.159

Always an unruly fellow , and dangerous to trust among crockery .
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.160

At Hanover he could do no good in the way of breeding :
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.161

sage Leibnitz himself , with his big black periwig and large patient
nose , could have put no metaphysics into such a boy .
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.162

Sublime <font> Théodicée <$$font> <paren> Leibnitzian " justification of
the ways of God " <$$paren> was not an article this individual had the
least need of , nor at any time the least value for .
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.163

" Justify ? CARLYLE-1858-2,28.164

What doomed dog questions it , then ? CARLYLE-1858-2,28.165

Are you for Bedlam , then ? " CARLYLE-1858-2,28.166

- and in maturer years his rattan might have been dangerous !
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.167

For this was a singular individual of his day ; human soul still in
robust health , and not given to spin its bowels into cobwebs .
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.168

He is known only to have quarrelled much with Cousin George , during the
year or so he spent in those parts . CARLYLE-1858-2,28.169

But there was another Cousin at Hanover , just one other , little Sophie
Dorothee <paren> called after her mother <$$paren> , a few months older
than himself ; by all accounts , a really pretty little child , whom he
liked a great deal better . CARLYLE-1858-2,28.170

She , I imagine , was his main resource , while on this Hanover visit ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,28.171

with her were laid the foundations of an intimacy which ripened well
afterwards . CARLYLE-1858-2,28.172

Some say it was already settled by the parents that there was to be a
marriage in due time . CARLYLE-1858-2,28.173

Settled it could hardly be ; CARLYLE-1858-2,28.174

for Wilhelmina tells us , her Father had a " choice of three " allowed
him , on coming to wed ; CARLYLE-1858-2,28.175

and it is otherwise discernible there had been <P_29> eclipses and
uncertainties , in the interim , on his part . CARLYLE-1858-2,29.176

Settled , no ; but hoped and vaguely prefigured , we may well suppose .
CARLYLE-1858-2,29.177

And at all events , it has actually come to pass ; CARLYLE-1858-2,29.178

" Father being ardently in love with the Hanover Princess , " says our
Margravine , " and much preferring her to the other two , " or to any
and all others . CARLYLE-1858-2,29.179

Wedded , with great pomp , 28th November , 1706 ; CARLYLE-1858-2,29.180

- and Sophie Dorothee , the same that was his pretty little Cousin at
Hanover twenty years ago , she is mother of the little Boy now born and
christened , whom men are to call Frederick the Great in coming
generations . CARLYLE-1858-2,29.181

Sophie Dorothee is described to us by courtier contemporaries as " one
of the most beautiful princesses of her day : " CARLYLE-1858-2,29.182

Wilhelmina , on the other hand , testifies that she was never strictly
to be called beautiful , but had a pleasant attractive physiognomy ;
which may be considered better than strict beauty .
CARLYLE-1858-2,29.183

Uncommon grace of figure and look , testifies Wilhelmina ; much dignity
and soft dexterity , on social occasions ; perfect in all the arts of
deportment ; CARLYLE-1858-2,29.184

and left an impression on you at once kindly and royal .
CARLYLE-1858-2,29.185

Portraits of her , as Queen at a later age , are frequent in the
Prussian Galleries ; CARLYLE-1858-2,29.186

she is painted sitting , where I best remember her .
CARLYLE-1858-2,29.187

A serious , comely , rather plump , maternal-looking Lady ; something
thoughtful in those gray still eyes of hers , in the turn of her face
and carriage of her head , as she sits there , considerately gazing out
upon a world which would never conform to her will .
CARLYLE-1858-2,29.188

Decidedly a handsome , wholesome and affectionate aspect of face .
Hanoverian in type , that is to say , blond , florid , slightly <font>
profuse ; CARLYLE-1858-2,29.189

<$$font> - yet the better kind of Hanoverian , little or nothing of the
worse or at least the worst kind . CARLYLE-1858-2,29.190

The eyes , as I say , are gray , and quiet , almost sad ; expressive of
reticence and reflection , of slow constancy rather than of <font> speed
<$$font> in any kind . CARLYLE-1858-2,29.191

One expects , could the picture speak , the querulous sound of maternal
and other solicitude ; of a temper tending towards the obstinate , the
quietly unchangeable ; - loyal patience not wanting , yet in still
larger measure royal impatience well concealed , and long and carefully
cherished . CARLYLE-1858-2,29.192

This is what I read in Sophie Dorothee's Portraits , - probably
remembering what I had otherwise read , and come to know of her .
CARLYLE-1858-2,29.193

She too will not a little concern us in the first part of this History .
CARLYLE-1858-2,29.194

I find , for one thing , she had given much of her physiognomy to the
Friedrich now born . CARLYLE-1858-2,29.195

In his Portraits as <P_30> Prince-Royal , he strongly resembles her ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.196

it is his mother's face informed with youth and new fire , and
translated into the masculine gender : CARLYLE-1858-2,30.197

in his later Portraits , one less and less recognizes the mother .
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.198

Friedrich Wilhelm , now in the sixth year of wedlock , is still very
fond of his Sophie Dorothee , - " <font> Fiechen <$$font> " <paren>
<font> Feekin <$$font> diminutive of <font> Sophie <$$font> <$$paren> ,
as he calls her ; she also having , and continuing to have , the due
wife's regard for her solid , honest , if somewhat explosive bear .
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.199

He troubles her a little now and then , it is said , with whiffs of
jealousy ; CARLYLE-1858-2,30.200

but they are whiffs only , the product of accidental moodinesses in him
, or of transient aspects , misinterpreted , in the court-life of a
young and pretty woman . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.201

As the general rule , he is beautifully goodhumored , kind even , for a
bear ; CARLYLE-1858-2,30.202

and , on the whole , they have begun their partnership under good omens
. CARLYLE-1858-2,30.203

And indeed we may say , in spite of sad tempests that arose , they
continued it under such . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.204

She brought him gradually no fewer than fourteen children , of whom ten
survived him and came to maturity : CARLYLE-1858-2,30.205

and it is to be admitted their conjugal relation , though a royal , was
always a human one ; the main elements of it strictly observed on both
sides ; all quarrels in it capable of being healed again , and the
feeling on both sides true , however troublous . A rare fact among
royal wedlocks , and perhaps a unique one in that epoch .
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.206

The young couple , as is natural in their present position , have many
eyes upon them , and not quite a paved path in this confused court of
Friedrich I . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.207

But they are true to one another ; CARLYLE-1858-2,30.208

they seem indeed to have held well aloof from all public business or
private cabal ; and go along silently expecting , and perhaps silently
resolving this and that in the future tense ; but with moderate immunity
from paternal or other criticisms , for the present .
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.209

The Crown-Prince drills or hunts , with his Grumkows , Anhalt-Dessaus :
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.210

these are harmless employments ; CARLYLE-1858-2,30.211

- and a man may have within his own head what thoughts he pleases ,
without offence so long as he keeps them there . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.212

Friedrich the old Grandfather lived only thirteen months after the birth
of his grandson : CARLYLE-1858-2,30.213

Friedrich Wilhelm was then King ; CARLYLE-1858-2,30.214

thoughts then , to any length , could become actions on the part of
Friedrich Wilhelm . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.215

<heading>

Chapter IV . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.217

Father's Mother . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.218

<$$heading>

Friedrich Wilhelm's Mother , as we hinted , did not live to see this
marriage which she had forecast in her maternal heart .
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.220

She died , rather suddenly , in 1705 , at Hanover , whither she had gone
on a visit ; shortly after parting with this her one boy and child ,
Friedrich Wilhelm , who is then about seventeen ; whom she had with
effort forced herself to send abroad , that he might see the world a
little , for the first time . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.221

Her sorrow on this occasion has in it something beautiful , in so bright
and gay a woman : CARLYLE-1858-2,30.222

shows us the mother strong in her , to a touching degree .
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.223

The rough cub , in whom she noticed rugged perverse elements , "
tendencies to avarice , " and a want of princely graces , and the more
brilliant qualities in mind and manner , had given her many thoughts and
some uneasy ones . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.224

But he was evidently all she had to love in the world ; a rugged
creature inexpressibly precious to her . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.225

For days after his departure , she had kept solitary ; busied with
little ; indulging in her own sad reflections without stint .
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.226

Among the papers she had been scribbling , there was found one slip with
a <font> heart <$$font> sketched on it , and round the heart " Parti "
<paren> Gone <$$paren> : My heart is gone ! - poor lady , and after
what a jewel ! CARLYLE-1858-2,30.227

But Nature is very kind to all children and to all mothers that are true
to her . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.228

Sophie Charlotte's deep sorrow and dejection on this parting was the
secret herald of fate to herself . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.229

It had meant ill health withal , and the gloom of broken nerves .
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.230

All autumn and into winter she had felt herself indefinitely unwell ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.231

she determined , however , on seeing Hanover and her good old Mother at
the usual time . CARLYLE-1858-2,30.232

The gloomy sorrow over Friedrich Wilhelm had been the premonition of a
sudden illness which seized her on the road to Hanover , some five
months afterwards , and which ended fatally in that city .
CARLYLE-1858-2,30.233

Her death was not in the light style Friedrich her <P_32> grandson
ascribes to it ; CARLYLE-1858-2,32.234

she died without epigram , and though in perfect simple courage , with
the reverse of levity . CARLYLE-1858-2,32.235

Here , at first hand , is the specific account of that event ; which ,
as it is brief and indisputable , we may as well fish from the
imbroglios , and render legible , to counteract such notions , and
illuminate for moments an old scene of things . CARLYLE-1858-2,32.236

The writing , apparently a quite private piece , is by " M. de la
Bergerie , Pastor of the French Church at Hanover , " respectable
Edict-of-Nantes gentleman , who had been called in on the occasion ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,32.237

- gives an authentic momentary picture , though a feeble and vacant one
, of a locality at that time very interesting to Englishmen .
CARLYLE-1858-2,32.238

M. de la Bergerie privately records : - ' The night between the last of
January and the first of February , 1705 , between one and two o'clock
in the morning , I was called to the Queen of Prussia , who was then
dangerously ill . CARLYLE-1858-2,32.239

Entering the room , I threw myself at the foot of her bed , testifying
to her in words my profound grief to see her in this state . After
which I took occasion to say , " She might know now that Kings and
Queens are mortal equally with all other men ; and that they are obliged
to appear before the throne of the majesty of God , to give an account
of their deeds done , no less than the meanest of their subjects . " To
which her Majesty replied , " I know it well <paren> <font> Je le sais
bien <$$font> <$$paren> . CARLYLE-1858-2,32.240

" - I went on to say to her , " Madam , your Majesty must also recognise
in this hour the vanity and nothingness of the things here below , for
which , it may be , you have had too much interest ; and the importance
of the things of Heaven , which perhaps you have neglected and contemned
. CARLYLE-1858-2,32.241

" Thereupon the Queen answered , " True <paren> <font> Cela est vrai
<$$font> <$$paren> ! CARLYLE-1858-2,32.242

" " Nevertheless , Madam , " said I , " does not your Majesty place
really your trust in God ? CARLYLE-1858-2,32.243

Do you not very earnestly <paren> <font> bien sérieusement <$$font>
<$$paren> crave pardon of Him for all the sins you have committed ?
CARLYLE-1858-2,32.244

Do not you fly <paren> <font> n'a-t-elle pas recours <$$font> <$$paren>
to the blood and merits of Jesus Christ , without which it is impossible
for us to stand before God ? CARLYLE-1858-2,32.245

" The Queen answered , " <font> Oui <$$font> <paren> Yes <$$paren> .
CARLYLE-1858-2,32.246

" - While this was going on , her Brother , Duke Ernst August , came
into the Queen's room , ' - perhaps with his eye upon me and my motions
? CARLYLE-1858-2,32.247

' As they wished to speak together , I withdrew by order . '
CARLYLE-1858-2,32.248

This Duke Ernst August , age now 31 , is the youngest Brother of the
family ; CARLYLE-1858-2,32.249

there never was any Sister but this dying one , who is four years older
. CARLYLE-1858-2,32.250

Ernst August has some tincture of soldiership at this time <paren>
Marlborough Wars , and the like <$$paren> , as all his kindred <P_33>
had ; CARLYLE-1858-2,33.251

but ultimately he got the Bishopric of Osnabrück , that singular
spiritual heirloom , or half-heirloom {COM:font_change_around_"half"} of
the family ; CARLYLE-1858-2,33.252

and there lived or vegetated without noise . CARLYLE-1858-2,33.253

Poor soul , he is the same Bishop of Osnabruck , to whose house ,
twenty-two years hence , George I. , struck by apoplexy , was
breathlessly galloping in the summer midnight , one wish now left in him
, to be with his brother ; - and arrived dead , or in the article of
death . CARLYLE-1858-2,33.254

That was another scene Ernst August had to witness in his life .
CARLYLE-1858-2,33.255

I suspect him at present of a thought that M. de la Bergerie , with his
pious commonplaces , is likely to do no good . CARLYLE-1858-2,33.256

Other trait of Ernst August's life ; or of the Schloss of Hanover that
night , - or where the sorrowing old Mother sat , invincible though
weeping , in some neighboring room , - I can@ @not give .
CARLYLE-1858-2,33.257

M. de la Bergerie continues his narrative : ' Some time after , I again
presented myself before the Queen's bed , to see if I could have
occasion to speak to her on the matter of her salvation .
CARLYLE-1858-2,33.258

But Monseigneur the Duke Ernst August then said to me , That it was not
necessary ; that the Queen was at peace with her God <paren> <font>
était bien avec son Dieu <$$font> <$$paren> . ' CARLYLE-1858-2,33.259

- Which will mean also that M. de la Bergerie may go home ?
CARLYLE-1858-2,33.260

However , he still writes : ' Next day the Prince told me , That
observing I was come near the Queen's bed , he had asked her if she
wished I should still speak to her ; but she had replied , that it was
not necessary in any way <paren> <font> nullement <$$font> <$$paren> ,
that she already knew all that could be said to her on such an occasion
; that she had said it to herself , that she was still saying it , and
that she hoped to be well with her God . CARLYLE-1858-2,33.261

In the end a faint coming upon the Queen , which was what terminated her
life , I threw myself on my knees at the other side of her bed , the
curtains of which were open ; CARLYLE-1858-2,33.262

and I called to God with a loud voice , " That He would rank his angels
round this great Princess , to guard her from the insults of Satan ;
that He would have pity on her soul ; that He would wash her with the
blood of Jesus Christ her heavenly Spouse ; that , having forgiven her
all her sins , He would receive her to his glory . "
CARLYLE-1858-2,33.263

And in that moment she expired . ' CARLYLE-1858-2,33.264

- Age thirty-six and some months . CARLYLE-1858-2,33.265

Only Daughter of Electress Sophie ; and Father's Mother of Frederick the
Great . CARLYLE-1858-2,33.266

She was , in her time , a highly distinguished woman ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,33.267

and has left , one may say , something of her likeness still traceable
in the Prussian Nation , and its form of culture , to this day .
CARLYLE-1858-2,33.268

Charlottenburg <paren> Charlotte's-town , so called by the sorrowing
Widower <$$paren> , <P_34> where she lived , shone with a much-admired
French light under her presidency , - French essentially , Versaillese ,
Sceptico-Calvinistic , reflex and direct , - illuminating the dark North
; CARLYLE-1858-2,34.269

and indeed has never been so bright since . CARLYLE-1858-2,34.270

The light was not what we can call inspired ; lunar rather , not of the
genial or solar kind : CARLYLE-1858-2,34.271

but , in good truth , it was the best then going ; CARLYLE-1858-2,34.272

and Sophie Charlotte , who was her Mother's daughter in this as in other
respects , had made it her own . CARLYLE-1858-2,34.273

They were deep in literature , these two Royal Ladies ; especially deep
in French theological polemics , with a strong leaning to the
rationalist side . CARLYLE-1858-2,34.274

They had stopped in Rotterdam once , on a certain journey homewards from
Flanders and the Baths of Aix-la-Chapelle , to see that admirable sage ,
the doubter Bayle . CARLYLE-1858-2,34.275

Their sublime messenger roused the poor man , in his garret there , in
the Bompies , - after dark : CARLYLE-1858-2,34.276

but he had a headache that night ; CARLYLE-1858-2,34.277

was in bed , CARLYLE-1858-2,34.278

and could not come . CARLYLE-1858-2,34.279

He followed them next day ; leaving his paper imbroglios , his
historical , philosophical , anti-theological marine-stores ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,34.280

and suspended his neverending scribble , on their behalf ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,34.281

- but would not accept a pension , and give it up .
CARLYLE-1858-2,34.282

They were shrewd , noticing , intelligent and lively women ; persuaded
that there was some nobleness for man beyond what the tailor imparts to
him ; and even very eager to discover it , had they known how .
CARLYLE-1858-2,34.283

In these very days , while our little Friedrich at Berlin lies in his
cradle , sleeping most of his time , sage Leibnitz , a rather weak but
hugely ingenious old gentleman , with bright eyes and long nose , with
vast black peruke and bandy legs , is seen daily in the Linden Avenue at
Hanover <paren> famed Linden Alley , leading from Town Palace to Country
one , a couple of miles long , rather disappointing when one sees it
<$$paren> , daily driving or walking towards Herrenhausen , where the
Court , where the old Electress is , who will have a touch of dialogue
with him to diversify her day . CARLYLE-1858-2,34.284

Not very edifying dialogue , we may fear ; yet once more , the best that
can be had in present circumstances . CARLYLE-1858-2,34.285

Here is some lunar reflex of Versailles , which is a polite court ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,34.286

direct rays there are from the oldest written Gospels and the newest ;
from the great unwritten Gospel of the Universe itself ; and from one's
own real effort , more or less devout , to read all these aright .
CARLYLE-1858-2,34.287

Let us not condemn that poor French element of Eclecticism , Scepticism
, Tolerance , Theodicea , and Bayle of the Bompies <font> versus
<$$font> the College of Saumur . CARLYLE-1858-2,34.288

Let us admit that it was <P_35> profitable , at least that it was
inevitable ; CARLYLE-1858-2,35.289

let us pity it , and be thankful for it , and rejoice that we are well
out of it . CARLYLE-1858-2,35.290

Scepticism , which is there beginning at the very top of the world-tree
, and has to descend through all the boughs with terrible results to
mankind , is as yet pleasant , tinting the leaves with fine autumnal red
. CARLYLE-1858-2,35.291

Sophie Charlotte partook of her Mother's tendencies ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,35.292

and carried them with her to Berlin , there to be expanded in many ways
into ampler fulfilment . CARLYLE-1858-2,35.293

She too had the sage Leibnitz often with her , at Berlin ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,35.294

no end to her questionings of him ; eagerly desirous to draw water from
that deep well , - a wet rope , with cobwebs sticking to it , too often
all she got ; endless rope , and the bucket never coming to view .
Which , however , she took patiently , as a thing according to Nature .
CARLYLE-1858-2,35.295

She had her learned Beausobres and other Reverend Edict-of-Nantes
gentlemen , famed Berlin divines ; whom , if any Papist notability ,
Jesuit ambassador or the like , happened to be there , she would set
disputing with him , in the Soiree at Charlottenburg .
CARLYLE-1858-2,35.296

She could right well preside over such a battle of the Cloud-Titans ,
and conduct the lightnings softly , without explosions .
CARLYLE-1858-2,35.297

There is a pretty and very characteristic Letter of hers , still
pleasant to read , though turning on theologies now fallen dim enough ;
addressed to Father Vota , the famous Jesuit , King's-@ @confessor , and
diplomatist , from Warsaw , who had been doing his best in one such
rencontre before her Majesty <paren> date March , 1703 <$$paren> , -
seemingly on a series of evenings , in the intervals of his diplomatic
business ; the Beausobre champions being introduced to him successively
, one each evening , by Queen Sophie Charlotte . CARLYLE-1858-2,35.298

To all appearance the fencing had been keen ; the lightnings in need of
some dexterous conductor . CARLYLE-1858-2,35.299

Vota , on his way homeward , had written to apologize for the
sputterings of fire struck out of him in certain pinches of the combat ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,35.300

says , It was the rough handling the Primitive Fathers got from these
Beausobre gentlemen , who indeed to me , Vota in person , under your
Majesty's fine presidency , were politeness itself , though they treated
the Fathers so ill . CARLYLE-1858-2,35.301

Her Majesty , with beautiful art , in this Letter , smooths the raven
plumage of Vota ; CARLYLE-1858-2,35.302

- and , at the same time , throws into him , as with invisible
needle-points , an excellent dose of acupuncturation , on the subject of
the Primitive Fathers and the Ecumenic Councils , on her own score .
CARLYLE-1858-2,35.303

Let us give some Excerpt , in condensed state : CARLYLE-1858-2,35.304

" How can St. Jerome , for example , be a key to Scripture ? she
insinuates ; citing from Jerome this remarkable avowal of his method of
<P_36> composing books ; " especially of his method in that Book ,
<font> Commentary on the Galatians , <$$font> where he accuses both
Peter and Paul of simulation and even of hypocrisy .
CARLYLE-1858-2,36.305

The great St. Augustine has been charging him with this sad fact , "
says her Majesty , who gives chapter and verse ; CARLYLE-1858-2,36.306

and Jerome answers : " I followed the Commentaries of Origen , of " -
five or six different persons , who turned out mostly to be heretics
before Jerome had quite done with them in coming years !
CARLYLE-1858-2,36.307

- ' " And to confess the honest truth to you , " continues Jerome , " I
read all that ; CARLYLE-1858-2,36.308

and after having crammed my head with a great many things , I sent for
my amanuensis , CARLYLE-1858-2,36.309

and dictated to him now my own thoughts , now those of others , without
much recollecting the order , nor sometimes the words , nor even the
sense . " CARLYLE-1858-2,36.310

In another place <paren> in the Book itself farther on <$$paren> , he
says : " I do not myself write ; CARLYLE-1858-2,36.311

I have an amanuensis , CARLYLE-1858-2,36.312

and I dictate to him what comes into my mouth . CARLYLE-1858-2,36.313

If I wish to reflect a little , to say the thing better or a better
thing , he knits his brows , CARLYLE-1858-2,36.314

and the whole look of him tells me sufficiently that he can@ @not endure
to wait . " ' CARLYLE-1858-2,36.315

- Here is a sacred old gentleman , whom it is not safe to depend on for
interpreting the Scriptures , thinks her Majesty ; CARLYLE-1858-2,36.316

but does not say so , leaving Father Vota to his reflections .
CARLYLE-1858-2,36.317

Then again , coming to Councils , she quotes St. Gregory Nazianzen upon
him ; who is truly dreadful in regard to Ecumenic Councils of the Church
, - and indeed may awaken thoughts of Deliberative Assemblies generally
, in the modern constitutional mind . CARLYLE-1858-2,36.318

' He says , No Council ever was successful ; so many mean human passions
getting into conflagration there ; with noise , with violence and uproar
, " more like those of a tavern or still worse place , "
CARLYLE-1858-2,36.319

- these are his words . CARLYLE-1858-2,36.320

He , for his own share , had resolved to avoid all such " rendezvousing
of the Geese and Cranes , flocking together to throttle and tatter one
another in that sad manner . " CARLYLE-1858-2,36.321

Nor had St. Theodoret much opinion of the Council of Nice , except as a
kind of miracle . CARLYLE-1858-2,36.322

" Nothing good to be expected from Councils , " says he , " except when
God is pleased to interpose , and destroy the machinery of the Devil .
" ' CARLYLE-1858-2,36.323

- With more of the like sort ; all delicate , as invisible needlepoints
, in her Majesty's hand . What is Father Vota to say ?
CARLYLE-1858-2,36.324

- The <P_37> modern reader looks through these chinks into a strange old
scene , the stuff of it fallen obsolete , the spirit of it not , nor
worthy to fall . CARLYLE-1858-2,37.325

These were Sophie Charlotte's reunions ; very charming in their time .
At which how joyful for Irish Toland to be present , as was several
times his luck . CARLYLE-1858-2,37.326

Toland , a mere broken heretic in his own country , who went thither
once as Secretary to some Embassy <paren> Embassy of Macclesfield's ,
1701 , announcing that the English Crown had fallen Hanover-wards
<$$paren> , and was no doubt glad , poor headlong soul , to find himself
a gentleman and Christian again , for the time being , - admires Hanover
and Berlin very much ; CARLYLE-1858-2,37.327

and looks upon Sophie Charlotte in particular as the pink of women .
Something between an earthly Queen and a divine Egeria ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,37.328

" Serena " he calls her ; CARLYLE-1858-2,37.329

and , in his high-flown fashion , is very laudatory .
CARLYLE-1858-2,37.330

" The most beautiful Princess of her time , " says he , - meaning one of
the most beautiful : CARLYLE-1858-2,37.331

her features are extremely regular , and full of vivacity ; copious dark
hair , blue eyes , complexion excellently fair ; CARLYLE-1858-2,37.332

- " not very tall , and somewhat too plump , " he admits elsewhere .
CARLYLE-1858-2,37.333

And then her mind , - for gifts , for graces , culture , where will you
find such a mind ? CARLYLE-1858-2,37.334

" Her reading is infinite , CARLYLE-1858-2,37.335

and she is conversant in all manner of subjects ; "
CARLYLE-1858-2,37.336

" knows the abstrusest problems of Philosophy ; " says admiring Toland :
much knowledge everywhere exact , and handled as by an artist and queen
; CARLYLE-1858-2,37.337

for " her wit is inimitable , " CARLYLE-1858-2,37.338

" her justness of thought , her delicacy of expression , " her felicity
of utterance and management , are great . CARLYLE-1858-2,37.339

Foreign courtiers call her " the Republican Queen . "
CARLYLE-1858-2,37.340

She detects you a sophistry at one glance ; CARLYLE-1858-2,37.341

pierces down direct upon the weak point of an opinion :
CARLYLE-1858-2,37.342

never in my whole life did I , Toland , come upon a swifter or sharper
intellect . CARLYLE-1858-2,37.343

And then she is so good withal , so bright and cheerful ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,37.344

and " has the art of uniting what to the rest of the world are
antagonisms , mirth and learning , " - say even , mirth and good sense .
CARLYLE-1858-2,37.345

Is deep in music , too ; CARLYLE-1858-2,37.346

plays daily on her harpsichord , CARLYLE-1858-2,37.347

and fantasies , and even composes , in an eminent manner .
CARLYLE-1858-2,37.348

Toland's <P_38> admiration , deducting the highflown temper and manner
of the man , is sincere and great . CARLYLE-1858-2,38.349

Beyond doubt a bright airy lady , shining in mild radiance in those
Northern parts ; very graceful , very witty and ingenious ; skilled to
speak , skilled to hold her tongue , - which latter art also was
frequently in requisition with her . CARLYLE-1858-2,38.350

She did not much venerate her Husband , nor the Court population , male
or female , whom he chose to have about him : CARLYLE-1858-2,38.351

his and their ways were by no means hers , if she had cared to publish
her thoughts . CARLYLE-1858-2,38.352

Friedrich I. , it is admitted on all hands , was " an expensive Herr ;
" much given to magnificent ceremonies , etiquettes and solemnities ;
making no great way any-whither , and that always with noise enough ,
and with a dust vortex of courtier intrigues and cabals encircling him ,
- from which it is better to stand quite to windward .
CARLYLE-1858-2,38.353

Moreover , he was slightly crooked ; most sensitive , thin of skin and
liable to sudden flaws of temper , though at heart very kind and good .
CARLYLE-1858-2,38.354

Sophie Charlotte is she who wrote once , " Leibnitz talked to me of the
infinitely little <paren> <font> de l'infiniment petit <$$paren> :
mon_Dieu , <$$font> as if I did not know enough of that ! "
CARLYLE-1858-2,38.355

Besides , it is whispered she was once near marrying to Louis XIV. 's
Dauphin ; CARLYLE-1858-2,38.356

her Mother Sophie , and her Cousin the Dowager Duchess of Orleans ,
cunning women both , had brought her to Paris in her girlhood , with
that secret object ; CARLYLE-1858-2,38.357

and had very nearly managed it . CARLYLE-1858-2,38.358

Queen of France that might have been ; CARLYLE-1858-2,38.359

and now it is but Brandenburg , CARLYLE-1858-2,38.360

and the dice have fallen somewhat wrong for us ! CARLYLE-1858-2,38.361

She had Friedrich Wilhelm , the rough boy ; and perhaps nothing more of
very precious property . CARLYLE-1858-2,38.362

Her first child , likewise a boy , had soon died , CARLYLE-1858-2,38.363

and there came no third : CARLYLE-1858-2,38.364

tedious ceremonials , and the infinitely little , were mainly her lot in
this world . All which , however , she had the art to take up not in
the tragic way , but in the mildly comic , - often not to take up at all
, but leave lying there ; - and thus to manage in a handsome and softly
victorious manner . With delicate female tact , with fine female
stoicism too ; keeping all things within limits . CARLYLE-1858-2,38.365

She was much respected by her Husband , much loved indeed ; and greatly
mourned for by the poor man : CARLYLE-1858-2,38.366

the village Lützelburg <paren> Littletown <$$paren> , close by Berlin ,
where she had built a mansion for herself , he fondly named <font>
Charlottenburg <$$font> <paren> Charlotte's-town <$$paren> , after her
death , which name both House and Village still bear .
CARLYLE-1858-2,38.367

Leibnitz found her of an almost troublesome sharpness of intellect ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,38.368

" wants to know the why even of the why , " says Leibnitz .
CARLYLE-1858-2,38.369

That is the way of <P_39> female intellects when they are good ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,39.370

nothing equals their acuteness , CARLYLE-1858-2,39.371

and their rapidity is almost excessive . CARLYLE-1858-2,39.372

Samuel Johnson , too , had a young-lady friend once " with the acutest
intellect I have ever known . " CARLYLE-1858-2,39.373

On the whole , we may pronounce her clearly a superior woman , this
Sophie Charlotte ; notable not for her Grandson alone , though now
pretty much forgotten by the world , - as indeed all things and persons
have , one day or other , to be ! CARLYLE-1858-2,39.374

A <font> Life <$$font> of her , in feeble watery style , and distracted
arrangement , by one <font> Erman , <$$font> a Berlin Frenchman , is in
existence , CARLYLE-1858-2,39.375

and will repay a cursory perusal ; CARLYLE-1858-2,39.376

curious traits of her , in still looser form , are also to be found in
<font> Pöllnitz <$$font> : CARLYLE-1858-2,39.377

but for our purposes here is enough , and more than enough .
CARLYLE-1858-2,39.378

Chapter V . CARLYLE-1858-2,39.379

King Friedrich I . CARLYLE-1858-2,39.380

The Prussian royalty is now in its twelfth year when this little
Friedrich , who is to carry it to such a height , comes into the world .
CARLYLE-1858-2,39.381

Old Friedrich the Grandfather achieved this dignity , after long and
intricate negotiations in the first year of the Century ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,39.382

16th November 1700 , his ambassador returned triumphant from Vienna ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,39.383

the Kaiser had at last consented : CARLYLE-1858-2,39.384

We are to wear a crown royal on the top of our periwig ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,39.385

the old Electorate of Brandenburg is to become the Kingdom of Prussia ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,39.386

and the Family of Hohenzollern , slowly mounting these many centuries ,
has reached the uppermost round of the ladder . CARLYLE-1858-2,39.387

Friedrich , the old Gentleman who now looks upon his little Grandson
<paren> destined to be the Third King of Prussia <$$paren> with such
interest , - is not a very memorable man ; CARLYLE-1858-2,39.388

but he has had his adventures too , his losses and gains :
CARLYLE-1858-2,39.389

and surely among the latter , the gain of a crown royal into his House
gives him , if only as a <P_40> chronological milestone , some place in
History . CARLYLE-1858-2,40.390

He was son of him they call the Great Elector , Friedrich Wilhelm by
name ; of whom the Prussians speak much , in an eagerly celebrating
manner , and whose strenuous toilsome work in this world , celebrated or
not , is still deeply legible in the actual life and affairs of Germany
. CARLYLE-1858-2,40.391

A man of whom we must yet find some opportunity to say a word .
CARLYLE-1858-2,40.392

From him and a beautiful and excellent Princess Luise , Princess of
Orange , - Dutch William , <font> our <$$font> Dutch William@ @'s aunt ,
- this crooked royal Friedrich came . CARLYLE-1858-2,40.393

He was not born crooked ; straight enough once , and a fine little boy
of six months old or so ; there being an elder Prince now in his third
year , also full of hope . CARLYLE-1858-2,40.394

But in a rough journey to Königsberg and back <paren> winter of 1657 ,
as is guessed <$$paren> , one of the many rough jolting journeys this
faithful Electress made with her Husband , a careless or unlucky nurse ,
who had charge of pretty little Fritzchen , was not sufficiently
attentive to her duties on the worst of roads . CARLYLE-1858-2,40.395

The ever-@ @jolting carriage gave some bigger jolt ,
CARLYLE-1858-2,40.396

the child fell backwards in her arms ; CARLYLE-1858-2,40.397

- did not quite break his back , CARLYLE-1858-2,40.398

but injured it for life : CARLYLE-1858-2,40.399

- and with his back , one may perceive , injured his soul and history to
an almost corresponding degree . CARLYLE-1858-2,40.400

For the weak crooked boy , with keen and fine perceptions , and an
inadequate case to put them in , grew up with too thin a skin :
CARLYLE-1858-2,40.401

- that may be considered as the summary of his misfortunes ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,40.402

and , on the whole , there is no other heavy sin to be charged against
him . CARLYLE-1858-2,40.403

He had other loads laid upon him , poor youth : CARLYLE-1858-2,40.404

his kind pious Mother died , CARLYLE-1858-2,40.405

his elder Brother died , CARLYLE-1858-2,40.406

he at the age of seventeen saw himself Heir-Apparent ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,40.407

- and had got a Stepmother with new heirs , if he should disappear .
CARLYLE-1858-2,40.408

Sorrows enough in that one fact , with the venomous whisperings ,
commentaries and suspicions , which a Court population , female and male
, in little Berlin Town , can contrive to tack to it .
CARLYLE-1858-2,40.409

Does not the new Sovereign Lady , in her heart , wish <font> you
<$$font> were dead , my Prince ? Hope it , perhaps ?
CARLYLE-1858-2,40.410

Health , at any rate , weak ; CARLYLE-1858-2,40.411

and , by the aid of a little pharmacy - ye Heavens !
CARLYLE-1858-2,40.412

Such suspicions are now understood to have had no basis except in the
waste brains of courtier men and women ; CARLYLE-1858-2,40.413

but their existence there can become tragical enough . Add to which ,
the Great Elector , like all the Hohenzollerns , was a choleric man ;
<P_41> capable of blazing into volcanic explosions , when affronted by
idle masses of cobwebs in the midst of his serious businesses !
CARLYLE-1858-2,41.414

It is certain , the young Prince Friedrich had at one time got into
quite high , shrill and mutually minatory terms with his Stepmother ; so
that once , after some such shrill dialogue between them ending with "
You shall repent this , Sir ! " - he found it good to fly off in the
night , with only his Tutor or Secretary and a valet , to Hessen-Cassel
to an Aunt ; who stoutly protected him in this emergency ; and whose
Daughter , after the difficult readjustment of matters , became his Wife
, but did not live long . CARLYLE-1858-2,41.415

And it is farther certain the same Prince , during this his first wedded
time , dining one day with his Stepmother , was taken suddenly ill .
CARLYLE-1858-2,41.416

Felt ill , after his cup of coffee ; CARLYLE-1858-2,41.417

retired into another room in violent spasms , evidently in an alarming
state , and secretly in a most alarmed one : CARLYLE-1858-2,41.418

his Tutor or Secretary , one Dankelmann , attended him thither ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,41.419

and as the Doctor took some time to arrive , and the symptoms were
instant and urgent , Secretary Dankelmann produced ' from a pocketbook
some drug of his own , or of the Hessen-Cassel Aunt , ' emetic I supose
, CARLYLE-1858-2,41.420

and gave it to the poor Prince ; - who said often , and felt ever after
, with or without notion of poison , that {TEXT:That} Dankelmann had
saved his life . In consequence of which adventure he again quitted
Court without leave ; and begged to be permitted to remain safe in the
country , if Papa would be so good . CARLYLE-1858-2,41.421

Fancy the Great Elector's humours on such an occurrence ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,41.422

and what a furtherance to him in his heavy continual labours , and
strenous swimming for life , these beautiful humours and transactions
must have been ! CARLYLE-1858-2,41.423

A crookbacked boy , dear to the Great Elector , pukes , one afternoon ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,41.424

and there arises such an opening of the Nether Floodgates of this
Universe : in and round your poor workshop , nothing but sudden darkness
, smell of sulphur ; hissing of forked serpents here , and the universal
alleleu of female hysterics there ; - to help a man forward with his
work ! CARLYLE-1858-2,41.425

O reader , we will pity his crowned head , as well as the hatted and
even hatless one . CARLYLE-1858-2,41.426

Human creatures will not <font> go <$$font> quite accurately together ,
any more than clocks will ; CARLYLE-1858-2,41.427

and when their dissonance once rises fairly high , and they can@ @not
readily kill one another , any Great Elector who is third party will
have a terrible time of it . CARLYLE-1858-2,41.428

Electress Dorothee , the Stepmother , was herself somewhat of a hard
lady , not easy to live with , though so far above poisoning <P_42> as
to have ' despised even the suspicion of it . ' CARLYLE-1858-2,42.429

She was much given to practical economics , dairy-farming ,
market-gardening , and industrial and commercial operations such as
offered ; CARLYLE-1858-2,42.430

and was thought to be a very strict reckoner of money .
CARLYLE-1858-2,42.431

She founded the <font> Dorotheenstadt <$$font> , now oftener called the
<font> Neustadt <$$font> , chief quarter of Berlin ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,42.432

and planted , just about the time of this unlucky dinner , ' A.D. 1680
or so , ' the first of the celebrated <font> Lindens <$$font> , which
<paren> or the successors of which , in a stunted condition <$$paren>
are still growing there . CARLYLE-1858-2,42.433

<font> Unter-den-Linden : <$$font> it is now the gayest quarter of
Berlin , full of really fine edifices : CARLYLE-1858-2,42.434

it was then a sandy outskirt of Electress Dorothee's dairy-farm ; good
for nothing but building upon , thought Electress Dorothee .
CARLYLE-1858-2,42.435

She did much dairy-and-vegetable trade on the great scale ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,42.436

- was thought even to have , underhand , a commercial interest in the
principal Beerhouse of the city . CARLYLE-1858-2,42.437

People did not love her : CARLYLE-1858-2,42.438

to the Great Elector , who guided with a steady bridle-hand , she
complied not amiss ; though in him too there rose sad recollections and
comparisons now and then : CARLYLE-1858-2,42.439

but with a Stepson of unsteady nerves it became evident there could
never be soft neighbourhood . CARLYLE-1858-2,42.440

Prince Friedrich and his Father came gradually to some understanding ,
tacit or express , on that sad matter ; CARLYLE-1858-2,42.441

Prince Friedrich was allowed to live , on his separate allowance ,
mainly remote from Court . Which he did , for perhaps six or eight
years , till the Great Elector's death ; henceforth in a peacable manner
, or at least without open explosions . CARLYLE-1858-2,42.442

His young Hessen-Cassel Wife died suddenly in 1683 ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,42.443

and again there was mad rumour of poisoning ; which Electress Dorothee
disregarded as below her , and of no consequence to her , and attended
to industrial operations that would pay . CARLYLE-1858-2,42.444

That poor young Wife , when dying , exacted a promise from Prince
Friedrich that he would not wed again , but be content with the Daughter
she had left him : which promise , if ever seriously given , could not
be kept , as we have seen . CARLYLE-1858-2,42.445

Prince Friedrich brought his Sophie Charlotte home about fifteen months
after . CARLYLE-1858-2,42.446

With the Stepmother and with the Court there was armed neutrality under
tolerable forms , and no open explosion farther . CARLYLE-1858-2,42.447

In a secret way , however , there continued to be difficulties .
CARLYLE-1858-2,42.448

And such difficulties had already been , that the poor young man ,
<P_43> not yet come to his Heritages , and having , with probably some
turn for expense , a covetous unamiable Stepmother , had fallen into the
usual difficulties ; and taken the methods too usual .
CARLYLE-1858-2,43.449

Namely , had given ear to the Austrian Court , which offered him
assistance , - somewhat as an aged Jew will to a young Christian
gentleman in quarrel with papa , - upon condition of his signing a
certain bond : bond which much surprised Prince Friedrich when he came
to understand it ! Of which we shall hear more , and even much more ,
in the course of time ! CARLYLE-1858-2,43.450

- Neither after his accession <paren> year 1688 ; his Cousin Dutch
William , of the glorious and immortal memory , just lifting anchor
towards these shores <$$paren> was the new Elector's life an easy one .
CARLYLE-1858-2,43.451

We may say , it was replete with troubles rather ; and unhappily not so
much with great troubles , which could call forth antagonistic greatness
of mind or of result , as with never-ending shoals of small troubles ,
the antagonism to which is apt to become itself of smallish character .
CARLYLE-1858-2,43.452

Do not search into his history ; CARLYLE-1858-2,43.453

you will remember almost nothing of it <paren> I hope <$$paren> after
never so many readings ! CARLYLE-1858-2,43.454

Garrulous Pöllnitz and others have written enough about him ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,43.455

but it all runs off from you again , as a thing that has no affinity
with the human skin . CARLYLE-1858-2,43.456

He had a court ' <font> rempli d'intrigues <$$font> , full of
never-ending cabals , ' - about what ? CARLYLE-1858-2,43.457

One question only are we a little interested in : How he came by the
Kingship ? CARLYLE-1858-2,43.458

How did the like of him contrive to achieve Kingship ?
CARLYLE-1858-2,43.459

We may answer : It was not he that achieved it ; it was those that went
before him , who had gradually got it , - as is very usual in such cases
. CARLYLE-1858-2,43.460

All that he did was to knock at the gate <paren> the Kaiser's gate and
the world's <$$paren> , and ask , " <font> Is <$$font> it achieved ,
then ? " CARLYLE-1858-2,43.461

Is Brandenburg grown ripe for having a crown ? CARLYLE-1858-2,43.462

Will it be needful for you to grant Brandenburg a crown ? Which
question , after knocking as loud as possible , they at last took the
trouble to answer , CARLYLE-1858-2,43.463

" Yes , it will be needful . " CARLYLE-1858-2,43.464

- Elector Friedrich's turn for ostentation , - or , as we may interpret
it , the high spirit of a Hohenzollern working through weak nerves and a
crooked back , - had early set him a-@ @thinking of the Kingship ;
CARLYLE-1858-2,43.465

and no doubt , the exaltation of rival Saxony , which had attained that
envied dignity <paren> in a very unenviable manner , in the person of
Elector August made King of Poland <$$paren> in 1697 , operated as a new
spur on his activities . CARLYLE-1858-2,43.466

Then also Duke Ernst <P_44> of Hanover , his father-in-law , was
struggling to become Elector Ernst ; Hanover to be the Ninth Electorate
, which it actually attained in 1698 ; not to speak of England , and
quite endless prospects there for Ernst and Hanover .
CARLYLE-1858-2,44.467

These my lucky neighbours are all rising ; CARLYLE-1858-2,44.468

all this the Kaiser has granted to my lucky neighbours :
CARLYLE-1858-2,44.469

why is there no promotion he should grant me , among them !
CARLYLE-1858-2,44.470

