<BEGIN_chapman-1774-1>

{COM:Part_I}

<P_20>

<heading>

Sect. II . CHAPMAN-1774-1,20.5

<$$heading>

<font> Errors and Defects in Education . CHAPMAN-1774-1,20.7

Advice to Parents and Teachers . <$$font> CHAPMAN-1774-1,20.8

The errors which are frequently committed in education by parents , and
those to whom they transfer the care of their children , may be reckoned
one great source of human misery . CHAPMAN-1774-1,20.9

A few instances will confirm the truth of this observation .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,20.10

In the first period of life , when the child is most susceptible of
impressions , he is surrounded with persons of low education and of weak
minds . CHAPMAN-1774-1,20.11

The consequence is , <P_21> that he borrows their ideas , he imbibes
their prejudices , he adopts their manners . CHAPMAN-1774-1,21.12

Being generally intrusted to such persons , he is often corrupted by the
manner in which he is treated by them . CHAPMAN-1774-1,21.13

Is he peevish , for instance , and refuses to take his ordinary food ?
CHAPMAN-1774-1,21.14

he is told , that unless he take what is offered him , it will be given
to another . CHAPMAN-1774-1,21.15

The tendency of such a practice is obvious . CHAPMAN-1774-1,21.16

It can@ @not fail of producing a selfish and malevolent turn of mind .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,21.17

Is he discomposed by any accident ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,21.18

it is thought proper to punish the author of his misfortune , guilty or
innocent , animate or inanimate ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,21.19

and , which is still worse , he is sometimes encouraged to inflict the
imaginary punishment himself , till at length , his passion having
wreaked itself , he recovers his former tranquility .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,21.20

Hence we see <P_22> how the heart is hardened , and how hatred , cruelty
, and revenge , so fatal to mankind , are implanted in the human breast
. CHAPMAN-1774-1,22.21

The manifold accidents to which we are continually exposed , the
opposite views and different tempers of mankind , and the precarious
hold we have of whatever is external , require that the mind should be
formed , by an early and prudent culture , to bear , with fortitude and
self-command , the various troubles and misfortunes to which we may be
subjected . CHAPMAN-1774-1,22.22

Notwithstanding this , it is no uncommon thing , to see those children
whose tempers are warm , and who are susceptible of the finest feelings
, frequently neglected in this important point . CHAPMAN-1774-1,22.23

Instead of teaching them patiently to endure pain and disappointment ,
and the other evils of life , which can@ @not be altogether avoided ;
instead of teaching <P_23> them to govern their passions , and direct
them to proper objects , their parents are often blind enough to allow
them to contract an impatience under misfortune , and an impetuosity of
spirit when thwarted , which , gathering strength from indulgence , are
often productive of trouble to others , and of misery to themselves .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,23.24

To sources of this kind may be traced many of those outrages which
disturb the peace of society , and blast the enjoyment of life .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,23.25

Instead of being taught candidly to acknowledge his faults , the child
is suffered to make excuses for them ; and sometimes , by a direct lie ,
to disown them . CHAPMAN-1774-1,23.26

Thus the sacred regard which is due to truth is gradually diminished ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,23.27

and , that fence being broke down , dissimulation , the bane of virtue ,
establishes an early and a powerful empire in the human heart .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,23.28

<P_24>

Is the child sluggish or refractory ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,24.30

it is thought proper to engage him to his duty by a bribe .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,24.31

Thus , instead of disinterestedness , and the love of virtue , he
contracts a sordid and mercenary turn , and a strong attachment to money
, which he looks upon as the great object that interests the passions of
men , and the spring by which they ought to be moved :
CHAPMAN-1774-1,24.32

and the high encomiums on it which he so frequently hears , the passion
for it which he observes in the generality of mankind , and the respect
which he sees paid to the rich , independent of their virtues ,
naturally tend to pervert his taste , and teach him to associate the
ideas of merit , and of happiness , with the possession of riches .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,24.33

If he gets money from his relations or friends , which they design ,
through a fond but mistaken affection , as an expression of their regard
or esteem , he is often permitted , <P_25> or rather encouraged , to
throw it away in purchasing those things which will sow the seeds of
luxury and profusion in his tender mind . CHAPMAN-1774-1,25.34

Hence that unhappy keenness for toys , fruits , sweetmeats
{TEXT:sweat-meats} , &c. which we observe in youth , is nourished by
indiscreet and early indulgence ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,25.35

and hence may be derived that desire of superfluities , and those
numerous artificial wants , with which a vitiated appetite , or depraved
taste , punishes those who depart from the simplicity of nature .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,25.36

Thus we are so far from cultivating a principle of virtue in children
during this early period , that we can@ @not fail , by so unwary a
conduct , to ingraft vice in their tender breasts .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,25.37

Hence it is that teachers find it so difficult a task , to root out of
their unfortunate pupils those false notions which they have already
formed , and to train them up , by virtuous <P_26> habits , to be good
men and useful members of society . CHAPMAN-1774-1,26.38

When the child arrives at six or seven years , and begins now to
multiply his amusements , and to extend his acquaintance , seldom is
sufficient care taken to regulate his diversions , and make them
subservient to the improvement of his mind , or the health of his body .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,26.39

Is attention given in proportion to the flexibility of his temper , or
his want of experience , to shew him the difference of character among
the living as well as the dead ; to guard him against the infectious
example of any idle or naughty children with whom he may have occasion
to converse ; and to encourage an intimacy between him and those who are
diligent , modest , and virtuous ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,26.40

is he taught , with proper care , to strive with his equals in the noble
contest of making himself wiser and better than they ?
CHAPMAN-1774-1,26.41

Is he taught , at the <P_27> same time , to suppress the first risings
of envy , that enemy of human happiness , and to resist the emotions of
pride and vanity , those silly and selfish passions which are so apt to
steal into the unguarded breasts of youth ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,27.42

Is he taught , likewise , to love his companions , to sympathize with
them under sickness or unfortunate accidents ; to look upon all mankind
as his brethren , children of the same common parent ; and to consider
those to whom he is superior in understanding , or in any of the
advantages of fortune , as intitled , upon all occasions , to his advice
and assistance ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,27.43

The Author of nature , who confers his gifts with a liberal hand , and
adapts them with a parental foresight to the various exigencies of
mankind , often bestows a particular genius upon particular persons ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,27.44

and seems , by this wise provision , to have marked out the walk of life
<P_28> for which they were designed . CHAPMAN-1774-1,28.45

Notwithstanding this innate and useful bias , it seldom happens that
either the parents or the instructors of a child apply their sagacity to
discover the bent of his genius , or direct his studies with a view to
render it most valuable to himself , and most beneficial to society .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,28.46

But if his genius be not particular , it would be proper , as he
advances through youth , and before he chuses his employment , to give
him a just view of the advantages and disadvantages which attend the
different occupations of mankind , and to point out to him how far any
trade or profession which he may have in view is useful to society , and
how far it may be suited to his capacity , his temper , and his
constitution . CHAPMAN-1774-1,28.47

Though such considerations as these ought to have great weight in
determining his choice , yet seldom is such attention given to <P_29>
direct him , as the importance of that critical step , and the need he
has of advice , seem to require . CHAPMAN-1774-1,29.48

Unexperienced in life , and ignorant of what qualities are necessary in
different occupations , he is by no means a proper judge for himself :
CHAPMAN-1774-1,29.49

uninstructed by his parents or teachers , he is too ready to determine
himself by the taste of his companions , or by the little incidents
which may happen to strike his fancy in the place where he receives his
education . CHAPMAN-1774-1,29.50

In this critical period he is seldom instructed , with proper care , in
the use of his time and his money ; or taught to spend the former as
becomes a rational creature , to divest the latter of the false value
stamped upon it by the prejudices of mankind , and to view it in the
true light in which it ought to be viewed . CHAPMAN-1774-1,29.51

To acquire those accomplishments and those habits , when young , which
<P_30> will render us useful in life ; to provide for ourselves when of
age , and for our families , that they may not be burdens to society ;
to give our children a virtuous education ; to relieve the indigent , to
encourage modest merit , to promote honest industry and public spirit
among men , and , in general , to do good to our fellow-creatures , are
the great purposes to which our time and our money should be consecrated
. CHAPMAN-1774-1,30.52

We may observe too , that he is not sufficiently taught to look upon
industry in his future employment , and upon a faithful performance of
the duties of his station , as a debt which he owes to the public ;
CHAPMAN-1774-1,30.53

nor is he instructed to value men by the decency and propriety with
which they acquit themselves in society , rather than by the rank which
they hold . CHAPMAN-1774-1,30.54

He ought , among other things , to be taught that , if an employment be
useful , however humble , <P_31> it is never to be treated with ridicule
or contempt , and can never be so mean , as to preclude the person who
industriously and honestly follows it , from the protection and good
opinion of mankind . CHAPMAN-1774-1,31.55

We see also that he is not directed , with proper care , to the surest
means of attaining happiness . CHAPMAN-1774-1,31.56

Happiness , that great object which mankind universally pursue , may be
considered as consisting both in freedom from pain , and in enjoyment of
pleasure . CHAPMAN-1774-1,31.57

To avoid pain , it is necessary he should not allow his lower appetites
, or selfish passions , to usurp that place in his breast which is due
to the nobler and more refined . CHAPMAN-1774-1,31.58

To procure a succession of the most elevated pleasures he should not
rest satisfied with the regularity of an inoffensive conduct , while
unprofitable to others : CHAPMAN-1774-1,31.59

He should endeavour , by a proper exertion of his faculties , to render
his usefulness as <P_32> extensive as possible . CHAPMAN-1774-1,32.60

And that he may be more useful in life , and consequently more happy ,
his parents and teachers should take all possible pains to form his mind
in his early years , and to enforce their admonitions by a proper
discipline . CHAPMAN-1774-1,32.61

Thus he will acquire good habits when young ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,32.62

and virtue will , by degrees , become easy , natural , delightful to him
. CHAPMAN-1774-1,32.63

But how shall parents train up their children , or teachers instruct
their pupils , and inspire them with a just taste of books and of
manners , unless they have acquired such a taste themselves ?
CHAPMAN-1774-1,32.64

How can we expect to be happy ourselves , or to perform our duty to
those who are under our care , if we be hurried away by the violence of
our passions ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,32.65

It is true the passions are necessary to quicken our course in the great
voyage of human life : CHAPMAN-1774-1,32.66

and if we could learn to keep them within due bounds , how <P_33>
smoothly and how pleasantly should we sail over the ocean of life ,
which , in our present circumstances , we find sometimes so tempestuous
and so fatal ! CHAPMAN-1774-1,33.67

But the passions receive their direction , in a great measure , from the
ideas which we have learned to associate , and the opinions we have
formed . CHAPMAN-1774-1,33.68

It is natural for beings who live in society , and are constituted like
us , to try to excel one another : CHAPMAN-1774-1,33.69

but is it not as natural for them to try to excel in knowledge and
virtue , as in wealth or power ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,33.70

Is it not prejudice , and a shameful perversion of their faculties , if
they do not ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,33.71

To be sensible of an injury is natural : CHAPMAN-1774-1,33.72

but is it not also natural , since we are endued with moral feelings ,
and with reason as well as with passions , to set proper bounds to our
resentments , rather than allow them to hurry us away blindly into
violence and bloodshed ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,33.73

Are reason and conscience <P_34> placed within us to check the
impetuosity of our passions , CHAPMAN-1774-1,34.74

and shall we despise their heavenly admonitions ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,34.75

If then we would not be disappointed of our true happiness , which
consists in the perfection of our nature ; if we would not be wanting in
the duty which we owe to those who are under our care , let us study our
internal constitution with the greatest attention ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,34.76

let us try , by the due exercise of our reason , to strip outward
objects of that false and adventitious lustre which our early prejudices
may have thrown upon them , CHAPMAN-1774-1,34.77

and let us weigh every enjoyment in the scale of reason and of wisdom ;
CHAPMAN-1774-1,34.78

let us be careful to acquire a taste in our pleasures ;
CHAPMAN-1774-1,34.79

let us give the pleasures of sense , and of appetite , no more than
their subordinate and their proper place ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,34.80

let us strive to make ourselves acquainted with those <P_35> which arise
from the culture of our intellectual powers , such as the love of
knowledge and the fine arts ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,35.81

and , rising still higher in our taste , let us direct our ambition to
those of a moral kind , those of piety , fidelity , humanity , public
spirit , generosity , and the exalted joys of a self-approving mind .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,35.82

Were we thus enlightened in the pursuit of happiness , were we thus
formed to virtue , how delightful a spot would this earth be , and how
transporting the society of mankind ! CHAPMAN-1774-1,35.83

But if this be carrying our ideas too high , and if the rank which we
hold in the creation does not permit us , finite and short-sighted
creatures , to think of perfection here , we find ourselves , at least ,
bound by every tie of duty and of interest , and by the very law of our
nature , not only to aspire at the highest attainable degrees of virtue
ourselves , but to lend our hand to others , and to conduct them up the
arduous path . CHAPMAN-1774-1,35.84

<P_36>

But whom shall a tutor conduct but his own pupils , whom he has engaged
to instruct ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,36.86

or whom shall a parent conduct rather than his own children ; his
children , who are the most natural objects of his care , and the most
proper subjects of his culture ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,36.87

Thus employed , we shall cooperate with our almighty and beneficent
Parent ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,36.88

and , inspired with benevolence and the love of virtue ourselves , we
shall be disposed to look upon others , when deviating from their duty ,
not so much with hatred and horror , as with concern and compassion :
CHAPMAN-1774-1,36.89

we shall consider them as labouring under a distemper , as less
fortunate than we have been in the means of education , as less indebted
to the public for the opportunities given them of improving their
understanding , and of forming their taste in their early years .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,36.90

For though society justly punishes the breach of its laws , in <P_37>
order to bring us back to our duty , or to deter others from the like
practice ; yet it appears , that , in many instances , mistaken views
are the occasion of vice , and that the folly of the transgressor is
often greater than his guilt . CHAPMAN-1774-1,37.91

And it will not be denied , that if proper attention were given to
preserve the mind uncorrupted , and to cultivate it betimes , many of
those calamities which arise from irregular and ill-directed passions
might be prevented . CHAPMAN-1774-1,37.92

But as I shall afterwards take the liberty , as occasion may require ,
to put parents and teachers in mind of improving themselves , as well as
the children who are under their care , I shall not proceed to exhort
them at present , nor expatiate on the advantages which would arise from
a cultivated mind , and a rational pursuit of happiness .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,37.93

These are so obvious that they will not be disputed .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,37.94

Nor <P_38> is it necessary to swell the above detail of the mistakes
committed in educating children ; or of the defects of the common
practice ; since everyone , from his own observation , must make but too
many additions . CHAPMAN-1774-1,38.95

And a very little reflection on this important subject will be
sufficient to discover the necessity of reforming the common methods of
education , and the room there is for improving them .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,38.96

How to cure such errors , and supply such defects , must be left in a
great measure to the ingenuity and care of parents and teachers .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,38.97

And as there are some circumstances which greatly obstruct their united
labours , I shall presume , in the course of this work , to point out a
scheme by which these obstructions may be removed .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,38.98

But how favourable soever the public institution may be rendered for the
education of youth ; yet , if we consider the diversity of <P_39>
tempers , the struggle of passions , and the variety of cases that will
occur , we shall find , that , in different circumstances , different
methods will be necessary . CHAPMAN-1774-1,39.99

The greatest pains should be taken to preserve those children from
infection whose minds are as yet uncorrupted by the world ;
CHAPMAN-1774-1,39.100

and where medicine may be necessary for the mind , it should be adapted
, with a skilful hand , to the temper of the child , and the mental
diseases to which he is most liable . CHAPMAN-1774-1,39.101

On this subject treatises have appeared , CHAPMAN-1774-1,39.102

and systems have been written ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,39.103

and men of considerable reputation in the learned world , have not
disdained to employ their genius in laying down rules for the education
of youth . CHAPMAN-1774-1,39.104

After all , it is still to be regretted that some of those systems are
too confined , and others too little suited to practice , and to the
circumstances <P_40> of mankind , connected in society , and depending
upon one another . CHAPMAN-1774-1,40.105

But as many ingenious observations have been made , and many useful
directions given , by Mr. Locke , Mr. Rousseau , and other writers on
education , I shall throw together such of their precepts and remarks as
appear to be of the most extensive use ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,40.106

and , mingling some reflections of my own , I shall publish them , thus
blended together , as the second part of this treatise , after having
prefixed some rules laid down by approved physicians for the management
of infants . CHAPMAN-1774-1,40.107

Much , as has been already hinted , will still depend upon the parents ,
and much more upon the qualifications and character of the persons to
whom they transfer their authority . CHAPMAN-1774-1,40.108

But of this hereafter . CHAPMAN-1774-1,40.109

It will be proper , first , to inquire , whether children should be
educated in public or in <P_41> private ; how a school should be
constituted and governed ; and to consider the nature and degrees of
education necessary for the lower ranks ; that is , the far greater part
of mankind . CHAPMAN-1774-1,41.110

<heading>

Sect. III . CHAPMAN-1774-1,41.112

<$$heading>

<font> Strictures on Private Education . CHAPMAN-1774-1,41.114

Advantages and Disadvantages of Public Education . <$$font>
CHAPMAN-1774-1,41.115

One unfavourable circumstance in a private education is the dependence
of tutors on the parents <P_42> of their pupils . CHAPMAN-1774-1,42.116

On these they depend , not only for their present subsistence , but
frequently also for their future establishment ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,42.117

and as parents are not always the best judges of education , nor always
considerate enough to invest the tutor with proper authority , he is
sometimes constrained to adopt that method of instruction which the
parents lay down for their children , how improper soever that method
may be , and to submit to the caprice of his pupils , whom he ought to
direct . CHAPMAN-1774-1,42.118

Another disadvantage is , the risk a boy thus educated , runs of being
perverted in his temper , as well as retarded in his studies , by undue
indulgence from his parents , and by servile flattery from domestics .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,42.119

This is often complained of by private tutors : CHAPMAN-1774-1,42.120

and indeed it is natural to suppose , that , by this means , a boy ,
though otherwise capable of <P_43> the best impressions , will be in
danger of becoming untractable , and impatient of contradiction ,
arbitrary in his principles , as well as unsocial and tyrannical in his
temper . CHAPMAN-1774-1,43.121

Hence he will be disposed to treat those of an inferior rank with
insolence , as well as contempt ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,43.122

and having hitherto met with little opposition to his desires , and not
knowing what it is to live on an equality with others of the like age
with himself , he will expect the same compliance from the world which
he met with at home . CHAPMAN-1774-1,43.123

And as he will often find himself disappointed of the homage which he so
long considered as his due , he must become peevish and uneasy , and
feel , on many occasions , the disagreeable effects of the injustice
that was done him in his early years . CHAPMAN-1774-1,43.124

Add to this , that a private education is not of so great efficacy in
exciting a spirit of emulation . CHAPMAN-1774-1,43.125

There <P_44> is implanted in the human mind an ardent desire to excel .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.126

This desire , operating with greater force in society , proves a strong
motive with the generality of boys , CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.127

and keeps some awake who would otherwise languish in sloth , if they
were not frequently roused by the application of this powerful spur .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.128

Powerful it is ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.129

for by it the giddy may be fixed , CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.130

the passionate may be restrained , CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.131

and the sluggish may be roused . CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.132

The consciousness of excelling is so pleasant , and of being excelled so
painful , that the hardest task will be attempted , and the severest
restraint endured , in hopes of attaining the former and avoiding the
latter . CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.133

This emulation , this virtuous rivalship for knowledge , ought never to
be checked , CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.134

and will not be easily rooted out , while social institutions remain .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,44.135

It is therefore the business of a public education to watch over a
passion which is to <P_45> have such influence over us , and so to
govern it , that it may never degenerate into envy .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,45.136

Let us , both parents and teachers , avail ourselves of this propensity
to vie with one another , CHAPMAN-1774-1,45.137

and let us lead youth to a rivalship in virtue as well as in knowledge .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,45.138

Let us set them an example ourselves . CHAPMAN-1774-1,45.139

For our encouragement , tho' we should miss the first prize in this
glorious contest , yet our labour will not be lost .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,45.140

{COM:Part_III}

<P_177>

<heading>

A Sketch of The Author's Method of Instruction in the Grammar-school of
Dumfries . CHAPMAN-1774-1,177.144

Sect. I . CHAPMAN-1774-1,177.145

<font> Of the Method of teaching the Principles of the Latin Tongue .
<$$font> CHAPMAN-1774-1,177.146

<$$heading>

The first thing beginners are taught in this school , is the use of
language in general , the letters of the Roman alphabet , their powers
and different classes , the way of combining syllables into words , the
nature of a noun , both <P_178> substantive and adjective , the
declension of an English noun , and the terminations of Latin nouns as
they correspond to the different cases of the five declensions .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,178.148

To impress these terminations more deeply on the mind of the scholar , a
variety of examples is prescribed , and care taken to ask him the cases
, not only as they stand in his rudiments , but also promiscuously , and
from one declension to another . CHAPMAN-1774-1,178.149

Then he is carried forward to the adjectives ; which are taught with the
like care , and their degrees of comparison explained .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,178.150

Thus prepared , he is taught this rule in syntax , " An adjective agrees
with a substantive in gender , number , and case ; "
CHAPMAN-1774-1,178.151

and various examples are given him ; as , <font> a white horse , a deep
river , a high tree , <$$font> and the like . CHAPMAN-1774-1,178.152

In these exercises , he is taught to put the substantive first in the
case required , and then to make <P_179> the adjective agree with it in
all its accidents ; by which means this rule , which occurs so often ,
and gives so much trouble to the learner , is rendered plain and
familiar . CHAPMAN-1774-1,179.153

Then he is taught the pronouns , which , after the foregoing exercises ,
he learns with ease . CHAPMAN-1774-1,179.154

He proceeds next to the verbs , CHAPMAN-1774-1,179.155

and is carefully taught their nature and accidents ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,179.156

and runs over the tenses of <font> amo , <$$font> as they stand in his
book , with the way of forming them from the four principal parts of the
verb : CHAPMAN-1774-1,179.157

then he is examined upon the tenses promiscuously , and at great length
. CHAPMAN-1774-1,179.158

<P_180>

When , by repeated exercises , he is pretty much master of <font> amo ,
<$$font> and <P_181> two or three other verbs taken from his vocabulary
, as , <font> voco , do , veto , <$$font> he is carried forward to the
second conjugation ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,181.160

and after learning <font> doceo , <$$font> and a few more verbs , as ,
<font> jubeo , augeo , torqueo , <$$font> he proceeds to the third
conjugation ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,181.161

and having run over <font> lego , scribo , frango , capio , <$$font> and
the like , he is advanced to the fourth . CHAPMAN-1774-1,181.162

By this time his labour being greatly diminished , he is taught <font>
audio , munio , sepelio , baudio , <$$font> all in the same manner as
<font> amo . <$$font> CHAPMAN-1774-1,181.163

And as a verb is the principal part of speech , and occurs in every
sentence , it is thought necessary to inculcate it upon him by the most
frequent and laborious exercises . CHAPMAN-1774-1,181.164

Particular care is likewise taken to ask such questions as will try his
skill in distinguishing one conjugation from another , and prevent his
blundering afterwards ; such as , " they read - they love - they command
- they draw - we will write - we <P_182> will give - we will bury -
CHAPMAN-1774-1,182.165

what does <font> amamus <$$font> signify in English ? <font> scribamus
? amemus ? bauriemus ? &c. <$$font> CHAPMAN-1774-1,182.166

He is now taught the second rule of his syntax , viz. the agreement of
a finite verb with its nominative , and carried through a variety of
examples upon the first two rules , till he has acquired a dexterity in
applying them . CHAPMAN-1774-1,182.167

A lesson of this kind he prepares every morning from his vocabulary ,
consisting of three substantives , as many adjectives , and one verb ,
which is gradually increased till he has got a pretty large stock of
nouns and verbs , and can vary them through all their different
accidents . CHAPMAN-1774-1,182.168

The rest of the day he is employed in learning the irregular and
defective verbs , the nature of a participle , and the four indeclinable
parts of speech as laid down in his rudiments . CHAPMAN-1774-1,182.169

After this the different classes of nouns , pronouns , and verbs , are
explained ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,182.170

<P_183>

then he proceeds to the 28th , 44th , and 4th rules of his syntax ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,183.172

and runs through various examples of these , as well as of the first two
rules , while he reads Corderius . CHAPMAN-1774-1,183.173

The foundation being thus laid , he begins to learn the rules for the
genders of nouns and for the conjugation of verbs from his grammar ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,183.174

and is accustomed to take notice of the compound verbs as he proceeds .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,183.175

Along with these exercises on grammar , he is taught more fully to parse
the English language , and to translate from it into Latin .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,183.176

For this purpose he is carried through a variety of short sentences
prescribed by the master <font> viva_voce , <$$font> as before ;
CHAPMAN-1774-1,183.177

then taking Corderius , literally translated , or Mair's Introduction ,
<P_184> he reads some of the simplest sentences in the English column ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,184.178

and points out the different parts of speech contained in them , and
their dependence {TEXT:dependance} upon one another .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,184.179

This method , being gradually extended to the most complex sentences ,
he analyses their ingredients , CHAPMAN-1774-1,184.180

and shews their connection with one another . CHAPMAN-1774-1,184.181

In the mean time he advances through the other rules of syntax , which
he is taught in their natural order from Mr. Ruddiman's Rudiments ,
viz. rule 68 . 69 . 10 . 11 . 75 . 76 . 27 . &c. with proper
examples prescribed by the master <font> vivâ_voce , <$$font> as well as
from the Introduction . CHAPMAN-1774-1,184.182

In these exercises from the Introduction , he is accustomed first to
read <P_185> the English sentences with a clear and distinct voice ;
CHAPMAN-1774-1,185.183

then he parses them , CHAPMAN-1774-1,185.184

and applies his rules of construction . CHAPMAN-1774-1,185.185

And as the parts of speech in the Latin column are by this time pretty
plain to him , if he is a boy but of a moderate capacity , he will turn
the English sentence into Latin with ease , and sometimes without a
blunder . CHAPMAN-1774-1,185.186

Being now acquainted with the nature of a sentence , and the rules of
syntax , he begins the classical authors , CHAPMAN-1774-1,185.187

continues every day to get a lesson from his vocabulary and introduction
, till towards the end of the fourth year , and from the grammar till he
has finished it , CHAPMAN-1774-1,185.188

and afterwards repeats it only once in the week .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,185.189

But that the principles of the Latin tongue may be more fully known ,
and more deeply rivetted in the mind , he is accustomed also to parse
and construe every lesson of his lower authors ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,185.190

and besides all <P_186> these exercises , two or three of the classes
are , every Friday afternoon , examined together upon the declension of
nouns , the conjugation of verbs , the cases which adjectives and verbs
govern , and the like questions upon etymology and syntax .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,186.191

This keeps their emulation awake , CHAPMAN-1774-1,186.192

and preserves their knowledge of grammar . For which purpose they
employ likewise Saturday morning in repetitions of the vocabulary , of
the grammar , and of the rules of syntax , except what part of it they
spend in repeating the questions of their catechisms .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,186.193

<P_187>

<heading>

Sect. II . CHAPMAN-1774-1,187.196

<font> What Books are taught , and in what Order ; with the Manner of
teaching the Principles of the English Language . <$$font>
CHAPMAN-1774-1,187.197

<$$heading>

If boys have not begun the study of the Latin tongue before they enter
to this school , the first book they read is Mr. Ruddiman's Rudiments ,
then Mr. Mair's Vocabulary ; which not only furnishes them with a stock
of words , but is likewise a very proper book for exemplifying the
declensions and conjugations . CHAPMAN-1774-1,187.199

Along with the Vocabulary they are taught the principal rules of syntax
in English , in the manner pointed out in the preceding section , with
the rules of grammar for the genders of nouns and conjugations of verbs
: CHAPMAN-1774-1,187.200

and as they apply these rules <P_188> to the Vocabulary , and get a
lesson of it once every day , they acquire at length a remarkable
readiness with respect to that most useful part of grammar .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,188.201

Then they proceed to the other rules of syntax , CHAPMAN-1774-1,188.202

and make exercises upon them in the same manner as upon the principal
rules . CHAPMAN-1774-1,188.203

In the mean time they read , likewise , for the other lessons of the day
, several Colloquies of Corderius ; which , being ranged in the order of
construction , enlarge their exercises on grammar , and prepare them for
the study of the classics . CHAPMAN-1774-1,188.204

This is the business of the first two years ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,188.205

and it must be owned , that while children are thus employed , they may
be said to be <P_189> learning little more than the principles of the
Latin tongue . CHAPMAN-1774-1,189.206

But it is thought necessary , in the first place , to inculcate these
with the greatest exactness , as the most solid foundation of the
progress they are afterwards to make in science or learning of any kind
: so that this great expence of time and labour , though bestowed , as
it were , upon the elements of one language , is by no means thrown away
; CHAPMAN-1774-1,189.207

it is amply compensated by the effect it has upon their future studies ,
which it renders more pleasant , and more successful .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,189.208

The third year they read Phaedrus , and Cor. Nepos , and sometimes a
little of Eutropius ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,189.209

but before they begin Cor. Nepos , they are instructed in the
principles of Geography ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,189.210

and they continue to get daily lessons from the Vocabulary , Grammar ,
and Introduction , in the <P_190> manner pointed out in the last section
. CHAPMAN-1774-1,190.211

The fourth year they proceed to Caesar , Ovid's Metamorphoses , and
Sallust ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,190.212

and , for a sacred lesson , they read sometimes Castalio's Latin
translation of the New Testament . CHAPMAN-1774-1,190.213

They begin Virgil and the Greek Grammar : CHAPMAN-1774-1,190.214

they revise Mair's Introduction , CHAPMAN-1774-1,190.215

and read Christie's also ; which enlarges their praxis on syntax , and ,
with so extensive a preparation , costs them very little time and labour
. CHAPMAN-1774-1,190.216

And sometimes they begin , this year , to write versions from their
introductions , and to translate Lockman's Roman History into English .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,190.217

This year an hour is set apart , every day , for teaching the principles
of the English tongue . CHAPMAN-1774-1,190.218

For that most useful study , the boys of this class are sufficiently
prepared by their acquaintance with syntax , and by the stock of Latin
words <P_191> which they have already acquired . CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.219

The manner in which they are taught the principles of the English tongue
is this : CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.220

Newbery's , or Entick's , Spelling-Dictionary being taken as a text-book
, they are examined upon it . CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.221

In this exercise , taking the order of the alphabet , they spell the
word as they go along , CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.222

tell its meaning , CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.223

distinguish it from other words resembling it in orthography or
pronunciation , CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.224

and trace its origin , if it is of a Latin derivation .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.225

This praxis is very useful to them , as many English words of two
syllables , and most of those which exceed that number , are of a Latin
original . CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.226

Some indeed are from the Greek ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.227

and others have been adopted from the French : CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.228

but a little acquaintance with the Greek and French languages will ,
afterward , render these sufficiently plain . CHAPMAN-1774-1,191.229

After these exercises , Mr. Fisher's English Grammar is carefully
taught , <P_192> and Dr. Lowth's excellent Grammar recommended to their
perusal . CHAPMAN-1774-1,192.230

And these exercises are further improved , in the course of their
studies , as will afterwards be more particularly observed , by the
English versions which they are ordered to write , and by the best
English translations of their authors which they are accustomed to read
. CHAPMAN-1774-1,192.231

The fifth year they proceed through Virgil , CHAPMAN-1774-1,192.232

and read two or three books of Livy ; then Horace , Buchanan's Psalms ,
the Self-tormentor of Terence , and Cicero's treatises on Old Age and
Friendship , with the Greek Testament , Aesop , Cebes , and a book or
two of Homer's Iliad . CHAPMAN-1774-1,192.233

They are frequently examined upon the history of Greece , Rome , and
England , with Chronology , and Kennet's Antiquities ;
CHAPMAN-1774-1,192.234

and they are carried through a course of practical Geography .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,192.235

And their other exercises <P_193> , this year , are translations and
versions from Lockman's Roman History , Kimber's History of England ,
and the Spectator , in which they are very much employed ; as also
English versions from the Latin classics . CHAPMAN-1774-1,193.236

If they continue another year at school , they read Pliny's Epistles and
Cicero's Offices , CHAPMAN-1774-1,193.237

proceed through Homer , CHAPMAN-1774-1,193.238

and sometimes they learn Xenophon's Memorabilia Socratis , and sometimes
his Cyropaideia , CHAPMAN-1774-1,193.239

and write Latin and English versions at least once every week .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,193.240

As the Roman authors above mentioned are all , except Eutropius ,
standards of the Latin tongue , and of fine writing in their different
kinds , the boys who are educated here learn them more or less ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,193.241

and seldom fail to read a great part of <P_194> Sallust , Virgil , and
Horace . CHAPMAN-1774-1,194.242

Sometimes too , in the lower classes , they read a little of Florus , or
Justin , or Q. Curtius , or Buchanan's History of Scotland ; and in the
highest class , Tacitus's Life of Agricola , and his Description of the
Manners of the Germans . CHAPMAN-1774-1,194.243

The classics which are principally read here , are very proper for
forming the style and taste of the elder scholars ;
CHAPMAN-1774-1,194.244

but it is much to be wished that we had some Latin authors suited to the
lower classes . CHAPMAN-1774-1,194.245

The language of such authors should be pure , and free from figurative
expressions ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,194.246

the sentences should be short and clear ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,194.247

and the subject should be the lives of eminent men , or such passages in
history , whether ancient or modern , as afford both entertainment and
instruction . CHAPMAN-1774-1,194.248

The best thing of this kind that has hitherto appeared is a collection
from the classics , intitled , <font> Selectae è profanis <$$font>
<P_195> <font> scriptoribus historiae ; <$$font> which is sometimes
taught in this school . CHAPMAN-1774-1,195.249

As Poetry rises often above the strictness of truth , and soars , with
peculiar boldness , into the regions of fancy ; so it requires that its
style be raised above that of common life ; and in the Latin , as well
as the English language , may be said to be a dialect very different
from that of prose . CHAPMAN-1774-1,195.250

For this reason , the youth at this school are not taught Virgil and
Horace till they are properly prepared for them ; that is , till they
have overcome the difficulties of syntax , and till they have read the
plainest prose authors , and got the figurative style , the nature of
poetry and its different kinds explained . For which purpose , select
passages from Trapp's Lectures , Newbery on Poetry , the Preceptor ,
Rollin's Belles Lettres , and the Elements of Criticism , are carefully
read and illustrated ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,195.251

then the best English poets , <P_196> descriptive , pastoral , and epic
, such as , Thomson , Pope , Milton , are put into their hands from the
school-library , and warmly recommended to their perusal .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,196.252

This introduction to poetry , and this perusal of the most celebrated
poems in the English language , are thought necessary for giving youth a
critical taste of that kind . CHAPMAN-1774-1,196.253

But as a natural genius for poetry is absolutely requisite for forming a
poet , and is not to be acquired by art , though it may be greatly
improved by it ; therefore it is not attempted here to impose a study
upon youth , which nature has forbid to the generality of mankind .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,196.254

And indeed the wisdom of this prohibition will appear , if we consider ,
that a genius for poetry , if more widely diffused , would be very
unsuitable to the different circumstances in which men are placed , and
the various occupations which they are obliged to follow .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,196.255

<P_197>

For these reasons it is , that , after holding out those lamps which the
ancient poets have lighted up , and those which some of the moderns have
kindled in their turn , to conduct their brethren to the temple of the
Muses , it is thought proper to encourage those only on whom nature has
bestowed a poetical spirit , to pursue a path , which is no less
hazardous than it is honourable . CHAPMAN-1774-1,197.257

<heading>

Sect. III . CHAPMAN-1774-1,197.259

<font> The Method of Reading and Explaining the Classics . <$$font>
CHAPMAN-1774-1,197.260

<$$heading>

Till boys have laid in a considerable stock of Latin words , and till
they can vary them through all their different accidents , and apply the
rules of syntax with ease , they can@ @not be supposed ripe for <P_198>
explaining the classics . CHAPMAN-1774-1,198.262

The arrangement of words in the Latin tongue , which gives it so much
strength and spirit , being so different from that of the English ,
would render so preposterous an attempt extremely difficult and
perplexing . CHAPMAN-1774-1,198.263

It is in order to lessen {TEXT:lesson} this difficulty , as well as to
extend their knowledge of grammar , that , as we have already observed ,
the younger boys of this school are taught some colloquies from
Corderius , literally translated , and ranged in the order of
construction . CHAPMAN-1774-1,198.264

In reading these , the teacher , first of all , relates the subject of
the lesson in the simplest language ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,198.265

then he explains it word by word from the English translation ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,198.266

and runs over the parts of speech and rules of construction .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,198.267

Sometimes the foremost boy of the class is charged with the studies of
the rest ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,198.268

at other times they sit in separate parties , CHAPMAN-1774-1,198.269

and assist one another . CHAPMAN-1774-1,198.270

<P_199>

When they are ordered to give an account of their lesson , first they
translate it into English , each in his turn , CHAPMAN-1774-1,199.272

and then they analyse , or parse it , as below . CHAPMAN-1774-1,199.273

<P_200>

After the sentence is thus analysed , and the rules of grammar given for
the nouns and verbs contained in it , one of the boys is ordered to give
the rules of construction for the whole sentence , as the words depend
upon one another . CHAPMAN-1774-1,200.275

Thus <font> Decet te otiari : <$$font> " These four <font> decet ,
delectat " <$$font> &c. CHAPMAN-1774-1,200.276

<font> Otiari aut garrire : <$$font> " The conjunct. <font> et , ac ,
atque , " <$$font> &c. CHAPMAN-1774-1,200.277

<font> Praeceptor expectatur : <$$font> " A verb agrees with the
nominative , " &c. CHAPMAN-1774-1,200.278

As soon as they begin to read the classics , where the arrangement of
words is inverted , they are taught how to resolve a Latin sentence into
the order of construction , and accustomed to prepare the parts of
speech in the lesson before it is explained , with the order and rules
of construction , <P_201> and deliver them in their turn as above .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,201.279

The lesson is then explained by the teacher , and time allowed them to
prepare the interpretation . CHAPMAN-1774-1,201.280

And when it may be supposed to be sufficiently imprinted on their minds
, and the impression confirmed by an interval of an <P_202> hour or two
, they explain it to the master ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,202.281

and , last of all , one of them relates the subject in his own language
, CHAPMAN-1774-1,202.282

and sometimes tells the moral which it conveys . CHAPMAN-1774-1,202.283

This method is pursued while they read Eutropius , Phaedrus , and Cor.
Nepos ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,202.284

and the difficulties of syntax being by this time surmounted , and the
way to learning cleared , they begin now to taste those fruits , those
innocent and delicious fruits , with which the ancients have sweetened
the road to science . CHAPMAN-1774-1,202.285

While they read Caesar and the succeeding prose authors , being now
masters of a considerable number of words , both primitive and
derivative , they parse only the more difficult and uncommon words in
the lesson ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,202.286

then they construe it , CHAPMAN-1774-1,202.287

and hear it explained by the teacher . CHAPMAN-1774-1,202.288

And after they have prepared and explained it , they take an English
translation , CHAPMAN-1774-1,202.289

and render it back into <P_203> Latin , which is found to be a very
proper introduction to a classical style . CHAPMAN-1774-1,203.290

Last of all , the teacher asks them the most remarkable phrases which
occur in the lesson , in order to make them still better acquainted with
the propriety of expression and difference of idiom in the two languages
. CHAPMAN-1774-1,203.291

For instance , if they were reading in the beginning of Sallust , they
would be asked such phrases as these : " To exert themselves with all
their power , " <font> Niti summâ ope ; <$$font> - " To excel any one ,
" <font> Praestare alicui , <$$font> &c. CHAPMAN-1774-1,203.292

In reading the Latin poets , first of all they deliver the parts of
speech , the order of the words , the most remarkable rules of
construction , the prosody of a part of the lesson , and generally the
literal English of the whole . CHAPMAN-1774-1,203.293

Then the master relates the subject of the lesson ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,203.294

renders the Latin passage into proper English , CHAPMAN-1774-1,203.295

and points out whatever is <P_204> most beautiful in the sentiment , as
well as most elegant in the expression . CHAPMAN-1774-1,204.296

The lesson being prepared , and the interpretation delivered at the next
meeting of the school , the best poetical translation of it into English
is read aloud by one of the boys , and sometimes by the master ; who
does this with a view to make his pupils acquainted with English poetry
, to shew them more fully the difference of idiom in the two languages ,
and to enable them to read the poets , both Latin and English , with
more understanding and pleasure . CHAPMAN-1774-1,204.297

In like manner , while they learn Sallust , Terence , Pliny , and Cicero
, he either reads aloud the best English translation of the author they
are studying , CHAPMAN-1774-1,204.298

or causes one of the class to read it . CHAPMAN-1774-1,204.299

Besides the other advantages of this practice , it accustoms them to
read the English language with propriety and <P_205> ease , which is an
accomplishment no less useful than it is agreeable .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,205.300

In order that those beautiful sentiments , and those useful maxims ,
which occur so often in Virgil , Horace , and Homer , may make the
deeper impression on the mind , and serve as ready and agreeable
monitors in the conduct of life , the scholars are accustomed to get by
heart select passages from those admired authors .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,205.301

<P_206>

<heading>

Sect. IV . CHAPMAN-1774-1,206.304

<font> The Method of translating from English into Latin , and from
Latin into English . <$$font> CHAPMAN-1774-1,206.305

<$$heading>

So different is the idiom of the Latin from that of the English , that
to translate with propriety from the one into the other , and especially
from the latter into the former , is thought a very difficult task , and
is believed by many to be more than can be expected from the tender
years and the confined ideas of a school-boy . CHAPMAN-1774-1,206.307

It is this , no doubt , that puts his skill in the Latin tongue to the
severest trial . CHAPMAN-1774-1,206.308

But this task , difficult as it may appear , is not impracticable .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,206.309

The many instances of young men who have attained a classical style
before they left the grammar-school , prove , that <P_207> it is
possible for a boy of an ordinary capacity to write Latin with a good
deal of accuracy and ease , by the time he is fifteen or sixteen years
of age , if he begin to study it when he is nine or ten years old , and
if he be properly exercised in that way . CHAPMAN-1774-1,207.310

In the same period , he may likewise acquire some notion of the Greek ,
and make a considerable progress towards a good English style .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,207.311

I say , a boy of an ordinary capacity ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,207.312

for it is from the proficiency of such that the merit of the teacher can
be estimated . CHAPMAN-1774-1,207.313

There are some boys upon whom nature has bestowed such a quickness and
maturity of genius , that they will easily surmount all the
disadvantages of the most stupid and preposterous method .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,207.314

There are others again whose minds are so late in opening , that they
begin but to blossom , as it were , when they have reached their
fifteenth or sixteenth year . CHAPMAN-1774-1,207.315

On these the <P_208> nature of language , and the elegancies of diction
, will make but a faint impression during that period which is commonly
assigned for a school-education , though they are sometimes found to
make afterwards great proficiency in knowledge , and are frequently
observed to be very successful in business . CHAPMAN-1774-1,208.316

This classical stile is an object which the teacher ought always to have
in his eye : CHAPMAN-1774-1,208.317

without it we must be often at a loss for the meaning of the Latin
authors ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,208.318

without it we can neither see the beauties of that manly language , nor
read the admired compositions of the ancients with profit or pleasure .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,208.319

It is with a view to this purity of style that the boys at this school
are carried , in a gradual and natural way , through the principles of
the Latin tongue , taught both Introductions with the greatest care ,
and accustomed to turn into Latin the literal translations <P_209> of
the lower authors . CHAPMAN-1774-1,209.320

With a like view it is that they are exercised in turning a great part
of Lockman's Roman History into Latin ; not on account of its style ,
the inaccuracies of which are pointed out in the course of their lessons
, but for the connection it has with the Latin historians :
CHAPMAN-1774-1,209.321

and as a farther exercise of this kind , they translate several passages
from Kimber's History of England . CHAPMAN-1774-1,209.322

In these exercises they are not ordered to write their translation ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,209.323

but are allowed , for the greater expedition , to deliver it <font>
vivâ_voce ; <$$font> CHAPMAN-1774-1,209.324

and being accustomed to vary the same sentence different ways , they
acquire , by degrees , a readiness and a copiousness of expression .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,209.325

While they read Sallust , Livy , Terence , and Cicero , a free
translation is put into their hands when the lesson is over ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,209.326

and they render sometimes it , and sometimes the <P_210> English of
other passages , into Latin . CHAPMAN-1774-1,210.327

For this purpose a short time is allowed them ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,210.328

and when they have prepared , and delivered their translation , the
original is read over as the model by which they are to correct and form
their style . CHAPMAN-1774-1,210.329

It is after a little acquaintance with Terence and Cicero that they
begin to translate some papers from the Spectator .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,210.330

Besides all this , twice or thrice every week they write a Latin version
in the public school , prescribed out of some of the above-mentioned
English books , CHAPMAN-1774-1,210.331

and present it , to be examined at the same meeting of the school .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,210.332

And every year in the month of August , they compose a Latin poem ,
which they present to the Magistrates and Town-council , with a
translation of it into English verse . CHAPMAN-1774-1,210.333

This poem is called <font> a Supplication , <$$font> because it contains
a request for the <P_211> autumnal vacation ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,211.334

and is revised by the master , who is sometimes obliged to assist them
in making it . CHAPMAN-1774-1,211.335

Though the poetical spirit can@ @not be expected , unless in those whom
nature has endued with a particular genius for poetry , yet an exercise
of this kind , once in the year , is neither impracticable nor improper
for those in the highest class . CHAPMAN-1774-1,211.336

It is not impracticable ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,211.337

for , by this time , being acquainted with the Latin poets , and some of
the English also , they may supply themselves with poetical expressions
from thence : CHAPMAN-1774-1,211.338

and it is not improper ; as it obliges them to study an exactness in
prosody , a thing too much neglected in many schools , though attended
to by the ancient Romans with the most scrupulous delicacy , and
absolutely necessary , if you would read the classics with gracefulness
or pleasure . CHAPMAN-1774-1,211.339

At the same time the students are warned not to <P_212> do violence to
nature , by indulging a turn for versification , if they be not endued
with an original genius for poetry . CHAPMAN-1774-1,212.340

It has been already observed , that in order to instruct them in the
principles of the English tongue , and make them acquainted with its
genius , they are taught the Spelling-Dictionary and English Grammar ,
and accustomed to read over a free translation of Sallust , Livy ,
Terence , Cicero , Pliny . CHAPMAN-1774-1,212.341

For their further improvement in that useful language , it is thought
proper , with that preparation , to prescribe to them , every other day
, passages from the said classics , to be translated into English , and
presented at the same meeting of the school . CHAPMAN-1774-1,212.342

On these occasions particular care is taken to cause them to correct
their inaccuracies either in the spelling , pointing , or idiom , and to
form them to a perspicuous and unaffected <P_213> style .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,213.343

And the best English authors are recommended , some of which they have
an opportunity of reading from the library belonging to the school .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,213.344

<heading>

Sect. V . CHAPMAN-1774-1,213.346

<font> Observations on History . CHAPMAN-1774-1,213.347

Method of preparing Youth for the Study of it . <$$font>
CHAPMAN-1774-1,213.348

<$$heading>

As it is better to learn wisdom from the fate of others who have lived
before us , than to trust to our own experience and confined observation
of what passes around us , History is recommended to youth as the parent
of knowledge , and the great instructress of human life .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,213.350

In History we survey the various generations of mankind passing , as it
were , in review before our eyes . CHAPMAN-1774-1,213.351

There we observe the different characters of men ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,213.352

mark <P_214> their fate , CHAPMAN-1774-1,214.353

find it proportioned to their behaviour , CHAPMAN-1774-1,214.354

discern the superior advantages of wisdom and virtue ,
CHAPMAN-1774-1,214.355

and learn that misfortune and shame are the dismal portion of folly and
vice . CHAPMAN-1774-1,214.356

There we discover , that to sacrifice our intellectual , our moral
enjoyments , to the lower and more inglorious propensities of our nature
, is , in reality , to inflict a heavy punishment on ourselves ;
CHAPMAN-1774-1,214.357

there likewise we see , that no acquisition we can make is so fair , and
so valuable , as a mind enlightened with knowledge , and principled with
virtue ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,214.358

there we observe , not only the fate of individuals , but also the
various revolutions of empire , CHAPMAN-1774-1,214.359

and behold the conquerors and the conquered swallowed up at length in
undistinguished ruin . CHAPMAN-1774-1,214.360

If we look back but a few years , they who acted on the theatre of human
life are now no more . CHAPMAN-1774-1,214.361

What is become , it may be asked , of their deep-laid <P_215> schemes ,
their ambitious projects , their anxious cares , their adored riches ,
their dazzling honours , their alluring pleasures ?
CHAPMAN-1774-1,215.362

Of what consequence to them now are all those objects which so much
engrossed their wishes , or exercised their passions ?
CHAPMAN-1774-1,215.363

If we look forward but one century into futurity , where are we
ourselves ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,215.364

Gone , for ever gone , CHAPMAN-1774-1,215.365

and the places of our abode know us again no more .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,215.366

From a view of the native dignity and happy consequences of virtue on
the one hand , and the inherent meanness and unhappy effects of vice on
the other , shall we not learn to restrain our inordinate desires , and
direct them to objects more worthy of our nature , and more fitted for
procuring us solid and lasting felicity ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,215.367

From reflecting on the shortness and uncertainty of life , shall we not
learn to value <P_216> our time more highly , and improve it more
usefully ? CHAPMAN-1774-1,216.368

But it is only to the discerning and considerate reader that History
affords instruction . CHAPMAN-1774-1,216.369

Youth therefore , who are naturally thoughtless and inconsiderate , are
particularly to be instructed in the use they ought to make of history ,
and directed to the books they ought to read . CHAPMAN-1774-1,216.370

And while they are obliged , in studying it , to wade through long
details of the wars and the vices of men , let them be warned to bestow
upon the unhappy actors of those unnatural scenes that pity which is due
to the delusions , as well as that detestation which is due to the vices
, of mankind : CHAPMAN-1774-1,216.371

let them be taught to pass them over with a slighter glance , and to
give more particular attention to those objects which are worthy of
their approbation and esteem ; the civilizers of mankind , the inventors
of useful <P_217> arts , the friends of liberty and learning , and those
persons whom History records as most eminent for justice , generosity ,
temperance , fidelity , fortitude , humanity , and public spirit .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,217.372

What pity is it that examples of this sort , in the humbler as well as
the more exalted stations of life , have not been more particularly
attended to , and more carefully collected ! CHAPMAN-1774-1,217.373

What pity is it they have not been honoured with those encomiums which
they deserve , and transmitted from age to age for the improvement of
mankind , instead of those scenes of carnage and devastation which the
historian presents so often to our view . CHAPMAN-1774-1,217.374

Furnished with a more amiable picture of human nature , and dazzled no
longer with the glare of pomp and conquest , we should have been in less
danger of deceiving ourselves in our notions of grandeur and of
happiness . CHAPMAN-1774-1,217.375

Such illustrious patterns <P_218> of private as well as of public virtue
, thus held up for our imitation , would have naturally produced in us a
glorious emulation and a heroic desire to promote the most valuable
interests of mankind . CHAPMAN-1774-1,218.376

So feeble are the minds of children , and so apt to be misled by pomp
and shew , that the greatest attention should be given to direct them in
the study of history , and to lay before them such reflections as may
tend to form their taste , and teach them wherein virtue and true
greatness consist . CHAPMAN-1774-1,218.377

With a view to render this study more useful to the children at this
<P_219> school , as soon as they begin to read Cor. Nepos , they get
some instructions on the nature and use of history , which are
afterwards extended as they advance to the higher classes .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,219.378

And that they may be better prepared for the study of ancient as well as
modern history , and may have a clearer idea of what they read in the
classics , the principles of Geography are explained at a separate hour
, and the most curious and useful problems performed by the help of the
Terrestrial and Celestial Globes . CHAPMAN-1774-1,219.379

Then the four great divisions of the earth , their boundaries , and the
different states they contain , with the most remarkable places , rivers
, &c. in each , are pointed out on the Terrestrial Globe , and more
particularly on the respective maps of those divisions .
CHAPMAN-1774-1,219.380

A set of Maps , adapted to the classics , is likewise put into their
hands ; CHAPMAN-1774-1,219.381

and , the fifth year , Mair's Survey of the <P_220> Terraqueous Globe ,
being used as a text-book , they are carried through a course of
Practical Geography , as was formerly mentioned , CHAPMAN-1774-1,220.382

and directions are given them how to improve themselves farther in this
entertaining study from Salmon , Guthrie , Varenius , and other
Geographers . CHAPMAN-1774-1,220.383

By means of this preparation , and a little Chronology for
distinguishing the different periods of history , and the ages of the
most eminent men , they are enabled to read by themselves with
understanding and pleasure . CHAPMAN-1774-1,220.384

