<BEGIN_cibber-1740-1>

<P_34>

<heading>

Chap. III . CIBBER-1740-1,34.4

<font> The Author's several Chances for the Church , the Court , and the
Army . CIBBER-1740-1,34.5

Going to the University . CIBBER-1740-1,34.6

Met the Revolution at <$$font> Nottingham . CIBBER-1740-1,34.7

<font> Took Arms on that Side . CIBBER-1740-1,34.8

What he saw of it . CIBBER-1740-1,34.9

A few Political Thoughts . CIBBER-1740-1,34.10

Fortune willing to do for him . CIBBER-1740-1,34.11

His neglect of her . CIBBER-1740-1,34.12

The Stage preferr'd to all her Favours . CIBBER-1740-1,34.13

The Profession of an Actor consider'd . CIBBER-1740-1,34.14

The Misfortunes and Advantages of it . <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,34.15

<$$heading>

I am now come to that Crisis of my Life , when Fortune seem'd to be at a
Loss what she should do with me . CIBBER-1740-1,34.17

Had she favour'd my Father's first Designation of me , he might then ,
perhaps , have had as sanguine hopes of my being a Bishop , as I
afterwards conceiv'd of my being a General , when I first took Arms , at
the Revolution . CIBBER-1740-1,34.18

Nay , after that , I had a third Chance too , equally as good , of
becoming an Under-proper of the State . CIBBER-1740-1,34.19

How , at last , I came to be none of all these , the Sequel will inform
you . CIBBER-1740-1,34.20

About the year 1687 , I was taken from School to stand at the Election
of Children into <font> Winchester <$$font> College ; my being , by my
Mother's side , a Descendant of <font> William <$$font> of <font> Wickam
<$$font> , the Founder , CIBBER-1740-1,34.21

my Father <paren> who knew little how the World was to be dealt with
<$$paren> imagined my having that Advantage , would be Security enough
for my Success , CIBBER-1740-1,34.22

and so sent me simply down thither , without the least favourable
Recommendation or Interest , but that of my naked Merit , and a pompous
Pedigree in my Pocket . CIBBER-1740-1,34.23

<P_35>

Had he tack'd a Direction to my Back , and sent me by the Carrier to the
Mayor of the Town , to be chosen Member of Parliament there , I might
have had just as much chance to have succeeded in the one , as the other
. CIBBER-1740-1,35.25

But I must not omit in this place , to let you know , that the
Experience which my Father then bought , at my Cost , taught him , some
Years after , to take a more judicious care of my younger Brother ,
<font> Lewis Cibber <$$font> , whom , with the Present of a Statue of
the Founder , of his own making , he recommended to the same College .
CIBBER-1740-1,35.26

This Statue now stands <paren> I think <$$paren> over the School Door
there , CIBBER-1740-1,35.27

and was so well executed , that it seem'd to speak - for its Kinsman .
CIBBER-1740-1,35.28

It was no sooner set up , than the Door of Preferment was open to him .
CIBBER-1740-1,35.29

Here , one wou'd think , my Brother had the Advantage of me , in the
Favour of Fortune , by this his first laudable Step into the World .
CIBBER-1740-1,35.30

I own , I was so proud of his Success , that I even valued myself upon
it ; CIBBER-1740-1,35.31

and yet it is but a melancholy Reflexion to observe , how unequally his
Profession and mine were provided for ; when I , who had been the
Outcast of Fortune , could find means , from my Income of the Theatre ,
before I was my own Master there , to supply , in his highest Preferment
, his common Necessities . CIBBER-1740-1,35.32

I can@ @not part with his Memory without telling you , I had as sincere
a Concern for this Brother's Well-being , as my own .
CIBBER-1740-1,35.33

He had lively Parts , and more than ordinary Learning , with a good deal
of natural Wit and Humour ; CIBBER-1740-1,35.34

but , from too great a Disregard to his Health , he died a Fellow of
<font> New College <$$font> in <font> Oxford <$$font> , soon after he
had been ordain'd by Dr. <font> Compton <$$font> , then Bishop of
<font> London <$$font> . CIBBER-1740-1,35.35

I now return to the State of my own Affair of <font> Winchester <$$font>
. CIBBER-1740-1,35.36

After the Election , the moment I was inform'd that I was one of the
unsuccessful Candidates , I blest myself to think what a happy Reprieve
I had got , from the confin'd Life of a School-boy !
CIBBER-1740-1,35.37

and the same Day took Post back to <font> London <$$font> , that I might
arrive time enough to see a Play <paren> then my darling Delight
<$$paren> before <P_36> my Mother might demand an Account of my
travelling Charges . CIBBER-1740-1,36.38

When I look back to that time , it almost makes me tremble to think what
Miseries , in fifty Years farther in Life , such an unthinking Head was
liable to ! CIBBER-1740-1,36.39

To ask , why Providence afterwards took more care of me , than I did of
myself , might be making too bold an Enquiry into its secret Will and
Pleasure : CIBBER-1740-1,36.40

All I can say to that Point , is , that I am thankful , and amaz'd at it
! CIBBER-1740-1,36.41

'T@ @was about this time I first imbib'd an Inclination , which I durst
not reveal , for the Stage ; CIBBER-1740-1,36.42

for , besides that I knew it would disoblige my Father , I had no
Conception of any means , practicable , to make my way to it .
CIBBER-1740-1,36.43

I therefore suppress'd the bewitching Ideas of so sublime a Station ,
CIBBER-1740-1,36.44

and compounded with my Ambition by laying a lower Scheme , of only
getting the nearest way into the immediate Life of a
Gentleman-Collegiate . CIBBER-1740-1,36.45

My Father being at this time employ'd at <font> Chattsworth <$$font> in
<font> Derbyshire <$$font> , by the <paren> then <$$paren> Earl of
<font> Devonshire <$$font> , who was raising that Seat from a <font>
Gothick <$$font> , to a <font> Grecian <$$font> , Magnificence , I made
use of the Leisure I then had , in <font> London <$$font> , to open to
him , by Letter , my Disinclination to wait another Year for an
uncertain Preferment at <font> Winchester <$$font> , and to entreat him
that he would send me , <font> per_saltum <$$font> , by a shorter Cut ,
to the University . CIBBER-1740-1,36.46

My Father , who was naturally indulgent to me , seem'd to comply with my
Request , CIBBER-1740-1,36.47

and wrote word , that as soon as his Affairs would permit , he would
carry me with him , and settle me in some College , but rather at <font>
Cambridge <$$font> , where , <paren> {COM:missing_matching_close_paren}
during his late Residence at that Place , in making some Statues that
now stand upon <font> Trinity <$$font> College New Library , he had
contracted some Acquaintance with the Heads of Houses , who might assist
his Intentions for me . CIBBER-1740-1,36.48

This I lik'd better than to go discountenanc'd to <font> Oxford <$$font>
, to which it would have been a sort of Reproach to me , not to have
come elected . CIBBER-1740-1,36.49

After some Months were elaps'd , my Father , not being willing to let me
lie too long idling in <font> London <$$font> , sent for me down to
<font> Chattsworth <$$font> , to be under his Eye , till he cou'd be at
leisure to carry <P_37> me to Cambridge . CIBBER-1740-1,37.50

Before I could set out , on my Journey thither , the Nation fell in
labour of the Revolution , the News being then just brought to <font>
London <$$font> , That the Prince of <font> Orange <$$font> , at the
Head of an Army was landed in the <font> West <$$font> .
CIBBER-1740-1,37.51

When I came to <font> Nottingham <$$font> , I found my Father in Arms
there , among those Forces which the Earl of <font> Devonshire <$$font>
had rais'd for the Redress of our violated Laws and Liberties .
CIBBER-1740-1,37.52

My Father judg'd this a proper Season , for a young Strippling to turn
himself loose into the Bustle of the World ; CIBBER-1740-1,37.53

and being himself too advanc'd in Years , to endure the Winter Fatigue ,
which might possibly follow , entreated that noble Lord , that he would
be pleas'd to accept of his Son in his room , and that he would give him
<paren> my Father <$$paren> leave to return , and finish his Works at
<font> Chattsworth <$$font> . CIBBER-1740-1,37.54

This was so well receiv'd by his Lordship , that he not only admitted of
my Service , but promis'd my Father , in return , that when Affairs were
settled , he would provide for me . CIBBER-1740-1,37.55

Upon this , my Father return'd to <font> Derbyshire <$$font> , while I ,
not a little transported , jump'd into his Saddle . CIBBER-1740-1,37.56

Thus , in one Day , all my Thoughts of the University were smother'd in
Ambition ! CIBBER-1740-1,37.57

A slight Commission for a Horse-Officer , was the least View I had
before me . CIBBER-1740-1,37.58

At this Crisis you can@ @not but observe , that the Fate of King <font>
James <$$font> , and of the Prince of <font> Orange <$$font> , and that
of so minute a Being as my self , were all at once upon the Anvil :
CIBBER-1740-1,37.59

In what shape they wou'd severally come out , tho' a good <font> Guess
<$$font> might be made , was not then <font> demonstrable <$$font> to
the deepest Foresight ; CIBBER-1740-1,37.60

but as my Fortune seem'd to be of small Importance to the Publick ,
Providence thought fit to postpone it , 'till that of those great Rulers
of Nations , was justly perfected . CIBBER-1740-1,37.61

Yet , had my Father's Business permitted him to have carried me , one
Month sooner <paren> as he intended <$$paren> to the University , who
knows but , by this time , that purer Fountain might have wash'd my
Imperfections into a Capacity of writing <paren> instead of Plays and
Annual Odes <$$paren> Sermons , and Pastoral Letters .
CIBBER-1740-1,37.62

But whatever Care of the Church might , so , have fallen to my share ,
as I dare say it may be now , in <P_38> better Hands , I ought not to
repine at my being otherwise disposed of . CIBBER-1740-1,38.63

You must , now , consider me as one among those desperate Thousands ,
who , after a Patience sorely try'd , took Arms under the Banner of
Necessity , the natural Parent of all Human Laws , and Government .
CIBBER-1740-1,38.64

I question , if in all the Histories of Empire , there is one Instance
of so bloodless a Revolution , as that in <font> England <$$font> in
1688 , wherein Whigs , Tories , Princes , Prelates , Nobles , Clergy ,
common People , and a Standing Army , were unanimous .
CIBBER-1740-1,38.65

To have seen all <font> England <$$font> of one Mind , is to have liv'd
at a very particular Juncture . CIBBER-1740-1,38.66

Happy Nation ! who are never divided among themselves , but when they
have least to complain of ! CIBBER-1740-1,38.67

Our greatest Grievance since that time , seems to have been , that we
can@ @not all govern ; CIBBER-1740-1,38.68

and 'till the Number of good Places are equal to those , who think
themselves qualified for them , there must ever be a Cause of Contention
among us . CIBBER-1740-1,38.69

While Great Men want great Posts , the Nation will never want real or
seeming Patriots ; CIBBER-1740-1,38.70

and while great Posts are fill'd with Persons , whose Capacities are but
Human , such Persons will never be allow'd to be without Errors ;
CIBBER-1740-1,38.71

not even the Revolution , with all its Advantages , it seems , has been
able to furnish us with unexceptionable Statesmen ! CIBBER-1740-1,38.72

for , from that time , I do@ @n't remember any one Set of Ministers ,
that have not been heartily rail'd at ; a Period long enough , one would
think <$$paren> if all of them have been as bad as they have been call'd
<$$paren> to make a People despair of ever seeing a good one :
CIBBER-1740-1,38.73

But as it is possible that Envy , Prejudice , or Party , may sometimes
have a share in what is generally thrown upon 'em , it is not easy for a
private Man , to know who is absolutely in the right , from what is said
against them , or from what their Friends or Dependants may say in their
Favour : Tho' I can hardly forbear thinking that they who have been
<font> longest <$$font> rail'd at , must , from that Circumstance shew ,
in some sort a Proof of Capacity . CIBBER-1740-1,38.74

- But to my History . CIBBER-1740-1,38.75

<P_39>

It were almost incredible to tell you , at the latter end of King <font>
James <$$font> 's Time <paren> though the Rod of Arbitrary Power was
always shaking over us <$$paren> with what Freedom and Contempt the
common People , in the open Streets , talk'd of his wild Measures to
make a whole Protestant Nation Papists ; CIBBER-1740-1,39.77

and yet , in the height of our secure and wanton Defiance of him , we ,
of the Vulgar , had no farther Notion of any Remedy for this Evil , than
a satisfy'd Presumption , that our Numbers were too great to be master'd
by his mere Will and Pleasure ; that though he might be too hard for our
Laws , he would never be able to get the better of our Nature ; and that
to drive all <font> England <$$font> into Popery and Slavery , he would
find , would be teaching an old Lion to dance . CIBBER-1740-1,39.78

But , happy was it for the Nation , that it had then wiser Heads in it ,
who knew how to lead a People so dispos'd into Measures for the Publick
Preservation . CIBBER-1740-1,39.79

Here , I can@ @not help reflecting on the very different Deliverances
<font> England <$$font> met with , at this Time , and in the very same
Year of the Century before : CIBBER-1740-1,39.80

Then <paren> in 1588 <$$paren> under a glorious Princess , who had , at
heart , the Good and Happiness of her People , we scatter'd and
destroy'd the most formidable Navy of Invaders , that ever cover'd the
Seas : CIBBER-1740-1,39.81

And now <paren> in 1688 <$$paren> under a Prince , who had alienated the
Hearts of his People , by his absolute Measures , to oppress them , a
foreign Power is receiv'd with open Arms in defence of our Laws ,
Liberties , and Religion , which our native Prince had invaded !
CIBBER-1740-1,39.82

How widely different were these two Monarchs in their Sentiments of
Glory ! CIBBER-1740-1,39.83

But , <font> Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum . <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,39.84

When we consider , in what height of the Nation's Prosperity , the
Successor of Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> came to this Throne , it
seems amazing , that such a Pile of <font> English <$$font> Fame and
Glory , which her skilful Administration had erected , should , in every
following Reign , down to the Revolution , so unhappily moulder away ,
in one continual Gradation of Political Errors : All which <P_40> must
have been avoided , if the plain Rule , which that wise Princess left
behind her , had been observed , <font> viz. That the Love of her
People was the surest Support of her Throne . <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,40.85

This was the Principle by which she so happily govern'd herself , and
those she had the Care of . CIBBER-1740-1,40.86

In this she found Strength to combat , and struggle through more
Difficulties , and dangerous Conspiracies , than ever <font> English
<$$font> Monarch had to cope with . CIBBER-1740-1,40.87

At the same time that she profess'd to <font> desire <$$font> the
People's Love , she took care that her Actions shou'd <font> deserve
<$$font> it , without the least Abatement of her Prerogative ; the
Terror of which she so artfully covered , that she sometimes seem'd to
flatter those she was determin'd should obey . CIBBER-1740-1,40.88

If the four following Princes had exercis'd their Regal Authority with
so visible a Regard to the Publick Welfare , it were hard to know
whether the People of <font> England <$$font> might have ever complain'd
of them , or even felt the want of that Liberty they now so happily
enjoy . CIBBER-1740-1,40.89

'T@ @is true , that before her Time our Ancestors had many successful
Contests with their Sovereigns for their <font> ancient Right <$$font>
and <font> Claim <$$font> to it ; CIBBER-1740-1,40.90

yet what did those Successes amount to ? CIBBER-1740-1,40.91

little more than a Declaration , that there was such a Right in being ;
CIBBER-1740-1,40.92

but who ever saw it enjoy'd ? CIBBER-1740-1,40.93

Did not the Actions of almost every succeeding Reign shew , there were
still so many Doors of Oppression left open to the Prerogative , that
<paren> whatever Value our most eloquent Legislators may have set upon
those ancient Liberties <$$paren> I doubt it will be difficult to fix
the Period of their having a real Being , before the Revolution : Or if
there ever was an elder Period of our unmolested enjoying them , I own ,
my poor Judgment is at a loss where to place it . CIBBER-1740-1,40.94

I will boldly say then , it is to the Revolution only , we owe the full
Possession of what , 'till then , we never had more than a perpetually
contested Right to : CIBBER-1740-1,40.95

And , from thence , from the Revolution it is , that the Protestant
Successors of King <font> William <$$font> have found their Paternal
Care and Maintenance of that Right , has been the surest Basis of their
Glory . CIBBER-1740-1,40.96

<P_41>

These , Sir , are a few of my Political Notions , which I have ventur'd
to expose , that you may see what sort of an <font> English <$$font>
Subject I am ; CIBBER-1740-1,41.98

how wise , or weak they may have shewn me , is not my Concern ;
CIBBER-1740-1,41.99

let the weight of these Matters have drawn me never so far out of my
Depth , I still flatter my self , that I have kept a simple , honest
Head above Water . CIBBER-1740-1,41.100

And it is a solid Comfort to me , to consider that how insignificant
soever my Life was at the Revolution , it had still the good Fortune to
make one , among the many who brought it about ; and that I , now , with
my Coaevals , as well as with the Millions , since born , enjoy the
happy Effects of it . CIBBER-1740-1,41.101

But I must now let you see how my particular Fortune went forward , with
this Change in the Government ; of which I shall not pretend to give you
any farther Account than what my simple Eyes saw of it .
CIBBER-1740-1,41.102

We had not been many Days at <font> Nottingham <$$font> before we heard
, that the Prince of <font> Denmark <$$font> , with some other great
Persons , were gone off , from the King , to the Prince of <font> Orange
<$$font> , and that the Princess <font> Anne <$$font> , fearing the King
her Father@ @'s Resentment might fall upon her , for her Consort's
Revolt , had withdrawn her self , in the Night , from <font> London
<$$font> , and was then within half a Days Journey of <font> Nottingham
<$$font> ; on which very Morning we were suddenly alarm'd with the News
, that two_thousand of the King's Dragoons were in close pursuit to
bring her back Prisoner to <font> London : <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,41.103

But this Alarm it seems was all Stratagem , and was but a part of that
general Terror which was thrown into many other Places about the Kingdom
, at the same time , with design to animate and unite the People in
their common defence ; it being then given out , that the <font> Irish
<$$font> were every where at our Heels , to cut off all the Protestants
within the Reach of their Fury . CIBBER-1740-1,41.104

In this Alarm our Troops scrambled to Arms in as much Order as their
Consternation would admit of , when , having advanc'd some few Miles on
the <font> London <$$font> Road , they met the Princess in a Coach ,
attended only by the Lady <font> Churchill <$$font> <paren> now Dutchess
<P_42> Dowager of <font> Marlborough <$$font> <$$paren> and the Lady
<font> Fitzharding <$$font> , whom they conducted into <font> Nottingham
<$$font> , through the Acclamations of the People : CIBBER-1740-1,42.105

The same Night all the Noblemen , and the other Persons of Distinction ,
then in Arms , had the Honour to sup at her Royal Highness's Table ;
which was then furnish'd <paren> as all her necessary Accommodations
were <$$paren> by the Care , and at the Charge of the Lord <font>
Devonshire . <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,42.106

At this Entertainment , of which I was a Spectator , something very
particular surpriz'd me : CIBBER-1740-1,42.107

The noble Guests at the Table happening to be more in number , than
Attendants out of Liveries , could be found for , I being well known in
the Lord <font> Devonshire <$$font> 's Family , was desired by his
Lordship's <font> Maitre_d'Hotel <$$font> to assist at it :
CIBBER-1740-1,42.108

The Post assign'd me was to observe what the Lady <font> Churchill
<$$font> might call for . CIBBER-1740-1,42.109

Being so near the Table , you may naturally ask me , what I might have
heard to have pass'd in Conversation at it ? which I should certainly
tell you , had I attended to above two Words that were utter'd there ,
CIBBER-1740-1,42.110

and those were , <font> Some Wine and Water . <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,42.111

These , I remember , came distinguish'd , and observ'd to my Ear ,
because they came from the fair Guest , whom I took such Pleasure to
wait on : CIBBER-1740-1,42.112

Except at that single Sound , all my Senses were collected into my Eyes
, which during the whole Entertainment wanted no better Amusement , than
of stealing now and then the Delight of gazing on the fair Object so
near me : CIBBER-1740-1,42.113

If so clear an Emanation of Beauty , such a commanding Grace of Aspect
struck me into a Regard that had something softer than the most profound
Respect in it , I can@ @not see why I may not , without offence ,
remember it ; since Beauty , like the Sun , must sometimes lose its
Power to chuse , and shine into equal Warmth , the Peasant and the
Courtier . CIBBER-1740-1,42.114

Now to give you , Sir , a farther Proof of how good a Taste my first
hopeful Entrance into Manhood set out with , I remember above twenty
Years after , when the same Lady had given the World four of the
loveliest Daughters that ever were gaz'd on , even after they were all
nobly married , and were become the reigning Toasts of every Party of
Pleasure , their still lovely Mother <P_43> had at the same time her
Votaries , and her Health very often took the Lead , in those
involuntary Triumphs of Beauty . CIBBER-1740-1,43.115

However presumptuous , or impertinent these Thoughts might have appear'd
at my first entertaining them , why may I not hope that my having kept
them decently secret , for full fifty Years may be now a good round
Pleas for their Pardon ? CIBBER-1740-1,43.116

Were I now qualify'd to say more of this celebrated Lady , I should
conclude it thus : That she has liv'd <paren> to all Appearance
<$$paren> a peculiar Favourite of Providence ; that few Examples can
parallel the Profusion of Blessings which have attended so long a Life
of Felicity . A Person so attractive ! a Husband so memorably great !
an Offspring so beautiful ! a Fortune so immense ! and a Title , which
<paren> when Royal Favour had no higher to bestow <$$paren> she only
cou'd receive from the Author of Nature ; a great Grandmother without
grey Hairs ! CIBBER-1740-1,43.117

These are such consummate Indulgencies , that we might think Heaven has
center'd them all in one Person , to let us see how far , with a lively
Understanding , the full Possession of them could contribute to human
Happiness - CIBBER-1740-1,43.118

I now return to our Military Affairs . CIBBER-1740-1,43.119

From <font> Nottingham <$$font> our Troops march'd to <font> Oxford
<$$font> ; CIBBER-1740-1,43.120

through every Town we pass'd the People came out , in some sort of Order
, with such rural , and rusty Weapons as they had , to meet us , in
Acclamations of Welcome , and good Wishes . CIBBER-1740-1,43.121

This I thought , promis'd a favourable End of our Civil War , when the
Nation seem'd so willing to be all of a Side ! CIBBER-1740-1,43.122

At <font> Oxford <$$font> the Prince and Princess of <font> Denmark
<$$font> met for the first time , after their late Separation ,
CIBBER-1740-1,43.123

and had all possible Honours paid them by the University .
CIBBER-1740-1,43.124

Here we rested in quiet Quarters for several Weeks , till the Flight of
King <font> James <$$font> into <font> France <$$font> ; when the Nation
being left to take care of it self , the only Security that could be
found for it , was to advance the Prince and Princess of <font> Orange
<$$font> to the vacant Throne . CIBBER-1740-1,43.125

The publick Tranquillity being now settled , our Forces were remanded
back to <font> Nottingham . <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,43.126

Here all our Officers who had commanded them from their first rising ,
receiv'd Commissions <P_44> to confirm them in their several Posts ;
CIBBER-1740-1,44.127

and at the same time , such private Men as chose to return to their
proper Business or Habitations were offer'd their Discharges .
CIBBER-1740-1,44.128

Among the small number of those , who receiv'd them , I was one ;
CIBBER-1740-1,44.129

for not hearing that my Name was in any of these new Commissions , I
thought it time for me to take my leave of Ambition , as Ambition had
before seduc'd me from the imaginary Honours of the Gown ,
CIBBER-1740-1,44.130

and therefore resolv'd to hunt my Fortune in some other Field .
CIBBER-1740-1,44.131

From <font> Nottingham <$$font> I again return'd to my Father at <font>
Chattsworth <$$font> , where I staid till my Lord came down , with the
new Honours of Duke of <font> Devonshire <$$font> , Lord Steward of his
Majesty's Household {TEXT:Houshold} , and Knight of the Garter ! a
noble turn of Fortune ! and a deep Stake he had play'd for ! which
calls to my Memory a Story we had then in the Family , which though too
light for our graver Historians notice , may be of weight enough for my
humble Memoirs . CIBBER-1740-1,44.132

This noble Lord being in the Presence-Chamber in King <font> James
<$$font> 's time , and known to be no Friend to the Measures of his
Administration , a certain Person in favour there , and desirous to be
more so , took occasion to tread rudely upon his Lordship's Foot , which
was return'd with a sudden Blow upon the Spot : CIBBER-1740-1,44.133

For this Misdemeanour his Lordship was fin'd thirty_thousand Pounds ;
but I think had some time allow'd him for the Payment .
CIBBER-1740-1,44.134

In the Summer preceding the Revolution , when his Lordship was retir'd
to <font> Chattsworth <$$font> , and had been there deeply engag'd with
other Noblemen in the Measures , which soon after brought it to bear ,
King <font> James <$$font> sent a Person down to him , with Offers to
mitigate his Fine upon Conditions of ready Payment , to which his
Lordship reply'd , that if his Majesty pleas'd to allow him a little
longer time , he would rather chuse to play <font> double <$$font> or
<font> quit <$$font> with him : CIBBER-1740-1,44.135

The time of the intended Rising being then so near at hand , the Demand
, it seems , came too late for a more serious Answer .
CIBBER-1740-1,44.136

<P_45>

However low my Pretensions to Preferment were at this time , my Father
thought that a little Court Favour added to them , might give him a
Chance for saving the Expence of maintaining me , as he had intended at
the University : CIBBER-1740-1,45.138

He therefore order'd me to draw up a Petition to the Duke , and , to
give it some Air of Merit , to put it into <font> Latin <$$font> , the
Prayer of which was , that his Grace would be pleas'd to do something
<paren> I really forget what <$$paren> for me . CIBBER-1740-1,45.139

- However the Duke , upon receiving it , was so good as to desire my
Father would send me to <font> London <$$font> in the Winter , where he
would consider of some Provision for me . CIBBER-1740-1,45.140

It might , indeed , well require time to consider it ;
CIBBER-1740-1,45.141

for I believe it was then harder to know what I was really fit for ,
than to have got me any thing I was not fit for : CIBBER-1740-1,45.142

However , to <font> London <$$font> I came , where I enter'd into my
first State of Attendance and Dependance for about five Months , till
the <font> February <$$font> following . CIBBER-1740-1,45.143

But alas ! CIBBER-1740-1,45.144

in my Intervals of Leisure , by frequently seeing Plays , my wise Head
was turn'd to higher Views , CIBBER-1740-1,45.145

I saw no Joy in any other Life than that of an Actor , so that <paren>
as before , when a Candidate at <font> Winchester <$$font> <$$paren> I
was even afraid of succeeding to the Preferment I sought for :
CIBBER-1740-1,45.146

'T@ @was on the Stage alone I had form'd a Happiness preferable to all
that Camps or Courts could offer me ! CIBBER-1740-1,45.147

and there was I determin'd , let Father and Mother take it as they
pleas'd , to fix my <font> non ultra . <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,45.148

Here I think my self oblig'd , in respect to the Honour of that noble
Lord , to acknowledge that I believe his real Intentions to do well for
me , were prevented by my own inconsiderate Folly ; so that if my Life
did not then take a more laudable Turn , I have no one but my self to
reproach for it ; CIBBER-1740-1,45.149

for I was credibly inform'd by the Gentlemen of his Houshold , that his
Grace had , in their hearing , talk'd of recommending me to the Lord
<font> Shrewsbury <$$font> , then Secretary of State , for the first
proper Vacancy in that Office . CIBBER-1740-1,45.150

But the distant Hope of a Reversion was too cold a Temptation for a
Spirit impatient as mine , that wanted immediate Possession of what my
Heart was so differently set upon . CIBBER-1740-1,45.151

The Allurements of a Theatre are still <P_46> so strong in my Memory ,
that perhaps few , except those who have felt them , can conceive :
CIBBER-1740-1,46.152

And I am yet so far willing to excuse my Folly , that I am convinc'd ,
were it possible to take off that Disgrace and Prejudice , which Custom
has thrown upon the Profession of an Actor , many a well-born younger
Brother and Beauty of low Fortune would gladly have adorn'd the Theatre
, who by their not being able to brook such Dishonour to their Birth ,
have pass'd away their Lives decently unheeded and forgotten .
CIBBER-1740-1,46.153

Many Years ago , when I was first in the Management of the Theatre , I
remember a strong Instance , which will shew you what degree of Ignominy
the Profession of an Actor was then held at - CIBBER-1740-1,46.154

A Lady , with a real Title , whose female Indiscretions had occasion'd
her Family to abandon her , being willing , in her Distress , to make an
honest Penny of what Beauty she had left , desired to be admitted as an
Actress ; when before she could receive our Answer , a Gentleman <paren>
probably by her Relation's Permission <$$paren> advis'd us not to
entertain her , for Reasons easy to be guess'd . CIBBER-1740-1,46.155

You may imagine we cou'd not be so blind to our Interest as to make an
honourable Family our unnecessary Enemies , by not taking his Advice ;
which the Lady too being sensible of , saw the Affair had its
Difficulties , and therefore pursu'd it no farther .
CIBBER-1740-1,46.156

Now , is it not hard that it should be a doubt , whether this Lady's
Condition or ours were the more melancholy ? CIBBER-1740-1,46.157

For here , you find her honest Endeavour to get Bread from the Stage was
look'd upon as an Addition of new Scandal to her former Dishonour ! so
that I am afraid , according to this way of thinking , had the same Lady
stoop'd to have sold Patches and Pomatum in a Band-box from Door to Door
, she might in that Occupation have starv'd with less Infamy , than had
she reliev'd her Necessities by being famous on the Theatre .
CIBBER-1740-1,46.158

Whether this Prejudice may have arisen from the abuses that so often
have crept in upon the Stage , I am not clear in ; tho' when that is
grossly the Case , I will allow there ought to be no Limits set to
<P_47> the Contempt of it ; CIBBER-1740-1,47.159

yet in its lowest Condition , in my time , me@ @thinks there could have
been no Pretence of preferring the Band-box to the Buskin .
CIBBER-1740-1,47.160

But this severe Opinion , whether merited or not , is not the greatest
Distress that this Profession is liable to . CIBBER-1740-1,47.161

I shall now give you another Anecdote , quite the reverse of what I have
instanc'd , wherein you will see an Actress as hardly us'd for an Act of
Modesty <paren> which without being a Prude , a Woman , even upon the
Stage , may sometimes think it necessary not to throw off . <$$paren>
CIBBER-1740-1,47.162

This too I am forc'd to premise , that the Truth of what I am going to
tell you , may not be sneer'd at before it be known .
CIBBER-1740-1,47.163

About the Year 1717 , a young Actress , of a desirable Person , sitting
in an upper Box at the Opera , a military Gentleman thought this a
proper Opportunity to secure a little Conversation with her ; the
Particulars of which were probably no more worth repeating than it seems
the <font> Damoiselle <$$font> then thought them worth listening to ;
CIBBER-1740-1,47.164

for , notwithstanding the fine Things he said to her , she rather chose
to give the Musick the Preference of her Attention :
CIBBER-1740-1,47.165

This Indifference was so offensive to his high Heart , that he began to
change the Tender into the Terrible , CIBBER-1740-1,47.166

and , in short , proceeded at last to treat her in a Style too grosly
insulting , for the meanest Female Ear to endure unresented : Upon which
, being beaten too far out of her Discretion , she turn'd hastily upon
him , with an angry Look , and a Reply , which seem'd to set his Merit
in so low a Regard , that he thought himself oblig'd in Honour , to take
his time to resent it : CIBBER-1740-1,47.167

This was the full Extent of her Crime , which his Glory delay'd no
longer to punish than 'till the next time she was to appear upon the
Stage : CIBBER-1740-1,47.168

There , in one of her best Parts , wherein she drew a favourable Regard
and Approbation from the Audience , he , dispensing with the Respect
which some People think due to a polite Assembly , began to interrupt
her Performance , with such loud and various Notes of Mockery , as other
young Men of Honour in the same Place , have sometimes <P_48> made
themselves undauntedly merry with : CIBBER-1740-1,48.169

Thus , deaf to all Murmurs or Entreaties of those about him , he pursued
his Point , even to throwing near her such Trash as no Person can be
suppos'd to carry about him , unless to use on so particular an Occasion
. CIBBER-1740-1,48.170

A Gentleman then behind the Scenes , being shock'd at his unmanly
Behaviour , was warm enough to say , That no Man , but a Fool , or a
Bully cou'd be capable of insulting an Audience or a Woman , in so
monstrous a manner . CIBBER-1740-1,48.171

The former valiant Gentleman , to whose Ear the Words were soon brought
, by his Spies , whom he had plac'd behind the Scenes , to observe how
the Action was taken there , came immediately from the Pit , in a Heat ,
CIBBER-1740-1,48.172

and demanded to know of the Author of those Words , if he was the Person
that spoke them ? to which he calmly reply'd , That though he had never
seen him before , yet , since he seem'd so earnest to be satisfy'd , he
would do him the favour to own , That , indeed the Words were his , and
that they would be the last Words he should chuse to deny , whoever they
might fall upon . CIBBER-1740-1,48.173

To conclude , their Dispute was ended the next Morning in <font>
Hyde-Park <$$font> , where the determin'd Combatant who , first ask'd
for Satisfaction , was oblig'd afterwards to ask his Life too ;
CIBBER-1740-1,48.174

whether he mended it or not , I have not yet heard ;
CIBBER-1740-1,48.175

but his Antagonist , in a few Years after died in one of the principal
Posts of the Government . CIBBER-1740-1,48.176

Now , though I have , sometimes , known these gallant Insulters of
Audiences , draw themselves into Scrapes , which they have less
honourably got out of , yet , alas ! what has that avail'd ?
CIBBER-1740-1,48.177

This generous publick-spirited Method of silencing a few , was but
repelling the Disease , in one Part to make it break out in another :
CIBBER-1740-1,48.178

All Endeavours at Protection are new Provocations , to those who pride
themselves in pushing their Courage to a Defiance of Humanity .
CIBBER-1740-1,48.179

Even when a Royal Resentment has shewn itself , in the behalf of an
injur'd Actor , it has been unable to defend him from farther Insults !
an Instance of which happen'd <P_49> in the late King <font> James
<$$font> 's time . CIBBER-1740-1,49.180

Mr. <font> Smith <$$font> <paren> whose Character as a Gentleman ,
could have been no way impeach'd , had he not degraded it , by being a
celebrated Actor <$$paren> had the Misfortune , in a Dispute with a
Gentleman behind the Scenes , to receive a Blow from him :
CIBBER-1740-1,49.181

The same Night an Account of this Action was carry'd to the King , to
whom the Gentleman was represented so grossly in the wrong , that the
next Day , his Majesty sent to forbid him the Court upon it .
CIBBER-1740-1,49.182

This Indignity cast upon a Gentleman , only for having maltreated a
Player , was look'd upon as the Concern of every Gentleman ;
CIBBER-1740-1,49.183

and a Party was soon form'd to assert , and vindicate their Honour , by
humbling this favour'd Actor , whose slight Injury had been judg'd equal
to so severe a Notice . CIBBER-1740-1,49.184

Accordingly , the next time <font> Smith <$$font> acted he was receiv'd
with a Chorus of Cat-calls , that soon convinc'd him , he should not be
suffer'd to proceed in his Part ; upon which , without the least
Discomposure , he order'd the Curtain to be dropp'd ;
CIBBER-1740-1,49.185

and , having a competent Fortune of his own , thought the Conditions of
adding to it , by his remaining upon the Stage were too dear ,
CIBBER-1740-1,49.186

and from that Day entirely quitted it . CIBBER-1740-1,49.187

I shall make no Observation upon the King's Resentment , or on that of
his good Subjects ; CIBBER-1740-1,49.188

how far either was or was not right , is not the Point I dispute for :
CIBBER-1740-1,49.189

Be that as it may , the unhappy Condition of the Actor was so far from
being reliev'd by this Royal Interposition in his favour , that it was
the worse for it . CIBBER-1740-1,49.190

While these sort of real Distresses , on the Stage are so unavoidable ,
it is no wonder that young People of Sense <paren> though of low Fortune
<$$paren> should be so rarely found , to supply a Succession of good
Actors . CIBBER-1740-1,49.191

Why then may we not , in some measure , impute the Scarcity of them , to
the wanton Inhumanity of those Spectators , who have made it so terribly
mean to appear there ? CIBBER-1740-1,49.192

Were there no ground for this Question , where could be the Disgrace of
entring into a Society whose Institution , when not abus'd , is a
delightful School of Morality ; and where to excel requires as ample
Endowments of Nature as any one Profession <P_50> <paren> that of holy
Institution excepted <$$paren> whatsoever ? CIBBER-1740-1,50.193

But , alas ! as <font> Shakespear <$$font> says , <font> Where@ @'s
that Palace , whereinto , sometimes Foul things intrude not ? <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,50.194

Look into St. <font> Peter <$$font> 's at <font> Rome , <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,50.195

and see what a profitable Farce is made of Religion there !
CIBBER-1740-1,50.196

Why then is an Actor more blemish'd than a Cardinal ? While the
Excellence of the one arises from his innocently seeming what he is not
, and the Eminence of the other , from the most impious Fallacies that
can be impos'd upon human Understanding ? CIBBER-1740-1,50.197

If the best things , therefore , are most liable to Corruption , the
Corruption of the Theatre is no Disproof of its innate and primitive
Utility . CIBBER-1740-1,50.198

In this Light , therefore , all the Abuses of the Stage , all the low ,
loose , or immoral Supplements to wit , whether , in making Virtue
ridiculous or Vice agreeable , or in the decorated Nonsense and
Absurdities of Pantomimical Trumpery , I give up to the Contempt of
every sensible Spectator , as so much rank Theatrical Popery .
CIBBER-1740-1,50.199

But can@ @not still allow these Enormities to impeach the Profession ,
while they are so palpably owing to the deprav'd Taste of the Multitude
. CIBBER-1740-1,50.200

While Vice , and Farcical Folly , are the most profitable Commodities ,
why should we wonder that , time out of mind , the poor Comedian , when
real Wit would bear no Price , should deal in what would bring him most
ready Money ? CIBBER-1740-1,50.201

But this , you will say , is making the Stage a Nursery of Vice and
Folly , or at least keeping an open Shop for it . CIBBER-1740-1,50.202

- I grant it : CIBBER-1740-1,50.203

But who do you expect should reform it ? CIBBER-1740-1,50.204

The Actors ? CIBBER-1740-1,50.205

Why so ? CIBBER-1740-1,50.206

If People are permitted to buy it , without blushing , the Theatrical
Merchant seems to have an equal Right to the Liberty of selling it ,
without Reproach . CIBBER-1740-1,50.207

That this Evil wants a Remedy , is not to be contested ;
CIBBER-1740-1,50.208

nor can it be denied that the Theatre is as capable of being preserv'd ,
by a Reformation , as Matters of more Importance ; which , for the
Honour of our National Taste , I could wish were attempted ;
CIBBER-1740-1,50.209

and <P_51> then , if it could not subsist , under decent Regulations ,
by not being permitted to present any thing there , but what were <font>
worthy <$$font> to be there , it would be time enough to consider ,
whether it were necessary to let it totally fall , or effectually
support it . CIBBER-1740-1,51.210

Notwithstanding all my best Endeavours , to recommend the Profession of
an Actor , to a more general Favour , I doubt , while it is liable to
such Corruptions , and the Actor himself to such unlimited Insults , as
I have already mention'd , CIBBER-1740-1,51.211

I doubt , I say , we must still leave him a-drift , with his intrinsick
Merit , to ride out the Storm as well as he is able .
CIBBER-1740-1,51.212

However , let us now turn to the other side of this Account , and see
what Advantages stand there , to balance the Misfortunes I have laid
before you . There we shall still find some valuable Articles of Credit
, that , sometimes overpay his incidental Disgraces .
CIBBER-1740-1,51.213

First , if he has Sense , he will consider , that as these Indignities
are seldom or never offer'd him by People , that are remarkable for any
one good Quality , he ought not to lay them too close to his Heart :
CIBBER-1740-1,51.214

He will know too , that when Malice , Envy , or a brutal Nature , can
securely hide or fence themselves in a Multitude , Virtue , Merit ,
Innocence , and even sovereign Superiority , have been , and must be
equally liable to their Insults ; that therefore , when they fall upon
him in the same manner , his intrinsick Value can@ @not be diminish'd by
them : CIBBER-1740-1,51.215

On the contrary , if , with a decent and unruffled Temper , he lets them
pass , the Disgrace will return upon his Aggressor , and perhaps warm
the generous Spectator into a Partiality in his Favour .
CIBBER-1740-1,51.216

That while he is conscious , that , as an Actor , he must be always in
the Hands of Injustice , it does him at least this involuntary Good ,
that it keeps him in a settled Resolution to avoid all Occasions of
provoking it , or of even offending the lowest Enemy , who , at the
Expence of a Shilling , may publickly revenge it . <P_52> That , if he
excells on the Stage , and is irreproachable in his Personal Morals ,
and Behaviour , his Profession is so far from being an Impediment , that
it will be oftner a just Reason for his being receiv'd among People of
condition with Favour ; and sometimes with a more social Distinction ,
than the best , though more profitable Trade he might have follow'd ,
could have recommended him to . That this is a Happiness to which
several Actors , within my Memory , as <font> Betterton <$$font> ,
<font> Smith <$$font> , <font> Montfort <$$font> , <$$font> Captain
<font> Griffin <$$font> , and Mrs. <font> Bracegirdle <$$font> <paren>
yet living <$$paren> have arriv'd at ; to which I may add the late
celebrated Mrs. <font> Oldfield . <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,52.217

Now let us suppose these Persons , the Men , for example , to have been
all eminent Mercers , and the Women as famous Milliners ,
CIBBER-1740-1,52.218

can we imagine , that merely as such , though endow'd with the same
natural Understanding , they could have been call'd into the same
honourable Parties of Conversation ? CIBBER-1740-1,52.219

People of Sense and Condition , could not but know , it was impossible
they could have had such various Excellencies on the Stage , without
having something naturally valuable in them : CIBBER-1740-1,52.220

And I will take upon me to affirm , who knew them all living , that
there was not one of the Number who were not capable of supporting a
variety of Spirited Conversation , tho' the Stage were never to have
been the Subject of it . That , to have trod the Stage , has not always
been thought a Disqualification from more honourable Employments ;
CIBBER-1740-1,52.221

several have had military Commissions ; CIBBER-1740-1,52.222

<font> Carlisle <$$font> and <font> Wiltshire <$$font> were both kill'd
Captains ; one in King <font> William <$$font> 's Reduction of <font>
Ireland <$$font> ; and the other in his first War , in <font> Flanders
<$$font> ; CIBBER-1740-1,52.223

and the famous <font> Ben. Johnson <$$font> , tho' an unsuccessful
Actor , was afterwards made Poet-Laureat . CIBBER-1740-1,52.224

To these laudable Distinctions let me add one more ; that of Publick
Applause , which , when truly merited , is perhaps , one of the most
agreeable Gratifications that venial Vanity can feel . A Happiness
almost peculiar to the Actor , insomuch that the <P_53> best Tragick
Writer , however numerous his separate Admirers may be , yet , to unite
them into one general Act of Praise , to receive at once , those
thundring Peals of Approbation , which a crouded Theatre throws out , he
must still call in the Assistance of the skilful Actor , to raise and
partake of them . CIBBER-1740-1,53.225

In a Word , 't@ @was in this flattering Light only , though not perhaps
so thoroughly consider'd , I look'd upon the Life of an Actor when but
eighteen Years of Age ; CIBBER-1740-1,53.226

nor can you wonder , if the Temptations were too strong for so warm a
Vanity as mine to resist ; CIBBER-1740-1,53.227

but whether excusable or not , to the Stage at length I came ,
CIBBER-1740-1,53.228

and it is from thence , chiefly , your Curiosity , if you have any left
, is to expect a farther Account of me . CIBBER-1740-1,53.229

<heading>

Chap. IV . CIBBER-1740-1,53.231

<font> A short View of the Stage , from the Year <$$font> 1660 <font> to
the Revolution . CIBBER-1740-1,53.232

The King's and Duke's Company united , composed the best Set of <$$font>
English <font> Actors yet known . CIBBER-1740-1,53.233

Their several Theatrical Characters . <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,53.234

<$$heading>

Tho' I have only promis'd you an Account of all the material Occurrences
of the Theatre during my own Time ; yet there was one which happen'd not
above seven Years before my Admission to it , which may be as well worth
notice , as the first great Revolution of it , in which , among numbers
, I was involv'd . CIBBER-1740-1,53.236

And as the one will lead you into a clearer View of the other , it may
therefore be previously necessary to let you know that King <font>
Charles <$$font> II. at his Restoration , granted two Patents , one to
Sir <font> William Davenant <$$font> , and the other to <font> Thomas
Killigrew <$$font> , Esq; and their several Heirs and Assigns , for ever
, for the forming of two distinct Companies of Comedians :
CIBBER-1740-1,53.237

The first were call'd the <font> King's Servants <$$font> , and acted at
the Theatre-Royal in <font> Drury-Lane <$$font> ; <P_54> and the other
the <font> Duke's Company <$$font> , who acted at the Duke's Theatre in
<font> Dorset-Garden . <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,54.238

About ten of the King's Company were on the Royal Houshold-Establishment
, having each ten Yards of Scarlet Cloth , with a proper quantity of
Lace allow'd them for Liveries ; CIBBER-1740-1,54.239

and in their Warrants from the Lord Chamberlain , were stiled <font>
Gentlemen of the Great Chamber <$$font> : CIBBER-1740-1,54.240

Whether the like Appointments were extended to the Duke's Company , I am
not certain ; CIBBER-1740-1,54.241

but they were both in high Estimation with the Publick , and so much the
Delight and Concern of the Court , that they were not only supported by
its being frequently present at their publick <font> Presentations
<$$font> , but by its taking cognizance even of their private Government
, insomuch , that their particular Differences , Pretentions , or
Complaints were generally ended by the <font> King <$$font> , or <font>
Duke@ @'s <$$font> Personal Command or Decision . CIBBER-1740-1,54.242

Besides their being thorough Masters of their Art , these Actors set
forwards with two critical Advantages , which perhaps may never happen
again in many Ages . CIBBER-1740-1,54.243

The one was , their immediate opening after the so long Interdiction of
Plays , during the Civil War , and the Anarchy that followed it .
CIBBER-1740-1,54.244

What eager Appetites from so long a Fast , must the Guests of those
Times have had , to that high and fresh variety of Entertainments ,
which <font> Shakespear <$$font> had left prepar'd for them ?
CIBBER-1740-1,54.245

Never was a Stage so provided ! CIBBER-1740-1,54.246

A_hundred Years are wasted , and another silent Century well advanced ,
CIBBER-1740-1,54.247

and yet what unborn Age shall say <font> Shakespear <$$font> has his
equal ! CIBBER-1740-1,54.248

How many shining Actors have the warm Scenes of his Genius given to
Posterity ? without being himself , in his Action , equal to his
Writing ! A strong Proof that Actors , like Poets , must be born such .
CIBBER-1740-1,54.249

Eloquence and Elocution are quite different Talents :
CIBBER-1740-1,54.250

<font> Shakespear <$$font> could write <font> Hamlet <$$font> ;
CIBBER-1740-1,54.251

but Tradition tells us , That the <font> Ghost <$$font> , in the same
Play , was one of his best Performances as an Actor :
CIBBER-1740-1,54.252

Nor is it within the reach of Rule or Precept to complete either of them
. CIBBER-1740-1,54.253

Instruction , 't@ @is true , may guard them equally against Faults or
Absurdities , CIBBER-1740-1,54.254

but there it stops ; CIBBER-1740-1,54.255

Nature must do the rest : CIBBER-1740-1,54.256

To excel <P_55> in either Art , is a self-born Happiness , which
something more than good Sense must be the Mother of .
CIBBER-1740-1,55.257

The other Advantage I was speaking of , is , that before the Restoration
, no Actress had ever been seen upon the <font> English <$$font> Stage .
CIBBER-1740-1,55.258

The Characters of Women , on former Theatres , were perform'd by Boys ,
or young Men of the most effeminate Aspect . CIBBER-1740-1,55.259

And what Grace , or Master-strokes of Action can we conceive such ungain
{COM:sic} Hoydens to have been capable of ? CIBBER-1740-1,55.260

This Defect was so well considered by <font> Shakespear <$$font> , that
in few of his Plays , he has any greater Dependance upon the Ladies ,
than in the Innocence and Simplicity of a <font> Desdemona <$$font> , an
<font> Ophelia <$$font> , or in the short Specimen of a fond and
virtuous <font> Portia <$$font> . CIBBER-1740-1,55.261

The additional Objects then of real , beautiful Women , could not but
draw a Proportion of new Admirers to the Theatre . CIBBER-1740-1,55.262

We may imagine , too , that these Actresses were not ill chosen , when
it is well known , that more than one of them had Charms sufficient at
their leisure Hours , to calm and mollify the Cares of Empire .
CIBBER-1740-1,55.263

Besides these peculiar Advantages , they had a private Rule or Agreement
, which both Houses were happily ty'd down to , which was , that no Play
acted at one House , should ever be attempted at the other .
CIBBER-1740-1,55.264

All the capital Plays therefore of <font> Shakespear <$$font> , <font>
Fletcher <$$font> , and <font> Ben. Johnson <$$font> were divided
between them , by the Approbation of the Court , and their own alternate
Choice . So that when <font> Hart <$$font> was famous for <font>
Othello <$$font> , <font> Betterton <$$font> had no less a Reputation
for <font> Hamlet . <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,55.265

By this Order the Stage was supply'd with a greater Variety of Plays ,
than could possibly have been shewn had both Companies been employ'd at
the same time , upon the same Play ; which Liberty , too , must have
occasion'd such frequent Repetitions of 'em , by their opposite
Endeavours to forestall and anticipate one another , that the best
Actors in the World must have grown tedious and tasteless to the
Spectator : CIBBER-1740-1,55.266

For what Pleasure is not languid to Satiety ? CIBBER-1740-1,55.267

It was therefore one of our greatest Happinesses <paren> during my time
of being in the Management of the Stage <$$paren> that <P_56> we had a
certain Number of select Plays , which no other Company had the good
Fortune to make a tolerable Figure in , and consequently , could find
little or no Account , by acting them against us . CIBBER-1740-1,56.268

These Plays therefore , for many Years , by not being too often seen ,
never fail'd to bring us crowded Audiences ; CIBBER-1740-1,56.269

and it was to this Conduct we ow'd no little Share of our Prosperity .
CIBBER-1740-1,56.270

But when four Houses are at once <paren> as very lately they were
<$$paren> all permitted to act the same Pieces , let three of them
perform never so ill , when Plays come to be so harrass'd and hackney'd
out to the common People <paren> half of which too , perhaps , would as
lieve see them at one House as another <$$paren> the best Actors will
soon feel that the Town has enough of them . CIBBER-1740-1,56.271

I know it is the common Opinion , That the more Play-houses the more
Emulation ; CIBBER-1740-1,56.272

I grant it ; CIBBER-1740-1,56.273

but what has this Emulation ended in ? CIBBER-1740-1,56.274

Why , a daily Contention which shall soonest surfeit you with the best
Plays ; so that when what <font> ought <$$font> to please , can no
<font> longer <$$font> please , your Appetite is again to be raised by
such monstrous Presentations , as dishonour the Taste of a civiliz'd
People . CIBBER-1740-1,56.275

If , indeed , to our several Theatres , we could raise a proportionable
Number of good Authors to give them all different Employment , then ,
perhaps , the Publick might profit from their Emulation :
CIBBER-1740-1,56.276

But while good Writers are so scarce , and undaunted Criticks so plenty
, I am afraid a good Play and a blazing Star , will be equal Rarities .
CIBBER-1740-1,56.277

This voluptuous Expedient , therefore , of indulging the Taste with
several Theatres , will amount to much the same variety as that of a
certain Oeconomist , who , to enlarge his Hospitality , would have two
Puddings , and two Legs of Mutton for the same Dinner .
CIBBER-1740-1,56.278

- But , to resume the Thread of my History . These two excellent
Companies were both prosperous for some few Years , 'till their Variety
of Plays began to be exhausted : CIBBER-1740-1,56.279

Then of course , the better Actors <paren> which the King's seem to have
been allowed <$$paren> could not fail of drawing the greater Audiences .
CIBBER-1740-1,56.280

<P_57>

Sir <font> William Davenant <$$font> , therefore , Master of the Duke's
Company , to make Head against their Success , was forced to add
Spectacle and Musick to Action ; and to introduce a new Species of Plays
, since call'd Dramatick Opera's , of which kind were the <font> Tempest
<$$font> , <font> Psyche <$$font> , <font> Circe <$$font> , and others ,
all set off with the most expensive Decorations of Scenes and Habits ,
with the best Voices and Dancers . CIBBER-1740-1,57.282

This sensual Supply of Sight and Sound , coming in to the Assistance of
the weaker Party , it was no Wonder they should grow too hard for Sense
and simple Nature , when it is consider'd how many more People there are
, that can see and hear , than think and judge . CIBBER-1740-1,57.283

So wanton a Change of the publick Taste , therefore , began to fall as
heavy upon the King's Company , as their greater Excellence in Action ,
had , before , fallen upon their Competitors : Of which Encroachment
upon Wit , several good Prologues in those Days frequently complain'd .
CIBBER-1740-1,57.284

But alas ! what can Truth avail , when its Dependance is much more upon
the Ignorant , than the sensible Auditor ? CIBBER-1740-1,57.285

a poor Satisfaction , that the due Praise given to it , must at last ,
sink into the cold Comfort of - <font> Laudatur & Alget . <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,57.286

Unprofitable Praise can hardly give it a <font> Soup_maigre . <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,57.287

Taste and Fashion , with us , have always had Wings ,
CIBBER-1740-1,57.288

and fly from one publick Spectacle to another so wantonly , that I have
been inform'd , by those , who remember it , that a famous Puppet-shew ,
in <font> Salisbury <$$font> Change <paren> then standing where <font>
Cecil-Street <$$font> now is <$$paren> so far distrest these two
celebrated Companies , that they were reduced to petition the King for
Relief against it : CIBBER-1740-1,57.289

Nor ought we perhaps to think this strange , when if I mistake not ,
<font> Terence <$$font> himself reproaches the <font> Roman <$$font>
Auditors of his Time , with the like Fondness for the <font> Funambuli
<$$font> , the Rope-dancers . CIBBER-1740-1,57.290

Not to dwell too long therefore upon that Part of my History , which I
have only collected , from oral Tradition , I shall content my self with
telling you that <font> Mohun <$$font> , and <font> Hart <$$font> now
growing old <paren> for , above thirty Years before this Time , they had
severally born the King's Commission of Major and Captain , in the Civil
Wars <$$paren> , and the younger Actors , as <font> Goodman <$$font> ,
<font> Clark <$$font> , <P_58> and others , being impatient to get into
their Parts , and growing intractable , the Audiences too of both Houses
then falling off , the Patentees of each , by the King's Advice , which
perhaps amounted to a Command , united their Interests , and both
Companies into one , exclusive of all others , in the Year 1684 .
CIBBER-1740-1,58.291

This Union was , however , so much in favour of the Duke's Company ,
that <font> Hart <$$font> left the Stage upon it , CIBBER-1740-1,58.292

and <font> Mohun <$$font> survived not long after .
CIBBER-1740-1,58.293

One only Theatre being now in Possession of the whole Town , the united
Patentees imposed their own Terms , upon the Actors ;
CIBBER-1740-1,58.294

for the Profits of acting were then divided into twenty Shares , ten of
which went to the Proprietors , and the other Moiety to the principal
Actors , in such Sub-divisions as their different Merit might pretend to
. CIBBER-1740-1,58.295

These Shares of the Patentees were promiscuously sold out to
Money-making Persons , call'd Adventurers , who , tho' utterly ignorant
of Theatrical Affairs , were still admitted to a proportionate Vote in
the Management of them ; CIBBER-1740-1,58.296

in particular Encouragements to Actors were by them , of Consequence ,
look'd upon as so many Sums deducted from their private Dividends .
CIBBER-1740-1,58.297

While therefore the Theatrical Hive had so many Drones in it , the
labouring Actors , sure , were under the highest Discouragement , if not
a direct State of Oppression . CIBBER-1740-1,58.298

Their Hardship will at least appear in a much stronger Light when
compar'd to our later Situation , who with scarce half their Merit
succeeded to be Sharers under a Patent upon five times easier Conditions
: CIBBER-1740-1,58.299

For as they had but half the Profits divided among ten or more of them ;
we had three fourths of the whole Profits divided only among three of us
: CIBBER-1740-1,58.300

And as they might be said to have ten Task-masters over them , we never
had but one Assistant-manager <paren> not an Actor <$$paren> join'd with
us ; who , by the Crown's Indulgence , was sometimes too of our own
chusing . CIBBER-1740-1,58.301

Under this heavy Establishment then groan'd this United Company , when I
was first admitted into the lowest Rank of it . CIBBER-1740-1,58.302

How they came to be relieved by King <font> William <$$font> 's Licence
in 1695 , how they were <P_59> again dispersed early in Queen <font>
Anne <$$font> 's Reign ; and from what Accidents Fortune took better
care of Us , their unequal Successors , will be told in its Place :
CIBBER-1740-1,59.303

But to prepare you for the opening so large a Scene of their History ,
me@ @thinks I ought , <paren> in Justice to their Memory too <$$paren>
to give you such particular Characters of their Theatrical Merit , as in
my plain Judgment they seem'd to deserve . CIBBER-1740-1,59.304

Presuming then that this Attempt may not be disagreeable to the Curious
, or the true Lovers of the Theatre , take it without farther Preface .
CIBBER-1740-1,59.305

In the Year 1690 , when I first came into this Company , the principal
Actors then at the Head of it were , Of Men . Mr. <font> Betterton
<$$font> , Mr. <font> Monfort <$$font> , Mr. <font> Kynaston <$$font>
, Mr. <font> Sandford <$$font> , Mr. <font> Nokes <$$font> , Mr.
<font> Underhil <$$font> , and Mr. <font> Leigh . <$$font> Of Women .
Mrs. <font> Betterton <$$font> , Mrs. <font> Barry <$$font> , Mrs.
<font> Leigh <$$font> , Mrs. <font> Butler <$$font> , Mrs. <font>
Monfort <$$font> , and Mrs. <font> Bracegirdle . <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,59.306

These Actors , whom I have selected from their Cotemporaries , were all
original Masters in their different Stile , not meer auricular Imitators
of one another , which commonly is the highest Merit of the middle Rank
; but Self-judges of Nature , from whose various Lights they only took
their true Instruction . CIBBER-1740-1,59.307

If in the following Account of them , I may be obliged to hint at the
Faults of others , I never mean such Observations should extend to those
who are now in Possession of the Stage ; CIBBER-1740-1,59.308

for as I design not my Memoirs shall come down to their Time , I would
not lie under the Imputation of speaking in their Disfavour to the
Publick , whose Approbation they must depend upon for Support .
CIBBER-1740-1,59.309

But to my Purpose . CIBBER-1740-1,59.310

<font> Betterton <$$font> was an Actor , as <font> Shakespear <$$font>
was an Author , both without Competitors ! form'd for the mutual
Assistance , and Illustration <P_60> of each others Genius !
CIBBER-1740-1,60.311

How <font> Shakespear <$$font> wrote , all Men who have a Taste for
Nature may read , and know - CIBBER-1740-1,60.312

but with what higher Rapture would he still be <font> read <$$font>
could they conceive how <font> Betterton play'd <$$font> him !
CIBBER-1740-1,60.313

Then might they know , the one was born alone to speak what the other
only knew , to write ! CIBBER-1740-1,60.314

Pity it is , that the momentary Beauties flowing from an harmonious
Elocution , can@ @not like those of Poetry , be their own Record ! That
the animated Graces of the Player can live no longer than the instant
Breath and Motion that presents them ; or at best can but faintly
glimmer through the Memory , or imperfect Attestation of a few surviving
Spectators . CIBBER-1740-1,60.315

Could <font> how Betterton <$$font> spoke be as easily known as <font>
what <$$font> he spoke ; then might you see the Muse of <font>
Shakespear <$$font> in her Triumph , with all her Beauties in their best
Array , rising into real Life , and charming her Beholders .
CIBBER-1740-1,60.316

But alas ! since all this is so far out of the reach of Description ,
how shall I shew you <font> Betterton ? <$$font> CIBBER-1740-1,60.317

Should I therefore tell you , that all the <font> Othellos <$$font> ,
<font> Hamlets <$$font> , <font> Hotspurs <$$font> , <font> Mackbeths
<$$font> , and <font> Brutus's <$$font>
{COM:font_change_around_"Brutus"} , whom you may have seen since his
Time , have fallen far short of him ; this still would give you no Idea
of his particular Excellence . CIBBER-1740-1,60.318

Let us see then what a particular Comparison may do ! whether that may
yet draw him nearer to you ? CIBBER-1740-1,60.319

You have seen a <font> Hamlet <$$font> perhaps , who , on the first
Appearance of his Father's Spirit , has thrown himself into all the
straining Vociferation requisite to express Rage and Fury ,
CIBBER-1740-1,60.320

and the House has thunder'd with Applause ; tho' the mis-guided Actor
was all the while <paren> as <font> Shakespear <$$font> terms it
<$$paren> tearing a Passion into Rags - CIBBER-1740-1,60.321

I am the more bold to offer you this particular Instance , because the
late Mr. <font> Addison <$$font> , while I sat {TEXT:sate} by him , to
see this Scene acted , made the same Observation , asking me , with some
Surprize , if I thought <font> Hamlet <$$font> should be in so violent a
Passion with the Ghost , which , tho' it might have astonish'd , it had
not provok'd him ? CIBBER-1740-1,60.322

for you may observe that in this beautiful Speech the Passion never
rises beyond an almost breathless Astonishment , or an Impatience ,
limited by filial Reverence , to enquire into the suspected <P_61>
Wrongs that may have rais'd him from his peaceful Tomb ! and a Desire
to know what a Spirit so seemingly distrest , might wish or enjoin a
sorrowful Son to execute towards his future Quiet in the Grave ?
CIBBER-1740-1,61.323

This was the Light into which <font> Betterton <$$font> threw this Scene
; which he open'd with a Pause of mute Amazement ! CIBBER-1740-1,61.324

then rising slowly , to a solemn , trembling Voice , he made the Ghost
equally terrible to the Spectator , as to himself !
CIBBER-1740-1,61.325

and in the descriptive Part of the natural Emotions which the ghastly
Vision gave him , the boldness of his Expostulation was still govern'd
by Decency , manly , but not braving ; his Voice never rising into that
seeming Outrage or wild Defiance of what he naturally rever'd .
CIBBER-1740-1,61.326

But alas ! to preserve this medium , between mouthing and meaning too
little , to keep the Attention more pleasingly awake by a temper'd
Spirit , than by meer Vehemence of Voice , is of all the Master-strokes
of an Actor the most difficult to reach . CIBBER-1740-1,61.327

In this none yet have equall'd <font> Betterton . <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,61.328

But I am unwilling to shew his Superiority only by recounting the Errors
of those , who now can@ @not answer to them , CIBBER-1740-1,61.329

let their farther Failings therefore be forgotten !
CIBBER-1740-1,61.330

or rather , shall I in some measure excuse them ? CIBBER-1740-1,61.331

For I am not yet sure , that they might not be as much owing to the
false Judgment of the Spectator , as the Actor . CIBBER-1740-1,61.332

While the Million are so apt to be transported , when the Drum of their
Ear is so roundly rattled ; while they take the Life of Elocution to lie
in the Strength of the Lungs , it is no wonder the Actor , whose end is
Applause , should be also tempted , at this easy rate to excite it .
CIBBER-1740-1,61.333

Shall I go a little farther ? and allow that this Extreme is more
pardonable than its opposite Error ? CIBBER-1740-1,61.334

I mean that dangerous Affectation of the Monotone , or solemn Sameness
of Pronounciation , which , to my Ear , is insupportable ;
CIBBER-1740-1,61.335

for of all Faults that so frequently pass upon the Vulgar , that of
Flatness will have the fewest Admirers . CIBBER-1740-1,61.336

That this is an Error of ancient standing seems evident by what <font>
Hamlet <$$font> says , in his Instructions to the Players , <font> viz.
Be not too tame , neither , <$$font> &c. CIBBER-1740-1,61.337

<P_62>

The Actor , doubtless , is as strongly ty'd down to the Rules of <font>
Horace <$$font> as the Writer . CIBBER-1740-1,62.339

<font> Si vis me flere , dolendum est Primum ipsi tibi - <$$font>
CIBBER-1740-1,62.340

He that feels not himself the Passion he would raise , will talk to a
sleeping Audience : CIBBER-1740-1,62.341

But this never was the Fault of <font> Betterton <$$font> ;
CIBBER-1740-1,62.342

and it has often amaz'd me , to see those who soon came after him ,
throw out in some Parts of a Character , a just and graceful Spirit ,
which <font> Betterton <$$font> himself could not but have applauded .
And yet in the equally shining Passages of the same Character have
heavily dragg'd the Sentiment along , like a dead Weight ; with a
long-ton'd Voice , and absent Eye , as if they had fairly forgot what
they were about : CIBBER-1740-1,62.343

If you have never made this Observation , I am contented you should not
know , where to apply it . CIBBER-1740-1,62.344

