<BEGIN_clarke-1730-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

An Essay upon the Education <font> &c. <$$font> CLARKE-1730-2,1.4

<$$heading>

Tho' Nature has not dispensed her Favours with an equal Hand to all
Mankind , but there is a very visible Inequality in the natural Parts
and Abilities of several Men ; yet the greatest Difference amongst them
, will be found to arise from the different Use and Improvement of their
Faculties , which is chiefly owing to Education . CLARKE-1730-2,1.6

For how many Men are there born into the World <P_2> with Parts
sufficient , had they been duly cultivated , to qualify them for the
highest Posts in Church or State ; who , for want of that Improvement ,
never rise above the Talents necessary for the Management of an ordinary
Trade , or engrossing to themselves the greatest Share of Talk in common
Conversation , with Men of their own low Rank ? CLARKE-1730-2,2.7

Nay , I think , I may very safely venture to say , that few Men ever
attain to any considerable Eminence in Virtue or Knowledge , the only
Foundations of all true and solid Greatness , who were not in a great
measure indebted to their Education for it . CLARKE-1730-2,2.8

Children are Strangers in the World , where the first Acquaintance they
make is with sensible Objects : CLARKE-1730-2,2.9

Those must store the yet empty Cabinet of the Mind with variety of Ideas
, as the foundation and Materials of their future Knowledge .
CLARKE-1730-2,2.10

And as the natural Thirst in the Mind after Happiness , disposes them to
pursue with great Eagerness , whatsoever they find capable of
ministering {TEXT:ministring} to their Pleasure ; so it is the Business
of Education to watch over that weak and tender Age , <P_3> that the yet
unwary thoughtless Mind , uncapable of seeing into the Nature and
Consequences of Things , be not too much led away , and entirely
possessed by the deluding Pleasures of Sense ; and by due Information
and Restraint , to prevent the settling of vicious Habits .
CLARKE-1730-2,3.11

Where this is not done , ill Customs are unavoidable , and hardly ever
after to be broke {COM:sic} . CLARKE-1730-2,3.12

All the Force of Reason and Eloquence from the Pulpit , or the Press ,
is seldom found sufficient to draw those from the Ways of Vanity and
Folly , that have had the Misfortune to be engaged in them from their
Childhood . CLARKE-1730-2,3.13

This shews the Necessity of an early Care of Youth , if you design they
should be of any Use in the World , either to themselves or their
Country . CLARKE-1730-2,3.14

Tho' the forming the Mind to Virtue is the main thing to be aimed at in
Education , yet it is not the only one : CLARKE-1730-2,3.15

Learning , or the Knowledge of Things , is another , and Skill in
Languages , at least the Latin , as an Introduction to it .
CLARKE-1730-2,3.16

This part is not only necessary , as being highly subservient to the
former , CLARKE-1730-2,3.17

but is of the greatest Use and Service in all <P_4> the most important
Stations of Human Life . CLARKE-1730-2,4.18

Virtue stands in need of Knowledge to direct ; CLARKE-1730-2,4.19

and a pious Disposition , when misguided by false Notions of Duty ,
serves oftentimes only to make a Man very mischievous in the World .
CLARKE-1730-2,4.20

The mistaken Zealot , the poor blind Bigot , is hurried on to Actions of
the most dreadful Consequence to the Peace and Happiness of Mankind ,
under the Notion of Duty , and to avoid the Penalty of eternal Damnation
; that the World has had but too much Reason in all Ages , to complain
in the Words of the Poet , <font> Tantum Religio {TEXT:Relligio} potuit
suadere Malorum ! <$$font> CLARKE-1730-2,4.21

And perhaps it will not be very easy to determine , whether a misguided
Zeal in Matters of Religion , or downright Profaneness , have done more
Mischief . CLARKE-1730-2,4.22

Nay , I can@ @not but think , that whoever will take an impartial Survey
of the History of this Part of the World , since the Destruction of the
Roman Empire , will find some Reason to be of Opinion , that Men have
suffered <P_5> more in their dearest Interests , by false Notions of
Religion , than by all the other Causes or Occasions of Human Misery put
together . CLARKE-1730-2,5.23

Besides , the Helps of Learning are necessary , as I said before , in
all the most important Stations of Human Life . CLARKE-1730-2,5.24

History , which , as a wise Man observes , ought to be the constant
Study of a Gentleman , how necessary is it for the Guidance and
Direction of the Statesman {TEXT:Staseman} and Politician ?
CLARKE-1730-2,5.25

Those narrow contracted Views of Mankind , he must needs have , that has
only his own Experience and Observation to go upon , will frequently
misguide him in Matters of the greatest Consequence , to the Peace ,
Strength , and Security of Kingdoms . CLARKE-1730-2,5.26

But he that keeps a constant Correspondence with the wisest and most
judicious Historians , both ancient and modern , will from thence
receive such a Knowledge of Men and Things , as will enable him to act
his Part to the Happiness and Glory of his Country , and his own Honour
. CLARKE-1730-2,5.27

The Law of Nature and Nations is another Branch of Literature ,
necessary for a Gentleman in a Publick Station : CLARKE-1730-2,5.28

And <P_6> as such Persons should not neglect any proper Means of
improving and enlarging their Capacities ; Modern Philosophy , I mean
the notional Part , together with the Mathematicks , will be highly
serviceable to that purpose . CLARKE-1730-2,6.29

Divinity is the common Concern of all Men . CLARKE-1730-2,6.30

And of what Use the Latin Tongue is , which is the common Language of
the learned World , is too obvious to be insisted on .
CLARKE-1730-2,6.31

Since therefore a right Method of Education is a Matter of the greatest
Importance , it is a Wonder to me , that amidst the great Variety of
Books the World is overcharged with , there should have appeared so very
few upon this Subject . CLARKE-1730-2,6.32

I know not of any in our Language that are worth the Perusal but Mr.
<font> Locke <$$font> 's , who has indeed acquitted himself upon this
Head with his usual Strength of Reason and Judgment , so far as he has
gone . CLARKE-1730-2,6.33

But as the the Business of Education is twofold , to rectify the Will ,
and enlighten the Understanding , he has been as full and particular
upon the former head as could well be desired ; but , in my Opinion ,
<P_7> deficient in the latter ; I mean , as to a Method of reading and
attaining the Languages . CLARKE-1730-2,7.34

The Reason of this great Silence upon the Subject , sure {COM:sic} is
not that a Publick Education is already carried to the highest Pitch it
is capable of ; far from it ! CLARKE-1730-2,7.35

The Vulgar Method that obtains in our Schools , is so miserably trifling
, that any one , who duly considers it , will have much ado to forbear
thinking , it has been contrived in Opposition to all the Rules of good
Method , on purpose to render the Learning of the Languages more tedious
than it needs to be : CLARKE-1730-2,7.36

How else were it possible for Boys of good Parts , to spend six or seven
Years in a Grammar-School , without attaining so much of the Latin
Tongue , as to make Sense of half-a-dozen Lines in the easiest of the
Classic Authors ? CLARKE-1730-2,7.37

This , which upon Enquiry will be found to be a very common Case , is ,
I imagine , sufficient to justify the ill Opinion several People have
conceived of that Way of Teaching , which is usually follow'd in our
Schools . CLARKE-1730-2,7.38

The great , and I think I may say , the only End , propounded both by
Parents <P_8> and Masters in the common Method , is the Instruction of
Youth in the Languages of Latin and Greek : CLARKE-1730-2,8.39

This {COM:sic} their whole Time is spent in at School ;
CLARKE-1730-2,8.40

and if a Boy can but shew a very moderate Skill in the Latin , by a Copy
of Verses , and a Theme , and make a shift to construe an easy Greek
Author indifferently , the Master thinks he has play'd his Part
sufficiently , CLARKE-1730-2,8.41

and the Father is very well satisfied with his Son's Proficiency .
CLARKE-1730-2,8.42

But how far short this is of what Boys might be brought to by the Age of
Sixteen or Seventeen , will appear , I hope , by the Sequel of this
Discourse . CLARKE-1730-2,8.43

For my part , I can@ @not but wonder , that when it is evident , a great
deal of useful Knowledge might be taught them at the same Time they
learn the Languages , that advantage should be so little regarded ; and
the learning of Words made their only Business during the best Part of
their Lives . CLARKE-1730-2,8.44

I shall need no Allowance , I think , for saying that Boys learn nothing
but Words , in the useful Method of the Schools ; CLARKE-1730-2,8.45

for a few Scraps of the Greek and Roman History , with as many of <P_9>
the Heathen Mythology , no Man of Sense , I believe , will look upon as
any great Accomplishment . CLARKE-1730-2,9.46

This , without a more perfect Acquaintance with those , as well as other
Things , is worse than none at all ; CLARKE-1730-2,9.47

and serves only to fill their Heads with a vain Conceit of themselves ,
CLARKE-1730-2,9.48

and renders them oftentimes Pedantick and impertinent , all the Days of
their Lives after . CLARKE-1730-2,9.49

It is not therefore bare Latin and Greek a Boy should spend his whole
Time in at School . CLARKE-1730-2,9.50

These must of Necessity go to the making of a Scholar ;
CLARKE-1730-2,9.51

but then there are other things as necessary , which School-Boys are not
only capable of , but may easily be taught , without any Hindrance to
their Proficiency in the tongues : CLARKE-1730-2,9.52

I mean History and Geography , both Ancient and Modern , with Chronology
, and the most necessary and useful Things in Divinity , &c.
CLARKE-1730-2,9.53

These , if a right Method was used with them , might be taught them , to
a greater Degree of Perfection than most Men of a Scholastick Education
, that apply themselves to Reading , ever attain to .
CLARKE-1730-2,9.54

And what a Byass , <P_10> what an Inclination for Books and Learning ,
it would give Boys , if they were to leave the School so furnished , I
need not say . CLARKE-1730-2,10.55

I shall therefore , in the first Place , present the Reader with a
Detail of those Faults and Blunders , I conceive the common Method is
chargeable with , and then proceed to lay down one of my own .
CLARKE-1730-2,10.56

The former I shall digest under the following Heads .
CLARKE-1730-2,10.57

I. The Beginning with Grammar , and that a Latin one so ill contriv'd
as Lily's is . CLARKE-1730-2,10.58

II. The want of proper Helps for the Reading of Latin .
CLARKE-1730-2,10.59

III. The want of proper Helps for the Writing and Speaking of it .
CLARKE-1730-2,10.60

IV. The want of due Order and Method in the Readings of Authors .
CLARKE-1730-2,10.61

V. The making Boys get their Lessons in the Poets without Book .
CLARKE-1730-2,10.62

VI. The putting them to too many several Things at the same Time .
CLARKE-1730-2,10.63

VII. The putting them upon Exercise above their Years or Improvement .
CLARKE-1730-2,10.64

VIII. The putting them upon Greek Exercise . CLARKE-1730-2,10.65

<P_11>

In all these Respects I imagine , the Common Method will be found to be
very faulty ; CLARKE-1730-2,11.67

and if it be , it will no longer appear a Wonder , Boys should advance
so very slowly , and after all , go away so meanly furnished as they do
, to the University , when they have so many Clogs and Incumbrances upon
them . CLARKE-1730-2,11.68

I. The First Fault I find with the Common Method of Teaching , is
<font> Beginning with Grammar <$$font> , and that a Latin one so ill
contrived as Lily's is ; whereas , after Boys have got the Declensions
of Nouns and Conjugations of Verbs perfectly without Book , they should
be immediately entered {TEXT:entred} in the Reading of Authors , and not
be troubled with any more of Grammar , till they have made such a
Progress , as to be able to read the easier Authors of the Latin Tongue
pretty familiarly . CLARKE-1730-2,11.69

I doubt not but a great many People will be shock'd at this , and look
upon it as a very preposterous Method of proceeding .
CLARKE-1730-2,11.70

I desire their Patience but a little , till they hear my Reasons for it
; CLARKE-1730-2,11.71

and then let them determine as they see Cause . CLARKE-1730-2,11.72

<P_12>

1. Boys have no Occasion for <font> Grammar <$$font> for the Reading
such Authors as are proper for Beginners , with the Help of <font>
Literal Translations <$$font> , such as they should be provided with ;
CLARKE-1730-2,12.74

and therefore , there is no Necessity {COM:missing_comma} however , for
their being troubled with any thing of Grammar so soon , besides the
Declensions and Conjugations . CLARKE-1730-2,12.75

It will be time enough , after they have , by Reading , gained some
Acquaintance with Latin Words , to inform them , how they are to put
them together , in order to the Writing and Speaking of Latin .
CLARKE-1730-2,12.76

2. It is not very practicable , I think , to bring a Boy to understand
<font> Grammar <$$font> tolerably well , or in any reasonable Time , by
making him read the Grammar only over and over again :
CLARKE-1730-2,12.77

And if he must not be entered {TEXT:entred} in his Authors , till he has
attained it either wholly , or in a good Measure that Way , I doubt he
will never come to read a Latin Author at all . CLARKE-1730-2,12.78

This is what every one that follows that Method must be very sensible of
from his own Experience . CLARKE-1730-2,12.79

And indeed the Practice of our Schools is a pretty good Proof , that
either the Teaching of <P_13> Grammar is mis-timed , by putting Boys too
soon upon it , before their Reason is ripe enough to deal with so
difficult a Subject ; or that the Way of doing it is not proper , or
both : CLARKE-1730-2,13.80

For Boys are every where put upon the Reading of Authors , before they
understand any thing at all almost of their Grammar , notwithstanding
the mighty Pains taken with them , by making them Construe and Parse it
over and over again . CLARKE-1730-2,13.81

The going through the Rules of the Syntax , just in the same Order they
lie in Lily , will never make them understand it . CLARKE-1730-2,13.82

No body was ever made Master of the Syntax that Way ,
CLARKE-1730-2,13.83

nor ever will . CLARKE-1730-2,13.84

The only proper Method for that Purpose , is , to furnish Boys with
Variety of proper English Examples to their Rules , for them to
translate into Latin , beginning with the easiest first , and advancing
by degrees to what is more Difficult . CLARKE-1730-2,13.85

This , with the Parsing their Lesson in the Authors they read , is the
only Means I know of , to bring them to the Knowledge and Practice of
their Syntax : CLARKE-1730-2,13.86

the Examples in the Grammar are far short of being sufficient for that
Purpose . CLARKE-1730-2,13.87

<P_14>

3. The Reading of Authors with <font> Literal Translations <$$font> ,
such as I have above taken notice of , our Schools should be furnished
with , employs nothing but Memory ; CLARKE-1730-2,14.89

and consequently is more suitable to the Capacity of a young Boy , than
the Understanding and Practice of Grammar Rules ; which require great
Application , Attention and Labour of Thought , and for that Reason
should be let alone , till the Mind has been ripened , and improved by
Reading . CLARKE-1730-2,14.90

In the Learning of any Thing , we ought to begin with what is easiest
first , and proceed , as much as may be , by insensible Steps of
Difference , to what is more difficult . CLARKE-1730-2,14.91

Thus the Mind may in Time be brought to master any Thing .
CLARKE-1730-2,14.92

To begin therefore the Learning of the Latin Tongue with the Practice of
Grammar Rules , is quite wrong : CLARKE-1730-2,14.93

And if People would but consider what a sorry Pittance of Grammar it is
that Boys attain to in four or five Years , at the best of our Schools ,
where the common Method of Teaching is followed , notwithstanding all
the Whipping and Spurring made use of to put them forward ; they would
find Reason <P_15> to think that Grammar is too difficult for Boys so
young . CLARKE-1730-2,15.94

And tho' I do not think it impracticable , to make a Boy of eight or
nine Years of Age a pretty good Master of his Syntax , in two Years , or
three however ; yet I can not {COM:sic} but think it much more
adviseable to defer it , till he can read an easy Latin Author ; because
then one fourth Part of the time will do it . CLARKE-1730-2,15.95

If he begins with Reading , and has the Help above-mentioned , he will
lose no Time , because his Business will have no Difficulty in it ;
CLARKE-1730-2,15.96

but if he must set out with Grammar , he infallibly will .
CLARKE-1730-2,15.97

The Mind of a Child of that Age is so little capable of the
Consideration and Reflection , necessary for the Understanding and
Practice of Grammar Rules ; that tho' he has all the Help that Art can
give him , yet his Work will go very heavily and slowly forward ; and
three Parts at least in four of his Time be lost , which might and would
be saved , if he was kept to what his Capacity is well enough fitted for
, and what is difficult deferr'd , till a greater Ripeness of Sense and
Understanding has duly prepared him for it . CLARKE-1730-2,15.98

<P_16>

But supposing it was necessary to begin with Grammar , yet why must the
Grammar needs be in Latin ! CLARKE-1730-2,16.100

What can be more ridiculous than to deliver Rules for the Learning of
any Thing , in a Language the Learner understands not ?
CLARKE-1730-2,16.101

This is such a palpable Piece of Absurdity , that I am perfectly at a
loss to imagine , what can be alledged in Vindication of it .
CLARKE-1730-2,16.102

If Boys must begin with Grammar , in the Name of Wisdom , what is the
Meaning of putting Rules upon them in a Language they are going to learn
, and consequently as yet know nothing of ? CLARKE-1730-2,16.103

Are you afraid they should understand , and make use of them too soon ?
CLARKE-1730-2,16.104

If not , why are they not in a Language they are acquainted with ? When
after all , you are forced to render them into that Language , before
they can be a Jot the better for them . CLARKE-1730-2,16.105

And here I appeal to any Man of common Sense , whether if he was to
learn the Hebrew Tongue , he would for that Purpose make use of a
Grammar writ in Hebrew . CLARKE-1730-2,16.106

If not , let him consider the Reason he has to reject such a Method
himself ; CLARKE-1730-2,16.107

and he must be a strange Man <P_17> indeed , if he does not see the
Absurdity of it in the Education of Children . CLARKE-1730-2,17.108

If he could not forbear thinking himself imposed upon , by a Master that
should pretend to teach him the Hebrew Tongue by such a Method ; who
instead of plain and easy Rules in a Language he understood , should put
into his Hands a Grammar writ all in Hebrew : I say , if in this Case he
could not forbear thinking himself mocked or imposed upon , and that his
Teacher's Design was to render his Progress as tedious as possible , for
his own Advantage ; he can@ @not , if he considers the Reason of it ,
but be sensible , how absurd it is to make use of such a Method in the
instructing of Children , less capable of mastering the Difficulties ,
and supplying by any Sense or Contrivance of their own , the Defects of
so absurd a Method , than Men are . CLARKE-1730-2,17.109

The committing of Rules to Memory is a Task unpleasant enough in it_self
, CLARKE-1730-2,17.110

and needs not to be rendred more so , by their being delivered in a
Language the Learner knows nothing of . CLARKE-1730-2,17.111

This can serve no other End or Purpose , than <P_18> only to give Boys
an Aversion for their Book . CLARKE-1730-2,18.112

They understand not the Latin Rule ; CLARKE-1730-2,18.113

but you@ @'ll say , by the Help of their Construing Book they may .
CLARKE-1730-2,18.114

No , I say , they can not {COM:sic} ; CLARKE-1730-2,18.115

they comprehend that Jumble of Latin and English Words in their
Construing Book no better than the Latin by it_self .
CLARKE-1730-2,18.116

This any one , that teaches Lily's Grammar , may quickly be satisfied of
by his own Experience . CLARKE-1730-2,18.117

Nothing will make them understand what the Latin Rule is to teach them ,
but the frequent inculcating it in plain English , join'd with a great
deal of Practice : CLARKE-1730-2,18.118

But this , it@ @'s manifest , will do best by it_self ;
CLARKE-1730-2,18.119

and therefore , all the Time spent in getting by Heart and construing
their Grammar Rules , is absolutely lost , since it contributes not one
Jot towards a Boy's Instruction in the Latin Tongue , but on the
contrary renders the Learning of the English Rules more tediously
abundantly , than they would be if delivered alone .
CLARKE-1730-2,18.120

I shall back what I have said on this Head with the Words of an Author
of great Note , who thus exposes the Custom of teaching Latin by a Latin
Grammar ; CLARKE-1730-2,18.121

{COM:french_quote_omitted}

<P_19>

That is , " Is it not evident that we ought to make use of what we
already know , for the Learning of what we do not ? And that it would
be a down-right Piece of Mockery , to give a French-man a Grammar writ
in High-German Verse , <P_20> in order to teach him that Language ?
CLARKE-1730-2,20.124

And yet we put into the Hands of Children the Latin Verses of
Despauterius , obscure with a witness for Children , who have much ado
to comprehend any thing , tho' never so easy . CLARKE-1730-2,20.125

Reason and Experience are both against this Custom .
CLARKE-1730-2,20.126

Since Children are in this Method of Instruction , a most tedious while
of learning a little Latin , and that but badly too ; nevertheless , it
will be thought Rashness in any one to condemn the Practice :
CLARKE-1730-2,20.127

And that which a Chinese could not hear without Laughing , is , in this
Part of the World we live in , approved , by the Wise and Learned . "
CLARKE-1730-2,20.128

<font> Monsieur Malebranch <$$font> 's Preface to the <font>
Eclaircissements <$$font> of his <font> Recherche de la Verité <$$font>
. CLARKE-1730-2,20.129

We are , it@ @'s true , furnished with an English Syntax in the
Accidence , CLARKE-1730-2,20.130

but to what purpose I know not ; since it is expected a Boy should learn
and make use of the Latin Syntax , before he can understand it , without
a construing Book . CLARKE-1730-2,20.131

If not , why has he a construing Book put into his Hands for that <P_21>
purpose ? CLARKE-1730-2,21.132

And there is no reason that I know of , why a Boy's Memory should be
burdened with two Syntaxes , any more than twenty .
CLARKE-1730-2,21.133

And should any Master depart so far from the vulgar Method of teaching ,
as to make use only of the English Rules in the Accidence , it would no
doubt be look'd upon as a very grand Defect , and expose him to suffer
in his Reputation and Interest for it . CLARKE-1730-2,21.134

But the Language of Lily's Grammar is not the only Objection that lies
against it ; CLARKE-1730-2,21.135

the ill Contrivance of it is another . CLARKE-1730-2,21.136

The Rules he gives for the Genders of Nouns , are too intricate and
puzzling for Boys . CLARKE-1730-2,21.137

The most proper and easy Way of proceeding would be to give Rules taken
from the Termination or Declension of Nouns , without any Regard to the
increasing or not increasing of the Genitive Case .
CLARKE-1730-2,21.138

As for <font> As in Praesenti <$$font> , it is a Part of the Grammar
wholly useless ; CLARKE-1730-2,21.139

for there Boys are directed to find the Supine <paren> which few Verbs
have <$$paren> by the Praeter-perfect Tense , and that by the
Conjugation ; for the finding of which , they neither have nor <P_22>
can have any Rules given them ; CLARKE-1730-2,22.140

that they must know from their Dictionary or the use of Authors ;
CLARKE-1730-2,22.141

but in the same Manner they may learn the Praeter-perfect Tense too .
CLARKE-1730-2,22.142

And therefore if Rules for that purpose are not wholly useless ; yet the
Benefit is so very inconsiderable , that it@ @'s never worth the Task
and Trouble of getting them without Book . CLARKE-1730-2,22.143

And Lily's wise Way of proceeding in this Part of his Grammar , is very
near a-kin to the Simplicity of the honest Country Fellow , who directed
a Gentleman that was a Stranger upon the Road , and ask'd his Way , to
go by his Father's Garth-End , and then by his Uncle Roger's Close .
CLARKE-1730-2,22.144

The Method of the Syntax is improper , for a Reason I have given in the
Preface to my <font> Introduction to making Latin <$$font> , which the
Reader may consult . CLARKE-1730-2,22.145

And if he will but give himself the trouble of comparing the Rules given
in that Book , with Lily's Syntax , he will , I presume , be convinced ,
the Method I have taken is preferable to that of Lily's .
CLARKE-1730-2,22.146

<P_23>

Tho' the Language and Contrivance of Lily's Grammar be a great Grievance
upon the Publick ; yet the Imprudence of those that make use of it ,
does really render it much greater than it is in it_self :
CLARKE-1730-2,23.148

for the common Custom is , to make the Boys construe their <font>
Propria quae maribus , Quae genus <$$font> , and <font> As in Praesenti
<$$font> , quite thro' , as tho' they could not possibly proceed aright
, without understanding the Signification of all the Words that are
brought in as Examples to , or Exceptions from , the Rules ; whereas the
Rules are all there@ @'s any Necessity for them at that time to
understand . CLARKE-1730-2,23.149

The Signification of Words will be learnt with more Ease and Delight ,
in the Reading of Latin Authors , CLARKE-1730-2,23.150

and is the only proper Way of learning them : CLARKE-1730-2,23.151

If not , why is not the Sense of all the other Words in the Latin Tongue
taught them after the same wise Manner , and Boys made Masters of their
Dictionary too , before they proceed to the Reading of Authors ?
CLARKE-1730-2,23.152

And tho' Boys may seem in such a Way of using their Grammar ; that is ,
construing up all before them , to enlarge <P_24> their Acquaintance
with the Latin Tongue , yet in Effect they do not , or at least not to
such a Degree as is answerable to the Time spent that Way .
CLARKE-1730-2,24.153

They can tell you indeed the English of the Words , if you let them take
them in Train , one after another , as they lie in their Grammar ;
CLARKE-1730-2,24.154

yet when they come to meet with them apart , in the Reading of Authors ,
especially in the oblique Cases , they rarely understand them .
CLARKE-1730-2,24.155

All this is applicable too to the Use of <font> Nomenclatures , <$$font>
or <font> Vocabularies <$$font> , so common in our Schools : A Practice
I judge something more ridiculous than the former ; CLARKE-1730-2,24.156

for here the Words are , for the most part , such as lie quite out of
the common Road of their Business , CLARKE-1730-2,24.157

and therefore are all absolutely forgotten in a very little time , after
those wonderful Books are laid aside . CLARKE-1730-2,24.158

I can@ @not imagine for my part , what People mean by the Use of such
Baubles ; CLARKE-1730-2,24.159

and till some body shall have the Goodness to inform me better , I shall
take the Liberty to set them down for one of those vain Amusements that
have been found out to make Boys spend their Time at School , to no
purpose . CLARKE-1730-2,24.160

<P_25>

After all , it is much easier to complain of the Grievance of Lily's
Grammar , than to remedy it . CLARKE-1730-2,25.162

Not that I look upon it as any great Difficulty to compile one more easy
, short , and compendious , and yet more full and compleat :
CLARKE-1730-2,25.163

I have already , I humbly conceive , done it in a great measure , in my
<font> Introduction to the making of Latin <$$font> ;
CLARKE-1730-2,25.164

but the Difficulty would be to prevail with our Masters to make use of
it . CLARKE-1730-2,25.165

Some , we may well suppose , would , after all that could be said for
their Conviction , remain prejudiced in favour of the Common Grammar ;
and upon that score be averse to any Innovation or Change .
CLARKE-1730-2,25.166

Others again , tho' glad enough to be fairly quit of Lily , yet would
not care to comply with the use of a New Grammar , unless it could be
generally established in our Schools , either by Authority , or common
Consent ; because of the Inconveniences apprehended from the use of
different Grammars in the different Schools . CLARKE-1730-2,25.167

Others again , that could well enough get over this Difficulty , would
be aw'd by the Objection of Singularity , and the fear of giving <P_26>
Offence to such Parents , as having had Lily whipp'd into them at School
, and therefore concluding that must {TEXT:musts} needs be very precious
, that cost them so very dear , much Money and Pains , with many a
bloody Bout , will not think their Sons have an Orthodox Education ,
unless they are taught by Lily's Grammar . CLARKE-1730-2,26.168

These Difficulties lie in the way of a New Grammar ,
CLARKE-1730-2,26.169

and great pity it is they should : CLARKE-1730-2,26.170

For all of that Kind necessary for Boys at School , besides their
Declensions and Conjugations , might be brought within the Compass of
one single Sheet of Paper , or two at the most ; which would with ease
be lodged in the Memory of a Child , of any tolerable Capacity , in a
Fortnight or three Weeks . Whereas Lily , when all the Time spent upon
him from first to last is brought to Account , will be found to cost the
Boys in most and the best Schools , two Years time at least , and in
many others a great deal more . CLARKE-1730-2,26.171

A flagrant Instance how much Mischief the well-meant Folly of one single
Man may do in the World ! CLARKE-1730-2,26.172

I would therefore propose it to the serious Consideration of all such
<P_27> as are intrusted with the Education of Youth , into whose hands
this little Treatise may come , whether or no it would not be very well
worth their while , turn much to their own Credit and Advantage , in the
speedy Progress of Youth under their Care , by saving a great deal of
time that is thrown away upon Lily to no purpose , to promote and
encourage the Design of substituting in the room of that Latin Trifle ,
<font> A Compendious , Methodical , Easy Grammar in English <$$font> .
CLARKE-1730-2,27.173

II. The next Objection against the common Method of Teaching , is , the
<font> Want of proper Helps for the Reading of Authors <$$font> , or
drawing Beginners over the first Difficulties of the Latin Tongue , and
bringing them to a familiar use of the easier Authors in that Language .
CLARKE-1730-2,27.174

By these Helps , I mean <font> Translations <$$font> , and those as
<font> Literal <$$font> as possible ; the great Advantage of which lies
so obvious to common Sense , and is so constantly made use of in the
teaching of other Languages , that it@ @'s a perfect Mystery it should
be overlook'd in the <P_28> teaching of Latin . CLARKE-1730-2,28.175

The common Method is , I think , in this Respect , compleatly ridiculous
. CLARKE-1730-2,28.176

For what miserable Pottering Work do the poor Boys make of it , every
where , for the first two or three Years , for want of this Help so easy
to be had , and so visibly necessary , that it@ @'s perfectly amazing
they should so long together have been unfurnished with it .
CLARKE-1730-2,28.177

It puts me in mind of a Reflection I have known made upon Schoolmasters
, that of all Men they are the greatest Bunglers in their Profession .
CLARKE-1730-2,28.178

And I should wish this Blunder in our Conduct , as well as several
others hereafter to be taken notice of , did not give too much Reason
for such a Censure . CLARKE-1730-2,28.179

The Way is , for the Master to construe the Boys their Lessons , while
they read Cordery and Aesop's Fables . CLARKE-1730-2,28.180

After the Reading of half_a_score Pages in each of these Books , they
are usually thought abundantly qualified to deal with Erasmus , by the
Help of a Dictionary , at least with some small Assistance of the Master
, in the most difficult Places . CLARKE-1730-2,28.181

By this means it comes to pass , that the poor Boys commonly spend one
half <P_29> of their Time , Morning and Afternoon , in poring over two
or three Lines , and teasing {TEXT:teazing} first one , and then another
of them , the Master , or some of their School-fellows , perpetually for
their Assistance , who might as well read a Page or more in the Time ,
with great Peace and quietness in their Seats , if they had but the Help
of a <font> Literal Translation <$$font> . CLARKE-1730-2,29.182

This , it@ @'s plain , would save both Master and Boys so much Trouble ;
would bring the latter so smoothly , and withal so very expeditiously ,
to the Reading of the Classicks , that it is the most unaccountable
thing in the World to me , our Schools should be without any Helps of
this Nature . CLARKE-1730-2,29.183

<font> Hool <$$font> has indeed translated Cordery and Aesop's Fables ,
CLARKE-1730-2,29.184

but then he has frequently departed from the Letter of the Latin <paren>
which the {TEXT:he} honest Man takes care to give the Reader notice of
in the Title-Page , for fear his Folly should be over-look'd <$$paren>
CLARKE-1730-2,29.185

and has by that means render'd his Translations in a great measure
useless . CLARKE-1730-2,29.186

Boys {TEXT:Boys'} only Business , when they first set forward in the
Reading of Authors , being to get acquainted with <P_30> the precise
Meaning , and proper Import of Latin Words , as fast as possible ,
<font> Translations <$$font> design'd for their Use must be <font>
Literal <$$font> , to answer that End ; CLARKE-1730-2,30.187

for otherwise they are so far from being serviceable to them , that they
lead them continually into Mistakes . CLARKE-1730-2,30.188

<font> Translations <$$font> have been thought so necessary for the
Attainment of the Greek Tongue , that for above these hundred_and_fifty
Years last past , no Authors in that Language have been published
without them . CLARKE-1730-2,30.189

This might , one would think , have naturally led the World to the
pursuit of the same Method , at least with the easier Authors of the
Latin Tongue , for the use of Schools . CLARKE-1730-2,30.190

For must it not needs appear to any considerate Man a little
unaccountable , that <font> Translations <$$font> should be thought
useful and necessary for Men or elder Boys , in order to their more easy
and speedy Progress in the Greek Tongue , but neither necessary , nor
useful , for younger Boys in the Attainment of the Latin ?
CLARKE-1730-2,30.191

Is it agreeable to Reason or common Sense , to suppose , a Boy of
sixteen or seventeen Years of Age stands in need of a Translation , to
<P_31> assist him in the reading of Greek , but that a Boy of ten or
twelve may do his business in the Latin Tongue easily and expeditiously
enough without any such help ? CLARKE-1730-2,31.192

Has a Child of that Age more Sense for the consulting and using a Latin
Dictionary , than he has for making use of a Greek Lexicon , when he is
arrived almost at the Years of Manhood ? CLARKE-1730-2,31.193

Besides , It@ @'s a mere {TEXT:meer} Jest to put Boys , so soon as is
usually done , upon getting their Lessons by the Dictionary .
CLARKE-1730-2,31.194

The looking for their Words does not only make a strange Consumption of
their time , supposing it would do their Business , CLARKE-1730-2,31.195

but , alas ! it will not . CLARKE-1730-2,31.196

They are perfectly bewilder'd in that Variety of Significations many
Words have , CLARKE-1730-2,31.197

and want Skill to make choice of such as are proper for their Purpose .
Whereas the Use of Literal Translations has no difficulty in it :
CLARKE-1730-2,31.198

That employs nothing but Memory : CLARKE-1730-2,31.199

Their Words are all ready at hand , CLARKE-1730-2,31.200

and they go smoothly forward , without any Rubs in their Way , or Loss
of Time ; and with a great deal of Satisfaction , to find their Business
so very easy . CLARKE-1730-2,31.201

<P_32>

All this is so undeniably plain , that I can@ @not forbear saying again
, That it is astonishing to me , our Schools should be to this day
without any Helps of this Kind : CLARKE-1730-2,32.203

Nay , so little sensible does the World appear of any thing amiss in
this Matter , that we hear no Complaints made of the Want of such Helps
. CLARKE-1730-2,32.204

Our Schools are very easy , CLARKE-1730-2,32.205

and our Masters proceed very quietly and contentedly , in a senseless
{TEXT:sensless} absurd Method of reading Authors , that with the Use of
Lily's Grammar , occasions the Loss of at least three of the four first
Years Boys spend at School . CLARKE-1730-2,32.206

For this , I think , a Man might safely venture his Reputation upon ,
That a Boy , by the Help of <font> Literal Translations <$$font> , would
do more in one Year , than without them he would in three or four .
CLARKE-1730-2,32.207

I have had Thoughts of attempting to remedy this vast Inconvenience , by
publishing some of the easier Authors in the Latin Tongue , with
Translations as Literal as possible , for the Use of Schools :
CLARKE-1730-2,32.208

And have accordingly publish'd <font> a select Century of Cordery's
Colloquies <$$font> , in that Method ; in which , because it is the Book
Boys commonly <P_33> begin with , and for that Reason at least , should
be made as easy as possible , the Order of the Latin Words is alter'd ,
and accommodated to the English Tongue , and the Words corresponding to
one another in the Latin and English Columns are in the same Characters
, the Roman and Italick being used alternately for the Purpose .
CLARKE-1730-2,33.209

If that relishes with the Publick and I find Encouragement , I shall ,
as my Business and Occasions permit , go on , and publish some of the
easier Classicks , with Translations . CLARKE-1730-2,33.210

III. The next Fault I find with the vulgar Method of Grammar Schools ,
is , <font> the Want of proper Helps for the Writing and Speaking of
Latin <$$font> . CLARKE-1730-2,33.211

The bringing Boys to read a Latin Author , has really no great
difficulty in it : CLARKE-1730-2,33.212

Furnish them but with proper Translations , and see they do not saunter
away their <P_34> Time , and you will find your Business done , much
sooner than without Tryal you would imagine . CLARKE-1730-2,34.213

But the bringing Boys to a true Latin Style , is really Matter of great
Difficulty , and the greatest of all Difficulties the Master has upon
his hands . CLARKE-1730-2,34.214

This requires Art and Method , and a great deal of Pains both from
Master and Scholar . CLARKE-1730-2,34.215

Whoever considers the vast Application the Romans themselves made use of
, to arrive at that Mastery in their own Language , we so much admire in
them ; will perhaps think it impossible for us now-a-days , who have no
other Way of Learning their Language , than from the Books they have
left behind them , to equal them and very difficult to come any thing
near them . CLARKE-1730-2,34.216

And it@ @'s so rare to meet with a Man that has attain'd a true genuine
Roman Style , that it@ @'s no wonder Boys go away from School so very
deficient in that Qualification . CLARKE-1730-2,34.217

It is not the Reading twenty or thirty Pages in two or three of the
Latin Classicks in Prose , with the Scribbling {TEXT:Scribling} a few
Lines of Latin Exercise every Night , by the help of a Dictionary , such
as we are yet <P_35> furnished with however , will do the Business .
CLARKE-1730-2,35.218

The Latin is a large copious Language , that abounds with Variety of
Words , very various in their Significations : CLARKE-1730-2,35.219

And to imagine that boys should make any tolerable Acquaintance with
them , in that poor Pittance of the Classick Authors in Prose <paren>
from which alone they are to learn a Style <$$paren> is a Jest that can
never enter into the Head of any Man of Understanding , that considers
the Matter . CLARKE-1730-2,35.220

Another Thing there is too , which renders the Attainment of Latin Style
Matter of great difficulty , CLARKE-1730-2,35.221

and that is , the Way and Manner of Expression in that Language , which
is so widely different from that of our own , that hardly any thing in
either Language is capable of being literally , and at the same time
handsomely and elegantly , translated into the other .
CLARKE-1730-2,35.222

And tho' from a Comparison of the Idiom of both Languages , it be
possible to give the Learner some Help in this Matter by Rules ; yet
those will reach but a very little way , CLARKE-1730-2,35.223

and after all , the Propriety of the Latin Tongue is no other ways to be
attain'd , than by <P_36> a careful attentive Perusal of the best
Authors , and Writing and Speaking as much as possible in imitation of
them . CLARKE-1730-2,36.224

The first Step towards the Attainment of a Latin Style , should be a
collection of proper <font> English Examples <$$font> , for the Reducing
the Latin Syntax to Practice . CLARKE-1730-2,36.225

I did not know of any such , when I publish'd my <font> Introduction to
the Making of Latin <$$font> ; CLARKE-1730-2,36.226

if I had , I should have been glad to have saved my_self that Trouble .
CLARKE-1730-2,36.227

The Reader has , in the Preface to that Book , the Reasons why I could
not be satisfy'd with any thing I had met with in that Way , which I
shall not repeat here . CLARKE-1730-2,36.228

And if I have not succeeded better in that Undertaking , than others
that went before me ; we are , I doubt , still destitute of a proper
help , for the bringing Boys easily and expeditiously to the Practice of
their Grammar Rules ; CLARKE-1730-2,36.229

and something further must be contrived for that purpose .
CLARKE-1730-2,36.230

But the Reception this Book has met with from the Publick gives me some
reason to suppose , I have been so fortunate as to succeed better
therein , than others that have gone before me , because <P_37> it has
some time ago come to a <font> sixth Edition <$$font> .
CLARKE-1730-2,37.231

After Boys have done with their English Examples , it is usual to put
them to the Translation of <font> Galtruchius <$$font> 's <font> Heathen
Gods <$$font> , or the <font> Pantheon <$$font> , Books proper enough
for the purpose , if they were but made use of , as they should be :
CLARKE-1730-2,37.232

but here again I can@ @not but look upon the common Method to be very
faulty . CLARKE-1730-2,37.233

Boys are left to make their Latin by the Dictionary ;
CLARKE-1730-2,37.234

but were our Dictionaries as well contrived as they are otherwise , it
would be impossible for Boys so young to make use of them :
CLARKE-1730-2,37.235

Much less can they make use of such sort of English-Latin Dictionaries
as we yet have , without Blundering perpetually in the Choice of their
Words . CLARKE-1730-2,37.236

I am sure it is a fair Wager or two to one against them , they chuse
amiss , almost every time they have occasion to consult their Dictionary
. CLARKE-1730-2,37.237

To leave them therefore to the Use of that so soon , is the Way to spoil
them , by filling their Heads with infinite Mistakes , as to the proper
Import and Signification of Words . CLARKE-1730-2,37.238

The Master must be at the pains to supply them with the <P_38> Words
they want , CLARKE-1730-2,38.239

and for that purpose should read them at least one Lesson every Day , in
the Book they use for Exercise , into Latin ; which they must go over
again amongst themselves , till they are perfect in it .
CLARKE-1730-2,38.240

This Method is to be pursued , till they have got a pretty good
Acquaintance with Words , and can acquit themselves tolerably well in
the Translation of the Pantheon , or any such plain easy Book . After
which , the most proper Way of proceeding with them , in my Opinion ,
will be to make them translate some easy Author ; such as Caesar ,
Justin , or Cornelius Nepos , by way of Exercise in the Evenings , and
oblige them to get their Translations to read back again into the very
Original Latin of their Author : CLARKE-1730-2,38.241

Thus they will kill two Birds with one Stone , improve in both Languages
at once , and by seeing the Idiom of the Latin and English go constantly
together , make a much greater Progress in Style , than will easily be
imagined by one that has not tried this Method . CLARKE-1730-2,38.242

But then you must not let them put you off with a bald Literal
Translation , but oblige them to turn <P_39> their Author into proper
English ; for which purpose some Rules and Directions may be given them
, which will easily enough offer themselves to any one that will be at
the pains to exercise himself in Translation now and then ; or compare
any good Translation of a Classick Author with the Original .
CLARKE-1730-2,39.243

I would advise the Master to help them a little at first setting out in
this way , by reading them their Author into proper English , tho' with
as little Variation too from the Letter of the Latin as is consistent
with a tolerable English Stile . CLARKE-1730-2,39.244

As they improve in each Language by this Exercise , they may take more
Liberty ; till at last they must be left to their utmost Freedom in
their Way of Expression , provided they keep but up to the Sense of
their Author ; CLARKE-1730-2,39.245

for that any one must do , to make a right good Translation of any Latin
Author . CLARKE-1730-2,39.246

Another Help wanting for the due and speedy Improvement of Youth in the
Writing and Speaking of Latin , is a <font> Good Set of Latin Dialogues
, upon all the usual Topicks of common Conversation , with a proper
English Translation <$$font> ; <P_40> not for the understanding them ,
for I propose not this ; but for the use of such Boys as have made some
progress in Reading of Authors , and are therefore capable of
understanding such a Book pretty well without Help .
CLARKE-1730-2,40.247

But I would have them read their Translation into Latin .
CLARKE-1730-2,40.248

This would bring them on apace towards Style , and be of other kind of
use to their Speaking of Latin , than their talking barbarously among
themselves ; which is the Way , forsooth ! of bringing Boys to the
Speaking of Latin in some Schools , but , in my mind , a very strange
one , unless the talking badly with those that can@ @not inform them
better , can be supposed to be the Way to talk well .
CLARKE-1730-2,40.249

There is no properer Method of improving in any Language , for those
that already have a Smattering in it , than Conversation with such as
talk it well ; and on the other hand , nothing worse than Conversation
with those that talk it but badly . CLARKE-1730-2,40.250

Boys therefore must not be put upon this Task of Speaking Latin , till
they can write it pretty well , and are Judges of the Latin Idiom ; that
is to say , in almost all Schools never at all . CLARKE-1730-2,40.251

<P_41>

When Boys have attained to something of a Mastery in the easier
Classicks , then , instead of Reading the Latin Prose Authors into
English , I think it would be proper to make them read the best
Translation of them that are Publick , into Latin ; I mean that of the
Authors themselves , by making them read the Original and Translation
together , till they can render the latter into the former exactly .
CLARKE-1730-2,41.253

In this Way of Proceeding , they will have these three great Advantages
. 1. Of Understanding their Latin Authors more compleatly , and more
readily than they could do without the Translation . 2. Of Improving
in the English tongue , whilst they are getting the Latin , and that
perhaps in the most proper Way that could be thought of . and 3. Of
Attaining much quicker to an Imitation of the Stile of the best Authors
in the Latin Tongue , than they would do by reading the Originals alone
. CLARKE-1730-2,41.254

All which is so very visible , that I think I need not enlarge upon this
Head . CLARKE-1730-2,41.255

IV. A fourth Objection against the usual Way of Proceeding in our
Schools , <P_42> is , <font> The Want of due Order and Method in the
Reading of Authors : <$$font> CLARKE-1730-2,42.256

For when Boys are thought fit to be enter'd in the Classicks , they
commonly begin with the Poets ; some with <font> Ovid de Tristibus
<$$font> , some with his <font> Metamorphoses <$$font> , and some with
both ; a very great Absurdity certainly : CLARKE-1730-2,42.257

For none sure that know what Poetry means , can make a doubt of it ,
whether the Style of Prose be not ordinarily more easy than that of the
Poets . CLARKE-1730-2,42.258

<font> Horace <$$font> , I am sure , tells us as much , when he says a
Poet is one <font> Ingenium cui sit , cui mens divinior atque os Magna
sonaturum . <$$font> For which Reason he says in the same Place ,
<font> Primum ego me illorum dederis quibus esse Poetas Excerpam numero
, neque enim concludere versum Dixeris esse satis , neque si quis
scribit uti nos Sermoni propiora , putes hunc esse Poetam ? <$$font>
CLARKE-1730-2,42.259

<P_43>

The Style of his Satyrs he makes account is so low , so much beneath the
Loftiness peculiar to Poetry , that he thinks they do not deserve the
Name . CLARKE-1730-2,43.261

And yet if I say they are more difficult than the Roman Historians , I
believe there are few acquainted with both , but what will easily agree
with me . CLARKE-1730-2,43.262

But what need is there of Authority in the Case ? CLARKE-1730-2,43.263

Let any one dip into a Poet and an Historian at the same time , and
compare the first Passage he lights on together , CLARKE-1730-2,43.264

and it will give him full Satisfaction , if he wants it .
CLARKE-1730-2,43.265

The one abounds with Figure , CLARKE-1730-2,43.266

and the whole Turn of his Expression is quite out of the common Road ,
while the Historian generally delivers his Mind in proper Terms , and in
a Way and Manner agreeable to common Conversation .
CLARKE-1730-2,43.267

In short , they have so visibly the Advantage of the Poets , with
respect to Perspicuity and Plainness of Stile , that I can@ @not but
wonder how the latter came to take place of the former , in the common
Method of the Schools . CLARKE-1730-2,43.268

This looks something like teaching young Children to stand upon their
Hands , before they know how to make use of their Legs .
CLARKE-1730-2,43.269

<P_44>

Nor is this all : CLARKE-1730-2,44.271

I have another Reason why Boys ought to read Prose well , before they
meddle with the Poets ; which is this , that it will not only be useful
, but necessary to teach them a proper Latin Style :
CLARKE-1730-2,44.272

For the Reading of the Poets can do them no Kindness in this Respect ,
but rather a great deal of Hurt ; if they are not well acquainted with
Prose first . CLARKE-1730-2,44.273

For the Style of Poetry is so remote from the vulgar Manner of
Expression , that to imitate it in Prose , would be the most ridiculous
thing in the World ; CLARKE-1730-2,44.274

and he should be sure to set every body a laughing at him , that should
pretend to write a History in the Strain of Virgil's Aeneid , or
Horace's Lyricks . CLARKE-1730-2,44.275

To prevent therefore their confounding those two different Styles , it
will be necessary to make them read the Historians well in the first
place : CLARKE-1730-2,44.276

By so doing , they will learn the genuine and proper Signification of
Words , and use them accordingly : CLARKE-1730-2,44.277

They will not be misled by the figurative Use of Words , Phraseology ,
and Forms of Construction proper only for Poetry ; CLARKE-1730-2,44.278

nor need they fear to imitate <P_45> the Language of their Authors :
CLARKE-1730-2,45.279

Whereas , in the Reading of the Poets , the Case would be quite
otherwise ; CLARKE-1730-2,45.280

there they could borrow nothing , without rendering their Style very
bombastick and ridiculous . CLARKE-1730-2,45.281

V. Another Oversight in the common Method of Teaching , is <font>
making Boys get their Lessons in the Poets without Book <$$font> .
CLARKE-1730-2,45.282

If this be proper , why is it not equally so , to take the same Method
with them in Prose , and make them commit to Memory every Lesson they
read there too ? CLARKE-1730-2,45.283

But if this be absurd , as I suppose every body will readily grant , why
is not the other so too ? CLARKE-1730-2,45.284

For what is it that Boys do in getting any thing without book , but
learn the Order of the Words ? For Instance , in <font> Tityre tu
patulae , &c. <$$font> that Virgil has put <font> Tityre <$$font>
before <font> tu <$$font> , and <font> tu <$$font> before <font> patulae
<$$font> , and so forth ; CLARKE-1730-2,45.285

and where is the Benefit of this , I wonder , that a Boy must needs be
made to charge his Memory with the precise Order of the Words , in every
Lesson he reads in Poetry ? CLARKE-1730-2,45.286

Indeed wherever any Passage occurs <P_46> either in Prose or Verse that
is finely turn'd , and carries a Sense along with it proper for frequent
Meditation or Reflection , there it may be of good Use to make the Boys
get it without book , because by this means they have the Sense compleat
, without any Diminution ; CLARKE-1730-2,46.287

and the thing is rendered more moving and affecting , by the Fineness
and Beauty of the Expression . CLARKE-1730-2,46.288

But where their Lessons have nothing of this kind to recommend them , I
would fain know to what purpose their getting them without book can
serve , but to hinder their Progress in reading ; CLARKE-1730-2,46.289

for they will sooner get three or fourscore Lines to construe , than
twenty to say without book : CLARKE-1730-2,46.290

and he must be a strange Man , I should think , that does not see the
former will contribute vastly more to a Boy's Improvement , than the
latter . CLARKE-1730-2,46.291

But as Mr. <font> Locke <$$font> has very well exposed this simple
Custom , in his Thoughts of Education , and has said all upon the Point
that I think can well be said , I shall , I hope , oblige my Reader much
more by presenting him with the Words of that great Master of <P_47>
Education , than by enlarging my_self upon the Matter .
CLARKE-1730-2,47.292

They are as follows . CLARKE-1730-2,47.293

{COM:quotation_omitted}

<P_53>

VI. Another thing that in the common Method of our Schools proves a
great Impediment to the Progress of Boys , is , <font> The putting them
on too many several things at the same Time <$$font> .
CLARKE-1730-2,53.296

Thus 't@ @is usual for them to be engaged in the Reading of half_a_dozen
Authors , or more , and almost as many several sorts of Exercise at once
. CLARKE-1730-2,53.297

Nay , I know a publick School , and in no obscure Place , where the Boys
, by that time they reach Virgil , are plyed with such a Multiplicity of
Authors , that <font> poor Virgil <$$font> takes his turn but for one
Lesson a Week <P_54> amongst them : A most admirable Method , to be sure
, to make Boys understand that admirable Author ! CLARKE-1730-2,54.298

I am clearly of Opinion , that such a Man deserves more to be whipt for
his Folly , than any Boy he teaches . CLARKE-1730-2,54.299

Would not any one be thought half crazed , that should pretend to carry
on his Studies in so confused a manner , by engaging in ten or a_dozen
Authors at a time ? CLARKE-1730-2,54.300

And shall that be a proper Method to be taken with Boys , that would
pass for little less than Madness in a Man ? CLARKE-1730-2,54.301

I could never yet hear any Reason alledged for this wonderful way of
proceeding . CLARKE-1730-2,54.302

What occasion can Boys have for any more Author than one at once , till
they begin with the Greek Tongue ? CLARKE-1730-2,54.303

And then one Greek , and one Latin , or two at the most , will be enough
in all conscience . CLARKE-1730-2,54.304

Where Boys are perplexed and confounded with so much Variety , things
take not their turn in the Mind often enough , for the speedy and
thorough fixing them there ; CLARKE-1730-2,54.305

but one Impression is quite effaced and worn out , before it is revived
anew ; CLARKE-1730-2,54.306

and so becomes as difficult for the Mind to retain , as if it <P_55> had
never made its Appearance there before . Whereas , in the use of but
one single Author at a time , the same Words and Forms of Expression
will return more frequently , and quicker upon them , and by that means
stick sooner by them , than they would do , in the use of several
Authors in different Styles , and upon different Subjects .
CLARKE-1730-2,55.307

The same Reason holds against so much Variety in the Exercise they are
put upon ; CLARKE-1730-2,55.308

Translations English , or Latin , or both , Epistles , Themes , and
Verses , are frequently jumbled all together within the Compass of a
Week . CLARKE-1730-2,55.309

But sure the most regular Way would be , to hold them to the Translation
of English into Latin , till they have perfectly master'd their Rules ,
and got some tolerable Acquaintance with Words , and after that to
proceed to the Translation of Latin into English ; with which you may
now and then intermix Dialogues and Epistles , for these are in effect ,
as to Matter and Language , much the same : and after they are , by
these and the other Methods I have proposed , brought to something of
Style , to advance them to Themes and <P_56> Verses , laying all other
Exercise aside , either wholly , or in a great measure , as you must do
, if you think it practicable to make all Boys that are capable of
learning the Languages , Orators and Poets , and resolve to have them
such . CLARKE-1730-2,56.310

But the putting Boys too soon to the Reading of <font> Greek <$$font> ,
is , I think , one of the great Grievances of the common Method .
CLARKE-1730-2,56.311

It is very frequent to enter them in the <font> Greek Grammar <$$font> ,
before they have Skill enough in Latin to understand the Rules of it ,
than which nothing can be more ridiculous . CLARKE-1730-2,56.312

This is design'd sure to impose upon the Parents , by making them
believe their Sons are wonderful Scholars , rather than for the
Childrens' {TEXT:Childrens} Improvement . CLARKE-1730-2,56.313

The Father <P_57> oftentimes understands not so much as the Character of
that Language : CLARKE-1730-2,57.314

And how can he chuse but take his Son for a downright Conjurer , when he
finds him able to read a Book he can@ @not tell a Letter in , to his
great astonishment ? CLARKE-1730-2,57.315

