<BEGIN_cobbett-1838-2>

<P_140>

<heading>

CHAPTER VI . COBBETT-1838-2,140.4

<$$heading>

<font> Fruits . Propagation , Planting , Training and Pruning , whether
wall-trees , espaliers , or standards , with an Alphabetical List of the
several Fruits , and with observations on the Diseases of Fruit-trees .
<$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,140.6

200 . All the fruits to be treated of here , with the exception of the
cranberry , the melon , and the strawberry , are the produce of <font>
trees <$$font> , or of <font> woody plants . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,140.7

In treating of them I shall pursue the following course : first , give
instructions as to the propagation , next as to the planting , next as
to the training and pruning ; COBBETT-1838-2,140.8

next I shall give the list of fruits ; COBBETT-1838-2,140.9

and lastly , I shall make some remarks on the nature and tendency of the
diseases of fruit-trees , and on the remedies proper to be applied .
COBBETT-1838-2,140.10

<heading>

PROPAGATION . COBBETT-1838-2,140.12

<$$heading>

201 . All fruit-trees , from the loftiest cherry down to the gooseberry
, may be propagated by <font> seed ; <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,140.14

and this would be the proper way ; COBBETT-1838-2,140.15

but nature has so contrived it that the seed of fruit-trees will not
bring trees to produce the same sort of fruit , except by mere accident
; so that gardeners are compelled , in order to ensure the sort of fruit
which they wish to have , to raise the trees from <font> some part or
other of the wood <$$font> of the tree the like of which they wish to
have . COBBETT-1838-2,140.16

The several parts of the wood taken and used for this purpose , are
SLIPS , LAYERS , CUTTINGS , and BUDS . COBBETT-1838-2,140.17

The different methods of propagation suited to each kind will be
mentioned under the name of the kinds respectively in the alphabetical
list , which will form a part of this present chapter .
COBBETT-1838-2,140.18

In this place , therefore , I am to describe the several methods
generally , and the general management suited to each .
COBBETT-1838-2,140.19

202 . SLIPS are little branches of one or two years' growth , pulled
off from a limb or larger branch of the tree by a downward jerk of the
hand . COBBETT-1838-2,140.20

You then take a sharp knife , COBBETT-1838-2,140.21

trim off the ragged <P_141> bark from the bottom of the slip ,
COBBETT-1838-2,141.22

and cut the tip of the slip off at the same time , leaving the slip
altogether to be about a foot long . COBBETT-1838-2,141.23

The time of the year for taking off slips is about the beginning of
March ; COBBETT-1838-2,141.24

and if it were a little earlier it might be as well .
COBBETT-1838-2,141.25

You then plant them as you would a little tree , but three or four
inches deep in the ground , and in a <font> shady place ; <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,141.26

a most convenient place for purposes of this sort would be near the
hedge on the south side of the garden . COBBETT-1838-2,141.27

They should be put in a row or rows about eighteen inches apart , and
about a foot apart in the row . COBBETT-1838-2,141.28

In this situation they will make shoots in the summer , and make roots .
COBBETT-1838-2,141.29

They should be watered a little at the time of planting , and
occasionally a little in the spring and summer , until they have shoots
two or three inches long . COBBETT-1838-2,141.30

There are many sorts of apples that will admit of propagation in this
way , as quinces also will ; COBBETT-1838-2,141.31

and the common codling apple may be raised in this manner with the
gratest facility . COBBETT-1838-2,141.32

In a very dry and hot season , it may not be amiss to lay a little
litter upon the ground in which the slips are planted in order to keep
it cool . COBBETT-1838-2,141.33

203 . LAYERS . COBBETT-1838-2,141.34

- You take a limb or branch of a tree in the fall , or <font> early
<$$font> in spring , or at Midsummer , COBBETT-1838-2,141.35

and pull it down in such a way as to cause its top , or small shoots and
twigs , to lie upon the ground . COBBETT-1838-2,141.36

Then <font> fasten <$$font> the limb down by a peg or two , so that its
own force will not raise it up . COBBETT-1838-2,141.37

Then prune off all the small branches and shoots that stick upright ;
COBBETT-1838-2,141.38

and having a parcel of shoots lying horizontally , <font> lay <$$font>
earth upon the whole , all along upon the limb from the point where it
begins to touch the ground , and also upon all the <font> bottoms of all
the shoots : <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,141.39

Then cut the shoots off at the points , leaving only two or three joints
or buds beyond the earth . COBBETT-1838-2,141.40

The earth laid on should be <font> good <$$font> , COBBETT-1838-2,141.41

and the ground should be fresh digged and made very fine and smooth
before the branches be laid upon it . COBBETT-1838-2,141.42

The earth laid on should be from six inches to a foot thick .
COBBETT-1838-2,141.43

If the limb or mother branch be very <font> stubborn <$$font> , a little
cut on the upper side of it will make it more easy to be held down .
COBBETT-1838-2,141.44

The ground should be kept clean from weeds , and as cool as possible in
hot weather . COBBETT-1838-2,141.45

Perhaps rocks or stones <paren> not large <$$paren> are the best and
coolest covering . COBBETT-1838-2,141.46

These layers will be ready to take up and plant out as trees after they
have been laid a year . COBBETT-1838-2,141.47

In cases where the branches intended to be laid can@ @not be bent down
sufficiently near to the ground without danger of breaking them off , a
box of earth or a pan with notches in the sides to <P_142> lay the
branch in may be used . COBBETT-1838-2,142.48

Vines may , by means of pots with opening sides , be laid as they are
growing in the grapery or against the wall ; COBBETT-1838-2,142.49

and this is frequently done by the gardeners as matter of curiosity
mixed with utility . COBBETT-1838-2,142.50

They lay a shoot in this manner in the spring , COBBETT-1838-2,142.51

and when it has rooted and is in full bearing in the fall , they cut it
off immediately below the pot , COBBETT-1838-2,142.52

and produce at table a growing tree covered with ripe fruit .
COBBETT-1838-2,142.53

The earth however , in boxes , or pans , or pots , being in small bodies
, necessarily dries up sooner than when not so ; COBBETT-1838-2,142.54

and therefore when this method of laying is adopted , great care must be
taken to water constantly , so as to keep up the required moisture .
COBBETT-1838-2,142.55

And not only does the limb require this moisture to make it root , but ,
when rooted , the young roots require it to keep them alive .
COBBETT-1838-2,142.56

To cause the limb to put forth roots , it is a common practice to prick
it nearly through in two or three directions , at one of the joints that
are to be buried under_ground ; or to cut a notch nearly half way
through the limb . COBBETT-1838-2,142.57

At these wounds , matter oozes out which quickly causes the putting
forth of young roots . COBBETT-1838-2,142.58

204 . CUTTINGS are short pieces cut from trees in the month of February
. COBBETT-1838-2,142.59

You take a shoot of the last year , COBBETT-1838-2,142.60

and cut it off with a small piece of the preceding year's wood at the
bottom of it , if that be convenient . COBBETT-1838-2,142.61

The shoot should be a sound and strong one , COBBETT-1838-2,142.62

and it is not <font> absolutely necessary <$$font> that it should have a
piece of the preceding year's wood . COBBETT-1838-2,142.63

The cutting should have , altogether , about six joints or buds ,
COBBETT-1838-2,142.64

and three of these should be under_ground when planted .
COBBETT-1838-2,142.65

The cutting should be fixed firmly in the ground , COBBETT-1838-2,142.66

and the cuts should be performed with a sharp knife , so that there may
be nothing ragged or bruised about the bark . COBBETT-1838-2,142.67

As to situation , watering , and the rest , follow precisely the
directions given in the case of the slips . COBBETT-1838-2,142.68

Currants and gooseberries , some apples , and a great number of
flowering shrubs , are universally propagated from cuttings .
COBBETT-1838-2,142.69

205 . BUDS are little pieces taken out from the side of a shoot in the
summer , containing a newly-@ @formed bud , which is fixed into the side
of a branch growing upon another tree ; COBBETT-1838-2,142.70

but as buds will be more fully described when I come to the act of
budding , nothing more is necessary upon the subject in this place .
COBBETT-1838-2,142.71

206 . STOCKS . COBBETT-1838-2,142.72

- The general way of obtaining fruit-trees of the larger kinds is by
<font> grafting <$$font> or <font> budding <$$font> ;
COBBETT-1838-2,142.73

and this grafting or budding is performed by putting cuttings or buds
upon other trees . COBBETT-1838-2,142.74

<P_143> They may be put upon large trees , which are already bearing ;
so that , by these arts , you may have numerous sorts of fruit upon the
same tree ; COBBETT-1838-2,143.75

but , what I am to treat of here is the manner of raising young trees ;
COBBETT-1838-2,143.76

and , to have these , there must be stocks previously prepared to
receive the grafts or the buds ; COBBETT-1838-2,143.77

therefore , I now proceed to {TEXT:spurious_open_quote} give directions
for the making of this previous preparation or provision .
COBBETT-1838-2,143.78

Under the name of the different fruits , I shall speak of the sort of
stocks suitable to each ; COBBETT-1838-2,143.79

but I may observe here , that the stocks for apples are crabs , or
apples ; that the stocks for pears are pears , quinces , or hawthorn ;
and that the stocks for peaches and nectarines are plums , peaches ,
nectarines , or almonds ; that the stocks for apricots are plums or
apricots : that the stocks for plums are plums ; that the stocks for
cherries are cherries ; and that the stocks for medlars or pears are
hawthorn . COBBETT-1838-2,143.80

In many of the cases , stocks may be raised from suckers ,
COBBETT-1838-2,143.81

and they are so raised ; COBBETT-1838-2,143.82

but never ought to be so raised . COBBETT-1838-2,143.83

Suckers are shoots that come up out of the ground , starting from the
roots of trees , COBBETT-1838-2,143.84

and are very abundant from pears and plums , and sometimes from cherries
. COBBETT-1838-2,143.85

They run to wood , COBBETT-1838-2,143.86

and produce suckers themselves in abundance , which trees do not that
are raised from seeds , cuttings , or layers . COBBETT-1838-2,143.87

Suckers , therefore , never ought to be used to graft or bud upon ;
COBBETT-1838-2,143.88

for if you graft a pear , for instance , upon a pear sucker , the tree
begins to send out suckers almost immediately ; COBBETT-1838-2,143.89

and , in America , where this hasty and lazy practice prevails , I have
seen a pear orchard with all the ground covered with underwood forming a
sort of coppice . COBBETT-1838-2,143.90

I will therefore say no more about suckers , but proceed now to the
proper mode of obtaining stocks , first speaking of those which are to
be obtained from the <font> pips <$$font> , and then of those which are
to be obtained from the stones . COBBETT-1838-2,143.91

The pips of crabs , apples , pears , and quinces , are obtained from the
fruit ; the three former in great abundance , when cider , perry , or
verjuice , is made ; the last with some difficulty , on account of the
comparative rareness of the fruit , COBBETT-1838-2,143.92

but quince stocks are so easily obtained from cuttings or layers , that
this is not a matter of much consequence . COBBETT-1838-2,143.93

The pips are , of course , collected in the fall of the year ;
COBBETT-1838-2,143.94

and , when collected , make them dry , COBBETT-1838-2,143.95

put them immediately into fine dry earth or sand , COBBETT-1838-2,143.96

and keep them safe from mice until the month of March .
COBBETT-1838-2,143.97

When that month comes , dig a piece of ground well and truly ;
COBBETT-1838-2,143.98

make it rich ; COBBETT-1838-2,143.99

make it very fine , COBBETT-1838-2,143.100

form it into beds three feet wide , COBBETT-1838-2,143.101

<P_144> draw drills across it at eight inches' distance ,
COBBETT-1838-2,144.102

make them from two to three inches deep , COBBETT-1838-2,144.103

put in the seeds pretty thickly , COBBETT-1838-2,144.104

cover them completely , COBBETT-1838-2,144.105

tread the earth down upon them ; COBBETT-1838-2,144.106

and then smooth the surface . COBBETT-1838-2,144.107

When the plants come up , thin them to about three inches apart ;
COBBETT-1838-2,144.108

and keep the ground between them perfectly clean during the summer .
COBBETT-1838-2,144.109

Hoe frequently ; but <font> not deep near the plants ; <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,144.110

for we are speaking of <font> trees <$$font> here ;
COBBETT-1838-2,144.111

and trees do not renew their roots so quickly as a cabbage or a turnip
does . COBBETT-1838-2,144.112

These young trees should be kept during the first summer as <font> moist
<$$font> as possible , without watering ; COBBETT-1838-2,144.113

and the way to keep them as moist as possible is to keep the ground
perfectly clean and to hoe it frequently . COBBETT-1838-2,144.114

I can@ @not help observing here , upon an observation of Mr. Marshall :
COBBETT-1838-2,144.115

" As to <font> weeding , " <$$font> says he , " though seedling trees
must not be <font> smothered <$$font> , yet some <font> small <$$font>
weeds may be suffered to grow in the summer , as they help to <font>
shade <$$font> the plants and to keep the ground <font> cool . "
COBBETT-1838-2,144.116

<$$font> Mercy on this gentleman's readers ! COBBETT-1838-2,144.117

Mr. Marshall had not read Tull ; COBBETT-1838-2,144.118

if he had , he never would have written this very erroneous sentence .
COBBETT-1838-2,144.119

It is the root of the weed that does the mischief .
COBBETT-1838-2,144.120

Let there be a rod of ground well set with even <font> " small weeds , "
<$$font> and another rod <font> kept weeded . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,144.121

Let them adjoin each other . COBBETT-1838-2,144.122

Go , after fifteen or twenty days of dry weather ; examine the two ; and
you will find the weedless ground moist and fresh , while the other is
dry as dust to a foot deep . COBBETT-1838-2,144.123

The root of the weed sucks up every particle of moisture .
COBBETT-1838-2,144.124

What pretty things they are then to keep seedlings trees <font> cool !
<$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,144.125

- To proceed : these seedlings , if well managed , will be eight inches
high , and some higher , at the end of the first summer .
COBBETT-1838-2,144.126

The next spring they should be taken up ; COBBETT-1838-2,144.127

or this may be done in the fall , COBBETT-1838-2,144.128

They should be planted in rows , four feet apart , to give room to turn
about amongst them : and at two feet apart in the rows , if intended to
be grafted or budded without being again removed .
COBBETT-1838-2,144.129

If intended to be again removed , before grafting or budding , they may
be put at a foot apart . COBBETT-1838-2,144.130

They should be kept clean by hoeing between them ,
COBBETT-1838-2,144.131

and the ground between them should be <font> digged in the fall <$$font>
, but not at any other season of the year . COBBETT-1838-2,144.132

The plants will grow fast or slowly according to the management ;
COBBETT-1838-2,144.133

and the proper age for budding or grafting is from three to five years ;
COBBETT-1838-2,144.134

but it is better to have a strong stock than a too weak or too young one
. COBBETT-1838-2,144.135

The younger they are the sooner they will bear , COBBETT-1838-2,144.136

but the sooner they also decline and perish . COBBETT-1838-2,144.137

To speak of the <font> kind <$$font> of stocks most suitable to the
different <P_145> kinds of fruit-trees , is reserved till we come to
speak of the trees themselves ; COBBETT-1838-2,145.138

but there are some remarks to be made here , which have a <font> general
application <$$font> , relative to the kinds of stocks .
COBBETT-1838-2,145.139

It is supposed by some persons that the nature of the stock affects the
nature of the <font> fruit ; <$$font> that is to say , that the fruit
growing on branches proceeding from a <font> bud <$$font> , or a <font>
graft <$$font> , partakes more or less of the flavour of <font> the
fruit which would have grown on the stock <$$font> if the stock had been
suffered to grow to a tree and to bear fruit . COBBETT-1838-2,145.140

This is Mr. Marshall's notion . COBBETT-1838-2,145.141

But , how erroneous it is must be manifest to every one , when he
reflects that the stock for the <font> pear <$$font> tree is frequently
the <font> white-thorn . <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,145.142

Can a pear partake of the nature of the <font> haw <$$font> , which
grows upon the thorn , and which is a <font> stone-fruit <$$font> too ?
COBBETT-1838-2,145.143

If this notion were correct , there could be hardly a single
apple-orchard in all England ; COBBETT-1838-2,145.144

for they are all grafted upon <font> crab-stocks ; <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,145.145

and of course all the apples , in the course of years , would become
crabs . COBBETT-1838-2,145.146

Apricots and peaches are generally put on plum-stocks ,
COBBETT-1838-2,145.147

yet , after centuries of this practice , they do not become plums .
COBBETT-1838-2,145.148

If the <font> fruit <$$font> of the graft partake of the nature of the
stock , why not the <font> wood <$$font> and <font> leaves ? <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,145.149

Yet , is it not visible to all eyes that neither ever does so partake ?
COBBETT-1838-2,145.150

- The bud or graft retains its own nature wholly unchanged by the stock
; COBBETT-1838-2,145.151

and all that is of consequence , as to the kind of stock , is whether it
be such as will <font> last long enough <$$font> , and supply the tree
with <font> a suitable quantity of wood . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,145.152

As to the stocks raised from stone-fruit , the stones must be taken from
the fruit when the fruit is ripe , made perfectly dry in the sun ; then
packed in perfectly dry sand , and kept there until the month of
November , when the stones must be sowed in just the same manner as
described for the pips , except that they ought not to be closer than an
inch from each other in the drill , and should be covered to the depth
of three inches , or perhaps a little more . COBBETT-1838-2,145.153

The plants will come up in the spring , COBBETT-1838-2,145.154

and will attain a good height the first summer . COBBETT-1838-2,145.155

They should be transplanted in the fall , first taking off the taproot ,
and shortening the side roots . COBBETT-1838-2,145.156

In the next month of April , they should be cut down to the ground and
suffered to send up only a single stalk for grafting or budding upon .
COBBETT-1838-2,145.157

They should now be planted in rows at four feet apart and at a foot
apart in the row , in order to give room for the operations of grafting
and budding . COBBETT-1838-2,145.158

There are cases when stocks raised from <font> layers <$$font> are
preferred ; COBBETT-1838-2,145.159

these cases will be mentioned under the head of the fruit <P_146> to
which they apply , COBBETT-1838-2,146.160

and the reader already knows how to raise stocks from layers , because
it is done in just the same manner as when the layer is intended to be a
tree to bear fruit without budding or grafting . COBBETT-1838-2,146.161

I can@ @not dismiss this part of the subject without exhorting the
reader never to make use of suckers as stocks : COBBETT-1838-2,146.162

by a very little additional care you obtain seedling stocks ;
COBBETT-1838-2,146.163

and really if a man have not the trifling portion of industry that is
here required , he is unworthy of the good fruit and the abundant crops
which , with proper management , he may generally make himself sure of .
COBBETT-1838-2,146.164

207 . Grafting . COBBETT-1838-2,146.165

- When I come to the alphabetical list of fruits , I shall speak of
those circumstances connected with grafting in which one sort of fruit
differs from another ; COBBETT-1838-2,146.166

but the mode of performing the operation of grafting , and the mode of
doing other things relative to the stock and the scion , are the same in
all cases , COBBETT-1838-2,146.167

therefore I shall in this place give the instructions necessary for a
knowledge of the arts of grafting and budding . COBBETT-1838-2,146.168

There is another thing , too , which is equally applicable in all cases
, and which ought to be mentioned before I enter upon the subject of
<font> grafting <$$font> and <font> budding <$$font> ;
COBBETT-1838-2,146.169

and that is this , that the stock ought to stand one whole <font> summer
<$$font> upon the spot where it is grafted or budded before that
operation is performed upon it . COBBETT-1838-2,146.170

If stocks be planted out in the fall , the sap does not rise vigorously
enough in the spring to afford a fair chance for the growing of the
graft ; COBBETT-1838-2,146.171

but another remark of equal importance is that fruit-trees should stand
only <font> one summer <$$font> on the spot whence they are to be
removed to their final destination , because if they stand longer than
this , they will have large and long roots , great amputations must take
place , and the tree suffer exceedingly . COBBETT-1838-2,146.172

208 . Grafting is the joining of a <font> cutting <$$font> of one to
another tree in such a way as that the tree on which the <font> cutting
<$$font> is placed sends up its sap into the <font> cutting <$$font> ,
and makes it grow and become a tree . COBBETT-1838-2,146.173

When a cutting is thus applied it is called a <font> scion . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,146.174

Certain stocks have been found to be suited to certain scions ,
COBBETT-1838-2,146.175

but these will be particularly mentioned hereafter in the articles
treating of the respective kinds of fruit . COBBETT-1838-2,146.176

It is best that I confine myself here , as much as possible , to
instructions as to the time of grafting , the mode of preparing the
scion , the mode of performing the operation of grafting , and lastly to
the treatment of the plant grafted . COBBETT-1838-2,146.177

The time of grafting is , generally , from the beginning of February to
<P_147> the end of March , beginning with the earliest sorts of trees ,
as plums , cherries , and pears , and ending with the latest , as apples
. COBBETT-1838-2,147.178

But seasons are different , COBBETT-1838-2,147.179

and in a backward one the season for grafting will be backward ,
COBBETT-1838-2,147.180

and in such case , the fullness and bursting appearance of the stocks ,
and the mildness of the weather , must be our guides .
COBBETT-1838-2,147.181

Not but much more than the necessary importance is attached to this
matter by us ; COBBETT-1838-2,147.182

for I have seen an American negro-man , sitting by a six-plate stove ,
grafting apple trees in the month of <font> January <$$font> , and then
putting away the grafted plants in a cave there to wait till <font>
April <$$font> , before he planted them ! COBBETT-1838-2,147.183

However , it is certain that mild weather with occasional showers is the
best time for grafting . COBBETT-1838-2,147.184

The mode of preparing the scion comes next : COBBETT-1838-2,147.185

in the early part of February , take from the tree which you mean to
propagate as many branches of last year's wood as you think will cut
into the quantity of scions that you want : COBBETT-1838-2,147.186

but in choosing what branches to take , let the vigour of the tree guide
you in some measure . COBBETT-1838-2,147.187

If it be a healthy , flourishing , and young tree , take your branches
from the outside shoots , COBBETT-1838-2,147.188

for the upright ones at the top , or those near the middle , are more
likely to be given to produce wood than fruit . COBBETT-1838-2,147.189

Yet do not take branches from the lowest part of the tree if you can
avoid it , as these are sure to be more puling in their nature .
COBBETT-1838-2,147.190

In case the tree be old , or weakly , then choose the most vigorous of
its last year's shoots , no matter where they grow .
COBBETT-1838-2,147.191

Keep these branches buried to the middle in dry mould ;
COBBETT-1838-2,147.192

and , when the season for grafting arrives , take them up
COBBETT-1838-2,147.193

and cut them into proper lengths . COBBETT-1838-2,147.194

The middle part of each branch will generally be found to be the best ;
COBBETT-1838-2,147.195

but your branches may be scarce and few in number ,
COBBETT-1838-2,147.196

and then make use of every part . COBBETT-1838-2,147.197

Each scion should have from three to six buds on it ;
COBBETT-1838-2,147.198

but six will , in all cases , be quite enough , as there is no use in an
extraordinary length of scion ; COBBETT-1838-2,147.199

but , on the contrary , it may be productive of much mischief by
overloading the head with young shoots and leaves as summer advances ,
and thereby making it more subject to accident from high winds or heavy
rains . COBBETT-1838-2,147.200

209 . <font> The operation of grafting <$$font> is performed many ways
, though no one of them differs from any of the others in <font>
principle <$$font> , which is that of bringing the under or inner bark
of the scion to bear upon the same bark of the stock ; so that the scion
is <paren> as I said before <$$paren> a branch of another tree , brought
and made to occupy precisely <P_148> the place where a branch has been
cut off . COBBETT-1838-2,148.201

The sap of the stock flows upward towards the scion ,
COBBETT-1838-2,148.202

and will flow on into the scion , <font> provided it find no
interruption . <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,148.203

Here therefore is the nicety : to fit those two barks so closely the one
upon the other that the sap shall proceed onward into the scion just as
it would have done into the amputated branch , causing the scion to
supplant the branch . COBBETT-1838-2,148.204

I shall only mention and illustrate two modes of grafting , namely ,
<font> tongue-grafting <$$font> and <font> cleft-grafting . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,148.205

These two it is necessary for me to speak of separately and thoroughly
to describe , COBBETT-1838-2,148.206

for they are not both of them applicable in all cases , the former being
used in grafting on small-sized stocks , and small branches of trees ,
and the latter on large stocks and large branches .
COBBETT-1838-2,148.207

210 . <font> Tongue-grafting . <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,148.208

- Suppose you to have your stock of the proper age for grafting <paren>
and for all about which see above , the article on stocks <$$paren> ,
COBBETT-1838-2,148.209

you cut it off at three or four inches from the ground ,
COBBETT-1838-2,148.210

and , with a very <font> sharp , straight , and narrow-bladed
grafting-knife <$$font> , cut a thin strip of wood and bark upward from
about two inches below the top of your already shortened stock .
COBBETT-1838-2,148.211

Make this cut at one pull of the knife , inserting the edge rather
horizontally , COBBETT-1838-2,148.212

and when it has gone through the bark and into the wood a little short
of the middle , pull straight upwards <paren> plate 3 , <font> fig.
<$$font> 1 , <font> a b <$$font> <$$paren> . COBBETT-1838-2,148.213

{COM:figures_omitted}

<P_149>

Then , at less than half way down this cut , and with the blade of your
knife across the cut , the edge downward , cut a very <font> thin tongue
<$$font> of not more than three-eighths of an inch long <paren> plate 3
, <font> fig. <$$font> 1 . <font> c <$$font> <$$paren> .
COBBETT-1838-2,149.216

Proceed nearly in the same way with the bottom part of the scion :
COBBETT-1838-2,149.217

cut first a narrow strip of wood and bark out , but not putting the
knife in horizontally as you have done with regard to the stock at
<font> fig. <$$font> 2 , <font> a <$$font> , nor bringing it out
straight to the end to make a shoulder or angle , as you have done with
the stock at <font> fig. <$$font> 1 , <font> b ; <$$font> but making a
sloping cut <paren> plate 3 , <font> fig. <$$font> 3 , <font> a b
<$$font> <$$paren> of about the same length as the cut in the stock , or
a little less , if any thing ; COBBETT-1838-2,149.218

then make a tongue <paren> plate 3 , <font> fig. <$$font> 2 <font> c
<$$font> <$$paren> to correspond with that in the stock ,
COBBETT-1838-2,149.219

but recollect that this must be cut <font> upward <$$font> instead of
<font> downward ; <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,149.220

then place the scion upon the stock , inserting the tongue of the scion
into the tongue of the stock . COBBETT-1838-2,149.221

Bring the four edges of bark , that is , the two edges of the cut in the
top of the stock , and the two corresponding edges of the cut in the
bottom of the scion , to meet precisely ; COBBETT-1838-2,149.222

or , if the scion be in diameter a smaller piece of wood than the stock
, so that its two edges of bark can@ @not both meet those of the stock ,
then let only one meet , COBBETT-1838-2,149.223

but be sure that that one meets precisely . COBBETT-1838-2,149.224

Observe well that this can never be , unless the first cut in the stock
and that in the scion <paren> plate 3 , <font> figures <$$font> 1 and 2
, <font> a <$$font> and <font> b <$$font> <$$paren> be as even as a die
, and performed by a knife scarcely less sharp than a razor .
COBBETT-1838-2,149.225

Take a common pruning-knife , and attempt to make a cut of this kind ,
and you will find , when you come to fit the scion on , that , squeeze
them together as you may , you will , in most cases , see light between
the parts of the stock and the scion that you are trying to join so
effectually as that the <font> sap shall flow out of the one and into
the other , unconscious of any division at all ! <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,149.226

But I will not suppose anybody so ungain <paren> as it is called in
Hampshire <$$paren> as to go about so nice an operation as this without
being prepared with the proper instrument for performing it ;
COBBETT-1838-2,149.227

and , therefore , I now suppose the scion put on properly , and
presenting the appearance as in plate 3 , <font> fig. <$$font> 3 .
COBBETT-1838-2,149.228

But this is not all : COBBETT-1838-2,149.229

the operation is not yet complete . COBBETT-1838-2,149.230

The two parts thus joined must be bound closely to one another by
matting , or bass , as the gardeners call it <paren> pl. 3 , <font>
fig. <$$font> 4 <$$paren> . COBBETT-1838-2,149.231

A single piece tied on to the stock an inch or so below the part grafted
, and then wound closely up till it reach the very top of the stock ,
will , if well done , almost ensure the junction ;
COBBETT-1838-2,149.232

but , lest parching winds should come and knit up all vegetation , it is
<P_150> usual to put on , besides the bandage of matting , a ball of
well-beaten clay , sprinkled over with a little wood-ashes , or the fine
siftings of cinders , to cover completely the parts grafted , that is ,
from an inch below them to an inch or so above them <paren> pl. 3 ,
<font> fig. <$$font> 5 <$$paren> ; COBBETT-1838-2,150.233

and even to prevent this ball of clay from being washed off by heavy
rains , it is well to tie round it a covering of coarse canvass , or
else to earth up the whole plant as you do peas or beans , drawing a
little mould round it so as nearly to reach the top of the clay .
COBBETT-1838-2,150.234

Something now remains to be said on the <font> future treatment <$$font>
of the grafted plant . COBBETT-1838-2,150.235

In a month's time , at least , you will see whether the scion have taken
; COBBETT-1838-2,150.236

it will then be either bursting forth into leaf , COBBETT-1838-2,150.237

or it will be irrecoverably dead . COBBETT-1838-2,150.238

In this latter case , take off immediately canvass , clay , bandage and
dead scion , COBBETT-1838-2,150.239

and let the stock push forth what shoots it please , and recover itself
. COBBETT-1838-2,150.240

In the former case , however , you must , as soon as the scion is
putting forth shoots , cut off , or rub off , all shoots proceeding from
the stock between the ground and the clay , as these , if suffered to
push on , would divert the sap away from the scion , and probably starve
it ; COBBETT-1838-2,150.241

then carefully stake the plant , that is , put a small stick into the
ground at within three inches , or thereabouts , of the root , and long
enough to reach a few inches above the scion , which you will tie to it
slightly with a piece of wetted matting . COBBETT-1838-2,150.242

This is really necessary ; COBBETT-1838-2,150.243

for , when the shoots proceeding from the scion become half a foot long
, they , with the aid of their leaves , become so heavy that , when
blown to and fro by the wind , they will break off immediately above the
clay , or become loosened down at the part joined to the stock .
COBBETT-1838-2,150.244

The staking being done , you need do nothing more till about the middle
of June , when you should take off the whole mass of canvass , clay ,
and bandage ; COBBETT-1838-2,150.245

but be very careful , in taking off the clay , not to break off the
plant at the junction . COBBETT-1838-2,150.246

It should be done by a careful hand , and after a day or two of rainy
weather , as then the clay is moist , and comes off without so much
danger to the plant as when it is not . COBBETT-1838-2,150.247

On taking off the clay , there is found a little sharp angle left at the
top of the stock ; COBBETT-1838-2,150.248

this should now be cut smooth off , as is marked by the dots at <font> a
<$$font> in <font> fig. <$$font> 3 . COBBETT-1838-2,150.249

The bark of the stock and that of the scion will heal over this ,
COBBETT-1838-2,150.250

and the union is then complete . COBBETT-1838-2,150.251

Lastly , it is frequently found that mould , and sometimes small vermin
, have collected round the heretofore-@ @covered parts of the plant ,
according as the clay has been cracked by the sun .
COBBETT-1838-2,150.252

Rub off all mould <P_151> with your fingers . COBBETT-1838-2,151.253

No instrument does it so well ; COBBETT-1838-2,151.254

and kill all vermin in the same way ; COBBETT-1838-2,151.255

and it is not amiss to finish this work by washing the joined parts with
a little soap and water , using a small painting-brush for the operation
. COBBETT-1838-2,151.256

All these things done , you have now only to guard against high winds ,
COBBETT-1838-2,151.257

for , if the plants be not staked as is above described , they will very
likely be broken off by them , COBBETT-1838-2,151.258

and , in this work of destruction , you will have the mortification to
see the finest of your plants go first . COBBETT-1838-2,151.259

211 . <font> Cleft grafting . <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,151.260

- This , as I said above , is a species of grafting adopted in cases
where the stock is large , or where it consists of a branch or branches
of a tree headed down . COBBETT-1838-2,151.261

In either of these cases , saw off horizontally the part you wish to
graft , COBBETT-1838-2,151.262

and smooth the wound over with a carpenter's plane , or a sharp
long-bladed knife <paren> plate 4 , <font> fig. <$$font> 1 <$$paren> .
COBBETT-1838-2,151.263

{COM:figures_omitted}

Prepare your scion in this manner : COBBETT-1838-2,151.265

at about an inch and a half from the bottom , cut it in the form of the
blade of a razor , that is , make it sharp on one side and let it be
blunt at the back , where you will also take care to leave the bark
whole <paren> plate 4 , <font> fig. <$$font> 2 , <font> a <$$font>
<$$paren> . COBBETT-1838-2,151.266

Having thus prepared the scion , make a split <paren> plate 4 , <font>
fig. <$$font> 1 , <font> a <$$font> <$$paren> in the crown of the
saw-cut , downwards , for about two inches , taking care that the two
sides of this split be perfectly even . COBBETT-1838-2,151.267

Hold it then open by means of a chisel or a wedge <paren> or , when the
stock is but a small one , your knife <$$paren> , COBBETT-1838-2,151.268

and insert the scion , the sharp edge going inwards , and the bark-side
, or razor-back , remaining out-ward , so that , on taking out the wedge
or chisel , the cleft closes firmly upon the scion <paren> plate 4 ,
<font> fig. <$$font> 3 <$$paren> , the two edges of bark formed by the
cleft squeezing exactly upon the two edges of bark formed by the blunt
razor-back . COBBETT-1838-2,151.269

To make the two barks meet precisely is , the reader will see , the only
nicety in his operation ; COBBETT-1838-2,151.270

but this is <P_152> so essential that the slightest deviation will
defeat the purpose . COBBETT-1838-2,152.271

In this sort of grafting , the stock on which you graft is generally
strong enough to hold the scion close enough within its cleft without
the aid of binding , COBBETT-1838-2,152.272

and then it is better not to bind ; COBBETT-1838-2,152.273

but , as it is also necessary to prevent air circulating within the
wounded parts both of the stock and the scion , use grafting-clay to
cover them over so as effectually to exclude that air ,
COBBETT-1838-2,152.274

and cover the clay with a piece of coarse canvas , wetting it first ,
and then binding it on securely . COBBETT-1838-2,152.275

In this way , the stock being strong , you may insert several scions on
the same head , by making several different clefts , and putting one
scion in each ; COBBETT-1838-2,152.276

but this can only be to ensure your having two to succeed ,
COBBETT-1838-2,152.277

for , if all the scions that you can put upon one head take , you must
choose the two most eligible , and sacrifice the rest , as more than two
leading limbs from such head ought not to be encouraged .
COBBETT-1838-2,152.278

The season for performing this sort of grafting , and the mode of
preparing the scion , and the future treatment of the tree , are
precisely the same as in <font> Tongue-grafting . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,152.279

212 . I have mentioned an application of clay to be used in grafting :
COBBETT-1838-2,152.280

but it may be as well here to give some particular instructions as to
preparing this , before I end this article on grafting .
COBBETT-1838-2,152.281

The object being to put something round the wounded part of the stock
and the scion that shall exclude water and air , it is necessary , of
course , that the application be adhesive and close .
COBBETT-1838-2,152.282

Pure yellow or blue clay is both , if you beat it well with a good stout
stick , now-and-then pouring on a little water to make it work .
COBBETT-1838-2,152.283

Get it , in this way , to be perfectly pliable in the hand .
COBBETT-1838-2,152.284

Beat it upon a hard stone , or a boarded floor , or a brick floor swept
clean first ; COBBETT-1838-2,152.285

but beat it again and again , returning to it for two or three days ,
and taking a spell each day . COBBETT-1838-2,152.286

If you suffer it to remain hard , besides the danger of unsettling the
scion in squeezing round it this untractable mass , it cracks , the very
first hot day , COBBETT-1838-2,152.287

and is utterly useless . COBBETT-1838-2,152.288

Let it , therefore , be so loose that the man who follows the grafter ,
to put it on , can take off a piece and readily flatten it out into a
kind of pancake , an inch or so thick , and wrap it , without any
exertion on his part , or any resistance on the part of the plant ,
round the grafted tree . COBBETT-1838-2,152.289

Then he should sprinkle a little wood-ashes over the whole to dry it ,
and prevent its cracking from the heat of the sun .
COBBETT-1838-2,152.290

213 . BUDDING is performed for precisely the same purpose as grafting ,
COBBETT-1838-2,152.291

and , like grafting , it is performed in many different <P_153> ways ;
COBBETT-1838-2,153.292

but I shall only notice the most usual , and , as long experience has
ascertained , the best , method : namely , that <font> T budding
<$$font> , so called from the form of the two cuts that are made in the
bark of the stock to receive the bud <paren> pl. 5 , <font> fig.
<$$font> 1 <$$paren> ; or <font> shield budding <$$font> , as it is
sometimes called , from the form of the piece of bark on which the bud
is seated <paren> pl. 5 , <font> fig. <$$font> , 2 <$$paren> ,
assuming the shape of a shield when it is prepared to be inserted within
the T cut in the stock . COBBETT-1838-2,153.293

The only solid difference between budding and grafting is
{COM:figures_omitted} this , that whereas , in grafting you insert on
the stock <font> a branch <$$font> already produced , in budding you
insert only the <font> bud . <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,153.294

I {TEXT:space_in_text} shall proceed , in treating of this matter , in
the same way that I did in the preceding article ; namely , as to the
<font> season proper for budding , the choosing and preparing of the bud
, the operation of budding , and the future treatment of the plant
budded . <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,153.295

214 . The <font> season for budding <$$font> is , generally , from the
latter end of July to the latter end of August , the criterions being a
plump appearance of the bud formed on the spring shoot of the same year
, seated in the angle of a leaf ; and a readiness in the bark of the
stock to separate from the wood . COBBETT-1838-2,153.296

215 . In <font> choosing and preparing the bud <$$font> , fix on one
seated at about the middle of a healthy shoot of the Midsummer growth .
COBBETT-1838-2,153.297

These are , generally speaking , most inclined to fruitfulness .
COBBETT-1838-2,153.298

Choose a cloudy day , if you have a choice of days at this season ,
COBBETT-1838-2,153.299

and , if not , perform your work early in the morning , or in the
evening . COBBETT-1838-2,153.300

The time being proper , you sever the branch on which you find buds to
your liking . COBBETT-1838-2,153.301

Take this with you to the stock that you are going to bud .
COBBETT-1838-2,153.302

Holding the branch in your left-hand , the largest end downward , make a
sloping cut from about an inch <P_154> and a half below the bud , to
about an inch above it , suffering your knife to go through the bark and
about half way into the wood , cutting out wood and all .
COBBETT-1838-2,154.303

This keeping of the wood prevents the bud and its bark from drying while
you are preparing the incision in the stock ; COBBETT-1838-2,154.304

and , if you wish to carry buds of scarce sorts to any distance , you
may do so safely by putting their ends in water or in damp moss ,
COBBETT-1838-2,154.305

but it is always safer , as well in grafting as in budding , to perform
the operation with as much expedition as possible ,
COBBETT-1838-2,154.306

but particularly it is so in budding . COBBETT-1838-2,154.307

216 . <font> Operation of budding . <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,154.308

Cut off the leaf under which the bud is seated , COBBETT-1838-2,154.309

but leave its foot-stalk <paren> <font> pl. 5 , fig. <$$font> 2 ,
<font> a <$$font> <$$paren> , COBBETT-1838-2,154.310

and by this , hold it between your lips while , with your budding-knife
, you cut two straight lines in the stock at the place where you wish to
insert the bud , COBBETT-1838-2,154.311

and this should be at a place where the bark is smooth , free from any
bruises or knots , and on the side rather from the mid-day sun .
COBBETT-1838-2,154.312

Of these lines , let the first be horizontal <font> <paren> pl. 5 ,
fig. <$$font> 1 , <font> a <$$paren> <$$font> , COBBETT-1838-2,154.313

and let the next be longitudinal , beginning at the middle of the first
cut , and coming downward <paren> <font> pl. 5 , fig. <$$font> 1 ,
<font> b <$$font> <$$paren> . COBBETT-1838-2,154.314

Let them , in short , describe the two principal bars of the Roman
letter T . COBBETT-1838-2,154.315

You have now to take out from the bark , on which your bud is , the
piece of wood on which the bark is , and which has served you up to this
time , to preserve the bark and bud from drying and shrinking .
COBBETT-1838-2,154.316

But this is a nice matter . COBBETT-1838-2,154.317

In doing it , you must be careful not to endanger the root , as it is
called , of the bud , because in that is its existence .
COBBETT-1838-2,154.318

The bark <paren> if the season be proper for budding <$$paren> will
easily detatch itself from this piece of wood , COBBETT-1838-2,154.319

but still it requires very careful handling to get it out without
endangering the <font> root of the bud . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,154.320

Hold the bud upon your fore-finger , COBBETT-1838-2,154.321

and keep your thumb on the wood opposite ; COBBETT-1838-2,154.322

then , with the fore-finger and thumb of the other hand , bend backward
and forward the lower end of the shield , COBBETT-1838-2,154.323

and thus coax the wood to disengage itself from the bark ;
COBBETT-1838-2,154.324

and when you find it decidedly doing so , remove your thumb from it ,
COBBETT-1838-2,154.325

and the whole piece of wood will come out , leaving you nothing but a
piece of bark of about two_and_a_half inches long , with a bud and
foot-stalk of a leaf on it . COBBETT-1838-2,154.326

If the root of the bud be carried away with the piece of wood , you will
perceive a small <font> cavity <$$font> where it ought to be .
COBBETT-1838-2,154.327

In this case , throw away the bud COBBETT-1838-2,154.328

and try another . COBBETT-1838-2,154.329

217 . Having succeeded in a second attempt , now open the two sides of
the longitudinal bar of the T , with the ivory haft of your <P_155>
budding-knife <paren> <font> pl. 5 , fig. <$$font> 1 , <font> b
<$$font> <$$paren> , COBBETT-1838-2,155.330

but , in doing this , raise the bark clearly down to the wood ,
COBBETT-1838-2,155.331

for the inside of the piece of bark belonging to the bud must be placed
directly against this . COBBETT-1838-2,155.332

Having opened these sides wide enough to receive the longest end of bark
, insert it nicely : taking especial care that its <font> inner side lie
flatly against the wood of the stock . <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,155.333

Then cut the upper end of the bark off so that its edge shall
{TEXT:shal} meet precisely the edge of the horizontal bar of the T
<font> <paren> pl. 5 , fig. <$$font> 1 , <font> a <$$font> <$$paren> .
COBBETT-1838-2,155.334

With your finger and thumb , bring the two sides of the longitudinal bar
over the bark of the bud , or rather the shield , COBBETT-1838-2,155.335

and , with a piece of well-soaked matting , begin an inch below this bar
, COBBETT-1838-2,155.336

and bind firmly all the way up to an inch above the horizontal bar ,
taking good care to leave the bud peeping out . COBBETT-1838-2,155.337

Bind in such a way as to exclude the air , COBBETT-1838-2,155.338

for that is the intent of binding in this case . COBBETT-1838-2,155.339

Tie your piece of matting on first , COBBETT-1838-2,155.340

and then wind it round and round the stock as you would a ribbon ,
taking care not to twist the matting . COBBETT-1838-2,155.341

Wind it <font> slowly <$$font> , COBBETT-1838-2,155.342

and every time you have gone completely round , give a gentle pull to
make it firm . COBBETT-1838-2,155.343

218 . <font> Future treatment . <$$font> COBBETT-1838-2,155.344

- In a fortnight's time from the operation , you will discover whether
the bud have taken , by its roundness and healthy look ;
COBBETT-1838-2,155.345

and , in a fortnight after that , loosen the bandage to allow the whole
plant to swell ; COBBETT-1838-2,155.346

and , in about five weeks from the time of budding , take away the
bandage altogether . COBBETT-1838-2,155.347

In this state the plant passes the winter , COBBETT-1838-2,155.348

and , just as the sap begins to be in motion , in the following spring ,
you head down the stock at about half an inch above the bud , beginning
behind it , and making a sloping cut upward to end above its point .
COBBETT-1838-2,155.349

Some gardeners leave a piece of the stock about six inches long for the
first year , in order to tie the first summer's shoot to it , to prevent
its being broken off by the wind . COBBETT-1838-2,155.350

This may be well , when the plant is exposed to high winds ,
COBBETT-1838-2,155.351

but , even then , if you see danger , you may tie a short stick on the
top part of the stock , and to this tie the young shoot ,
COBBETT-1838-2,155.352

and then the sap all goes into the shoots from the bud , instead of
being divided between it and the six inches of stock left in the other
way . COBBETT-1838-2,155.353

219 . There are some advantages that <font> budding <$$font> has over
<font> grafting <$$font> , COBBETT-1838-2,155.354

and these I think it right to mention . COBBETT-1838-2,155.355

In the first place , universal experience has proved that certain trees
succeed very much better when budded than the same trees do when grafted
: COBBETT-1838-2,155.356

such are the peach , nectarine , apricot , plum , and cherry ;
COBBETT-1838-2,155.357

indeed , the <P_156> rule is that all stone fruits do better budded than
grafted . That they are , when budded , less given to <font> gum
<$$font> , a disease peculiar to stone fruits , and often very
pernicious to them . COBBETT-1838-2,156.358

You may also , by budding , put two or more branches upon a stock that
would be too weak to take so many grafts ; COBBETT-1838-2,156.359

and you may bud in <font> July <$$font> when grafting <font> has failed
<$$font> in <font> March <$$font> and <font> April . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,156.360

The disadvantage of budding is that the trees are rendered one year
later in coming into bearing than when you graft .
COBBETT-1838-2,156.361

220 . PLANTING . COBBETT-1838-2,156.362

- Under the heads of the several trees in the list which will follow
hereafter , directions will be given with regard to the age , the size ,
and other circumstances which will be found to vary according to the
several purposes and situations for which the trees are intended .
COBBETT-1838-2,156.363

I shall here , therefore , confine myself merely to the act of planting
; that is to say , the manner of removing a young tree from one spot and
placing it in another ; the rules here being applicable to all trees .
COBBETT-1838-2,156.364

The first thing to be observed is that , though trees will grow if kept
out of the ground for a considerable time , they ought to be kept in
that state as short a time as possible , COBBETT-1838-2,156.365

and , during even that short time , the roots ought to be exposed as
little as possible to the sun and wind . COBBETT-1838-2,156.366

The taking up of a young tree ought to be performed with the greatest
possible care , especially if it have stood in the place whence it is
taken for more than one year . COBBETT-1838-2,156.367

And here let me stop for a minute in order to re-impress upon the mind
of the reader the importance of the observation which I made in
paragraph 204 . COBBETT-1838-2,156.368

After having read that paragraph again , the reader will please to
observe that all long roots must be pruned off to within at most four or
five inches of the stem of the tree ; and that , if the tree have stood
too long in its place before its final removal , this loss of root will
render it absolutely necessary to cut off the upper part of the tree
very near to the ground ; and , even after that , will make it very slow
to re-enter upon vigorous growth . COBBETT-1838-2,156.369

If , therefore , you be not ready for the transplanting of your trees ,
at the time when they might be transplanted , rather than let them stand
to get these long roots , take them up in the fall of the year ,
COBBETT-1838-2,156.370

give the roots and heads a pruning , COBBETT-1838-2,156.371

and plant them again , so that you may not experience the great check at
the final transplanting . COBBETT-1838-2,156.372

221 . I return now to the taking up of the tree , which ought to be
done without tearing any of the roots , and which is not done without
such tearing one time out of twenty . COBBETT-1838-2,156.373

You ought to dig <P_157> some earth away a little distance all round the
tree to a considerable depth , and nearly let it tumble down of itself ;
COBBETT-1838-2,157.374

for if you pull you break a root ; COBBETT-1838-2,157.375

and if that root be large , and break off near the stem of the tree ,
the tree will have a bad root , COBBETT-1838-2,157.376

and will never grow finely . COBBETT-1838-2,157.377

Having taken the tree fairly out of the ground , you begin by pruning
the root . COBBETT-1838-2,157.378

All the larger shoots of the roots you cut off to within six inches of
the stem , COBBETT-1838-2,157.379

and you take entirely out all the hairy fibres ; COBBETT-1838-2,157.380

for they never grow again , COBBETT-1838-2,157.381

and they are apt to mould and to keep the earth from closely touching
the roots out of which the new shoots are to come .
COBBETT-1838-2,157.382

Having pruned the root , you proceed to plant the tree .
COBBETT-1838-2,157.383

The hole must be much deeper and wider than is required for the mere
reception of the root . COBBETT-1838-2,157.384

The earth ought to be broken very finely at the bottom of the hole .
COBBETT-1838-2,157.385

When that is done , the root of the tree ought to be placed upon it in
such a manner as for the tree to stand about an inch higher above the
ground than it stood before it was removed . COBBETT-1838-2,157.386

If the tree be to be placed against a wall , the head should lean gently
against the wall , and the bottom of the trunk about eight or ten inches
from it : COBBETT-1838-2,157.387

if the tree be to be planted in the open ground , the trunk should be
held perfectly upright : COBBETT-1838-2,157.388

while thus held , very fine earth should be put upon the roots :
COBBETT-1838-2,157.389

if it were sifted , so much the better : COBBETT-1838-2,157.390

the tree should be joggled or shaken a little , to cause the earth to go
down in and amongst the roots and fill up all the cavities , so that the
fine earth may touch the roots , and lie closely round them in every
part . COBBETT-1838-2,157.391

If you tumble in the rough earth , which would leave part of the roots
untouched , the parts so untouched will mould , COBBETT-1838-2,157.392

will perish , or become cankered . COBBETT-1838-2,157.393

When the roots are all covered with very fine earth , you may fill up
the hole with the earth that has come out of it , only taking care to
break it very fine . COBBETT-1838-2,157.394

Before you have put in quite all the earth , give a gentle tread all
round the tree with your foot , treading first at a foot distance from
the tree , and approaching all round to within three or four inches ;
COBBETT-1838-2,157.395

then put the rest of the earth over the treading ,
COBBETT-1838-2,157.396

and leave the surface round the treading in the form of a dish .
COBBETT-1838-2,157.397

222 . If you plant late in the spring , lay a little short litter into
the dish , COBBETT-1838-2,157.398

and give the tree a watering occasionally until the month of July ,
unless the weather obviously render such operation unnecessary .
COBBETT-1838-2,157.399

I am particularly anxious that the reader should attend to this part of
my instructions ; COBBETT-1838-2,157.400

for , nine times out of ten , when failure takes place , careless
planting is {TEXT:in} the cause . COBBETT-1838-2,157.401

If you <P_158> purchase trees , you should look well at the roots ;
COBBETT-1838-2,158.402

and , if they be very large , or at all torn , it is much better to
fling the trees away than to plant them ; COBBETT-1838-2,158.403

for what are a few shillings , or even a few pounds , when compared with
the <font> loss of years <$$font> , in providing yourself with fruit ?
COBBETT-1838-2,158.404

<heading>

TRAINING AND PRUNING . COBBETT-1838-2,158.406

<$$heading>

223 . Training and pruning go together ; COBBETT-1838-2,158.408

they are two parts of the same act , because you lay the branch in its
proper place at the same time that you cut it . COBBETT-1838-2,158.409

They are , therefore , inseparable as matters to be treated of .
COBBETT-1838-2,158.410

There are , however , different sorts of training : one against walls or
pails , or against a house ; COBBETT-1838-2,158.411

and the trees thus situated are called <font> wall-trees . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,158.412

After these , come <font> espaliers <$$font> and dwarf trees in various
shapes for a garden . COBBETT-1838-2,158.413

These will be spoken of by_and_by ; COBBETT-1838-2,158.414

and , at last , I shall speak of the planting of standard trees for an
orchard . COBBETT-1838-2,158.415

The main principles of pruning are the same in all cases :
COBBETT-1838-2,158.416

the objects are to render trees productive , to preserve their health ,
and to keep them in regular and convenient form ; COBBETT-1838-2,158.417

for , in this case , as well as in almost every other , though nature
does a great deal , she will not do all : COBBETT-1838-2,158.418

she will not do every thing : COBBETT-1838-2,158.419

she must be and will be assisted ; COBBETT-1838-2,158.420

and certainly the management of fruit-trees may be considered as one of
the principal parts of the art of gardening . COBBETT-1838-2,158.421

224 . I shall now give instructions for the pruning of peach trees
placed against walls . COBBETT-1838-2,158.422

If I were to stop at every particular part of the instructions , in
order to point out the difference between the pruning of a peach tree
and that of the apricot and other trees , the mind of the reader would
be bewildered : COBBETT-1838-2,158.423

therefore , I shall keep the peach tree solely in my eye while giving
these instructions ; COBBETT-1838-2,158.424

and , as this head of training and pruning will immediately be followed
by an Alphabetical List of Fruits , the reader will find , under the
name of each fruit , such remarks as are required to point out to him in
what respect he is to differ in his training and pruning from the rules
laid down in the case of the peach . COBBETT-1838-2,158.425

He will , therefore , please to observe that , in the instructions which
I am now about to give , I have the peach tree solely in my eye .
COBBETT-1838-2,158.426

225 . Training and pruning involve so many circumstances , <P_159> such
a great variety of objects and of operations , that to give minute
instructions upon the subject absolutely demand a great space ;
COBBETT-1838-2,159.427

and , after all , it is fortunate , when mechanical operations are to be
described by words ; COBBETT-1838-2,159.428

it is extremely fortunate , if the writer make himself clearly
understood ; COBBETT-1838-2,159.429

and , indeed , it is impossible for him to do it unless he have the best
<font> attention <$$font> of the reader : COBBETT-1838-2,159.430

it is not a clear statement of a fact ; COBBETT-1838-2,159.431

it is not a mere affirmation or negation , that is required here ;
COBBETT-1838-2,159.432

nor is it in the construction of an argument and the drawing of a
conclusion : COBBETT-1838-2,159.433

here we have to describe innumerable minute acts to be performed with
the hands and the fingers ; COBBETT-1838-2,159.434

and , I have always found that to be intelligible , in such a case , is
the most difficult thing that one experiences in the use of words .
COBBETT-1838-2,159.435

Hence it is that this is hardly ever attempted without the assistance of
drawings , or of something that teaches through the channel of the eye .
COBBETT-1838-2,159.436

I shall do my best to make myself clearly understood ;
COBBETT-1838-2,159.437

and , if I have the strict <font> attention <$$font> of the reader , I
have little doubt of success . COBBETT-1838-2,159.438

I shall first offer some preliminary observations ,
COBBETT-1838-2,159.439

and to these I request the reader's extraordinary attention .
COBBETT-1838-2,159.440

226 . The time , or rather times , of pruning , are common to all fruit
trees . COBBETT-1838-2,159.441

The winter pruning is performed in February , March , and April ,
beginning with the earliest sorts of trees <paren> with reference to
their blooming <$$paren> and ending with the latest , forming this
series : apricot , peach , plum , pear , cherry , apple .
COBBETT-1838-2,159.442

Quinces and medlars will be spoken of sufficiently under the names of
those trees , as will gooseberries , currants , and raspberries .
COBBETT-1838-2,159.443

It may be matter of indifference , perhaps , whether the winter pruning
of the above-mentioned trees take place in one of the afore-mentioned
months or the other ; COBBETT-1838-2,159.444

but three things are to be observed in the case of all trees ; that
pruning ought not to be done during the time of flowering ; and that the
summer pruning ought not to be done till after the fruit has attained a
considerable size ; that it is essential always to prune with a very
sharp knife ; that the cut ought to be from below , upwards , beginning
behind a bud , and finishing near its opening , taking good care not to
hurt it . COBBETT-1838-2,159.445

A rubbishing pruning-knife , a thing made of bad stuff , or in bad shape
, will spoil any set of trees in the world . COBBETT-1838-2,159.446

The best pruning knives that I have ever seen are made by Mr.
Richardson of Kensington , and Mr. Holmes of Derby .
COBBETT-1838-2,159.447

227 . <font> Preliminary observations . <$$font>
COBBETT-1838-2,159.448

First : The sap of trees always <P_160> mounts perpendicularly from the
root to the top , flowing through the straight branches , and producing
wood instead of fruit . COBBETT-1838-2,160.449

Therefore , when you wish to restore equality between two branches , of
which one is more weak than the other , bend the more vigorous one down
a little COBBETT-1838-2,160.450

and raise the weak one , which will soon overtake it .
COBBETT-1838-2,160.451

Also , when you wish a tree to furnish well at bottom , you must prevent
the sap mounting to the head , by inclining the upper branches downwards
and pruning them long , and , if necessary , by means of the annulary
incision . COBBETT-1838-2,160.452

228 . Second : The less the sap has of direct channels ; the less it
can freely circulate between the bark , the more it will produce of side
branches and fruit-buds . COBBETT-1838-2,160.453

Thus it is , perhaps , that the graft and the annulary incision , by
stopping the progress of the sap , augment the quantity and improve the
quality of the fruit . COBBETT-1838-2,160.454

So , when a tree runs to wood , bend the branches downwards ;
COBBETT-1838-2,160.455

stop the sap , COBBETT-1838-2,160.456

and force it to produce fruit . COBBETT-1838-2,160.457

