<BEGIN_coleridge-1825-2>

<P_5,500>

{ED:1490_To_Edward_Coleridge}

8 . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.4

Plains of Waterloo , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.5

Ramsgate - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.6

Tuesday Afternoon 18 Octr 1825 - . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.7

My very dear Edward I have just received your letter inclosed in one
from Mr Gillman ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.8

and <paren> Deo Volente & Adjuvante <$$paren> I trust to reach Eton on
Friday Evening . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.9

Mr Gillman can not leave Highgate - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.10

<font> must <$$font> not . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.11

It is morally impossible . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.12

And as to Mrs Gillman's going , this seems to me as profitless as the
other is impracticable - as under our present impressions there appears
but one thing to do - namely , to go and bring him back with me .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,500.13

Mrs Gillman received the sad tidings as <P_5,501> from my intimate
knowledge of her character I could have anticipated .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.14

The correctness of her Feelings , her moral High-mindedness , could not
save her from suffering keenly as a mother ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.15

but it preserved her judgement unwarped , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.16

and the moment the first Shock had subsided , she reverted
affectionately to the distress and vexation , that you must have
suffered in having to write the letter , and during the time in which
the necessity of taking this step became daily more evident .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.17

She sought an alleviation of the afflicting intelligence in her habitual
conviction , that the Parent , who has not to mourn over <font> Want of
Principle <$$font> in a child , ought to blend gratitude to Providence
with the sharpest feelings of natural grief for any lesser infliction .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.18

Accustomed to find Comfort herself in the Consciousness of having done
her Duty , she still recurs to your attestation in Henry's behalf - that
you have discovered nothing bad in his moral nature , and weakness &
inconstancy , rather than want of Understanding .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.19

But of this be assured , that both Parents feel undiminished gratitude &
affection to you , and the fullest confidence not only in the kindness
of your intentions but in the persistency and judicious direction of
your efforts to realize them . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.20

- After Henry's Letters , written indeed in the paroxysm of
Home-sickness but yet disclosing a strong presentiment of his unfitness
for the Arena in which he was to wrestle , your information did not
surprize us - except that in every transformation of fear into Certainty
, of <font> Thought <$$font> into <font> Thing <$$font> , there is a
suddenness , that imitates Surprize , and which no Fore-bodings can
prevent . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.21

- But I will not intrude longer on your time - as I shall so soon have
the opportunity of talking it over . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.22

- I left Highgate , tomorrow will be a fortnight - with Mr , Mrs , and
Miss Steel & Mrs Gillman , by the Ramsgate Steam-Vessel -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.23

Mr Steel is an old School-fellow of mine - & the Family intimate
acquaintances of the Gillmans - and very worthy people - so that we form
a very comfortable Household here . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.24

- I shall bring with me a small boxful of my Memorata - o sia , Crudezze
futuriformi e seminativi - as I must first go to Highgate .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.25

- May God bless you , my dear Edward ! and your obliged and
affectionate Uncle S. T. Coleridge COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.26

I leave this place by the Steam-Vessel on Thursday Morning 1$$2 past 7 -
My Birth-day ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.27

- But I can@ @not pass it better than in performing an act of Duty to Mr
& Mrs Gillman . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.28

P.S. The only part of your information that perplexed us was of Henry's
personal uncleanliness & ' the act of <font> indecency <$$font> ' -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,501.29

from his <P_5,502> infancy he has been bred up with such scrupulous
attention to Neatness , and all the minutiae of Modesty -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.30

And in the last Mementos , I wrote for him & which his Mother , I
believe , made him transcribe into his pocket-book , the anxious
retention of the habits , which he had been {TEXT:missing_"been"}
brought up in , on those points was especially urged .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.31

Can it have arisen from an abandonment of himself to Despondency ?
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.32

{ED:1491_To_James_Gillman}

18 October {TEXT:Oc} 1825 {TEXT:missing_"1825"}
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.34

My dearest Gillman I find that it will be impossible to get any letter ,
that you might write in answer to this , till an hour or more after the
Steam Vessel sets off - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.35

Therefore I must act on my own judgement singly -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.36

& God willing , shall be with you on Thursday Evening -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.37

If the Royal Sovereign should have a fair voyage , & arrive before 4 , I
might dine with you - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.38

but do not wait beyond 1$$2 past 5 . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.39

- And on Friday Evening I propose to be at Eton .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.40

Tho' I by no means see the event in such sombre hues , as you in the
first shock of the tidings see it ; yet I perfectly agree with you in
the propriety of removing Henry . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.41

Much evil & no good can come of his remaining !
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.42

- Or if from conversation with Edward Coleridge & minuter information on
the Spot , and my observation of Henry himself , I should gather any
data for a different opinion , you may safely trust my inclination to
avail myself of it , & I hope , my judgement likewise .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.43

As to Mrs Gillman's accompanying me , in whatever way I look at it , and
on whatever supposition - whether of Henry's removal or continuance - I
am positive in dissuading it <font> as worse than useless . <$$font>
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.44

As it is absolutely & confessedly impracticable for you to go , there
would , I feel , be almost an impropriety in <font> my <$$font> being
not the representative of both Parents but of you only .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.45

Besides , the more quietly the whole is managed & with the least
attraction of notice , the better it will be - whichever Result should
be decided on . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.46

In like manner , as to Highgate . - It should be said what with
sufficient truth may be said , that Henry's strength is found unequal to
the hardships of the College , & that his Health had begun to be
affected by it - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,502.47

& to give this fuller effect & for other still weightier reasons , it
will be best for him to return with me at once to Ramsgate - & be under
my care for the next month - during which time I shall be better
<P_5,503> able to offer you and Mrs G. a well-weighed Advice .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.48

- My dear Gillman ! you have my Nephew's testimony that Henry@ @'s a
Boy of <font> Principle <$$font> , and that there is weakness and
impersistency rather than want of Intellect . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.49

- For the rest , it was an experiment - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.50

& no experiment ought to be said to have wholly failed , if it has shewn
what road we are to take - tho' negatively , by demonstrating the
impracticability of the Road , we should have preferred .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.51

No apprehension can be turned into a Certainty ,
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.52

no <font> Thought <$$font> returned upon us a <font> Thing <$$font> ,
without a sad'ning Suddenness that for the moment lays our powers
prostrate & which no fore-bodings , however distinct , no not prescience
itself can disarm of it's sting or blunt it's sharpness .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.53

- But let the Thing settle back & thin away again , into a Thought - &
the Evil shrinks with it into human & bearable Dimensions .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.54

- What ? if H. had been reported to you as an incurable Liar ? or
privy Thief ? COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.55

- Of Anderson I say nothing - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.56

Indeed nothing but my vexation at finding you so depressed would make me
attempt <font> writing <$$font> any thing when in so short a time I
expect to be talking with you . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.57

- I have not talked much with Mrs Gillman . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.58

She must & I doubt not will pardon me for the abruptness with which I
put the negative on her going to Eton . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.59

But really the Light flashed so vividly on my mind that I should have
done violence to my Conscience not to have made my words as decisive as
my Convictions . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.60

- I never remember any run of Ill Luck or what was thought such , that
was not succeeded by some Compensative Occurrence or other .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.61

And at all events we will breast the waves together -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.62

Would you purchase the removal of all these mishaps at the price of a
single Pang of <font> Remorse <$$font> ? COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.63

- Then stand upright , my dear Gillman ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.64

and to hear the worst , hope the best ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.65

{COM:conclusion_and_signature_cut_off}

I have written to Edward . {TEXT:"E"_without_period}
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.67

{ED:1492_To_Hyman_Hurwitz}

1$$2 past One , Grove , Highgate - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.69

21 Octr 1825 - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,503.70

My dear Friend The date of place & time of this hasty scrawl , where I
have just arrived & this same moment received your letter forwarded from
<P_5,504> Ramsgate , and that after I have finished this answer & taken
a sandwich & a glass of Wine & water I must leave in order to return by
the 4 o'clock Stage that leaves Piccadilly for Eton - that tomorrow
night , if possible , but at the latest on Sunday , I shall leave Eton &
hope , God permitting , to reach Ramsgate by Monday Evening if the
strength of the young Charge , I shall have with me , holds out - these
particulars with the interpretation , which I should not withhold from
<font> your <$$font> confidential <font> Ear <$$font> , but would rather
not <font> write <$$font> even if I had the time or tranquillity
requisite - will entirely acquit me of all intentional Neglect of your
concerns . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.71

- At present , I can only reply that as soon as I reach Ramsgate , i.e.
from Tuesday Morning , 25 Octr - I will readily & instantly do my best
endeavors to effect all , you wish - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.72

& shall therefore content myself at present with leaving you to judge
whether the distance of a one_day Post from London will be an impediment
or not - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.73

The Post leaves Ramsgate every night <paren> Saturdays excepted
<$$paren> at 7 o'clock - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.74

& Letters from London arrive at Ramsgate , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.75

& may by sending to the Post office be procured by 8 in the Morning .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.76

- If this will do , I shall find a Letter from you at Ramsgate or
whatever else you may wish to send by the Ramsgate Coaches which go off
from Grace-church Street - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.77

I forget the name of the Inn . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.78

But I shall certainly call & stay some hours , perhaps sleep on Sunday
Night at Mr Ingram's , a Hatter , in Coleman Street : where any parcel
or letter will be delivered to me , if directed - ' to be delivered to
Mr Coleridge when he calls ' - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.79

I forget the Number - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.80

but perhaps I shall be able to learn it before I put this in the Post ,
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.81

& will therefore take a wafer in my pocket , & keep it open -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.82

Excuse my haste & I fear unintelligibility - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.83

God bless you & your troubled but most sincere Friend S. T. Coleridge
. COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.84

Do not mention any part of the Contents of this Letter to <font> any one
. <$$font> COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.85

I have borne this continued Movement from Dan to Bathsheba day after day
far better than I had dared hope for - or others for me : from which you
may infer the importance & urgency of my Business .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.86

- Mr Ingram , Hatter , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.87

26 Coleman Street COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,504.88

<P_5,505>

{ED:1493_To_James_Gillman}

Saturday Noon . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.91

{ED:22_October_1825}

My dear Friend Tho' I have barely seen Henry , and till I have talked
with him tête-à-tête can form no decisive judgement , and tho' there is
no Post till tomorrow evening , I yet commence the Letter - chiefly that
I may have more <font> time <$$font> for the writing of what is to come
, when I have that only to write ; but likewise that you may know the
process of my mind as well as it's ultimate decision .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.93

I had , of course , a cordial reception from Edward -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.94

and after clearing a plate of mutton kidneys & half an hour's earnest
conversation , I accompanied my Nephew to Dr Keates who is confined by
indisposition , & tho' recovering , still very weak from a sort of
bilious fever . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.95

I never remember a more perfect confirmation , than several of the facts
gave , of your conjectures , tho' the most striking I obtained from
Sally . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.96

It was evident <paren> N.B. not to herself : who had drawn no such
conclusion , having mentioned them only as instances of Henry's
simplicity and entire confidence in her , as his comforter <$$paren>
that the Floggings had gratified his Vanity , & almost perhaps so as to
be an object of his aspiration . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.97

What a strange child he is ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.98

- But this is an anticipation . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.99

- Edward began by entreating me to understand one thing - that <font> he
<$$font> did not wish the Boy to be removed , on account of any trouble
or the like , that he occasioned <font> him <$$font> <paren> Edward
<$$paren> personally - that there were other Boys that gave him far more
trouble - that as far as his Letter originated in any motive relating to
himself , it was exclusively this - to put you & Mrs Gillman in full
possession of what he could & of what he could <font> not <$$font> ,
henceforward hold himself <font> responsible <$$font> for .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.100

- ' If his moral Being should receive a stain , more than superficial ;
and if his classical education should make no advance , or none , that
for a moment would be considered by you as compensation for the loss of
innocence , in it's two great points , Veracity and Purity ; I must not
be held responsible for the result . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.101

I will do all in my power to prevent it , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.102

I will spare no trouble or circumspection to bring about the contrary ;
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.103

but I must not be held responsible for the One ,
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.104

and I can@ @not promise the other . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,505.105

' No one <paren> he continued <$$paren> ' can be more thoroughly aware ,
than I am , that a bare six weeks , and for a <font> Nestling <$$font>
too , could not in any ordinary case be considered even a tolerably fair
Trial - and especially , when so large a part of his Faults and
<P_5,506> Failures might , as appears from the Letters you have shewn me
, be rationally attributed to the paroxysm of Home-sickness and the
Exhaustion consequent both on this and on the previous state of
Excitement and the Straining of his Faculties beyond their natural
strength . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.106

And were the <font> moral <$$font> Risk out of the question , even now
tho' this is <font> not <$$font> an ordinary case , I should think that
this consideration ought to decide in favor of his remaining here - for
a time , at least , sufficient to ascertain what he can or will do ,
when his mind is at ease , & his feelings reconciled to the change , and
familiarized to the ways &c of the School & College .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.107

But he does seem to me so little capable of withstanding temptation ,
and still less , far far less of repelling Seduction - his facility in
giving way to any impudent Boy who laughs at or scoffs him for
hesitating to follow his example is so extreme - that I do feel that
there is a serious <font> moral <$$font> Risk - both respecting his
Purity of mind & act , and his <font> Veracity . <$$font>
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.108

Hitherto , his Honesty and Adherence to the Truth have been exemplary &
in some instances affecting . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.109

But how long with such childishness , and want of <font> Sense <$$font>
<paren> I use the word <font> practically <$$font> & in distinction from
Talent or intellectual Capability <$$paren> may this continue ?
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.110

I can not remove Temptation - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.111

& there are many bad Boys , from whose intimacy I can warn him but from
whose neighborhood I can@ @not remove him . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.112

- How long , I say ? COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.113

- Let the following Instance shew , how far my fears are or are not
groundless . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.114

A bad vulgar-minded bold Boy asked Henry to go down with him into a
Butcher's yard near the College , instead of going on <paren> as he was
going <$$paren> to the College . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.115

Henry resisted - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.116

did not want to go - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.117

refused - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.118

& on being again asked or bullied , went - to see a Bullock killed &
<font> cut up <$$font> - & to receive certain anatomical demonstrations
from the Butcher's Boys , as the little Rascal's <paren> his Seducer's
<$$paren> premature fancy had anticipated . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.119

Poor Henry had either no , or very indistinct , notions what it was , he
was to see . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.120

However , the Bullock <font> had <$$font> been killed & cut up before
they arrived : COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.121

but one of the Butcher's Lads asked Medsum <paren> or some such name
<$$paren> whether he had been flogged that day -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.122

the little Vagabond answered , Yes ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.123

- " Let us see " - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.124

and he consented COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.125

& let down his Trousers to shew them . {TEXT:"the"_without_period}
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.126

<paren> There {TEXT:missing_<paren>_"There"} were two Butcher's Lads & a
Butcher's man as the Spectators . <$$paren> COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.127

Then {TEXT:T} the {TEXT:missing_"the"} question was put to , & received
the same answer from , Henry . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.128

And he too was called on , & desired to do the same , that they might
compare the Floggings . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.129

Henry hesitated , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.130

& , I doubt not , was very unwilling - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.131

But on the other Boy's threatening him , that the Butchers would spurt
some blood on him , he consented , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.132

and exposed his person & the marks of Shame to these Ruffians ! '
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,506.133

- Other cases have occurred , not indeed <paren> thank God ! <$$paren>
of this sort but yet sad proofs of his incapability to stand out in any
resolve <P_5,507> that his own better mind would dictate .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.134

- I do think , my dear Gillman ! that the preceding Anecdote suggests a
strong additional Ground of Objection to the practice , & above all to
the frequency of Flogging in the Public Schools .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.135

It can not but weaken the Boys' sense of Self-respect in one of it's
most efficient Supports and Consequents , reverential Modesty to their
own person - & deaden the <font> human <$$font> instinct of proud Shame
, and the connection of Shame with Nakedness .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.136

- Of Henry's goings on in point of <font> Learning <$$font> , & of the
Symptoms of Ability or Inability to go through with the Tasks imposed on
him , & which in a short period will increase in number & difficulty , I
can say nothing which has not been already communicated in my Nephew's
Letter to you . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.137

- Here then I conclude , for the present , the one side of the Question
. COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.138

Now audi alteram partem . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.139

- Henry came in , while we were breakfasting .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.140

Whether Sally had prepared him , I do@ @n't know -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.141

Probably she had . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.142

He did not appear at all agitated - so very little , that I could not
help asking him - if he was not glad to see me ?
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.143

Yes ! very glad . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.144

- And by his manners & conversation it was plain that he felt under no
restraint or awe from his Tutor's Presence . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.145

He looked plump & well - & tolerably neat , according to <font> my
<$$font> preconceptions of School-boys . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.146

He drank a basin or large Cup of Tea COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.147

& eat a roll & butter - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.148

& was obliged <paren> he said <$$paren> to go off to attend his Master .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.149

- At {COM:missing_material} of this letter he came to me in Edward's
Study , according to my desire : COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.150

and I have had about an hour's Talk with him .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.151

- The result may be conveyed in few words . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.152

The neglect of his person in washing & change of linen {TEXT:line} he in
part denied - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.153

it was a false charge which his Dame's Servant had made to Sally & which
his Tutor over-heard - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.154

She had said , he neglected washing because he did not wash at his
Dame's , where they stole his Soap , but washed at Mother Stevens's
where he could do it comfortably ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.155

and in part , he laid the fault on his Dame , whom he dislikes , and her
Servants whom he detests . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.156

But that since the Time , his Tutor had talked to him , he had given no
cause of complaint , that he was aware of , in this respect .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.157

- When I spoke to him of the Act of Indecency , he was silent .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.158

And when I told him , I must tell you of it but would not for the world
that his Mother should ever know the particulars , & pointed out the
shockingness of the degradation as it would appear to every pure mind ,
he wept . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.159

When I charged him with the frightful silliness , the almost ideotic
childishness of being vain of his Floggings & boasting almost of them to
a Woman-servant , he was silent . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.160

- But over and over again , he said , he was happy , very happy - was
never happier any where - wished very much to <font> stay <$$font>
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,507.161

& said , his greatest difficulty & the chief occasion of his being
flogged , was his inability to learn <P_5,508> by heart , which he had
never been accustomed to - that he could learn Greek far easier than
Latin , and Long Ovid <paren> i.e. the Metamorphoses <$$paren> tho' 40
lines , easier than Short Ovid <paren> i.e. Epistles <$$paren> tho' but
24 - but that he thought , he should get over it - & tho' he could not
say much of his Progress hitherto , yet he did think that now he was
quite comfortable , he should make way . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.162

He talked rationally . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.163

It was one of his sensible days , at least . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.164

I gave him a Shilling : COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.165

& bid him come to me again {TEXT:missing_"again"} after {TEXT:fter}
Church , i.e. at 4 o'clock . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.166

It is now 3 . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.167

These are the Facts on both {TEXT:missing_"on_both"} sides .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.168

- I shall decide , I think , in favor of his staying
{TEXT:missing_"k_,_in_favor_of_his_s"} - unless you think no -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.169

On the other hand , he does not seem to have any better reason for
believing that he shall be equal to his Tasks & Rank in the School but
his <font> feelings . <$$font> COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.170

I will try to see Pattison . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.171

One bad thing is that the Boys are all possessed with the notion of his
silliness & absurdity . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.172

P.S. Edward expects his Brother Henry to pass by Egham on his road from
Devon to Town , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.173

and has written an urgent letter to stop him & bring him here for a day
; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.174

& has intreated me so strongly to stay over Monday , that I have given a
half-promise to do so - the more readily , that I may have a few lines
from you in answer to this , if you write by return of Post .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.175

I never was so perplexed & irresolute before .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.176

The main argument for his staying till Christmas , at least , is the ill
effect , it may have on the Boy's own mind , to think that he has been
hardly used , and not allowed to have a fair Trial : when he was eager
to do so - Perhaps , too , on his Mother's mind , & might strengthen her
desire to repeat the Experiment at the Charter House .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.177

- I will again consult Dr Keates . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.178

- God bless you & your ever faithful S. T. C. -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.179

{ED:1494_To_Edward_Coleridge}

Ramsgate COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.181

Friday COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,508.182

{ED:11_November_1825}

My dear Edward In this obdurate weather , ipso Novembre <font>
Novembrius <$$font> , even to <font> monologue <$$font> with you
telegraphically is to enjoy a Half-holiday <paren> for a holi@ @hour
{COM:font_change_around_"hour"} will not , I suspect , pass the Mint
<$$paren> from the most <P_5,509> tedious Work for trifling Wage , that
even an unpopular Author was doomed to moil at - videlicet , the
correction of the Proof Sheets of another Man's Compositions , where the
Composer's Errors in Stuff and Style are to be rectified as well as the
Compositor's Errata . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.184

This is far worse and the Earning still more unconscionably
disproportionate to the Time and Trouble , than Translation itself -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.185

nor should I have undertaken it but to oblige a very worthy man and in
the belief , that the work itself will do good .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.186

- The worst <paren> i.e. to <font> my <$$font> feelings <$$paren> of
all these {TEXT:th} necessitated tasks is , that I work at them under
the painful reflection {TEXT:painf_flection} that they are so many
<font> Avulsions <$$font> from the small remainder of Time that might
have been devoted to the completion of my own Works , and with my mind
constantly starting off to them like a Horse when he is passing the door
of his Stable , or the road that turns down to it .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.187

- But indeed , if they were <paren> as one of them actually is <$$paren>
ready for the Press , I see no chance of their seeing the light
otherwise than as post-humous Publications . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.188

Warned by the unsaleableness of all that have been published , the
Booksellers are shy of risking so great an expence -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.189

I could not in common honesty attempt to influence any but the most
opulent , the Magnates of the Trade - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.190

and among these I have no Hopers or Admirers -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.191

and as to publishing by <font> Subscription <$$font> , I sicken at the
very thought of it . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.192

A Novel , or a Tour , may make it's own way - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.193

but experience has given me bitter proof , that a Work intended to add
to the knowledge of the Reader , on subjects in which knowledge can@
@not be acquired without more or less effort of Thought on the Reader's
part , will for ever remain in the Publisher's Cellar , unless the
Public are informed by some Authority that they ought to have the Book
in their Libraries . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.194

I am not silly enough to overlook the defects of my writings , or the
internal causes of their unpopularness ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.195

but still it remains true , what Charles Lamb wrote to me , some 15
months ago - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.196

' You are one of Fortune's <font> Ne'er-do-wells <$$font> :
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.197

- the Edinburgh Review abuses you , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.198

the Quarterly never mentions you - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.199

Murray hates you , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.200

Gifford did not like you , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.201

and now your Nephew is Editor , he can@ @not befriend you , without
subjecting himself & <paren> as Murray will say <$$paren> the Quarterly
itself to a charge of Partiality and Nepotism . '
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,509.202

- With as full a confidence , as a Christian dare feel respecting his
own acquaintance with his own heart , I can assert , that , if I
possessed a sufficiency for the decencies and comforts of Life that are
in fact necessaries if the exertion of my intellectual <P_5,510> powers
be included in <font> Living <$$font> , the thought of writing for
posterity alone and of benefiting my contemporaries by kindling and
inseminating the minds of a few Individuals , as I have hitherto done in
the <font> Nos non nobis <$$font> way of Conversation , would be
pleasurable to me . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.203

I have not a single sparkle of the Love of literary Reputation for it's
own sake . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.204

Could I be sure that the same good would be effected by any thing , I
wrote , a very trifling sum would purchase from me the reputation of
having written it . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.205

- But things being as they are , I can@ @not help feeling my
friendlessness in the Literary Republic hard -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.206

& it deepens my regret in not having entered into the Church .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.207

- I have had but little time for reading . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.208

I have , however , gone thro' the two Volumes of Skelton , and Davison's
Discourses . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.209

- Skelton was a truly <font> genial <$$font> Spirit - tho' his
compositions are strikingly unequal . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.210

On the subject of the Trinity he is a <font> Master <$$font> - and
worthy to be named with Bull and Waterland . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.211

His greatest Draw_back he has in common with several other Divines of
that period - the disposition to place the favorite <font> Theory
<$$font> of the Age on the same level with the sacred Truths , which it
was one way of <font> arguing <$$font> for - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.212

I will explain myself hereafter - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.213

However , I have not seen any work from which half_a_dozen powerful and
useful Sermons for the great Festivals of the Church might be more
easily compiled . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.214

- Davison's is indeed a most valuable Accession to our Theological
Literature - and eminently free from the error , I complain of in
Skelton . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.215

Nevertheless , I must confess , that the first 120 pages excited an
expectation , which the remainder of the Volume did not <font> quite
<$$font> answer - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.216

Yet understand this rather as a tribute to the extraordinary merit of
the former , than as any dispraise of the latter .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.217

- The subject appears to me a Mine , the richest Veins of which still
remain to be opened - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.218

and with all Davison's well-earned honors distinctly before me , I do
exceedingly wish that <font> you <$$font> had the same or a similar
opportunity of distinguishing yourself . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.219

- And this brings me back to my chief motive for availing myself of an
offered Frank - viz. to urge you not to forget your half-promise to
pass a few days with me at Highgate . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.220

I can@ @not express how great a delight & comfort it would be to me -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,510.221

<P_5,511>

We leave Ramsgate at the close of next week - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.223

& as soon as I reach Highgate , I promise myself to write a more
entertaining Letter than the present . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.224

- I pray God fervently for his worthy Parents' sake that Henry Gillman
may be going on well - and doing his best , at least !
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.225

- God bless you , and your affectionate Uncle S. T. Coleridge
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.226

{ED:1495_To_James_Gillman}

3 . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.228

Wellington Crescent COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.229

Sunday COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.230

{ED:13_November_1825}

Ramsgate COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.232

My dear Gillman This most unramsgatish , this obdurate Weather <font>
ipso Novembre Novembrius <$$font> - thank God ! it is no longer <font>
this ! <$$font> COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.233

Old Mother Damnable on the Sky-Top Wringing her Dish-clouts or twirling
her Mop - Or astride on her Broom-stick , a notable Roarer
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.234

With her grim duffel Cloak <paren> <font> vide <$$font> Juvenal's
Satires <$$paren> - Qy {COM:sic} ? Why ? Be-Trimm'd and be-flounced
with it's own Rags & Tatters Blown over her head and streaming before
her She gallop'd away , on the scent of the Booty , Right over the Deck
Of a {TEXT:missing_"Of_a"} Goodwin sands Wreck To stop the poor Soul
that had not paid the Duty - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.235

is gone - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.236

Exit ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.237

and makes room for a Lady-like Sky . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.238

- All our weather-sages assure us that the Weather has taken a turn ,
and that we shall have a Spell of the <font> right Ramgsate <$$font> -
dry , bracing , cheerful . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.239

- In fact , so long a continuance of <font> wicked <$$font> bad weather
is scarcely remembered here - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.240

and I know but of one thing , in compensation - namely , that tho' it
put a stop to Bathing , forbad Ass-exercise , <paren> or , interpreting
the words according to the Heteroepy and Heterography of the broad
Vulgar , allowed of no other <$$paren> amerced all our Walks , or
confined them to the Colonnade - still it produced no <font> retrograde
<$$font> movement in Mrs Gillman's Health . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.241

It did not {TEXT:missing_"not"} even suspend her progress ; tho' it
doubtless put a drag to the Wheel , and made it less than it would have
been . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.242

Still , however , it is a great Comfort that she had no lee-way to make
up - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,511.243

and judging from her Looks after her Sea-bath before Breakfast this
<P_5,512> morning , and after her Donkey-trip with Mrs Steele and Susan
to Margate <paren> for the purpose of calling on Mrs Westinghausen , and
to return a Volume of Bacon to the Revd Mr Bayley <$$paren> and back
again - and now <paren> untired <$$paren> gone for a Walk on the Pier ,
I do think that a fortnight of such weather so used and availed of would
not only make but <font> leave <$$font> an improvement in her strength ,
that would be felt throughout the Winter . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.244

Before the bad weather visited us , she had repeatedly rode ten and even
twelve Miles , walked an hour & half before , and again after her return
- with no worse effect than that of feeling pleasantly tired at Bed-time
- COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.245

and that the gloomy damp weather , and the entire suspension of all
these Befriendments did not <font> undo <$$font> the good effect , but
left her able to start afresh , is to me a datum of Hope - on which I
ground <font> my <$$font> anticipation of a benefit greater than she has
derived from her Sea-sojourn in the two or three Autumns before this .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.246

- I regard her <font> strength <$$font> much more than her <font> Looks
<$$font> ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.247

and of course , all I have said , must be understood relatively and
comparatively . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.248

- I will not speak of myself , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.249

for tho' I certainly feel the <font> commencement <$$font> of an
improvement in my own health , in two points especially and those the
points , that had most disquieted & harrassed me - & can@ @not deny ,
that I shall take the cup from my lips reluctantly , and with a wish for
a fuller draught - yet as certainly this is not my influencing motive -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.250

and therefore I will not let it pass for such .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.251

- Mrs Gillman , however , is prepared to return with Mrs Steele & Susan
on Thursday - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.252

and should the Day be fair , and as Captn Major assures them will , be
the case , if the Weather continue in it's present mood , the Vessel
likely to arrive at the Custom-house Steps by four o'clock , they
propose to return by <font> it . <$$font> COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.253

- I give you my honor , that Mrs Gillman has <font> discountenanced
<$$font> the notion of staying out the two months <paren> on which I had
& supposed her to have , calculated - and the more so that my Trip and
then the Weather-luck had abridged it - a fortnight or more <$$paren>
from the hour that Mr Steele's last letter came - .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.254

Neither does she think that even tho' you wished us to stay out the time
, I should be able to prevail on Mrs Steele to leave Susan here -
without which &c - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,512.255

for verily , with all respect for , and due sense of , <font>
appearances <$$font> , I can neither think of or even look at myself
without a sort of Bitter <font> Smile <$$font> , in connection with the
Scruple - tho' it is only one of the occasions , in which I feel the
sharpy {COM:sic} and jagged Contrast of the wickedness of the World & my
own innocence - & painfully were it only that it <P_5,513> draws my
attention to the latter as if any thing else were possible , just as if
I was compelled to say to myself - No ! I have not a stinking purulent
ulcer under my Arm ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.256

It is not true , that my Nose is rotting off !
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.257

Mrs Gillman has been in again , to protest against my putting the
question - whether if I could induce Mrs Steele to let Susan stay , you
would like us to remain here another fortnight -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.258

So I let it drop - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.259

Nevertheless , I must entreat you to write by Monday Evening's Post ,
respecting the return by the Steam-Pacquet . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.260

You may rely on it , that if the Day did not promise and all but ensure
a calm & quick passage , I should not permit them to go aboard -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.261

But if I do not finish , I shall lose the Post - .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.262

Poor dear Mr & Mrs Aders ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.263

- One day all Rain & Storm , and Mr A. ill in his Bedroom -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.264

& the next day forced by his Letters to set off again , to Town
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.265

{ED:conclusion_and_signature_cut_off}

<paren> O that you had this Sea before you ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.267

How gladly would I live in Horsemonger Lane Gaol {TEXT:Goal} for a
fortnight , to give you the same time in this House - <$$paren>
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.268

{ED:1496_To_James_Gillman}

16 Novr 1825 - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,513.270

My dearest Gillman On the receipt of your kind Letter , Mrs Steele
having in consequence offered to leave Susan , and it <font> being
<$$font> very fine , and <font> promising <$$font> settled , weather ,
it was decided that we should stay : tho' Mrs Gillman was so much
affected by the kindness of your expressions <P_5,514> and your goodness
in so promptly acceding to the first wish expressed in her behalf , tho'
<paren> as was really the case <$$paren> without her consent , that she
was more than disposed to prove her sense of it by not availing herself
of the permission , and instead of entrusting it to my eloquence <paren>
there is no such word , escribence - in consequence , I imagine , of the
scri being a <font> long <$$font> syllable : for really escribence would
have been an accession to our language <$$paren> return to thank you in
person . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.271

- In fact , there were some tears shed , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.272

& I stood for the moment arraigned by her feelings of <font> selfishness
<$$font> - tho' God knows ! the only self-reference consisting in my
aversion to appear a Trifler , and retract convictions , without any
conviction of their having been formed without due grounds .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.273

- If personal wishes , confined to my feelings of and concerning my own
single Self , had been allowed to determine the matter , or rather if I
had allowed any right of voting to such Wishes , I should not have left
the Grove : COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.274

and at this moment have the Parlour & my comfortable Bed and Book Room
before my Heart's Eyes . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.275

But your Wife's undoubted & regular advance in flesh and strength gives
a warrant to my Belief , that a longer period of <font> Stationariness
<$$font> of her present Winnings will be obtained by prolonging her
sojourn to the close of the Month <paren> i.e. should the fine weather
continue <$$paren> - & that at the worst , we shall all be more
satisfied that the chance had been given . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.276

I think , that she <font> looks <$$font> much better ;
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.277

but as I said before , it is not by her Looks that I have been
influenced but by the continued change for the better in her <font>
strength <$$font> - as evinced among other signs by her spirits flagging
so much less from 5 o'clock to 1$$2 past 10 - or Bed-time .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.278

Mrs Steel has been very good & kind , and altogether a great <font>
Comfort <$$font> - . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.279

Even on my own account I shall always think of her with affectionate
pleasure . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.280

- I wish , when you meet Mr Steel , you would express this to him - and
any little recognition on your part of the Service , she has been to Mrs
Gillman , to Mrs Steel herself - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.281

half_a_score words said as <font> you <$$font> can say them - would be
felt by her in no common way - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.282

for she entertains a high esteem & partiality <paren> I can@ @not hit on
a better word <$$paren> for you . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.283

- Poor Mrs Kaye ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.284

- I had seen a Paragraph about an eminent City Solicitor -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.285

& had asked half_a_score people in Burgess's Library , and elsewhere
<font> who <$$font> it was , with a curiosity and interest that I could
not myself account for - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.286

but from your letter first I learnt the Name .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.287

Good God ! what a misery - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.288

and poor Caroline Atkins - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.289

The two Lads were Pupils of Edward's , who had christened them <font>
Scythian <$$font> and <font> Arab <$$font> - but thought highly of their
talents . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.290

- It is very curious ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,514.291

but just after my return hither from Eton Mrs Gillman gently
remonstrated with me for the dislike , & <font> prejudice <$$font> ,
<P_5,515> I had taken to Mr Kaye - adding that he was an affectionate
Husband , good Father , &c - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.292

& my answer <paren> as she will tell you <$$paren> was to this purpose -
that I could not help it ; that I had never taken to him but that the
last time , I saw him on horse-back in the Grove , his face or a
something in it had disturbed me so , that holy or unholy , <font> the
Spirit <$$font> twitched me back from him - tho' doubtless I ought to
keep it to myself . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.293

- I have written to Edward - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.294

& purpose to write again to_morrow , if I get a frank -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.295

& Mrs G. will write again to Henry . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.296

- If he can but make <font> any <$$font> progress , & at the same time
goes on in safety , the Advantage can@ @not but be great -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.297

& tho' I am anxious , uneasy perhaps , still I have cheering Hopes -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.298

the Child appeared to me so much improved in his manners .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.299

I only press on Edward the necessity of <font> Patience <$$font> for a
time - & that he will be so good as to bear in mind , that the reality
of <font> any <$$font> progress , much more than the <font> quantity
<$$font> , is the thing on your heart at present .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.300

- I have received a multiplicity of Invitations ;
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.301

but have refused all , but Sir T. Gray <paren> once <$$paren> and Mr
Jones <paren> once <$$paren> and a Mr Morice & Mr Wykeham Martin each
once - the third took me by surprize - and Mr W. Martin by virtue of
his famous Leeds Castle , near Maidstone , his lineal descent from
William of Wykeham , & his having a large <font> Waggon-load <$$font> of
MSS consisting of Letters between Oliver Cromwell & Sir T. Fairfax
{TEXT:Fair-fax} - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.302

But I have neither seen or heard aught of the least interest -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.303

Pray , remember me kindly to Mr and Mrs Mence - & to Mr Nixon , and the
Lasses - and to Mr Chance & his good Lady - and likewise to Hutton
Rolandson . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.304

- Tell Susan , that Harriet & Lester have just returned with her
Mistress , Mrs & Miss Steele from King's Gate - in high delight with
their Treat . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.305

{ED:conclusion_and_signature_cut_off}

P.S. Mrs Westinghausen has been over here - her Plans not yet settled -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.307

She & Charlotte are coming to dine with us - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.308

Edmund after a most stormy voyage arrived safe at Elington &c -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.309

Susy sends her <font> very <$$font> kind love to Mr Gillman - .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.310

{ED:1497_To_James_Gillman}

{ED:22_November_1825}

My dear Friend Never came letter more acceptable than your's to me this
morning . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,515.313

- The contents of the preceding one - the afflicting symptom of
<P_5,516> <font> want of sense <$$font> in the requests , after such a
preface , particularly of his desiring you to send some one down to him
, as if my journey had been mainly for his <font> amusement ; <$$font> &
the proof , which the prefatory confession gave , of the entire
evaporation of the effect produced by my coming , by his Tutor's solemn
address to him , by his narrow escape & the contract , which he had made
and subscribed to , all gone , like so much Ether , that had but touched
the surface & left it unwet - all this weighed & preyed on <font> my own
mind <$$font> , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.314

and set my fears at work <font> composing <$$font> the Letter from
Edward which I expected to come & fancied myself reading .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.315

But on his Mother the Facts came like a Simoom - that stifles and
withers - or as if all <font> Hope <$$font> had been pumped out of her
by one stroke of the piston ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.316

She was not agitated , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.317

nor could she shed tears ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.318

but I was downright sick at heart with the apprehension , that all the
little Capital & Lay-up of Strength & Spirits would imperceptibly steal
away like water in the Egyptian Wine-Coolers - only a tear-drop seen now
and then on the outside , yet at the close of the day all gone - .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.319

To <font> her <$$font> therefore Edward's Letter came with wings of
Healing - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.320

There was still a <font> Perch <$$font> for Hope to entalon , tho' it
should hang by it's claws with it's head downward .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.321

- She bore the gentle <font> censure <$$font> on her excess of anxious
Superintendence with a cheerful good grace ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.322

and only observed <paren> not , I must say , without some reason
<$$paren> that whatever portion of the Evil was attributed to this , an
equal portion of the <font> good <$$font> should take the same direction
. COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.323

The never intermitted Over-looking , By-standing , and Admonishing ,
which had enfeebled his Volition by habituating him to dependence on
others , had likewise kept the moral Will pure and rendered Veracity a
Habit . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.324

Something too should be allowed for the <font> passive <$$font> strength
in bearing bodily pain - so far at least , that the punishments , he
knows himself to have deserved , have produced neither resentment , nor
a desire to get out of their reach , nor any other mark of
self-abandonment . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.325

Sad and strange as his Idleness is , it is not however the sloth of
self-despairing Baseness . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.326

- But in simple truth , we know what the result is under +A ;
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.327

but what it would have been under -A , we do not know !
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.328

Therefore , it is very difficult to determine how much or how little of
the Result is to be considered as an <font> Effect <$$font> - .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.329

The whole has been <font> cum hôc ; <$$font> COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.330

but it does not follow , that the whole is <font> propter_hoc <$$font>
{COM:font_change_around_"propter"} . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,516.331

- His Idleness , the absence or great deficiency of <font> initiative
<$$font> power , of <font> setting <$$font> himself off on the skaits ,
no momentum from within , and even when this had been supplied from
without , yet no fulcrum to renew it from - these <paren> in their
existing <font> degree <$$font> , at least <$$paren> and in some measure
likewise his Vanity , as being the natural offspring of conscious
weakness with habits of dependency on others , in natures <P_5,517> that
but for weakness would be <font> affectionate , & <$$font> which being
weak are <font> fond <$$font> - these , I say , or rather the <font>
degree <$$font> in which these exist in Henry , may be justly , because
probably , attributed to the incessant solicitude and attendance , of
which he knew himself to be the <font> Object . <$$font>
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.332

- But the weakness itself , the Substratum of his character , the
combination of intenacity with unimpressibility , the gleaminess of his
intellectual powers that at once proves their existence and their
feebleness - and more than all , the want of <font> Sense <$$font> under
the evident sufficiency of memory , apprehension , & associative power -
these <font> can@ @not <$$font> be accidents of <font> Education
<$$font> - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.333

these can not reasonably be accounted for by any excess of good
qualities in the Instructor & Guardian . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.334

I never thought so much on any one character in my whole life as I have
on Henry's - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.335

& never have been so much perplexed & baffled in my attempts to
understand it . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.336

- I will not say , that I have arrived at <font> no <$$font> result ;
but that the following is the only Result , I can rest in - .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.337

First however , I must premise that by <font> Sense <$$font> I here mean
a man's power of thinking of himself in relation to the Things and
Persons , that he has to deal with , and vice_versâ , the power of
apprehending and looking at Things & Persons in relation to himself .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.338

Only in this way can the Self become a Subject , or the <font>
Circumstantia {TEXT:Cirmstantia} Objects <$$font> ;
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.339

but both would fleet {COM:sic} on a delirium where the
{TEXT:missing_"the"} sensations are as objective as the Perceptions ,
and the Perceptions as subjective as the Sensations .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.340

It is only , I say , by the habit of referring a number and variety of
passing objects to the same abiding <font> Subject <$$font> , that the
<font> flux <$$font> of the former can be arrested , and the latter made
a nucleus for them to crystallize {TEXT:chrystallize} round .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.341

But again it is only by the habit of referring & comparing the Subject
to and with the Objects , that it can be consciously known as the <font>
same <$$font> & <font> abiding <$$font> - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.342

and before it can be <font> compared <$$font> , it must have been
distinguished , thought of separately , and singly for itself - .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.343

There must be Reflection - a turning in of the Mind on itself .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.344

In order to be a Subject , the conscious Percipient and Appropriator of
outward Objects , it must have been made itself an Object for itself -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.345

for so only can it know itself to be a <font> Subject <$$font>
relatively to all else . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.346

- Now what is that which first induces the Individual to turn inward on
himself ? COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.347

<font> Generally <$$font> expressed , it is <font> Sensibility .
<$$font> COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.348

But that is far <font> too <$$font> general .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.349

I am persuaded , that it is some <font> specific <$$font> sensibility ,
having it's seat and source in some special energy of the organic and
organific Life - & connected with , growing with , & following the same
fates with , some system of organs - not perhaps the structure , but yet
with the functions and functional development {TEXT:developement} .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,517.350

- Now the peccatum radicale in Henn is , I am persuaded , Want of Sense
, arising from the lateness in the developement of the <font> conditions
<$$font> of Sense - whether from a fault in the Germ , which I do
<P_5,518> not think probable , or from some nipping Frost or Blight in
early Spring , God knows ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.351

- Now the practical conclusion , I would draw , is simply - Patience ,
fed by the Consolation which the good points of his character supply -
and Hope directed toward the revolution , that his Body and bodily Life
will sooner or later undergo - satisfied in the interim , that all
enfeebling Causes are removed , & that by virtue of the contrary
Influences and Excitants his manners , and <font> automatic volitions
<$$font> will imperceptibly be prepared for , & perhaps accelerating ,
the change - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.352

I was to have said a great deal for Mrs G. & about our coming - & how a
good <font> two thirds <$$font> of our daily weather is fine &
delightful here - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.353

but I must write again - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.354

God bless you & S. T. C. COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.355

We have rain , generally , from about 5 in the afternoon , till 8 , 9 ,
or even the greater part of the Night - but delightful {TEXT:delighful}
Mornings & days . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.356

Yesterday was one of the only two <font> reprobate <$$font> days , we
have had . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.357

Mrs Gillman enjoined me to tell you , how very thankful she is for your
kindness in so immediately sending Edward's Letter .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.358

- Susan sends her <font> very <$$font> kind love . -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.359

{ED:1498_To_George_Skinner}

22 Novr 1825 COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.361

3 Wellington Crescent , Ramsgate COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.362

My dear Sir I feel so much confidence in your kindness that I will not
hesitate to tell you that it would be a long story to explain the first
causes & occasions of this lamentable weakness , this great but
self-punishing fault - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.363

in periods of Sickness & depression I have such a nervous dread of
Letters , that had I not a better and wiser self than myself I might
lose every friend I possessed and see the explanation before my eyes in
a pile of unopened Letters . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.364

When therefore I feel myself unwell and my spirits depressed , I entreat
Mr & Mrs Gillman to open the letters , and <font> make <$$font> me
answer them . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.365

- That my trust in them is absolute and yet only commensurate with my
Obligations , and that I have not knowingly a recess of my heart or a
thought in it which I would not wish layed open to them , will perhaps
but half excuse this transfer of duties - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.366

the other half of the excuse must be , that it is the lesser of two
evils . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.367

You will not therefore wonder that on leaving Highgate for a sojourn by
the Sea side - I entreated Mr G. to open my Letters , and inform me of
such as required an answer - and that it is in this way that I have
learnt of your very kind invitation . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,518.368

How gladly would I have availed myself of it had <P_5,519> it been in my
power ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.369

But I am obliged to remain here till the 1st of December ,
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.370

and then I return with the expectation of a Visit from my Nephew , the
Revd E. Coleridge of Eton . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.371

- As soon however as I can summon my thoughts , I mean to write to you &
show you that you have been often in the thoughts of My dear Sir
{ED:no_conclusion_or_signature_in_transcript} COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.372

{ED:1499_To_Edward_Coleridge}

Tuesday Noon . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.374

- 6 {TEXT:missing_"6"} Dec. 1825 COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.375

My dear Edward Since the receipt of your kind & to me most exhilarating
letter , one interruption after another has <font> punctuated <$$font>
my answer from a semi-colon to a full stop . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.376

Long & short - ? COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.377

! ! ! - and blank interspaces sufficient for the division of chapters
. COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.378

Instead therefore of attempting to finish my reply <font> seriatim
<$$font> to the different topics started in your's , and which has
already reached the beginning of the second side of a second sheet -
tho' if I can find it in my heart to make you pay double postage , or
should procure a frank , you will receive it on Thursday Morning - I
have decided on sending a sort of Dwarf Trumpeter before - with the
<font> necessaries <$$font> for the interim .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.379

- Without therefore repeating my gladness at the thought of seeing you ,
I shall simply say that all days & hours will be convenient , with the
single exception of Friday next - which I am obliged to devote to my
excellent friend , Mr Green of Lincoln's Inn Fields on a matter of great
& pressing importance to him in his present harrassing Contest with Envy
, Hatred , and Malice in the persons of Sir Astley Cooper & his two
Nephews , Mess. Bransby Cooper & Key , with Farce , Falsehood , and
Fatuity as their Train-bearers . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,519.380

<P_5,520>

Poor dear Miss Lamb is under her sore periodical Visitation - and
Charles himself very unwell . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.382

- I foreboded , and I more than fear too truly , that his emancipation
from the India House would not add to his Happiness .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.383

Blanco White is , you know , a Valetudinarian ,
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.384

& by a very interesting letter I have received from him with Doblado &
his ' Poor Man's Preservative against Popery ' , which had for me all
the charm of Novelty and I even think pleased me more than the original
Work , I learn that he {TEXT:missing_"I_learn_that_he"} is very infirm
and weather-daunted . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.385

But the moment , I hear from you , what day <paren> alas !
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.386

why must I say <font> day <$$font> - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.387

I have no liking for your singular numbers ! COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.388

I want Daniel's ' a time and two times and half a time ' -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.389

and here is a comfortable Bed and Bed-room for you , and Mr & Mrs
Gillman to worship as well as welcome you - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.390

Every additional hour , you spent here , would really confer a week of
genial Sensation on these warm-hearted and affectionate people , both
intensive in the present enjoyment & extensive in their
after-recollections . <$$paren> COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.391

- I will set about it in good earnest with Irving , White , and the
unique Charles . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.392

- It so happens , that on Thursday Mr & Mrs Gillman have the offer of a
rich Friend's carriage , which could fetch Henry from the Piccadilly
Coach-place - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.393

and I am instructed to ask you , whether there would be any <font>
impropriety <$$font> in requesting of Dr Keate his permission for Henry
to leave Eton on Thursday - whether <font> you <$$font> deem it right
and advisable . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.394

For if you entertain the least <font> doubt <$$font> on the subject ,
they would not think of it . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.395

By return of post be so good as to give me two or three lines .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.396

I do not ask for more - knowing how busy you must be .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.397

And now I must conclude - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.398

yet I can@ @not do it without transcribing or rather abridging one part
of my letter - viz. respecting the Quarterly .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.399

When I wrote , I was in the atro-caerulean Mist of the hell-blue Spirits
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.400

<paren> let the epithet pass for a Germanism , hell-blau or clear blue
<$$paren> - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.401

but even then any complaint of John was leagues off from my thoughts .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.402

Not only myself , but Charles Lamb , meant the term ' ill-luck ' in it's
simplest & strictest sense . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,520.403

He placed himself <P_5,521> in John's situation ,
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.404

and judged by what would regulate his own decision .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.405

Silent as the Quarterly on every occasion had been respecting me , any
Review , that could at <font> any <$$font> time have served me , would
inevitably be attributed by a large party to the change in the Editors -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.406

Read under such an impression it could do <font> me <$$font> no good -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.407

and might injure the Review , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.408

& certainly would expose John to censure or suspicion .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.409

- Such were my inmost convictions - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.410

and such too would have been the advice , I would give , even at this
moment . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.411

You are aware , my very dear Nephew ! that neither my feelings nor my
judgement have ever been thoroughly reconciled to this Editorship - and
only appeased by the almost implicit confidence I have the habit of
feeling in John's strength & sanity of judgement .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.412

The pleasure with which I heard of his professional success was sensibly
increased by the hope , that stress of business would with the motive
remove the ability to continue in that honorable but invidious situation
- for which likewise a <font> dash <$$font> of the party-coloured Devil
is almost a necessary qualification - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.413

and if I shrunk from the very fancy , that Murray had the <font> power
<$$font> of saying to John - Why did you do so ? - with how much
stronger & quicker aversion must I not recoil from the thought that
Murray should have a <font> right <$$font> to say it ?
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.414

- All Walter Scott's reputation with my Contemporaries would not
compensate for the knowledge that such a thing had happened , & on my
account - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.415

For I very , very much love , esteem , & prize your Brother . -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.416

{ED:no_conclusion_or_signature_in_transcript}

{ED:1500_To_Edward_Coleridge}

Thursday Midnight COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.419

{ED:8_December_1825}

My dear Edward I write merely to tell you , that I have secured Charles
Lamb and Mr Irvine to meet you , & wait only to learn the day for the
endeavour to induce Mr Blanco White to join us .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.421

Will you present Mr & Mrs Gillman's regards to your Brothers , Henry and
John - & that they would be most happy if both or either could be
induced to accompany you ? COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,521.422

I have had a very interesting conversation with Irvine this evening on
the present condition of the Scottish Church , the spiritual arteries of
which , yea , the very Aorta , he describes as in a <P_5,522> state of
Ossification . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.423

The greater part of the Scottish Clergy , he complains , have lost the
<font> unction <$$font> of their own Church without acquiring the
erudition and accomplishments of ours - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.424

Their sermons are all dry theological arguing & disputing , lifeless ,
pulseless - a rush-light in a fleshless skull .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.425

My kindest Love to your Sister and kisses , prayers , and blessings for
the Little one - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.426

{ED:S._T._Coleridge}

I almost despair of John's coming ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.428

but do persuade Henry if you can . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.429

I quite long to see him again . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.430

{ED:1501_To_Blanco_White}

Grove , Highgate COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.432

Monday Afternoon COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.433

{ED:12_December_1825}

My dear Sir On my return from my two months' <font> Maritimate <$$font>
at Ramsgate I found Doblado , the Poor Man's Preservative & your very
kind and interesting letter . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.435

For all three receive my cordial thanks . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.436

The first I had never read tho' often heard of .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.437

I began it an hour before dinner - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.438

resumed it after tea , i.e. 7 o'clock - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.439

and when I heard the clock strike 2 , thought it was time to undress -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.440

and did so , save and except my drawers & dressing gown ,
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.441

but could not lay the Book down till I had finished the last page just
as it struck three . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.442

I need not say , it was a delightful work ; COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.443

but I should be ungrateful if I did not avow that both directly and by
suggestion it has been a most instructive one to me .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.444

- The Poor Man's Preservative - to repeat the words I used in a note to
my Nephew - had all the charm of Novelty for me .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.445

I am not certain that it did not please me even more than the original
larger Volume . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.446

But probably , the constant lively sense of the great present utility of
the Preservative , and the excellent management of the Dialogue , bribed
my Judgement a little . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.447

- The fashionable <font> French <$$font> Modesty has for many years
supplied a subject of indignant contempt & complaint with me - .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,522.448

To_morrow I purpose to send a small parcel to you , with Hurwitz's '
Vindiciae Hebraicae ' , a work which passed under my hand - and
<P_5,523> of which the Author <paren> the person spoken of in my Aids to
Reflection , p. 205 <$$paren> respectfully entreats your acceptance .
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.449

In a passage , that I have marked by a slip of Paper <paren> and which
Mr Hurwitz has introduced with a compliment that shews him to have
contemplated my character thro' the famous ' <font> Amici <$$font>
Reflecting-Microscope ' that is said to magnify a_million times
<$$paren> you will find the echo of your sentiments -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.450

But for this & other topics I must refer you to the Letter which I shall
inclose in the parcel - COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.451

For the proper and immediate purpose of the present Scrawl is to say -
that my Nephew , the Revd. Edward Coleridge , of Eton , a most sincere
Lover and Admirer of your's , is with his Brother , Henry <paren> who
accompanied his Cousin , the Bishop , to Barbadoes <$$paren> , to spend
the day with us on Thursday next . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.452

- They both anxiously wish for a personal introduction to you -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.453

and tho' my knowledge {TEXT:knowlege} of your ill-health and that you
are , not without good cause , weather-daunted , make my hopes burn very
dim , yet I can@ @not help <font> Trying <$$font> - so far as to assure
you in my own name , my Nephews' , and Mr and Mrs Gillman's , that you
would confer an especial delight on us all , if you would join the party
. COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.454

We shall dine at an early hour - about 4 : COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.455

and a well-aired Bed & Bed Room with a Fire in it will be prepared for
you . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.456

- Oblige me with a single Line by the return of Post -
COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.457

and let it be , Yes ! if <font> that <$$font> be possible with <font>
safety . <$$font> COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.458

But if you are convinced , that you could not come but at a hazard , I
retract my request , COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.459

and tho' the <font> Wish <$$font> will survive , yet it shall be
swallowed up in a larger , as Jonas in the Whale , to be cast on shore
again , sub dio in a more genial Season . COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.460

- I shall miss the Post , if I do not hasten to repeat that with unmixed
Esteem and cordial regard , I am , my dear Sir , Your obliged Friend S.
T. Coleridge COLERIDGE-1825-2,5,523.461

