<BEGIN_cook2-1901-2>

<P_105>

<heading>

Roses COOK2-1901-2,105.4

<$$heading>

A good start in Rose-growing means future success . COOK2-1901-2,105.6

Many failures in gardening are simply the result of beginning in an
unreasonable way , thinking nothing perhaps of the soil , the varieties
, whether they are vigorous , free , or the reverse , and the treatment
necessary to ensure a happy life . COOK2-1901-2,105.7

The Rose is the flower of the English garden , COOK2-1901-2,105.8

and its value increases as we grow accustomed to the desires of the
Tea-scented varieties , and know something of the wonderful beauty of
the climbers , the Bardou Job , Carmine Pillar , and many other rambling
kinds that fling their flower-laden shoots over arch , pergola , and
pillar , and sometimes look into the window to flood the house with
perfume . COOK2-1901-2,105.9

The Soil is a matter of some importance , COOK2-1901-2,105.10

but the majority are compelled to make the best of the garden as it is ,
COOK2-1901-2,105.11

and are not in a position to bring in a large amount of fresh material .
COOK2-1901-2,105.12

Ground that has been occupied with vegetables is usually in excellent
condition for Roses . COOK2-1901-2,105.13

The best position in the garden should be given to the Roses .
COOK2-1901-2,105.14

It is unreasonable to expect an abundant harvest of flowers from plants
under the shade of trees , or soil already filled with roots from a
neighbouring shrubbery . COOK2-1901-2,105.15

We will assume , therefore , that the bed is in the centre of the garden
, or some spot about which the ardent rosarian would not quarrel .
COOK2-1901-2,105.16

The Rose absolutely revels in sunshine and air , COOK2-1901-2,105.17

and the aspect can@ @not be too carefully selected for the bed .
COOK2-1901-2,105.18

A convenient size for the bed would be about twenty feet long and five
feet wide . COOK2-1901-2,105.19

This would provide space for about thirty Rose bushes .
COOK2-1901-2,105.20

The preparation of the bed is of first importance , COOK2-1901-2,105.21

and should be carried out , if possible , not later than September , if
autumn planting <paren> by far the best <$$paren> be adopted .
COOK2-1901-2,105.22

Unquestionably the best soil for all Roses <paren> except those of the
Tea-scented and allied tribes <$$paren> is a strong , rather heavy ,
even clayey loam . COOK2-1901-2,105.23

In this soil the Hybrid Perpetual kinds are very happy ,
COOK2-1901-2,105.24

but if light and sandy , then the Tea-scented and Hybrid Teas should
predominate . COOK2-1901-2,105.25

In making preparation for bastard_trenching or double_digging the bed ,
mark out the length and width with a line . COOK2-1901-2,105.26

{COM:diagram_omitted}

<P_106>

Divide the bed off into six sections as illustrated .
COOK2-1901-2,106.29

The soil of section A is dug out to the depth of the spade and placed on
the path at the other end of the bed . COOK2-1901-2,106.30

The broken soil is then shovelled out and placed at the end also .
COOK2-1901-2,106.31

The second or lower spit of section A is then broken up with a
four-pronged fork , well incorporating with the soil thoroughly decayed
farmyard or stable manure . COOK2-1901-2,106.32

The soil must not be brought to the top , but kept in the same place .
COOK2-1901-2,106.33

When this second spit appears heavily charged with water , artificially
drain the bed . COOK2-1901-2,106.34

To do this , the second spit must be thrown out , and about four inches
or five inches of large stones , clinkers , or broken bricks put in the
bottom , and the second spit returned . COOK2-1901-2,106.35

It is wise to raise the bed four inches or five inches when the soil is
badly drained , as stagnation means that the young roots rot away .
COOK2-1901-2,106.36

When manure has been mixed with the bottom spit , the top spit of
section B is put into section A . COOK2-1901-2,106.37

The shovellings of section B placed in A will complete the first trench
. COOK2-1901-2,106.38

When much manure , either liquid or solid , has been used on the soil in
the past , a dressing of chalk would improve its fertility if
incorporated with the surface soil at the rate of two pounds per square
yard . COOK2-1901-2,106.39

When the soil is very light , <font> i.e. <$$font> sandy or gritty ,
put a good layer of cow manure during trenching below the bottom spit of
soil . COOK2-1901-2,106.40

Burnt weeds and other garden refuse are excellent to mix with the top
soil . COOK2-1901-2,106.41

These may appear unnecessarily elaborate preparations , but the bed when
thoroughly made will last for years , with the usual attention required
by the plants . COOK2-1901-2,106.42

Planting . COOK2-1901-2,106.43

- Early planting is one of the most important points ,
COOK2-1901-2,106.44

and choose from the middle of October to the end of November .
COOK2-1901-2,106.45

Roses may , however , be planted in the spring , or in winter when the
weather is favourable . COOK2-1901-2,106.46

Purchasing . COOK2-1901-2,106.47

- Give the order to the nurseryman early , COOK2-1901-2,106.48

or , better still , go to the nursery COOK2-1901-2,106.49

and bring the plants back with you . COOK2-1901-2,106.50

If foliage is still on the growths remove it , COOK2-1901-2,106.51

and to prevent the wood shrivelling , make a trench in a shady spot
COOK2-1901-2,106.52

and place the roots of the bushes in it , covering them with soil until
they can be properly planted . COOK2-1901-2,106.53

If the arrangement of the kinds has been well considered on paper the
Roses should be so laid in the trench as to enable them to be drawn out
as required with_out disturbing the others . COOK2-1901-2,106.54

Do not leave their roots exposed to the air for even a few minutes .
COOK2-1901-2,106.55

Tea Roses must be upon the seedling or cutting briar ,
COOK2-1901-2,106.56

and the last-mentioned is the best stock for the Hybrid Perpetuals .
COOK2-1901-2,106.57

When about to plant have a bucket of water ready at hand to dip the
roots in . COOK2-1901-2,106.58

Keep the plants covered with a sack or mat until required .
COOK2-1901-2,106.59

Trim over the jagged ends of the roots with a sharp knife ,
COOK2-1901-2,106.60

and if the branches are more than two feet in length cut the surplus
away , as this prevents the wind from moving the stems to and fro after
the plants are in their places . COOK2-1901-2,106.61

In planting make a hole in the soil about one foot each way , and deep
enough to allow space for the roots to be spread out carefully .
COOK2-1901-2,106.62

Dwarf or bush Roses are either on their own roots , that is to say ,
struck from cuttings , or budded upon a foster stock .
COOK2-1901-2,106.63

This foster stock is of four kinds - the Briar-cutting , the Seedling
Briar , Manetti , and De la Grifferaie . COOK2-1901-2,106.64

These are described under the heading of Stocks . COOK2-1901-2,106.65

All these stocks spread their roots outwards , except the <P_107>
seedling briar , which makes a long tap-root , and must be shortened to
prevent it going too deep into the cold soil below the first spit .
COOK2-1901-2,107.66

Place the junction between scion and stock an inch below the surface
<paren> not more <$$paren> . COOK2-1901-2,107.67

The roots having been dipped in water , hold the plant in the left hand
COOK2-1901-2,107.68

and arrange the fibres to the right and left . COOK2-1901-2,107.69

It is not labour lost to prepare ready a bushel or two of fine soil for
placing immediately over the roots . COOK2-1901-2,107.70

Give them a thin covering of this , COOK2-1901-2,107.71

and lift the plant gently up and down to allow the soil to run among the
fine roots . COOK2-1901-2,107.72

Put some more soil on COOK2-1901-2,107.73

and tread firmly . COOK2-1901-2,107.74

Roses like firm planting when the land is not wet . COOK2-1901-2,107.75

Do not quite fill up the hole . COOK2-1901-2,107.76

When a saucer-like cavity is left around each plant this facilitates
watering should the weather remain dry . COOK2-1901-2,107.77

After the plants have been in the soil about a week give one good
watering unless rain has intervened , COOK2-1901-2,107.78

then fill up the cavity with fine dusty soil COOK2-1901-2,107.79

and allow this to remain as loose as possible . COOK2-1901-2,107.80

Do not plant when the ground is wet and sticky , COOK2-1901-2,107.81

but leave the plants in the trenches . COOK2-1901-2,107.82

When planting is finished the surface soil should be left rough , not
raked over and made neat . COOK2-1901-2,107.83

Earth up the bushes in November in the same way one would potatoes ,
hence the wisdom of planting the bushes in rows . COOK2-1901-2,107.84

All the growths covered with the soil are quite safe from severe frosts
. COOK2-1901-2,107.85

The Hybrid Perpetuals should be earthed up as well as the Teas .
COOK2-1901-2,107.86

One never knows the kind of winter to expect , COOK2-1901-2,107.87

and there is comfort in the thought that the Roses are safe .
COOK2-1901-2,107.88

Even when the soil is frozen very hard the growths remain uninjured .
COOK2-1901-2,107.89

When Roses for some good reason can@ @not be planted in November wait
until February and March unless one is blessed with a fine January .
COOK2-1901-2,107.90

In the case of deferred planting prune the plants back to three inches
or four inches from the base before planting . COOK2-1901-2,107.91

Many thousands of Roses are killed every year through adopting the "
filling up gaps " practice . COOK2-1901-2,107.92

By making a hole and planting a Rose between two established plants this
hole attracts an undue share of moisture , COOK2-1901-2,107.93

and the roots suffer considerably . COOK2-1901-2,107.94

Far better replant the whole border or bed , COOK2-1901-2,107.95

and remember that it is unwise to allow fresh manure to come immediately
into contact with the roots . COOK2-1901-2,107.96

To plant a bed twenty feet by five feet containing a good representative
collection , and arranged according to habit of growth , having the
strongest in the centre row , the following diagram will indicate the
position of each variety according to the number against the name :
COOK2-1901-2,107.97

- {COM:diagram_omitted} Distance to Plant . COOK2-1901-2,107.98

- Bush Roses may be planted as close together as fourteen inches in the
rows , and eighteen inches from row to row , COOK2-1901-2,107.99

but <P_108> eighteen inches to twenty-four inches each way is better .
COOK2-1901-2,108.100

Many growers for exhibition prune their plants severely <paren> a
practice alluded to under the head of pruning <$$paren> ,
COOK2-1901-2,108.101

then fourteen inches is sufficient . COOK2-1901-2,108.102

Standard Roses are usually given a distance of two feet six inches to
three feet each way . COOK2-1901-2,108.103

Stocks for Roses . COOK2-1901-2,108.104

- Many beginners , when ordering Roses , desire them on " their own
roots . " COOK2-1901-2,108.105

It should be clearly understood what an own-root Rose is :
COOK2-1901-2,108.106

it is one raised from a cutting of any particular variety ;
COOK2-1901-2,108.107

but an ordinary bush Rose is one that is budded or grafted upon a foster
stock , either in the stem near the root or upon the root itself .
COOK2-1901-2,108.108

Own-root or cutting Roses are very satisfactory for some varieties ,
COOK2-1901-2,108.109

but they are not always procurable . COOK2-1901-2,108.110

The foster stock usually employed are the Manetti ; Hedge Briars from
cuttings known as the Briar-cutting ; Briars from seed known as seedling
briar , Hedge Briars to make Standard or Tree Roses , De la Grifferaie ,
and Polyantha stocks . COOK2-1901-2,108.111

But Roses may be budded upon almost any variety of Rose -
COOK2-1901-2,108.112

in fact , one could bud an old Rose all over with a modern kind if so
desired . COOK2-1901-2,108.113

Where a foster stock is used there is always a danger of suckers
springing up and choking , as it were , the kind we desire to possess .
COOK2-1901-2,108.114

We have known instances where Marechal Niel has been planted and the
plant killed by frost . COOK2-1901-2,108.115

The owner , however , was unaware of this , COOK2-1901-2,108.116

and instead of the Marechal Niel he cultivated for some time the stock
that sprang up from the roots , COOK2-1901-2,108.117

and wondered why it produced only tiny pink flowers instead of rich
blossoms filled with perfume . COOK2-1901-2,108.118

It may be as well to briefly describe the Manetti , Briars , De la
Grifferaie , and Polyantha stocks . COOK2-1901-2,108.119

The Manetti Stock can@ @not be mistaken for the cultivated Roses .
COOK2-1901-2,108.120

The foliage is of a tender grass-green colour , the leaves seven in
number whereas most of the Hybrid Perpetual , Tea , and Hybrid Tea
tribes have five only ; COOK2-1901-2,108.121

the wood in the young sucker state is a reddish brown , and the prickles
of the same colour . COOK2-1901-2,108.122

In about two inches of its growth there are two or three large prickles
, interspersed among them being numerous tiny prickles resembling the
cylinder of a musical-box . COOK2-1901-2,108.123

The Briar Stock is so well known that it seems superfluous to describe
it . COOK2-1901-2,108.124

There are , however , many varieties of the Wild Briar some of them much
resembling the Ayrshire Roses , COOK2-1901-2,108.125

but the usual form is very prickly , the foliage of a dull dark green ,
COOK2-1901-2,108.126

and there are seven leaves on a stalk . COOK2-1901-2,108.127

The De la Grifferaie Stock may deceive the novice .
COOK2-1901-2,108.128

It has large leaves like a cultivated Rose , COOK2-1901-2,108.129

but they have a peculiar downy appearance COOK2-1901-2,108.130

and are purplish-green in the young state . COOK2-1901-2,108.131

The wood is thick and of red colour , spines large and about equal in
size . COOK2-1901-2,108.132

The tip of the grown has quite a mealy look . COOK2-1901-2,108.133

The Polyantha Stock has a flower like the Blackberry , nine leaves on a
stalk , very pale but dull green , COOK2-1901-2,108.134

and the edges are prettily notched . COOK2-1901-2,108.135

The tip of the growth is downy , COOK2-1901-2,108.136

and the wood is green with brownish spine . COOK2-1901-2,108.137

As the best bush Roses can be obtained from the leading growers from
nine pence to one shilling a piece , probably it would not pay the
beginner to bud his own Roses . COOK2-1901-2,108.138

Later on , however , he may wish to do so . COOK2-1901-2,108.139

As the cuttings are inserted in September at the same time as those of
cultivated <P_109> Roses the method is described under the heading of
Own-Root Roses , COOK2-1901-2,109.140

and as for the seedling briars it is not worth the trouble involved for
the amateur to attempt to raise them , when they can be bought so
cheaply . COOK2-1901-2,109.141

Stocks planted for budding should be secured in the autumn , the roots
put into some soil temporarily and protected from frost until February .
COOK2-1901-2,109.142

When planted before this , hard frost is liable to raise the plants out
of the ground . COOK2-1901-2,109.143

Plant them in rows two feet apart in the best position , and the stocks
six inches apart . COOK2-1901-2,109.144

If they are to remain permanently where planted , and this plan is
strongly advised , more space should be given between the plants , say
twelve inches . COOK2-1901-2,109.145

Dwarf stocks must be planted rather shallow , their roots being about
six inches below the surface . COOK2-1901-2,109.146

When about to bud the stocks hoe the soil away COOK2-1901-2,109.147

and return it again after budding is completed . COOK2-1901-2,109.148

Standard briars may be bought from labourers for one shilling to one
shilling and sixpence per dozen , COOK2-1901-2,109.149

but do not buy them unless they have some small fibrous roots ,
COOK2-1901-2,109.150

and see that they are not green and sappy . COOK2-1901-2,109.151

Plant these briars in November the same distance apart as the dwarf
stocks , and their roots about eight inches deep . COOK2-1901-2,109.152

All stocks should be grown in good soil , COOK2-1901-2,109.153

and hoe frequently and deeply . COOK2-1901-2,109.154

Thin the growth of standard stocks in June , retaining three of the best
to receive the buds . COOK2-1901-2,109.155

Pruning . COOK2-1901-2,109.156

- The beginner in Rose-growing is generally puzzled with trial to
pruning , which is , however , quite a simple operation , its object
being to induce the plant to make new wood . COOK2-1901-2,109.157

Readers should grasp this fact , COOK2-1901-2,109.158

and then insect pests , green-fly , and the thousand ills that Roses are
heir to will become less troublesome . COOK2-1901-2,109.159

The time to prune for districts , except those that are very late , is
early in March . COOK2-1901-2,109.160

Exception should be made in the case of Tea Roses , pruning of which is
best deferred until the first week in April . COOK2-1901-2,109.161

The first pruning of the previous autumn-planted Roses should consist in
shortening the growths to about six inches from the ground .
COOK2-1901-2,109.162

All varieties do not grow alike , some producing two growths the first
year and some only one , COOK2-1901-2,109.163

but the first year in all cases cut back to within six inches of the
ground and close to an eye or leaf-bud looking outward .
COOK2-1901-2,109.164

Newly-@ @planted climbing Roses on walls should be pruned in this way
the first year . COOK2-1901-2,109.165

The second and following years the growths are retained almost their
entire lengths , merely clipping them and cutting out old and dead wood
. COOK2-1901-2,109.166

Another point to remember is , that the <font> harder <$$font> the wood
and the <font> less <$$font> pith it contains the more vigorous is the
growth . COOK2-1901-2,109.167

Cut out very soft , pithy shoots clean away to the base .
COOK2-1901-2,109.168

The second year the pruning must be somewhat different .
COOK2-1901-2,109.169

Growths on unusually strong varieties that make yearly shoots some four
feet to five feet in length should be left quite eighteen inches long .
COOK2-1901-2,109.170

If quite hard they might even be left three feet long ,
COOK2-1901-2,109.171

and would then produce three to five new growths at the top .
COOK2-1901-2,109.172

Prune the second year Hybrid Perpetual , Hybrid Teas , Teas , Noisettes
, Polyantha , and Bourbons , except the strongest growers , to within
six inches to nine inches of the ground . COOK2-1901-2,109.173

With regard to the Japanese , Austrian Briars , Penzance Briars , Scotch
Roses , and Monthly Roses , merely remove a few inches from the extreme
ends . COOK2-1901-2,109.174

Shoots on <P_110> Moss Roses , Damask Roses , Maiden's Blush , Hybrid
Chinese , and Gallicas may be left from twelve inches to eighteen inches
long , COOK2-1901-2,110.175

but reduce the number of old growths . COOK2-1901-2,110.176

Roses of the type of Gloire de Dijon , if grown as bushes , may be left
two feet to four feet long , COOK2-1901-2,110.177

and they will flower up the shoots . COOK2-1901-2,110.178

Do not prune into the old wood , COOK2-1901-2,110.179

but always cut back the growths made the previous season .
COOK2-1901-2,110.180

Old wood merely yield blind or flowerless shoots . COOK2-1901-2,110.181

The Rose grower should always endeavour to cut away entirely some of the
old growths each season . COOK2-1901-2,110.182

This should be accomplished in September . COOK2-1901-2,110.183

There is a sacrifice of some autumn bloom , COOK2-1901-2,110.184

but the young wood is strengthened for another year .
COOK2-1901-2,110.185

Four to six good , sound one-year-old growths upon each plant , even
when the bushes are twenty years old , are better than a bush with
innumerable shoots . COOK2-1901-2,110.186

Many Roses flower upon the new growths no matter if pruned to the ground
line each year . COOK2-1901-2,110.187

La France Baroness Rothschild , and others are of this nature .
COOK2-1901-2,110.188

By pruning to within five inches or six inches of the ground splendid
new wood is obtained . COOK2-1901-2,110.189

If an abundance of bloom be wanted such rigorous treatment is fatal .
COOK2-1901-2,110.190

The longest the growths are retained for this purpose the better ,
COOK2-1901-2,110.191

but even in this case it is well to remove a whole growth on two each
year to allow air and sunshine to play upon the heart of the bush .
COOK2-1901-2,110.192

Remove in the third year the strong centre growth quite to the base .
COOK2-1901-2,110.193

By this time younger growth will have appeared to take its place .
COOK2-1901-2,110.194

It is always best to prune to dormant eyes . COOK2-1901-2,110.195

Some years the growths start out so early that one must prune back
severely to find dormant buds . COOK2-1901-2,110.196

With very strong growers that have , say , five or six long growths ,
these growths , through cutting back to about eighteen inches and then
spreading outward by means of galvanised iron pegs , result in a very
fine plant with plenty of flowering growths ; whilst the bending outward
compels strong new growths to break out from the base which the
following season will be used for flowering , COOK2-1901-2,110.197

and those flowering this year will be cut away . COOK2-1901-2,110.198

Standard Roses of the same kinds as dwarfs are subjected to a similar
pruning . COOK2-1901-2,110.199

Only quite strong growers should be grown as standards .
COOK2-1901-2,110.200

The climbing Teas make very fine heads , COOK2-1901-2,110.201

but all Teas as standards , except the familiar Gloire de Dijon tribe ,
run great risks of being killed in a hard <P_111> winter ,
COOK2-1901-2,111.202

therefore they are not recommended . COOK2-1901-2,111.203

Strong-growing varieties on standards that make long , half-pendulous
growths should be lightly pruned , merely well thinning the centre .
COOK2-1901-2,111.204

With climbing Roses the object should be to retain all the growths of
the previous summer almost their entire length , removing perhaps five
inches or six inches of the extreme ends . COOK2-1901-2,111.205

During the summer and early autumn , after flowering , look over the
climbers , COOK2-1901-2,111.206

remove very old growths to the ground , COOK2-1901-2,111.207

and jealously guard the current season's wood , when , if they are
spread to the right or the left in the spring , they will flower from
almost every eye or bud . COOK2-1901-2,111.208

These remarks apply especially to the climbing Tea and Noisette Roses .
COOK2-1901-2,111.209

The Rambler Roses should not be pruned , as one may then obtain glorious
masses of flowers ; COOK2-1901-2,111.210

but this does not mean that very old and dead wood should not be removed
. COOK2-1901-2,111.211

The commonest climbers should be thinned . COOK2-1901-2,111.212

Autumn is the best time for this work . COOK2-1901-2,111.213

Untie or unnail the plants , COOK2-1901-2,111.214

and place them on the ground so as to remove unnecessary growths ,
COOK2-1901-2,111.215

then the plants may be re-nailed to the wall , or tied to the arch or
pole . COOK2-1901-2,111.216

Where walls are available plant the Tea and Noisette Roses against them
, COOK2-1901-2,111.217

but the Evergreen , Ayrshire , crimson Rambler , Yellow Rambler , &c. ,
are best upon arches , arbours , clambering up posts or stumps of trees
, or throwing their long growths over hedges , banks , or any similar
positions . COOK2-1901-2,111.218

A beautiful way of growing some of these Roses is as isolated specimens
; COOK2-1901-2,111.219

let them grow as the wild Roses in the hedges . COOK2-1901-2,111.220

{COM:picture_omitted} Watering and Syringing . COOK2-1901-2,111.221

- Instead of using so much patent manure use the hoe more frequently ,
COOK2-1901-2,111.222

and keep three inches or four inches of the surface soil loose .
COOK2-1901-2,111.223

This considerably counteracts drought ; COOK2-1901-2,111.224

it allows the air to penetrate the soil , COOK2-1901-2,111.225

and admits the warm rays of the sun . COOK2-1901-2,111.226

Always hoe after rain , at each artificial watering ,
COOK2-1901-2,111.227

and use the syringe freely to cleanse the foliage .
COOK2-1901-2,111.228

When the garden is near a large town sponge the foliage now and then ,
COOK2-1901-2,111.229

but avoid wetting the leaves during bright sunshine .
COOK2-1901-2,111.230

Syringe early in the morning , before seven o'clock .
COOK2-1901-2,111.231

The city man as well as the artisan will find the work among Roses a
delightful occupation , especially before breakfast .
COOK2-1901-2,111.232

When hoeing is constantly practised Roses will not as a rule require
artificial watering before the flower-buds appear , except in very dry
springs , COOK2-1901-2,111.233

and then water only newly-@ @planted kinds . COOK2-1901-2,111.234

It is when foliage is ample and almost fully expended that the roots
take up most moisture . COOK2-1901-2,111.235

The best time to water <P_112> is the end of May and early in June ;
COOK2-1901-2,112.236

if dry , give a thorough good soaking with plain soft water about twice
a week . COOK2-1901-2,112.237

The plants also appreciate gentle syringing in the evening of a hot day
. COOK2-1901-2,112.238

Mildew often results through unseasonable waterings and overdoses of
artificial manures , which burn the tiny rootlets .
COOK2-1901-2,112.239

A dressing of lime and soot soon after pruning is helpful ;
COOK2-1901-2,112.240

indeed , both soot and lime are not sufficiently used .
COOK2-1901-2,112.241

Manures . COOK2-1901-2,112.242

- Roses are not gross feeders , COOK2-1901-2,112.243

but they like good foods , COOK2-1901-2,112.244

Phosphates are very important to promote abundant flowering .
COOK2-1901-2,112.245

Bone-meal , which is so rich in phosphate , is an excellent fertiliser ,
a light sprinkling in March being very useful and lasting .
COOK2-1901-2,112.246

Night-soil is excellent COOK2-1901-2,112.247

but must be applied with care . COOK2-1901-2,112.248

Make a drill at the end of May down the middle of the rows , as though
one were about to sow beans . COOK2-1901-2,112.249

Pour the night-soil into the drill COOK2-1901-2,112.250

and return the earth . COOK2-1901-2,112.251

The rains will wash the fertiliser to the roots . COOK2-1901-2,112.252

Never give liquid manure in dry weather unless plain water has been
previously applied . COOK2-1901-2,112.253

An excellent manure is known as Tonk's , COOK2-1901-2,112.254

and should be applied early in spring immediately after pruning .
COOK2-1901-2,112.255

Hoe the ground , COOK2-1901-2,112.256

then sprinkle all over the soil at the rate of 1$$4 lb. to the square
yard . COOK2-1901-2,112.257

The recipe is as follows : COOK2-1901-2,112.258

- {COM:recipe_omitted} Liquid manure can be easily made by setting up a
paraffin cask in an out-of-the-way corner . COOK2-1901-2,112.259

Put a bushel of fresh cow manure into a bag , COOK2-1901-2,112.260

tie the end up loosely , COOK2-1901-2,112.261

and put the bag into the cask , which should then be filled with water .
COOK2-1901-2,112.262

Give this liquid in equal proportions , COOK2-1901-2,112.263

and change the manure every ten days or so . COOK2-1901-2,112.264

If sheep droppings are procurable , put some in the tub in addition .
COOK2-1901-2,112.265

Ichthemic , or fish guano , is a splendid stimulant for Roses .
COOK2-1901-2,112.266

Do not give liquid manure to weakly plants , only to those in full
vigour . COOK2-1901-2,112.267

It must not be given too early , COOK2-1901-2,112.268

but wait until the flower-buds can be just seen or felt at the points of
the shoots , COOK2-1901-2,112.269

or gross , green-centred flowers will result . COOK2-1901-2,112.270

When the buds are seen , an application of manure water twice a week may
be given . COOK2-1901-2,112.271

Withhold liquid manure when the flowers show colour .
COOK2-1901-2,112.272

After first flowering a few doses are beneficial to such Roses as bloom
a second time . COOK2-1901-2,112.273

Manure water may be given to Roses in winter to their great advantage .
COOK2-1901-2,112.274

Mulching the surface during June and July is important .
COOK2-1901-2,112.275

The best material is the peat moss litter from a good stable .
COOK2-1901-2,112.276

Hoe the surface deeply before applying it , COOK2-1901-2,112.277

then lay on about three or four inches . COOK2-1901-2,112.278

Thinning and Disbudding . COOK2-1901-2,112.279

- Pruning should be supplemented by thinning the young shoots in May .
COOK2-1901-2,112.280

Remove all that appear to crowd the centre of the plant .
COOK2-1901-2,112.281

If one growth carries three or four young Shoots at its end this will
suffice . COOK2-1901-2,112.282

Growths may be entirely removed in May when they appear too crowded .
COOK2-1901-2,112.283

If variety is wanted , as well as quality , put the plants closer ,
COOK2-1901-2,112.284

and retain not more than two of the best <P_113> growths of the previous
summer . COOK2-1901-2,113.285

Disbudding usually applies to the reduction of the number of flower-buds
. COOK2-1901-2,113.286

Where show blooms are required remove the side buds COOK2-1901-2,113.287

and retain the centre one , which , if faulty must be removed , and the
best of the side buds retained . COOK2-1901-2,113.288

Pinch off all new growths as they spring out of the shoot that is
crowned with the flower-bud . COOK2-1901-2,113.289

Tea Roses require this if show blooms are desired , COOK2-1901-2,113.290

but for garden decoration leave them alone . COOK2-1901-2,113.291

Plenty of growth means plenty of flowers . COOK2-1901-2,113.292

Budding . COOK2-1901-2,113.293

- This operation as well as many another in garden craft is very simple
when the art has been acquired . COOK2-1901-2,113.294

The illustration represents a piece of Rose growth .
COOK2-1901-2,113.295

At the base of each leaf-stalk is an eye , or leaf-bud , which contains
the germ of a new plant . COOK2-1901-2,113.296

To be successful in budding this growth must be " ripe , " that is , it
must have flowered , or on the point of so doing . COOK2-1901-2,113.297

The growths first produced are the best to use for budding .
COOK2-1901-2,113.298

They should be firm , and the spines or thorns be easily rubbed off .
COOK2-1901-2,113.299

If the latter are soft and juicy the Wood is not ripe enough ,
COOK2-1901-2,113.300

but it is more important to see that the stocks " run well , " that is ,
there should be an abundance of sap in the plant . COOK2-1901-2,113.301

In a very dry summer it is sometimes necessary to water the stocks a day
or two before budding . COOK2-1901-2,113.302

Always bud the standard briars first , COOK2-1901-2,113.303

for they cease to grow long before the dwarf stocks .
COOK2-1901-2,113.304

The latter should be budded as close to the root as possible ,
especially if the plants are wanted for potting up .
COOK2-1901-2,113.305

Standard briars should be budded in July , and the dwarf stocks during
August . COOK2-1901-2,113.306

Insert the bud in dwarf stocks on the west side if practicable .
COOK2-1901-2,113.307

During the operation of budding keep the shoots in a jar of water ,
previously cutting off the leaves but retaining about half an inch of
the leaf-stalk so as to obtain to a firm hold of the bud .
COOK2-1901-2,113.308

Insert the knife in the shoot about one inch above the bud as at B ,
Fig. I . COOK2-1901-2,113.309

Cut thinly under the bark COOK2-1901-2,113.310

and when past the bud rend it off . COOK2-1901-2,113.311

It will then appear as C and D , Fig. {TEXT:Fig} I .
COOK2-1901-2,113.312

Hold the bud between the thumb and finger of the left hand ,
COOK2-1901-2,113.313

and with the point of the knife lift up the small slice of wood attached
to the bark COOK2-1901-2,113.314

and jerk it out . COOK2-1901-2,113.315

As a rule it <P_114> comes out easily enough , leaving the germ of the
bud intact . COOK2-1901-2,114.316

If this germ is missing , and there is a hole about the size of a pin
head under the bud , it is waste of time to insert the bud .
COOK2-1901-2,114.317

Some varieties behave in this way COOK2-1901-2,114.318

and must be cut rather thinner than others . COOK2-1901-2,114.319

Before cutting off the bud wipe the stock clean COOK2-1901-2,114.320

and make a cut upwards , and then crosswise in shape like the letter T
COOK2-1901-2,114.321

<paren> see Fig. 2 , A B <$$paren> . COOK2-1901-2,114.322

Do not cut so deeply as to injure the wood of the stock .
COOK2-1901-2,114.323

Raise only the bark gently on each side of the long cut by inserting the
bone of the budding_knife . COOK2-1901-2,114.324

Then insert the bud at C COOK2-1901-2,114.325

and gently push it down to the end of the cut D . COOK2-1901-2,114.326

Many budders dispense with the cross cut , COOK2-1901-2,114.327

but it facilitates the insertion of the bud . COOK2-1901-2,114.328

When the bud is placed in position cut off the surplus piece of bark
COOK2-1901-2,114.329

and bind up the wound tight <paren> see E , Fig. 2 <$$paren> with
raffia . COOK2-1901-2,114.330

When the soil is free from insect pests draw up some of the finest mould
to the bud so as to quite envelop it . COOK2-1901-2,114.331

This is essential in a dry season . COOK2-1901-2,114.332

A month after budding remove the soil , COOK2-1901-2,114.333

examine the bud , COOK2-1901-2,114.334

and if found alive <paren> which can be easily seen from where the
leaf-stalk was attached , but which has now decayed <$$paren> , return
the soil again COOK2-1901-2,114.335

and leave it until spring . COOK2-1901-2,114.336

Do not touch the tops of stocks until after the leaf has fallen , and
not there unless they are wanted for cuttings . COOK2-1901-2,114.337

The time to remove them is in February . COOK2-1901-2,114.338

They are then cut quite away to , within an inch of the bud .
COOK2-1901-2,114.339

Seedling briars are budded in the collar , that is , the thick root
immediately below the branches . COOK2-1901-2,114.340

Budding Standard Briars . COOK2-1901-2,114.341

- These are budded in the best lateral growths , COOK2-1901-2,114.342

but close up to the upright stem two or more kinds may be budded on one
standard , COOK2-1901-2,114.343

but they should agree in growth - COOK2-1901-2,114.344

for instance , La France <paren> pink <$$paren> and Alfred Colomb
<paren> red <$$paren> would associate well together .
COOK2-1901-2,114.345

In the case of the standards remove the raffia after the fourth week ,
COOK2-1901-2,114.346

but do not cut away any of the growths until February .
COOK2-1901-2,114.347

When the buds start out <paren> as they often will and blossom <$$paren>
, leave them until autumn , COOK2-1901-2,114.348

and then cut back to one eye . COOK2-1901-2,114.349

Retain the raffia on dwarf stocks ; COOK2-1901-2,114.350

the soil will rot it off before February . COOK2-1901-2,114.351

Propagating by Cuttings . COOK2-1901-2,114.352

- There are many different ways of striking Roses from cuttings ,
COOK2-1901-2,114.353

but the best one for the beginner is as follows : COOK2-1901-2,114.354

- Early in September a piece of ground in a sheltered part of the garden
, but not necessarily under a north hedge , should be deeply dug , or ,
better <P_115> still , trenched . COOK2-1901-2,115.355

When gritty material , sand , burnt garden refuse , &c. , is at hand
intermix this with the soil , unless the latter is sandy .
COOK2-1901-2,115.356

Whilst this soil is settling down make the cuttings from growths that
bore the first or summer flowers . COOK2-1901-2,115.357

Where possible they should have a heel , <font> i.e. <$$font> a piece
of the old stem attached . COOK2-1901-2,115.358

The cutting may be of any length , COOK2-1901-2,115.359

but five to six inches is about right . COOK2-1901-2,115.360

Smooth over the heel with a sharp knife , COOK2-1901-2,115.361

remove all foliage save the topmost leaf-stalk , COOK2-1901-2,115.362

but do not cut away any leaf-buds . COOK2-1901-2,115.363

The cutting is now ready for planting . COOK2-1901-2,115.364

Where a heel can@ @not be secured , cut the end just below an eye or
leaf-bud . COOK2-1901-2,115.365

The wood must be quite hard . COOK2-1901-2,115.366

As the different kinds are made , tie into bundles ,
COOK2-1901-2,115.367

and lay them in boxes of moist sand or soil , COOK2-1901-2,115.368

and keep them in a shed . COOK2-1901-2,115.369

When all are made they should be planted . COOK2-1901-2,115.370

Take out a trench of the prepared bed one foot wide , and the depth of a
spade . COOK2-1901-2,115.371

Cut down a wall of soil as perpendicular as possible .
COOK2-1901-2,115.372

At the bottom of this wall of soil put an inch of sand or old coconut
fibre , COOK2-1901-2,115.373

then stand the end of the cutting on the land , COOK2-1901-2,115.374

and lean them against the wall of soil , the cuttings being about
one_and_a-half inches apart or more , if there be plenty of room .
COOK2-1901-2,115.375

Many prefer to dibble the cuttings in with a dibbler , which is often
disastrous , as the cuttings hang , <font> i.e. <$$font> do not touch
the bottom of the hole . COOK2-1901-2,115.376

It is much better to dig the ground as advised . COOK2-1901-2,115.377

When the row is completed , gently place half the soil to the cuttings ,
COOK2-1901-2,115.378

then tread firmly with the foot , <P_116> the remainder of soil being
returned and made firm . COOK2-1901-2,116.379

The cuttings should not be out of the ground more than an inch ,
COOK2-1901-2,116.380

but this is not material so long as they are in the ground to a depth of
five inches . COOK2-1901-2,116.381

When the row is completed , more ground is dug , and another row
commenced about twelve inches from the first . COOK2-1901-2,116.382

After a hard frost the cuttings are often by its action raised out of
the ground and left hanging . COOK2-1901-2,116.383

As soon as frost has gone go over the cuttings , COOK2-1901-2,116.384

and push them down . COOK2-1901-2,116.385

It may be necessary to do this two or three times , COOK2-1901-2,116.386

but if neglected for long success can@ @not be expected .
COOK2-1901-2,116.387

Subsequent treatment consists in keeping the surface soil loose for
about two inches , COOK2-1901-2,116.388

and in the following spring twelvemonths , that is about eighteen months
after planting , the cuttings should be transplanted to their permanent
position . COOK2-1901-2,116.389

When doing this , place a little very fine soil near the roots , which
are so fine that in heavy soil they do not start properly .
COOK2-1901-2,116.390

The majority of Roses will strike readily from cuttings ,
COOK2-1901-2,116.391

but will not all be in fit condition at one time . COOK2-1901-2,116.392

Do not attempt to strike any from the first lot of plants ,
COOK2-1901-2,116.393

for the wood you would use is of great value the second season for
flowers . COOK2-1901-2,116.394

Plants three years old will provide plenty of useful cuttings .
COOK2-1901-2,116.395

There are other ways of making Rose cuttings , the next best to the
above being from the growths of pot-grown plants in March or April .
COOK2-1901-2,116.396

If a variety is scarce , one eye or leaf-bud is cut off and stuck , with
leaf attached , round the side of a three_and_a_half inch pot of sandy
soil . COOK2-1901-2,116.397

A cutting with two eyes and both leaves attached , however , is
preferable , COOK2-1901-2,116.398

but remove the end leaflet , COOK2-1901-2,116.399

and plunge the pot in cocoa-nut fibre in a cucumber or melon frame .
COOK2-1901-2,116.400

Place a small bell glass over the pot of cuttings , COOK2-1901-2,116.401

and freely sprinkle the foliage . COOK2-1901-2,116.402

It is most important to well preserve the foliage , COOK2-1901-2,116.403

and , of course , when inserted the cutting should be clean and free
from insect pests . COOK2-1901-2,116.404

Protecting Rose Blooms . COOK2-1901-2,116.405

- Even the beginner , if he grows a fine rose , wishes it to last as
long as possible , and develop to its utmost beauty .
COOK2-1901-2,116.406

With some of the Tea and light-coloured Roses , shading of the flowers
is necessary . COOK2-1901-2,116.407

Zulu straw hats fastened on sticks are as good as anything ,
COOK2-1901-2,116.408

or a frame of wire can be made cheaply to support a piece of calico .
COOK2-1901-2,116.409

Even a flat piece of board tacked on a stake will keep a flower clean
and not exclude the air . COOK2-1901-2,116.410

High-coloured Roses should not be shaded . COOK2-1901-2,116.411

Treatment after First Flowering . COOK2-1901-2,116.412

- Go over the plants that are autumn flowering , COOK2-1901-2,116.413

remove any crowded growths , COOK2-1901-2,116.414

and those that have flowered , unless the flower has been cut with a
fairly long stalk , should be cut back a few inches to a dormant
leaf-bud looking outward . COOK2-1901-2,116.415

A better second growth is secured , COOK2-1901-2,116.416

and it does no harm to next season blossoming . COOK2-1901-2,116.417

It is a great strain upon a plant to allow it to seed .
COOK2-1901-2,116.418

As the flowers die off , cut back the growth at once , instead of
allowing the seed-pods that appear at the base of the flower to develop
. COOK2-1901-2,116.419

Pests , Insect , and Otherwise . COOK2-1901-2,116.420

- Caterpillars and green-fly are the worst insect pests .
COOK2-1901-2,116.421

There is nothing better than hand-picking for the former .
COOK2-1901-2,116.422

When two leaves are stuck together , or rolled up a fat maggot will be
found . COOK2-1901-2,116.423

Pinch the leaf , COOK2-1901-2,116.424

and this will settle the marauder . COOK2-1901-2,116.425

Constant watching is necessary . COOK2-1901-2,116.426

Do not let two days go by without looking over all the plants .
COOK2-1901-2,116.427

Many a flower is injured through neglect of this <P_117> caution .
COOK2-1901-2,117.428

When pruning is carried out as directed , and the plants relieved of
much old wood , the eggs of these caterpillars will depart also .
COOK2-1901-2,117.429

Green-fly will not trouble those who keep their Roses thoroughly healthy
. COOK2-1901-2,117.430

They do not like the sap of healthy plants as a rule ,
COOK2-1901-2,117.431

it is the weakly growths they attack . COOK2-1901-2,117.432

Good syringings of cold water dislodge many , COOK2-1901-2,117.433

and it is a good plan to dip the ends of the young shoot when covered
with green-fly into a vessel of strong tobacco water or quassia chips
solution . COOK2-1901-2,117.434

A good recipe for quassia chips solution is as follows :
COOK2-1901-2,117.435

- Take four ounces of quassia chips , COOK2-1901-2,117.436

steep them in water for a few hours , COOK2-1901-2,117.437

then simmer from twelve to twenty-four hours in a gallon of water ,
COOK2-1901-2,117.438

and add three ounces of good soft soap . COOK2-1901-2,117.439

When dissolved , add water to make up two_and_a_half gallons .
COOK2-1901-2,117.440

Green-fly upon Roses under glass can be readily exterminated by
fumigating . COOK2-1901-2,117.441

M'Dougall's tobacco sheets are the simplest remedy .
COOK2-1901-2,117.442

One or more , according to cubic measurement , are hung in the house ,
and set alight . COOK2-1901-2,117.443

They gradually consume , COOK2-1901-2,117.444

and not a fly will be found the next day . COOK2-1901-2,117.445

Richards' XL All is too well known to describe ; COOK2-1901-2,117.446

it is an excellent remedy . COOK2-1901-2,117.447

Red spider is often very prevalent on Roses under glass .
COOK2-1901-2,117.448

Want of syringing and too dry an atmosphere cause it .
COOK2-1901-2,117.449

The leaves turn yellow COOK2-1901-2,117.450

and drop off . COOK2-1901-2,117.451

With a magnifying glass the pests may be seen running about on the under
side of the leaf . COOK2-1901-2,117.452

The same fumigation will check them , COOK2-1901-2,117.453

but syringing well the under side of the leaves is the best remedy .
COOK2-1901-2,117.454

Mildew is a troublesome fungus . COOK2-1901-2,117.455

It inflicts considerable injury by choking the breathing pores of the
foliage , COOK2-1901-2,117.456

and consequently growth is hindered . COOK2-1901-2,117.457

When a plant is badly attacked , the latter has the appearance of being
dusted with flour . COOK2-1901-2,117.458

It makes its appearance under the leaf as well as on the surface .
COOK2-1901-2,117.459

A thoroughly good dredging with black sulphur , underneath as well as on
the surface of the leaf , will check its ravages . COOK2-1901-2,117.460

Put some sulphur in a piece of cheese-cloth made into a bag ,
COOK2-1901-2,117.461

and thoroughly dust the foliage with it . COOK2-1901-2,117.462

After remaining on for two days , syringe off COOK2-1901-2,117.463

and give another dredging if needful ; COOK2-1901-2,117.464

this should be done on a quiet evening , when the foliage is slightly
damp . COOK2-1901-2,117.465

It is a mistake to wait until the plants are badly attacked ,
COOK2-1901-2,117.466

but as soon as a few spots appear , press them with the thumb and finger
, previously dusting or dipping the thumb and finger into some sulphur .
COOK2-1901-2,117.467

Mildew is the result of a check of some kind . COOK2-1901-2,117.468

Out of doors one can@ @not quite avoid it , COOK2-1901-2,117.469

but never let anything , if possible , check the young roots , such as
strong liquid manure . COOK2-1901-2,117.470

Indoors one is troubled most with mildew . COOK2-1901-2,117.471

In starting Roses into growth , do so gradually , COOK2-1901-2,117.472

then the foliage becomes as it were hard , COOK2-1901-2,117.473

and can stand a little cold . COOK2-1901-2,117.474

Give them , however , very warm treatment at the start , so that the
growth is tender , and the first cold wind , or too much air , will
bring about mildew . COOK2-1901-2,117.475

Cold winds blowing immediately on the foliage are fatal .
COOK2-1901-2,117.476

Soot is a good remedy for mildew if applied carefully ,
COOK2-1901-2,117.477

it should be some months old , COOK2-1901-2,117.478

and must not remain on the foliage more than two days at a time .
COOK2-1901-2,117.479

If the tiny white spots of mildew are dusted with sulphur when first
observed , the plague is checked . COOK2-1901-2,117.480

Red Rust or Orange Fungus is another troublesome fungus .
COOK2-1901-2,117.481

It <P_118> forms on the shoots like knots of powder ,
COOK2-1901-2,118.482

and is of a rich orange colour . COOK2-1901-2,118.483

Go over the plants , COOK2-1901-2,118.484

and pick off and burn the leaves thus troubled . COOK2-1901-2,118.485

There are other pests , insect and fungoid , COOK2-1901-2,118.486

but the above are the chief . COOK2-1901-2,118.487

<heading>

THE TEA AND HYBRID TEA ROSE COOK2-1901-2,118.489

<$$heading>

The Tea Rose is queen of the Rose world , COOK2-1901-2,118.491

and the hybrid Tea is almost as delicate in colour and in form .
COOK2-1901-2,118.492

During recent years many beautiful kinds have been added to our
collections , COOK2-1901-2,118.493

and this raising up of practically a new race has altered in no small
degree the complexion of the English garden . COOK2-1901-2,118.494

A group of Edith Gifford , or of Viscountess Folkestone , upon the lawn
is a joy , if not for ever , at least from the time the crimeson shoots
appear through the soil until the last flower has faded in the cold dark
days of late October ; COOK2-1901-2,118.495

and when the weather is fine in the autumn and early winter flowers may
, in sheltered places , be gathered even at Christmas .
COOK2-1901-2,118.496

A well drained soil is most suitable , COOK2-1901-2,118.497

and always select a sunny aspect although the plants are a success in a
north border , the flowers appearing later . COOK2-1901-2,118.498

The finest flowers are produced upon standards or Tree Roses ,
COOK2-1901-2,118.499

but they are more troublesome to manage . COOK2-1901-2,118.500

Most of the Tea varieties and hybrids may be grown as bushes budded upon
the seedling briar or struck from cuttings . COOK2-1901-2,118.501

The plants should be kept growing by hoeing and watering freely .
COOK2-1901-2,118.502

Tea Roses are excellent for forcing , providing lovely button-hole
flowers as well as long_stemmed blooms for table or vases .
COOK2-1901-2,118.503

Protect the bushes in winter by earthing up the base with burnt earth or
ordinary mould . COOK2-1901-2,118.504

Then put some fern from the wood among the branches COOK2-1901-2,118.505

and they will be secure for the winter . COOK2-1901-2,118.506

Commence to cover up in November COOK2-1901-2,118.507

and keep soil to the base until April , COOK2-1901-2,118.508

but the fern should be removed now and then during mild intervals .
COOK2-1901-2,118.509

If flowers of high quality are desired prune hard each year <paren> in
April <$$paren> , COOK2-1901-2,118.510

but if profusion then merely remove unripe ends of growths
COOK2-1901-2,118.511

and keep the centre open . COOK2-1901-2,118.512

Walls for Tea Roses . COOK2-1901-2,118.513

- Every advantage should be taken of walls and close-@ @boarded fences
for the beautiful Tea Roses COOK2-1901-2,118.514

Unless the walls are very high do not plant the usual so-called climbing
kinds . COOK2-1901-2,118.515

Varieties known as the strongest dwarf growers are the most suitable .
COOK2-1901-2,118.516

Trench the ground , COOK2-1901-2,118.517

plant in autumn , COOK2-1901-2,118.518

and prune very sparingly . COOK2-1901-2,118.519

Thoroughly soak the plants at the roots now and then with water .
COOK2-1901-2,118.520

Twelve excellent kinds for this purpose are Anna Olivier , Mme. Hostel
Comtesse de Nadaillac , Niphetos , Mme. de Watteville , The <P_119>
Bride , Bridesmaid , Maman Cochet , Marie Van Houtte , Mme. Charles ,
Mme. Lambard , and Mlle. Abel Chatenay . COOK2-1901-2,119.521

Hybrid Perpetual Roses . COOK2-1901-2,119.522

- This famous group of Roses has its origin in the Damask Perpetual
which was crossed with the Bourbon , Hybrid Chinese , and other closely
allied kinds , COOK2-1901-2,119.523

and all the varieties have been raised since the year 1844 .
COOK2-1901-2,119.524

The h.-p.'s , as rosarians called this class for the sake of brevity ,
are more in request to give those beautiful flowers seen at the
exhibition , perfect specimens of form and colour , but not always so
perfect or desirable in the garden . COOK2-1901-2,119.525

There is no question that the hybrid-perpetual is for the garden doomed
to partial extinction through the raising of so many charming
Tea-scented flowers , brilliant China , or Monthly Roses , flowers far
more worthy of the name perpetual than those so christened , possessing
also greater delicacy of colour and form . COOK2-1901-2,119.526

But we hope the day is far distant when the hybrid perpetual Roses ,
flowers of intense colour , deep crimson , pink , rose and white , and
many other shades , and filled with richest perfume , will disappear .
COOK2-1901-2,119.527

We have need of them . COOK2-1901-2,119.528

Standard Roses . COOK2-1901-2,119.529

- When these are desired the planter would do well to select them from
the hybrid perpetual race , except a few from the climbing Tea-scented
and Noisette sections to vary the colouring ; COOK2-1901-2,119.530

but , as a rule , bushes or " dwarfs " are the most suitable for the
beginner . COOK2-1901-2,119.531

The hybrid perpetuals are easily produced by budding or from cuttings ,
which are called " own-root " plants . COOK2-1901-2,119.532

Four stocks are usually employed , however : cutting and seedling briars
, the Hedgerow Briar , for the formation of standards , and the Manetti
, which is the worst of all stocks for the garden ; COOK2-1901-2,119.533

it is necessary for the exhibitor , because it promotes large and early
flowers . COOK2-1901-2,119.534

It may be interesting to mention that when the soil is heavy loam the
briar-cutting should be used . COOK2-1901-2,119.535

A deep clay is suitable for the seedling briar . COOK2-1901-2,119.536

Some kinds are excellent for bedding if a brief display will satisfy .
COOK2-1901-2,119.537

They are excellent Roses for pots , COOK2-1901-2,119.538

and should be grown thus in cold frames . COOK2-1901-2,119.539

Climbing Roses under Glass . COOK2-1901-2,119.540

- Climbing Roses succeed best when they can receive plenty of heat and
moisture after flowering the first time to perfect new wood for the
following season . COOK2-1901-2,119.541

The old wood is partially cut away when the flowers are gathered ,
COOK2-1901-2,119.542

and by giving heat and moisture fine new rods are produced , which
should be well ripened . COOK2-1901-2,119.543

Climbing Roses also succeed well if the long growths produced the
previous summer are bent down on a framework of wire or wood about a
foot from the side benches . COOK2-1901-2,119.544

A flower-bud , with of course a short stem , will start from nearly
every one of the eyes . COOK2-1901-2,119.545

After flowering cut the shoots back hard to promote fine long rods early
in the year . COOK2-1901-2,119.546

This is only possible where artificial heat is available .
COOK2-1901-2,119.547

Unless that is so it is better to leave the growths unpruned and thin
them when they become crowded or too old , merely shortening the
laterals to one or two eyes . COOK2-1901-2,119.548

Marechal Niel Rose under Glass . COOK2-1901-2,119.549

- This glorious Rose deserves <P_120> a house to itself ,
COOK2-1901-2,120.550

but this is seldom possible . COOK2-1901-2,120.551

It must be grown with a variety of greenhouse plants .
COOK2-1901-2,120.552

The three points essential to success are : a good border ; a healthy
plant , well rooted , and young ; good annual growths thoroughly
hardened . COOK2-1901-2,120.553

A Good Border should be made inside the house . COOK2-1901-2,120.554

Prepare it as if for a Grape Vine . COOK2-1901-2,120.555

Remove the old soil to a depth of three feet ; COOK2-1901-2,120.556

put about nine inches of drainage in the bottom , consisting of clinkers
, large stones , or broken bricks . COOK2-1901-2,120.557

Then fill up with a compost of three-parts fibrous loam , one-part cow
dung , and a six-inch pot of bone-meal to each wheelbarrow-load of soil
. COOK2-1901-2,120.558

When the loam is obtained fresh from a meadow put the turfy portions
with the grass side downwards . COOK2-1901-2,120.559

This work should be done some five or six weeks before planting time ,
which is for preference in October . COOK2-1901-2,120.560

A Healthy Plant . COOK2-1901-2,120.561

- The best stock to grow Marechal Neil upon is a hedge briar , known as
a half-standard . COOK2-1901-2,120.562

The briar may either be planted first and budded afterwards , or a plant
procured already budded . COOK2-1901-2,120.563

When the latter , see that it has an abundance of fibrous roots .
COOK2-1901-2,120.564

When this is the style selected , prune its growths back to within an
inch or two from where it has been budded . COOK2-1901-2,120.565

This can be accomplished about January or February .
COOK2-1901-2,120.566

Do not give too much heat at first . COOK2-1901-2,120.567

The slower the new growths break the better , COOK2-1901-2,120.568

and as they grow , train them horizontally . COOK2-1901-2,120.569

If the plant is put on one side near the centre , one growth , would be
trained to the right and one to the left . COOK2-1901-2,120.570

These would probably reach further than the ends - COOK2-1901-2,120.571

if so , do not prevent them . COOK2-1901-2,120.572

Pinch out the points in September to help the shoots to ripen .
COOK2-1901-2,120.573

These two arms provide , as it were , the limbs for the base of future
shoots . COOK2-1901-2,120.574

The following spring , retain the growths of the same length as the
house is COOK2-1901-2,120.575

then , as the new shoots break out , the best are led up the roof and
tied to wires . COOK2-1901-2,120.576

More shoots break out than are wanted ; COOK2-1901-2,120.577

the best only are retained , and , as far as possible , at even
distances apart , say about one foot . COOK2-1901-2,120.578

Suppose the roots work freely , COOK2-1901-2,120.579

these shoots will go up the roof on one side and down the other .
COOK2-1901-2,120.580

They must be stopped in autumn , but not too early COOK2-1901-2,120.581

or they will break out into growth again . COOK2-1901-2,120.582

The object is to get them thoroughly hard , COOK2-1901-2,120.583

for it is upon these that the flowers appear , COOK2-1901-2,120.584

and if they are good , strong , hard growths some noble blossoms will
result . COOK2-1901-2,120.585

Now comes the question of the rods for future requirements .
COOK2-1901-2,120.586

After flowering cut the canes right back to the two main arms ,
COOK2-1901-2,120.587

and again the latter send out new shoots , which will require thinning
as before . COOK2-1901-2,120.588

After flowering maintain a good heat , COOK2-1901-2,120.589

and freely syringe the plants before eight o'clock in the morning , and
after four o'clock in the afternoon . COOK2-1901-2,120.590

The border must not be neglected , COOK2-1901-2,120.591

but usually one or two good waterings suffice , with an occasional dose
of liquid manure . COOK2-1901-2,120.592

Before doing so prod the soil with a fork . COOK2-1901-2,120.593

This , then , is the best plan of growing Marechal Niel Roses .
COOK2-1901-2,120.594

But it may also be grown in a cold-house . COOK2-1901-2,120.595

Here again we advise half-standard plants , COOK2-1901-2,120.596

but they must not be pruned back so hard , as artificial heat is not
available . COOK2-1901-2,120.597

Keep the growths well spread out , and weak wood thinned out .
COOK2-1901-2,120.598

Remove old shoots now and then , COOK2-1901-2,120.599

and retain as much new wood as possible . COOK2-1901-2,120.600

<P_121> Amateurs would find this Rose profitable to grow , especially if
retarded so that the plants flowered about the end of May and early June
when Roses are scarce . COOK2-1901-2,121.601

This can be done by pruning late and keeping air in the house night and
day . COOK2-1901-2,121.602

We have seen the door made in two sections so that the lower half is
kept always open , thus allowing a current of air to enter without a
draught being caused . COOK2-1901-2,121.603

Preparing a Border for Roses under Glass . COOK2-1901-2,121.604

- Allusion has been already made to this work . COOK2-1901-2,121.605

When it is decided to plant out all Roses <paren> and we strongly advise
this <$$paren> prepare the border in the same way , even for dwarf
growers . COOK2-1901-2,121.606

Roses glory in good loam , COOK2-1901-2,121.607

but they detest stagnation , hence the need for drainage either natural
or artificial . COOK2-1901-2,121.608

An investment in two or three cartloads of loam will well repay the
grower of indoor Roses . COOK2-1901-2,121.609

Roses in Small Greenhouses . COOK2-1901-2,121.610

- In a small structure where other plants are grown , Roses should be in
pots or tubs . COOK2-1901-2,121.611

If there are no cold draughts the hardier section can be cultivated .
COOK2-1901-2,121.612

Such plants as have been grown for twelve months outdoors in pots are
the best for the beginner . COOK2-1901-2,121.613

The pots are full of roots , which is the main secret of success .
COOK2-1901-2,121.614

Supposing the beginner wishes to grow a few pot Roses let him either
purchase established plants in six-inch or eight-inch pots or bushes in
October and pot them up himself . COOK2-1901-2,121.615

Prepare some compost in September , COOK2-1901-2,121.616

and this should consist of three-parts loam , one-part well-rotted
manure , preferably from the cowyard , not fresh but one year old .
COOK2-1901-2,121.617

Then add a little artificial manure at the rate of a six-inch potful to
a wheelbarrow-load of soil . COOK2-1901-2,121.618

Mix all well together , COOK2-1901-2,121.619

and let it remain in a rain-proof open shed until required .
COOK2-1901-2,121.620

When plants are received in October , cut off all foliage ,
COOK2-1901-2,121.621

trim back the growths to one and a half to two feet ,
COOK2-1901-2,121.622

shorten the roots a little , COOK2-1901-2,121.623

and smooth off jagged ends , COOK2-1901-2,121.624

and they are ready for potting . COOK2-1901-2,121.625

Keep them in the shade until potted . COOK2-1901-2,121.626

Prepare some eight-inch pots by washing them clean inside and out ,
COOK2-1901-2,121.627

place about one and a half inches of drainage in bottom , and a little
well-rotted manure over the crocks . COOK2-1901-2,121.628

Take the plant in left hand , COOK2-1901-2,121.629

carefully arrange the roots to prevent cramping , COOK2-1901-2,121.630

and with a wooden trowel place some of the compost among the roots .
COOK2-1901-2,121.631

Ram the soil about the roots firmly with a potting stick ,
COOK2-1901-2,121.632

then put in some more soil , COOK2-1901-2,121.633

give another ramming , COOK2-1901-2,121.634

and the operation is complete when the soil reaches the rim of the pot .
COOK2-1901-2,121.635

Keep the tops well syringed , COOK2-1901-2,121.636

but do not water the roots for a day or two , COOK2-1901-2,121.637

and then only give one good watering . COOK2-1901-2,121.638

Plunge the plants in some ashes outdoors unless a cold pit is available
, COOK2-1901-2,121.639

then it is better they should be kept in this , with the light off
unless frost or heavy rains intervene . COOK2-1901-2,121.640

Prune the plants in February , cutting them back to four or five inches
from the top of the pot . COOK2-1901-2,121.641

Keep Lights off on mild days , COOK2-1901-2,121.642

but put them on every night . COOK2-1901-2,121.643

Neither let the soil get quite dry nor over_water .
COOK2-1901-2,121.644

As new growths appear keep the plants well apart , COOK2-1901-2,121.645

and fumigate with tobacco sheets when green-fly is seen .
COOK2-1901-2,121.646

It is not necessary to keep the plants in pits , COOK2-1901-2,121.647

but it is advisable , as then one is able to prune earlier without
danger of new shoots being injured . COOK2-1901-2,121.648

Simple pits may be made with turf walls , COOK2-1901-2,121.649

and any handy man can make a light , COOK2-1901-2,121.650

or the parts can be purchased and nailed together .
COOK2-1901-2,121.651

By May there will be fine flowers on these plants .
COOK2-1901-2,121.652

Plunge outdoors in full sun <P_122> for the summer ,
COOK2-1901-2,122.653

and in autumn they may be introduced to the greenhouse
COOK2-1901-2,122.654

pits with a southern aspect will grow Roses quite as well as a
greenhouse COOK2-1901-2,122.655

in fact , they would be better if it is necessary to have other plants .
COOK2-1901-2,122.656

Give a top dressing the first year , not repotting .
COOK2-1901-2,122.657

This is accomplished scraping away about an inch of the surface soil ;
COOK2-1901-2,122.658

scatter a tablespoon of guano on the soil , COOK2-1901-2,122.659

and replace the soil removed with some fresh loam .
COOK2-1901-2,122.660

If a Marechal Niel or other climbing Rose is desired to grow on wall or
roof of the greenhouse , either plant it in a large pot or unless a
small border can be prepared for it , as advised under heading "
Marechal Niel under Glass . " COOK2-1901-2,122.661

If in pot or tub , give plenty of drain COOK2-1901-2,122.662

and raise it upon two or three bricks , so that water can pass away from
and also air enter the soil . COOK2-1901-2,122.663

Climbing plants known as " extra_sized " in eight-inch pots are the best
to secure . COOK2-1901-2,122.664

For very small houses it would pay the grower to renew the plants
annually , COOK2-1901-2,122.665

for the nurseryman has better facilities of growing this class of Rose
correctly . COOK2-1901-2,122.666

When purchased no pruning is necessary ; save the extreme ends of the
growths , COOK2-1901-2,122.667

for the stems should be Well ripened and in condition to produce a
number of fine flowers the following spring . COOK2-1901-2,122.668

Unless these climbing Roses , especially Marechal Niel , can be made to
yield new and strong annual growths they soon deteriorate , hence the
advice to purchase annually , COOK2-1901-2,122.669

for they can be secured for two or three shillings ,
COOK2-1901-2,122.670

and the flowers they yield would realise more than this at wholesale
prices . COOK2-1901-2,122.671

Potting Roses . COOK2-1901-2,122.672

- Roses forced in strong heat should be repotted in July , and those
grown in cool house in September . COOK2-1901-2,122.673

The pots and crocks should be clean and pot firm ; COOK2-1901-2,122.674

the soil must not be too wet or too dry . COOK2-1901-2,122.675

Give ample drainage , COOK2-1901-2,122.676

and do not sift the soil as Roses like the little of loam .
COOK2-1901-2,122.677

The best compost consists of three-parts loam , that which has been
stacked twelve months , if one can obtain it ; one-part one-year-old cow
manure ; and either a six-inch potful of guano or the same of steamed
bone-meal . COOK2-1901-2,122.678

When about to pot , turn out the plant , the ball on its side ,
COOK2-1901-2,122.679

and remove the crocks . COOK2-1901-2,122.680

Then with a pointed stick go all over the ball of earth ,
COOK2-1901-2,122.681

and gently prod it . COOK2-1901-2,122.682

This releases the roots , and some of the soil at the same time .
COOK2-1901-2,122.683

Then take the mass in both hands , COOK2-1901-2,122.684

and shake gently . COOK2-1901-2,122.685

Place it carefully in the centre of the pot , COOK2-1901-2,122.686

and fill up with compost , ramming this hard in . COOK2-1901-2,122.687

The pots must not be filled too full , merely to the rim .
COOK2-1901-2,122.688

Place the plants on bed of ashes when potted , COOK2-1901-2,122.689

and keep them here until wanted , unless frosts or heavy rains intervene
. COOK2-1901-2,122.690

Pillar Roses . COOK2-1901-2,122.691

- For many varieties of Roses the columnar or pillar form , is the most
natural as well as the most attractive . COOK2-1901-2,122.692

A pillar say of Crimson Rambler , well isolated upon the lawn , its fine
growths darting out here and there to relieve the pillar of formality ,
is , when with its crimson panicles of blossom , a gorgeous picture .
COOK2-1901-2,122.693

