<BEGIN_cooke1-1712-1>

{COM:In_this_text,_"Montezuma"_is_always_spelled_"Motezuma"}

<P_1,417>

<heading>

Chap. XXX . COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.5

<$$heading>

New Spain <font> discover'd by <$$font> John de Grijalva ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.7

Cortes <font> sent with Forces to settle in that Country ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.8

he lands , COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.9

routs the <$$font> Tlascalans , COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.10

<font> then joins in Confederacy with them , COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.11

goes to <$$font> Mexico , COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.12

<font> is well entertain'd at first , then expell'd ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.13

besieges , and takes that City , COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.14

and subdues all about it . <$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.15

After the Discovery of the <font> West_Indies <$$font> by the Admiral
<font> Christopher Columbus <$$font> , his Son <font> James Columbus
<$$font> succeeding him in that Dignity , gave the Government of the
Island of <font> Cuba <$$font> to Capt. <font> James Velasquez <$$font>
, who subdu'd that Island , and founded most of the <font> Spanish
<$$font> Towns in it . COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.16

<font> Velasquez <$$font> having settled the Affairs of his Government ,
and being inform'd of some Discoveries made along the Coast of <font>
Yucatan <$$font> by <font> Francis Fernandez de Cordova <$$font> ,
fitted out three Ships and a Brigantine , at his own Cost , under the
Command of <font> John de Grijalva <$$font> who sailing over to the
aforesaid Coast of <font> Yucatan <$$font> , ran along rounding the
Continent , 'till he came to the Province of <font> Panuco <$$font> ,
and , by the Way , had some Intelligence of the mighty <font> Mexican
<$$font> Monarchy , and the Majesty of <font> Motezuma <$$font> , with
which he return'd to <font> Cuba . <$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.17

<font> Velasquez <$$font> was displeas'd with <font> Grijalva <$$font> ,
for that he had not left a Colony on some Part of that Coast , where he
found a friendly Reception , COOKE1-1712-1,1,417.18

and therefore resolv'd to commit that Affair to <font> Ferdinand Cortes
<$$font> , who had behav'd <P_1,418> himself well in the reducing of
<font> Cuba <$$font> , giving him the Command of 10 Vessels he fitted
out , from 80 to 100 Tuns , on which 300 Soldiers embark'd .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.19

With this Force he sail'd from the Port of <font> Santiago <$$font> in
<font> Cuba <$$font> , on the 18th of <font> November <$$font> , 1518 ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.20

and coasting along the <font> North <$$font> Side of <font> Cuba
<$$font> , touch'd at the Ports of the <font> Trinity <$$font> and the
<font> Holy Ghost <$$font> , where he gather'd above 100 Men more , and
other Recruits at the <font> Havana <$$font> , where he form'd all his
Men into 11 Companies , and set Sail for the Continent .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.21

Having touch'd at the Island of <font> Cozumel <$$font> , where he took
up <font> Jerome de Aguilar <$$font> , a <font> Spaniard <$$font> , who
had been long Prisoner among the <font> Indians <$$font> , and learnt
their Language , which prov'd afterwards of great Use , he stood over
for the Continent , COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.22

landed in the Province of <font> Tabasco <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.23

and , after defeating an Army of the Natives , concluded a Peace with
them , COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.24

and proceeded on his Voyage to the Port of St. <font> John de Ulva
<$$font> , where he landed all his Forces . COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.25

Here <font> Dona Marina <$$font> , an <font> Indian <$$font> Woman ,
presented to <font> Cortes <$$font> by the <font> Cacique <$$font> of
<font> Tabasco <$$font> , prov'd very helpful to him , as understanding
the <font> Mexican <$$font> Language , which the afore-mention'd <font>
Aguilar <$$font> did not . COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.26

The <font> Indians <$$font> readily built Huts for the <font> Spaniards
<$$font> ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.27

and two of <font> Motezuma <$$font> 's Governors came to visit <font>
Cortes <$$font> , bringing him Presents , and asking what his Intention
was ? COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.28

He told them , he was to deliver a Message to their Sovereign from the
King of <font> Spain <$$font> ; which they oppos'd ; and , after some
Contest , sent Messengers to know his Pleasure , who returning ,
positively forbad him going to <font> Mexico <$$font> , but brought a
Present of considerable Value . COOKE1-1712-1,1,418.29

Whilst the Messages went forward and backward , to and from <font>
Mexico <$$font> , and <font> Ferdinand Cortes <$$font> prepar'd to
advance to that City , Embassadors <P_1,419> came to him , from the
neighbouring Province of <font> Zempoala <$$font> , to settle a strict
Amity with him , and declaring themselves mortal Enemies to the <font>
Mexicans <$$font> , for their Incroachments and Cruelty ; which was very
acceptable to <font> Cortes <$$font> , who , by this Means , understood
, that <font> Motezuma <$$font> was a haughty Tyrant , and as such hated
by his own Subjects , as well as Neighbours . COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.30

During this same Interval , he resolv'd to build a little Town , to
serve for a Port to receive Supplies . COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.31

This done , <font> Cortes <$$font> march'd away by Land to <font>
Zempoala <$$font> , where he was entertain'd in most friendly Manner ,
and built the Town which he call'd <font> la Vera Cruz . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.32

Then , at the Instigation of the <font> Zampoalans <$$font> , he march'd
against the Town of <font> Zimpazingo <$$font> , which sent out their
Priests to appease him ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.33

and being inform'd , that there were private Animosities between those
two People , which did no Way concern the Empire of <font> Mexico
<$$font> , he reconcil'd them , COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.34

and return'd to his new Town of <font> Vera Cruz . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.35

There he prevail'd on the <font> Indians <$$font> to cast out their
Idols , and convert their chief Temple into a Church .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.36

His next Care was to send Commissioners into <font> Spain <$$font> , to
acquaint the Emperor <font> Charles <$$font> V. with his Enterprize ,
and clear himself from any Thing that might be laid to his Charge ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.37

then punish'd some Persons , who would have stole away with a Ship ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.38

and to prevent the like Designs for the future , caus'd them all to be
sunk . COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.39

His whole Strength , upon a Review , consisted now of 500 Foot , 15
Horse and six Pieces of Cannon , whereof 150 Men and two Horses were
left in the new Town of <font> Vera Cruz . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,419.40

With this Force , and about 400 arm'd <font> Zempoalans <$$font> ,
besides those that <P_1,420> carry'd Burdens , he began his March
towards <font> Mexico <$$font> , on the 16th of <font> August <$$font>
1519 , suffering very much in the Mountain Country , 'till they came to
the Town of <font> Zocotlan <$$font> , where their Entertainment was
very cold , COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.41

and the <font> Cacique <$$font> magnify'd the Power of <font> Motezuma
<$$font> , to deter them from proceeding . COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.42

His Persuasions {TEXT:Perswasions} being of no Force , it was resolv'd
to advance by the Way of <font> Tlascala <$$font> , because that
Province was always at War with <font> Mexico <$$font> , and in League
with <font> Zempoala <$$font> , for which Reason four <font> Zempoalans
<$$font> were sent to persuade {TEXT:perswade} the <font> Tlascalans
<$$font> to give the <font> Spaniards <$$font> free Passage thro' their
Country . COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.43

The Council of <font> Tlascala <$$font> , which was a Common-wealth ,
having consider'd on what was propos'd to them by the Embassadors ,
resolv'd to make War on the <font> Spaniards <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.44

and detain'd the <font> Zempoalans . COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.45

Cortes <$$font> having stay'd eight Days at <font> Xacozingo <$$font> ,
for the Return of his Messengers , mov'd towards <font> Tlascala .
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.46

As soon as enter'd upon their Territories , he was encounter'd by a Body
of 20000 of them , who , after a short Engagement , soon fled with the
Terror of the Fire-Arms . COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.47

The next Day 40000 <font> Tlascalans <$$font> appear'd , whom the <font>
Spaniards <$$font> , nothing daunted , attack'd , and after a resolute
Opposition , put to Flight , with the Loss of one Horse on their Side ,
and nine or ten Men wounded ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.48

but on the Enemy's Side most of the prime Officers , and a great Number
of private Men , were kill'd . COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.49

The <font> Zempoalans <$$font> behav'd themselves very well in this
Action . COOKE1-1712-1,1,420.50

The <font> Tlascalans <$$font> , no Way discourag'd , returned again
with 50000 Men , who gave so furious a Charge , that the small Body of
<font> Spaniards <$$font> began to break ; but being rally'd , stood
<P_1,421> their Ground better , 'till a Misunderstanding in the Enemy's
Army , was the Occasion of their drawing off , and leaving <font> Cortes
<$$font> a third entire Victory . COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.51

These Defeats put the Senate of <font> Tlascala <$$font> upon debating
what was farther to be done ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.52

and by Advice of their Sorcerers , they order'd the <font> Spaniards
<$$font> should be assaulted in their Intrenchments by Night ; which was
accordingly done by their whole Power , two several Times , and they
repuls'd in both Attacks with incredible Loss . COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.53

All these Defeats prevail'd with the Senate of <font> Tlascala <$$font>
to sue to <font> Cortes <$$font> for Peace ; which was concluded ,
notwithstanding <font> Motezuma <$$font> 's Embassadors us'd all their
Arts to obstruct it . COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.54

Then <font> Cortes <$$font> continu'd his March to the City of <font>
Tlascala <$$font> , where he was receiv'd by the Senate , nobly
entertain'd , and admir'd by all the Inhabitants , making his Entry on
the 23d of <font> September <$$font> 1519 . COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.55

<font> Tlascala <$$font> was then a very populous City , standing on
four Hills , the Houses indifferent high , all of Brick and Stone , and
flat_roof'd . COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.56

The Inhabitants were concern'd to see the <font> Spaniards <$$font>
always on their Guard , COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.57

and complain'd of it to <font> Cortes <$$font> , as a Token of Distrust
; COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.58

but he put it off , alledging it was the Custom of his Country to keep
the Soldiers always to their Duty . COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.59

Those People remain'd satisfy'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.60

and to show their Sincerity , feasted COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.61

and presented the <font> Spaniards <$$font> with all the best their
Province afforded . COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.62

The burning Mountain not far from the City , happen'd to cast out Fire
at this Time , COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.63

and Capt. <font> James de Ordas <$$font> ventur'd to go up to the Top
of it , and look down into the Mouth , which is a Quarter of a League in
Compass , COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.64

and at the Bottom of it perceiv'd an immense Mass of Fire .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,421.65

This <P_1,422> Action seem'd more than human to the <font> Indians
<$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.66

and afterwards prov'd of Use to the <font> Spaniards <$$font> , who out
of that Mouth fetch'd Brimstone to make Powder , when they were in Want
of Ammunition . COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.67

Twenty Days were spent at <font> Tlascala <$$font> in refreshing the Men
, and receiving the Homage from all Parts of the Province , submitting
themselves to the King of <font> Spain <$$font> ; after which <font>
Cortes <$$font> appointed to prosecute his Journey to <font> Mexico
<$$font> ; and tho' dissuaded {TEXT:disswaded} by the <font> Tlascalans
<$$font> , concluded to take his Way through the City of <font> Cholula
<$$font> , whither he was attended by a good Body of arm'd <font>
Tlascalans <$$font> , always advising him to be upon his Guard ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.68

for there was certainly some Treachery design'd against him at that City
. COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.69

Being arriv'd there , the <font> Spaniards <$$font> fortify'd their
Quarters in two or three great Houses assign'd them , and the <font>
Tlascalans <$$font> theirs in the Fields close by , the <font> Cholulans
<$$font> furnishing Provisions plentifully , and appearing very friendly
. COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.70

However , it was not long before <font> Cortes <$$font> began to observe
the Falsehood of their Hearts , COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.71

and <font> Dona Marina <$$font> , the <font> Indian <$$font> Female
Interpreter , being advis'd by another <font> Indian <$$font> Woman ,
whose Affection she had gain'd , to withdraw herself from the <font>
Spaniards <$$font> , got out of her , that they were all to be destroy'd
by the Towns_People , who would be seconded by 20000 arm'd Men <font>
Motezuma <$$font> had sent to that Purpose . COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.72

She discover'd this to <font> Cortes <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.73

and the other Woman being seiz'd , confess'd the whole Design .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.74

Soon after the <font> Tlascalans <$$font> acquainted <font> Cortes
<$$font> , that the Inhabitants were sending away their Goods and Women
, and that 12 Children of both Sexes had been sacrific'd that Morning ,
which was usual before some great Undertaking . COOKE1-1712-1,1,422.75

For farther <P_1,423> Satisfaction , some of their Priests were sent for
and examin'd , who plainly own'd the Conspiracy .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.76

Then <font> Cortes <$$font> acquainted the <font> Tlascalans <$$font>
and <font> Spaniards <$$font> with the Discovery , giving out he would
march the next Morning ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.77

and when ready , declar'd to the <font> Caciques <$$font> , that he knew
all their wicked Practices . COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.78

They fled to the 20000 Men sent by <font> Motezuma <$$font> , who ,
after a short Dispute , were routed , together with the Inhabitants , by
the <font> Spaniards <$$font> and their Confederate <font> Indians
<$$font> , 6000 of them kill'd , many more burnt and destroy'd in their
Temples , and the City plunder'd by the <font> Tlascalans . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.79

After this Execution , <font> Cortes <$$font> pardon'd the rest ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.80

releas'd the Prisoners , COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.81

the People return'd to their Houses , COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.82

and the <font> Tlascalans <$$font> and <font> Cholulans <$$font> were
reconcil'd . COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.83

Fourteen Days were spent at this Place , COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.84

and then the little Army advanc'd again towards <font> Mexico <$$font> ,
by the Mountain Way of <font> Chalco <$$font> , where <font> Montezuma
<$$font> had laid an Ambush to cut them off ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.85

but being inform'd of it , they took another Road ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.86

and came at length to the Bank of the great Lake , many <font> Indians
<$$font> by the Way complaining to <font> Cortes <$$font> of the
miserable Oppression they liv'd under from the <font> Mexicans .
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.87

The whole Number of his Forces was then 450 <font> Spaniards <$$font>
and 6000 <font> Indians <$$font> , with whom he march'd into that mighty
City of <font> Mexico <$$font> , over a long Causeway {TEXT:Causway} ,
being met halfway by 4000 of the Nobility and Officers , and soon after
by <font> Motezuma <$$font> himself , magnificently attended , and
carry'd on Men's Shoulders , whom he presented with a Collar of
glittering Glass Beads ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.88

and the King , in Return , gave him another Collar of Shells most
artificially set in Gold . COOKE1-1712-1,1,423.89

This Entry was on the 8th of <font> November <$$font> 1519 , when the
<font> Spaniards <$$font> were <P_1,424> lodg'd in one of <font>
Motezuma <$$font> 's best Palaces . COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.90

The wonderful Grandeur of these Palaces , and the Particulars of what
pass'd between <font> Cortes <$$font> and <font> Motezuma <$$font> ,
can@ @not be contain'd in so short a Narrative ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.91

all we can say , is , that the <font> Spaniards <$$font> were
plentifully supply'd , and nobly entertain'd in that Place , 'till two
<font> Tlascalans <$$font> disguiz'd , brought <font> Cortes <$$font> a
Letter from his new Town of <font> Vera Cruz <$$font> , by which he
understood , that a General of <font> Motezuma <$$font> 's disturbing
the <font> Indians <$$font> in those Parts , <font> John de Escalante
<$$font> , whom he left Governor there , had routed his Army , but was
himself dead of the Wounds he receiv'd in the Action .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.92

This News troubled <font> Cortes <$$font> , who enquiring farther , was
inform'd , that the great Men of <font> Mexico <$$font> appear'd
discontented and thoughtful ; that some of them had been heard to say ,
it were easy to break down the Bridges , and that the Head of a <font>
Spaniard <$$font> had been privately carry'd to <font> Motezuma <$$font>
, who order'd it to be hid ; by all which Tokens he was convinc'd ,
remembering the treacherous Practices of that Monarch before his coming
to <font> Mexico <$$font> , that he was resolv'd to destroy him and his
Men , COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.93

and therefore concerted with his Officers , for their own Security , to
seize him . COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.94

They went to visit him ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.95

and after much arguing the Point , he was prevail'd upon to go quietly
with them , COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.96

was there treated with such Respect , that he began to grow easy , and
deliver'd up his General , and others who had attack'd the <font>
Spaniards <$$font> , to <font> Cortes . <$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.97

These Men being examin'd , own'd , that all had been done by <font>
Motezuma <$$font> 's Order , COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.98

and were publickly executed . COOKE1-1712-1,1,424.99

Things continu'd long in this Posture , that Monarch growing familiar
with the <font> Spaniards <$$font> , going <P_1,425> abroad when he
pleas'd , and seeming intirely satisfy'd with his Keepers .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.100

At this Time , the King of <font> Tezcuco <$$font> , hoping to succeed
<font> Motezuma <$$font> , form'd a Conspiracy for massacring of the
<font> Spaniards <$$font> ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.101

but was seiz'd , by Order of that Monarch , COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.102

and his Crown transferr'd to his Brother . COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.103

At last , <font> Motezuma <$$font> resolving to get rid of his Guests ,
call'd all his Nobility , COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.104

and , in their Presence , declar'd the King of <font> Spain <$$font> his
rightful Successor , resigning the Crown to him , and owning him for his
Sovereign ; which was done , in the same Manner , by all there present ,
and a vast Treasure gather'd to be sent to their new Sovereign , by way
of Acknowledgment . COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.105

As soon as this was perform'd , <font> Motezuma <$$font> told <font>
Cortes <$$font> it was Time for him to return to his Country ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.106

and gave immediate Orders to furnish all Necessaries for building of
Ships ; which much surpriz'd that Commander , who us'd all possible
Means to delay the Time . COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.107

Such was the Posture of Affairs , when Advice was brought that 18 <font>
Spanish <$$font> Ships were arriv'd on the Coast , with 800 <font>
Spaniards <$$font> , sent by <font> James Velasquez <$$font> against
<font> Cortes <$$font> , under the Command of <font> Pamphilo de Narvaez
. <$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.108

After some Messages had pass'd between these two Commanders , with
little Success , the new_Comer being resolv'd to reduce the other by
Force , <font> Cortes <$$font> set out from <font> Mexico <$$font> with
all his Forces , except 80 <font> Spaniards <$$font> left in the City
under the Command of <font> Peter de Alvarado <$$font> .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.109

He march'd to <font> Zempoala <$$font> , where <font> Narvaez <$$font>
was quarter'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.110

surpriz'd , routed , and took him Prisoner , COOKE1-1712-1,1,425.111

and then listed most of his Men among his own , so that he had now above
1000 <font> Spanish <$$font> Foot and 100 Horse , with which Force he
return'd to <font> Mexico <$$font> , being inform'd <P_1,426> that all
Things were there in Disorder , COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.112

and so he found them , tho' peaceably admitted into the City .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.113

He had not been long there before it appear'd , that all the Inhabitants
were in Arms ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.114

and <font> James de Ordas <$$font> , going abroad with a Party to
observe their Motions , was furiously set upon , COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.115

and retir'd to the Quarters with many Men wounded , the <font> Mexicans
<$$font> pursuing 'till the Cannon oblig'd them to give back .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.116

Soon after , they attack'd the Quarter with an infinite Multitude and
Fury ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.117

but being repuls'd , set Fire to it ; which being put out , <font>
Cortes <$$font> sally'd , and , after an incredible Slaughter , routed
those numerous Troops , filling the Streets with dead Bodies .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.118

Twice again they return'd to the Assault ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.119

and the last Time , <font> Motezuma <$$font> , from a Window ,
endeavouring to appease them , was struck with a Stone on the Head , of
which Wound he dy'd in three Days . COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.120

The <font> Mexicans <$$font> then chose <font> Quetlavaca <$$font> ,
King of <font> Iztapalapa <$$font> , for their Sovereign , under whose
Conduct they again several Times attack'd the <font> Spaniards <$$font>
, with as little Success as they had done before ; for which Reason it
was resolv'd to starve them out . COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.121

<font> Cortes <$$font> , understanding their Design , provided all
Things for his Departure , COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.122

and march'd out of his Quarters at Midnight , with as much Secrecy as
possible , having provided Bridges to be laid over the several Waters
which ran across the Streets . COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.123

The Inhabitants soon discover'd their Motion , COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.124

fill'd the Streets with their Multitudes , COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.125

and cover'd the Lake with arm'd Canoes , attacking them on all Sides .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,426.126

When the <font> Spaniards <$$font> had pass'd the first Water , their
Bridge remain'd so fix'd with the Weight of the Horses and Cannon , that
they could not <P_1,427> take it up ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.127

but they fill'd the next Channel with the Bodies of their slaughter'd
Enemies , COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.128

and pass'd over them . COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.129

In fine , he got out of the City to <font> Tacuba <$$font> where , upon
a Review , it appeared there had been 200 <font> Spaniards <$$font> lost
in the Retreat , above 1000 <font> Tlascalans <$$font> , and 46 Horses .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.130

Hence they march'd on for <font> Tlascala <$$font> , being pursu'd and
furiously assaulted by the Way , but still repulsing their Enemies with
incredible Loss ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.131

and yet had a worse Adversary to encounter , which was Hunger and Thirst
. COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.132

Yet in the last Engagement , they slew 20000 <font> Mexicans . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.133

After all these Toils and Misfortunes , the <font> Spaniards <$$font>
reach'd the City of <font> Tlascala <$$font> , where they were receiv'd
, and entertain'd with the greatest Joy and Affection that can be
imagin'd . COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.134

There they were refresh'd after their Fatigues , and the wounded Men
carefully look'd after . COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.135

The <font> Mexicans <$$font> us'd all Arts to persuade the <font>
Tlascalans <$$font> to destroy the <font> Spaniards <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.136

but they rejected them with Scorn . COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.137

Here <font> Cortes <$$font> receiv'd Intelligence , that the People of
<font> Tepeaca <$$font> had murder'd some <font> Spaniards <$$font> that
were coming to him ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.138

therefore , without Delay , he drew out his Forces ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.139

march'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.140

and defeated them twice in the Field ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.141

then advancing to their City , they humbled themselves to the Ground ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.142

submitted to the Emperor , COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.143

and , at their Request , the City was fortify'd , and a small Fort built
, by the Name of <font> Segura de la Frontera <$$font> , into which a
Garrison was put , for the Security of that Pass .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.144

<font> Cuetlavac <$$font> , new Emperor of <font> Mexico <$$font> ,
chosen in the Place of <font> Motezuma <$$font> , dying , <font>
Gnatimozin <$$font> , Nephew to <font> Motezuma <$$font> , was elected
in his Stead , COOKE1-1712-1,1,427.145

and immediately made mighty Preparations <P_1,428> for War , sending
30000 Men to <font> Guacachula <$$font> which were defeated by <font>
Cortes <$$font> , assisted by the People of that City , and many other
Confederate <font> Indians <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,428.146

At this Time , two Vessels arriv'd , one after another , at St. <font>
John de Ulva <$$font> , with 15 or 16 Men , and two or three Horses ,
sent from <font> Cuba <$$font> by <font> James Velasquez <$$font> , to
<font> Pamphilo de Narvaez <$$font> , supposing he had got the Command ,
and secur'd <font> Cortes <$$font> , which prov'd quite contrary , as
has been shewn , and those Men and Horses an Addition to his Enemy's
{TEXT:Enemies} Strength . COOKE1-1712-1,1,428.147

<font> Cortes <$$font> had now resolv'd upon subduing the City of <font>
Mexico <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,428.148

and , in order to it , gave Directions for building 13 Brigantines ,
which were to command the great Lake . COOKE1-1712-1,1,428.149

Then wanting Powder , some Soldiers offer'd to venture into the Mouth of
the burning Mountain , as they actually did , COOKE1-1712-1,1,428.150

and , to the Astonishment of the <font> Indians <$$font> , brought out a
sufficient Quantity of Brimstone for that Work .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,428.151

In the mean_while , three <font> Spanish <$$font> Ships , design'd for
the Conquest of the Province of <font> Panuco <$$font> , being drove by
Stress of Weather to <font> Vera Cruz <$$font> , all the Men they had
aboard , being 150 , took Service under <font> Cortes <$$font> , with
about 20 Horses , and a considerable Quantity of Provisions and
Ammunition . COOKE1-1712-1,1,428.152

When all Things were in Readiness , it was resolv'd to march directly to
<font> Tezcuco <$$font> , and secure that City , which was on the Road
to <font> Mexico <$$font> , and almost on the Bank of the Lake , for a
Place of Arms . COOKE1-1712-1,1,428.153

Then the Army being review'd , there were found 540 <font> Spanish
<$$font> Foot , 40 Horse , and nine Pieces of Cannon ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,428.154

the <font> Tlascalans <$$font> that were to march with them , being
10000 , and reckoning all the other Confederates , they amounted to
60000 ; which <P_1,429> afterwards continually increasing by the
Accession of others , came at last to make up 200000 .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.155

Thus provided , <font> Cortes <$$font> set forward from <font> Tlascala
<$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.156

and possess'd himself of the City of <font> Tezcuco <$$font> , the King
of it , who thought to have trapp'd him in it , flying , all the great
Men rejoicing in their Deliverance from his Tyranny , and <font> Cortes
<$$font> placing the rightful Heir on the Throne , who was presently
baptiz'd . COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.157

Next , the <font> Spaniards <$$font> made themselves Masters of <font>
Iztapalapa <$$font> , <font> Chalco <$$font> , and other Places about
the City of <font> Mexico <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.158

brought their new Brigantines from <font> Tlascala <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.159

receiv'd the Submission of many Places , which were willing to shake off
the <font> Mexican <$$font> Yoke , COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.160

and in several Encounters , routed the Inhabitants of that City .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.161

At length the Brigantines were launch'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.162

the <font> Spaniards <$$font> , by several Recruits , were increas'd to
900 , with 86 Horses , and 18 Pieces of Cannon , and the <font> Indian
<$$font> Confederates as above-@ @mention'd ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.163

the City of <font> Mexico <$$font> was invested , the Army being divided
into three Parts , to secure the three Avenues , or Causeways leading to
it over the Lake , and the Aqueducts which supply'd it with Water , cut
off . COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.164

The first considerable Action was on the Lake , between the Brigantines
and an innumerable Multitude of Canoes , which were overthrown with a
mighty Slaughter , and a Fort on a small Island gain'd .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.165

The Causeways were vigorously defended by the Besieg'd , and no less
resolutely attack'd by the Besiegers who could not have made good their
Posts against the Showers of Arrows flying from the Canoes on both Sides
, had not the Brigantines dispers'd {TEXT:disper'd} and overturn'd them
. COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.166

A general assault was given , COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.167

and the <font> Spaniards <$$font> penetrated into the City ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,429.168

but being oppressed <P_1,430> by the Multitude , were oblig'd to retire
, leaving 40 of their Number Prisoners , who were all sacrific'd by the
<font> Mexicans . <$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.169

Many of the Confederate <font> Indians <$$font> , upon this
Disappointment , began to withdraw themselves , and forsake the Camp ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.170

but soon return'd with greater Numbers ; so that they amounted , as has
been said , to 200000 . COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.171

<font> Cortes <$$font> for many Days thought it sufficient to cut off
all provisions from the City ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.172

and succeeded so well , that the Prisoners taken in some Sallies ,
assured him , that the Inhabitants began to suffer much Want .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.173

However , another general Assault was given , COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.174

the Defences forc'd , the Besiegers took their Posts within the City ,
the <font> Mexican <$$font> King , <font> Guatimozin <$$font> , retiring
to the remotest Quarter . COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.175

The next Day the <font> Spaniards <$$font> advanc'd again ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.176

the <font> Mexicans <$$font> offer'd to treat , only to gain Time for
their King to escape , COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.177

but he was taken on the Lake . COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.178

<font> Cortes <$$font> receiv'd him with extraordinary Respect ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.179

and he sent an Officer to command his Forces to lay down their Arms ,
and depart . COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.180

They instantly obey'd , being so great a Multitude , as was amazing
after so mighty a Slaughter . COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.181

Thus was that Imperial City taken , on the 13th of <font> August
<$$font> 1521 , and that Empire annex'd to the Crown of <font> Castile
<$$font> , as may be seen more at large in the History of the Conquest
of <font> Mexico <$$font> , written in <font> Spanish <$$font> by <font>
Anthony de Solis <$$font> , from whom this Account is taken , he being
the Author of most Esteem that has treated of it .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.182

After the Reduction of this Capital , no considerable Opposition was
made by any of the Provinces subject to it , most of them being
naturally averse to the tyrannical Government of those Princes ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,430.183

and if any continu'd <P_1,431> better affected , they were dispirited ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,431.184

and wanted a Head . COOKE1-1712-1,1,431.185

<font> Cortes <$$font> having settled the Government , sent his Officers
to several Parts to subdue other Provinces which had never been
conquer'd . COOKE1-1712-1,1,431.186

The great Province of <font> Mechoacan <$$font> , subject to a King of
its own , and always in Enmity with that of <font> Mexico <$$font> ,
voluntarily submitted ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,431.187

<font> Cortes <$$font> himself march'd to , and subdu'd the Province of
<font> Panuco <$$font> ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,431.188

<font> Peter de Alvarado <$$font> conquer'd that of <font> Guatemala
<$$font> , and so others in several Places . COOKE1-1712-1,1,431.189

The Particulars of these Actions would fill a greater Volume ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,431.190

those who desire it , may see them in <font> Herrera <$$font> 's History
of the <font> West_Indies . <$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,431.191

From <font> Mexico <$$font> , the <font> Spaniards <$$font> , by Degrees
, extended themselves to 37 or 38 Degrees of <font> North <$$font>
Latitude , where they have the City of <font> Santa Fe <$$font> , or
<font> New Mexico <$$font> , where we must leave them , to give some
short Relation of what Foreigners have made any Attempts on these Coasts
of <font> New Spain <$$font> , as has before been done in <font> Chile
<$$font> and <font> Peru . <$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,431.192

<P_1,432>

<heading>

Chap. XXXI . COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.195

<$$heading>

The <font> several Attempts and Expeditions along the <$$font> South Sea
<font> Coast of <$$font> North America ; <font> of Sir <$$font> Francis
Drake , <font> Sir <$$font> Thomas Candish , George Spilbergen , <font>
Capt. <$$font> Morgan , <font> Capt. <$$font> Sharp , <font> Capt.
<$$font> Dampier , <font> and some others . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.197

In speaking of the several Adventurers into the <font> South Sea
<$$font> , we brought Sir <font> Francis Drake <$$font> to the <font>
North <$$font> Part of the Coast of <font> Peru <$$font> , whence he
continu'd his Course still <font> Northward <$$font> , out at Sea ,
without ever touching , or coming in Sight of the Coast of <font> New
Spain <$$font> , 'till the 5th of <font> June <$$font> 1578 , when being
in the Latitude of 43 Degrees , and finding it very cold , he stood in
for the Land , which they tell us was not mountainous , and fell into a
good Bay , in 38 Degrees Latitude . COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.198

I give the Relation , as we have it in <font> Purchas <$$font> , not
without Suspicion of Errors , which I have before shown he is subject to
; COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.199

nor is it easy to guess to what End <font> Drake <$$font> should sail
into the Latitude of 43 , without any Prospect of Advantage , to fall
down into 38 for a Port . COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.200

But let us proceed with him . COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.201

The Natives , he says , sent a Present to the General , admiring him and
his Ships , COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.202

and he , in Return , gave them some Things to cover their Nakedness .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.203

It is to be observ'd , that this we are now speaking of , is the <font>
Northern <$$font> Coast of <font> California . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.204

Their Presents consisted of Feathers and Cauls of Net-work ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,432.205

their <P_1,433> Houses were partly of Earth thrown up round , on which
stood a Circle of Timber , meeting on the Top like a Sugar-Loaf ; their
Beds a few Rushes on the Ground , round about , and a Fire in the Middle
. COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.206

The Men went stark naked , COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.207

but the Women had a small covering of Rushes hanging about their Waste
{COM:sic} , COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.208

and were very submissive to their Husbands . COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.209

Another Time they presented Feathers and Tobacco {TEXT:Tabacco} , the
Men only coming forward , whilst the Women standing on a Hill , tore
their Cheeks , which was suppos'd to be some Sacrifice ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.210

and at this Time the Men brought back all that had been given them .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.211

Some Days after , came the <font> Cacique <$$font> , or petty Prince of
those People , clad in Skins , follow'd by many of his People naked ,
but painted , some white , some black , and some with other Colours .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.212

Being near the General's Tent , they advanc'd dancing and singing ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.213

and then making a long Speech , offer'd him the Kingdom , as <font>
Purchas <$$font> informs us , COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.214

tho' no Man there understood a Word of what was said , only he tells us
they put a Crown on the General's Head . COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.215

To pass by these Tales , going up into the Country , the <font> English
<$$font> saw Herds of a_thousand large and fat Deer ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.216

and perceiv'd the Fields were like one continu'd Warren of a Sort of
small Conies , their Heads like ours , with Feet like Moles , long Tails
like Rats , and under their Mouths a Bag on each Side , which they fill
with Meat after satisfying their Hunger . COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.217

This is the most remarkable Part of what Sir <font> Francis Drake
<$$font> saw in <font> California <$$font> , whence he return'd Home by
the <font> East_Indies <$$font> and <font> Cape of Good Hope <$$font> .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,433.218

Sir <font> Thomas Candish <$$font> having sail'd along the Coast of
<font> Peru <$$font> as was said in speaking of that <P_1,434> Country ,
on the 12th of <font> June <$$font> 1587 , cross'd the Equinoctial ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.219

and on the first of <font> July <$$font> had Sight of the Coast of
<font> New Spain <$$font> , being then four Leagues from it , in 10
Degrees of <font> North <$$font> Latitude . COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.220

The 9th , he took a Ship of 120 Tuns Burthen ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.221

and having taken out her Rigging , Firing , and Men , burnt her .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.222

The 10th he took a Bark , COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.223

but the Men were all fled COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.224

and the 26th anchor'd in the River <font> Copalita <$$font> to water ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.225

and that Night sent 30 Men in the Pinnace to <font> Aguatulco <$$font> ,
two Leagues distant , in 15 Deg. 40 Min. of <font> North <$$font>
Latitude . COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.226

There they took another empty Bark , COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.227

and burnt the poor Town , with the Church and Custom-House , in which
was a good Quantity of Indigo and Cacao . COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.228

The next Day , the Ship sail'd into <font> Aguatulco <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.229

and <font> Candish <$$font> landing with 30 Men , went two Miles up into
the Woods , COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.230

and took a <font> Mestizo <$$font> , that is , one begot between a
<font> Spaniard <$$font> and an <font> Indian . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.231

Then he went with 30 Men in the Pinnace to <font> Puerto de la Navidad
<$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.232

took a <font> Mulatto <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.233

kill'd his Horse , COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.234

and burnt some Houses , and two Ships on the Stocks .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.235

The 26th of <font> August <$$font> , they put into the Bay of <font>
Santiago <$$font> , in 19 Deg. 18 Min. Latitude ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.236

and water'd in a River , along whose Banks there were many Plantans ,
and in it Plenty of Fish . COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.237

Some of the Men dragging there for Oysters , took a small Quantity of
Pearl . COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.238

The 3d of <font> September <$$font> put into a Bay call'd <font> Malacca
<$$font> , a League West from <font> la Navidad <$$font> , a good Place
to ride in , COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.239

landed 30 Men , COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.240

and travell'd two Miles to destroy a poor <font> Indian <$$font> Town ,
call'd <font> Acatlan <$$font> , consisting of about 20 or 30 Houses .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.241

Sailing on along the Coast , on the 8th they came into the Road of
<font> Chacalla <$$font> , where were only two little Houses ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.242

and it is 18 Leagues from Cape <font> Corrientes <$$font> ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,434.243

40 Men <P_1,435> were sent two Leagues up the Country , who brought away
three <font> Spaniards <$$font> , with their Wives and Children , and
one <font> Portuguese <$$font> ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.244

and having oblig'd them to bring Plantans , Lemons , Oranges ,
Pine-Apples , and other Fruit , they were dismiss'd .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.245

The 12th of <font> September <$$font> , arriv'd at the little Island of
St. <font> Andrew <$$font> , where is Plenty of Fowl and Wood ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.246

dry'd abundance of Fowl , COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.247

and kill'd many <font> Seals <$$font> and <font> Guanos . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.248

The 24th arriv'd in the Road of <font> Masatlan <$$font> , lying just
under the Tropick of <font> Cancer <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.249

a large River within , COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.250

but has a Bar at the Mouth ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.251

and on the <font> North <$$font> Side , without the Bar , is good Water
, but bad filling of it , because at low Water it is Shoal half a Mile
from the Shore . COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.252

The 27th , ran to an Island , a League to the <font> Northward
{TEXT:Norward} <$$font> of <font> Masatlan <$$font> , where they trimm'd
their Ships , and new-built their Pinnace . COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.253

There is another Island a quarter of a League from this , whence a
<font> Spanish <$$font> Prisoner made his Escape , swimming a Mile to
the Continent . COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.254

At the Island where the Ships were , they found fresh Water , digging
two or three Foot down into the Sand . COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.255

Here they stay'd till the 9th of <font> October <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.256

and then sail'd for Cape St. <font> Luke <$$font> , in <font>
California <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.257

and fell in with it on the 14th , where they water'd in <font> Puerto
Seguro <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.258

and then lay off and on with Cape St. <font> Luke <$$font> , 'till the
4th of <font> November <$$font> , when they spy'd a Sail bearing in from
the Sea , gave Chase , came up with , and boarded her .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.259

She was call'd the <font> St. Anne <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.260

fought resolutely for about five Hours , 'till having receiv'd several
Shot between Wind and Water , she was ready to sink ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.261

and then yielded . COOKE1-1712-1,1,435.262

There was found in her the Value of 120000 Pieces of Eight in Gold , her
Lading being most Silk , with some Musk , and other Commodities of
<P_1,436> Value . COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.263

<font> November 6. <$$font> they return'd into <font> Puerto Seguro
<$$font> , where they set all the <font> Spaniards <$$font> ashore in
that barbarous Island , burnt their Ship , and on the 19th of the said
Month of <font> November <$$font> 1587 , set Sail from <font> California
<$$font> , and return'd home <font> West <$$font> about .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.264

The only Dutch-Man {COM:font_change_around_"Dutch"} I met {TEXT:meet}
with in <font> these <$$font> Parts , was <font> George Spilbergen
<$$font> , who having pass'd the <font> Magellan Straits
{TEXT:Streights} <$$font> , in the Year 1615 , and sail'd up the Coast
of <font> Chile <$$font> and <font> Peru <$$font> , as was there said ,
cross'd the <font> Equinoctial <$$font> and , on the 20th of <font>
September <$$font> , had sight of the Land of <font> New Spain <$$font>
, in the Latitude of 13 Deg. 30 Min. then stood off to Sea , the
Weather proving foul , and , <font> October <$$font> the 1st , came in
Sight of Land again ; but the Sea still running high , beat off and on
'till the 11th , when they enter'd the Port of <font> Acapulco .
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.265

Having put out a Flag of Truce , two <font> Spaniards <$$font> came
aboard , COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.266

and agreed to exchange Prisoners for Sheep , Fruit , and other
Provisions , which was done accordingly . COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.267

They sail'd thence the 18th , COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.268

and took a Vessel bound for the Pearl-Fishery , with 11 Men in her , the
rest having made their Escape . COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.269

<font> November <$$font> 10. {COM:sic} they anchor'd before Port <font>
Selaques <$$font> , in 19 Degrees Latitude . COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.270

On the 11th , they proceeded on to Port <font> Navidad <$$font> , where
they water'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.271

and then stood over for the Islands <font> Ladrones . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.272

These were the first early Attempts in those Parts , and perform'd under
lawful Commissions in Time of open War ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.273

next follow Pyratical Enterprizes , which ought rather to have been
bury'd in Oblivion , being contrary to all Justice ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.274

but having been made known to all the World , may have a Place among the
others . COOKE1-1712-1,1,436.275

What has been done in this Nature on the Coasts of <font> Peru <$$font>
and <font> Chile <$$font> , was mention'd <P_1,437> in its Place ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.276

we are now to speak of such Actions as appertain to that Side of <font>
North America . <$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.277

Capt. <font> Morgan <$$font> having committed many Robberies on the
<font> North <$$font> Seas , in the Year 1670 , set out from <font>
Chagre <$$font> , near <font> Nombre de Dios <$$font> with 1200 Men ,
five Boats with Artillery , and 32 Canoes , COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.278

went up the River as far as navigable , COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.279

and then landed . COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.280

Nine Days were spent in crossing the <font> Isthmus <$$font> , to the
City of <font> Panama <$$font> , on the <font> South <$$font> Sea .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.281

Before it they met a Body of <font> Spaniards <$$font> , whom they
defeated , COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.282

and then murder'd some Religious Men they had taken in cold Blood .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.283

They immediately advanc'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.284

and attack'd the City , which they enter'd after a hot Dispute ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.285

and <font> Morgan <$$font> caus'd it to be set on Fire , and the
greatest Part burnt down ; for which , no Reason was ever known , unless
it were a natural Delight in Mischief . COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.286

Next they begun their Search for Plate and Gold , whereof they found
some considerable Quantity in Wells and Cisterns , and among the Ruins .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.287

They took some Barks ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.288

but a rich Galcon , which had on Board the greatest Treasure of the City
and Churches , with the Nuns , happily escap'd them , whilst they were
taken up in their brutal Pleasures of Drunkenness and ravishing some
Women they found . COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.289

The Barks they had taken , being mann'd and sent out , return'd with a
Ship , and a Boat laden with considerable Goods , and 20000 Pieces of
Eight ; the Parties by Land , at the same Time , ranging about , and
taking many Prisoners , and much Wealth about them .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,437.290

On these unfortunate Persons , the Pirates exercis'd the most barbarous
Cruelty , racking them inhumanly , to discover Goods of their own or
others <P_1,438> conceal'd . One Instance whereof , was , their
disjointing the Arms of a Servant who could make no Discovery ; then
twisting a Rope about his Head , 'till his Eyes were ready to start out
; and lastly , hanging him up by the Privities .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.291

Religious Men and Priests were sure to be worst handled , if possible ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.292

and Women found no Mercy , unless they submitted to their Lust .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.293

<font> Morgan <$$font> himself was no way backward in this Brutality ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.294

for a beautiful Woman of Quality being brought to him , he first try'd
all obliging Means to debauch her ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.295

and then finding she was deaf to his beastly Kindness , he thrust her
into a stinking Cellar , with such a short Allowance of Meat , as was
scarce fit to keep her alive ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.296

yet no Hardships could prevail with that Vertuous Lady to forfeit her
Honour ; for which Reason , at last , having extorted a considerable
Ransom , he set her at Liberty . COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.297

Having gather'd a mighty Treasure , and 600 Prisoners , these Monsters
return'd with them towards the <font> North <$$font> Sea , the same Way
they came , treating those Prisoners with the greatest Inhumanity , to
extort Ransoms from them , as is declar'd by one who says he was in the
Expedition , and an Eye-Witness to all these Villainies ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.298

and having no better to say of them , we will leave such Hellish Company
on their Way home , since they are departed from the <font> South
<$$font> Sea . COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.299

The next of this Sort , is Capt. <font> Sharp <$$font> , who landing on
the Coast of <font> Darien <$$font> in the Year 1680 , travell'd thence
by Land and Water to a poor Town , call'd <font> Santa Maria <$$font> ,
which having taken , they found nothing but a Parcel of wretched
thatch'd Houses . COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.300

Here they embark'd on 35 Canoes and a Piragua , COOKE1-1712-1,1,438.301

sail'd <P_1,439> down the River into the <font> South <$$font> Sea ,
where they surpriz'd a Bark at an Island , call'd <font> Farol de
Platatnos <$$font> , seven Leagues from the Bay of <font> Panama
<$$font> , and soon after another out at Sea . COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.302

Then putting into another little Island , call'd <font> Chepillo
<$$font> , took 14 Prisoners and a <font> Piragua <$$font> , which
Prisoners they soon order'd to be murder'd by the <font> Indians
<$$font> , tho' all of them , but one , forc'd their Way thro' into the
Woods . COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.303

Coming up in Sight of <font> Panama <$$font> , they took two Ships out
at Sea , after a sharp Engagement , the Particulars whereof are too
fabulous to deserve repeating , COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.304

and in the Bay seiz'd five others , which had no Men in them , and some
Barks at Sea . COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.305

Hence they sail'd to the <font> Southward <$$font> , as may be seen in
the Chapters of <font> Peru <$$font> and <font> Chile <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.306

and then turn'd again to the <font> Northward <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.307

and on <font> Monday , May <$$font> 2. {COM:sic} 1681 , were in 9
Degrees of <font> North <$$font> Latitude ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.308

the 6th they stood in for the Gulf of <font> Nicoya <$$font> , the Land
to the <font> Eastward <$$font> being plain and even , with a great Road
along it , to be seen out at Sea . COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.309

Sounding in the Middle of the Gulf , found 14 Fathom Water ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.310

and then anchor'd near the <font> East <$$font> Key in 15 Fathom , ouzy
Ground ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.311

in the Evening anchor'd again in five Fathom . COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.312

Took some Prisoners at this Place , COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.313

ransom'd them for Provisions , COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.314

and <font> May <$$font> the 27th set Sail again ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.315

and drove out to the <font> Westward <$$font> of <font> Cabo Blanco
<$$font> , where the Coast runs <font> N.W. <$$font> half <font> W.
<$$font> and grows lower and lower towards Cape <font> Guiones .
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.316

They proceeded to <font> Golfo Dulce <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.317

and there careen'd ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.318

then being fitted to their Mind , stood again to the <font> Southward
<$$font> , without having done any Thing worth taking Notice of .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,439.319

There is another particular Account of a Gang of <font> French <$$font>
and <font> English <$$font> Pirates roving in <P_1,440> the <font> South
<$$font> Sea , at several Times , from the Year 1684 'till 1689 , which
we shall not need take Notice of , as being the same which will be
mention'd in speaking of Capt. <font> Dampier <$$font> ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.320

nor shall we take Notice of <font> Cowley <$$font> 's Voyage , having no
Design to compile a History of Robberies , but only to mention those
Persons who have been remarkable in those Seas , or give some
Particulars which others have not done . COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.321

Capt. <font> Dampier <$$font> was in the above-mention'd pyratical
Expedition with Capt. <font> Sharp <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.322

and return'd out of the <font> South <$$font> Sea , with many others ,
who approv'd not of <font> Sharp <$$font> , over Land , as they had gone
, to the <font> North <$$font> Sea . COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.323

In the year 1683 , he set out again under Capt. <font> Cook <$$font> ,
for the <font> South <$$font> Sea ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.324

what happen'd to him along the Coasts of <font> Chile <$$font> and
<font> Peru <$$font> , may be seen in those Chapters ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.325

but at the Beginning of <font> July <$$font> 1684 , they fell in with
Cape <font> Blanco <$$font> , so call'd from the white Rocks lying off
it , which is on the Coast of <font> Nicaragua <$$font> , in the
Latitude of 9 Deg. 56 Min. COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.326

From this Cape on the <font> N.W. <$$font> Side , the Land runs <font>
N.E. <$$font> for about four Leagues , making a Bay , call'd <font>
Caldera <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.327

A League within Cape <font> Blanco <$$font> , on the <font> N.W.
<$$font> Side , at the Entrance of the Bay , is a small Brook of very
good Water , running into the Sea , COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.328

the Land low , COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.329

and makes a Saddle between two Hills , and producing large tall Trees of
several Sorts ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.330

the Mould black and deep . COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.331

About a Mile from the Brook , towards the <font> N.E. <$$font> the
Wood-Land terminates , COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.332

and the Plain begins ; the Grass on it kindly , thick , and long .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.333

Towards the Bottom of the Bay , the Land next the Sea , is low , and
full of Mangroves , but farther up , high and mountainous .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,440.334

From the Bottom of the Bay , to the Lake of <font> Nicaragua <$$font> ,
is about <P_1,441> 14 Leagues . COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.335

Here Capt. <font> Cook <$$font> dy'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.336

and his Ship , with Capt. <font> Eaton <$$font> 's and a Prize , came
to an Anchor . COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.337

Two <font> Indians <$$font> taken here , inform'd them , that there was
Plenty of Cattle {TEXT:Cattel} three Miles off : COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.338

Twenty_four Men were sent ashore to fetch some , half whereof return'd
Aboard , leaving the other twelve to drive the Cattle {TEXT:Cattel} ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.339

and hearing nothing of them , the next Morning , the Boat went off again
, COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.340

and found them standing on a Rock in the Water , whither {TEXT:whether}
they had fled from the <font> Spaniards <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.341

took them off , COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.342

and went back to their Ships . COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.343

<font> Edward Davis <$$font> was here chosen Captain , in the Place of
<font> Cook <$$font> deceas'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.344

and the 20th of <font> July <$$font> they sail'd from this Bay ,
designing for <font> Realejo <$$font> , which is the most remarkable
Land on that Coast , there being a high peeked burning Mountain , call'd
<font> Volcan Viejo <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.345

This must be brought to bear <font> N.E . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.346

then steer in directly for the Mountain , and that brings you unto the
Harbour . COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.347

The Town of <font> Realejo <$$font> is two Leagues from this Place ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.348

and there are two Creeks that run towards it . COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.349

It was design'd to attack this Place , COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.350

but a Horse-man seen on the Shore riding away , carry'd Advice ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.351

and therefore it was not thought fit to attempt any Thing .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.352

Having taken a Turn to the <font> Southward <$$font> , from this Place ,
they again made up for <font> Panama <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.353

and were join'd by a mighty Swarm of <font> French <$$font> and <font>
English <$$font> Pyrates , come over by Land from the <font> North
<$$font> Sea ; so that they were now 10 Sail , and above 1000 Men .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.354

They thought to have taken the <font> Spanish <$$font> Fleet at <font>
Panama <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.355

but finding it too strong , were fain to make a running Fight , and get
off as well as they could . COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.356

To pass by smaller Matters of no Moment , they made away for <font>
Realejo <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,441.357

and <P_1,442> came before it on the 8th of <font> August <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.358

and the next Day sent up 520 Men in Canoes , COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.359

rowed up the Creek on the <font> S.E. <$$font> Side of the Harbour ,
which leads to the City of <font> Leon <$$font> , the Place intended to
be plunder'd , being 20 Miles from the Sea , stands in a pleasant Plain
, not far from the burning Mountain , call'd <font> Volcan de Leon .
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.360

The Houses are well built , with Gardens , COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.361

there are three Churches , and a Cathedral , the Wealth of the Place
consisting in Cattle {TEXT:Cattel} and Sugar . COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.362

The Pyrates enter'd the Town with little Opposition ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.363

and after treating in vain about Ransom , set it on Fire ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.364

and march'd to <font> Realejo <$$font> , where they found no Inhabitants
, but a Quantity of Meal , and Naval Stores , which they carry'd off ,
with much Beef and Sugar . COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.365

This done , the Gang parted Company , some sailing back to the <font>
Southward <$$font> , and others resolving to proceed to the <font>
Westward <$$font> , among which last was Capt. <font> Dampier .
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.366

They sail'd the 3d of <font> September <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.367

and being off the burning Mountain of <font> Guatemala <$$font> , put
106 Men into Canoes , under Capt. <font> Townley <$$font> , intending
to land for Refreshments , which they did , but return'd without any ,
having lost one Man , and many of their Arms , as they pretended by the
oversetting of their Canoes ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.368

but whether it was not flying from the <font> Spaniards <$$font> ashore
, must be left to them ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.369

for they did meet with a Party , COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.370

and could not find the Town of <font> Teguantepeque <$$font> , which
they went to seek . COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.371

Proceeding on their Voyage , they put into the Port of <font> Aguatulco
<$$font> , in 15 Deg. 30 Min. Latitude , COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.372

march'd 14 Miles up the Country to a poor <font> Indian <$$font> Town ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.373

and return'd without any Advantage . COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.374

The 12th of <font> October <$$font> 1685 , sail'd from <font> Aguatulco
<$$font> , to Port <font> Angels <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.375

got some little Beef , but very inconsiderable , COOKE1-1712-1,1,442.376

<P_1,443>

landed again at a River two Leagues <font> West <$$font> of the Rock
<font> Alcatraz <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.378

and found nothing but Fish and Salt . COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.379

Then sailing to <font> Acapulco <$$font> , Capt. <font> Townley
<$$font> went with 140 Men to take a Ship come from <font> Peru <$$font>
, which lay there ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.380

but being near , durst not attempt her , COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.381

and some Shot being made from the Shore , rowed out again with all Speed
. COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.382

<font> Acapulco <$$font> , says <font> Dampier <$$font> 's Voyage , is a
pretty large Town ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.383

but , <font> Gemelli <$$font> tells us it may be more properly call'd a
poor Village of Fishermen , being only a few wretched Houses of Mud ,
Wood , and Straw , and inhabited by none but Blacks and Mulattoes ; by
which we see what Credit is to be given to the Accounts of some Men ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.384

for <font> Gemelli <$$font> was in it several Days ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.385

and had no Reason to lessen it , being an excellent Describer of all he
saw . COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.386

Thus they proceeded along to Cape <font> Corrientes <$$font> , hoping to
meet with the <font> Manila <$$font> Ship ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.387

but missing of her , Capt. <font> Townley <$$font> went back ,
designing to return by Land to the <font> North <$$font> Sea , the same
Way he came . COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.388

Capt. <font> Swan <$$font> held on his Course along the Coast of <font>
New Spain <$$font> , landing at several Places , without any Thing
remarkable , 'till putting into the River of <font> Santiago <$$font> ,
which is in 22 Deg. 15 Min. Latitude , he went ashore there with 140
Men , to a small Town to get Provisions ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.389

but falling into an Ambush laid by the <font> Spaniards <$$font> , had
50 of his Men kill'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.390

and return'd to his Ships with very little Corn . After which
unfortunate Exploit , Capt. <font> Swan <$$font> sail'd up to the
{TEXT:the_to} Islands <font> Tres Marias <$$font> , near <font>
California <$$font> , and thence for the Islands <font> Ladrones
<$$font> , to come Home by the <font> East_Indies . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,443.391

The same Capt. <font> Dampier <$$font> last spoken of , return'd to the
<font> South Sea <$$font> , in the Year 1703 , having then himself the
Command of a Ship , in <P_1,444> Company with another , commanded by
Capt. <font> Pulling <$$font> , and both Commissions from Prince <font>
George <$$font> of <font> Denmark <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.392

They arriv'd at the Island <font> Juan Fernandes <$$font> in <font>
February <$$font> 1704 ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.393

what they did along those <font> Southern <$$font> Coasts , has been
already touch'd in its Place . COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.394

Their Proceedings to the <font> Northward <$$font> , were as follows :
COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.395

From the Bay of <font> Tacames <$$font> , in 1 Deg. 20 Min. of <font>
North <$$font> Latitude , they sail'd to the Bay <font> Caldera <$$font>
, COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.396

and anchor'd between it and some small Islands the <font> Spaniards
<$$font> call <font> Islas de en Medio <$$font> , or the Middle Islands
, COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.397

laid their Ship a-ground , COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.398

clean'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.399

and stopp'd the Leaks . COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.400

Here Capt. <font> Dampier <$$font> 's chief Mate left him , going away
with 21 of his Men in a small Prize they had taken .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.401

The Design was to take the <font> Manila <$$font> Ship ; in order to
which , as soon as refitted , they hal'd out from the Middle Islands ,
and anchor'd in the Gulph ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.402

and on the 23d of <font> September <$$font> , left that Place to cruize
to the <font> Westward . COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.403

October <$$font> 7. they were in 13 Deg. 7 Min. <font> North <$$font>
Latitude , the Variation 4 Deg. 30 Min. <font> Westerly <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.404

and then saw the two burning Mountains of <font> Guatemala
{TEXT:Guatimala} <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.405

The 9th they took a Bark of about 80 Tuns in Ballast , bound for <font>
Realejo <$$font> , and had some small Quantity of Provisions .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.406

The 15th they were in the Latitude of 13 Deg. 25 Min. Variation 3 Deg.
<font> West <$$font> off the burning Mountain of <font> Avitlan .
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.407

The 20th were abreast of <font> Tecoantepeque <$$font> , very low Land ,
with small Hills , looking like Islands . COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.408

<font> November <$$font> the 11th , <font> Funnel <$$font> tells us ,
they landed at a Place call'd <font> Suvartanco <$$font> , which Name I
can@ @not meet with in any <font> Spanish <$$font> Author ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.409

he says , it lies in 17 Deg. 40 Min. <font> North <$$font> , and has a
Village of about 40 Houses , which they romag'd , and found in it many
small Things , with 16 Packs of good Flower ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,444.410

the Men <P_1,445> would have burnt the Village , COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.411

but the Captain would not permit them . COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.412

The 18th they stood to the <font> Westward <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.413

and the 22d anchor'd in the Bay of <font> Martaba <$$font> , under the
Mountains <font> Motines <$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.414

water'd , COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.415

and took excellent Tortoises . COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.416

The 26th took a Bark of about 60 Tuns , laden with Planks , from <font>
California <$$font> , and had some Pearl Aboard , taken at that Island .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.417

<font> December <$$font> 4. came into the Bay of the <font> Nativity
<$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.418

2nd there took a Vessel of about 60 Tuns , which in the Chase had thrown
her Goods over Board , COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.419

and the Men ran ashore in their Boat . COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.420

<font> December 6. <$$font> being off the burning Mountain of <font>
Colima <$$font> , came up with a Sail , which prov'd to be the
look'd_for <font> Manila <$$font> Ship , COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.421

gave her several Broad-sides , before she could clear any of her Guns ,
as thinking nothing of an Enemy . COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.422

As soon as they got out one Tire of Guns , they were too hard for the
Privateers , who being soon much shatter'd , stood off , and left her .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.423

Being thus disappointed , they continu'd cruizing along the Shore to the
<font> Eastward <$$font> , in Sight of Land , passing by several Ports ,
designing for the Bay of <font> Amapalla <$$font> , to refit ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.424

but before they came thither , some being for staying longer , and
others for returning Home , they parted , COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.425

33 sail'd directly for <font> India <$$font> in a Bark ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.426

the rest stay'd longer tho' to no great Purpose , as may be seen in
<font> Dampier <$$font> 's Travels . COOKE1-1712-1,1,445.427

<P_1,446>

<heading>

Chap. XXXII . COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.430

<$$heading>

<font> Return Home from the <$$font> South Sea , <font> through <$$font>
India ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.432

<font> touch at the Islands <$$font> Ladrones , Batavia , <font> and
Cape of <$$font> Good Hope ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.433

<font> arrive in <$$font> Holland , North <font> about , and thence into
the <$$font> Downs . COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.434

We left our Ships at <font> Puerto Segura <$$font> in <font> California
<$$font> to treat of the Coasts and Country of <font> New Spain <$$font>
, as had been done before with <font> Chile <$$font> and <font> Peru
<$$font> , COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.435

it is now Time to return to them , and continue our Voyage to <font>
England . <$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.436

<font> Tuesday , January <$$font> 10 . 1709 - 10 .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.437

having put between 60 and 70 <font> English <$$font> into the Prize ,
with about 30 <font> Indians <$$font> and Blacks , in all about 100 ,
ran out at Midnight , COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.438

and at Twelve the next Day , Cape St. <font> Lucas <$$font> bore <font>
North <$$font> , distant five Leagues . COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.439

Provisions being scarce , the Allowance was shorten'd to a Pound and a
half of Meal or Bread for five Men . COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.440

Steer'd away for some Days <font> S.W. <$$font> by <font> S. <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.441

and , according to a good Observation , had but a <font> S.S.W.
<$$font> Course occasion'd by the Current , the Variation here scarce
worth observing . COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.442

Getting into the Trade-Winds , our Course was afterwards uniform , so
that it will be needless to be particular in it , there being nothing
remarkable , 'till <font> Friday , March <$$font> 10 . 1709 - 10 .
when , at Three in the Afternoon , we made the Island <font> Sarpana
<$$font> , bearing <font> W.N.W. <$$font> distant 12 Leagues ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.443

and at Six in the Evening , the Island <font> Guam <$$font> or <font>
Guagan <$$font> , bearing <font> W. <$$font> by <font> S. <$$font>
distant 12 Leagues , lay by most Part of the Night ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,446.444

and <font> Saturday <$$font> , the 11th <P_1,447> in the Morning ,
steer'd <font> S.S.W. <$$font> and <font> S.W. <$$font> Latitude 13
Deg. 30 Min. COOKE1-1712-1,1,447.445

At Six in the Evening came to an Anchor at Port <font> Umata <$$font> ,
of the Island <font> Guam <$$font> , the Houses bearing <font> E.
<$$font> by <font> N. <$$font> distant about a Mile .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,447.446

The <font> Spanish <$$font> Governor of the Island promis'd to furnish
us with all the Island afforded . COOKE1-1712-1,1,447.447

They entertain'd us with all possible Civility , COOKE1-1712-1,1,447.448

and in Return , we paid for all we had , to their entire Satisfaction .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,447.449

The necessary Description of the several Countries we sail'd along in
the <font> South Sea <$$font> , and of the several Ways into it , with
the small Abridgments of what has been done by other Adventurers in
these Parts , having taken up so much of this Volume , it has been
thought most convenient to shorten our Run Home , that the reader may
not look upon this as an imperfect Relation , if we should break off
abruptly , after taking the <font> Manila <$$font> Ship ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,447.450

we shall therefore conclude with this Chapter , only mentioning the
Heads , or most material Passages , from this Time , 'till our Return
into <font> England <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,447.451

It is however intended to publish , in a very short Time , a second
Volume , containing all the Particulars of the remaining Part of our
Voyage from <font> California <$$font> , with exact Descriptions , not
only of the Island <font> Guam <$$font> , but of all other Places we
touch'd at , or shall have Occasion to mention in our Way , the Bearings
of all the Coasts on the Back of <font> America <$$font> , from the
Island of <font> California <$$font> , to the Straits {TEXT:Streights}
of <font> Magellan <$$font> , Draughts of many considerable Harbours ,
taken from the <font> Spanish <$$font> Coasting-Pilots , and other
curious Cuts , which , with several Curiosities , too tedious to be here
taken Notice of , will render the Work as useful , instructive , and
diverting , as any Book of this Nature hitherto extant .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,447.452

I must therefore <P_1,448> refer the Reader to it , proceeding for the
present to bring our Ships Home , with the greatest Brevity .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.453

<font> Tuesday , March <$$font> 21 . 1709 - 10 . in the Morning we all
sail'd with a small Breeze at <font> N.E . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.454

and at Noon the Body of the Island <font> Guam <$$font> bore <font>
N.N.E. <$$font> distant six Leagues . COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.455

We saw no Land 'till <font> Monday , April <$$font> 11 .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.456

and then at Two in the Afternoon made a pleasant small low Island ,
bearing <font> E.S.E. <$$font> distant about six Leagues , not laid
down in any of our Charts . COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.457

It is full of Trees , COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.458

and I make it to lie in the Latitude of 2 Deg. 55 Min. <font> North
<$$font> , and 14 Deg. 40 Min. Latitude <font> West <$$font> from
<font> Guam . COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.459

Thursday <$$font> 13 . at Two in the Afternoon saw another Island
bearing <font> W.S.W. <$$font> distant 11 Leagues .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.460

<font> Friday <$$font> 14. at Noon the same Island bore <font> S.W.
<$$font> half <font> W. <$$font> distant 10 Leagues ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.461

and then we saw another large Island , bearing <font> N.W. <$$font>
distant 12 Leagues ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.462

and soon after several Spouts came near our Ships ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.463

and we had foul Weather for several Days . COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.464

<font> Thursday , May <$$font> 4 . saw a small Island , lying between
<font> Celebes <$$font> and <font> Gilolo <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.465

bore <font> W. <$$font> by <font> S. <$$font> distant 10 Leagues .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.466

Latitude this Day at Noon 1 Deg. 50 Min. <font> North <$$font> ,
Longitude from the Island <font> Moratay <$$font> 2 Deg. 55 Min.
<font> West <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.467

<font> Monday , May <$$font> 8 . 1710 . COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.468

perceiving a strong Current had set us to the <font> Eastward <$$font> ,
resolv'd to pass through the Streight between <font> Gilolo <$$font> and
<font> New Guinea <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.469

The 14th in the Evening we saw the Land of <font> Papous <$$font> ,
which is high cragged Land , and inhabited by Blacks ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.470

and the 15th at Noon saw a small high Island , bearing <font> S.S.W.
<$$font> eight Leagues from us , which I make to be in the Latitude of 1
Deg. 30 Min. <font> South . COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.471

Thursday , May <$$font> 18 . made the Island <font> Ceram <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,448.472

and were very near it at Noon , being <P_1,449> very high Land , full of
Valleys , and very woody ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.473

our Latitude then 3 Deg. <font> South <$$font> .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.474

We would have gone into the Bay , COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.475

but the Wind would not permit , COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.476

and oblig'd us to ply about in desperate Storms , and sudden Calms ,
'till <font> Thursday , May <$$font> 25 . COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.477

we made up with two little Islands , COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.478

and the Inhabitants came off with <font> Indian <$$font> Corn ,
Coco-Nuts , Patatas , Papas , Hens , and pretty <font> Indian <$$font>
Birds , to truck for Cloaths , Knives , Scissars {COM:sic} , <font> &c.
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.479

<font> Sunday , May <$$font> 28 . came to an Anchor , in 18 Fathom
Water , Three Leagues from <font> Bouton <$$font> , which is in 5 Deg.
40 Min. <font> South <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.480

Capt. <font> Dampier <$$font> , and some others , carry'd a Letter to
the King , to desire of him Provisions and Pilots to carry us to <font>
Batavia <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.481

We lay here several Days , trading with the People who came off in Boats
, bringing Fowl , Corn , Rice , Plantans , Beans , Arrack , <font> &c.
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.482

and in the mean_while we wooded and water'd . COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.483

Having made the best Provision the Place would afford , on <font>
Wednesday , June <$$font> 7 . 1710 . we weigh'd at Eight in the
Morning ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.484

but there being little Wind , and a strong Tide against us , were
oblig'd to anchor again at Twelve . COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.485

At Four weigh'd again , COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.486

and kept all night under an easy Sail , COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.487

made the best of our Way the following Days , 'till <font> Monday , June
<$$font> the 10th , at Night , were forc'd to anchor again two Leagues
from the Passage , between the Islands <font> Celebes <$$font> and
<font> Solayo <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.488

We had now an <font> Indian <$$font> able Pilot aboard , to conduct us
to <font> Batavia . COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.489

Thursday , June <$$font> 15 . in the Morning , saw the High-land ,
which is the <font> Northernmost <$$font> Part of the great Island of
<$$font> Java <$$font> , call'd <font> Japara <$$font> ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.490

the 16th saw the Island <font> Cariman Java <$$font> , bearing from us
<font> N. <$$font> by <font> W. <$$font> distant four Leagues .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,449.491

<font> Monday , June <$$font> 19 . came to an Anchor in 15 Fathom ,
about three <P_1,450> Leagues <font> E.N.E. <$$font> from the General's
Island , which lies off the Harbour of <font> Batavia <$$font> ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.492

and here are great Store-Houses , where the <font> Dutch <$$font> land
the Spice they have from the <font> Molucco <$$font> Islands .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.493

<font> Tuesday <$$font> 20. sail'd again , COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.494

at Noon the General's Island bore <font> W. <$$font> by <font> S.
<$$font> distant two Miles , COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.495

and thence could see the Ships in <font> Batavia <$$font> Road .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.496

This Island lies in 6 Deg. 4 Min. <font> South <$$font> , and the City
of <font> Batavia <$$font> in 6 Deg. 10 Min. Longitude from the <font>
S.W. <$$font> Point of <font> Celebes <$$font> , 11 Deg. 34 Min.
<font> West <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.497

<font> Wednesday <$$font> was <font> June <$$font> the 21st by our
Reckoning , but <font> Thursday June <$$font> the 22d by the <font>
Dutch <$$font> Account , we having lost 18 Hours by coming round to the
<font> Westward <$$font> , and the <font> Dutch <$$font> got six Hours
going to the <font> Eastward <$$font> , which makes one whole Day , as
is well known to be always done in sailing round the Globe .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.498

The Night before , we came to an Anchor in <font> Batavia <$$font> Road
, in five Fathom Water , the Ground so soft and loose , that the Anchor
sinks several Foot under the Ouse . COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.499

This Day , between Twelve and One , the Captain of an <font> English
<$$font> Ship from <font> Madras <$$font> , came aboard with another
<font> English <$$font> Man . COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.500

All we Commanders went a-shore , COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.501

were conducted to the <font> Dutch <$$font> General ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.502

shew'd him our Commissions , COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.503

and ask'd leave to victual and fit our Ships . COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.504

He directed us to send him the Particulars of what we wanted in Writing
, COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.505

and he would give us his Answer . COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.506

We went thence to see the City , which is the Metropolis of the <font>
Dutch <$$font> Dominions in <font> India <$$font> , and seems to be
bigger than <font> Bristol <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.507

But we must refer the farther Account of this Place to our Second Part .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.508

We were order'd to a little Island call'd <font> Horn <$$font> to fit
our Ships' {TEXT:Ships} Bottoms , COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.509

and then return'd to <font> Batavia <$$font> , where we rigg'd .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,450.510

The <font> Marquis <$$font> being found quite unfit to <P_1,451> perform
her Voyage home , was here sold , and the Men and Officers distributed
into the other three Ships . COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.511

During our Stay here , we had the Liberty of all the Markets , and the
City , to buy what we pleas'd ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.512

but found it very hard to get salt Provisions , which oblig'd us to kill
several Bullocks , and pickle the Flesh , taking out all or most of the
Bones . COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.513

Arrack , Rice , and Fowls , were cheap enough . COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.514

Several English Ships arriv'd in the Port , whilst we were there .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.515

Having done all that was requisite at <font> Batavia <$$font> , and
bought sufficient Provisions , and other Necessaries to serve us to the
Cape of <font> Good Hope <$$font> , <font> October <$$font> 14 . 1710 .
sail'd at Six in the Morning , with the Land-Breeze .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.516

At one the Sea-Breeze took us ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.517

and not being able to weather the Islands , came to an Anchor , the
Island <font> Horn <$$font> bearing <font> S. <$$font> by <font> W.
<$$font> distant two Miles , some of the <font> English <$$font>
Gentlemen from <font> Batavia <$$font> accompanying us out to Sea , to
make up Accompts that were between us , and wish us a good Voyage .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.518

<font> October <$$font> 15 sail'd again in the Morning ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.519

and at Six in the Evening , the Point of <font> Bantam <$$font> bore
<font> W. <$$font> half <font> N. <$$font> distant eight Leagues ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.520

and at 7 were oblig'd to come to an Anchor ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.521

the 16th sail'd again , COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.522

and the 17th anchor'd in a Bay near the <font> Java <$$font> Head .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.523

The 19th sent several Men with Arms and Provisions to <font> Pepper
<$$font> Bay , to buy Fowls and fresh Provisions , which the Natives
exchange for Knives and Toys . COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.524

In the mean Time , we wooded and water'd ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.525

but our Men could shoot no Buffaloes , as we had intended , they being
very wild , and the Country full of Tygers , which are very dangerous .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.526

The <font> Indian <$$font> People traded in a very friendly manner ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,451.527

and often came aboard of <P_1,452> us . COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.528

<font> October <$$font> 25 . our Boat , which we fear'd had been lost ,
return'd with 12 Dozen of Fowl , Mangos , <font> &c. <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.529

The 26th we sail'd , at Noon COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.530

<font> Java <$$font> Head bore <font> E. <$$font> by <font> N.
<$$font> seven Leagues distant . COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.531

Held on our Course 66 Days , without any Thing remarkable ;
COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.532

and <font> December <$$font> 30 . 1710 . anchor'd at the Cape of
<font> Good Hope <$$font> , at nine in the Morning , in seven Fathom
Water , red Sandy Ground , the <font> North <$$font> Point bearing
<font> N. <$$font> by <font> E. <$$font> the Island in the Offing
<font> N. <$$font> by <font> W. <$$font> the <font> Western <$$font>
Point in the Bay <font> N.W. <$$font> the Peak <font> S.W. <$$font> by
<font> W. <$$font> the Table-Land <font> S.W. <$$font> by <font> S.
<$$font> COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.533

saluted the Garrison with nine Guns , COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.534

they return'd seven ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.535

the <font> Donegal <$$font> India-man {COM:font_change_around_"India"}
gave us seven , which we all return'd . COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.536

Some Time after , it clear'd up , COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.537

and the <font> Duke <$$font> and <font> Batchelor <$$font> came in ,
saluting as we had done ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.538

all moor'd <font> S.E. <$$font> and <font> N.W . <$$font>
COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.539

and went a-shore to the Governor , who receiv'd us very kindly , and
afterwards invited all the <font> English <$$font> Commanders , and
other Officers , to dine , with him at the Fort , on the <font> Sunday
<$$font> following . COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.540

This Place is well known , for the <font> Sugar-Loaf Hill ,
Table-Mountain <$$font> , <font> &c. <$$font> well describ'd in our
<font> East-India <$$font> Waggoners , and other Books .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.541

It is in 34 Deg. 15 Min. of <font> South <$$font> Latitude , and 17
Degrees Longitude <font> East <$$font> from the Meridian of <font>
London <$$font> . COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.542

<font> N. <$$font> by <font> W. <$$font> half <font> W. <$$font> from
the Road of the Cape , is a small Island , by the <font> English
<$$font> call'd <font> Penguin <$$font> Island , where is a Fort and
good Anchoring ; COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.543

and there Ships often stay for the Sea-Breeze , being but three Leagues
from the Cape . COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.544

The Town at the Cape formerly belong'd to the <font> English <$$font> ,
COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.545

but the <font> Dutch <$$font> have had it many Years .
COOKE1-1712-1,1,452.546

