<BEGIN_cook1-1776-1>

<P_12>

<heading>

Cape of Good Hope . COOK1-1776-1,12.4

<$$heading>

October 30 , 1772 . COOK1-1776-1,12.6

At 8 A.M. the <font> Resolution <$$font> , being Commodore , saluted
the fort with eleven guns , which the Governor returned .
COOK1-1776-1,12.7

In the evening a French bark arrived from the island of Mauritius .
COOK1-1776-1,12.8

October 31 . COOK1-1776-1,12.9

Unbent our sails . COOK1-1776-1,12.10

Set up on shore the astronomer's observatory . COOK1-1776-1,12.11

Received on board fresh meat , mutton , and soft bread for the ship's
company . COOK1-1776-1,12.12

<P_13>

November 1 . COOK1-1776-1,13.14

Hard gales of wind . COOK1-1776-1,13.15

Got down top-gallant-yards , COOK1-1776-1,13.16

and bent the sheet_cable . COOK1-1776-1,13.17

On the 2d got down yards and top-masts , COOK1-1776-1,13.18

and overhauled the rigging . COOK1-1776-1,13.19

Two Dutch Indiamen arrived from Middleburg ; one of which informed us
that she had been out four months , had buried 150 of her men , and had
then 60 sick in the hold : COOK1-1776-1,13.20

The other had been out six months , COOK1-1776-1,13.21

had buried 66 men , COOK1-1776-1,13.22

and was very sickly . COOK1-1776-1,13.23

Table Bay , according to many coelestial observations made by Captain
Wallis , when on shore at Green Point , lies in Lat. 34@ @=o= . 2 ' .
S. Long. from Greenwich 18@ @=o= . 8 ' . E. COOK1-1776-1,13.24

The variation of the needle at this place was 19@ @=o= . 30 ' . W.
COOK1-1776-1,13.25

Table Bay is a good harbour in summer , but not in winter :
COOK1-1776-1,13.26

the Dutch never permit any of their ships to lie here longer than the
15th of May , which answers to our November . COOK1-1776-1,13.27

After that time , as Captain Carteret relates , all ships go to False
Bay , which is well sheltered from the north-west winds , that blow here
with great violence . COOK1-1776-1,13.28

The plain of Green Point is about two miles distant from Capetown .
COOK1-1776-1,13.29

The Cape of Good Hope , in Caffraria , or the country of the Hottentots
, is the most southern promontory of Africa . COOK1-1776-1,13.30

Caffraria is a very mountainous country ; COOK1-1776-1,13.31

the Table mountain near the Cape is of a very great height ,
COOK1-1776-1,13.32

and the top of it is always covered with a cap of clouds before a storm
. COOK1-1776-1,13.33

There are no harbours , though there is a sea coast of a_thousand miles
. COOK1-1776-1,13.34

When Commodore Byron touched at the Cape , he was obliged to work into
Table Bay with his topsails close reefed , there being a strong gale
with hard squalls at S.S.E. COOK1-1776-1,13.35

Indeed the Cape is scarce ever free from storms a week together ,
COOK1-1776-1,13.36

the winds blow hard and on every side from the vast southern ocean ,
COOK1-1776-1,13.37

and the waves of the sea rise to a height never seen or experienced in
any part of Europe . COOK1-1776-1,13.38

The Bay of Biscay , turbulent as it is , has no billows that mount like
those on this great extensive ocean . COOK1-1776-1,13.39

Ships roll and pitch in the former to an uncommon degree ,
COOK1-1776-1,13.40

and the sea has generally an angry and often a dreadful appearance ;
COOK1-1776-1,13.41

but in the latter the stoutest vessels are tossed and almost literally
lifted to the skies . COOK1-1776-1,13.42

A number of rich ships have perished on this coast : COOK1-1776-1,13.43

the Dutch have lost whole fleets even at anchor before the town ,
COOK1-1776-1,13.44

and they are under a necessity of mooring their guard-ships with the
strongest chains instead of cables . COOK1-1776-1,13.45

<P_14>

The climate is very healthy , COOK1-1776-1,14.47

the country is fine , COOK1-1776-1,14.48

and it abounds with refreshments of every kind . COOK1-1776-1,14.49

The Company's garden is a most ravishing spot , COOK1-1776-1,14.50

and produces all the most delicious fruits of Asia and Europe :
COOK1-1776-1,14.51

It is guarded from the winds and storms coming off the ocean by hedges
of bay very thick and high , affording a most refreshing shade in the
hottest season . COOK1-1776-1,14.52

It abounds with peaches , pomegranates , pineapples or bananas , citrons
, lemons , oranges , the pears and apples of Europe , all excellent in
their kind , and the crimson Japan apple , appearing through the green
leaves , of all the most beautiful . COOK1-1776-1,14.53

The Dutch have large plantations of almond trees , and many sorts of
camphire trees , COOK1-1776-1,14.54

and there is scarce a cottage without a vineyard to it .
COOK1-1776-1,14.55

Their cabbages and colliflowers weigh from thirty to forty pounds ,
their potatoes from six to ten , raised from seed brought from Cyprus
and Savoy : COOK1-1776-1,14.56

Their corn is ripe in December , COOK1-1776-1,14.57

and our Christmas is the time of their harvest : COOK1-1776-1,14.58

In January they tread out their corn , COOK1-1776-1,14.59

and in February the farmers carry it to the Company's magazines .
COOK1-1776-1,14.60

They sow every kind of grain but oats . COOK1-1776-1,14.61

Lions , tygers , leopards , elephants , and the rhinoceros , are to be
found here ; the elephants very large , COOK1-1776-1,14.62

their teeth weigh from sixty to one_hundred_and_twenty pounds .
COOK1-1776-1,14.63

The zebra , porcupine , and sea cow , which feeds on the grass and
retires to the sea for security when alarmed , are to be met with here ,
and amongst the birds eagles and ostriches . COOK1-1776-1,14.64

The Dutch keep up a body of regular forces , COOK1-1776-1,14.65

and have a strong garrison at the Cape ; COOK1-1776-1,14.66

they have also a militia , a corps of men in all nations formidable in
themselves , most dreadful to an enemy , and when called out upon
service spreading destruction all around them in the height of their
ungoverned fury : COOK1-1776-1,14.67

They are withal of so restless a disposition , and so naturally inclined
for war , that like the Devonshire and Northamptonshire champions in
England , they are ever ready to solicit employment even against the
principles of their own institution . COOK1-1776-1,14.68

November 3 . COOK1-1776-1,14.69

Arrived a small Dutch snow from Holland . COOK1-1776-1,14.70

November 12 . COOK1-1776-1,14.71

Hoisted in the launch , COOK1-1776-1,14.72

and received on board the instruments belonging to the astronomer's
observatory . COOK1-1776-1,14.73

While the <font> Resolution <$$font> lay at the Cape , we had pitched a
tent on shore for the ship's company occasionally to sleep in , with
<P_15> those of the <font> Adventure <$$font> , in order to make hay and
brooms for the ships . COOK1-1776-1,15.74

One day a midshipman of the <font> Resolution <$$font> ordered a sailor
belonging to the <font> Adventure <$$font> to go on board ;
COOK1-1776-1,15.75

the sailor refused to obey him , telling him , " that tho' he was an
officer of the commodore's ship , he was not <font> his <$$font> officer
, and he would not go aboard . " COOK1-1776-1,15.76

Upon this the midshipman drew his hanger COOK1-1776-1,15.77

and thrust it into the sailor's body : COOK1-1776-1,15.78

His hanger was instantly taken from him by a petty officer , and the
wounded seaman sent on board his own ship in a dangerous condition .
COOK1-1776-1,15.79

The midshipman soon after procured a small sword , COOK1-1776-1,15.80

and with it ran a black man through , who had given him some offence .
COOK1-1776-1,15.81

The man bore a very good character , COOK1-1776-1,15.82

was esteemed very honest and sober , COOK1-1776-1,15.83

had a family , COOK1-1776-1,15.84

and lived in good credit with his neighbours : COOK1-1776-1,15.85

His wounds were dressed , COOK1-1776-1,15.86

and he was carried home , but thought to be in great danger .
COOK1-1776-1,15.87

After this second coup_d'eclat , the midshipman thought proper to make
his escape into the country ; COOK1-1776-1,15.88

but on application to the Fiscal , he detached a party in pursuit of him
, by whom he was soon apprehended and brought back . COOK1-1776-1,15.89

Captain Cook ordered him on board , COOK1-1776-1,15.90

and made all the reparation in his power . COOK1-1776-1,15.91

The people were so enraged against the midshipman , that his life was in
danger , many persons having determined to kill him the first
opportunity they had . COOK1-1776-1,15.92

This is one amongst other circumstances that will occur in the course of
this narrative , which the editor would have willingly suppressed ;
COOK1-1776-1,15.93

but a journal is no journal unless all occurrences are faithfully
related , COOK1-1776-1,15.94

and a journalist as well as an historian is equally bound to observe the
following line of conduct : <font> Ne quid falsi dicere audeat , ne quid
veri non audeat . <$$font> COOK1-1776-1,15.95

November 13 . COOK1-1776-1,15.96

The Dutch Governor at the Cape of Good Hope , and the English Consul ,
came on board in order to see our still for making salt-water fresh .
COOK1-1776-1,15.97

The <font> Resolution <$$font> saluted his Excellency with 15 guns ,
COOK1-1776-1,15.98

manned ship COOK1-1776-1,15.99

and gave him three cheers : COOK1-1776-1,15.100

The <font> Adventure <$$font> did the same , COOK1-1776-1,15.101

and saluted him with 9 guns . COOK1-1776-1,15.102

The Dutch Commodore saluted him with 15 guns . COOK1-1776-1,15.103

These ceremonies passed on his coming aboard , COOK1-1776-1,15.104

and the same honors were repeated at his departure .
COOK1-1776-1,15.105

The method of working the still is as follows : COOK1-1776-1,15.106

" At five o'clock in the morning 56 gallons of salt-water were put in
the still : COOK1-1776-1,15.107

at 7 it began to run , COOK1-1776-1,15.108

and about half an hour after twelve it afforded 42 gallons of
fresh-water , at an expence of 9 pounds of wood <P_16> and 69 pounds of
coals . COOK1-1776-1,16.109

Thirteen gallons and two quarts remained in the still ,
COOK1-1776-1,16.110

and that which came off had no ill taste , nor , as we had after
experienced , any hurtful quality . COOK1-1776-1,16.111

We always used the still when we were reduced to 45 tons ,
COOK1-1776-1,16.112

and preserved the rain water with the utmost diligence . " - <font>
Capt. Wallis's Voyage round the World . <$$font> COOK1-1776-1,16.113

This day , November 13 , Mr. Burney , midshipman on board the <font>
Resolution <$$font> , was appointed by Capt. Cook a Lieutenant to our
companion the <font> Adventure . <$$font> COOK1-1776-1,16.114

November 19 . COOK1-1776-1,16.115

Several ladies and gentlemen came off from the Cape to dine on board and
to view the ship : COOK1-1776-1,16.116

We saluted them with three cheers . COOK1-1776-1,16.117

As a seaman was firing at a bird , his piece being overloaded , burst in
his hand , COOK1-1776-1,16.118

and carried away one finger . COOK1-1776-1,16.119

<heading>

<font> The <$$font> Resolution <font> and <$$font> Adventure <font>
proceed on their Voyage in order to discover <$$font> Land <font> near
the <$$font> South Pole . COOK1-1776-1,16.121

<$$heading>

November 22 . COOK1-1776-1,16.123

A young gentleman , a Swede , came on board , to assist Dr. Foster and
his son , as a botanist , on our voyage . COOK1-1776-1,16.124

This day having refreshed our men and completed our wood and water , and
having taken such provisions and stores on board as we wanted , and
being ready for sea , we saluted the Fort and Governor ,
COOK1-1776-1,16.125

made sail , COOK1-1776-1,16.126

and proceeded on our voyage , steering southward . COOK1-1776-1,16.127

As nothing is more engaging , or makes more lasting impressions , than
the politeness of foreigners {COM:no_open_paren;_see_errata} who are
vested with a supreme command {COM:no_close_paren;_see_errata} shewn to
such officers of different nations who occasionally touch at the several
ports where they preside , or that does more honor to the power by whom
they are employed , it would be singular injustice not to mention the
very great character given the Dutch Governor of the Cape of Good Hope ,
by the Captains of the British ships , on their voyages round the world
, performed in the reign of his present Majesty George III .
COOK1-1776-1,16.128

Commodore Byron , in his Voyage , speaks of the Dutch Governor as
follows : COOK1-1776-1,16.129

<P_17>

" The next morning <paren> Feb. 14 , 1766 , <$$paren> {COM:sic_parens}
I waited upon the Governor , who had sent his coach and six to the water
side for me . COOK1-1776-1,17.131

He is an old man , COOK1-1776-1,17.132

but is a favourite with all ranks of people : COOK1-1776-1,17.133

he received me with the greatest politeness , COOK1-1776-1,17.134

and not only offered me the Company's house in the garden for my
residence while I should continue at the Cape , but his coach whenever I
should think fit to use it . COOK1-1776-1,17.135

Having continued here three weeks , I took leave of the good old
Governor , " &c. &c. COOK1-1776-1,17.136

Had our Governors in North America imitated this bright example , and
acquired as great a popularity amongst all ranks of people where they
presided , as this venerable Hollander at the settlement of the Cape ,
there had been no occasion for British swords to have been drawn , or
British bayonets to have been pointed at the breasts of fellow subjects
and countrymen , who in the last most glorious war bled at each other's
side , brave and victorious warriors , in the common cause of Great
Britain and their Sovereign . COOK1-1776-1,17.137

Captain Wallis , in his Voyage round the World , speaks very
advantageously of the Dutch Governor at this place .
COOK1-1776-1,17.138

" We anchored on the 4th of February 1768 in Table Bay , at the Cape of
Good Hope . COOK1-1776-1,17.139

As soon as the ship was at anchor I sent an officer on shore with the
usual compliments to the Governor , who received him with great civility
, telling him that we were welcome to all the refreshments and
assistance that the Cape afforded , and that he would return our salute
with an equal number of guns . " COOK1-1776-1,17.140

Capt. Carteret adds his testimony thus , both of country , Governor ,
and inhabitants . COOK1-1776-1,17.141

" The recovery of my people made it necessary to continue here till
January 6 , 1769 . COOK1-1776-1,17.142

At this place we breathed pure air , COOK1-1776-1,17.143

had wholesome food , COOK1-1776-1,17.144

and went freely about the country , which is extremely pleasant , so
that I began to think myself already in Europe . COOK1-1776-1,17.145

We found the inhabitants open , hospitable and polite , there being
scarcely a gentleman in the place , either in a public or private
station , from whom I did not receive some civility ;
COOK1-1776-1,17.146

and I should very ill deserve the favors they bestowed , if I did not
particularly mention the First and Second Governor , and the Fiscal . "
COOK1-1776-1,17.147

<P_18>

November 23 . COOK1-1776-1,18.149

This day every man on board received the King's present of a jacket and
trowsers , designed for use in the frozen ocean . COOK1-1776-1,18.150

November 25 . COOK1-1776-1,18.151

From this day to December 9th , we had very stormy weather , hard gales
of wind , and heavy squalls of rain . COOK1-1776-1,18.152

December 9 . COOK1-1776-1,18.153

During our run from November 25th , we split the foretop-sail ,
COOK1-1776-1,18.154

and laid to under a balanced mizen , COOK1-1776-1,18.155

and battened {TEXT:battered;_see_errata} down our hatches fore and aft ;
COOK1-1776-1,18.156

and our companion the <font> Adventure <$$font> laid to under a
main-topsail . COOK1-1776-1,18.157

One night about 12 o'clock , and the middle watch , the ship's company
were alarmed with a cry that she was sinking very fast .
COOK1-1776-1,18.158

Officers and men were upon deck in an instant , COOK1-1776-1,18.159

and the consternation was great ; COOK1-1776-1,18.160

the darkness of the night inspired additional horror :
COOK1-1776-1,18.161

the sea broke over us every minute : COOK1-1776-1,18.162

the ship was nearly water-logged {COM:for_water-clogged;_see_errata} .
COOK1-1776-1,18.163

In this confusion ordered lights COOK1-1776-1,18.164

and went down below : COOK1-1776-1,18.165

worked the chain and hand pumps : COOK1-1776-1,18.166

at last discovered a scuttle in the boatswain's store-room that was
broke in . COOK1-1776-1,18.167

Had it not pleased Providence to direct us in our search , and enable us
to find out this opening to the sea at the exact moment we did , in a
few minutes all discovery had been fruitless ; COOK1-1776-1,18.168

the ship must have gone down , COOK1-1776-1,18.169

and every soul on board must have irretrievably perished .
COOK1-1776-1,18.170

It was with the utmost difficulty the water taken in , before the
scuttle was secured , could be pumped out and the ship cleared .
COOK1-1776-1,18.171

December 10 . COOK1-1776-1,18.172

Lat. 49@ @=o= . 39 ' . S. Long. 21@ @=o= . 20 ' . E.
COOK1-1776-1,18.173

The weather became more moderate . COOK1-1776-1,18.174

At 4 in the morning our companion the <font> Adventure <$$font> made the
signal for seeing land : COOK1-1776-1,18.175

this gave spirits to us all after our late turbulent and tempestuous
course : COOK1-1776-1,18.176

it gave us additional spirits because we were sensible it must be a new
discovery , COOK1-1776-1,18.177

but to our great mortification on approaching it nearer we found it to
be an island of ice . COOK1-1776-1,18.178

In the afternoon the <font> Adventure <$$font> made another signal for
seeing land , which also proved as the former , an island of ice , with
this difference , that it was considerably larger , and so lofty that it
was in height equal to our top-gallant-mast head . COOK1-1776-1,18.179

Soon after came on a thick fog : COOK1-1776-1,18.180

made a signal for our companion to come under our stern , lest we should
fall foul of each other in the fog : COOK1-1776-1,18.181

At 7 P.M. spoke her . COOK1-1776-1,18.182

<P_19>

December 11 . COOK1-1776-1,19.184

Sharp frosty weather . COOK1-1776-1,19.185

At 5 in the afternoon saw an island of ice , computed to be six miles in
circumference . COOK1-1776-1,19.186

It was now so extremely cold that we were obliged to sow up our sheep
and goats in red baize , to preserve them from the inclemency of the
weather . COOK1-1776-1,19.187

December 12 . COOK1-1776-1,19.188

Great falls of snow : extremely cold . COOK1-1776-1,19.189

Made a signal for seeing land , COOK1-1776-1,19.190

but it proved ice . COOK1-1776-1,19.191

At this time there were no less than seven islands of ice in sight .
COOK1-1776-1,19.192

December 14 . COOK1-1776-1,19.193

Discovered ice a-head and upon each beam as far as we could see , which
made us conclude that there must certainly be land behind it , under
which it must first contract . COOK1-1776-1,19.194

Bore away to the leewardmost point : COOK1-1776-1,19.195

hauled up COOK1-1776-1,19.196

and ran at the back of it , COOK1-1776-1,19.197

but could discover no land . COOK1-1776-1,19.198

Being thus disappointed of land , after so promising a prospect , we
began to despair of ever finding any to the southward .
COOK1-1776-1,19.199

December 15 . COOK1-1776-1,19.200

Sharp frosts and great snows . COOK1-1776-1,19.201

Hoisted out a boat to try the current and to examine the state of the
air : COOK1-1776-1,19.202

by the astronomer's account it appeared to be four degrees warmer at 100
fathom under water than at the surface . COOK1-1776-1,19.203

December 19 . COOK1-1776-1,19.204

Saw a great many whales , and islands of ice innumerable .
COOK1-1776-1,19.205

On the 20th spoke our companion . COOK1-1776-1,19.206

On the 22d saw flocks of penguins : COOK1-1776-1,19.207

shot many of them . COOK1-1776-1,19.208

Lat. 54@ @=o= . 52 ' . S. Long. 29@ @=o= . 1 ' . E.
COOK1-1776-1,19.209

December 25 . COOK1-1776-1,19.210

Christmas-Day . COOK1-1776-1,19.211

Spoke and cheered our companion the <font> Adventure . <$$font>
COOK1-1776-1,19.212

December 29 . COOK1-1776-1,19.213

Saw an island of ice a-head : COOK1-1776-1,19.214

proposed to water the ship , COOK1-1776-1,19.215

but on approaching nearer found it too dangerous . COOK1-1776-1,19.216

On this island were hundreds of penguins , and some animal resembling a
man : COOK1-1776-1,19.217

we fired two great shot at them , which did not appear to disturb them
in the least . COOK1-1776-1,19.218

Saw also many whales . COOK1-1776-1,19.219

December 31 . COOK1-1776-1,19.220

It came on to blow hard . COOK1-1776-1,19.221

Got down top-gallant yards , COOK1-1776-1,19.222

and at 3 in the morning we were brought up by a thick field of ice ,
which obliged us to tack and hand to the north west .
COOK1-1776-1,19.223

Lat. 59@ @=o= . 27 ' . S. COOK1-1776-1,19.224

January 8 , 1773 . COOK1-1776-1,19.225

Attempted to water our ship at an island of ice , COOK1-1776-1,19.226

but found it too dangerous . COOK1-1776-1,19.227

January 9 . COOK1-1776-1,19.228

Fell in with some broken ice . COOK1-1776-1,19.229

Hoisted out our boats COOK1-1776-1,19.230

and got eleven loads of ice , as did our companion the <font> Adventure
. <$$font> COOK1-1776-1,19.231

Pounded the ice COOK1-1776-1,19.232

and melted it in the coppers , COOK1-1776-1,19.233

<P_20>

and the water proved exceeding good . COOK1-1776-1,20.235

On the 12th saw a seal and a sea lion . COOK1-1776-1,20.236

On the 15th hoisted our boats COOK1-1776-1,20.237

and got more ice for water for the ship . COOK1-1776-1,20.238

This day the ship's company was put to short allowance of bread .
COOK1-1776-1,20.239

Saw a whale . COOK1-1776-1,20.240

Latitude 64@ @=o= . 18 ' . S. COOK1-1776-1,20.241

<heading>

<font> The two Ships having crossed the <$$font> Antartic Circle ,
<font> arrive in Latitude 66@ @=o= . 36 ' . S. COOK1-1776-1,20.243

are stopped by the Ice , and obliged to tack . <$$font>
COOK1-1776-1,20.244

<$$heading>

January 16 . COOK1-1776-1,20.246

Hard gales of wind . COOK1-1776-1,20.247

Got down top-gallant yards . COOK1-1776-1,20.248

At 7 in the evening we crossed the Antartic Circle , Long. 37@ @=o= E.
COOK1-1776-1,20.249

but could proceed no farther than Lat. 66@ @=o= . 36 ' . S. being
stopped by the great quantities of ice ; COOK1-1776-1,20.250

so were obliged to tack and haul away to the northward .
COOK1-1776-1,20.251

This day saw several whales . COOK1-1776-1,20.252

Lat. 66@ @=o= . 36 ' . S. Long. 38@ @=o= . 29 ' . E.
COOK1-1776-1,20.253

January 25 . COOK1-1776-1,20.254

Hard gales of wind . COOK1-1776-1,20.255

Got down top-gallant yards . COOK1-1776-1,20.256

Saw several whales . COOK1-1776-1,20.257

On the 27th made a signal to our companion to go three leagues to
leeward and look out . COOK1-1776-1,20.258

At 7 in the evening we were alarmed with a fire in the fore-sail room ,
which was directly over the magazine . COOK1-1776-1,20.259

It burnt a new hawser , some sails , and the bulk-head , before we could
possibly extinguish it ; which it pleased God we were so lucky to do ,
COOK1-1776-1,20.260

and a great escape it was . COOK1-1776-1,20.261

There is nothing so dreadful to seamen as fire on board a ship :
COOK1-1776-1,20.262

It is with great difficulty they can be brought to act for their own
preservation , COOK1-1776-1,20.263

and it has been known frequently to deprive them of their senses .
COOK1-1776-1,20.264

On such horrid emergencies the officers alone have , by their activity
and spirited exertions , saved the ship . COOK1-1776-1,20.265

This day we were in Lat. 54@ @=o= . 48 ' . S. COOK1-1776-1,20.266

January 28 . COOK1-1776-1,20.267

Made a signal for our companion to look out . COOK1-1776-1,20.268

January 29 . COOK1-1776-1,20.269

Lat. 52@ @=o= . 28 ' . S. Long. 54@ @=o= . 4 ' . E.
COOK1-1776-1,20.270

From the 29th of January to the 1st of February we had hard gales of
wind , sleet and rain . COOK1-1776-1,20.271

We split the fore-stay sail and gibb . COOK1-1776-1,20.272

On the first of February we made a signal for our companion to look out
, COOK1-1776-1,20.273

and at 7 in the evening she fired a gun , the meaning of which we could
not understand : COOK1-1776-1,20.274

she soon after bore <P_21> down COOK1-1776-1,21.275

and hailed us , COOK1-1776-1,21.276

and told us she had seen a large field of rock-weed , and some birds
very much resembling those we had seen in the English Channel .
COOK1-1776-1,21.277

We asked her latitude and longitude ; COOK1-1776-1,21.278

she answered , Lat. 48@ @=o= . 48 ' . S. Long. 58@ @=o= . E.
COOK1-1776-1,21.279

We laid to all night for fear of running upon land .
COOK1-1776-1,21.280

We asked how the weeds bore for her , COOK1-1776-1,21.281

and from her account greatly expected to find land at no great distance
, COOK1-1776-1,21.282

and cruized for it some time in vain . COOK1-1776-1,21.283

February 5 . COOK1-1776-1,21.284

Spoke our companion again . COOK1-1776-1,21.285

She had carried away her main-top-gallant mast in a gale of wind two
days after we spoke her before . COOK1-1776-1,21.286

February 8 . COOK1-1776-1,21.287

It blew hard with heavy and thick rain . COOK1-1776-1,21.288

Lost sight of our companion : COOK1-1776-1,21.289

fired guns every half hour for two days and two nights ,
COOK1-1776-1,21.290

and burnt false fires , COOK1-1776-1,21.291

but never heard her answer above two or three guns .
COOK1-1776-1,21.292

We split the fore-top-gallant_sail , COOK1-1776-1,21.293

and laid to under a mizen stay-sail . COOK1-1776-1,21.294

We now gave up all thoughts of seeing our companion any more .
COOK1-1776-1,21.295

February 20 . COOK1-1776-1,21.296

Saw something on our starboard quarter that had the appearance of land :
COOK1-1776-1,21.297

tacked and stood for it , COOK1-1776-1,21.298

but soon found it to be a cloud . COOK1-1776-1,21.299

Saw some porpoises . COOK1-1776-1,21.300

This evening had a view of the southern lights , distinguishable ,
bright and clear . COOK1-1776-1,21.301

February 21 . COOK1-1776-1,21.302

Watered the ship from an island of ice . COOK1-1776-1,21.303

Some of the ship's company lost the use of their limbs from the
excessive cold , COOK1-1776-1,21.304

but proper methods being taken they recovered the use of them again .
COOK1-1776-1,21.305

Indeed the whole crew were remarkably healthy , considering the severity
of the weather , and the great fatigue they underwent .
COOK1-1776-1,21.306

March 3 . COOK1-1776-1,21.307

Saw a shoal of porpoises rolling along-side the ship :
COOK1-1776-1,21.308

they appeared to be curiously marked with streaks of black and white :
COOK1-1776-1,21.309

one of them was struck with a gig , COOK1-1776-1,21.310

but he broke away . COOK1-1776-1,21.311

On the 15th carried away our studding-sail-boom in a gale .
COOK1-1776-1,21.312

On the 18th split the gibb . COOK1-1776-1,21.313

On the 22d hard gales of wind . COOK1-1776-1,21.314

Split the fore-top-gallant_sail , COOK1-1776-1,21.315

and carried away our studding-sail-boom and yard . COOK1-1776-1,21.316

On the 23d bent buoy-ropes , COOK1-1776-1,21.317

and made ready for seeing land . COOK1-1776-1,21.318

March 25 . COOK1-1776-1,21.319

Lady Day . COOK1-1776-1,21.320

This morning at 10 A.M. discovered from the mast head several islands
belonging to New Zealand . COOK1-1776-1,21.321

At 4 P.M. got well in with the land COOK1-1776-1,21.322

and saw a bay a-head ; COOK1-1776-1,21.323

but it appeared to be very dangerous from the <P_22> number of rocks
lying about it , some just under water , others just above it .
COOK1-1776-1,22.324

The country mountainous , the mountains covered with trees :
COOK1-1776-1,22.325

tacked and stood off all night , the weather coming on very thick and
hazy . COOK1-1776-1,22.326

We had the good fortune this afternoon to escape a sunken rock under our
bow . COOK1-1776-1,22.327

Heavy rain and hard gales all night . COOK1-1776-1,22.328

<heading>

<font> The <$$font> Resolution <font> arrives at <$$font> Dusky Bay ,
<font> near <$$font> West Cape , <font> in that Division of <$$font> New
Zealand <font> called <$$font> Poenammoo . COOK1-1776-1,22.330

<$$heading>

March 26 . COOK1-1776-1,22.332

The weather became more moderate . COOK1-1776-1,22.333

At 4 o'clock , A.M. wore ship , COOK1-1776-1,22.334

had a pleasant breeze right aft , COOK1-1776-1,22.335

and sailed into a bay with an intention to come to , COOK1-1776-1,22.336

but could get no soundings at a_hundred fathoms . COOK1-1776-1,22.337

Stood on COOK1-1776-1,22.338

and opened several other bays , COOK1-1776-1,22.339

and sailed in amongst a number of islands not above twice the ship's
length distant from each other . COOK1-1776-1,22.340

Here we let go our anchor , in a bay named by Capt. Cook , in his
former voyage in the Endeavour , Dusky Bay , COOK1-1776-1,22.341

and steaded {COM:for_headed;_see_errata} the ship with hawsers to the
trees . COOK1-1776-1,22.342

Thus we lay as secure and safe as possible from the wind and sea .
COOK1-1776-1,22.343

Lat. 45@ @=o= . 47 ' . S. Long. 193@ @=o= . 17 ' . W.
COOK1-1776-1,22.344

Nothing could be more delightful than our present situation between
these islands . All around us green trees , bushes , and flowers : the
lawns enamelled like a garden , the trees full of birds of various
colours , whose feathers expanded in the sun displayed all the radiance
of gold and silver . COOK1-1776-1,22.345

No landscape of <font> Tesniers <$$font> or <font> Claude Loraine ,
<$$font> or of any painter of the most luxuriant imagination , could
exhibit a view more beautiful , or more striking to the eye : add to
which , the sweet harmony of these feathered songsters from every branch
was ravishing beyond description ; COOK1-1776-1,22.346

and withal they were so very gentle and tame , as not to stir or move
from their seats , unless disturbed by some sudden and alarming act of
hostility : COOK1-1776-1,22.347

they would even bear small stones to be thrown at them from the rude
hands of northern seamen , insensible of the music of their sweet notes
, and whose ears were unaccustomed to any whistling but that of winds
and tempests , or the shrill strains <P_23> of their own melodious
boatswain , at the meridian hour of appetite . COOK1-1776-1,23.348

Musical inclinations , or a delight in harmony , are not at present
amongst the accomplishments of a British tar : COOK1-1776-1,23.349

there are no <font> dilettanti <$$font> or <font> connoscenti <$$font>
on the forecastle of a King's ship : COOK1-1776-1,23.350

and therefore it was , without doubt , that the Governors of the
Foundling Hospital in London , observing this defect in the service ,
have , in this age of improvement and cultivation of the <font> Bon Ton
, <$$font> so wisely employed , and at a great annual expence , the most
celebrated masters , such as Signor Giardini , Dr. Burney , and others
, to instruct the children intended for the sea in that noblest of all
arts , the science of music , now become , according to them , a <font>
national concern . <$$font> COOK1-1776-1,23.351

Knowledge of music will certainly harmonize the passions , and soften
that robust ferocity , for which our British seamen have been so long
reproached by the politer French and Spaniards . COOK1-1776-1,23.352

In a few years , all motions on board a man of war will , probably , be
directed by the tone of musical instruments , in the same manner as
battalions of foot perform their evolutions more regularly by the slam
of a drum . COOK1-1776-1,23.353

The capstern will heave up the anchor <font> adagio , <$$font> to the
hum of a Caledonian bagpipe ; the sails be loosened and furled <font>
allegro , <$$font> to the sprightly airs of a hautboy ; and the cannon
be played in full chorus , instead of barbarous broadsides , upon an
approaching enemy . COOK1-1776-1,23.354

What a martial appearance must the commander of a line of battleship
exhibit , sitting on the quarter-deck and giving orders to his intrepid
<font> band <$$font> {TEXT:stand;_see_errata} of English , by the sudden
stroke of a double bass or kettle-drum between his legs !
COOK1-1776-1,23.355

How must an enemy be struck with terror , who is received after the
first fire with a <font> catch <$$font> or a <font> glee <$$font> ,
performed by <font> English Johns <$$font> in concert , instead of three
obstreperous huzzas ! COOK1-1776-1,23.356

And there is great reason to expect the British seamen will be very
expert in such salutes , under the instructions of the present
philharmonic First Lord of the Admiralty , who will , no doubt ,
vouchsafe his concurrence to the <font> dilettanti <$$font> Governors of
the Foundling , for promoting this great institution in the royal fleet
, and will establish , in the room of a schoolmaster or useless
mathematician , a <font> catch-master <$$font> on board of every ship in
the navy , being so good a proficient at a <font> catch <$$font> himself
. COOK1-1776-1,23.357

Profane oaths and curses , which at present so much disgrace the service
, will <P_24> be banished from the decks and gangways of all men of war
, and every room and cabin resound with tender airs and recitatives
{TEXT:recitativos;_see_errata} . COOK1-1776-1,24.358

Such will probably be the happy consequences of this sage institution ,
adopted by the present intelligent Governors of the Foundling Hospital ,
to whom this kingdom can@ @not fail hereafter of standing indebted for
many signal victories and glorious achievements , solely obtained by the
irresistible powers of English seamen bred to music .
COOK1-1776-1,24.359

<heading>

<font> The <$$font> Resolution <font> at Anchor in <$$font> Dusky Bay ,
New Zealand . COOK1-1776-1,24.361

<$$heading>

March 27 . COOK1-1776-1,24.363

Continued at anchor between the islands . COOK1-1776-1,24.364

They lie in Lat. 45@ @=o= . S. COOK1-1776-1,24.365

and are about 150 leagues from Queen Charlotte's Sound to the southward
. COOK1-1776-1,24.366

Queen Charlotte's Sound lies in Lat. 41@ @=o= . S. Long. <paren>
from the meridian of Greenwich <$$paren> 184@ @=o= . 45 ' . W.
bearing S.W. by S.S.W. and W.S.W. COOK1-1776-1,24.367

New Zealand was first discovered by Abel Jansen Tasman , a Dutchman , in
the year 1642 , COOK1-1776-1,24.368

but was little known till Capt. Cook's former voyage in the Endeavour .
COOK1-1776-1,24.369

Fish we caught this day in such quantities as served the ship's whole
company , COOK1-1776-1,24.370

and they were of an exceeding good quality . COOK1-1776-1,24.371

We shot many parrots , many large birds , and one seal .
COOK1-1776-1,24.372

The only inconvenient circumstance that attended us here was the want of
water . COOK1-1776-1,24.373

One of our lieutenants took the pinnace COOK1-1776-1,24.374

and went in search of another place to take the ship to , where we might
be supplied with that necessary article , COOK1-1776-1,24.375

and on his return informed us he had discovered a very pleasant cove ,
at a little distance , where there was plenty of good water .
COOK1-1776-1,24.376

Upon this intelligence we hove to in order to proceed to the cove
described , COOK1-1776-1,24.377

and were obliged to steer between two islands that lay so close to each
other that our yard-arms touched the trees on both sides .
COOK1-1776-1,24.378

When we approached the cove it was low water , COOK1-1776-1,24.379

and the cove was so narrow that it took the ship in like a dock .
COOK1-1776-1,24.380

We made her fast to the trees on each side , COOK1-1776-1,24.381

and the fresh water ran down in streams close under our stern .
COOK1-1776-1,24.382

We saw no inhabitants , COOK1-1776-1,24.383

but heard bitter cries in the night . COOK1-1776-1,24.384

We carried two tents on shore , one for the cooper and brewer , and the
other for the <P_25> sail-maker : COOK1-1776-1,25.385

erected an observatory for the astronomer , COOK1-1776-1,25.386

and made pens for the sheep and goats . COOK1-1776-1,25.387

The black flies were very numerous and very troublesome in this cove .
COOK1-1776-1,25.388

March 28 . COOK1-1776-1,25.389

The lieutenants and master took a boat to row , amongst the islands ,
COOK1-1776-1,25.390

and discovering a fine sandy beach , they had intended to land upon it ,
COOK1-1776-1,25.391

but suddenly they perceived a number of Indians launching their canoes
in a great hurry : COOK1-1776-1,25.392

they called to the master , who called to them again ,
COOK1-1776-1,25.393

and as their appearance and motions looked rather hostile , he made the
best of his way on board : COOK1-1776-1,25.394

at this time the greatest part of the ship's company were on shore
bathing , when they were alarmed with a voice from the ship ,
COOK1-1776-1,25.395

<font> Come on board , COOK1-1776-1,25.396

come on board , COOK1-1776-1,25.397

the Indians are coming down : <$$font> COOK1-1776-1,25.398

this put the people in a great consternation , fearing they should come
down by land and intercept them before they could reach the boat .
COOK1-1776-1,25.399

As soon as the men were all well on board we got our small arms upon
deck , COOK1-1776-1,25.400

cut lashes , COOK1-1776-1,25.401

and stood by to cut the ship adrift , in case the Indians came by land :
COOK1-1776-1,25.402

but all our precautions were unnecessary , as they seemed to be more
afraid of us than we of them . COOK1-1776-1,25.403

We descried them peeping at the ship from the point of an island , and
in a dread lest we should perceive them . COOK1-1776-1,25.404

This lasted for some time , after which they ventured to paddle a little
nearer to us ; COOK1-1776-1,25.405

but their hearts failed them , COOK1-1776-1,25.406

and they put about COOK1-1776-1,25.407

and paddled away . COOK1-1776-1,25.408

We saw no more of them till every body was below at dinner , when they
paddled close in shore , and had got pretty near the ship .
COOK1-1776-1,25.409

The Captain ordered a French Jack to be waved , COOK1-1776-1,25.410

and called to them ; upon which they laid upon their paddles near twenty
minutes , and soon after paddled back again . COOK1-1776-1,25.411

With our glasses we could observe them to be clothed with skins .
COOK1-1776-1,25.412

At 2 P.M. two of our boats well armed , with the Captain and three
marines , went in search of the Indians . COOK1-1776-1,25.413

At 6 the Captain and boats returned , with an account of their seeing
the canoes hauled upon a beach , and the Indians gone .
COOK1-1776-1,25.414

Captain Cook went into a canoe , COOK1-1776-1,25.415

and found a net and some coal-fish ; COOK1-1776-1,25.416

the head of the canoe was carved , COOK1-1776-1,25.417

and resembled a man's head . COOK1-1776-1,25.418

He saw a hut made in the form of the tilt of a waggon , with a hole to
creep in and out at , and the top covered with green boughs and leaves :
COOK1-1776-1,25.419

he did not choose to enter it , lest any Indians should be in it , and
should be alarmed at the appearance <P_26> of the men under arms ,
COOK1-1776-1,26.420

so he returned to the canoe again , COOK1-1776-1,26.421

and left in her several strings of beads , knives , ribbons and
looking-glasses ; COOK1-1776-1,26.422

he also cut a tree with a small axe , COOK1-1776-1,26.423

and left it sticking in the wood . COOK1-1776-1,26.424

March 29 . COOK1-1776-1,26.425

This day the Captain called the ship's company aft , COOK1-1776-1,26.426

and spoke to them to the following effect : COOK1-1776-1,26.427

" Gentlemen , I have sent for you to acquaint you , that while we stay
here , it is my intention that the ship's company be stopped one half of
their provisions : COOK1-1776-1,26.428

here are great quantities of fish , COOK1-1776-1,26.429

and you shall have as many as you please . COOK1-1776-1,26.430

I think this saving had better be made now , than for us to be under a
necessity of making it when we are more advanced to the southward , and
when you will have more occasion for your full allowance .
COOK1-1776-1,26.431

To put you to short allowance then would be much against my inclination
, COOK1-1776-1,26.432

and indeed I would sooner shorten our voyage if reduced to that
alternative . COOK1-1776-1,26.433

I do not mean to stop your provisions from you entirely ,
COOK1-1776-1,26.434

for you shall be paid for them ; upon which consideration I hope to hear
no grumbling or discontent amongst you , COOK1-1776-1,26.435

for I promise you my officers and I will set you the example . "
COOK1-1776-1,26.436

All the people were very well satisfied , COOK1-1776-1,26.437

acquiesced cheerfully in the Captain's resolution , COOK1-1776-1,26.438

and were this day employed in felling trees : COOK1-1776-1,26.439

the ground was so moist that we could shove down trees 12 or 14 feet
high with our hands . COOK1-1776-1,26.440

We began to brew spruce_beer , COOK1-1776-1,26.441

made candles , COOK1-1776-1,26.442

and boiled the blubber of seals . COOK1-1776-1,26.443

Got up the armourer's forge . COOK1-1776-1,26.444

March 30 . COOK1-1776-1,26.445

Made a fire to burn and clear some ground , COOK1-1776-1,26.446

and it coming on to blow hard , all hands were obliged to go on shore at
midnight to put it out , fearing the tents should take fire .
COOK1-1776-1,26.447

April 1 . COOK1-1776-1,26.448

This afternoon the Captain went in the pinnace to the canoe again ,
COOK1-1776-1,26.449

and found the beads , knives , ribbons , &c. unmoved
{COM:for_unremoved;_see_errata} , and just as he left them ; by which it
appeared the Indians had never returned to the canoe from the time he
had been there before . COOK1-1776-1,26.450

He entered the hut , COOK1-1776-1,26.451

and found a basket of berries like elder-berries , and a patoo-pattoo ,
which is their chief instrument of offence in war , especially when at
close quarters . COOK1-1776-1,26.452

Shot a seal and some ducks , COOK1-1776-1,26.453

and saw something like a jackall . COOK1-1776-1,26.454

<P_27>

April 2 . COOK1-1776-1,27.456

Shot some plover , parrots , and seals ; COOK1-1776-1,27.457

one of the latter weighed 228 lb. COOK1-1776-1,27.458

Found the head bone of a lion , or some other large beast .
COOK1-1776-1,27.459

On the 5th hard showers and storms of hail , and a great deal of thunder
. COOK1-1776-1,27.460

The climate seemed to be very tempestuous : COOK1-1776-1,27.461

we had not six hours fair weather from the time we arrived at these
islands . COOK1-1776-1,27.462

April 6 . COOK1-1776-1,27.463

Capt. Cook went this day a reconnoitring the country in a boat , and
surveying the coast , COOK1-1776-1,27.464

and as he was returning he heard a voice on shore : COOK1-1776-1,27.465

on his approaching to it , he saw an old man , two middle_aged women ,
and a very fine young woman , appearing to be about 18 or 19 years of
age . COOK1-1776-1,27.466

From their first discovering the boat they all seemed in great dismay ,
the women especially . COOK1-1776-1,27.467

The old man came trembling down a rock , COOK1-1776-1,27.468

and endeavoured to prevent the boat from landing , by shoving her with a
long stick . COOK1-1776-1,27.469

When he found all his attempts to prevent our landing fruitless , he
returned to his wives , who were standing on the shore much terrified .
COOK1-1776-1,27.470

The Captain and boat's crew landed , COOK1-1776-1,27.471

and the Indians stood motionless , till the Captain advanced up to one
of the ladies and saluted her , by putting his nose to her's , according
to the custom prevailing in the late discovered countries .
COOK1-1776-1,27.472

He attempted to pay the same compliment to the other wife ,
COOK1-1776-1,27.473

but could not <font> weather <$$font> a great wen that grew on her lip .
COOK1-1776-1,27.474

All this time the old man stood motionless , observing the Captain
saluting his wives : COOK1-1776-1,27.475

the Captain then turned to the old man , who looked like death , from
the fright and terror he was in , COOK1-1776-1,27.476

and presented him in a courteous manner with a knife and an axe :
COOK1-1776-1,27.477

this pleased him much , COOK1-1776-1,27.478

and he began to talk and to be very familiar . COOK1-1776-1,27.479

By this time the ladies too had recovered from their first alarm .
COOK1-1776-1,27.480

Some of the gentlemen addressed the young beauty COOK1-1776-1,27.481

and gave her some fish and birds , which she threw back at them with an
air of disdain , and laughed at them heartily , by way of rebuke , as we
apprehended , for offering her presents in her own power to obtain .
COOK1-1776-1,27.482

She seemed to be a lass of humour and spirit , COOK1-1776-1,27.483

and assumed airs that would not have disgraced an
{COM:for_a;_see_errata} European fine lady . COOK1-1776-1,27.484

We must not absolutely infer , from the address and manner of this fair
incognita of the south , that coquetry is a natural accomplishment to
the female sex , and because we see it so generally admitted amongst the
graces of our European beauties ; COOK1-1776-1,27.485

yet it can@ @not <P_28> be denied but it is a sort of presumptive proof
of something like it , and that nature meant a little <font> flirtation
<$$font> as no <font> unbecoming <$$font> auxiliary to a graceful person
. COOK1-1776-1,28.486

After displaying many of these delicate airs of a fine lady , our
Indiana took a great fancy to a little dog that followed the Captain .
COOK1-1776-1,28.487

In this passion too for a lap-dog she not a little resembled our
European females . COOK1-1776-1,28.488

She took and played with the dog a considerable time , till he barked ,
which so affrighted her that she let him go , and would never suffer him
to come near her afterwards , but kept as far from him as possible .
COOK1-1776-1,28.489

From this it may be judged there were none of that species of animals in
these islands . COOK1-1776-1,28.490

Dr. Foster fired at a bird on a bush COOK1-1776-1,28.491

and killed it : COOK1-1776-1,28.492

this alarmed our Indians still more . COOK1-1776-1,28.493

They took particular notice of the Captain's boat-cloak ,
COOK1-1776-1,28.494

and seemed very desirous to have it . COOK1-1776-1,28.495

Our draftsman being present at this pantomimical conference , which was
totally carried on by signs and tokens , took out his pencil
COOK1-1776-1,28.496

and drew the picture of this young Indian beauty . COOK1-1776-1,28.497

When he had finished it , he shewed it her , at which she seemed
wonderfully pleased , and expressed a strong inclination to have it in
her possession . COOK1-1776-1,28.498

The Captain soon after took his leave for that time COOK1-1776-1,28.499

and returned on board . COOK1-1776-1,28.500

The ladies , at this <font> rencontre <$$font> , were armed with spears
, and the old gentleman with a patoo-pattoo . COOK1-1776-1,28.501

April 8 . COOK1-1776-1,28.502

This day the Captain went on shore again at the same place ,
COOK1-1776-1,28.503

and presented the old gentleman with a cloak of kersey , as he had
before shewed a desire of having the Captain's boat-cloak :
COOK1-1776-1,28.504

the Captain put this kersey cloak upon him , COOK1-1776-1,28.505

and he seemed highly delighted with it , strutting up and down , and
thinking himself exceeding fine . COOK1-1776-1,28.506

The Indians presented the Captain , in return , with some skins of
albitrosses . COOK1-1776-1,28.507

This day they had four beautiful children with them .
COOK1-1776-1,28.508

As soon as the Captain and company got into the boat to go on board ,
they all ascended a rock , COOK1-1776-1,28.509

and sat upon it , looking after the boat till she was out of sight .
COOK1-1776-1,28.510

We shot , while on shore , some parrots , shags , ducks , and cavallas .
COOK1-1776-1,28.511

April 11 . COOK1-1776-1,28.512

Sunday . COOK1-1776-1,28.513

Easter-Day , and the first fine day we have had since we have been at
these islands . COOK1-1776-1,28.514

At 10 , A.M. discovered a double canoe at a distance .
COOK1-1776-1,28.515

The Indians in her paddled till they came within a quarter of a mile
<P_29> of the ship , when the Captain took a boat and went out to sea to
meet them . COOK1-1776-1,29.516

Upon approaching the canoe the Captain found the old gentleman and his
family in it ; COOK1-1776-1,29.517

so he sent the boat on board , COOK1-1776-1,29.518

and took a paddle COOK1-1776-1,29.519

and paddled with them , expecting he should prevail upon them to come on
board the <font> Resolution <$$font> , COOK1-1776-1,29.520

but he soon found their intentions were to go into a cove ;
COOK1-1776-1,29.521

upon this he left them . COOK1-1776-1,29.522

As soon as they had taken care of their canoes they all came
COOK1-1776-1,29.523

and sat on a rock within view of the ship : COOK1-1776-1,29.524

they seemed to be afraid of the ship , COOK1-1776-1,29.525

and thought it was alive , COOK1-1776-1,29.526

and began to talk to it as a living creature . COOK1-1776-1,29.527

The old gentleman pointed to the masts and sails , and several things on
board , COOK1-1776-1,29.528

and then turned COOK1-1776-1,29.529

and spoke to his children , as making his remarks on what he saw .
COOK1-1776-1,29.530

The children appeared to be struck with amazement , COOK1-1776-1,29.531

and looked as if their father had been acquainting them with danger .
COOK1-1776-1,29.532

We played the fife and bagpipes , COOK1-1776-1,29.533

beat the drum , COOK1-1776-1,29.534

and rang the bell ; COOK1-1776-1,29.535

they all looked at one another with surprize , but with visible
satisfaction and pleasure in their countenances , COOK1-1776-1,29.536

and soon after manifested their joy by dancing and hallooing :
COOK1-1776-1,29.537

in the mean time a man went up to the main-top-gallant truck
COOK1-1776-1,29.538

and called to them : COOK1-1776-1,29.539

they all suddenly stopped dancing , COOK1-1776-1,29.540

and stood gazing at him with evident marks of wonder .
COOK1-1776-1,29.541

At night they made a great fire , COOK1-1776-1,29.542

and all sat round about it singing . COOK1-1776-1,29.543

The Captain ordered sentinels {TEXT:centinels} to be posted , lest any
of the seamen should go on shore and take away the old gentleman's
daughter . COOK1-1776-1,29.544

Our boats were this day employed in fishing , COOK1-1776-1,29.545

and several sharks and dog-fish were taken . COOK1-1776-1,29.546

The first and second lieutenant , a master's mate and midshipman , went
in a small cutter on a party of pleasure among the islands ,
COOK1-1776-1,29.547

and took three days provision with them . COOK1-1776-1,29.548

April 12 . COOK1-1776-1,29.549

To-day the old Indian and his family quitted the cove
COOK1-1776-1,29.550

and went up the country . COOK1-1776-1,29.551

The Captain shot 15 seals , COOK1-1776-1,29.552

and as he was out surveying the coast and islands he perceived a boat at
sea : COOK1-1776-1,29.553

rowed to her COOK1-1776-1,29.554

and found it to be our cutter adrift in which the lieutenants had been ,
and with all the provisions in her they had taken from the ship :
COOK1-1776-1,29.555

the Captain took her in tow with the pinnace , COOK1-1776-1,29.556

and soon after proceeded in search of his lieutenants .
COOK1-1776-1,29.557

At three in the morning he discovered a fire on a little island :
COOK1-1776-1,29.558

rowed to it COOK1-1776-1,29.559

and landed . COOK1-1776-1,29.560

Here he found the lieutenants and their companions , all <P_30> sitting
round the fire without either provisions or liquor , COOK1-1776-1,30.561

nor had they had any for 18 or 20 hours before . COOK1-1776-1,30.562

The Captain staid with them till day-light , COOK1-1776-1,30.563

and then left them . COOK1-1776-1,30.564

We caught a great many craw-fish in this place . COOK1-1776-1,30.565

April 15 . COOK1-1776-1,30.566

This day the Captain went a surveying again in the pinnace ,
COOK1-1776-1,30.567

and while he was out found a black dog , that we had brought from the
Cape of Good Hope , and had lost him on an island about ten or eleven
days before : COOK1-1776-1,30.568

he was in good condition , and fat , considering he had been his own
provider all the time . COOK1-1776-1,30.569

The Captain on his return brought on board plenty of ducks , water-hens
, curlews , parrots , hawks , shags , and seals . COOK1-1776-1,30.570

He saw some Indians at a great distance , COOK1-1776-1,30.571

but they never made up to him . COOK1-1776-1,30.572

April 18 . COOK1-1776-1,30.573

This day the old Indian and his family came into the cove again ,
COOK1-1776-1,30.574

and made fires to cook their dinner : COOK1-1776-1,30.575

this was done by fixing four forked sticks in the ground , then placing
sticks across and laying their fish on , scales and guts and all , after
cleaning and rolling them up in sea-weed . COOK1-1776-1,30.576

Their bread is made of roots of fern burnt . COOK1-1776-1,30.577

In the dusk of the evening one of the women went up the island to gather
sticks , COOK1-1776-1,30.578

and was followed by one of the seamen : COOK1-1776-1,30.579

when she returned the old gentleman beat her , being somewhat jealous ,
and perhaps not without reason : COOK1-1776-1,30.580

upon this the daughter began to beat him , in revenge for the ill usage
to her mother , COOK1-1776-1,30.581

but soon after , recollecting her want of filial duty to her father ,
and seeming conscious of the impropriety of her behaviour , she turned
her back to him , COOK1-1776-1,30.582

and he beat her . COOK1-1776-1,30.583

Then they all appeared to be sulky and displeased , COOK1-1776-1,30.584

and spoke to each other no more that evening . COOK1-1776-1,30.585

April 19 . COOK1-1776-1,30.586

Hauled the seine COOK1-1776-1,30.587

and caught 400 mackarel . COOK1-1776-1,30.588

Early this morning the old gentleman and his daughter , being now
reconciled , walked together round the cove , with their spears in their
hands , COOK1-1776-1,30.589

and came to the tents , COOK1-1776-1,30.590

and soon after they visited the ship . COOK1-1776-1,30.591

When the old man approached the ship he made a long speech ,
COOK1-1776-1,30.592

spoke very loud , COOK1-1776-1,30.593

and when he had finished it , he and the young lady his daughter came on
board . COOK1-1776-1,30.594

As soon as they were upon deck , they both jumped , to see if the deck
was fast and was strong enough to bear them , COOK1-1776-1,30.595

then walked very lightly upon it , as if afraid that it should give way
and fall in with them . COOK1-1776-1,30.596

The Captain carried <P_31> them into the cabin , COOK1-1776-1,31.597

and they visited the gun room also ; COOK1-1776-1,31.598

but the old gentleman never lost sight of Miss , COOK1-1776-1,31.599

nor would permit her to go any where without him . COOK1-1776-1,31.600

They made presents to the Captain and to the draftsman of new dresses of
the country , COOK1-1776-1,31.601

and in return the Captain gave the father two axes , a gouge and firmer
, COOK1-1776-1,31.602

and presented the young lady with a pompone , with which she seemed
highly delighted . COOK1-1776-1,31.603

Observing some red paint in a pot , they took a brush
COOK1-1776-1,31.604

and painted their faces . COOK1-1776-1,31.605

In this too our Indian beauty imitated the taste of European ladies .
COOK1-1776-1,31.606

It has been generally supposed that our British Fair had been indebted
to the French or Italian ladies of quality , for this embellishment of
their complexions ; COOK1-1776-1,31.607

but the present instance before us will shew , that nature had
instructed an unpolished Indian in the same fashionable practice ,
without the aid of foreign artists . COOK1-1776-1,31.608

Our Indiana had decorated her head with feathers , now become a British
fashion also . COOK1-1776-1,31.609

When they had satisfied their curiosity in viewing every part of the
ship , and were convinced that it was not alive , nor endued with the
faculties of a human being , as they first thought , and which more
particularly appeared by the old gentleman's addressing it in a long
speech before he came on board , they took their leaves of the Captain
and officers upon deck , COOK1-1776-1,31.610

and returned to their canoes . COOK1-1776-1,31.611

The thought of the ship's being alive must be very natural to those who
never saw or heard of a ship before , COOK1-1776-1,31.612

and therefore it is not at all surprising that the Indians supposed this
to be the case of the <font> Resolution . <$$font> COOK1-1776-1,31.613

Mr. Dryden has given a very animated picture of an Indian describing to
Montezuma the Spanish squadron on their first approach to Mexico , in
which this thought is illustrated with particular beauty .
COOK1-1776-1,31.614

The Indian is represented as relating to his Emperor this strange
phenomenon , and announcing the arrival of the Spanish ships on his
coast as follows : {COM:verse_omitted} COOK1-1776-1,31.615

<P_32>

April 22 . COOK1-1776-1,32.617

The Captain went in the pinnace , surveying the coast and making
observations . COOK1-1776-1,32.618

Saw three men and two women , who expressed the same fear at seeing him
as the old gentleman and his ladies : COOK1-1776-1,32.619

however he soon made friends with them , COOK1-1776-1,32.620

and presented them with two axes ; COOK1-1776-1,32.621

in return they gave him one of their dresses . COOK1-1776-1,32.622

This was the last intercourse we had with the natives at this cove .
COOK1-1776-1,32.623

On the 24th the Captain put two ganders and two geese on shore
COOK1-1776-1,32.624

and left them to breed . COOK1-1776-1,32.625

On the 28th struck the tents , COOK1-1776-1,32.626

and brought every thing on board ready to sail . COOK1-1776-1,32.627

April 29 . COOK1-1776-1,32.628

The Captain went on shore COOK1-1776-1,32.629

and sowed many sorts of seeds , soon after which we hauled out of the
cove and made sail : COOK1-1776-1,32.630

sailed about ten miles in_land COOK1-1776-1,32.631

and then came to . COOK1-1776-1,32.632

Saw many lights on the mountains at night . COOK1-1776-1,32.633

April 30 . COOK1-1776-1,32.634

At 10 A.M. hove up , COOK1-1776-1,32.635

and towed till 6 in the evening , COOK1-1776-1,32.636

and came to again . COOK1-1776-1,32.637

May 1 . COOK1-1776-1,32.638

At 7 A.M. hove up , COOK1-1776-1,32.639

turned , COOK1-1776-1,32.640

and came to again at one , so close to the shore that we entangled our
ensign-staff amongst the trees . COOK1-1776-1,32.641

Got some water , COOK1-1776-1,32.642

and found two huts uninhabited . COOK1-1776-1,32.643

May 3 . COOK1-1776-1,32.644

At 11 A.M. hove up , COOK1-1776-1,32.645

but there being but little wind came to again . COOK1-1776-1,32.646

On the 4th , hove up again at noon , COOK1-1776-1,32.647

and came to at 3 o'clock : COOK1-1776-1,32.648

hauled the seine COOK1-1776-1,32.649

and caught a few small fish , COOK1-1776-1,32.650

and found a muscle the shell of which was twelve inches long and eight
broad . COOK1-1776-1,32.651

This night was very tempestuous ; thunder , lightning and rain during
the whole of it . COOK1-1776-1,32.652

May 5 . COOK1-1776-1,32.653

At 3 P.M. got under way , COOK1-1776-1,32.654

and came to at 7 in a fine bay near the main ocean .
COOK1-1776-1,32.655

From the time we discovered these islands and made the land , we had not
one week in the whole that could be fairly termed good weather .
COOK1-1776-1,32.656

May 6 . COOK1-1776-1,32.657

Continued at anchor in the bay : COOK1-1776-1,32.658

caught a shark with 27 eggs in her . COOK1-1776-1,32.659

On the 7th hard gales of wind . COOK1-1776-1,32.660

Got our lower yards and top-gallant masts down . COOK1-1776-1,32.661

On the 9th hoisted in our boats COOK1-1776-1,32.662

and made ready for sea . COOK1-1776-1,32.663

This day shot two seals . COOK1-1776-1,32.664

<P_33>

<heading>

<font> The <$$font> Resolution <font> sails from the Islands round
<$$font> Dusky Bay , <font> bound for <$$font> Queen Charlotte's Sound ,
150 <font> Leagues to the Northward . <$$font> COOK1-1776-1,33.667

<$$heading>

May 11 . COOK1-1776-1,33.669

Weighed COOK1-1776-1,33.670

and put to sea . COOK1-1776-1,33.671

This day killed twelve seals . COOK1-1776-1,33.672

On the 15th came in sight of Cape <font> Farewell . <$$font>
COOK1-1776-1,33.673

On the 16th hard gales of wind , with heavy rain . COOK1-1776-1,33.674

Turned all day and night to weather the Cape , and to enter the Sound .
COOK1-1776-1,33.675

May 17 . COOK1-1776-1,33.676

This morning the weather became very fine , COOK1-1776-1,33.677

and the wind being right aft , we soon got sight of the western entrance
of the Sound : COOK1-1776-1,33.678

but all on a sudden we were taken a-back , COOK1-1776-1,33.679

the clouds put on a very threatening appearance , COOK1-1776-1,33.680

the sky looked black and louring , COOK1-1776-1,33.681

and the face of the heavens seemed to portend some dreadful event .
COOK1-1776-1,33.682

We made haste to prepare against it : COOK1-1776-1,33.683

lowered down our top-sails , COOK1-1776-1,33.684

hauled down all the stay-sails , COOK1-1776-1,33.685

and clewed up the courses ; COOK1-1776-1,33.686

and having taken these necessary precautions , waited the approaching
storm with firmness . COOK1-1776-1,33.687

It was not long before we saw the water at a distance in great motion ,
the waves rising to an uncommon height , and the whole sea in one
continued ferment : COOK1-1776-1,33.688

the astronomer , from the dreadful prospect before us and the vast swell
of the ocean , judged it to be a whirlwind coming on .
COOK1-1776-1,33.689

Soon after we saw the sea drawn up , as it were , into the clouds , and
forming two tremendous columns of water , resembling water-spouts of an
inconceivable size : COOK1-1776-1,33.690

scarce were these formed and suspended in the air , when three others ,
still more formidable in their appearance , began to gather nearer to
the ship , and one so very near as to strike us all with the greatest
consternation and horror . COOK1-1776-1,33.691

It was now a dead calm , COOK1-1776-1,33.692

the ship could not be moved , COOK1-1776-1,33.693

and there seemed no visible possibility of avoiding it .
COOK1-1776-1,33.694

It came fast towards us ; COOK1-1776-1,33.695

the approach was dreadful , COOK1-1776-1,33.696

and it was preceded by loud peals of thunder and fiery slashes of forked
lightning . COOK1-1776-1,33.697

We gave up all for lost , COOK1-1776-1,33.698

and patiently resigned ourselves to our fate , having no hopes but in
the all-gracious dispensations of Providence to relieve us in our great
extremity . COOK1-1776-1,33.699

Just as this <P_34> dreadful column advanced within twice the length of
the ship , threatening to break and to overwhelm us in an instant , it
pleased God , that merciful disposer of all human events , to send a
sudden breeze of wind , which put the ship in motion , then wafted us
briskly along , and in a few moments cleared us of all danger .
COOK1-1776-1,34.700

The whole was a dismal scene to behold , while it lasted ;
COOK1-1776-1,34.701

to those on shore , and near the Sound , it must have been a grand
spectacle : COOK1-1776-1,34.702

Phenomena of this extraordinary nature could not fail of inspiring that
secret fearful pleasure , so beautifully described by Lucretius .
COOK1-1776-1,34.703

{COM:verse_omitted}

May 18 . COOK1-1776-1,34.705

At day break saw great flashes of fire in the Sound , supposed to be of
lightning , the tempest having now reached the land .
COOK1-1776-1,34.706

Fired a gun . COOK1-1776-1,34.707

Saw more violent flashes of lightning at the upper end of the Sound ,
COOK1-1776-1,34.708

and heard explosions . COOK1-1776-1,34.709

The storm having subsided , and it falling little wind , we hoisted out
our boats to tow , COOK1-1776-1,34.710

and towed into the Sound . COOK1-1776-1,34.711

Here to our great joy we discovered our long lost companion the <font>
Adventure <$$font> , Captain Furneaux , laying at anchor , with her
yards and top-masts down and all her running-rigging unreefed .
COOK1-1776-1,34.712

Lat. 41@ @=o= . S. Long. 184@ @=o= . 45 ' . W.
COOK1-1776-1,34.713

<heading>

<font> The <$$font> Resolution <font> and <$$font> Adventure <font> at
Anchor in <$$font> Queen Charlotte's Sound . COOK1-1776-1,34.715

<$$heading>

As soon as the <font> Resolution <$$font> came to , the <font> Adventure
<$$font> sent her boat on board , COOK1-1776-1,34.717

and informed us of the health and condition of the ship ,
COOK1-1776-1,34.718

and gave the following intelligence of what passed since the separation
of the two ships . " That , at the time the <font> Adventure <$$font>
parted company , she cruized for 14 days successively , firing guns
continually and burning false fires every night ; after which time ,
despairing of joining us any more , they proceeded to Van Diemen's land
<paren> discovered in 1642 <$$paren> Lat. 38@ @=o= . S. Long. 210@
@=o= . W. COOK1-1776-1,34.719

There they lay in a commodious bay , COOK1-1776-1,34.720

and saw a great number of Indians : COOK1-1776-1,34.721

the water there was very brackish . COOK1-1776-1,34.722

They had no intercourse with the Indians , COOK1-1776-1,34.723

but when they departed from <P_35> the island they left a cask at the
watering place , COOK1-1776-1,35.724

and wrote upon it , <font> The Adventure is sailed for Charlotte Sound .
<$$font> COOK1-1776-1,35.725

That they never expected to see us any more during the voyage , and that
Captain Furneaux had intended to winter in the Sound , and to return to
England in the spring by the way of Cape Horn ; " and which he
afterwards did upon a second separation . COOK1-1776-1,35.726

May 19 . COOK1-1776-1,35.727

The two ships continued at anchor in the Sound . COOK1-1776-1,35.728

Queen Charlotte's Sound , and the land forming the harbour , called by
the natives Totarranue , was discovered and taken possession of by Capt.
Cook , in his former voyage . COOK1-1776-1,35.729

His method of taking possession is thus related by himself :
COOK1-1776-1,35.730

" I took a post to the highest part of the island , on Tuesday , January
30 , 1770 , COOK1-1776-1,35.731

and after fixing it firmly in the ground I hoisted upon it the union
flag , COOK1-1776-1,35.732

and honoured this inlet with the name of Queen Charlotte's Sound , at
the same time taking formal possession of this and the adjacent country
in the name and for the use of his Majesty King George the Third .
COOK1-1776-1,35.733

We then drank a bottle of wine to her Majesty's health .
COOK1-1776-1,35.734

The land about this Sound , which is of such a height that we saw it at
the distance of twenty leagues , consists wholly of high hills and deep
vallies , well stored with a variety of excellent timber , fit for all
purposes except masts , for which it is too hard and heavy . "
COOK1-1776-1,35.735

This day the two Captains went up the river in the <font> Resolution
<$$font> 's pinnace , well armed , to look for some Indians , who had
visited Captain Furneaux a few days before , and offered some human
flesh to sell . COOK1-1776-1,35.736

It is a practice on this coast for the Indians to eat the bodies of
their enemies killed in battle . COOK1-1776-1,35.737

This Captain Cook had discovered in his former voyage ,
COOK1-1776-1,35.738

and there were incontestible proofs of it : COOK1-1776-1,35.739

he saw several human bones picked of the flesh , COOK1-1776-1,35.740

and one of the Indians brought him four heads of their enemies , who had
been killed and eaten , one of which was purchased by Mr. Banks , but
with great reluctance on the part of the seller , it being supposed they
are kept as trophies , like the scalps in America . COOK1-1776-1,35.741

The two Captains returned without seeing any of the Indians ,
COOK1-1776-1,35.742

but saw several <font> hippahs <$$font> {COM:for_hippacks;_see_errata}
or villages . COOK1-1776-1,35.743

They shot and brought on board plenty of wild fowl , some wild celery ,
<P_36> scurvy-grass , and other herbs for the ship's company .
COOK1-1776-1,36.744

We saw a long canoe in the offing full of Indians . COOK1-1776-1,36.745

Hauled the seine COOK1-1776-1,36.746

and caught some gurnets , coal-fish , cavallas , silver and elephant
fish . COOK1-1776-1,36.747

May 21 . COOK1-1776-1,36.748

Sent our boat to assist our companion the <font> Adventure <$$font> in
watering , and making ready for sea . COOK1-1776-1,36.749

On the 23d three canoes came down COOK1-1776-1,36.750

and traded with fish for nails . COOK1-1776-1,36.751

On the 24th one of the canoes came on board , COOK1-1776-1,36.752

and soon after another entered the Sound , COOK1-1776-1,36.753

but on seeing the two ships at anchor they put back again .
COOK1-1776-1,36.754

One of the Indians on board hailed the canoes , COOK1-1776-1,36.755

and called them along-side , COOK1-1776-1,36.756

but we could not persuade them to come on board . COOK1-1776-1,36.757

This canoe was thirty feet long , COOK1-1776-1,36.758

and had twelve men , women , and children in her . COOK1-1776-1,36.759

They traded tools of jasper for glass bottles , nails , and beads ,
COOK1-1776-1,36.760

and scarcely refused any thing , whether of use or curiosity :
COOK1-1776-1,36.761

we bought of them seventy-five silver fish for two nails .
COOK1-1776-1,36.762

Shot this day several owls . COOK1-1776-1,36.763

May 29 . COOK1-1776-1,36.764

A canoe came off with sixteen men , women , and children , to trade .
COOK1-1776-1,36.765

As theft is natural to all the natives of these islands , they were
detected presently in stealing a four-hour glass , a scraper , a fork ,
and a lamp full of oil ; COOK1-1776-1,36.766

this last discovered them , the oil running down the legs of the thief
from under his cloaths . COOK1-1776-1,36.767

In order to convince them that theft was a crime , and would not be
permitted with impunity , we turned them out of the ship ,
COOK1-1776-1,36.768

and handed them into the canoe a little roughly . COOK1-1776-1,36.769

At this they seemed surprised COOK1-1776-1,36.770

and expressed some resentment , COOK1-1776-1,36.771

but soon after paddled away COOK1-1776-1,36.772

and went on board the <font> Adventure , <$$font> some of the seamen of
which found a deep_sea lead , which they had stolen from us , at the
bottom of the canoe . COOK1-1776-1,36.773

Their canoe was thirty-two feet long , and the heads curiously carved .
COOK1-1776-1,36.774

They offered to sell their children for one shirt each ,
COOK1-1776-1,36.775

but the Captain would not permit any one to purchase them .
COOK1-1776-1,36.776

June 1 . COOK1-1776-1,36.777

This day three sailing canoes came down the river to trade :
COOK1-1776-1,36.778

they had on board twenty-seven men and some very handsome young women .
COOK1-1776-1,36.779

The faces of the men were marked and blackened with many streaks in a
very curious manner , which denoted them to be warriors .
COOK1-1776-1,36.780

All the prisoners they take in war they kill and eat ,
COOK1-1776-1,36.781

and when they have taken more than are required for the present
subsistence , <P_37> they tie their hands and legs together ,
COOK1-1776-1,37.782

then bind them fast to a tree , COOK1-1776-1,37.783

and leave them till they are wanted for the table . COOK1-1776-1,37.784

As soon as these unfortunate captives have fallen a victim to the savage
appetites of their literally blood-thirsty conquerors , and their horrid
repast is over , they proceed to knock out all their teeth and draw the
nails from off their fingers , COOK1-1776-1,37.785

then boring holes through them , they hang them to their ears
COOK1-1776-1,37.786

and wear them as trophies of victory . COOK1-1776-1,37.787

We purchased of these inhuman warriors teeth and finger-nails , and
fish-hooks made of men's bones . COOK1-1776-1,37.788

We also bought of them chisels {TEXT:chissels} and axes made of green
jasper curiously wrought . COOK1-1776-1,37.789

It chills the blood with horror to reflect on the dreadful situation of
those devoted natives whom the chance of war had thrown into the power
of their enemies , tied to a tree , exposed to the scorching heat of the
sun , to hunger and to thirst , and in daily expectation of the knife .
COOK1-1776-1,37.790

It is rather wonderful that frequent retaliations have not in a length
of time abolished and put an end to so barbarous a custom , considering
the uncertainties ever attending all hostile conflicts , and the chances
of being attacked by superior numbers , of being overpowered or
surprized . COOK1-1776-1,37.791

Dr. Hawkesworth imputes this barbarous custom principally to the great
want of provisions on this island , there being no sheep , or goats , or
hogs , or cattle ; and that hunger stimulates to this savage practice .
COOK1-1776-1,37.792

In the evening the canoes departed , COOK1-1776-1,37.793

but left some of their cannibals on board the ship : COOK1-1776-1,37.794

we made beds for them in the hog-stye , with which they were much
delighted , COOK1-1776-1,37.795

rose in the morning , COOK1-1776-1,37.796

and breakfasted on the heads and guts of wild fowl , raw and unwashed .
COOK1-1776-1,37.797

They took great pleasure in pulling and hauling , and doing any thing
they saw done by the seamen . COOK1-1776-1,37.798

June 2 . COOK1-1776-1,37.799

The Captain put on shore two goats COOK1-1776-1,37.800

and left them to breed . COOK1-1776-1,37.801

June 3 . COOK1-1776-1,37.802

Our largest cutter went nine miles up a river , to bring on board some
hay , which we had made some days before ; COOK1-1776-1,37.803

but on her passage was chaced by a double war canoe , which carried
sixty-six Indians . COOK1-1776-1,37.804

The cutter being unarmed , was obliged to put about and return to the
ship . COOK1-1776-1,37.805

Being well armed and manned she set out again in pursuit of her pursuers
; COOK1-1776-1,37.806

but the war canoe observing her motions , had sheered off
COOK1-1776-1,37.807

and was out of sight . COOK1-1776-1,37.808

In the evening two Indians fought <P_38> on shore , COOK1-1776-1,38.809

and one killed the other , which was no sooner done but the deceased was
dragged to a fire and broiled for supper . COOK1-1776-1,38.810

Turned a boar and sow loose upon the island , COOK1-1776-1,38.811

and left them to breed . COOK1-1776-1,38.812

June 4 . COOK1-1776-1,38.813

This being The King's Birth-Day , all the officers of the <font>
Adventure <$$font> dined on board our ship to celebrate the day .
COOK1-1776-1,38.814

At 8 in the morning a double war canoe came down ; COOK1-1776-1,38.815

at this time we had ten or twelve Indians on board : COOK1-1776-1,38.816

As soon as they saw the war canoe they ran up and down the ship like
distracted people , not knowing which way to escape .
COOK1-1776-1,38.817

This is not much to be wondered at , considering the fate they were
reserved for in case they had been taken . COOK1-1776-1,38.818

When the war canoe approached the ship , the Indians on board put
themselves in the best posture of defence they could with our gig-staffs
and their own patoo-pattoos , as if determined to sell their lives dear
. COOK1-1776-1,38.819

When the canoe was alongside , two of the chiefs , cloathed in the skins
of wild beasts , rose up COOK1-1776-1,38.820

and made a very long harangue . COOK1-1776-1,38.821

During this speech our Indians were very attentive , COOK1-1776-1,38.822

and as soon as the warriors prepared to come on board the ship , they
slipped over the other side , COOK1-1776-1,38.823

got safe on shore , COOK1-1776-1,38.824

and ran up the mountains with all the speed they could ; by this
stratagem and their own activity , thus preserving their bones from
being picked by their hungry and voracious adversaries .
COOK1-1776-1,38.825

