<BEGIN_cooke2-1770-2>

<P_46>

<heading>

MAY . COOKE2-1770-2,46.4

<font> Business of the <$$font> Kitchen Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,46.5

<$$heading>

Take out all the plants from the roots of your artichoaks , which have
been produced since the old stocks were slipped , COOKE2-1770-2,46.7

and cut off all the small artichoaks from the sides of the stems .
COOKE2-1770-2,46.8

If it is likely to rain sow turneps , COOKE2-1770-2,46.9

hoe those sowed last month , COOKE2-1770-2,46.10

and in open ground sow cucumbers for pickling . COOKE2-1770-2,46.11

Towards the latter end of the month , if the weather is favourable ,
transplant the tomatos for soups , and the capsicum , for pickling ,
which have been raised upon hot beds ; COOKE2-1770-2,46.12

and if the weather is dry , water them often . COOKE2-1770-2,46.13

You may forward the cabbaging of your early cabbages , by tying their
leaves together with a withy or bass mat . COOKE2-1770-2,46.14

Destroy all manner of weeds in your garden-beds , before they shed their
seed . COOKE2-1770-2,46.15

Sow peas and beans in a moist soil for a latter crop .
COOKE2-1770-2,46.16

About the middle of the month plant cauliflowers for Winter use ;
COOKE2-1770-2,46.17

keep the ground moist , COOKE2-1770-2,46.18

and shade the beds everyday with mats . COOKE2-1770-2,46.19

Plant out the red and white cabbages and savoys for Winter use .
COOKE2-1770-2,46.20

Transplant the first sown cellery into drills for blanching ;
COOKE2-1770-2,46.21

draw the earth about the stems of the cauliflowers , cabbage plants ,
beans , or any others crop . COOKE2-1770-2,46.22

In the heat of the day shade the cucumbers under frames with mats ,
COOKE2-1770-2,46.23

but let the melons in warm weather have air . COOKE2-1770-2,46.24

Transplant Silesia , cos , and imperial lettuces {TEXT:luttuces} , to
succeed those of the last month . COOKE2-1770-2,46.25

<P_47>

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Fruit Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,47.28

<$$heading>

You must be very careful to thin peaches and apricots of their
superabundant fruit , COOKE2-1770-2,47.30

for too many on a tree make the whole insipid ; COOKE2-1770-2,47.31

and therefore two upon one branch are esteemed sufficient .
COOKE2-1770-2,47.32

You must now take away all dry , withered branches from wall trees , and
be careful to cleanse them from , snaile , cankers , &c.
COOKE2-1770-2,47.33

Cut off the extremities of the shoots of goosberries , which will in a
great measure prevent or kill the canker worm . COOKE2-1770-2,47.34

Tie up the shoots of the vine to the props , leaving only three or four
of the strongest shoots . COOKE2-1770-2,47.35

Loosen or disengage such branches of the vine as will be observed
sometimes to be bound between the joints of the wall , and behind the
larger wood . COOKE2-1770-2,47.36

About the latter end of the month begin to nail the most forward
branches of the vine , where fruit is close to the wall ,
COOKE2-1770-2,47.37

and be careful {TEXT:carful} to pick off all fruitless shoots .
COOKE2-1770-2,47.38

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Flower Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,47.40

<$$heading>

Your choice tulips must be shaded from the heat of the sun , and
defended from rain ; COOKE2-1770-2,47.42

when they have done flowering break off their seedpods .
COOKE2-1770-2,47.43

The sicoides , which is propagated by the cuttings being planted abroad
in a natural bed of earth in this month , will be fit to put in pots in
August , where it may remain in the open air till the latter end of
September ; COOKE2-1770-2,47.44

some kinds of , this plant are annual , COOKE2-1770-2,47.45

and therefore must be raised from seeds every year ; COOKE2-1770-2,47.46

and one sort of it <P_48> will stand the Winter , if we raised young
plants of it about July or August , that do not blossom three or four
months . COOKE2-1770-2,48.47

The shrub kinds which have their stalks woody will bear moderate
watering , COOKE2-1770-2,48.48

but the others , which are more succulent , must have very little water
. COOKE2-1770-2,48.49

These plants must have the benefit of the sun to open their blossoms ,
unless two kinds , which only flower in the night . COOKE2-1770-2,48.50

The cuttings of these plants should not be planted till the sun has
dried up the wounded parts . COOKE2-1770-2,48.51

The torch-thistle bears no leaves . COOKE2-1770-2,48.52

It is a succulent plant , propagated from cuttings , planted between May
and the end of July ; COOKE2-1770-2,48.53

they must be planted upon a little hill in the middle of the pot ,
COOKE2-1770-2,48.54

for they can hardly endure water ; COOKE2-1770-2,48.55

they must stand abroad about twenty days to take root , before put into
the hot-bed , observing to water them at their first putting in pot ;
COOKE2-1770-2,48.56

and during the Summer months they may now and then be gently refreshed :
COOKE2-1770-2,48.57

the best compost for these plants is the rubbish of old walls , mixed
with about one third of sandy soil . COOKE2-1770-2,48.58

The myrtle tree is increased by layers in this month ;
COOKE2-1770-2,48.59

the youngest shoots that are tender must be bent into the earth after it
is well stirred , COOKE2-1770-2,48.60

and being , often refreshed with water , will take root , and be fit to
take off from the mother plants the Spring following .
COOKE2-1770-2,48.61

The cuttings of this tree are planted in July , stripping off the leaves
two inches from each cutting , and setting that depth about an inch
apart , in pots of fine light earth , watering them frequently till they
have taken root which will be about the latter end of August :
COOKE2-1770-2,48.62

this young plantation is to remain till the second of March before they
are transplanted <P_49> into single pots . COOKE2-1770-2,49.63

Near the middle of April such old trees as are in a bad state may be
pruned about the roots , and have fresh earth put to them ;
COOKE2-1770-2,49.64

their branches must be cut within three or four inches of the stem .
COOKE2-1770-2,49.65

The pyracintha is an evergreen plant , raised from cutting , planted ,
in this month or June ; COOKE2-1770-2,49.66

the cuttings , which are to be fresh tender twigs , are to be planted in
pots of fine earth , and watered frequently , keeping them from the sun
till the following Winter , at which time a warm exposure will cherish
them , and prepare them to make strong shoots in the Spring .
COOKE2-1770-2,49.67

It may also be raised by seeds and layers . COOKE2-1770-2,49.68

A light gravelly soil , unmixed with dung , or other rich manure , is by
far the best . COOKE2-1770-2,49.69

<heading>

<font> Manure of the month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,49.71

<$$heading>

The industrious gardener will now be daily visiting the kitchen and
fruit garden , not only disciplining the barren , but encouraging the
weak plants . COOKE2-1770-2,49.73

All new planted trees are to be watched , lest some of them , for want
of seasonable help , should pine and languish ; COOKE2-1770-2,49.74

therefore such as are found in a declining state must be sheltered with
boards and mats ; COOKE2-1770-2,49.75

for though the sun gives life and motion to vegetable nature , yet those
that are weak are apt to be overpowered with its heat ,
COOKE2-1770-2,49.76

and on its too frequent and sudden returns will certainly die away .
COOKE2-1770-2,49.77

The analogy between plants and animals is sufficiently shewn in this
observation , and particularly the human race ; COOKE2-1770-2,49.78

for we frequently find , in a severe season , the bodies of some men
will be sensibly injured by a too sudden approach to a large fire .
COOKE2-1770-2,49.79

<P_50>

An operation must be performed towards the latter end of this month ,
which is , by shortening luxuriant branches in all fruit-trees , except
vines , to two inches of the place from whence they shoot :
COOKE2-1770-2,50.81

Winter pruning , instead of taking from , gives vigour to a tree ;
COOKE2-1770-2,50.82

but this operation now , when Nature is in its full career , gives a
great damp and check to its course . COOKE2-1770-2,50.83

The shortening luxuriant branches this month respects not only such
branches as are intended to be left to fill a void place , but also all
vigorous shoots made from the place of inoculation in the nursery , as
well as the same made from new planted trees , especially apricots and
peaches , which are apt , from too much vigour , to be in very great
danger . COOKE2-1770-2,50.84

In the Summer trees of all kinds may be thus transplanted .
COOKE2-1770-2,50.85

<heading>

<font> Produce of the month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,50.87

<$$heading>

We have this month great plenty of asparagus , COOKE2-1770-2,50.89

and cauliflowers are now in perfection . COOKE2-1770-2,50.90

The imperial royal Silesia , and other sorts {TEXT:others_sort} of
cabbage lettuces , are in their prime , and very proper sallads for this
season , mixed with young burnet , purslain , the flowers of the small
nasturtium , and cucumbers . COOKE2-1770-2,50.91

Carrots which were sown on hot beds in February are now very good ;
COOKE2-1770-2,50.92

but those remaining of the crop sown at Michaelmas are past use ;
COOKE2-1770-2,50.93

we have still some kidney beans on hot beds . COOKE2-1770-2,50.94

This month produces plenty of artichoaks ; COOKE2-1770-2,50.95

and peas and beans which were sown in October may be now gathered .
COOKE2-1770-2,50.96

Pears and apples of different sorts still remain eatable .
COOKE2-1770-2,50.97

We have now green gooseberries for <P_51> tarts , COOKE2-1770-2,51.98

and towards the end of the month we have ripe scarlet strawberries in
the natural ground ; likewise the common May cherry , with some few of
the May duke cherries against walls , and green apricots for tarts .
COOKE2-1770-2,51.99

The flowers that blow this month are , columbines , tulips , peonies ,
double jonquils , ranuncula's , asphodels , yellow lily , lychnis orchis
, pinks , roses , rockets , veronicas , stock gillyflower , star-flowers
, chalcedons , crowfoot , martagon , double catchfly , Venetian vetch ,
arbor_judae , bee flowers , campanellas , honeysuckles , buglos , moly ,
cyanus , cytisus , and iris's . COOKE2-1770-2,51.100

<heading>

JUNE . COOKE2-1770-2,51.102

<font> Work of the month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,51.103

<$$heading>

Plants of all sorts must be carefully preserved from the violent heat of
the sun ; COOKE2-1770-2,51.105

those that have been already transplanted must be moderately watered
about their extreme fibres : COOKE2-1770-2,51.106

the evening is the best time to do this sort of work .
COOKE2-1770-2,51.107

You must not cut asparagus after the first week of this month , as it
will very much impoverish the roots . COOKE2-1770-2,51.108

In dry weather gather seeds of all sorts that are ripe ,
COOKE2-1770-2,51.109

and spread them to dry before their husks or pods are rubbed or beaten .
COOKE2-1770-2,51.110

This is the proper season for distilling most sorts of herbs .
COOKE2-1770-2,51.111

Shade your melon plants in the heat of the day , COOKE2-1770-2,51.112

and water the alleys between the beds . COOKE2-1770-2,51.113

Destroy all snails and weeds . COOKE2-1770-2,51.114

Plant the late crop of kidny beans , lettuce for a late crop , and
likewise endive . COOKE2-1770-2,51.115

The business in the kitchen garden is little this month , except weeding
and watering . COOKE2-1770-2,51.116

<P_52>

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Fruit Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,52.119

<$$heading>

The shoots of peaches , whose leaves are infected by blights , and begin
to appear curled at the extremities , are to be carefully pruned off .
COOKE2-1770-2,52.121

Peaches , apricots , and plumbs , expect their Summer nailing , and
likewise pruning , to let the sun come to the fruit , and avoid too much
confusion . COOKE2-1770-2,52.122

You must now check the luxuriant growth of vines by a Summer pruning ,
wherein the branches must be shortened at the fourth or fifth bud beyond
the fruit ; COOKE2-1770-2,52.123

but if a vigorous branch be wanted to fill a void place next year , it
is best to let that particular branch alone till October .
COOKE2-1770-2,52.124

Nail or otherwise fasten those branches of grapes which project too much
, COOKE2-1770-2,52.125

and those unprofitable roots which were not before discovered , must be
taken off . COOKE2-1770-2,52.126

<font> In the <$$font> Flower Garden , We have this month the saffron
crocus , a plant of great use as well as beauty ; COOKE2-1770-2,52.127

the leaves appear as soon as the flower is past , COOKE2-1770-2,52.128

and remain all the Winter ,
{COM:head_of_relative_clause_is_subject_of_previous_token} which in the
Spring should be tied together in knots , to help the increase of the
roots . COOKE2-1770-2,52.129

About Midsummer they will be fit to remove or transplant :
COOKE2-1770-2,52.130

it chiefly delights in a chalky ground , COOKE2-1770-2,52.131

but it will also prosper in a sandy soil : COOKE2-1770-2,52.132

the pistillum contains the saffron used in medicine .
COOKE2-1770-2,52.133

The roots of the several kinds of this plant may be taken out of the
ground in this month , and replanted with other bulbs ;
COOKE2-1770-2,52.134

they love a light soil , COOKE2-1770-2,52.135

and may be increased by off_sets . COOKE2-1770-2,52.136

<P_53>

This is a proper time to clip edgings of box , ever-green hedges , &c.
especially after rain . COOKE2-1770-2,53.138

Let your pine-apples be frequently watered , COOKE2-1770-2,53.139

and in the heat of the day give them air ; COOKE2-1770-2,53.140

those that want larger pots may be transplanted . COOKE2-1770-2,53.141

Mow grass walks early in the morning after rain , COOKE2-1770-2,53.142

and continue to roll your gravel walks . COOKE2-1770-2,53.143

Transplant the roots of cyclamen , saffron , and colchicum .
COOKE2-1770-2,53.144

After rain continue to transplant annuals , COOKE2-1770-2,53.145

and sow others to succeed those sown in the former months .
COOKE2-1770-2,53.146

Gather choice aquatick plants from rivers , ponds , ditches , & c.
COOKE2-1770-2,53.147

and transplant them into your water-tubs , where they make a pretty shew
among other curious plants . COOKE2-1770-2,53.148

Such of your carnations as are strong enough to bear it , may be laid ,
COOKE2-1770-2,53.149

but be careful to pick off their most tender flower buds .
COOKE2-1770-2,53.150

Large podded carnation , which generally burst , are now to be helped ,
by opening the other side of the pod with a fine penknife , without
touching the flower leaves : COOKE2-1770-2,53.151

earwigs , which infest these flowers , may be destroyed with ox-hoofs
and tobacco-pipes . COOKE2-1770-2,53.152

<heading>

<font> Produce of the month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,53.154

<$$heading>

Battersea and sugar-loaf cabbages are now fit to cut .
COOKE2-1770-2,53.156

You may draw young carrots and onions sown in February , and some young
parsneps . COOKE2-1770-2,53.157

The pot-herbs in use the preceding month are still good :
COOKE2-1770-2,53.158

and the flower-stems of burrage and burnet are good in cool-tankards .
COOKE2-1770-2,53.159

We have now melons of the first ridges . COOKE2-1770-2,53.160

The sallads of this month are composed of purslain , burnet , the
flowers of nasturtium indicum , <P_54> and cabbage-lettuces of various
sorts , with some blanched endive and cucumbers . COOKE2-1770-2,54.161

Artichoaks , garden-beans , peas , kidney-beans and cauliflowers are in
great perfection the beginning of this month . COOKE2-1770-2,54.162

Till about the end of the month you may gather green gooseberies for
tarts . COOKE2-1770-2,54.163

The ripe fruits are strawberries , rasberries and currants ;
COOKE2-1770-2,54.164

we have likewise cherries of many kinds , as the duke , white , black ,
and red hearts . COOKE2-1770-2,54.165

We have also codlings fit for use , and near the end of the month some
genettings and the masculine apricot , COOKE2-1770-2,54.166

peaches and nectarines , together with grapes , are now ripe in the
forcing frames . COOKE2-1770-2,54.167

Winter pears and apples are yet lasting . COOKE2-1770-2,54.168

In the barks-beds ananas or pine-apples . COOKE2-1770-2,54.169

Observe to net your cherries against the walls , or dwarfs , to prevent
their being destroyed by the birds . COOKE2-1770-2,54.170

The flowers that blow this month are , campanula , convolvulus , lychnis
, snapdragons , amaranthus , antirrhinum , pinks , nasturtium indicum ,
fraxinella , jasmines , carnations , honey-suckles , pansies , roses ,
campions , poppies , marygolds , stock gilliflowers , cornflag ,
satyrions , candy-tufs , monkshood , tube-roses , digitalis or foxglove
, and hollyhocks . COOKE2-1770-2,54.171

<heading>

JULY . COOKE2-1770-2,54.173

<font> The business of the month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,54.174

<$$heading>

The exercises in the garden are now for the most part gathering in the
fruit of our labour bestowed in the Winter and Spring months ;
COOKE2-1770-2,54.176

for we are arrived at that happy season which <P_55> affords us almost
every variety the kitchen garden can produce . COOKE2-1770-2,55.177

In order to preserve a further supply , you must now sow the last crop
of kidney-beans , in a situation defended from morning frosts in Autumn
. COOKE2-1770-2,55.178

Plant cellery into drills for blanching , COOKE2-1770-2,55.179

and continue to sow all sorts of small sallad herbs .
COOKE2-1770-2,55.180

On dry evenings , water such plants as have lately been transplanted ,
COOKE2-1770-2,55.181

and carefully destroy the weeds in every part of the garden .
COOKE2-1770-2,55.182

Give no water to your melons , which now begin to ripen .
COOKE2-1770-2,55.183

Repair your young asparagus beds , COOKE2-1770-2,55.184

and plant in moist weather fresh plants , where any have failed :
COOKE2-1770-2,55.185

water , duly in dry weather , the cucumbers brought up under handglasses
; COOKE2-1770-2,55.186

transplant the cellery into beds , which was sown in May , and some
endive , to succeed that planted the former month .
COOKE2-1770-2,55.187

Clear your artichoaks from weeds , COOKE2-1770-2,55.188

and break down close to the surface of the ground the stems of those fit
for use on the old stocks ; COOKE2-1770-2,55.189

make a bed for mushroons as directed in February , COOKE2-1770-2,55.190

and cover it very thin with earth . COOKE2-1770-2,55.191

About the close of the month , sow spinach for Winter use ; coleworts ,
carrots and onions for Spring use ; COOKE2-1770-2,55.192

transplant broccoli and cabbages for Spring use ; COOKE2-1770-2,55.193

and plant out cauliflowers for the Autumn crop : COOKE2-1770-2,55.194

transplant all kinds of lettuce sown last month ; COOKE2-1770-2,55.195

destroy the different sorts of pernicious insects , which abound this
month . COOKE2-1770-2,55.196

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Flower Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,55.198

<$$heading>

In the vineyard carefully tie the fruit branches to the props or
espaliers , COOKE2-1770-2,55.200

and diligently remove all weak and fruitless shoots , either by pinching
or the knife , COOKE2-1770-2,55.201

and keep them free from weeds all <P_56> the Summer ;
COOKE2-1770-2,56.202

the much better way in Winter is to fork up the ground instead of
digging it . COOKE2-1770-2,56.203

The vines are now in their full strength , COOKE2-1770-2,56.204

and push with the utmost vigour ; insomuch that the greatest confusion
imaginable will ensue , if they are neglected and left unpruned .
COOKE2-1770-2,56.205

Apricots are now to be exposed to the sun , by taking off some of the
leaves , that the fruit may take its proper beauty and colour ;
COOKE2-1770-2,56.206

and the latter end of the month the peaches must be treated in the same
manner . COOKE2-1770-2,56.207

If any strong wood or water shoots push from the apricot or peach-tree
this month , unless a void place wants to be filled , they ought to be
entirely taken away ; COOKE2-1770-2,56.208

but their young short branches are to be carefully preserved by nailing
them to the wall . COOKE2-1770-2,56.209

You must now pay attention to the pear-tree , which , if over vigorous ,
must be properly discipined ; COOKE2-1770-2,56.210

and all branches that push forward are still to be cut off two inches .
COOKE2-1770-2,56.211

You may continue inoculation , especially after wet weather .
COOKE2-1770-2,56.212

A plentiful application of water to a peach-tree full of fruit is a
great advantage to the swelling and ripening of the fruit .
COOKE2-1770-2,56.213

The fruit-trees that are in pots must be now daily watered ,
COOKE2-1770-2,56.214

otherwise their fruit will drop off : COOKE2-1770-2,56.215

but with this care they will perform wonders . COOKE2-1770-2,56.216

Fruit near the ground <paren> if not too near <$$paren> have a double
advantage , COOKE2-1770-2,56.217

and may be expected to be large and first ripe . COOKE2-1770-2,56.218

Snails , wasps , flies , earwigs , &c. being this month the great
enemies to wall-fruit , particularly nectarines , the most effectual
methods for their destruction are to be put in practice .
COOKE2-1770-2,56.219

In this and the preceding month , weeding ought to <P_57> be diligently
minded , that the borders of fruit-trees , &c. and alleys may be kept
clean . COOKE2-1770-2,57.220

Lay carnations as they gather strength , COOKE2-1770-2,57.221

and often refresh them with water . COOKE2-1770-2,57.222

Sow tulip-seeds , which are now ripe , in cases of light earth ;
COOKE2-1770-2,57.223

sow also some anemony seeds and annuals in edgings , to blow in
September . COOKE2-1770-2,57.224

Continue to make cuttings of the torch-thistle , Indian fig , hythimals
, sedums , and other succulent plants . COOKE2-1770-2,57.225

Raise myrtles of cuttings , according to the directions given in May .
COOKE2-1770-2,57.226

Lay down young shoots of the Arabian jessamine . COOKE2-1770-2,57.227

Set coffee-tree berries , which are now ripe ; and the fruit of the
ananas . COOKE2-1770-2,57.228

Roll your {TEXT:you} gravel walks well after rain .
COOKE2-1770-2,57.229

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Fruit Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,57.231

<$$heading>

The management of the vine being a very principal concern this month ,
we shall say something farther relating to it . COOKE2-1770-2,57.233

It has been observed , that , from a vigorous shoot of a vine already
once pruned , there will push again several Midsummer shoots weaker than
the former , from the first , second , and third bud , towards the
extremity ; which shoots are to be taken off , only remembering that it
is proper to spare the last of such shoots , so far as to leave one bud
upon it , from whence nature may exert itself a third time in Autumn :
COOKE2-1770-2,57.234

for if those shoots were all entirely removed , the vine would push at
those bearing buds which lie at the bottom of the shoots ; the effect
whereof would be either the want of fruit at those places next year , or
a necessity of pruning the branch shorter than was intended , or is
convenient in the Winter . COOKE2-1770-2,57.235

<P_58>

Grapes being exposed to the sun this month will not receive any danger ;
COOKE2-1770-2,58.237

for though the vines appear thin of leaves and wood , that fault will be
recovered by the shoots in Autumn . COOKE2-1770-2,58.238

In order to destroy wasps and other injects , which now devour the
peaches , apricots , and other fruits , place phials of honey and ale
near the trees , COOKE2-1770-2,58.239

and you will soon catch a large quantity of them . COOKE2-1770-2,58.240

Renew the bottles once every week . COOKE2-1770-2,58.241

Cover your grapes with nets , to prevent the birds getting at them .
COOKE2-1770-2,58.242

Water , having a large quantity of walnut tree leaves steeped in it a
fortnight or three weeks , being poured on the ground , will destroy
worms , and make them quit their holes ; COOKE2-1770-2,58.243

and they may be taken by a candle and lanthorn in a Summer's evening
after rain . COOKE2-1770-2,58.244

In a dry season , if you take lime and brine , and pot-ashes decocted in
water , and cast it on your grass-plats , it will not only destroy the
worms , but improve the grass ; COOKE2-1770-2,58.245

and a decoction of tobacco refuse will destroy worms in gravel walks .
COOKE2-1770-2,58.246

<heading>

<font> Produce of the month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,58.248

<$$heading>

The sallads for this month are cabbage-lettuces , purslane , tarragon ,
burner , young onions , cucumbers , flowers of the nasturtium indicum ,
and some endive blanched . COOKE2-1770-2,58.250

We have now great plenty of melons , artichoaks , cauliflowers ,
cabbages , young carrots , turneps and beets {TEXT:beet} , peas , garden
beans and kidney-beans . And also all sorts of herbs for the kitchen ;
which are now very good , especially if the gardener has remembered from
time to time to cut them down for shooting afresh .
COOKE2-1770-2,58.251

<P_59>

Small cucumbers for pickling are in their prime ; COOKE2-1770-2,59.253

and this is the best month for the pickling of them .
COOKE2-1770-2,59.254

The different fruits we have this month are , gooseberries , currants ,
rasbenies , cherries , early plums , jenetting and codling apples ,
apricots , peaches and nectarines ; COOKE2-1770-2,59.255

and towards the end of the month we have figs and some of the July
grapes . COOKE2-1770-2,59.256

The peaches are good for little yet , COOKE2-1770-2,59.257

but the apricots are in full perfection . COOKE2-1770-2,59.258

There is one sort among peaches peculiar , called the bourdine , which
succeeds very well in a standard , as the apricot ; COOKE2-1770-2,59.259

and if it be situated in a warm place , and not carried up too high in
the stem , will bear very well : COOKE2-1770-2,59.260

this and the standard apricot-trees require only the same management
with orchard fruit-trees . COOKE2-1770-2,59.261

The wall peaches must be treated with a great deal of care ,
COOKE2-1770-2,59.262

for the quantity and excellence of their fruit will be in proportion .
COOKE2-1770-2,59.263

These kinds of peaches , like the several apricots , are all varieties
from one original stock or kind : COOKE2-1770-2,59.264

they have been raised by planting the stones of fine peaches ,
COOKE2-1770-2,59.265

for these trees vary from seed like flowers . COOKE2-1770-2,59.266

The first stock may be from a nursery , COOKE2-1770-2,59.267

but it will be worth while to raise new kinds this way afterwards .
COOKE2-1770-2,59.268

The peaches which ripen in the beginning of August should be chosen for
this purpose , and such as have a thin skin , a yellowish , juicy flesh
, and a small stone , sticking to the flesh , not parting from it .
COOKE2-1770-2,59.269

Some of the choicest of these should hang on the tree till they drop off
, COOKE2-1770-2,59.270

and the stones of these should be planted in a small bed of the nursery
six weeks afterwards . COOKE2-1770-2,59.271

The young plants are to be managed in the same manner as tender shrubs
or plants of other kinds , COOKE2-1770-2,59.272

<P_60>

and at two years growth are to be planted in the places designed for
them , with the same care , and in the very same manner , as directed
for apricots . COOKE2-1770-2,60.274

They must remain in their new places till they have borne fruit ;
COOKE2-1770-2,60.275

and after the second year of fruiting their value will be discovered ;
COOKE2-1770-2,60.276

those that are bad must be pulled up , and the fine ones propagated by
inoculating them on stocks in the general manner . COOKE2-1770-2,60.277

The best stocks for the early kinds are the almond , and for the others
the muscle plum . COOKE2-1770-2,60.278

These stocks are to be raised from the stone , and trees planted at one
year old , to prevent their sending down great top roots ;
COOKE2-1770-2,60.279

and after two years more growth in the nursery they will be fit for this
purpose . COOKE2-1770-2,60.280

When the trees are to be brought to the places where they are to stand ,
they must be take up with care early in Autumn , the roots trimmed , the
trees carefully planted , and all the branches nailed slightly to the
wall : COOKE2-1770-2,60.281

they are to be defended during the Winter , by laying turfs at their
roots the wrong side upwards . COOKE2-1770-2,60.282

The flowers that blow this month are , basils , geraniums , gladiolus ,
clematis , or virgin's_bower , African marygolds , thlaspi creticum ,
veronica , lark-heels , lupines , scabious , marvel of Peru , lobels ,
catch-flies , lillies of all sorts , apples of love , marygolds , female
balsams , dittany , passion flower , candinal-flower , sun-flower , and
valerian . COOKE2-1770-2,60.283

<P_61>

<heading>

AUGUST . COOKE2-1770-2,61.286

<font> Work to be done in the <$$font> Kitchen Garden .
COOKE2-1770-2,61.287

<$$heading>

As the first part of this month is generally hot and dry , frequent
waterings are necessary , which must be carefully attended to , as well
as the destruction of vermin . COOKE2-1770-2,61.289

About the middle of the month , or towards the latter end , sow some
common cabbage-lettuce , and brown Dutch lettuce , to be planted under
frames , to come up early in the Spring ; also cos and Silesia lettuces
. COOKE2-1770-2,61.290

Sow cauliflower seed for the early crop under bell or hand-glasses .
COOKE2-1770-2,61.291

Weed your beds of coleworts sown last month ; COOKE2-1770-2,61.292

if the plants are too thick , draw some of them out COOKE2-1770-2,61.293

and transplant them . COOKE2-1770-2,61.294

Sow your early Battersea and Yorkshire cabbage seed .
COOKE2-1770-2,61.295

Earth up your cellery in dry weather ; COOKE2-1770-2,61.296

tie up your full_grown endive , COOKE2-1770-2,61.297

manage your artichoaks as before directed ; COOKE2-1770-2,61.298

gather your cucumbers for pickling ; COOKE2-1770-2,61.299

sow turneps for a latter crop ; COOKE2-1770-2,61.300

hough your spinach sown last month , COOKE2-1770-2,61.301

and gather your seeds as before directed . COOKE2-1770-2,61.302

In moist weather cut off the flowering branches of those aromatic plants
which are past flowering , that they may make new shoots before Winter .
COOKE2-1770-2,61.303

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Fruit Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,61.305

<$$heading>

We are now to review the laying peaches and apricots open to the sun to
perfect their ripening . COOKE2-1770-2,61.307

Continue the pruning of those vines that were neglected the last month ,
COOKE2-1770-2,61.308

and keep the <P_62> fruit as close to the wall as possible ;
COOKE2-1770-2,62.309

but the grapes are now to be discreetly shaded with leaves , and
sufficiently defended against the cold nights , at the latter end of the
month . COOKE2-1770-2,62.310

In gathering apricots this and the other months , great care is to be
used that you do not break the branch whereon they grow ; because from
thence we are to expect another bearing branch the succeeding year .
COOKE2-1770-2,62.311

The borders are now to be reviewed and kept clean ; COOKE2-1770-2,62.312

and at the latter end of this month give them a stirring , the better to
receive the autumnal rains . COOKE2-1770-2,62.313

Give the ever-green hedges and pyramids a second clipping , which in a
wet season will be much wanted . COOKE2-1770-2,62.314

Make layers of all sorts of shrubs and trees , which remain abroad all
Winter , observing always to lay down the most tender shoots .
COOKE2-1770-2,62.315

There being little more to be done this month in the fruit garden than
what has been directed in the former months , we shall proceed to the
works . COOKE2-1770-2,62.316

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Flower Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,62.318

<$$heading>

The tulip-tree is a plant of the wood , COOKE2-1770-2,62.320

and should be set among such trees as are designed for groves , where it
will rise to a great height ; COOKE2-1770-2,62.321

its leaves are somewhat like those of the maple , COOKE2-1770-2,62.322

and the flowers have some resemblance of a tulip , which gave name to
the tree . COOKE2-1770-2,62.323

The seeds of this tree , which are brought from Virginia , are to be
sown in pots this month , and sheltered all the Winter ,
COOKE2-1770-2,62.324

and the Spring following they will come up . COOKE2-1770-2,62.325

The young plants may be transplanted into pots , at two years growth ,
COOKE2-1770-2,62.326

and must have shelter in the Winter <P_63> for the first nine years at
least , till they have gathered strength enough to resist the severity
of our frosts , COOKE2-1770-2,63.327

and they may then be planted in the natural ground ;
COOKE2-1770-2,63.328

a sandy soil is the best . COOKE2-1770-2,63.329

This time of sowing of seeds must be observed , because experience has
shewn they are not to be raised in the Spring . COOKE2-1770-2,63.330

The bushous violet , or snow-drop , is reckoned amongst the daffodils .
COOKE2-1770-2,63.331

It is one of the most early flowers in the Spring , generally blowing in
January . COOKE2-1770-2,63.332

The hyacinth will bear the severity of our frosts , COOKE2-1770-2,63.333

and blows early in the Spring ; COOKE2-1770-2,63.334

it is increased from off_sets of the roots , planted the latter end of
this month , or in September , in beds of sandy soil .
COOKE2-1770-2,63.335

The tuberous hyacinth is a plant of an aspiring head , and a very tender
nature ; COOKE2-1770-2,63.336

the roots of it must be taken up in April , COOKE2-1770-2,63.337

and being carefully parted , are to be replanted in pots of prepared
earth , and have the assistance of a hot-bed like other tender shrubs .
COOKE2-1770-2,63.338

In September you may take up the bulbs of this plant , and preserve them
in dry sand . COOKE2-1770-2,63.339

Lillies are propagated by parting their roots when the leaves are fallen
about July , or August , COOKE2-1770-2,63.340

and delight in an open sandy soil : COOKE2-1770-2,63.341

they are very proper flowers for the middle of borders in great gardens
, or to be planted under hedges in long walks ; COOKE2-1770-2,63.342

and the striped white lilly is so great a rarity as to deserve place in
the nicest garden . COOKE2-1770-2,63.343

The orange lilly is very ornamental in gardens , and an agreeable
companion for the white lilly . COOKE2-1770-2,63.344

The lilly of the valley delights in shady ground , COOKE2-1770-2,63.345

and is easily increased from plants . COOKE2-1770-2,63.346

<P_64>

<heading>

<font> Produce of the month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,64.349

<$$heading>

We have now sallads composed of cabbage lettuces , cresses , mustard ,
cucumbers , radish , with a mixture of tarragon . COOKE2-1770-2,64.351

We have horse-radish , plenty of cucumbers for pickling , all sorts of
kitchen herbs , COOKE2-1770-2,64.352

and towards the end we cut cellery . COOKE2-1770-2,64.353

There are artichoaks , cauliflowers , beans , peas , and kidney-beans
cabbages and cabbage sprouts , beets , carrots and turneps ,
COOKE2-1770-2,64.354

but other boiling roots must not yet be used . COOKE2-1770-2,64.355

We have likewise musk-melons in great abundance . COOKE2-1770-2,64.356

Although the present produce is very extensive , yet we have several
roots and herbs of the last year , such as rocambole , shalots , onions
, garlick , &c. COOKE2-1770-2,64.357

We have variety of fruit this month , such as apricots , peaches , and
nectarines ; several sorts of grapes , figs , Summer pears and apples ,
mulberries , and some filberts . COOKE2-1770-2,64.358

Morella cherries are now ripe , and plums of various kinds .
COOKE2-1770-2,64.359

Gooseberries , rasberries , and currants are still very good .
COOKE2-1770-2,64.360

The flowers that blow this month , are colchicum , Autumnal hyacinths ,
belvederes , ranunculas , cyclamens , amaranthus , starwort , nigella
monthly roses , hellebore , jessamines , and the mallow tree .
COOKE2-1770-2,64.361

<P_65>

<heading>

SEPTEMBER . COOKE2-1770-2,65.364

<font> Business of this month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,65.365

<$$heading>

Make plantations of Dutch and brown lettuce to stand the Winter .
COOKE2-1770-2,65.367

Plant out cauliflowers sown the last month , upon old cucumber or melon
beds , COOKE2-1770-2,65.368

and sow Spanish radish spinach . COOKE2-1770-2,65.369

In dry weather hough and clean turneps , COOKE2-1770-2,65.370

weed the beds of spinach , onions , carrots , cauliflowers , cabbage
plants , and coleworts . COOKE2-1770-2,65.371

About the middle of the month you may safely transplant most sorts of
annual aromatic plants . COOKE2-1770-2,65.372

Continue to sow small sallad herbs ; COOKE2-1770-2,65.373

gather all seeds as they ripen , COOKE2-1770-2,65.374

and preserve them as before directed . COOKE2-1770-2,65.375

Blanch endive , COOKE2-1770-2,65.376

transplant lettuces , COOKE2-1770-2,65.377

cut down the haulm of asparagus , COOKE2-1770-2,65.378

and be careful to dung and hough the beds . COOKE2-1770-2,65.379

Preserve your young cauliflower plants from rain , COOKE2-1770-2,65.380

prepare the ground of your Summer crops for fresh ones ,
COOKE2-1770-2,65.381

or trench it up to lie till Spring free from all weeds .
COOKE2-1770-2,65.382

Near the end of the month plant some beans and early peas in warm
borders . COOKE2-1770-2,65.383

Let your latter crop of cellery be transplanted into drills , and the
last crop of broccoli where it is to continue . COOKE2-1770-2,65.384

Seeds in general must be dried in the sun before they are laid up , to
preserve them properly for future uses . COOKE2-1770-2,65.385

<P_66>

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Fruit Garden COOKE2-1770-2,66.388

<$$heading>

Gather such fruits as are ripe upon the trees , and others that are full
grown , and in good condition to be laid up for the use of the following
months . COOKE2-1770-2,66.390

Such pears or apples as are fit to gather will easily quit the tree ;
COOKE2-1770-2,66.391

therefore use no violence if they do not come off easy .
COOKE2-1770-2,66.392

A room where very little air comes is the best place to keep them for
Winter use . COOKE2-1770-2,66.393

Before you eat Winter pears , let them be warmed by the fire as you do
red port , which will very much heighten their flavour .
COOKE2-1770-2,66.394

You may still inoculate pears ; COOKE2-1770-2,66.395

but a vegetative nature has now made a considerable stop in its
circulation of sap , COOKE2-1770-2,66.396

and the growth of most trees , and all kinds of delicious fruits are now
ripe , COOKE2-1770-2,66.397

we have little to do in this and the former month , but to collect and
enjoy what the gardens so abundantly produce . COOKE2-1770-2,66.398

Be careful to preserve your fruit from wasps ; earwigs , and ants .
COOKE2-1770-2,66.399

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Flower Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,66.401

<$$heading>

Let your tall flowers be staked to prevent injury from the winds , which
at this time blow hard . COOKE2-1770-2,66.403

Sow the seeds of bulbous rooted plants , as tulips , ranunculus , crocus
, &c. COOKE2-1770-2,66.404

Take off your carnation layers ; COOKE2-1770-2,66.405

transplant flowering shrubs of all sorts , and make layers of them ,
such as the honey-suckle , jessamine , virgin's_bower , Virginian
dogwood , periwinkle , &c. COOKE2-1770-2,66.406

Plant your jonquil roots , COOKE2-1770-2,66.407

and let them stand two or three {TEXT:thee} years in the same place .
COOKE2-1770-2,66.408

Sow stock-gilliflowers <P_67> for a supply in the Spring .
COOKE2-1770-2,67.409

We may yet plant ever-greens , such as hollies , yews , box , &c. if
they rise with good roots , COOKE2-1770-2,67.410

but the best season is August . COOKE2-1770-2,67.411

Sow poppies , larkspurs , annual stocks , candy-tufts , and Venus's
looking-glass , to blossom early in the Spring . COOKE2-1770-2,67.412

<heading>

<font> Manure of the Month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,67.414

<$$heading>

As the tulip {TEXT:tulips} is a beautiful flower , and requires
particular care in its cultivation , we should describe it at large .
COOKE2-1770-2,67.416

It is propagated as follows : COOKE2-1770-2,67.417

the stems of this flower being left remaining upon the root , will
perfect the seeds about July , which will be fit to gather when the
seed-vessels begin to burst ; COOKE2-1770-2,67.418

then they are to be cut close to the ground in a dry day , and laid in
some dry place till September , which is the most proper season for
sowing them . COOKE2-1770-2,67.419

They love a soil composed of sand and natural black earth , or the
rubbish of old buildings and natural earth , COOKE2-1770-2,67.420

but may be sown in a natural soil , COOKE2-1770-2,67.421

and the first year their roots will be very small , COOKE2-1770-2,67.422

but after their second appearance above ground , they may be taken from
the pots or cases they were sown in , and put in a bed of natural sandy
soil well sifted , where the thickness of half an inch of the same earth
should be spread over them ; COOKE2-1770-2,67.423

and , thus they are to continue , without any other culture than adding
half an inch of the earth for the covering every year , till they begin
to blow , which will be in five or six years time .
COOKE2-1770-2,67.424

In this manner tulip seeds are to be sown every year for new varieties .
COOKE2-1770-2,67.425

It is good to plant all the forward blowers in a bed together ; and of
the late flowering tulips <P_68> to place the tallest sorts in the
middle line of the bed , with two rows of the shortest blowers on each
side . COOKE2-1770-2,68.426

When they are planted in this month , they need no shelter till the
March , that the flower-buds appear , COOKE2-1770-2,68.427

and then they ought to be defended from blights with mats or painted
cloth strained upon hoops ; which covering will serve also for
sheltering the flowers from the heat of the sun and rain , when they are
blown . COOKE2-1770-2,68.428

There are two different classes of tulips ; the praecore , or early
blowers , and the serotine , or later blowers : COOKE2-1770-2,68.429

and these are distinguished by their double and single flowers .
COOKE2-1770-2,68.430

They have also different denominations from their colours and statute ;
as bagats , which are the tallest flowers , commonly purple and white
marbled ; agates , which grow shorter than the other , whose flowers are
veined with two colours ; and beazarts , which have four colours ,
tending to yellow and reds of different kinds . COOKE2-1770-2,68.431

The cultivation of violets in gardens is increased by transplanting
their runners either in this month or in February ; COOKE2-1770-2,68.432

they will take root of themselves at every joint , without the
assistance of any art . COOKE2-1770-2,68.433

They should be planted in the most rural part of the garden , or near
the edges of garden beds ; COOKE2-1770-2,68.434

a binding soil and shady situation is by far the best .
COOKE2-1770-2,68.435

Annuals stocks are sown in spots , COOKE2-1770-2,68.436

or may be used for edgings , their flowers being of a pink colour .
COOKE2-1770-2,68.437

You may increase daisies by parting their roots either in Spring or
Autumn , COOKE2-1770-2,68.438

they make pretty edgings for flower beds . COOKE2-1770-2,68.439

The honey_suckle or woodbine is a twining plant , proper to be placed
about trees in avenues , to intermix its blossoms among their branches ;
COOKE2-1770-2,68.440

or it may be trained up into a standard as a headed <P_69> plant in the
most remote part of the garden . COOKE2-1770-2,69.441

These plants , and indeed all flowering shrubs are best managed as
headed plants , and planted in pots , by which means , when in flower ,
they may be agreeably mixed with evergreens , and removed as soon as the
blossom is over , to make room for others . COOKE2-1770-2,69.442

They are raised from layers or cuttings , ordered like those of the
jessamine , in this month or October : COOKE2-1770-2,69.443

they love shade , COOKE2-1770-2,69.444

and are the natural inhabitants of the woods , where they prefume the
air with their fragrant odours . COOKE2-1770-2,69.445

The Virginia myrtle , which bears berries , from which is drawn the
green wax whereof candles are made , is propagated by sowing the berries
in pots of black sandy earth , in this month , being kept continually
moist . COOKE2-1770-2,69.446

The box-tree is valuable for its wood , and for the continued verdure of
its leaves . COOKE2-1770-2,69.447

This plant will make delightful hedges in gardens : COOKE2-1770-2,69.448

but it delights in chalky mountains , where it will grow much quicker
than in our gardens . COOKE2-1770-2,69.449

It is raised by layers , slips , or seeds ; COOKE2-1770-2,69.450

and the best time to make layers or slips of it is in this month ;
COOKE2-1770-2,69.451

the seeds of it may be sown so soon as ripe , or laid in sand during the
Winter to be sown the Spring following . COOKE2-1770-2,69.452

<heading>

<font> Produce of the Month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,69.454

<$$heading>

The sallads of this month {TEXT:months} are composed of cresses ,
radishes , chervil , young onions , burnet , tarragon , some blanched
cellery and endive , and lettuce . COOKE2-1770-2,69.456

There are yet melons and cucumbers , plenty of mushroons upon beds and
in pasture grounds , young garden peas and beans , and some kidney-beans
. <P_70> Cabbages and sprouts of cabbages in great abundance ; carrots
, turneps , skirrets , beets , onions , shalots , rocambole , and
horse-radish . COOKE2-1770-2,70.457

We have in this month good flowers and suckers from artichoaks planted
in Spring ; COOKE2-1770-2,70.458

and in our kitchen garden we have still plenty of cauliflowers .
COOKE2-1770-2,70.459

The fruit-garden affords us this month grapes , peaches , and nectarians
in great abundance . COOKE2-1770-2,70.460

The old Newington peach , which is so much valued , is now in its
greatest perfection . COOKE2-1770-2,70.461

There are blue and white figs , blue and white perdigran plums , the
Summer bon cretien , bergamot , and other sorts of pears . Some apples
, walnuts , and filberds . COOKE2-1770-2,70.462

The method of preserving ripe grapes till Christmas is thus :
COOKE2-1770-2,70.463

let them be gathered when they are full ripe , and dry ;
COOKE2-1770-2,70.464

cut the branches off with three or four joints of the branch ,
COOKE2-1770-2,70.465

and wax each end of the joint with sealing_wax : COOKE2-1770-2,70.466

then hang them in a room where there is generally a fire .
COOKE2-1770-2,70.467

Melons that are full grown and not ripe , will ripen , if put in a net
and hung up in a warm room . COOKE2-1770-2,70.468

The flowers that blow this month are , love-apples , moly , colchicums ,
Guernsey lilies , sun-flowers , hollyhocks , tube-roses , double violets
, saffron-crocus , poppies , stock-gilliflowers , carnations , Indian
pinks , Ethiopic apples , and musk-roses . COOKE2-1770-2,70.469

<P_71>

<heading>

OCTOBER . COOKE2-1770-2,71.472

<font> Business of the Month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,71.473

<$$heading>

It is now time to make plantations of lettuce for Winter use :
COOKE2-1770-2,71.475

transplant cabbages and cauliflower plants ; COOKE2-1770-2,71.476

take up those cauliflower plants which begin to flower ,
COOKE2-1770-2,71.477

tie their leaves together , COOKE2-1770-2,71.478

and bury their roots and stalks in sand in a cellar , or some cool place
. COOKE2-1770-2,71.479

Cut artichoaks with long stalks , COOKE2-1770-2,71.480

and preserve them in the house by setting their stalks in sand .
COOKE2-1770-2,71.481

Dress and earth up such artichaoks as have done blowing ,
COOKE2-1770-2,71.482

and continue to earth up cellery for blanching . COOKE2-1770-2,71.483

Draw up some full_grown endive , to plant down on the sides of the
ridges to blanch . COOKE2-1770-2,71.484

Transplant lettuces upon warm borders , COOKE2-1770-2,71.485

and keep your spinach , carrots , onions , &c. sown in July and August
, clean from weeds . COOKE2-1770-2,71.486

Plant beans and peas at the beginning and end of this month upon dry
grounds , and in warm situations . COOKE2-1770-2,71.487

Transplant cauliflower plants into the places where they are to abide
the Winter . COOKE2-1770-2,71.488

Break down the inner leaves of your cauliflowers sown in May , to defend
them from frost or wet , COOKE2-1770-2,71.489

and earth up the stems of your broccoli plants : COOKE2-1770-2,71.490

make some moderate hot beds to plant mint and tansey upon .
COOKE2-1770-2,71.491

Guard your mushroon-beds from wet and frost : COOKE2-1770-2,71.492

spread some rotten dung on the beds of seedling asparagus plants ,
COOKE2-1770-2,71.493

and make hot beds for asparagus , if required at table in December .
COOKE2-1770-2,71.494

Lay on the quarters of the garden the dung of your melons and cucumber
beds , also the dung of the lay-stall . COOKE2-1770-2,71.495

<P_72>

Sow kidney-beans in baskets under a south-wall , to be afterwards
forwarded by hot-beds , for early beans : and hotspur-peas , and Spanish
beans , in some well exposed border under a wall or a hedge .
COOKE2-1770-2,72.497

Sow also radishes in some warm place to draw early in the Spring ; and
cresses , lettuce , mustard , spinach , &c. upon a decayed hot-bed :
COOKE2-1770-2,72.498

put likewise some roots of mint upon a gentle hot-bed for Winter sallads
. COOKE2-1770-2,72.499

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Fruit Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,72.501

<$$heading>

This is the most proper season for planting of peaches , apricots , and
other fruit-trees , which is best done in untryed earth , nothing being
more prejudical to them than dung . COOKE2-1770-2,72.503

If the weather should be moist or wet this month , the borders must be
raised , and the trees planted high ; COOKE2-1770-2,72.504

for it is certain death to peaches and apricots to stand where water
stagnates in the Winter . COOKE2-1770-2,72.505

Vines should be planted against walls seven or eight feet asunder .
COOKE2-1770-2,72.506

The best soil for vines is the rubbish of old buildings , sea-coal ashes
, or drift sand with rotten dung , mixed with an equal quantity of
natural earth . COOKE2-1770-2,72.507

Preserve a good stick of untryed earth to be ready , on all occasions ,
for fruits-tree , ever-greens and flowers . COOKE2-1770-2,72.508

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Flower Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,72.510

<$$heading>

Continue to transplant and lay roses and such like flowering shrubs ;
and to plant the cuttings of jessamines and honeysuckles in shady
borders : COOKE2-1770-2,72.512

Sow the berries of yew , holly , and other evergreens , prepared in
earth or sand , COOKE2-1770-2,72.513

and if the <P_73> season be mild , these kinds of plants may be pruned .
COOKE2-1770-2,73.514

Let the time of watering your housed greens be in the morning , when the
sun shines upon them ; COOKE2-1770-2,73.515

but after the middle of the month you are to give no watering to your
tender succulent plants . COOKE2-1770-2,73.516

Be careful to keep your walks clean from autumnal leaves .
COOKE2-1770-2,73.517

<heading>

<font> Manure of the Month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,73.519

<$$heading>

With respects to soils for plantation of fruit-trees , it has been
observed that vines thrive best in dry light ground : that peaches ,
plums and cherries delight in a sandy loam ; and figs , pears and apples
agree with all sorts of soils , provided the ground be near three feet
deep . COOKE2-1770-2,73.521

For the distance to be observed in planting of fruit trees , a wall of
seven or eight feet high will require the trees to be planted about ten
or twelve feet asunder ; and if the walls be ten feet high , eight or
ten feet asunder ; COOKE2-1770-2,73.522

but in either case the peach and nectarine should be planted at a much
less distance than the apricot , plum or cherry . COOKE2-1770-2,73.523

Before you begin your plantations be careful that the ground is properly
enriched for that purpose ; COOKE2-1770-2,73.524

the border should be dug two feet deep the whole length of it , and four
or six feet over , filling it up with a sandy loam half a foot higher
than the level ; COOKE2-1770-2,73.525

be careful to preserve some of the finest mould near the top , to plant
your trees in . COOKE2-1770-2,73.526

Experience tells us that untryed earth dug from a waste or common fed
with cattle is the most agreeable for all manner of young fruit-trees .
COOKE2-1770-2,73.527

<P_74>

<heading>

<font> Produce of the month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,74.530

<$$heading>

The herbs which form sallad this month are cresses , chervil , mustard ,
radish , turnep , rape , spinach , lettuce , burnet , tarragon , young
onions , blanched cellery , and endive . COOKE2-1770-2,74.532

For kitchen use we have now parsley , beets , and all sorts of aromatic
herbs : likewise cauliflowers , artichoaks , peas and beans , and kidney
beans sown in July ; COOKE2-1770-2,74.533

and we have yet cucumbers , and some melons , with plenty of mushrooms .
COOKE2-1770-2,74.534

This month produces the following roots for boiling ; carrots , turneps
, parsnips , potatoes , skirrets , scorzonera , and beets .
COOKE2-1770-2,74.535

To use raw , we have onions , garlick , shalots , and other roots .
Likewise some chardons . COOKE2-1770-2,74.536

The fruits of this month are , some of the late peaches and plums ,
grapes , figs , and mulberries , with some filberds and walnuts , and
great variety of pears and apples . COOKE2-1770-2,74.537

The flowers that blow this month are , pansies , amomus , heliotropes ,
arbutus , single wallflowers , carnations , stock-gilliflowers , double
violets , and the saffron crocus . COOKE2-1770-2,74.538

<heading>

NOVEMBER . COOKE2-1770-2,74.540

<font> Business of the month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,74.541

<$$heading>

Draw up the roots of carrots , parsnips potatoes , beets , large_rooted
parsley , &c COOKE2-1770-2,74.543

lay them in sand , defended from wet and frost , COOKE2-1770-2,74.544

<P_75>

pick off decayed leaves from your cauliflower plants ,
COOKE2-1770-2,75.546

and draw earth up to the stems of those under bell and hand glasses .
COOKE2-1770-2,75.547

Weed your spinach , onions , and other crops sown in July and August .
COOKE2-1770-2,75.548

Sow peas and beans to succeed those of the former month ,
COOKE2-1770-2,75.549

and draw up earth to the stems of those which are come up .
COOKE2-1770-2,75.550

If the weather is mild your cauliflowers and lettuce plants that are in
frames , or under glasses , may have some air given them .
COOKE2-1770-2,75.551

The ground between your artichoaks must be trenched , laying a large
ridge of earth over the roots , equal on their sides and tops .
COOKE2-1770-2,75.552

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Fruit Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,75.554

<$$heading>

It is now proper time to begin pruning pears and plums , especially the
dwarfs , and those on the espaliers ; COOKE2-1770-2,75.556

the vine , of all other works , is the most material to be observed this
month . COOKE2-1770-2,75.557

Lay down the branches , particularly such as you would have fruit upon
the following year , to be set growing in pots upon a table at great
entertainments . COOKE2-1770-2,75.558

The branches for this purpose must be shoots of the same year , and so
drawn thro' the hole at the bottom of a garden pot , that when it is
filled with earth there may be a reasonable number of eyes or buds above
ground . COOKE2-1770-2,75.559

Eight or nine bunches of grapes will grow on a strong branch .
COOKE2-1770-2,75.560

Nurseries for stocks of all sorts of fruit-trees may be made this and
the preceding month , as well as in February and March .
COOKE2-1770-2,75.561

You can@ @not easily chuse or make the soil of your nursery for
wall-trees too rich , because stocks should be <P_76> vigorous .
COOKE2-1770-2,76.562

Plant the best plum-suckers , COOKE2-1770-2,76.563

or sow the stones and kernels whereon to raise peaches and apricots ,
pears and apples . COOKE2-1770-2,76.564

Trees that are unhealthy may be refreshed by applying new mould to their
roots . COOKE2-1770-2,76.565

Let your most delicate stone fruit be covered , to defend them from the
severity of the piercing winds . COOKE2-1770-2,76.566

In planting and sowing it is a general rule to sow moderately dry , and
plant moist . COOKE2-1770-2,76.567

Nail the tender branches of fig-trees close to the wall , before the
great frosts come on . COOKE2-1770-2,76.568

If the weather be open continue to plant and remove fruit trees .
COOKE2-1770-2,76.569

<heading>

<font> In the <$$font> Flower Garden . COOKE2-1770-2,76.571

<$$heading>

Preserve heaps of earth for your several sorts of flowers ,
COOKE2-1770-2,76.573

and make the proper mixtures for exotics ; observing that where the
ground is too stiff it may be brought to a state of loam , by adding to
it a sufficient quantity of drift or sea-sand . COOKE2-1770-2,76.574

Tie up all trees and shrubs to stakes , COOKE2-1770-2,76.575

otherwise , by their being loose and at liberty , they will be destroyed
by the winds . COOKE2-1770-2,76.576

Cut down the stalks of tall blowing flowers that have done blossoming ,
within three inches of the root . COOKE2-1770-2,76.577

Roses , jessamines and honeysuckles may be yet transplanted if the
weather is open . COOKE2-1770-2,76.578

Lay down your auricula pots upon their sides , the plants towards the
sun , to drain them from moisture , and preserve them from frosts .
COOKE2-1770-2,76.579

Give your seeding bulbs daily airings , COOKE2-1770-2,76.580

and keep them sheltered from the frost . COOKE2-1770-2,76.581

Plant hyacinths , and jonquils , COOKE2-1770-2,76.582

and plunge them into hot-beds , to blossom about Christmas .
COOKE2-1770-2,76.583

<P_77>

<heading>

<font> Manure of the Month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,77.586

<$$heading>

Plant currants , gooseberries , apricots , cherries , early peaches ,
nectaries , &c. against a paling of five feet high , made after the
following manner : COOKE2-1770-2,77.588

the stakes to support this paling must be set about four feet distance
from each other ; to which you must nail whole deal boards of twelve
feet long , well jointed to one another , and ploughed on the edge , so
as to set in laths , that thereby the steam of the dung , which is to
lie at the back , may not get among the plants ; because wherever such
steam comes it will cause mildews . COOKE2-1770-2,77.589

The deals are to be an inch in thickness ; COOKE2-1770-2,77.590

for if they are not quite so thick , the trees will be apt to be
scorched upon the first application of the first dung ;
COOKE2-1770-2,77.591

and if they are thicker , the artificial heat applied to their backs ,
upon the time it begins to decline , will not be powerful enough to warm
them thorough , COOKE2-1770-2,77.592

and then the dung must be often refreshed . COOKE2-1770-2,77.593

When the pailing is up , you are to mark out a border on the south side
of it about four feet wide ; COOKE2-1770-2,77.594

and on the outside of the border , fasten to the ground in a straight
line , some scantlings of wood about four inches thick , to rest
glass-lights upon , which are to slope back to the pailing for shelting
{COM:sic} the fruit , as occasion requires ; COOKE2-1770-2,77.595

between these glass-lights must be bars cut out of whole deal , about
four inches wide , so made , that the glass-lights may rest in them :
COOKE2-1770-2,77.596

these bars must always remain fixed , as in a frame for a hot-bed .
COOKE2-1770-2,77.597

<P_78>

At the end of this frame must {TEXT:most} be a door shaped to the
profile of the frame , to be opened , either the one or the other , as
the wind happens to blow , always observing that the door be opened on
that side only which is freest from the air . COOKE2-1770-2,78.599

If a frame of this nature be made in the Summer season , you may plant
it the same Summer with fruit-trees , COOKE2-1770-2,78.600

and the trees will take very good root before Winter , and be so well
stored with sap against the following Spring , as to shew no sign of
their removal , but bear extremely . COOKE2-1770-2,78.601

Besides , by this Summer planting , the trees seldom or never throw away
their strength in Autumn shoots , COOKE2-1770-2,78.602

or make any attempt towards it , till September and October , when the
frosts prevent their design . COOKE2-1770-2,78.603

The trees planted must have time allowed for the juices to digest ,
before you begin to force them : COOKE2-1770-2,78.604

therefore the hot dung is not to be applied to the back of the paling
before November . COOKE2-1770-2,78.605

About the middle of this month , or towards the end , is time enough to
bring ripe cherries in February ; COOKE2-1770-2,78.606

at the same time likewise heat may be used for apricots , so as to make
the masculine apricots as large in February as duke cherries , and ripen
them the beginning of April . COOKE2-1770-2,78.607

Apricots , tho' forced in the uncommon season , will thrive and prosper
well for many years ; COOKE2-1770-2,78.608

but our cherries {TEXT:cheeries} do not bear this alteration in nature
so well . COOKE2-1770-2,78.609

Some forward sorts of plums will ripen about the end of April ; and the
Anne-peach at the same time . COOKE2-1770-2,78.610

The early nectarine being thus forced , would ripen with the masculine
apricot . COOKE2-1770-2,78.611

And as to gooseberries , we may have green fruit <P_79> fit for tarts in
January and February ; and ripe gooseberries and currants in March and
April . COOKE2-1770-2,79.612

In this frame you might also plant a row or two of strawberries , which
would ripen at the end of February or beginning of March .
COOKE2-1770-2,79.613

And amongst the fruit you may mix here and there a monthly rose-tree ;
and have a border planted with early tulips , hyacinths , jonquils ,
narcissus , and other flowers , which by the forcing heats would make a
kind of Summer all the Winter . COOKE2-1770-2,79.614

The trees planted in these frames must be close to the paling , contrary
to the methods of planting against {TEXT:again} walls ;
COOKE2-1770-2,79.615

for the roots will run under the pales , and draw nourishment equally
from the earth about them , COOKE2-1770-2,79.616

but with walls it is otherwise . COOKE2-1770-2,79.617

The trees need not be planted at a greater distance than four or five
feet : COOKE2-1770-2,79.618

and those that have stood seven or eight years against walls , may be
removed to these forcing frames without any danger :
COOKE2-1770-2,79.619

As to pruning these trees , the same method is to be followed as
recommended for other trees in February ; COOKE2-1770-2,79.620

but the season for doing it is not the same ; COOKE2-1770-2,79.621

for in the forcing frames our Spring begins in November ,
COOKE2-1770-2,79.622

but in the other case it does not begin till the end of January or
February . COOKE2-1770-2,79.623

The trees are to be pruned and nailed to the pales <paren> every branch
as close to the pales as may be <$$paren> about a week before the
forcing heat is applied ; and all the glasses , to be put up as soon as
they are pruned . COOKE2-1770-2,79.624

The hot dung to be laid to the back of the pales , ought to be tossed up
in an heap some days before it is used , that it may yield a heat <P_80>
every where alike : COOKE2-1770-2,80.625

and when it is fit to be applied to the pales , you must lay it four
feet wide at the base ; and let it slope to two feet at the top , the
heighth in all being at first within four inches of the top of the pales
, COOKE2-1770-2,80.626

and in six weeks time it will sink to about three feet , when you are to
apply fresh dung . COOKE2-1770-2,80.627

The first heat does little more than swell the buds of the trees , and
bring them to a green colour ; COOKE2-1770-2,80.628

the second forwards their blossoming , COOKE2-1770-2,80.629

and the third brings the fruit to maturity . COOKE2-1770-2,80.630

It helps very much the blossoming of the trees , to cover them with the
glass-lights , when frost happens : COOKE2-1770-2,80.631

but no opportunity of showers should be denied them , if the weather be
tolerable mild , till the buds begin to stir ; COOKE2-1770-2,80.632

after that , the glasses are to remain over them constantly till the sun
begins to have some power . COOKE2-1770-2,80.633

When the sun shines warm , and {COM:"a"_upside_down} the wind is not too
sharp , give air at the front of your frame ; COOKE2-1770-2,80.634

and if this does not happen during a fortnight's space , then give air
at the end , COOKE2-1770-2,80.635

and put up mats or canvas to correct the winds , and cause the air to
circulate in the frames . COOKE2-1770-2,80.636

About three changes of dung will suffice to bring your cherries to
ripeness in February , allowing each parcel to remain a month at the
back of the pales : COOKE2-1770-2,80.637

but if April proves cold , the forcing heat is to be continued till May
, for plums , peaches , nectarines and apricots . COOKE2-1770-2,80.638

Where these forcing frames are kept , the dung , when it has lost its
heat , may be laid in heaps to rot for the improvement of land .
COOKE2-1770-2,80.639

<P_81>

<heading>

<font> Produce of the Month . <$$font> COOKE2-1770-2,81.642

<$$heading>

The sallads of this month are composed from the small herbs on the
hot-bed , with burnet , cabbage-lettuce , cellery , and endive blanched
, and young onions . COOKE2-1770-2,81.644

If the cucumber plants that were sown in July have been properly guarded
from rain and frosts , they will produce fruit this month .
COOKE2-1770-2,81.645

We have cauliflowers and some artichaoks in the greenhouse .
COOKE2-1770-2,81.646

The roots we have this month are , carrots , parsneps , turneps , beets
, skirrets , horse-radish , potatoes , onions , shalots and rocambole .
COOKE2-1770-2,81.647

The herbs and plants for boiling are , cabbages and the spinach .
COOKE2-1770-2,81.648

The dried herbs are , mint , sweet marjoram , and marygold flowers .
COOKE2-1770-2,81.649

The pot-herbs are cellery , parsley , sorrel , thyme , savory ,
beet-leaves , and clary . COOKE2-1770-2,81.650

Apples and pears of several sorts are now ripe , such as the St.
Germain , la chafferee , the ambret , colmar , crissan , and swain's egg
; COOKE2-1770-2,81.651

there are walnuts , medlars , and services . COOKE2-1770-2,81.652

We have likewise some grapes and figs . COOKE2-1770-2,81.653

The flowers that blow this month are , single anemonies , gentianella ,
polyanthus , stock-gilliflower , and double violets .
COOKE2-1770-2,81.654

We have likewise some carnations in the green house .
COOKE2-1770-2,81.655

