<BEGIN_dalton-1808-2>

<P_141>

<heading>

Chap. II On the Constitution of Bodies . DALTON-1808-2,141.4

<$$heading>

There are three distinctions in the kinds of bodies , or three states ,
which have more especially claimed the attention of philosophical
chemists ; namely , those which are marked by the terms <font> elastic
fluids , liquids , and solids . <$$font> DALTON-1808-2,141.6

A very familiar instance is exhibited to us in water , of a body , which
, in certain circumstances , is capable of assuming all the three states
. DALTON-1808-2,141.7

In steam we recognise a perfectly elastic fluid , in water , a perfect
liquid , and in ice a complete solid . DALTON-1808-2,141.8

These observations have tacitly led to the conclusion which seems
universally adopted , that all bodies of sensible magnitude , whether
liquid or solid , are constituted of a vast number of extremely small
particles , or atoms of matter bound together by a force of attraction ,
which is more or less powerful according to circumstances , and which as
it endeavours to prevent their separation , is very <P_142> properly
called in that view , <font> attraction of cohesion ; <$$font>
DALTON-1808-2,142.9

but as it collects them from a dispersed state <paren> as from steam
into water <$$paren> it is called , <font> attraction of aggregation ,
<$$font> or more simply , <font> affinity . <$$font>
DALTON-1808-2,142.10

Whatever names it may go by , they still signify one and the same power
. DALTON-1808-2,142.11

It is not my design to call in question this conclusion , which appears
completely satisfactory ; but to shew that we have hitherto made no use
of it , and that the consequence of the neglect , has been a very
obscure view of chemical agency , which is daily growing more so in
proportion to the new lights attempted to be thrown upon it .
DALTON-1808-2,142.12

The opinions I more particularly allude to , are those of Berthollet on
the Laws of chemical affinity ; such as that chemical agency is
proportional to the mass , and that in all chemical unions , there exist
insensible gradations in the proportions of the constituent principles .
DALTON-1808-2,142.13

The inconsistence of these opinions , both with reason and observation ,
can@ @not , I think , fail to strike every one who takes a proper view
of the phenomena . DALTON-1808-2,142.14

Whether the ultimate particles of a body , such as water , are all alike
, that is , of the same figure , weight , &c. is a question of some
importance . DALTON-1808-2,142.15

From what is known , we have no reason to apprehend a diversity in these
<P_143> particulars : DALTON-1808-2,143.16

if it does exist in water , it must equally exist in the elements
constituting water , namely , hydrogen and oxygen .
DALTON-1808-2,143.17

Now it is scarcely possible to conceive how the aggregates of dissimilar
particles should be so uniformly the same . DALTON-1808-2,143.18

If some of the particles of water were heavier than others , if a parcel
of the liquid on any occasion were constituted principally of these
heavier particles , it must be supposed to affect the specific gravity
of the mass , a circumstance not known . DALTON-1808-2,143.19

Similar observations may be made on other substances .
DALTON-1808-2,143.20

Therefore we may conclude that <font> the ultimate particles of all
homogeneous bodies are perfectly alike in weight , figure , &c.
<$$font> . DALTON-1808-2,143.21

In other words , every particle of water is like every other particle of
water ; DALTON-1808-2,143.22

every particle of hydrogen is like every other particle of hydrogen ,
&c. DALTON-1808-2,143.23

Besides the force of attraction , which , in one character or another ,
belongs universally to ponderable bodies , we find another force that is
likewise universal , or acts upon all matter which comes under our
cognisance , namely , a force of repulsion . DALTON-1808-2,143.24

This is now generally , and I think properly , ascribed to the agency of
heat . DALTON-1808-2,143.25

An atmosphere of this subtile fluid constantly surrounds the atoms of
all bodies , DALTON-1808-2,143.26

and prevents them from being drawn into <P_144> actual contact .
DALTON-1808-2,144.27

This appears to be satisfactorily proved by the observation , that the
bulk of a body may be diminished by abstracting some of its heat :
DALTON-1808-2,144.28

But from what has been stated in the last section , it should seem that
enlargement and diminution of bulk depend perhaps more on the
arrangement , than on the size of the ultimate particles .
DALTON-1808-2,144.29

Be this as it may , we can@ @not avoid inferring from the preceding
doctrine on heat , and particularly from the section on the natural zero
of temperature , that solid bodies , such as ice , contain a large
portion , perhaps 4$$5 of the heat which the same are found to contain
in an elastic state , as steam . DALTON-1808-2,144.30

We are now to consider how these two great antagonist powers of
attraction and repulsion are adjusted , so as to allow of the three
different states of <font> elastic fluids , liquids , and solids .
<$$font> DALTON-1808-2,144.31

We shall divide the subject into four Sections ; namely , first , <font>
on the constitution of pure elastic fluids ; <$$font> second , <font> on
the constitution of mixed elastic fluids ; <$$font> third , <font> on
the constitution of liquids , <$$font> and fourth , <font> on the
constitution of solids . <$$font> DALTON-1808-2,144.32

<P_145>

<heading>

Section 1 . DALTON-1808-2,145.35

On the Constitution of Pure Elastic Fluids . DALTON-1808-2,145.36

<$$heading>

A pure elastic fluid is one , the constituent particles of which are all
alike , or in no way distinguishable . DALTON-1808-2,145.38

Steam , or aqueous vapour , hydrogenous gas , oxygenous gas , azotic gas
, and several others are of this kind . DALTON-1808-2,145.39

These fluids are constituted of particles possessing very diffuse
atmospheres of heat , the capacity or bulk of the atmosphere being often
one or two_thousand times that of the particle in a liquid or solid form
. DALTON-1808-2,145.40

Whatever therefore may be the shape or figure of the solid atom
abstractedly , when surrounded by such an atmosphere it must be globular
; DALTON-1808-2,145.41

but as all the globules in any small given volume are subject to the
same pressure , they must be equal in bulk , DALTON-1808-2,145.42

and will therefore be arranged in horizontal strata , like a pile of
shot . DALTON-1808-2,145.43

A volume <P_146> of elastic fluid is found to expand whenever the
pressure is taken off . DALTON-1808-2,146.44

This proves that the repulsion exceeds the attraction in such case .
DALTON-1808-2,146.45

The absolute attraction and repulsion of the particles of an elastic
fluid , we have no means of estimating , though we can have little doubt
but that the contemporary {TEXT:cotemporary} energy of both is great ;
DALTON-1808-2,146.46

but the excess of the repulsive energy above the attractive can be
estimated , and the law of increase and diminution be ascertained in
many cases . DALTON-1808-2,146.47

Thus in steam , the density may be taken at 1$$1728 that of water ;
DALTON-1808-2,146.48

consequently each particle of steam has 12 times the diameter that one
of water has , DALTON-1808-2,146.49

and must press upon 144 particles of a watery surface ;
DALTON-1808-2,146.50

but the pressure upon each is equivalent to that of a column of water of
34 feet ; DALTON-1808-2,146.51

therefore the excess of the elastic force in a particle of steam is
equal to the weight of a column of particles of water , whose height is
34 X 144 = 4896 feet . DALTON-1808-2,146.52

And further , this elastic force decreases as the distance of the
particles increases . DALTON-1808-2,146.53

With respect to steam and other elastic fluids then , the force of
cohesion is entirely counteracted by that of repulsion ,
DALTON-1808-2,146.54

and the only force which is efficacious to move the particles is the
excess of the repulsion above the attraction . DALTON-1808-2,146.55

Thus , if the attraction be as 10 and the repulsion as 12 , the
effective repulsive force is as 2 . DALTON-1808-2,146.56

It <P_147> appears then , that an elastic fluid , so far from requiring
any force to separate its particles , it always requires a force to
retain them in their situation , or to prevent their separation .
DALTON-1808-2,147.57

A vessel full of any pure elastic fluid presents to the imagination a
picture like one full of small shot . DALTON-1808-2,147.58

The globules are all of the same size ; DALTON-1808-2,147.59

but the particles of the fluid differ from those of the shot , in that
they are constituted of an exceedingly small central atom of solid
matter , which is surrounded by an atmosphere of heat , of great density
next the atom , but gradually growing rarer according to some power of
the distance ; whereas those of the shot are globules , uniformly hard
throughout , and surrounded with atmospheres of heat of no comparative
magnitude . DALTON-1808-2,147.60

It is known from experience , that the force of a mass of elastic fluid
is directly as the density . Whence is derived the law already
mentioned , that the repulsive power of each particle is inversely as
its diameter . That is , the <font> apparent <$$font> repulsive power ,
if we may so speak ; DALTON-1808-2,147.61

for the real or absolute force of repulsion is not known , as long as we
remain ignorant of the attractive force . DALTON-1808-2,147.62

When we expand any volume of elastic fluid , its particles are enlarged
, without any material change in the quantity of their heat ;
DALTON-1808-2,147.63

it follows then , that <P_148> the density of the atmospheres of heat
must fluctuate with the pressure . DALTON-1808-2,148.64

Thus , suppose a measure of air were expanded into 8 measures ;
DALTON-1808-2,148.65

then , because the diameters of the elastic particles are as the
cube_root of the space , the distances of the particles would be twice
as great as before , DALTON-1808-2,148.66

and the elastic atmospheres would occupy nearly 8 times the space they
did before , with nearly the same quantity of heat : whence we see that
these atmospheres must be diminished in density in nearly the same ratio
as the mass of elastic fluid . DALTON-1808-2,148.67

Some elastic fluids , as hydrogen , oxygen , &c. resist any pressure
that has yet been applied to them . DALTON-1808-2,148.68

In such then it is evident the repulsive force of heat is more than a
match for the affinity of the particles , and the external pressure
united . DALTON-1808-2,148.69

To what extent this would continue we can@ @not say ;
DALTON-1808-2,148.70

but from analogy we might apprehend that a still greater pressure would
succeed in giving the attractive force the superiority , when the
elastic fluid would become a liquid or solid . DALTON-1808-2,148.71

In other elastic fluids , as steam , upon the application of compression
to a certain degree , the elasticity apparently ceases altogether ,
DALTON-1808-2,148.72

and the particles collect in small drops of liquid ,
DALTON-1808-2,148.73

and fall down . DALTON-1808-2,148.74

This phenomenon requires explanation . DALTON-1808-2,148.75

From the very abrupt transition of steam <P_149> from a volume of 1700
to that of 1 , without any material increase of pressure , one would be
inclined to think that the condensation of it was owing to the <font>
breaking <$$font> of a spring , rather than to the <font> curbing
<$$font> of one . DALTON-1808-2,149.76

The last however I believe is the fact . DALTON-1808-2,149.77

The condensation arises from the action of affinity becoming superior to
that of heat , by which the latter is overruled , but not weakened .
DALTON-1808-2,149.78

As the approximation of the particles takes place , their repulsion
increases from the condensation of the heat , DALTON-1808-2,149.79

but their affinity increases , it should seem , in a still greater ratio
, till the approximation has attained a certain degree , when an
equilibrium between those two powers takes place , and the liquid ,
water , is the result . DALTON-1808-2,149.80

That this is the true explanation we may learn from what has been stated
at page 131 ; wherein it is shewn that the heat given off by the
condensation of steam , is in all probability no more than would be
given off by any permanently elastic fluid , could it be mechanically
condensed into the like volume , and is moreover a small portion of the
whole heat previously in combination . DALTON-1808-2,149.81

As far then as the heat is concerned in this phenomenon , the
circumstances would be the same , whether the approximation of the
particles was the effect of affinity , or of external mechanical force .
DALTON-1808-2,149.82

<P_150>

The constitution of a liquid , as water , must then be conceived to be
that of an aggregate of particles , exercising in a most powerful manner
the forces of attraction and repulsion , but nearly in an equal degree .
DALTON-1808-2,150.84

- Of this more in the sequel . DALTON-1808-2,150.85

<heading>

Section 2 . DALTON-1808-2,150.87

On the Constitution of Mixed Elastic Fluids . DALTON-1808-2,150.88

<$$heading>

When two or more elastic fluids , whose particles do not unite
chemically upon mixture , are brought together , one measure of each ,
they occupy the space of two measures , DALTON-1808-2,150.90

but become uniformly diffused through each other , DALTON-1808-2,150.91

and remain so , whatever may be their specific gravities .
DALTON-1808-2,150.92

The fact admits of no doubt ; DALTON-1808-2,150.93

but explanations have been given in various ways , and none of them
completely satisfactory . DALTON-1808-2,150.94

As the subject is one of primary importance in forming a system of
chemical principles , we must enter somewhat more fully into the
discussion . DALTON-1808-2,150.95

Dr. Priestley was one of the earliest to notice the fact :
DALTON-1808-2,150.96

it naturally struck him with surprise , <P_151> that two elastic fluids
, having apparently no affinity for each other , should not arrange
themselves according to their specific gravities , as liquids do in like
circumstances . DALTON-1808-2,151.97

Though he found this was not the case after the elastic fluids had once
been thoroughly mixed , yet he suggests it as probable , that if two of
such fluids could be exposed to each other without agitation , the one
specifically heavier would retain its lower situation .
DALTON-1808-2,151.98

He does not so much as hint at such gases being retained in a mixed
state by affinity . DALTON-1808-2,151.99

With regard to his suggestion of two gases being carefully exposed to
each other without agitation , I made a series of experiments expressly
to determine the question , the results of which are given in the Manch.
Memoirs , Vol. 1 . <font> new series . <$$font> DALTON-1808-2,151.100

From these it seems to be decided that gases always intermingle and
gradually diffuse themselves amongst each other , if exposed ever so
carefully ; but it requires a considerable time to produce a complete
intermixture , when the surface of communication is small .
DALTON-1808-2,151.101

This time may vary from a minute , to a day or more , according to the
quantity of the gases and the freedom of communication .
DALTON-1808-2,151.102

When or by whom the notion of mixed gases being held together by
chemical affinity was first propagated , I do not know ;
DALTON-1808-2,151.103

but it seems <P_152> probable that the notion of water being dissolved
in air , led to that of air being dissolved in air .
DALTON-1808-2,152.104

- Philosophers found that water gradually disappeared or evaporated in
air , and increased its elasticity ; DALTON-1808-2,152.105

but steam at a low temperature was known to be unable to overcome the
resistance of the air , DALTON-1808-2,152.106

therefore the agency of affinity was necessary to account for the effect
. DALTON-1808-2,152.107

In the permanently elastic fluids indeed , this agency did not seem to
be so much wanted , as they are all able to support themselves ;
DALTON-1808-2,152.108

but the diffusion through each other was a circumstance which did not
admit of an easy solution any other way . DALTON-1808-2,152.109

In regard to the solution of water in air , it was natural to suppose ,
nay , one might almost have been satisfied without the aid of experiment
, that the different gases would have had different affinities for water
, and that the quantities of water dissolved in like circumstances ,
would have varied according to the nature of the gas .
DALTON-1808-2,152.110

Saussure found however that there was no difference in this respect in
the solvent powers of carbonic acid , hydrogen gas , and common air .
DALTON-1808-2,152.111

- It might be expected that at least the <font> density <$$font> of the
gas would have some influence upon its solvent powers , that air of half
density would take half the water , or the quantity of water would
diminish in some proportion to <P_153> the density ;
DALTON-1808-2,153.112

but even here again we are disappointed ; DALTON-1808-2,153.113

whatever be the rarefaction , if water be present , the vapour produces
the same elasticity , DALTON-1808-2,153.114

and the hygrometer finally settles at extreme moisture , as in air of
common density in like circumstances . DALTON-1808-2,153.115

These facts are sufficient to create extreme difficulty in the
conception how any principle of affinity or <font> cohesion <$$font>
between air and water can be the agent . DALTON-1808-2,153.116

It is truly astonishing that the same quantity of vapour should cohere
to <font> one <$$font> particle of air in a given space , as to <font>
one_thousand <$$font> in the same space . DALTON-1808-2,153.117

But the wonder does not cease here ; DALTON-1808-2,153.118

a torricellian vacuum dissolves water ; DALTON-1808-2,153.119

and in this instance we have vapour existing independently of air at all
temperatures ; DALTON-1808-2,153.120

what makes it still more remarkable is , the vapour in such vacuum is
precisely the same in quantity and force as in the like volume of any
kind of air of extreme moisture . DALTON-1808-2,153.121

These and other considerations which occurred to me some years ago ,
were sufficient to make me altogether abandon the hypothesis of air
dissolving water , and to explain the phenomena some other way , or to
acknowledge they were inexplicable . DALTON-1808-2,153.122

In the autumn of 1801 , I hit upon an idea which seemed to be exactly
calculated to explain the phenomena of vapour ; DALTON-1808-2,153.123

it gave rise to a great variety of <P_154> experiments upon which a
series of essays were founded , which were read before the Literary and
Philosophical Society of Manchester , and published in the 5th Vol. of
their memoirs , 1802 . DALTON-1808-2,154.124

The distinguishing feature of the new theory was , that the particles of
one gas are not elastic or repulsive in regard to the particles of
another gas , but only to the particles of their own kind .
DALTON-1808-2,154.125

Consequently when a vessel contains a mixture of two such elastic fluids
, each acts independently upon the vessel , with its proper elasticity ,
just as if the other were absent , whilst no mutual action between the
fluids themselves is observed . DALTON-1808-2,154.126

This position most effectually provided for the existence of vapour of
any temperature in the atmosphere , because it could have nothing but
its own weight to support ; DALTON-1808-2,154.127

and it was perfectly obvious why neither more nor less vapour could
exist in air of extreme moisture , than in a vacuum of the same
temperature . DALTON-1808-2,154.128

So far then the great object of the theory was attained .
DALTON-1808-2,154.129

The law of the condensation of vapour in the atmosphere by cold , was
evidently the same on this scheme , as that of the condensation of pure
steam , DALTON-1808-2,154.130

and experience was found to confirm the conclusion at all temperatures .
DALTON-1808-2,154.131

The only thing now wanting to completely establish <P_155> the
independent existence of aqueous vapour in the atmosphere , was the
conformity of other liquids to water , in regard to the diffusion and
condensation of their vapour . DALTON-1808-2,155.132

This was found to take place in several liquids , and particularly in
sulphuric ether , one which was most likely to shew any anomaly to
advantage if it existed , on account of the great change of
expansibility in its vapour at ordinary temperatures .
DALTON-1808-2,155.133

The existence of vapour in the atmosphere and its occasional
condensation were thus accounted for ; DALTON-1808-2,155.134

but another question remained , how does it rise from a surface of water
subject to the pressure of the atmosphere ? DALTON-1808-2,155.135

The consideration of this made no part of the essays above@ @mentioned ,
it being apprehended , that if the other two points could be obtained by
any theory , this third too , would , in the sequel , be accomplished .
DALTON-1808-2,155.136

From the novelty , both in the theory and the experiments , and their
importance , provided they were correct , the essays were soon
circulated , both at home and abroad . DALTON-1808-2,155.137

The new facts and experiments were highly valued , DALTON-1808-2,155.138

some of the latter were repeated , and found correct ,
DALTON-1808-2,155.139

and none of the results , as far as I know , have been controverted ;
DALTON-1808-2,155.140

but the theory was almost universally misunderstood , and <P_156>
consequently reprobated . DALTON-1808-2,156.141

This must have {TEXT:have_have} arisen partly at least from my being too
concise , and not sufficiently clear in its exposition .
DALTON-1808-2,156.142

Dr. Thomson was the first , as far as I know , who publicly
animadverted upon the theory ; DALTON-1808-2,156.143

this gentleman , so well known for his excellent System of Chemistry ,
observed in the first edition of that work , that the theory would not
account for the equal distribution of gases ; but that , granting the
supposition of one gas neither attracting nor repelling another , the
two must still arrange themselves according to their specific gravity .
DALTON-1808-2,156.144

But the most general objection to it was quite of a different kind ;
DALTON-1808-2,156.145

it was admitted , that the theory was adapted so as to obtain the most
uniform and permanent diffusion of gases ; DALTON-1808-2,156.146

but it was urged , that as one gas was as a vacuum to another , a
measure of any gas being put to a measure of another , the two measures
ought to occupy the space of one measure only . DALTON-1808-2,156.147

Finding that my views on the subject were thus misapprehended , I wrote
an illustration of the theory , which was published in the 3d Vol. of
Nicholson's Journal , for November , 1802 . DALTON-1808-2,156.148

In that paper I endeavoured to point out the conditions of mixed gases
more at large , according to my hypothesis ; DALTON-1808-2,156.149

and particularly touched upon the <P_157> discriminating feature of it ,
that of two particles of any gas A , repelling each other by the known
stated law , whilst one or more particles of another gas B , were
interposed in a direct line , without at all affecting the reciprocal
action of the said two particles of A . DALTON-1808-2,157.150

Or , if any particle of B were casually to come in contact with one of A
, and press against it , this pressure did not preclude the contemporary
{TEXT:cotemporary} action of all the surrounding particles of A upon the
one in contact with B . DALTON-1808-2,157.151

In this respect the mutual action of particles of the same gas was
represented as resembling magnetic action , which is not disturbed by
the intervention of a body not magnetic . DALTON-1808-2,157.152

As the subject has since received the animadversions of several authors
, which it is expedient to notice more or less , it will be proper to
point out the order intended to be pursued . DALTON-1808-2,157.153

First , I shall consider the objections to the new theory made by the
several authors , with their own views on the subject ;
DALTON-1808-2,157.154

and then shall give what modifications of the theory , the experience
and reflection of succeeding time have suggested to me .
DALTON-1808-2,157.155

The authors are Berthollet , Dr. Thomson , Mr. Murray , Dr. Henry ,
and Mr. Gough . DALTON-1808-2,157.156

Berthollet in his Chemical Statics <paren> 1804 <$$paren> has given a
chapter on the constitution of the <P_158> atmosphere , in which he has
entered largely into a discussion of the new theory .
DALTON-1808-2,158.157

This celebrated chemist , upon comparing the results of experiments made
by De Luc , Saussure , Volta , Lavoisier , Watt , &c. together with
those of Gay Lussac , and his own , gives his full assent to the fact ,
that vapours of every kind increase the elasticity of each species of
gas alike , and just as much as the force of the said vapours in vacuo ;
and not only so , but that the specific gravity of vapour in air and
vapour in vacuo is in all cases the same <paren> Vol. 1 . Sect. 4 .
<$$paren> DALTON-1808-2,158.158

Consequently he adopts the theorem for finding the quantity of vapour
which a given volume of air can dissolve , which I have laid down ;
namely , {COM:equation_omitted} where <font> p <$$font> represents the
pressure upon a given volume <paren> 1 <$$paren> of dry air , expressed
in inches of mercury , <font> f <$$font> = the force of the vapour in
vacuo at the temperature , in inches of mercury , and <font> s <$$font>
= the space which the mixture of air and vapour occupies under the given
pressure , <font> p , <$$font> after saturation . DALTON-1808-2,158.159

So far therefore we perfectly agree : DALTON-1808-2,158.160

but he objects to the theory by which I attempt to explain these
phenomena , DALTON-1808-2,158.161

and substitutes another of his own . DALTON-1808-2,158.162

The first objection I shall notice is one that <P_159> clearly shews
Berthollet either does not understand , or does not rightly apply the
theory he opposes ; DALTON-1808-2,159.163

he says , " If one gas occupied the interstices of another , as though
they were vacancies , there would not be any augmentation of volume when
aqueous or ethereal vapour was combined with the air ;
DALTON-1808-2,159.164

nevertheless there is one proportional to the quantity of vapour added :
DALTON-1808-2,159.165

humidity should increase the specific gravity of the air , whereas it
renders it specifically lighter , as has been already noticed by Newton
. " DALTON-1808-2,159.166

This is the objection which has been so frequently urged ;
DALTON-1808-2,159.167

it has even been stated by Mr. Gough , if I understand him aright , in
almost the same words <paren> Nicholson's Journal , Vol. 9 , page 162
<$$paren> ; DALTON-1808-2,159.168

yet this last gentleman is profoundly skilled in the mechanical action
of fluids . DALTON-1808-2,159.169

Let a tall cylindrical glass vessel containing dry air be inverted over
mercury , and a portion of the air drawn out by a syphon , till an
equilibrium of pressure is established within and without ;
DALTON-1808-2,159.170

let a small portion of water , ether , &c. be then thrown up into the
vessel ; DALTON-1808-2,159.171

the vapour rises DALTON-1808-2,159.172

and occupies the interstices of the air as a void ;
DALTON-1808-2,159.173

but what is the obvious consequence ? DALTON-1808-2,159.174

Why , the surface of the mercury being now pressed both by the dry air ,
and by the new raised vapour , is more pressed within than <P_160>
without , DALTON-1808-2,160.175

and an enlargement of the volume of air is unavoidable , in order to
restore the equilibrium . DALTON-1808-2,160.176

Again , in the open air : suppose there were no aqueous atmosphere
around the earth , only an azotic one = 23 inches of mercury , and an
oxygenous one = 6 inches . DALTON-1808-2,160.177

The air being thus perfectly dry , evaporation would commence with great
speed . DALTON-1808-2,160.178

The vapour first formed being constantly urged to ascend by that below ,
and as constantly resisted by the air , must , in the first instance ,
dilate the other two atmospheres ; DALTON-1808-2,160.179

<paren> for , the ascending steam adds its force to the upward
elasticity of the two gases , DALTON-1808-2,160.180

and in part alleviates their pressure , the necessary consequence of
which is dilatation . <$$paren> DALTON-1808-2,160.181

At last when all the vapour has ascended , that the temperature will
admit of , the aqueous atmosphere attains an equilibrium ;
DALTON-1808-2,160.182

it no longer presses upon the other two , but upon the earth ;
DALTON-1808-2,160.183

the others return to their original density and pressure throughout .
DALTON-1808-2,160.184

In this case it is true , there would not be any augmentation of volume
when aqueous vapour was combined with the air ; DALTON-1808-2,160.185

humidity would increase the weight of the congregated atmospheres , but
diminish their specific gravity under a given pressure .
DALTON-1808-2,160.186

One would have thought that this solution of the phenomenon upon my
hypothesis was too obvious to escape the notice <P_161> of any one in
any degree conversant with pneumatic chemistry . DALTON-1808-2,161.187

Berthollet indeed enquires , " Is such a division {TEXT:divsion} of the
same pressure of the atmosphere analogous with any physical property yet
known ? DALTON-1808-2,161.188

Can it be conceived that an elastic substance exists , which adds its
volume to that of another , and which nevertheless does not act on it by
its expansive force ? " DALTON-1808-2,161.189

Certainly ; we can not only conceive it , but bring an instance that
must be allowed to be in point . DALTON-1808-2,161.190

Two magnets repel each other , that is , act upon each other with an
expansive force , DALTON-1808-2,161.191

yet they do not act upon other bodies in the same way , but merely as
inelastic bodies ; DALTON-1808-2,161.192

and this no doubt would be the same if they were reduced to atoms :
DALTON-1808-2,161.193

So two particles of the same kind of air may act upon each other
elastically , and upon other bodies inelastically , and therefore not at
all , unless when in contact . DALTON-1808-2,161.194

Berthollet observes , " Hydrogen gas and oxygen gas form water in a
given circumstance ; DALTON-1808-2,161.195

azotic gas , and oxygen gas , can also produce nitric acid ;
DALTON-1808-2,161.196

but the reciprocal action which decides the combinations can@ @not be
considered as a force commencing at the precise moment at which it is
manifested , DALTON-1808-2,161.197

it must have existed long before producing its effect ,
DALTON-1808-2,161.198

and increases gradually till it becomes preponderant . "
DALTON-1808-2,161.199

It is <P_162> no doubt true that the opposite powers of attraction and
repulsion are frequently , perhaps constantly , energetic at the same
instant ; DALTON-1808-2,162.200

but the effect produced in those cases arises from the difference of the
two powers . DALTON-1808-2,162.201

When the excess of the repulsive power above the attractive in different
gases is comparatively small and insignificant , it constitutes that
character which may be denominated neutral , and which I supposed to
exist in the class of mixed gases which are not observed to manifest any
sign of chemical union . DALTON-1808-2,162.202

I would not be understood to deny an energetic affinity between oxygen
and hydrogen , &c. in a mixed state ; DALTON-1808-2,162.203

but that affinity is more than counterbalanced by the repulsion of the
heat , except in circumstances which it is not necessary at present to
consider . DALTON-1808-2,162.204

Again , " Azotic gas comports itself with oxygen gas , in the changes
occasioned by temperature and pressure , precisely like one and the same
gas : DALTON-1808-2,162.205

Is it necessary to have recourse to a supposition which obliges us to
admit so great a difference of action without an ostensible cause ? "
DALTON-1808-2,162.206

It is possible this may appear an objection to a person who does not
understand the theory , DALTON-1808-2,162.207

but it never can be any to one who does . DALTON-1808-2,162.208

If a mixture of gas , such as atmospheric air , containing azote
pressing <P_163> with a force equal to 24 inches of mercury , and oxygen
with a force equal to 6 inches , were suddenly condensed into half the
compass , the azotic gas would then evidently , on my hypothesis , press
with a force = 48 inches , and the oxygen with a force = 12 inches ,
making together 60 inches , just the same as any simple gas .
DALTON-1808-2,163.209

And a similar change in the elasticity of each would take place by heat
and cold . DALTON-1808-2,163.210

Will the opposite theory of Berthollet be equally free from this
objection ? DALTON-1808-2,163.211

We shall presently examine it . DALTON-1808-2,163.212

Another objection is derived from the very considerable time requisite
for a body of hydrogen to descend into one of carbonic acid ;
DALTON-1808-2,163.213

if one gas were as a vacuum for another , why is the equilibrium not
instantly established ? DALTON-1808-2,163.214

This objection is certainly plausible ; DALTON-1808-2,163.215

we shall consider it more at large hereafter . DALTON-1808-2,163.216

In speaking of the pressure of the atmosphere retaining water in a
liquid state , which I deny , Berthollet adopts the idea of Lavoisier ,
" that without it the moleculae would be infinitely dispersed , and that
nothing would limit their separation , unless their own weight should
collect them to form an atmosphere , " DALTON-1808-2,163.217

This , I may remark , is not the language dictated by a correct notion
on the subject . DALTON-1808-2,163.218

Suppose our atmosphere were annihilated , and the <P_164> waters on the
surface of the globe were instantly expanded into steam ;
DALTON-1808-2,164.219

surely the action of gravity would collect the molecule into an
atmosphere of similar constitution to the one we now possess ;
DALTON-1808-2,164.220

but suppose the whole mass of water evaporated amounted in weight to 30
inches of mercury , DALTON-1808-2,164.221

how could it support its own weight at the common temperature ?
DALTON-1808-2,164.222

It would in a short time be condensed into water merely by its weight ,
leaving a small portion , such as the temperature could support ,
amounting perhaps to half an inch of mercury in weight , as a permanent
atmosphere , which would effectually prevent any more vapour from rising
, unless there were an increase of temperature . DALTON-1808-2,164.223

Does not every one know that water and other liquids can exist in a
Torricellian vacuum at low temperatures solely by the pressure of vapour
arising from them ? DALTON-1808-2,164.224

What need then of the pressure of the atmosphere in order to prevent an
excess of vapourisation ? DALTON-1808-2,164.225

After having concluded that " without the pressure of the aerial
atmosphere , liquids would pass to the elastic state , " Berthollet
proceeds in the very next paragraph to shew that the quantity of vapour
in the atmosphere may in fact be much <font> more <$$font> than would
exist if the atmosphere were suppressed , DALTON-1808-2,164.226

and hence infers , " that the variations of the barometer occasioned
<P_165> by those of the humidity of the atmosphere may be much greater
than was believed by Saussure and Delue . " DALTON-1808-2,165.227

I can@ @not see how the author reconciles the opposite conclusions .
DALTON-1808-2,165.228

The experiments of Fontana on the distillation of water and ether in
close vessels containing air , are adduced to prove , that vapours do
not penetrate air without resistance . DALTON-1808-2,165.229

This is true no doubt ; DALTON-1808-2,165.230

vapour can@ @not make its way in such circumstances through a long and
circuitous route without time , DALTON-1808-2,165.231

and if the external atmosphere keep the vessel cool , the vapour may be
condensed by its sides , and fall down in a liquid form as fast as it is
generated , without ever penetrating in any sensible quantity to its
remote extremity . DALTON-1808-2,165.232

We come now to the consideration of that theory which Berthollet adopts
in his explanation of the phenomena of gaseous mixtures .
DALTON-1808-2,165.233

According to his theory , there are two degrees of affinity .
DALTON-1808-2,165.234

The one is strong , DALTON-1808-2,165.235

makes the particles of bodies approach nearer to each other ,
DALTON-1808-2,165.236

and generally expels heat : DALTON-1808-2,165.237

the effect of this may be called <font> combination ; <$$font>
DALTON-1808-2,165.238

for instance , when oxygen gas is put to nitrous gas , the two combine ,
DALTON-1808-2,165.239

give out heat , DALTON-1808-2,165.240

are condensed in volume , DALTON-1808-2,165.241

and become possessed of properties different from what they had
previously . DALTON-1808-2,165.242

The other is weak ; DALTON-1808-2,165.243

it <P_166> does not sensibly condense the volume of any mixture , nor
give out heat , nor change the properties of the ingredients ;
DALTON-1808-2,166.244

its effect may be called <font> solution <$$font> or <font> dissolution
; <$$font> DALTON-1808-2,166.245

for instance , when oxygen gas and azotic gas are mixed in due
proportion , they constitute atmospheric air , in which they retain
their distinguishing properties . DALTON-1808-2,166.246

It is upon this supposed <font> solution <$$font> of one elastic fluid
in another that I intend to make a few observations .
DALTON-1808-2,166.247

That I have not misrepresented the author's ideas , will , I think ,
appear from the following quotations . DALTON-1808-2,166.248

" When different gases are mixed , whose action is confined to this
solution , no change is observed in the temperature , or in the volume
resulting from the mixture ; DALTON-1808-2,166.249

hence it may be concluded , that this mutual action of two gases does
not produce any condensation , and that it can@ @not surmount the effort
of the elasticity , or the affinity for caloric , so that the properties
of each gas are not sensibly changed - . " DALTON-1808-2,166.250

" Although both the solution and combination of two gases are the effect
of a chemical action , which only differs in its intensity , a real
difference may be established between them , because there is a very
material difference between the results : DALTON-1808-2,166.251

the combination of two gases always leads to a condensation of their
volume , DALTON-1808-2,166.252

and <P_167> gives rise to new properties ; DALTON-1808-2,167.253

on their solution , the gases share in common the changes arising from
compression and temperature , DALTON-1808-2,167.254

and preserve their individual properties , which are only diminished in
the ratio of the slight action which holds them united . " <paren> Page
198 . <$$paren> DALTON-1808-2,167.255

" The mutual affinity of the gases can , therefore , produce between
them an effect which is greater than their difference of specific
gravity , but which is inferior to the elastic tension which belongs to
each molecule of both , so that the volume is not changed by this action
; DALTON-1808-2,167.256

the liquids which take the elastic state , comport themselves afterwards
like the gases . " <paren> Page 218 . <$$paren> DALTON-1808-2,167.257

" Solution must be distinguished from combination , not only because in
the first , each of the substances is retained by an affinity so weak ,
that it preserves its dimensions . - " <paren> Page 219 . <$$paren>
DALTON-1808-2,167.258

Again , " It can@ @not be doubted , that the parts of elastic fluids are
<font> not <$$font> endued with the force of cohesion , as the
substances dissolved by them undergo an equal distribution , which could
not happen but by the means of a reciprocal chemical attraction ; that
which constitutes the force of cohesion . " <paren> Researches into the
Laws of chemical affinity , Eng. Trans. {TEXT:Trans} , page 57 .
<$$paren> DALTON-1808-2,167.259

Here the translator has , I apprehend , mistaken the English idiom .
DALTON-1808-2,167.260

The author means to say , that the parts of <P_168> elastic fluids
<font> are <$$font> endued with the force of cohesion ;
DALTON-1808-2,168.261

but this he applies only to heterogeneous particles .
DALTON-1808-2,168.262

He certainly does not mean that the particles of homogeneous elastic
fluids possess the force of cohesion . DALTON-1808-2,168.263

Newton has demonstrated from the phenomena of condensation and
rarefaction that elastic fluids are constituted of particles , which
repel one another by forces which increase in proportion as the distance
of their centres diminishes : DALTON-1808-2,168.264

in other words , the forces are reciprocally as the distances .
DALTON-1808-2,168.265

This deduction will stand as long as the Laws of elastic fluids continue
to be what they are . DALTON-1808-2,168.266

What a pity it is that all who attempt to reason , or to theorise
respecting the constitution of elastic fluids , should not make
themselves thoroughly acquainted with this immutable Law , and
constantly hold it in their view whenever they start any new project !
DALTON-1808-2,168.267

When we contemplate a mixture of oxygenous and hydrogenous gas , what
does Berthollet conceive , are the particles that repel each other
according to the Newtonian Law ? DALTON-1808-2,168.268

The mixture <font> must <$$font> consist of such ; DALTON-1808-2,168.269

and he ought in the very first instance to have informed us what
constitutes the <font> unity <$$font> of a particle in his solution .
DALTON-1808-2,168.270

If he grants that each particle of oxygen retains its unity , and each
particle of hydrogen does the <P_169> same , then we must conclude that
the mutual action of two particles of oxygen is the same as that of a
particle of oxygen , and one of hydrogen , namely , a repulsion
according to the Law above stated , which effectually destroys the
supposed solution by chemical agency . DALTON-1808-2,169.271

But if it be supposed that each particle of hydrogen attaches itself to
a particle of oxygen , and the two particles so united form <font> one ,
<$$font> from which the repulsive energy emanates ; then the new elastic
fluid may perfectly conform to the Newtonian Law ; DALTON-1808-2,169.272

in this case a true saturation will take place when the number of
particles of hydrogen and oxygen in a mixture happen to be equal , or at
least in the ratio of some simple numbers , such as 1 to 2 , 1 to 3 ,
&c. DALTON-1808-2,169.273

Now something like this does actually take place when a real combination
is formed , as for instance , steam , and nitric acid formed of a
mixture of oxygen and nitrous gas . DALTON-1808-2,169.274

Here we have new elastic fluids , the atoms of which repel one another
by the common Law , DALTON-1808-2,169.275

heat is given out , DALTON-1808-2,169.276

a great condensation of volume ensues , DALTON-1808-2,169.277

and the new fluids differ from their constituents in their chemical
relations . DALTON-1808-2,169.278

It remains then to determine whether , in the instance of solution , all
these effects take place in a " slight " degree ; that is , in so small
a degree as not to be <P_170> cognisable to any of the senses .
DALTON-1808-2,170.279

It certainly requires an extraordinary stretch of the imagination to
admit the affirmative . DALTON-1808-2,170.280

One great reason for the adoption of this , or any other theory on the
subject , arises from the phenomena of the evaporation of water .
DALTON-1808-2,170.281

How is water taken up and retained in the atmosphere ?
DALTON-1808-2,170.282

It can@ @not be in the state of vapour , it is said , because the
pressure is too great : DALTON-1808-2,170.283

there must therefore be a true chemical solution .
DALTON-1808-2,170.284

But when we consider that the surface of water is subject to a pressure
equal to 30 inches of mercury , and besides this pressure , there is a
<font> sensible <$$font> affinity between the particles of water
themselves ; how does the <font> insensible <$$font> affinity of the
atmosphere for water overcome both these powers ? DALTON-1808-2,170.285

It is to me quite inexplicable upon this hypothesis , the leading object
of which is to account for this very phenomenon . DALTON-1808-2,170.286

Further , if a particle of air has attached a particle of water to it ,
what reason can be assigned why a superior particle of air should rob an
inferior one of its property , when each particle possesses the same
power ? DALTON-1808-2,170.287

If a portion of common salt be dissolved in water and a little muriatic
acid added ; is there any reason to suppose the additional acid
displaces that already combined with the soda , and that upon
evaporation the salt is not obtained with <P_171> the identical acid it
previously had ? DALTON-1808-2,171.288

Or , if oxygen gas be confined by water , is there any reason to suppose
that the hydrogen of the water is constantly giving its oxygen to the
air and receiving an equal quantity from the same ?
DALTON-1808-2,171.289

Perhaps it will be said in the case of air dissolving water , that it is
not the affection of one particle for one , it is that of a mass of
particles for another mass ; it is the united action of all the atoms in
the atmosphere upon the water , which raises up a particle .
DALTON-1808-2,171.290

But as all these energies are reciprocal , the water must have a like
action on the air , DALTON-1808-2,171.291

and then an atmosphere over water would press downward by a force
greater than its weight , which is contradicted by experience .
DALTON-1808-2,171.292

When two measures of hydrogen and one of oxygen gas are mixed , and
fired by the electric spark , the whole is converted into steam ,
DALTON-1808-2,171.293

and if the pressure be great , this steam becomes water .
DALTON-1808-2,171.294

It is most probable then that there is the same number of particles in
two measures of hydrogen as in one of oxygen . DALTON-1808-2,171.295

Suppose then three measures of hydrogen are mixed with one of oxygen ,
and this slight affinity operates as usual ; DALTON-1808-2,171.296

how is the union effected ? DALTON-1808-2,171.297

According to the principle of equal division , each atom of oxygen ought
to have <font> one atom and a half <$$font> of hydrogen attached <P_172>
to it ; DALTON-1808-2,172.298

but this is impossible ; DALTON-1808-2,172.299

one half of the atoms of oxygen must then take two of hydrogen , and the
other half , one each . DALTON-1808-2,172.300

But the former would be specifically lighter than the latter ,
DALTON-1808-2,172.301

and ought to be found at the top of the solution ; DALTON-1808-2,172.302

nothing like this is however observed on any occasion .
DALTON-1808-2,172.303

Much more might be advanced to shew the absurdity of this doctrine of
the solution of one gas in another , and the insufficiency of it to
explain any of the phenomena ; DALTON-1808-2,172.304

indeed I should not have dwelt so long upon it , had I not apprehended
that respectable authority was likely to give it credit , more than any
arguments in its behalf derived from physical principle .
DALTON-1808-2,172.305

Dr. Thomson , in the 3d Edition of his System of Chemistry , has
entered into a discussion on the subject of mixed gases ;
DALTON-1808-2,172.306

he seems to comprehend the excellence and defects of my notions on these
subjects , with great acuteness . DALTON-1808-2,172.307

He does not conclude with Berthollet , that on my hypothesis , " there
would not be any augmentation of volume when aqueous and ethereal vapour
was combined with the air , " which has been so common an objection .
DALTON-1808-2,172.308

There is however one objection which this gentleman urges , that shews
he does not completely understand the <P_173> mechanism of my hypothesis
. DALTON-1808-2,173.309

At page 448 , Vol. 3 he observes that from the principles of
hydrostatics , " each particle of a fluid sustains the whole pressure .
DALTON-1808-2,173.310

Nor can I perceive any reason why this principle should not hold , even
on the supposition that Dalton's hypothesis is well founded . "
DALTON-1808-2,173.311

Upon this I would observe , that when once an equilibrium is established
in any mixture of gases , each particle of gas is pressed as if by the
surrounding particles <font> of its own kind only . <$$font>
DALTON-1808-2,173.312

It is in the renunciation of that hydrostatical principle that the
leading feature of the theory consists . DALTON-1808-2,173.313

The lowest particle of oxygen in the atmosphere sustains the weight of
all the particles of oxygen above it , and the weight of no other .
DALTON-1808-2,173.314

It was therefore a maxim with me , that every particle of gas is equally
pressed in every direction , but the pressure arises from the particles
of its own kind only . DALTON-1808-2,173.315

Indeed when a measure of oxygen is put to a measure of azote , at the
moment the two surfaces come in contact , the particles of each gas
press against those of the other with their full force ;
DALTON-1808-2,173.316

but the two gases get gradually intermingled , DALTON-1808-2,173.317

and the force which each particle has to sustain proportionally
diminishes , till at last it becomes the same as that of the original
gas dilated to twice its volume . DALTON-1808-2,173.318

The ratio of the forces is as the cube_root <P_174> of the spaces
inversely ; that is as {COM:cube_root} 2 : 1 , or as 1.26 : 1 nearly .
DALTON-1808-2,174.319

In such a mixture as has just been mentioned , then , the common
hypothesis supposes the pressure of each particle of gas to be 1.26 ;
whereas mine supposes it only to be 1 ; DALTON-1808-2,174.320

but the sum of the pressure of both gases on the containing vessel , or
any other surface is exactly the same on both hypotheses .
DALTON-1808-2,174.321

Excepting the above objection , all the rest which Dr. Thomson has made
, are of a nature not so easily to be obviated ; DALTON-1808-2,174.322

- he takes notice of the considerable time which elapses before two
gases are completely diffused through each other , as Berthollet has
done , DALTON-1808-2,174.323

and conceives this fact makes against the supposition , that one gas is
as a vacuum to another . DALTON-1808-2,174.324

He further objects , that if the particles of different gases are
inelastic to each other ; then a particle of oxygen coming into actual
contact with one of hydrogen , ought to unite with it , and form a
particle of water ; DALTON-1808-2,174.325

but , on the other hand , he properly observes , that the great facility
with which such combinations are effected in such instances as a mixture
of nitrous and oxygen gas , is an argument in favour of the hypothesis .
DALTON-1808-2,174.326

- Dr. Thomson founds another objection upon the facility of certain
combinations , when one of the ingredients is in a <font> nascent
<$$font> form ; <P_175> that is , just upon the point of assuming the
elastic state ; DALTON-1808-2,175.327

this , he observes , " seems incompatible with the hypothesis , that
gases are not mutually elastic . " DALTON-1808-2,175.328

Upon the whole , Dr. Thomson inclines to the opinion of Berthollet ,
that gases have the property of dissolving each other ;
DALTON-1808-2,175.329

and admits , " however problematical it may appear at first view , that
the gases not only mutually repel each other , but likewise mutually
attract . " DALTON-1808-2,175.330

I have no doubt if he had taken due time to consider this conclusion ,
he would , with me , have pronounced it absurd : DALTON-1808-2,175.331

but of this again in the sequel . DALTON-1808-2,175.332

With regard to the objection , that one gas makes a more durable
resistance to the entrance of another , than it ought to do on my
hypothesis : This occurred to me in a very early period of my
speculations ; DALTON-1808-2,175.333

I devised the train of reasoning which appeared to obviate the objection
; DALTON-1808-2,175.334

but it being necessarily of a mathematical nature , I did not wish to
obtrude it upon the notice of chemical philosophers , but rather to wait
till it was called for . DALTON-1808-2,175.335

- The resistance which any medium makes to the motion of a body ,
depends upon the surface of that body , DALTON-1808-2,175.336

and is greater as the surface is greater , all other circumstances being
the same . DALTON-1808-2,175.337

A ball of lead 1 inch in diameter meets with a certain resistance in
falling through the <P_176> air ; DALTON-1808-2,176.338

but the same ball , being made into thousand smaller ones of 1$$10 of an
inch diameter , and falling with the same velocity , meets with 10 times
the resistance it did before ; because the force of gravity increases as
the <font> cube <$$font> of the diameter of any particle , and the
resistance only as the <font> square <$$font> of the diameter .
DALTON-1808-2,176.339

Hence it appears , that in order to increase the resistance of particles
moving in any medium , it is only necessary to divide them , and that
the resistance will be a maximum when the division is a maximum .
DALTON-1808-2,176.340

We have only then to consider particles of lead falling through air by
their own gravity , DALTON-1808-2,176.341

and we may have an idea of the resistance of one gas entering another ,
<$$font> DALTON-1808-2,176.342

only the particle of lead must be conceived to be infinitely small
<$$font> , if I may be allowed the expression . DALTON-1808-2,176.343

Here we shall find great resistance , DALTON-1808-2,176.344

and yet no one , I should suppose , will say , that the air and the lead
are mutually elastic . DALTON-1808-2,176.345

The other two objections of Dr. Thomson , I shall waive {TEXT:wave} the
consideration of at present . DALTON-1808-2,176.346

Mr. Murray has lately edited a system of chemistry , in which he has
given a very clear description of the phenomena of the atmosphere , and
of other similar mixtures of elastic fluids . DALTON-1808-2,176.347

He has ably discussed the different theories that have been proposed on
the subject , <P_177> and given a perspicuous view of mine , which he
thinks is ingenious , and calculated to explain several of the phenomena
well , but upon the whole , not equally satisfactory with that which he
adopts . DALTON-1808-2,177.348

He does not object to the mechanism of my hypothesis in regard to the
independent elasticity of the several gases entering into any mixture ,
DALTON-1808-2,177.349

but argues that the phenomena do not require so extraordinary a
postulatum ; DALTON-1808-2,177.350

and more particularly disapproves of the application of my theory to
account for evaporation . DALTON-1808-2,177.351

The principal feature in Mr. Murray's theory , and which he thinks
distinguishes it from mine , is " that between mixed gases , which are
capable , under any circumstances of combining , an attraction must
always be exerted . " DALTON-1808-2,177.352

It is unnecessary to recount the arguments on behalf of this conclusion
, because it will not be controverted . DALTON-1808-2,177.353

Mr. Murray announces his views of the constitution of the atmosphere ,
as follows : DALTON-1808-2,177.354

" Perhaps that chemical attraction which subsists between the solid
bases of these gases , but which , when they are merely mixed together ,
can@ @not , from the distance at which their particles are placed by the
repulsive power of caloric , bring them into intimate union , may still
be so far exerted , as to prevent their separation :
DALTON-1808-2,177.355

or , they may be <P_178> retained in mixture by that force of adhesion ,
which , exerted at the surfaces of many bodies , retains them in contact
with considerable force . " DALTON-1808-2,178.356

He supports these notions at length by various observations ,
DALTON-1808-2,178.357

and repeats some of the observations of Berthollet , whose doctrine on
this subject , as has been seen , is nearly the same .
DALTON-1808-2,178.358

Before we animadvert on these principles , it may be convenient to
extend the first a little farther , and to adopt as a maxim , " that
between the particles of <font> pure <$$font> gases , which are capable
under any circumstances of combining , an attraction must always be
exerted . " DALTON-1808-2,178.359

This , Mr. Murray can@ @not certainly object to , in the case of steam
, a pure elastic fluid , the particles of which are known in certain
circumstances to combine . DALTON-1808-2,178.360

Nor will it be said that steam and a permanent gas are different ;
DALTON-1808-2,178.361

for he justly observes , " this distinction <paren> between gases and
vapours <$$paren> is merely relative , DALTON-1808-2,178.362

and arises from the difference of temperature at which they are formed ;
DALTON-1808-2,178.363

the state with regard to each , while they exist in it , is precisely
the same . " DALTON-1808-2,178.364

Is steam then constituted of particles in which the attraction is so far
exerted as to prevent their separation ? DALTON-1808-2,178.365

No : they exhibit no traces of attraction , more than the like number of
particles of oxygen do , when in <P_179> the gaseous form .
DALTON-1808-2,179.366

What then is the conclusion ? DALTON-1808-2,179.367

It is this : DALTON-1808-2,179.368

<font> notwithstanding it must be allowed , that all bodies at all times
, and in every situation , attract one another ; yet in certain
circumstances , they are likewise actuated by a repulsive power ;
DALTON-1808-2,179.369

the only efficient motive force is then the difference of these two
powers . <$$font> DALTON-1808-2,179.370

From the circumstance of gases mixing together without experiencing any
sensible diminution of volume , the advocates for the agency of chemical
affinity , characterise it as a " slight action , " and " a weak
reciprocal action : " DALTON-1808-2,179.371

So far I think they are consistent ; DALTON-1808-2,179.372

but when we hear of this affinity being so far exerted as to prevent the
separation of elastic particles , I do not conceive with what propriety
it {TEXT:t} can be called weak . DALTON-1808-2,179.373

Suppose this affinity should be exercised in the case of steam of 212@
@=o= ; DALTON-1808-2,179.374

then the attraction becoming equal to the repulsion , the force which
any one particle would exercise must be equal to the weight of a column
of water of 4896 feet high . DALTON-1808-2,179.375

<paren> See page 146 . <$$paren> DALTON-1808-2,179.376

It is somewhat remarkable that those gases which are known to combine
occasionally , as azote and oxygen , and those which are never known to
combine , as hydrogen and carbonic acid , should dissolve one another
with equal <P_180> facility ; DALTON-1808-2,180.377

nay , these last exercise this solvent power with more effect than the
former ; DALTON-1808-2,180.378

for , hydrogen can draw up carbonic acid from the bottom to the top of
any vessel , notwithstanding the latter is 20 times the specific gravity
of the former . DALTON-1808-2,180.379

One would have thought that a force of adhesion was more to be expected
in the particles of steam , than in a mixture of hydrogen and carbonic
acid . DALTON-1808-2,180.380

But it is the business of those who adopt the theory of the mutual
solution of gases to explain these difficulties . DALTON-1808-2,180.381

In a mixture where are 8 particles of oxygen for 2 of hydrogen , it is
demonstrable that the central distances of the particle of hydrogen are
at a medium twice as great as those of oxygen . DALTON-1808-2,180.382

Now supposing the central distance of two adjacent particles of hydrogen
to be denoted by 12 , query , what is supposed to be the central
distance of any one particle of hydrogen from that one particle , or
those particles of oxygen with which it is connected by this weak
chemical union ? DALTON-1808-2,180.383

It would be well if those who understand and maintain the doctrine of
chemical solution would represent how they conceive this to be ;
DALTON-1808-2,180.384

it would enable those who are desirous to learn , to obtain a clear idea
of the system , and those who are dissatisfied with it , to point out
its defects with <P_181> more precision . DALTON-1808-2,181.385

The greatest possible central distance would be 8_1$$2 in the above
instance , DALTON-1808-2,181.386

and the least might perhaps be 1 . DALTON-1808-2,181.387

Berthollet , who decries the diagram by which I endeavoured to
illustrate my ideas on this subject , has not given us any precise
information , either verbally or otherwise , relative to the collocation
of the heterogeneous particles , unless it is to be gathered from the
consideration that the affinity is so weak that the mixture of fluids
preserves its dimensions . DALTON-1808-2,181.388

What can this weak affinity do , when opposed by a repulsive power of
infinite superiority ? DALTON-1808-2,181.389

In discussing the doctrines of elastic fluids mixed with vapours , Mr.
Murray seems disposed to question the accuracy of the fact , that the
quantity of vapour is the same in vacuo as in air , though he has not
attempted to ascertain in which case it more abounds .
DALTON-1808-2,181.390

This is certainly the touchstone of the mechanical and chemical theories
; DALTON-1808-2,181.391

and I had thought that whoever admitted the truth of the fact , must
unavoidably adopt the mechanical theory . DALTON-1808-2,181.392

Berthollet {COM:missing_comma} however , convinced from his own
experience , that the fact was incontrovertible , attempts to reconcile
it , inimical as it is , to the chemical theory ; DALTON-1808-2,181.393

with what success it is left to others to judge . DALTON-1808-2,181.394

Mr. Murray joins with Berthollet in condemning as extravagant <P_182>
the position I maintain , that if the atmosphere were annihilated , we
should have little more aqueous vapour than at present exists in it .
Upon which I shall only remark , that if either of those gentlemen will
calculate , or give a rough estimate upon their hypothesis , of the
quantity of aqueous vapour that would be collected around the earth , on
the said supposition , I will engage to discuss the subject with them
more at large . DALTON-1808-2,182.395

