<BEGIN_darwin-1842-2>

<P_83>

<heading>

Chapter IV . DARWIN-1842-2,83.4

On the growth of coral-reefs . DARWIN-1842-2,83.5

<$$heading>

In this chapter I will give all the facts which I have collected ,
relating to the distribution of coral-reefs , - to the conditions
favourable to their increase , - to the rate of their growth , - and to
the depth at which they are formed . DARWIN-1842-2,83.7

These subjects have an important bearing on the theory of the origin of
the different classes of coral-reefs . DARWIN-1842-2,83.8

<heading>

Section First . DARWIN-1842-2,83.10

<font> On the distribution of coral-reefs , and on the conditions
favourable to their increase . <$$font> DARWIN-1842-2,83.11

<$$heading>

With regard to the limits of latitude , over which coral-reefs extend ,
I have nothing new to add . DARWIN-1842-2,83.13

The Bermuda Islands , in 32@ @=o= 15 ' N. , is the point furthest
removed from the equator , in which they appear to exist ;
DARWIN-1842-2,83.14

and it has been suggested that their extension so far northward in this
instance is owing to the warmth of the Gulf Stream .
DARWIN-1842-2,83.15

In the Pacific , the Loo Choo Islands , in lat. 27@ @=o= N. , have
reefs on their shores , DARWIN-1842-2,83.16

and there is an atoll in 28@ @=o= 30 ' , situated N.W. of the Sandwich
Archipelago . DARWIN-1842-2,83.17

In the Red Sea there are coral-reefs in lat. 30@ @=o= .
DARWIN-1842-2,83.18

In the southern hemisphere coral-reefs do not extend so far from the
equatorial sea . DARWIN-1842-2,83.19

In the Southern Pacific there are only a few reefs <P_84> beyond the
line of the tropics , DARWIN-1842-2,84.20

but Houtmans Abrolhos , on the western shores of Australia in lat. 29@
@=o= S. , are of coral formation . DARWIN-1842-2,84.21

The proximity of volcanic land , owing to the lime generally evolved
from it , has been thought to be favourable to the increase of
coral-reefs . DARWIN-1842-2,84.22

There is , however , not much foundation for this view ;
DARWIN-1842-2,84.23

for nowhere are coral-reefs more extensive than on the shores of New
Caledonia , and of north-eastern Australia , which consist of primary
formations ; DARWIN-1842-2,84.24

and in the largest groups of atolls , namely the Maldiva , Chagos ,
Marshall , Gilbert , and Low Archipelagoes , there is no volcanic or
other kind of rock , excepting that formed of coral .
DARWIN-1842-2,84.25

The entire absence of coral-reefs in certain large areas within the
tropical seas , is a remarkable fact . DARWIN-1842-2,84.26

Thus no coral-reefs were observed , during the surveying voyages of the
<font> Beagle <$$font> and her Tender on the west coast of South America
south of the equator , or round the Galapagos Islands .
DARWIN-1842-2,84.27

It appears , also , that there are none north of the equator ;
DARWIN-1842-2,84.28

Mr. Lloyd , who surveyed the Isthmus of Panama , remarked to me , that
although he had seen corals living in the Bay of Panama , yet he had
never observed any reefs formed by them . DARWIN-1842-2,84.29

I at first attributed this absence of reefs on the coasts of Peru and of
the Galapagos Islands , to the <P_85> coldness of the currents from the
south , DARWIN-1842-2,85.30

but the Gulf of Panama is one of the hottest pelagic districts in the
world . DARWIN-1842-2,85.31

In the central parts of the Pacific there are islands entirely free from
reefs ; DARWIN-1842-2,85.32

in some few of these cases I have thought that this was owing to recent
volcanic action ; DARWIN-1842-2,85.33

but the existence of reefs round the greater part of Hawaii , one of the
Sandwich Islands , shows that recent volcanic action does not
necessarily prevent their growth . DARWIN-1842-2,85.34

In the last chapter I stated that the bottom of the sea round some
islands is thickly coated with living corals , which nevertheless do not
form reefs , either from insufficient growth , or from the species not
being adapted to contend with the breaking waves . DARWIN-1842-2,85.35

I have been assured by several people , that there are no coral-reefs on
the west coast of Africa , or round the islands in the Gulf of Guinea .
DARWIN-1842-2,85.36

This perhaps may be attributed , in part , to the sediment brought down
by the many rivers debouching on that coast , and to the extensive
mud-banks , which line great part of it . DARWIN-1842-2,85.37

But the islands of St. Helena , Ascension , the Cape Verdes , St.
Paul's , and Fernando Noronha , {COM:sic} are , also , entirely without
reefs , although they lie far out at sea , are composed of the same
ancient volcanic rocks , and have the same general form , with those
<P_86> islands in the Pacific , the shores of which are surrounded by
gigantic walls of coral-rock . DARWIN-1842-2,86.38

With the exception of Bermuda , there is not a single coral-reef in the
central expanse of the Atlantic Ocean . DARWIN-1842-2,86.39

It will , perhaps , be suggested that the quantity of carbonate of lime
in different parts of the sea , may regulate the presence of reefs .
DARWIN-1842-2,86.40

But this can@ @not be the case , DARWIN-1842-2,86.41

for at Ascension , the waves charged to excess precipitate a thick layer
of calcareous matter on the tidal rocks ; DARWIN-1842-2,86.42

and at St. Jago , in the Cape Verdes , carbonate of lime not only is
abundant on the shores , DARWIN-1842-2,86.43

but it forms the chief part of some upraised post-tertiary strata .
DARWIN-1842-2,86.44

The apparently capricious distribution , therefore , of coral-reefs ,
can@ @not be explained by any of these obvious causes ;
DARWIN-1842-2,86.45

but as the study of the terrestrial and better known half of the world
must convince every one that no station capable of supporting life is
lost , - nay more , that there is a struggle for each station , between
the different orders of nature , - we may conclude that in those parts
of the intertropical sea , in which there are no coral-reefs , there are
other organic bodies supplying the place of the reef-building polypifers
. DARWIN-1842-2,86.46

It has been shown in the chapter on Keeling atoll that there are some
species of large fish , and the whole tribe of Holothuriae which prey on
the tenderer parts of the corals . DARWIN-1842-2,86.47

On the other hand , the polypifers in their turn must prey on some other
organic beings ; the decrease of which from any cause would cause a
proportionate destruction of the living coral . DARWIN-1842-2,86.48

The relations , therefore , which determine the formation of reefs on
any shore , by the vigorous growth of the efficient kinds of coral ,
must be very complex , and with our imperfect knowledge quite
inexplicable . DARWIN-1842-2,86.49

From these considerations , we may infer that changes in the condition
of the sea , not obvious to our senses , might destroy all the
coral-reefs in one area , and cause them to appear in <P_87> another :
DARWIN-1842-2,87.50

thus , the Pacific or Indian Ocean might become as barren of coral-reefs
as the Atlantic now is , without our being able to assign any adequate
cause for such a change . DARWIN-1842-2,87.51

It has been a question with some naturalists , which part of a reef is
most favourable to the growth of coral . DARWIN-1842-2,87.52

The great mounds of living Porites and of Millepora round Keeling atoll
occur exclusively on the extreme verge of the reef , which is washed by
a constant succession of breakers ; DARWIN-1842-2,87.53

and living coral nowhere else forms solid masses . DARWIN-1842-2,87.54

At the Marshall islands the larger kinds of coral <paren> chiefly
species of Astraea , a genus closely allied to Porites <$$paren> " which
form rocks measuring several fathoms in thickness , " prefer , according
to Chamisso , the most violent surf . DARWIN-1842-2,87.55

I have stated that the outer margin of the Maldiva atolls consists of
living corals <paren> some of which , if not all , are of the same
species with those at Keeling atoll <$$paren> , DARWIN-1842-2,87.56

and here the surf is so tremendous , that even large ships have been
thrown , by a single heave of the sea , high and dry on the reef , all
on board thus escaping with their lives . DARWIN-1842-2,87.57

Ehrenberg remarks , that in the Red Sea the strongest corals live on the
outer reefs , and appear to love the surf ; DARWIN-1842-2,87.58

he adds , that the more branched kinds abound a little way within , but
that even these in still more protected places become smaller .
DARWIN-1842-2,87.59

Many other facts having a similar tendency might be adduced .
DARWIN-1842-2,87.60

It has , however , been doubted <P_88> by MM. Quoy and Gaimard ,
whether any kind of coral can even withstand , much less flourish in ,
the breakers of an open sea : DARWIN-1842-2,88.61

they affirm that the saxigenous lithophytes flourish only where the
water is tranquil , and the heat intense . DARWIN-1842-2,88.62

This statement has passed from one geological work to another ;
DARWIN-1842-2,88.63

nevertheless , the protection of the whole reef undoubtedly is due to
those kinds of coral , which can@ @not exist in the situations thought
by these naturalists to be most favourable to them .
DARWIN-1842-2,88.64

For should the outer and living margin perish , of any one of the many
low coral-islands , round which a line of great breakers is incessantly
foaming , the whole , it is scarcely possible to doubt , would be washed
away and destroyed , in less than half a century . DARWIN-1842-2,88.65

But the vital energies of the corals conquer the mechanical power of the
waves ; DARWIN-1842-2,88.66

and the large fragments of reef torn up by every storm , are replaced by
the slow but steady growth of the innumerable polypifers , which form
the living zone on its outer edge . DARWIN-1842-2,88.67

From these facts , it is certain , that the strongest and most massive
corals flourish , where most exposed . DARWIN-1842-2,88.68

The less perfect state of the reef of most atolls on the leeward and
less exposed side , compared with its state to windward ; and the
analogous case of the greater number of breaches on the near sides of
those atolls in the Maldiva Archipelago , which afford some protection
to each other , are obviously explained by this circumstance .
DARWIN-1842-2,88.69

If the question had been , under what conditions the greater number of
species of coral , not regarding their bulk and strength , were
developed , I should answer , - probably in the situations described by
MM. Quoy and Gaimard , where the water is tranquil and <P_89> the heat
intense . DARWIN-1842-2,89.70

The total number of species of coral in the circumtropical seas must be
very great : DARWIN-1842-2,89.71

in the Red Sea alone , 120 kinds , according to Ehrenberg , have been
observed . DARWIN-1842-2,89.72

The same author has observed that the recoil of the sea from a steep
shore is injurious to the growth of coral , although waves breaking over
a bank are not so . DARWIN-1842-2,89.73

Ehrenberg also states , that where there is much sediment , placed so as
to be liable to be moved by the waves , there is little or no coral ;
DARWIN-1842-2,89.74

and a collection of living specimens placed by him on a sandy shore died
in the course of a few days . DARWIN-1842-2,89.75

An experiment , however , will presently be related in which some large
masses of living coral increased rapidly in size , after having been
secured by stakes on a sandbank . DARWIN-1842-2,89.76

That loose sediment should be injurious to the living polypifers ,
appears , at first sight , probable ; DARWIN-1842-2,89.77

and accordingly , in sounding off Keeling atoll , and <paren> as will
hereafter be shown <$$paren> off Mauritius , the arming of the lead
invariably came up clean , where the coral was growing vigorously .
DARWIN-1842-2,89.78

This same circumstance has probably given rise to a strange belief ,
which , according to Capt. Owen , is general amongst the inhabitants of
the Maldiva atolls , namely that corals have roots , and therefore that
if merely broken down to the surface , they grow up again ; but , if
rooted out , they are permanently destroyed . DARWIN-1842-2,89.79

By this means the inhabitants keep their harbours clear ;
DARWIN-1842-2,89.80

and thus the French Governor of St. Mary's in Madagascar , " cleared
out and made a beautiful little port at that place . "
DARWIN-1842-2,89.81

For it is probable that sand would accumulate in the hollows formed by
tearing out the <P_90> corals , but not on the broken and projecting
stumps , DARWIN-1842-2,90.82

and therefore , in the former case , the fresh growth of the coral might
be thus prevented . DARWIN-1842-2,90.83

In the last chapter I remarked that fringing-reefs are almost
universally breached , where streams enter the sea .
DARWIN-1842-2,90.84

Most authors have attributed this fact to the injurious effects of the
fresh water , even where it enters the sea only in small quantity , and
during a part of the year . DARWIN-1842-2,90.85

No doubt brackish water would prevent or retard the growth of coral ;
DARWIN-1842-2,90.86

but I believe that the mud and sand which is deposited , even by
rivulets when flooded , is a much more efficient check .
DARWIN-1842-2,90.87

The reef on each side of the channel leading into Port Louis at
Mauritius , ends abruptly in a wall , at the foot of which I sounded and
found a bed of thick mud . DARWIN-1842-2,90.88

This steepness of the sides appears to be a general character in such
breaches : DARWIN-1842-2,90.89

Cook , speaking of one at Raiatea , says , " Like all the rest , it is
very steep on both sides . " DARWIN-1842-2,90.90

Now , if it were the fresh water mingling with the salt which prevented
the growth of coral , the reef certainly would not terminate abruptly ,
DARWIN-1842-2,90.91

but as the polypifers nearest the impure stream would grow less
vigorously than those farther off , so would the reef gradually thin
away . DARWIN-1842-2,90.92

On the other hand , the sediment brought down from the land would only
prevent the growth of the coral in the line of its deposition ,
DARWIN-1842-2,90.93

but would not check it on the side , so that the <P_91> reefs might
increase till they overhung the bed of the channel .
DARWIN-1842-2,91.94

The breaches are much fewer in number , DARWIN-1842-2,91.95

and front only the larger valleys in reefs of the encircling barrier
class . DARWIN-1842-2,91.96

They probably are kept open in the same manner as those into the lagoon
of an atoll , namely , by the force of the currents and the drifting
outwards of fine sediment . DARWIN-1842-2,91.97

Their position in front of valleys , although often separated from the
land by deep water lagoon-channels , which it might be thought would
entirely remove the injurious effects both of the fresh water and the
sediment , will receive a simple explanation when we discuss the origin
of barrier-reefs . DARWIN-1842-2,91.98

In the vegetable kingdom every different station has its peculiar group
of plants , DARWIN-1842-2,91.99

and similar relations appear to prevail with corals .
DARWIN-1842-2,91.100

We have already described the great difference between the corals within
the lagoon of an atoll and those on its outer margin .
DARWIN-1842-2,91.101

The corals , also , on the margin of Keeling Island occurred in zones ;
DARWIN-1842-2,91.102

thus the <font> Porites <$$font> and <font> Millepora complanata
<$$font> grow to a large size only where they are washed by a heavy sea
, DARWIN-1842-2,91.103

and are killed by a short exposure to the air ; whereas , three species
of Nullipora also live amidst the breakers , but are able to survive
uncovered for a part of each tide ; DARWIN-1842-2,91.104

at greater depths , a strong Madrepora and <font> Millepora alcicornis
<$$font> are the commonest kinds ; the former appearing to be confined
to this part : DARWIN-1842-2,91.105

beneath the zone of massive corals , minute encrusting corallines and
other organic bodies live . DARWIN-1842-2,91.106

If we compare the external margin of the reef at Keeling atoll with that
on the leeward side of Mauritius , which are very differently
circumstanced , we shall find a corresponding difference in the
appearance of the corals . DARWIN-1842-2,91.107

At the latter place , the genus Madrepora is preponderant over every
other kind , DARWIN-1842-2,91.108

and beneath the zone of massive corals there are large beds of
Seriatopora . DARWIN-1842-2,91.109

There is also a marked <P_92> difference , according to Captain Moresby
, between the great branching corals of the Red Sea , and those on the
reefs of the Maldiva atolls . DARWIN-1842-2,92.110

These facts , which in themselves are deserving of notice , bear ,
perhaps , not very remotely , on a remarkable circumstance which has
been pointed out to me by Capt. Moresby , namely , that with very few
exceptions , none of the coral-knolls within the lagoons of Peros Banhos
, Diego Garcia , and the Great Chagos Bank <paren> all situated in the
Chagos group <$$paren> , rise to the surface of the water ; whereas all
those , with equally few exceptions , within Solomon and Egmont atolls
in the same group , and likewise within the large southern Maldiva
atolls , reach the surface . DARWIN-1842-2,92.111

I make these statements , after having examined the charts of each atoll
. DARWIN-1842-2,92.112

In the lagoon of Peros Banhos , which is nearly twenty miles across ,
there is only one single reef which rises to the surface ;
DARWIN-1842-2,92.113

in Diego Garcia there are seven , DARWIN-1842-2,92.114

but several of these lie close to the margin of the lagoon ,
DARWIN-1842-2,92.115

and need scarcely have been reckoned : DARWIN-1842-2,92.116

in the Great Chagos Bank there is not one . DARWIN-1842-2,92.117

On the other hand , in the lagoons of some of the great southern Maldiva
atolls , although thickly studded with reefs , every one without
exception rises to the surface ; DARWIN-1842-2,92.118

and on an average there are less than two submerged reefs in each atoll
; DARWIN-1842-2,92.119

in the northern atolls , however , the submerged lagoon-reefs are not
quite so rare . DARWIN-1842-2,92.120

The submerged reefs in the Chagos atolls generally have from one to
seven fathoms water on them , DARWIN-1842-2,92.121

but some have from seven to ten . DARWIN-1842-2,92.122

Most of them are small , with very steep sides ; DARWIN-1842-2,92.123

<P_93>

at Peros Banhos they rise from a depth of about thirty fathoms , and
some of them in the Great Chagos Bank from above forty fathoms ;
DARWIN-1842-2,93.125

they are covered , Capt. Moresby informs me , with living and healthy
coral , two and three feet high , consisting of several species .
DARWIN-1842-2,93.126

Why then have not these lagoon-reefs reached the surface , like the
innumerable ones in the atolls above-named ? DARWIN-1842-2,93.127

If we attempt to assign any difference in their external conditions , as
the cause of this diversity , we are at once baffled :
DARWIN-1842-2,93.128

the lagoon of Diego Garcia is not deep , DARWIN-1842-2,93.129

and is almost wholly surrounded by its reef ; DARWIN-1842-2,93.130

Peros Banhos is very deep , much larger , with many wide passages
communicating with the open sea . DARWIN-1842-2,93.131

On the other hand , of those atolls , in which all , or nearly all the
lagoon-reefs have reached the surface , some are small , others large ,
some shallow , others deep , some well-enclosed , and others open .
DARWIN-1842-2,93.132

Capt. Moresby informs me that he has seen a French chart of Diego
Garcia made eighty years before his survey , and apparently very
accurate ; DARWIN-1842-2,93.133

and from it he infers , that during this interval there has not been the
smallest change in the depth on any of the knolls within the lagoon .
DARWIN-1842-2,93.134

It is also known that during the last fifty-one years , the eastern
channel into the lagoon has neither become narrower , nor decreased in
depth ; DARWIN-1842-2,93.135

and as there are numerous small knolls of living coral within it , some
change might have been anticipated . DARWIN-1842-2,93.136

Moreover , as the whole reef round the lagoon of this atoll has been
converted into land - an unparalleled case , I believe , in an atoll of
such large size , - and as the strip of land is for considerable spaces
more than half a mile wide - also a very unusual circumstance , - we
have the best possible evidence , that Diego Garcia has remained at its
present level for a very long period . DARWIN-1842-2,93.137

With this fact , and with the knowledge , <P_94> that no sensible change
has taken place during eighty years in the coral-knolls , and
considering that every single reef has reached the surface in other
atolls , which do not present the smallest appearance of being older
than Diego Garcia and Peros Banhos , and which are placed under the same
external conditions with them , one is led to conclude that these
submerged reefs , although covered with luxuriant coral , have no
tendency to grow upwards , and that they would remain at their present
levels for an almost indefinite period . DARWIN-1842-2,94.138

From the number of these knolls , from their position , size , and form
, - many of them being only one or two_hundred yards across , with a
rounded outline , and precipitous sides , - it is indisputable that they
have been formed by the growth of coral ; DARWIN-1842-2,94.139

and this makes the case much more remarkable . DARWIN-1842-2,94.140

In Peros Banhos and in the Great Chagos Bank , some of these almost
columnar masses are 200 feet high , DARWIN-1842-2,94.141

and their summits lie only from two to eight fathoms beneath the surface
; DARWIN-1842-2,94.142

therefore , a small proportional amount more of growth would cause them
to attain the surface , like those numerous knolls , which rise from an
equally great depth within the Maldiva atolls . DARWIN-1842-2,94.143

We can hardly suppose that time has been wanting for the upward growth
of the coral , whilst in Diego Garcia , the broad annular strip of land
, formed by the continued accumulation of detritus , shows how long this
atoll has remained at its present level . DARWIN-1842-2,94.144

We must look to some other cause than the rate of growth ;
DARWIN-1842-2,94.145

and I suspect it will be found in the reefs being formed of different
species of corals , adapted to live at different depths .
DARWIN-1842-2,94.146

The Great Chagos Bank is situated in the centre of the Chagos group ,
and the Pitt and Speaker Banks at its two extreme points .
DARWIN-1842-2,94.147

These banks resemble atolls , except in <P_95> their external rim being
about eight fathoms submerged , and in being formed of dead rock , with
very little living coral on it : DARWIN-1842-2,95.148

a portion nine miles long of the annular reef of Peros Banhos atoll is
in the same condition . DARWIN-1842-2,95.149

These facts , as will hereafter be shown , render it very probable that
the whole group at some former period subsided seven or eight fathoms ;
and that the coral perished on the outer margin of those atolls which
are now submerged , but that it continued alive , and grew up to the
surface on those which are now perfect . DARWIN-1842-2,95.150

If these atolls did subside , and if from the suddenness of the movement
or from any other cause , those corals which are better adapted to live
at a certain depth than at the surface , once got possession of the
knolls , supplanting the former occupants , they would exert little or
no tendency to grow upwards . DARWIN-1842-2,95.151

To illustrate this , I may observe , that if the corals of the upper
zone on the outer edge of Keeling atoll were to perish , it is
improbable that those of the lower zone would grow to the surface , and
thus become exposed to conditions for which they do not appear to be
adapted . DARWIN-1842-2,95.152

The conjecture , that the corals on the submerged knolls within the
Chagos atolls have analogous habits with those of the lower zone outside
Keeling atoll , receives some support from a remark by Captain Moresby ,
namely , that they have a different appearance from those on the reefs
in the Maldiva atolls , which , as we have seen , all rise to the
surface : DARWIN-1842-2,95.153

he compares the kind of difference to that of the vegetation under
different climates . DARWIN-1842-2,95.154

I have entered at considerable length into this case , although unable
to throw much light on it , in order to show that an equal tendency to
upward growth ought not to be attributed to all coral-reefs , - to those
situated at different depths , - to those forming the ring of an atoll
or those on the knolls within a lagoon , - to those in one area and
those in another . DARWIN-1842-2,95.155

<P_96>

The inference , therefore , that one reef could not grow up to the
surface within a given time , because another , not known to be covered
with the same species of corals , and not known to be placed under
conditions exactly the same , has not within the same time reached the
surface , is unsound . DARWIN-1842-2,96.157

<heading>

Section Second . DARWIN-1842-2,96.159

<font> On the rate of growth of coral-reefs . <$$font>
DARWIN-1842-2,96.160

<$$heading>

The remark made at the close of the last section , naturally leads to
this division of our subject , which has not , I think , hitherto been
considered under a right point of view . DARWIN-1842-2,96.162

Ehrenberg has stated , that in the Red Sea , the corals only coat other
rocks in a layer from one to two feet in thickness , or at most to a
fathom and a half ; DARWIN-1842-2,96.163

and he disbelieves that , in any case , they form , by their own proper
growth , great masses , stratum over stratum . DARWIN-1842-2,96.164

A nearly similar observation has been made by MM. Quoy and Gaimard ,
with respect to the thickness of some upraised beds of coral , which
they examined at Timor and some other places . DARWIN-1842-2,96.165

Ehrenberg saw certain large massive corals in the Red Sea , which he
imagines to be of such vast antiquity , that they might have been beheld
by Pharaoh ; DARWIN-1842-2,96.166

and according to Mr. Lyell there are certain corals at Bermuda , which
are known by tradition , to have been living for centuries .
DARWIN-1842-2,96.167

To show how slowly coral-reefs grow upwards , Captain Beechey has
adduced the case of <P_97> the Dolphin Reef off Tahiti , which has
remained at the same depth beneath the surface , namely , about two
fathoms and a half , for a period of sixty-seven years .
DARWIN-1842-2,97.168

There are reefs in the Red Sea , which certainly do not appear to have
increased in dimensions during the last half-century , and from the
comparison of old charts with recent surveys , probably not during the
last two_hundred years . DARWIN-1842-2,97.169

These , and other similar facts , have so strongly impressed many with
the belief of the extreme slowness of the growth of corals , that they
have even doubted the possibility of islands in the great oceans having
been formed by their agency . DARWIN-1842-2,97.170

Others , again , who have not been overwhelmed by this difficulty , have
admitted that it would require thousands , and tens of thousands of
years , to form a mass , even of inconsiderable thickness ;
DARWIN-1842-2,97.171

but the subject has not , I believe , been viewed in the proper light .
DARWIN-1842-2,97.172

That masses of considerable thickness have been formed by the growth of
coral , may be inferred with certainty from the following facts :
DARWIN-1842-2,97.173

- In the deep lagoons of Peros Banhos and of the Great Chagos Bank ,
there are , as already described , small steep-sided knolls covered with
living coral . DARWIN-1842-2,97.174

There are similar knolls in the southern Maldiva atolls , some of which
, as Captain Moresby assures me , are less than a_hundred yards in
diameter , DARWIN-1842-2,97.175

and rise to the surface from a depth of between 250 and 300 feet .
DARWIN-1842-2,97.176

Considering their number , form , and position , it would be
preposterous to suppose that they are based on pinnacles of any rock ,
not of coral formation ; or that sediment could have been heaped up into
such small and steep isolated cones . DARWIN-1842-2,97.177

As no kind of living coral grows above the height of a few feet , we are
compelled to suppose that these knolls have been formed by the
successive growth and death of <P_98> many individuals , - first one
being broken off or killed by some accident , and then another , and one
set of species being replaced by another set with different habits , as
the reef rose nearer the surface , or as other changes supervened .
DARWIN-1842-2,98.178

The spaces between the corals would become filled up with fragments and
sand , DARWIN-1842-2,98.179

and such matter would probably soon be consolidated ,
DARWIN-1842-2,98.180

for we learn from Lieut. Nelson , that at Bermuda a process of this
kind takes place beneath water , without the aid of evaporation .
DARWIN-1842-2,98.181

In reefs , also , of the barrier class , we may feel sure , as I have
shown , that masses of great thickness have been formed by the growth of
the coral ; DARWIN-1842-2,98.182

in the case of Vanikoro , judging only from the depth of the moat
between the land and the reef , the wall of coral-rock must be at least
300 feet in vertical thickness . DARWIN-1842-2,98.183

It is unfortunate that the upraised coral-islands in the Pacific have
not been examined by a geologist . DARWIN-1842-2,98.184

The cliffs of Elizabeth Island , in the Low Archipelago , are eighty
feet high , DARWIN-1842-2,98.185

and appear , from Captain Beechey's description , to consist of a
homogeneous coral-rock . DARWIN-1842-2,98.186

From the isolated position of this island , we may safely infer that it
is an upraised atoll , and therefore that it has been formed by masses
of coral , grown together : DARWIN-1842-2,98.187

Savage Island seems , from the description of the younger Forster , to
have a similar structure , DARWIN-1842-2,98.188

and its shores are about forty feet high : DARWIN-1842-2,98.189

some of the Cook Islands also appear to be similarly composed .
DARWIN-1842-2,98.190

Capt. Belcher , R. N. , in a letter which Capt. Beaufort showed me
at the Admiralty , speaking of Bow atoll , says , " I have succeeded in
boring forty-five feet through coral-sand , when the auger became jammed
by the falling in of the surrounding <font> creamy <$$font> matter . "
DARWIN-1842-2,98.191

On one of the Maldiva <P_99> atolls , Capt. Moresby bored to a depth of
twenty-six feet , when his auger also broke : DARWIN-1842-2,99.192

he has had the kindness to give me the matter brought up ;
DARWIN-1842-2,99.193

it is perfectly white , and like finely triturated coral-rock .
DARWIN-1842-2,99.194

In my description of Keeling atoll , I have given some facts , which
show that the reef probably has grown outwards ; DARWIN-1842-2,99.195

and I have found , just within the outer margin , the great mounds of
Porites and of Millepora , with their summits lately killed , and their
sides subsequently thickened by the growth of the coral :
DARWIN-1842-2,99.196

a layer , also , of Nullipora had already coated the dead surface .
DARWIN-1842-2,99.197

As the external slope of the reef is the same round the whole of this
atoll , and round many other atolls , the angle of inclination must
result from an adaption between the growing powers of the coral , and
the force of the breakers , and their action on the loose sediment .
DARWIN-1842-2,99.198

The reef , therefore , could not increase outwards , without a nearly
equal addition to every part of the slope , so that the original
inclination might be preserved , DARWIN-1842-2,99.199

and this would require a large amount of sediment , all derived from the
wear of corals and shells , to be added to the lower part .
DARWIN-1842-2,99.200

Moreover , at Keeling atoll , and probably in many other cases , the
different kinds of corals would have to encroach on each other ;
DARWIN-1842-2,99.201

thus the Nulliporae can@ @not increase outwards without encroaching on
the Porites and <font> Millepora complanata <$$font> , as is now taking
place ; nor these latter without encroaching on the strongly branched
Madrepora , the <font> Millepora alcicornis <$$font> , and some Astraeas
; nor these again without a foundation being formed for them within the
requisite depth , by the accumulation of sediment .
DARWIN-1842-2,99.202

How slow , then , must be the ordinary lateral or outward growth of such
reefs . DARWIN-1842-2,99.203

But off Christmas atoll , where the sea is much more shallow than is
usual , we have good reason to believe that , within a period not very
remote , the reef has increased considerably <P_100> in width .
DARWIN-1842-2,100.204

The land has the extraordinary breadth of three miles ;
DARWIN-1842-2,100.205

it consists of parallel ridges of shells and broken corals , which
furnish " an incontestable proof , " as observed by Cook , " that the
island has been produced by accessions from the sea , and is in a state
of increase . " DARWIN-1842-2,100.206

The land is fronted by a coral-reef , DARWIN-1842-2,100.207

and from the manner in which islets are known to be formed , we may feel
confident that the reef was not three miles wide , when the first , or
most backward ridge , was thrown up ; DARWIN-1842-2,100.208

and , therefore , we must conclude that the reef has grown outwards
during the accumulation of the successive ridges .
DARWIN-1842-2,100.209

Here then , a wall of coral-rock of very considerable breadth has been
formed by the outward growth of the living margin , within a period
during which ridges of shells and corals , lying on the bare surface ,
have not decayed . DARWIN-1842-2,100.210

There can be little doubt , from the account given by Capt. Beechey ,
that Matilda atoll , in the Low Archipelago , has been converted in the
space of thirty-four years , from being , as described by the crew of a
wrecked whaling vessel , a " reef of rocks " into a lagoon-island ,
fourteen miles in length , with " one of its sides covered nearly the
whole way with high trees . " DARWIN-1842-2,100.211

The islets , also , on Keeling atoll , it has been shown , have
increased in length , DARWIN-1842-2,100.212

and since the construction of an old chart , several of them have become
united into one long islet ; DARWIN-1842-2,100.213

but in this case , and in that of Matilda atoll , we have no proof ,
DARWIN-1842-2,100.214

and can only infer as probable , that the reef , that is the foundation
of the islets , has increased as well as the islets themselves .
DARWIN-1842-2,100.215

After these considerations , I attach little importance , as indicating
the ordinary and still less the possible rate of <font> outward <$$font>
growth of coral-reefs , to the fact that certain reefs <P_101> in the
Red Sea have not increased during a long interval of time ; or to other
such cases , as that of Ouluthy atoll in the Caroline group , where
every islet , described a_hundred years before by Cantova , was found in
the same state by Lutke , - without it could be shown that , in these
cases , the conditions were favourable to the vigorous and unopposed
growth of the corals living in the different zones of depth , and that a
proper basis for the extension of the reef was present .
DARWIN-1842-2,101.216

The former conditions must depend on many contingencies ,
DARWIN-1842-2,101.217

and in the deep oceans where coral formations most abound , a basis
within the requisite depth can rarely be present .
DARWIN-1842-2,101.218

Nor do I attach any importance to the fact of certain submerged reefs ,
as those off Tahiti , or those within Diego Garcia , not now being
nearer the surface than they were many years ago , as an indication of
the rate under favourable circumstances of the <font> upward <$$font>
growth of reefs ; after it has been shown , that all the reefs have
grown to the surface in some of the Chagos atolls , but that in
neighbouring atolls which appear to be of equal antiquity and to be
exposed to the same external conditions , every reef remains submerged ;
DARWIN-1842-2,101.219

for we are almost driven to attribute this to a difference , not in the
rate of growth , but in the habits of the corals in the two cases .
DARWIN-1842-2,101.220

In an old-standing reef , the corals , which are so different in kind on
different parts of it , are probably all adapted to the stations they
occupy , DARWIN-1842-2,101.221

and hold their places , like other organic beings , by a struggle one
with another , and with external nature ; DARWIN-1842-2,101.222

hence we may infer that their growth <P_102> would generally be slow ,
except under peculiarly favourable circumstances .
DARWIN-1842-2,102.223

Almost the only natural condition , allowing a quick upward growth of
the whole surface of a reef , would be a slow subsidence of the area in
which it stood ; DARWIN-1842-2,102.224

- if , for instance , Keeling atoll were to subside two or three feet ,
can we doubt that the projecting margin of live coral , about half an
inch in thickness , which surrounds the dead upper surfaces of the
mounds of Porites , would in this case form a concentric layer over them
, and the reef thus increase upwards , instead of , as at present ,
outwards ? DARWIN-1842-2,102.225

The Nulliporae are now encroaching on the Porites and Millepora ,
DARWIN-1842-2,102.226

but in this case might we not confidently expect that the latter would ,
in their turn , encroach on the Nulliporae ? DARWIN-1842-2,102.227

After a subsidence of this kind , the sea would gain on the islets ,
DARWIN-1842-2,102.228

and the great fields of dead but upright corals in the lagoon , would be
covered by a sheet of clear water ; DARWIN-1842-2,102.229

and might we not then expect that these reefs would rise to the surface
, as they anciently did when the lagoon was less confined by islets ,
and as they did within a period of ten years in the schooner-channel ,
cut by the inhabitants ? DARWIN-1842-2,102.230

In one of the Maldiva atolls , a reef , which within a very few years
existed as an islet bearing cocoa-nut trees , was found by Lieut.
Prentice " <font> entirely covered with live coral and Madrepore .
<$$font> " DARWIN-1842-2,102.231

The natives believe that the islet was washed away by a change in the
currents , DARWIN-1842-2,102.232

but if , instead of this , it had quietly subsided , surely every part
of the island which offered a solid foundation , would in a like manner
have become coated with living coral . DARWIN-1842-2,102.233

Through steps such as these , any thickness of rock , composed of a
singular intermixture of various kinds of corals , shells , and
calcareous sediment , might be formed ; DARWIN-1842-2,102.234

but without subsidence , the thickness would necessarily be determined
by the depth at which the reef-building <P_103> polypifers can exist .
DARWIN-1842-2,103.235

If it be asked , at what rate in years I suppose a reef of coral
favourably circumstanced could grow up from a given depth ; I should
answer , that we have no precise evidence on this point , and
comparatively little concern with it . DARWIN-1842-2,103.236

We see , in innumerable points over wide areas , that the rate has been
sufficient , either to bring up the reefs from various depths to the
surface , or , as is more probable , to keep them at the surface ,
during progressive subsidences ; DARWIN-1842-2,103.237

and this is a much more important standard of comparison than any cycle
of years . DARWIN-1842-2,103.238

It may , however , be inferred from the following facts , that the rate
in years under favourable circumstances would be very far from slow .
DARWIN-1842-2,103.239

Dr. Allan , of Forres , has , in his MS. Thesis deposited in the
library of the Edinburgh University <paren> extracts from which I owe to
the kindness of Dr. Malcolmson <$$paren> , the following account of
some experiments , which he tried during his travels in the years 1830
to 1832 on the east coast of Madagascar . DARWIN-1842-2,103.240

" To ascertain the rise and progress of the coral-family , and fix the
number of species met with at Foul Point <paren> lat. 17@ @=o= 40 '
<$$paren> , twenty species of coral were taken off the reef and planted
apart on a sand-bank <font> three feet deep at low water . <$$font>
DARWIN-1842-2,103.241

Each portion weighed ten pounds , DARWIN-1842-2,103.242

and was kept in its place by stakes . DARWIN-1842-2,103.243

Similar quantities were placed in a clump and secured as the rest .
DARWIN-1842-2,103.244

This was done in December 1830 . DARWIN-1842-2,103.245

In July following , each detached mass was nearly level with the sea at
low water , quite immovable , and several feet long , stretching as the
parent reef , with the coast current from north to south .
DARWIN-1842-2,103.246

The masses accumulated in a clump were found equally increased , but
some of the species in such unequal ratios , as to be growing over each
other . " DARWIN-1842-2,103.247

The loss of Dr. Allan's magnificent collection by shipwreck ,
unfortunately prevents its being known to what genera these corals
<P_104> belonged ; DARWIN-1842-2,104.248

but from the numbers experimented on , it is certain that all the more
conspicuous kinds must have been included . DARWIN-1842-2,104.249

Dr. Allan informs me , in a letter , that he believes it was a
Madrepora , which grew most vigorously . DARWIN-1842-2,104.250

One may be permitted to suspect that the level of the sea might possibly
have been somewhat different at the two stated periods ;
DARWIN-1842-2,104.251

nevertheless , it is quite evident that the growth of the ten-pound
masses , during the six or seven months , at the end of which they were
found immovably fixed and several feet in length , must have been very
great . DARWIN-1842-2,104.252

The fact of the different kinds of coral , when placed in one clump ,
having increased in extremely unequal ratios , is very interesting , as
it shows the manner in which a reef , supporting many species , of coral
, would probably be affected by a change in the external conditions
favouring one kind more than another . DARWIN-1842-2,104.253

The growth of the masses of coral in N. and S. lines parallel to the
prevailing currents , whether due to the drifting of sediment or to the
simple movement of the water , is , also , a very interesting
circumstance . DARWIN-1842-2,104.254

A fact , communicated to me by Lieut. Wellstead , I. N. , in some
degree corroborates the result of Dr. Allan's experiments :
DARWIN-1842-2,104.255

it is , that in the Persian Gulf a ship had her copper bottom encrusted
in the course of twenty months with a layer of coral , <font> two feet
<$$font> in thickness , which it required great force to remove , when
the vessel was docked : DARWIN-1842-2,104.256

it was not ascertained to what order this coral belonged .
DARWIN-1842-2,104.257

The case of the schooner-channel choked up with coral in an interval of
<P_105> less than ten years , in the lagoon of Keeling atoll , should be
here borne in mind . DARWIN-1842-2,105.258

We may also infer , from the trouble which the inhabitants of the
Maldiva atolls take to root out , as they express it , the coral-knolls
from their harbours , that their growth can hardly be very slow .
DARWIN-1842-2,105.259

From the facts given in this section , it may be concluded , first ,
that considerable thicknesses of rock have certainly been formed within
the present geological aera by the growth of coral and the accumulation
of its detritus ; and , secondly , that the increase of individual
corals and <P_106> of reefs , both outwards or horizontally and upwards
or vertically , under the peculiar conditions favourable to such
increase , is not slow , when referred either to the standard of the
average oscillations of level in the earth's crust , or to the more
precise but less important one of a cycle of years .
DARWIN-1842-2,106.260

<heading>

Section Third . DARWIN-1842-2,106.262

<font> On the Depths at which Reef-building Polypifers live . <$$font>
DARWIN-1842-2,106.263

<$$heading>

I have already described in detail , which might have appeared trivial ,
the nature of the bottom of the sea immediately surrounding Keeling
atoll ; DARWIN-1842-2,106.265

and I will now describe with almost equal care the soundings off the
fringing-reefs of Mauritius . DARWIN-1842-2,106.266

I have preferred this arrangement , for the sake of grouping together
facts of a similar nature . DARWIN-1842-2,106.267

I sounded with the wide bell-shaped lead which Capt. Fitzroy used at
Keeling Island , DARWIN-1842-2,106.268

but my examination of the bottom was confined to a few miles of coast
<paren> between Port Louis and Tomb Bay <$$paren> on the leeward side of
the island . DARWIN-1842-2,106.269

The edge of the reef is formed of great shapeless masses of branching
Madrepores , which chiefly consist of two species , - apparently <font>
M. corymbosa <$$font> and <font> pocillifera <$$font> , - mingled with
a few other kinds of coral . DARWIN-1842-2,106.270

These masses are separated from each other by the most irregular gullies
and cavities , into which the lead sinks many feet .
DARWIN-1842-2,106.271

Outside this irregular border of Madrepores , the water deepens
gradually to twenty fathoms , which depth generally is found at the
distance of from half to three-quarters of a mile from the reef .
DARWIN-1842-2,106.272

A little further out the depth is thirty fathoms , DARWIN-1842-2,106.273

and thence the bank slopes rapidly into the depths of the ocean .
DARWIN-1842-2,106.274

This inclination is very gentle compared with that outside <P_107>
Keeling and other atolls , DARWIN-1842-2,107.275

but compared with most coasts it is steep . DARWIN-1842-2,107.276

The water was so clear outside the reef , that I could distinguish every
object forming the rugged bottom . DARWIN-1842-2,107.277

In this part , and to a depth of eight fathoms , I sounded repeatedly ,
DARWIN-1842-2,107.278

and at each cast pounded the bottom with the broad lead ,
DARWIN-1842-2,107.279

nevertheless the arming invariably came up perfectly clean , but deeply
indented . DARWIN-1842-2,107.280

From eight to fifteen fathoms a little calcareous sand was occasionally
brought up , DARWIN-1842-2,107.281

but more frequently the arming was simply indented .
DARWIN-1842-2,107.282

In all this space the two Madrepores above mentioned , and two species
of Astraea , with rather large stars , seemed the commonest kinds ;
DARWIN-1842-2,107.283

and it must be noticed that twice at the depth of fifteen fathoms , the
arming was marked with a clean impression of an Astraea .
DARWIN-1842-2,107.284

Besides these lithophytes , some fragments of the <font> Millepora
alcicornis <$$font> , which occurs in the same relative position at
Keeling Island , were brought up ; DARWIN-1842-2,107.285

and in the deeper parts there were large beds of a Seriatopora ,
different from <font> S. subulata <$$font> , but closely allied to it .
DARWIN-1842-2,107.286

On the beach within the reef , the rolled fragments consisted chiefly of
the corals just mentioned , and of a <P_108> massive Porites , like that
at Keeling atoll , of a Meandrina , <font> Pocillopora verrucosa
<$$font> , and of numerous fragments of Nullipora .
DARWIN-1842-2,108.287

From fifteen to twenty fathoms the bottom was , with few exceptions ,
either formed of sand , or thickly covered with Seriatopora :
DARWIN-1842-2,108.288

this delicate coral seems to form at these depths extensive beds
unmingled with any other kind . DARWIN-1842-2,108.289

At 20 fathoms , one sounding brought up a fragment of Madrepora
apparently <font> M. pocillifera <$$font> , DARWIN-1842-2,108.290

and I believe it is the same species <paren> for I neglected to bring
specimens from both stations <$$paren> which mainly forms the upper
margin of the reef ; DARWIN-1842-2,108.291

if so , it grows in depths varying from to 20 fathoms .
DARWIN-1842-2,108.292

Between twenty and thirty-three fathoms I obtained several soundings ,
DARWIN-1842-2,108.293

and they all showed a sandy bottom , with one exception at 30 fathoms ,
when the arming came up scooped out , as if by the margin of a large
Caryophyllia . DARWIN-1842-2,108.294

Beyond 33 fathoms I sounded only once ; DARWIN-1842-2,108.295

and from 86 fathoms , at the distance of one mile and a third from the
edge of the reef , the arming brought up calcareous sand with a pebble
of volcanic rock . DARWIN-1842-2,108.296

The circumstance of the arming having invariably come up quite clean ,
when sounding within a certain number of fathoms off the reefs of
Mauritius and Keeling atoll <paren> eight fathoms in the former case ,
and twelve in the latter <$$paren> , and of its having always come up
<paren> with one exception <$$paren> smoothed and covered with sand ,
when the depth exceeded 20 fathoms , probably indicates a criterion , by
which the limits of the vigorous growth of coral might in all cases be
readily ascertained . DARWIN-1842-2,108.297

I do not , however , suppose that if a vast number of soundings were
obtained round these islands , the limit above assigned would be found
never to vary , DARWIN-1842-2,108.298

but I conceive the facts are sufficient to show , that the exceptions
would be few . DARWIN-1842-2,108.299

The circumstance of a <font> gradual <$$font> change , in the two cases
, from a field of clean coral to a smooth sandy <P_109> bottom , is far
more important in indicating the depth at which the larger kinds of
coral flourish than almost any number of separate observations on the
depth , at which certain species have been dredged up .
DARWIN-1842-2,109.300

For we can understand the gradation , only as a prolonged struggle
against unfavourable conditions . DARWIN-1842-2,109.301

If a person were to find the soil clothed with turf on the banks of a
stream of water , but on going to some distance on one side of it , he
observed the blades of grass growing thinner and thinner , with
intervening patches of sand , until he entered a desert of sand , he
would safely conclude , especially if changes of the same kind were
noticed in other places , that the presence of the water was absolutely
necessary to the formation of a thick bed of turf :
DARWIN-1842-2,109.302

so may we conclude , with the same feeling of certainty , that thick
beds of coral are formed only at small depths beneath the surface of the
sea . DARWIN-1842-2,109.303

I have endeavoured to collect every fact , which might either invalidate
or corroborate this conclusion . DARWIN-1842-2,109.304

Capt. Moresby , whose opportunities for observation during his survey
of the Maldiva and Chagos Archipelagoes have been unrivalled , informs
me , that the upper part or zone of the steep-sided reefs , on the inner
and outer coasts of the atolls in both groups , invariably consists of
coral , and the lower parts of sand . DARWIN-1842-2,109.305

At seven or eight fathoms depth , the bottom is formed , as could be
seen through the clear water , of great living masses of coral , which
at about ten fathoms generally stand some way apart from each other ,
with patches of white sand between them , DARWIN-1842-2,109.306

and at a little greater depth these patches become united into a smooth
steep slope , without any coral . DARWIN-1842-2,109.307

Capt. Moresby , also , informs me in support of his statement , that he
found only decayed coral on the Padua Bank <paren> northern part of the
<P_110> Laccadive group <$$paren> which has an average depth between 25
and 35 fathoms , but that on some other banks in the same group with
only ten or twelve fathoms water on them <paren> for instance , the
Tillacapeni bank <$$paren> , the coral was living .
DARWIN-1842-2,110.308

With regard to the coral-reefs in the Red Sea , Ehrenberg has the
following passage : DARWIN-1842-2,110.309

- " The living corals do not descend there into great depths .
DARWIN-1842-2,110.310

On the edges of islets and near reefs , where the depth was small , very
many lived ; DARWIN-1842-2,110.311

but we found no more even at six fathoms . DARWIN-1842-2,110.312

The pearl-fishers at Yemen and Massaua asserted that there was no coral
near the pearl-banks at nine fathoms deep , but only sand .
DARWIN-1842-2,110.313

We were not able to institute any more special researches . "
DARWIN-1842-2,110.314

I am , however , assured both by Captain Moresby and Lieut. Wellstead ,
that in the more northern parts of the Red Sea , there are extensive
beds of living coral at a depth of 25 fathoms , in which the anchors of
their vessels were frequently entangled . DARWIN-1842-2,110.315

Captain Moresby attributes the less depth , at which the corals are able
to live in the places mentioned by Ehrenberg , to the greater quantity
of sediment there ; DARWIN-1842-2,110.316

and the situations , where they were flourishing at the depth of 25
fathoms , were protected , DARWIN-1842-2,110.317

and the water was extraordinarily limpid . DARWIN-1842-2,110.318

On the leeward side of Mauritius , where I found the coral growing at a
somewhat greater depth than at Keeling atoll , the sea , owing
apparently to its tranquil state , was likewise very clear .
DARWIN-1842-2,110.319

Within the lagoons of some of the Marshall atolls , where the water can
be but little agitated , there are , according to Kotzebue , living beds
of coral in 25 fathoms . DARWIN-1842-2,110.320

From these facts , and considering the manner in which the beds of clean
coral off Mauritius , Keeling Island , the Maldiva and <P_111> Chagos
atolls , graduated into a sandy slope , it appears very probable that
the depth , at which reef-building polypifers can exist , is partly
determined by the extent of inclined surface , which the currents of the
sea and the recoiling waves have the power to keep free from sediment .
DARWIN-1842-2,111.321

MM. Quoy and Gaimard believe that the growth of coral is confined
within very limited depths ; DARWIN-1842-2,111.322

and they state that they never found any fragment of an Astraea <paren>
the genus they consider most efficient in forming reefs <$$paren> at a
depth above 25 or 30 feet . DARWIN-1842-2,111.323

But we have seen that in several places the bottom of the sea is paved
with massive corals at more than twice this depth ; and at 15 fathoms
<paren> or twice this depth <$$paren> off the reefs of Mauritius , the
arming was marked with the distinct impression of a living Astraea .
DARWIN-1842-2,111.324

<font> Millepora alcicornis <$$font> lives in from to 12 fathoms , and
the genera Madrepora and Seriatopora from to 20 fathoms .
DARWIN-1842-2,111.325

Capt. Moresby has given me a specimen of <font> Sideropora scabra
<$$font> <paren> Porites of Lamarck <$$paren> brought up alive from 17
fathoms . DARWIN-1842-2,111.326

Mr. Couthouy states that he has dredged up on the Bahama banks
considerable masses of Meandrina from 16 fathoms , DARWIN-1842-2,111.327

and he has seen this coral growing in 20 fathoms .
DARWIN-1842-2,111.328

A Caryophyllia , half an inch in diameter , was dredged up alive from 80
fathoms off Juan Fernandez <paren> lat. 33@ @=o= S. <$$paren> by Capt.
P. P. King : DARWIN-1842-2,111.329

this is the most remarkable fact with which I am acquainted , showing
the depth at which a genus of corals often found on reefs , can exist .
DARWIN-1842-2,111.330

We ought , however , <P_112> to feel less surprise at this fact , as
Caryophyllia alone of the lamelliform genera , ranges far beyond the
tropics ; DARWIN-1842-2,112.331

it is <P_113> found in Zetland in Lat. 60@ @=o= N. in deep water ,
DARWIN-1842-2,113.332

and I procured a small species from Tierra del Fuego in Lat. 53@ @=o=
S. DARWIN-1842-2,113.333

Capt. Beechey informs me , that branches of pink and yellow coral were
frequently brought up from between 20 and 25 fathoms off the Low atolls
; DARWIN-1842-2,113.334

and Lieut. Stokes , writing to me from the N.W. coast of Australia ,
says that a strongly branched coral was procured there from 30 fathoms :
DARWIN-1842-2,113.335

unfortunately it is not known to what genera these corals belong .
DARWIN-1842-2,113.336

Although the limit of depth , at which each particular kind of coral
ceases to exist , is far from being accurately known ; yet when we bear
in mind the manner in which the clumps of coral gradually became
infrequent at about the same depth , and wholly disappeared at a greater
depth than 20 fathoms , on the slope round Keeling atoll , on the
leeward side of the Mauritius , and at rather less depth , both without
and within the atolls of the Maldiva and Chagos Archipelagoes ; and when
we know that the reefs round these islands do not differ from other
coral formations in their form and structure , we may , I think ,
conclude that in ordinary cases , reef-building polypifers do not
<P_114> flourish at greater depths than between 20 and 30 fathoms .
DARWIN-1842-2,114.337

It has been argued that reefs may possibly rise from very great depths
through the means of small corals , first making a platform for the
growth of the stronger kinds . DARWIN-1842-2,114.338

This , however , is an arbitrary supposition : DARWIN-1842-2,114.339

it is not always remembered , that in such cases there is an antagonist
power in action , namely , the decay of organic bodies , when not
protected by a covering of sediment , or by their own rapid growth .
DARWIN-1842-2,114.340

We have , moreover , no right to calculate on unlimited time for the
accumulation of small organic bodies into great masses .
DARWIN-1842-2,114.341

Every fact in geology proclaims that neither the land , nor the bed of
the sea retain for indefinite periods the same level .
DARWIN-1842-2,114.342

As well might it be imagined that the British Seas would in time become
choked up with beds of oysters , or that the numerous small corallines
off the inhospitable shores of Tierra del Fuego would in time form a
solid and extensive coral-reef . DARWIN-1842-2,114.343

<P_115>

Chapter V . DARWIN-1842-2,115.345

Theory of the formation of the different classes of coral-reefs .
DARWIN-1842-2,115.346

The atolls of the larger archipelagoes are not formed on submerged
craters , or on banks of sediment . DARWIN-1842-2,115.347

- Immense areas interspersed with atolls . DARWIN-1842-2,115.348

- Their subsidence . DARWIN-1842-2,115.349

- The effects of storms and earthquakes on atolls .
DARWIN-1842-2,115.350

- Recent changes in their state . DARWIN-1842-2,115.351

- The origin of barrier-reefs and of atolls . DARWIN-1842-2,115.352

- Their relative forms . DARWIN-1842-2,115.353

- The step-formed ledges and walls round the shores of some lagoons .
DARWIN-1842-2,115.354

- The ring-formed reefs of the Maldiva atolls . DARWIN-1842-2,115.355

- The submerged condition of parts or of the whole of some annular reefs
. DARWIN-1842-2,115.356

- The disseverment of large atolls . DARWIN-1842-2,115.357

- The union of atolls by linear reefs . DARWIN-1842-2,115.358

- The Great Chagos Bank . DARWIN-1842-2,115.359

- Objections from the area and amount of subsidence required by the
theory , considered . DARWIN-1842-2,115.360

- The probable composition of the lower parts of atolls .
DARWIN-1842-2,115.361

The naturalists who have visited the Pacific , seem to have had their
attention riveted by the lagoon-islands , or atolls , - those singular
rings of coral-land which rise abruptly out of the unfathomable ocean -
DARWIN-1842-2,115.362

and have passed over , almost unnoticed , the scarcely less wonderful
encircling barrier-reefs . DARWIN-1842-2,115.363

The theory most generally received on the formation of atolls , is that
they are based on submarine craters ; DARWIN-1842-2,115.364

but where can we find a crater of the shape of Bow atoll , which is five
times as long as it is broad <paren> Plate III. , Fig. 5 <$$paren> ;
or like that of Mechchicoff Island <paren> Plate I. , Fig. 5 <$$paren>
, with its three loops , together sixty miles in length ; or like Rimsky
Korsacoff , narrow , crooked , and fifty-four miles long ; or <P_116>
like the northern Maldiva atolls , made up of numerous ring-formed reefs
, placed on the margin of a disc , - one of which discs is eighty-eight
miles in length , only from ten to twenty in breadth .
DARWIN-1842-2,116.365

It is , also , not a little improbable that there should have existed as
many craters of immense size crowded together beneath the sea , as there
are now in some parts atolls . DARWIN-1842-2,116.366

But this theory lies under a great difficulty , as will be evident ,
when we consider on what foundations the atolls of the larger
archipelagoes rest : DARWIN-1842-2,116.367

nevertheless , if the rim of a crater afforded a basis at the proper
depth , I am far from denying that a reef like a perfectly characterised
atoll might not be formed ; DARWIN-1842-2,116.368

some such , perhaps , now exist ; DARWIN-1842-2,116.369

but I can@ @not believe in the possibility of the greater number having
thus originated . DARWIN-1842-2,116.370

