<BEGIN_davy-1814-2>

<P_5,437>

<heading>

XVI . Some Experiments and Observations on a New Substance Which
Becomes a Violet-coloured Gas by Heat . DAVY-1814-2,5,437.4

<$$heading>

A new and a very curious substance has recently occupied the attention
of chemists at Paris . DAVY-1814-2,5,437.6

This substance was accidentally discovered about two years ago by M.
Courtois , a manufacturer of saltpetre <P_5,438> at Paris .
DAVY-1814-2,5,438.7

In his processes for procuring soda from the ashes of sea weeds ,
<paren> cendres de varec <$$paren> he found the metallic vessels much
corroded ; DAVY-1814-2,5,438.8

and in searching for the cause of this effect , he made the discovery .
DAVY-1814-2,5,438.9

The substance is procured from the ashes , after the extraction of the
carbonate of soda , with great facility , and merely by the action of
sulphuric acid : DAVY-1814-2,5,438.10

- when the acid is concentrated , so as to produce much heat , the
substance appears as a vapour of a beautiful violet colour , which
condenses in crystals having the colour and the lustre of plumbago .
DAVY-1814-2,5,438.11

M. Courtois , soon after he had discovered it , gave specimens of it to
MM. Desormes and Clement for chemical examination ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,438.12

and those gentlemen read a short memoir upon it , at a meeting of the
Imperial Institute of France , on November 29th . DAVY-1814-2,5,438.13

In this memoir , these able chemists have described its principal
properties ; DAVY-1814-2,5,438.14

they mentioned that its specific gravity was about four times that of
water , that it becomes a violet-coloured gas at a temperature below
that of boiling water , that it combines with the metals and with
phosphorus and sulphur , and likewise with alkalies and metallic oxides
, that it forms a detonating compound with ammonia , that it is soluble
in alcohol , and still <P_5,439> more soluble in ether ; and that by its
action upon phosphorus and upon hydrogen , a substance having the
characters of muriatic acid is formed . DAVY-1814-2,5,439.15

In this communication they offered no decided opinion respecting its
nature . DAVY-1814-2,5,439.16

M. Ampere had the goodness to give me some of this substance ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,439.17

and M. Clement having requested me to submit it to some analytical
tests , I made several experiments upon it , which convinced me that it
was a new substance undecompounded in any of the circumstances to which
I was able to expose it ; and that the acid formed in processes upon it
was not muriatic acid , but a new acid possessing a striking resemblance
to that body . DAVY-1814-2,5,439.18

M. Gay Lussac <paren> to whom M. Clement had furnished some of the
substance , and with whom he had made some experiments upon it before
the communication of his memoir <$$paren> on Monday , Dec. 6 , read to
the Institute a paper , in which he stated that the acid formed by its
action on hydrogen is a peculiar one . DAVY-1814-2,5,439.19

He mentioned several interesting particulars respecting the mode of its
production , DAVY-1814-2,5,439.20

and he compared it to oxymuriatic gas or chlorine , DAVY-1814-2,5,439.21

and stated that two hypotheses might be formed on its nature ; and that
it might be considered as an undecompounded substance , or as a compound
of oxygen . DAVY-1814-2,5,439.22

M. Gay Lussac is still engaged in experiments on this subject ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,439.23

and from his activity and great sagacity , a complete chemical history
of it may be anticipated . DAVY-1814-2,5,439.24

But as the mode of procuring the substance is now known to the chemical
world in general , and as the combinations and agencies of it offer an
extensive field for inquiry , and will probably occupy the attention of
many persons , and as the investigation of it is not pursued by the
discoverer himself , nor particularly by the <P_5,440> gentlemen to whom
it was first communicated , I shall not hesitate to lay before the Royal
Society an account of the investigations I have made upon it ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,440.25

and I do this with the less scruple , as my particular manner of viewing
the phenomena has led me to some new results , which probably will not
be considered by the Society as without interest in their relation to
the general theory of chemistry , and in their possible application to
some of the useful arts . DAVY-1814-2,5,440.26

The first experiments that I made on this substance , were to ascertain
whether <paren> argentane <$$paren> muriate of silver could be formed
from its solution in water or alcohol , DAVY-1814-2,5,440.27

and for this purpose it was purified by distilling it from lime .
DAVY-1814-2,5,440.28

Its solution , I found , when mixed with solution of nitrate of silver ,
deposited a dense precipitate , of a pale lemon-colour ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,440.29

this precipitate when collected and examined , proved to be fusible at a
low red heat , DAVY-1814-2,5,440.30

and then became of a red colour . DAVY-1814-2,5,440.31

When acted upon by fused hydrate of potassa , it was rapidly decomposed
, DAVY-1814-2,5,440.32

and a solid substance , having all the characters of oxide of silver ,
was formed . DAVY-1814-2,5,440.33

The matter soluble in water separated by a filter , and , acted upon by
sulphuric acid , afforded the peculiar substance . DAVY-1814-2,5,440.34

A solution of potassa , after being boiled on the precipitate , afforded
the peculiar substance , when treated by the same acid .
DAVY-1814-2,5,440.35

The precipitate was much more rapidly altered by exposure to light ,
than the muriate of silver , DAVY-1814-2,5,440.36

and was evidently quite a distinct body . DAVY-1814-2,5,440.37

Conceiving from the action of potassa upon it , that it must be a
compound of the peculiar substance and silver , I endeavoured to form it
directly by the combination of the two bodies . DAVY-1814-2,5,440.38

I introduced some of the substance into the closed end of a small glass
curved tube , DAVY-1814-2,5,440.39

and <P_5,441> placed in the upper part of it some silver foil ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,441.40

I heated the foil nearly to redness , DAVY-1814-2,5,441.41

and then passed the substance over it in vapour ; DAVY-1814-2,5,441.42

there was an immediate action , DAVY-1814-2,5,441.43

the silver was rapidly dissolved , DAVY-1814-2,5,441.44

and a fusible substance formed , in all its obvious sensible and
chemical characters , the same as that obtained from solutions of the
substance by nitrate of silver . DAVY-1814-2,5,441.45

The modes which occurred to me , as most likely to effect its
decomposition by chemical agents , were the action of the highly
inflammable metals upon it which unite to oxygen and chlorine , or the
action of chlorine which in general tends to the expulsion of oxygen ,
and to the separation of inflammable bases from that principle .
DAVY-1814-2,5,441.46

I heated some potassium in a little glass tube , DAVY-1814-2,5,441.47

and passed some of the substance in vapour over it ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,441.48

at the moment the vapour came in contact with the potassium , there was
an inflammation , DAVY-1814-2,5,441.49

and the potassium burnt slowly with a pale blue light .
DAVY-1814-2,5,441.50

There was no gas disengaged when the experiment was repeated in a
mercurial apparatus . DAVY-1814-2,5,441.51

The substance formed by the action of potassium was white , fusible at a
red heat , and soluble in water . DAVY-1814-2,5,441.52

It had a peculiar acrid taste . DAVY-1814-2,5,441.53

When acted upon by sulphuric acid , it effervesced ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,441.54

and the peculiar substance appeared . DAVY-1814-2,5,441.55

It was evident that in this experiment there had been no decomposition
of the body ; DAVY-1814-2,5,441.56

the result seemed to depend merely upon the combination of it with the
potassium . DAVY-1814-2,5,441.57

I exposed the body to the action of chlorine in a small glass tube ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,441.58

it absorbed the chlorine , DAVY-1814-2,5,441.59

and a substance formed which was volatile by heat , and which appeared
as a yellow solid ; DAVY-1814-2,5,441.60

it was soluble in water , DAVY-1814-2,5,441.61

and <P_5,442> rendered the water of a yellowish-green colour and
strongly acid , DAVY-1814-2,5,442.62

the solution when acted upon by solution of potassa not in excess
effervesced , DAVY-1814-2,5,442.63

and afforded the peculiar substance . DAVY-1814-2,5,442.64

The acid formed by the solution of the substance united to chlorine
reddened vegetable blues by its immediate contact , DAVY-1814-2,5,442.65

and soon after destroyed them . DAVY-1814-2,5,442.66

When the new substance was heated in oxygen gas , or brought in contact
with red hot hyperoxymuriate of potassa , it seemed to undergo no change
. DAVY-1814-2,5,442.67

MM. Desormes and Clement had stated , that , when the substance is
combined with the metals , metallic oxides could be obtained from the
solutions ; DAVY-1814-2,5,442.68

I suspected that this depended upon the presence of moisture , or upon
oxygen derived from the air , DAVY-1814-2,5,442.69

and experiment justified my suspicion . DAVY-1814-2,5,442.70

I heated the substance with iron , mercury , tin , zinc , and lead , out
of the contact of air ; DAVY-1814-2,5,442.71

it united to them without any violence of action , DAVY-1814-2,5,442.72

and formed compounds fusible at a moderate heat , and volatile at a
higher temperature . DAVY-1814-2,5,442.73

All the compounds , except that of zinc , which was white , were
coloured of different shades of red-brown , red and orange ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,442.74

the compound it formed with tin was of a deep orange , that with iron of
a bright red brown , that with lead a bright orange , that with mercury
an orange still more approaching to red , and which , when crystallized
, was bright crimson . DAVY-1814-2,5,442.75

The compound of iron and the substance , when exposed to an alkaline
solution , immediately deposited black oxide of iron ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,442.76

but when I heated it in a small retort , containing pure ammoniacal gas
, no such change occurred , DAVY-1814-2,5,442.77

and it combined with the ammonia DAVY-1814-2,5,442.78

and formed a compound which volatilized without leaving any oxide .
DAVY-1814-2,5,442.79

<P_5,443>

The crimson compound of the substance with mercury united in the same
manner without decomposition to potassa , DAVY-1814-2,5,443.81

and by the action of sulphuric acid , sulphate of potassa was formed ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,443.82

and the compound of the substance with mercury disengaged .
DAVY-1814-2,5,443.83

When the substance is made to act upon phosphorus , the two bodies
combine with great rapidity at common temperatures , producing heat
without light ; DAVY-1814-2,5,443.84

small quantities of a strongly acid gas generally arise from the mixture
, DAVY-1814-2,5,443.85

and by the application of heat , it is produced in greater quantities .
DAVY-1814-2,5,443.86

When the substance is in excess , an easily fusible and volatile
compound of a red colour is obtained ; DAVY-1814-2,5,443.87

when the phosphorus is in excess , the greater part of the product is
more fixed . DAVY-1814-2,5,443.88

I examined the gaseous acid formed by the action of phosphorus with
attention . DAVY-1814-2,5,443.89

It gives dense white fumes by combining with the aqueous vapour in the
air . DAVY-1814-2,5,443.90

It has a smell very similar to that of the solid compound of chlorine
and phosphorus , which itself is very analogous to that of muriatic acid
. DAVY-1814-2,5,443.91

It is rapidly absorbed by water . DAVY-1814-2,5,443.92

When made to act upon ammonia , it forms with it a dense white salt ,
which , when acted upon by sulphuric acid , affords the peculiar
substance , DAVY-1814-2,5,443.93

and at the same time a smell of hydrogen is perceived .
DAVY-1814-2,5,443.94

When mercury is heated in the acid gas , the same compound as that
produced by the action of the new substance directly upon mercury is
formed , DAVY-1814-2,5,443.95

and hydrogen equal to half the volume of the gas is disengaged .
DAVY-1814-2,5,443.96

When potassium is made to act upon it , there is no inflammation as in
muriatic acid gas , DAVY-1814-2,5,443.97

but the potassium becomes converted into a body , similar to that
produced by its combustion in the vapour of the substance ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,443.98

and a gas equal to half the volume of the acid gas , which burns in the
same manner as hydrogen , is disengaged . DAVY-1814-2,5,443.99

<P_5,444>

When the easily fusible and volatile compound of the substance with
phosphorus is heated in water , it rapidly dissolves in it ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,444.101

and forms a strong acid , which , when evaporated , leaves
hydrophosphorous acid , and which , before its evaporation , neutralized
by potash , and acted on by sulphuric acid , affords the peculiar
substance . DAVY-1814-2,5,444.102

When the difficultly fusible substance it forms with phosphorus is acted
on by a small quantity of water , and heated in a glass tube , much gas
spontaneously inflammable is disengaged , DAVY-1814-2,5,444.103

and a white sublimate arises , which , when acted on by cold water ,
becomes hot , and affords a considerable quantity of a gas having all
the properties of hydrophosphoric gas . DAVY-1814-2,5,444.104

The solution of this crystalline substance in water , neutralized by
potash , and decomposed by sulphuric acid , afforded the peculiar
substance , DAVY-1814-2,5,444.105

but when the solution was heated strongly before its neutralization , it
left only hydrophosphorous acid , which when heated gave off
hydrophosphoric gas , and became phosphoric acid .
DAVY-1814-2,5,444.106

It is easy to explain all these phenomena , except the production of the
acid gas , which is a compound of the peculiar substance and hydrogen :
DAVY-1814-2,5,444.107

to account for the appearance of this body , it is necessary to suppose
the existence of hydrogen , or of water in the substance , or of
hydrogen in phosphorus . DAVY-1814-2,5,444.108

I used the substance distilled through quick_lime , which there is every
reason to believe would absorb all the water united to it :
DAVY-1814-2,5,444.109

in this case the acid gas , which gave hydrogen when decomposed by
mercury , was produced in much smaller quantities ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,444.110

but , when the substance was moistened , the gas was afforded in very
large quantities . DAVY-1814-2,5,444.111

It is probable , that a little hydrogen existing in the phosphorus , and
which appears when that substance is acted on by Voltaic electricity ,
may influence <P_5,445> the result ; DAVY-1814-2,5,445.112

but I am inclined to attribute it principally to the moisture adhering
to the substance , DAVY-1814-2,5,445.113

and I have never been able to produce more gas from the fusible compound
by distilling it with a new quantity of phosphorus .
DAVY-1814-2,5,445.114

When the fusible compound of the substance with phosphorus is distilled
with a small quantity of water , the gas produced seems to be of the
same kind as that obtained by the action of heat during the combination
, DAVY-1814-2,5,445.115

and both these gases when absorbed by water afford , when acted upon by
nitrate of silver , the same product as that formed by the action of a
solution of the substance in water on the same salt .
DAVY-1814-2,5,445.116

I attempted to form a compound of the substance with hydrogen directly ,
by heating it in several experiments to redness in a glass tube filled
with hydrogen . DAVY-1814-2,5,445.117

When the gas was moist , or when the tube contained vapour , a strong
acid fluid was formed of a deep yellow colour . DAVY-1814-2,5,445.118

When the gas and the substance were dry , there was an expansion of
volume , DAVY-1814-2,5,445.119

and on breaking the tube , fumes appeared similar to those produced by
the action of the gas formed during the union of phosphorus and the
substance , and which precipitated in the same manner a solution of
nitrate of silver . DAVY-1814-2,5,445.120

This peculiar acid , which consists of the substance united to hydrogen
, has a very strong attraction for water , DAVY-1814-2,5,445.121

and a very small quantity of water absorbs a large quantity of the gas ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,445.122

and when combined with water , it rises with it in vapour ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,445.123

and in its state of liquid acid , it rapidly dissolves the substance ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,445.124

and becomes tawny . DAVY-1814-2,5,445.125

The new substance , as MM. Desormes and Clement have shewn , is rapidly
soluble in solution of potash ; DAVY-1814-2,5,445.126

when it is in excess the solution becomes red brown .
DAVY-1814-2,5,445.127

On evaporating the mixture and heating it to redness , <P_5,446> a
substance is formed , exactly similar to that produced by the
combination of the substance with potassium . DAVY-1814-2,5,446.128

As potassa is a compound of potassium and oxygen , it is evident that ,
to form a compound of potassium and the substance from potassa , oxygen
must be expelled , DAVY-1814-2,5,446.129

and I found by experiment , that this was the case ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,446.130

and in investigating minutely the action of fixed alkaline solutions on
the substance , I ascertained the existence of a class of substances ,
precisely similar to the hyperoxy-muriates , consisting of oxygen , the
substance , and potassium , and formed in a manner exactly analogous .
DAVY-1814-2,5,446.131

If the substance is thrown into a moderately strong solution of potassa
, as it dissolves crystals fall down , DAVY-1814-2,5,446.132

and by saturating the solution with the substance , considerable
quantities are obtained . DAVY-1814-2,5,446.133

By pouring off the mother liquor and evaporating it a little , more of
the crystals fall down . DAVY-1814-2,5,446.134

All these crystals , if precipitated from a solution not too much
saturated , are of the same kind ; DAVY-1814-2,5,446.135

they are little soluble in water , DAVY-1814-2,5,446.136

have a taste analogous to that of the hyperoxymuriates of potassa ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,446.137

scintillate when thrown upon burning coals , DAVY-1814-2,5,446.138

and form a deflagrating mixture when mixed with charcoal .
DAVY-1814-2,5,446.139

When fused , they give off abundance of oxygen gas ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,446.140

and become the same substance as that formed by the action of potassium
on the new substance . DAVY-1814-2,5,446.141

If the liquor which has ceased to afford the crystals be evaporated to
dryness , it yields a considerable quantity of a substance which is not
capable of detonating with combustible bodies , and which is the same as
that afforded by the combination of the substance with potassium .
DAVY-1814-2,5,446.142

It is evident then that the oxygen contained in the potassa is newly
combined by the action of the new <P_5,447> substance , and two
compounds formed , one consisting of potassium and the new substance ,
the other of potassium , the new substance , and the oxygen contained in
the potassa . DAVY-1814-2,5,447.143

By passing the vapour of the substance over dry red hot potassa formed
from potassium , oxygen is expelled , DAVY-1814-2,5,447.144

and it appears that oxygen can@ @not remain in the triple compound at a
heat above the red heat . DAVY-1814-2,5,447.145

By dissolving the substance in solutions of soda and baryta similar
results are obtained , DAVY-1814-2,5,447.146

and in each case two compounds are formed . DAVY-1814-2,5,447.147

The oxygen is condensed in one , DAVY-1814-2,5,447.148

and the other consists simply of the new substance and a metal .
DAVY-1814-2,5,447.149

To separate entirely the deflagrating salt from the soluble salt is not
easy , DAVY-1814-2,5,447.150

there always remains in the mother liquor a little of the deflagrating
compound ; DAVY-1814-2,5,447.151

but by separating the first crystals from solution of potassa not too
strong , the deflagrating compound of oxygen , potassium , and the
substance is obtained , apparently pure . DAVY-1814-2,5,447.152

As the new substance combines with potassium and the metals with much
less energy than chlorine , it occurred to me , that it would probably
be expelled from its combinations by that body ; DAVY-1814-2,5,447.153

and this I have found to be the case in all the experiments I have made
. DAVY-1814-2,5,447.154

When the compound of the new substance and potassium is heated in
contact with chlorine , potassane <paren> muriate of potassa <$$paren>
is formed , DAVY-1814-2,5,447.155

the violet gas appears , DAVY-1814-2,5,447.156

but soon combines with chlorine , DAVY-1814-2,5,447.157

and they form together the peculiar acid compound I have before
described ; DAVY-1814-2,5,447.158

but towards the end of the process , as the proportion of chlorine
diminishes , the violet_coloured gas again appears .
DAVY-1814-2,5,447.159

When the compound of the substance with silver was <P_5,448> treated in
the same manner <paren> argentane <$$paren> muriate of silver was formed
, DAVY-1814-2,5,448.160

and the substance combined with chlorine at the commencement of the
operation , DAVY-1814-2,5,448.161

but was disengaged uncombined towards the end . DAVY-1814-2,5,448.162

Similar phenomena occurred when the compounds of the substance with
mercury and lead were acted on by chlorine . DAVY-1814-2,5,448.163

The action of acids on the compounds of this substance , are what might
be expected from its analogies to chlorine . DAVY-1814-2,5,448.164

When concentrated sulphuric acid is poured upon the compound of the
substance and potassium , some of the substance appears ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,448.165

but a part of it rises in combination with hydrogen and water ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,448.166

and condenses by cold , DAVY-1814-2,5,448.167

and appears of a deep orange colour from having dissolved some of the
substance . DAVY-1814-2,5,448.168

The sulphuric acid likewise seems to retain some of the substance ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,448.169

for it continues red after being strongly heated , DAVY-1814-2,5,448.170

and the acid is partly decomposed , DAVY-1814-2,5,448.171

for sulphurous acid gas is disengaged . DAVY-1814-2,5,448.172

It seems probable , that the acid is decomposed to furnish oxygen to a
portion of the potassium , which quits in consequence the new substance
, and that water is likewise decomposed to furnish hydrogen to another
portion of the substance , and that the hydrogen and the substance , in
their acid form , combine with the water of the sulphuric acid , and
rise in vapour , sulphate of potassa being at the same time produced .
DAVY-1814-2,5,448.173

When sulphuric acid is poured on the salt consisting of the substance ,
oxygen , and potassium , the substance reappears , DAVY-1814-2,5,448.174

and there is a slight effervescence . DAVY-1814-2,5,448.175

In this case , part of the oxygen is employed to form potassa ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,448.176

and the remainder is expelled unaltered . DAVY-1814-2,5,448.177

When concentrated nitric acid is made to act on the <P_5,449> triple
compound , similar phenomena occur , DAVY-1814-2,5,449.178

and the substance reappears with effervescence . DAVY-1814-2,5,449.179

When nitric acid is applied to the double compound , there is a smell of
nitrous gas , DAVY-1814-2,5,449.180

and the substance is instantly reproduced . DAVY-1814-2,5,449.181

With concentrated muriatic acid , the phenomena presented by the two
different alkaline compounds , the binary and the triple , are very
interesting . DAVY-1814-2,5,449.182

When the acid is brought in contact with the triple salt , there is no
effervescence , DAVY-1814-2,5,449.183

but a substance , which appears to be a compound of chlorine and the new
body , is formed and dissolved in the water of the acid ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,449.184

and potassane is precipitated . DAVY-1814-2,5,449.185

When the double compound is used , there is a complete solution with a
partial decomposition , DAVY-1814-2,5,449.186

and by applying a gentle heat , the excess of muriatic acid is driven
off , DAVY-1814-2,5,449.187

and the same acid as that procured by the action of the substance on
hydrogen remains dissolved in the liquor . DAVY-1814-2,5,449.188

When mixtures of the two salts are employed , the substance itself
appears . DAVY-1814-2,5,449.189

It appears that in the instance when the triple compound is employed ,
there is not only sufficient oxygen to attract the hydrogen from the
chlorine which is to combine with the potassium , but likewise enough to
decompose a portion of muriatic acid , sufficient to afford chlorine to
enter into combination with the whole of the substance .
DAVY-1814-2,5,449.190

When the binary compound is used , the result is a simple instance of
double affinity ; DAVY-1814-2,5,449.191

the new substance quits the potassium to unite to the hydrogen of the
muriatic acid , DAVY-1814-2,5,449.192

and the chlorine and the potassium combine : DAVY-1814-2,5,449.193

and that the decomposition is only partial depends probably upon the
attraction of the compound of iodine and potassium for water .
DAVY-1814-2,5,449.194

When mixtures of the compounds <P_5,450> are used , the oxygen is
employed to attract hydrogen from the substance , to which it seems to
adhere with a much weaker attraction than to chlorine .
DAVY-1814-2,5,450.195

MM. Desormes and Clement have mentioned , that when the new substance
is exposed to liquid ammonia , a black powder is formed , which , when
dry , fulminates by the slightest contact or friction .
DAVY-1814-2,5,450.196

I introduced some of the substance into solution of ammonia ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,450.197

and separated the liquor from the black powder , DAVY-1814-2,5,450.198

and evaporated it to dryness ; DAVY-1814-2,5,450.199

it left a white saline substance , the same as that produced by the
union of ammonia with the peculiar acid , which consists of the
substance combined with hydrogen ; DAVY-1814-2,5,450.200

and hence it appeared probable that a portion of ammonia had been
decomposed to furnish hydrogen . DAVY-1814-2,5,450.201

I made the experiment on the action of strong solution of ammonia on the
substance in a pneumatic apparatus ; DAVY-1814-2,5,450.202

but no azote was given off . DAVY-1814-2,5,450.203

Hence I am induced to conclude , that the black powder is a compound of
the new substance and azote , similar in its character of a binary
compound to the detonating oil discovered by M. Dulong ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,450.204

and this conclusion is strengthened by the results of its detonation in
a tube of glass partially exhausted : DAVY-1814-2,5,450.205

they are , I find , the peculiar substance and a gas which is not
inflammable , and which does not support flame ; DAVY-1814-2,5,450.206

and unless the substance is moist , I have never been able to discover
any other product ; DAVY-1814-2,5,450.207

but the minute quantity I have employed prevents me from being confident
on this point . DAVY-1814-2,5,450.208

It was an object of considerable interest to ascertain the proportion in
which the new substance combines , as <P_5,451> compared with that in
which the other substances that form acids by their action on
inflammable bodies enter into union . DAVY-1814-2,5,451.209

I made several experiments on this subject . DAVY-1814-2,5,451.210

4 grains of hydrate of potassa , I found , were saturated by 6.25 of the
new substance , DAVY-1814-2,5,451.211

and 2.8 the quantity of potassium in 4 grains of hydrate of potassa is
to 6.25 the quantity of the substance , as 75 , the number representing
potassium , is to 166 . DAVY-1814-2,5,451.212

Again , 1 grain of hydrate of soda required 2.1 grains of the new
substance for its saturation , DAVY-1814-2,5,451.213

and 1 grain of hydrate of soda contains .578 of sodium , so that
supposing the combination of the new substance with sodium to contain a
double proportion of the substance , the number representing the
proportion in which it combines will be nearly 160 .
DAVY-1814-2,5,451.214

Two grains of the compound of the substance with sodium decomposed by
sulphuric acid afforded 1.28 {COM:see_errata} of dry sulphate of soda ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,451.215

and calculating on this experiment the number is 165.5 .
DAVY-1814-2,5,451.216

I have made some experiments on the quantity of the substance absorbed
by tin , mercury , and lead . DAVY-1814-2,5,451.217

Mercury absorbs nearly 3$$4 of its weight of the new body to become the
crimson substance ; from which it appears that it must absorb two
proportions . DAVY-1814-2,5,451.218

My experiments have been made upon quantities too small to afford very
exact results ; DAVY-1814-2,5,451.219

but they shew that the new substance enters into union in a quantity
much more than twice as great as that of chlorine ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,451.220

and , considered as an element , it offers a number much higher than
those of the simple inflammable bodies , and higher even than those of
most of the metals . DAVY-1814-2,5,451.221

The most correct mode of ascertaining the number representing the
proportion <paren> supposing it to be definite , as is the case with all
other bodies that have been accurately <P_5,452> examined <$$paren> in
which it combines , will probably be by ascertaining the specific
gravity of its gaseous compound with hydrogen . DAVY-1814-2,5,452.222

This gas , as I have stated , affords only half its volume of hydrogen ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,452.223

and it appeared to me to neutralize an equal volume of ammonia , so that
supposing it to consist of two proportions of hydrogen , and only one of
the substance , that is , to be analogous to muriatic acid gas in its
nature , it must be one of the heaviest elastic fluids existing .
DAVY-1814-2,5,452.224

Taking the number representing the proportion in which this new
substance combines as 165 , and supposing that it occupies the same
volume in this gas that chlorine occupies in muriatic acid gas , 100
cubical inches of the gas will weigh at mean temperature and pressure
95.27 grains , <font> i.e. <$$font> supposing hydrogen in the same
quantity to weigh 2.27 grains . DAVY-1814-2,5,452.225

I am not at present in possession of an apparatus for weighing the gas
with accuracy . DAVY-1814-2,5,452.226

A particular device will be required for this purpose , as the gas can@
@not be preserved over mercury . DAVY-1814-2,5,452.227

It may be collected during the action of phosphorus on the moistened
substance in a vessel exhausted of air ; DAVY-1814-2,5,452.228

or it may be made by heating the compound of the substance and potassium
in muriatic acid gas in a glass vessel : DAVY-1814-2,5,452.229

in this case , there is , I find , a double decomposition ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,452.230

the chlorine quits the hydrogen to unite to the potassium ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,452.231

and the substance quits the potassium to unite to the hydrogen .
DAVY-1814-2,5,452.232

The new substance , I find , is not decomposed when Voltaic sparks are
taken in it in its gaseous state from ignited points of charcoal :
DAVY-1814-2,5,452.233

at first there are white fumes , <P_5,453> probably from the action of
moisture or hydrogen in charcoal , on the substance ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,453.234

but these fumes soon cease , DAVY-1814-2,5,453.235

and when the tube in which the experiment is made is cooled , the
substance appears unaltered . DAVY-1814-2,5,453.236

From all the facts that have been stated , there is every reason to
consider this new substance as <font> an undecompounded body . <$$font>
DAVY-1814-2,5,453.237

In its specific gravity , lustre , the high number in which it enters
into combination and colour , it resembles the metals ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,453.238

but in all its chemical agencies it is more analogous to oxygen and
chlorine ; DAVY-1814-2,5,453.239

it is a nonconductor of electricity , DAVY-1814-2,5,453.240

and possesses , like these bodies , the negative electrical energy with
respect to metals , inflammable and alkaline substances ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,453.241

and hence when combined with these substances in aqueous solution and
electrized in the Voltaic circuit , it separates at the positive surface
; DAVY-1814-2,5,453.242

but it has a positive energy with respect to chlorine ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,453.243

for when united to chlorine in the compound acid I have described ,
<paren> page 442 <$$paren> , it separates from the chlorine at the
negative surface . DAVY-1814-2,5,453.244

This likewise corresponds with their relative attractive energy .
DAVY-1814-2,5,453.245

Chlorine expels the new substance from all its combinations on which I
have made any experiments . DAVY-1814-2,5,453.246

The new substance seems to possess a stronger attraction for most of the
metals than oxygen ; DAVY-1814-2,5,453.247

but it is expelled from phosphorus and sulphur by oxygen :
DAVY-1814-2,5,453.248

I found by passing oxygen and the compound of it with phosphorus through
a glass tube heated red , phosphorous acid was formed ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,453.249

and the violet gas appeared . DAVY-1814-2,5,453.250

That it produces so little heat and so seldom light in entering into
combination , may be accounted for from its solid form and its great
weight as an element . DAVY-1814-2,5,453.251

Potassium , however , as I have mentioned , burns in the violet-coloured
gas , DAVY-1814-2,5,453.252

and when this gas is thrown upon <P_5,454> the flame of hydrogen , it
seems to support its combustion . DAVY-1814-2,5,454.253

The saturating or neutralising powers of the new substance appear to be
greater than those of oxygen , and less than those of chlorine .
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.254

It agrees with chlorine and fluorine in forming acids with hydrogen ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.255

and it agrees with oxygen in forming an acid with chlorine .
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.256

In my first experiments I conceived that it formed substances analogous
to alkalies in combining with the alkaline metals ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.257

for the compound produced by its action upon solution of potassa , even
when the substance was in great excess , reddened turmeric paper ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.258

and rendered green paper tinged with the juice of violets ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.259

but I have since found that this is owing to a small quantity of
subcarbonate of potassa which existed in the hydrate of potassa ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.260

and when the compound is treated with the acid the substance forms with
hydrogen , DAVY-1814-2,5,454.261

and heated to redness , it loses this property ; DAVY-1814-2,5,454.262

and when thus formed , its taste more resembles that of a neutral salt
than of an alkali . DAVY-1814-2,5,454.263

I can@ @not yet say with certainty whether its compound with potassium
has powers like the oxides , of neutralising those acids which it does
not decompose , as in all the experiments I have made on this point I
used the compound which reddens turmeric ; DAVY-1814-2,5,454.264

this neutralised the phosphorous , sulphurous , and boracic acids ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.265

but the effect may possibly depend upon the undecomposed carbonate .
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.266

The name <font> ione <$$font> has been proposed in France for this new
substance from its colour in the gaseous state , from <font>
{COM:greek_omitted} <$$font> , viola ; DAVY-1814-2,5,454.267

and its combination with hydrogen has been named <font> hydroionic acid
. <$$font> DAVY-1814-2,5,454.268

The name <font> ione , <$$font> in English , would lead to confusion ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,454.269

for its compounds would be called <font> ionic <$$font> and <font>
ionian . <$$font> DAVY-1814-2,5,454.270

By terming it <font> iodine , <$$font> from {COM:greek_omitted}
violaceus , <P_5,455> this confusion will be avoided ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,455.271

and the name will be more analogous to chlorine and fluorine .
DAVY-1814-2,5,455.272

The acid it forms with hydrogen may , however , be with propriety named
in our language <font> hydroionic acid . <$$font> DAVY-1814-2,5,455.273

I venture to propose for the acid it forms with chlorine , the name of
<font> chlorionic acid , <$$font> and for that it forms with tin <font>
stannionic acid . <$$font> DAVY-1814-2,5,455.274

With respect to the other compounds , they may be called as a class
<font> iodes , <$$font> with the name of the base as <font> iode of
mercury , <$$font> and with <font> proto , deuto , &c. <$$font> to
signify the proportions ; DAVY-1814-2,5,455.275

or if a termination to the base should be preferred , as I have proposed
for the combinations of chlorine , the terminations may be in <font> m ,
<$$font> with the vowels in their usual order to signify proportions .
DAVY-1814-2,5,455.276

Thus , phosphoroma would signify the combination of one proportion of
iodine with phosphorus , DAVY-1814-2,5,455.277

and phosphoromè would signify two proportions of iodine to one of
phosphorus . DAVY-1814-2,5,455.278

If this last plan , which involves no theoretical views , should be
adopted , it may be extended with different consonants to the
combinations of <font> fluorine , <$$font> DAVY-1814-2,5,455.279

and the vowel may be made to signify the proportion , and the consonant
the nature of the compound . DAVY-1814-2,5,455.280

The vowel of termination , to the Latin name of the base , I have
already proposed , on another occasion , for the compounds of oxygen .
DAVY-1814-2,5,455.281

Thus argenta may be made to signify the protoxide of silver , and ferrè
the deutoxide of iron . DAVY-1814-2,5,455.282

<font> n <$$font> is the consonant which I have suggested to represent
the combination of chlorine , as <font> argentana <$$font> the <font>
proto-chloride <$$font> of silver ; DAVY-1814-2,5,455.283

and <font> l <$$font> in this system may represent fluorine .
DAVY-1814-2,5,455.284

Thus <font> calcala <$$font> would be fluor_spar {COM:sic} , or one
proportion of fluorine , and one of calcium , DAVY-1814-2,5,455.285

and the different combinations of calcium with the supporters of
combustion with oxygen , fluorine , chlorine , and iodine <P_5,456> in
one proportion , would be thus expressed <font> calca , calcala ,
calcana , <$$font> and <font> calcama . <$$font> DAVY-1814-2,5,456.286

I throw out these hints for discussion , rather than with any wish for
their adoption , and for the purpose of directing the attention of
chemists towards the subject of nomenclature , which ought to be settled
on some fixed principles ; DAVY-1814-2,5,456.287

and in naming a new class of compounds , great caution should be used to
prevent the necessity of alteration . DAVY-1814-2,5,456.288

In my last paper , presented to the Society two months ago , I ventured
to suggest that it was probable , that new species of matter , which act
with respect to inflammable bodies , like oxygen , chlorine , and
fluorine , would be discovered . DAVY-1814-2,5,456.289

I had not hoped , at that time , to be able so soon to describe the
properties of a body of , this kind , which forms an acid with hydrogen
, like chlorine and fluorine , and which in some of its combinations
resembles oxygen . DAVY-1814-2,5,456.290

This new fact will , I hope , do something towards settling the opinion
of chemists respecting the nature of acidity , which seems to depend
upon peculiar combinations of matter , and not on any peculiar
elementary principle . DAVY-1814-2,5,456.291

It is probable that <font> iodine <$$font> will be found in many
combinations in nature . DAVY-1814-2,5,456.292

We may expect that it will be discovered in various marine vegetables ,
and in sea water , DAVY-1814-2,5,456.293

and probably the loss of weight indicated in the analysis of certain
fossil substances may depend upon its expulsion . DAVY-1814-2,5,456.294

Its compounds with the metals will probably form a new class of pigments
, DAVY-1814-2,5,456.295

and it is not impossible , that the triple salts it forms containing
oxygen , may be made substitutes for nitre in the manufacture of
gunpowder . DAVY-1814-2,5,456.296

<P_5,457>

<heading>

XVII . Further Experiments and Observations on Iodine .
DAVY-1814-2,5,457.299

<$$heading>

I . <font> On the triple Compounds containing Iodine and Oxygen .
<$$font> DAVY-1814-2,5,457.301

1 . In this communication I shall have the honour of presenting to the
Royal Society , a continuation of the inquiries I have made respecting
the chemical agencies of iodine , and the properties of certain of its
compounds . DAVY-1814-2,5,457.302

2 . I described in my last paper the action of iodine on the fixed
alkaline lixivia , and the deflagrating salts it forms .
DAVY-1814-2,5,457.303

In the first experiment which I made on these compounds , I employed the
first crystals which fall down from moderately strong solutions of
potassa and soda saturated with iodine , which had been purified by
being repeatedly acted upon by distilled water : DAVY-1814-2,5,457.304

I now find that this process is not sufficient to free the triple
compound from the double compound ; and that to obtain them in a state
of absolute purity , it is necessary to boil them repeatedly in small
quantities of alcohol of specific gravity of from 8.6 to 9.2 , which
dissolves the double compound , but has little power of action on the
triple compound . DAVY-1814-2,5,457.305

The triple compounds , when purified , present some <P_5,458> curious
chemical phenomena , which a minute quantity of the double compound
adhering to the crystals that I operated upon , prevented me from
observing in the experiments I have already communicated to the Society
. DAVY-1814-2,5,458.306

I shall describe these phenomena as they are produced by the triple
compound of potassium , as this substance is most easily procured in
considerable quantities , DAVY-1814-2,5,458.307

but as far as I have been able to observe the phenomena presented by the
compound of sodium , are precisely analogous . DAVY-1814-2,5,458.308

The triple compound of potassium , purified by alcohol , is almost
tasteless , DAVY-1814-2,5,458.309

has no action on vegetable colours , DAVY-1814-2,5,458.310

is very little soluble in cold water , but more soluble in hot water ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,458.311

when it is thrown into concentrated nitric , or sulphuric , or
phosphoric acids , it has no violent action on them .
DAVY-1814-2,5,458.312

By heat it may be dissolved in them ; DAVY-1814-2,5,458.313

and the solutions , when saturated , congeal DAVY-1814-2,5,458.314

and form crystalline substances intensely acid . DAVY-1814-2,5,458.315

When the substance formed by the triple compound and the nitric acid is
strongly heated , the nitric acid flies off , DAVY-1814-2,5,458.316

and at the temperature at which it is entirely expelled , the substance
itself begins to decompose , DAVY-1814-2,5,458.317

and affords a little iodine and much oxygen . DAVY-1814-2,5,458.318

If the solution of the triple compounds in sulphuric or phosphoric acids
, be heated strongly at the temperature at which the acids sublime , the
triple compound itself is decomposed , DAVY-1814-2,5,458.319

and it affords oxygen and iodine , DAVY-1814-2,5,458.320

and leaves acid sulphate and phosphate of potassa .
DAVY-1814-2,5,458.321

If when the mixture is rendered fluid by heat , a little sugar or other
combustible matter is added , there is a violent action ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,458.322

and iodine is disengaged with great rapidity . DAVY-1814-2,5,458.323

The triple compound dissolves without decomposition in solution of
phosphorous acid ; DAVY-1814-2,5,458.324

but on heating the solution , <P_5,459> oxygen is attracted by it ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,459.325

iodine appears , DAVY-1814-2,5,459.326

and phosphate of potassa is formed . DAVY-1814-2,5,459.327

When the triple compound is thrown into concentrated muriatic acid ,
there is an effervescence , DAVY-1814-2,5,459.328

the smell of chlorine is perceived , DAVY-1814-2,5,459.329

the fluid becomes yellow , DAVY-1814-2,5,459.330

and when evaporated , yields the chlorionic acid .
DAVY-1814-2,5,459.331

When the solution of the hydroionic acid in water is poured upon the
triple salt , iodine is instantly produced in great quantities .
DAVY-1814-2,5,459.332

Acetic and oxalic acids dissolve the triple compound without decomposing
it . DAVY-1814-2,5,459.333

On heating the solution in oxalic acid , the acid becomes brown from the
deposition of charcoal , DAVY-1814-2,5,459.334

and iodine immediately appears . DAVY-1814-2,5,459.335

When the triple compound is thrown into solution of sulphurous acid ,
iodine is instantly produced , and sulphuric acid formed ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,459.336

and if the sulphurous acid is not in too large a proportion , the
solution becomes yellow by dissolving iodine ; DAVY-1814-2,5,459.337

if more sulphurous acid is added , water is decomposed , and sulphuric
acid and hydroionic acid formed . DAVY-1814-2,5,459.338

The <font> double compound <$$font> of potassium and iodine has no
action on oxalic , acetic , sulphurous , or phosphorous acids ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,459.339

but when it is mixed with the triple compound , it is instantly
decomposed by them , and iodine set free . DAVY-1814-2,5,459.340

The same double compound in its pure state is decomposed very slowly by
muriatic acid ; DAVY-1814-2,5,459.341

and to convert the greater portion into muriate of potassa <paren>
potassane <$$paren> , it is necessary that the acid should be very
frequently distilled from it , DAVY-1814-2,5,459.342

and a part always remains unaltered ; DAVY-1814-2,5,459.343

when mixtures of the triple and double compounds are exposed to the
action of muriatic acid , potassane <paren> muriate of potassa <$$paren>
is instantly formed ; DAVY-1814-2,5,459.344

and if the proper proportions are adopted , none of the double or triple
<P_5,460> compounds remain , DAVY-1814-2,5,460.345

and the results are potassane only , and the oxychloric acid .
DAVY-1814-2,5,460.346

Mixtures of the triple and double compounds produce abundance of iodine
when acted on by glacial hydrophosphoric acid gas ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,460.347

but the pure double compound affords only hydroionic acid gas ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,460.348

and this decomposition offers the best method which has yet occurred to
me of procuring pure hydroionic acid . DAVY-1814-2,5,460.349

When the two substances are gently heated together , the hydroionic acid
gas , which comes over in considerable quantities , forms a colourless
solution when absorbed by water . DAVY-1814-2,5,460.350

I have endeavoured to ascertain the composition of the triple compound
of potassium . DAVY-1814-2,5,460.351

Seven grains that had been dried at the temperature of boiling water ,
heated to redness in a small crucible of platinum , lost 2.2 grains .
DAVY-1814-2,5,460.352

Seven grains heated to dull redness in a small tube of glass , lost 1.7
grain : DAVY-1814-2,5,460.353

a minute portion of iodine , condensed in the middle part of the tube ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,460.354

but no violet vapour was observed in the upper part of it ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,460.355

and there was a very slight appearance only of moisture , so that the
loss of weight in this last experiment must be principally ascribed to
the expulsion of oxygen . DAVY-1814-2,5,460.356

On a comparison of the results of these two analyses , it appears very
probable that this triple compound is composed of one proportion of
iodine about 165 , one of potassium , 75 , and six of oxygen , 90 ;
which is a composition analogous to that of the hyperoxymuriate of
potassa . DAVY-1814-2,5,460.357

The quantities that I used in my experiments were too small to render
these results more than approximations ; DAVY-1814-2,5,460.358

yet the similarity of them to those presented by the hyperoxymuriates
ought , perhaps , to render them more worthy of confidence .
DAVY-1814-2,5,460.359

I have attempted to obtain pure triple compounds from solutions of
baryta and lime , and from magnesia <P_5,461> diffused through water ,
by dissolving iodine in them by heat , and by evaporating the clear
liquor until it began to deposit crystals . DAVY-1814-2,5,461.360

In this way I have procured substances , which when well washed in
distilled water , afforded no iodine to nitric acid , which yielded
chlorine and chlorionic acid when acted upon by muriatic acid , and
which , when distilled , afforded much oxygen and some iodine , and left
substances which appeared to be mixtures of the earths with compounds
that afforded iodine to sulphuric acid , producing a smell of sulphurous
acid gas ; and which probably consisted of the metals of the earths
united to iodine . DAVY-1814-2,5,461.361

The triple Compounds from lime and magnesia were soluble without
affording iodine in sulphuric acid ; DAVY-1814-2,5,461.362

but on evaporating the acid , at the time that the vessel of platinum in
which the experiment was made became dry and almost red-hot , the violet
vapour was perceived . DAVY-1814-2,5,461.363

Even the triple compound from baryta did not afford iodine or oxygen by
treatment with sulphuric acid , except under the same circumstances .
DAVY-1814-2,5,461.364

3 . When I first discovered that the triple compounds dissolved in
acids without effervescence , I thought it probable that the effect
depended upon the formation of a compound of oxygen and iodine , similar
to euchlorine , or the oxychloric acid , and which remained dissolved in
the fluid ; DAVY-1814-2,5,461.365

and on this idea I made a number of experiments with the hope of
obtaining such a combination in a detached form . DAVY-1814-2,5,461.366

I distilled the solution of the triple compound of potassium in
sulphuric acid , DAVY-1814-2,5,461.367

but the only gaseous product I obtained was oxygen .
DAVY-1814-2,5,461.368

Sulphuric acid and iodine condensed in the cool part of the apparatus ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,461.369

and the residuum was acid sulphate of potassa . DAVY-1814-2,5,461.370

Conceiving that a compound of oxygen and iodine <P_5,462> might
nevertheless exist in the fluid , and be decomposable at a high
temperature , I attempted to obtain it by acting on the triple compound
of barium by sulphuric acid , and by evaporating the fluid obtained at a
gentle heat , and suffering it to cool at different periods of the
process ; DAVY-1814-2,5,462.371

but in this manner of operating I gained no better results .
DAVY-1814-2,5,462.372

The triple compound of barium is scarcely soluble in water .
DAVY-1814-2,5,462.373

Water that had been boiled upon it gave only a slight cloudiness to
sulphuric acid , which possibly might be owing to some double compound
mixed with it ; DAVY-1814-2,5,462.374

the fluid , when evaporated nearly to dryness , afforded fumes which had
the characters of those of sulphuric acid , DAVY-1814-2,5,462.375

and by a red heat yielded iodine , DAVY-1814-2,5,462.376

and left sulphate of baryta . DAVY-1814-2,5,462.377

When the solid triple compound of baryta was heated in very small
quantities of diluted sulphuric acid , the fluid separated exhibited
acid properties , DAVY-1814-2,5,462.378

and when gradually evaporated left a substance which congealed by
cooling , and formed a solid of a yellow colour deliquescent in the air
, strongly acid , and which reddened vegetable blues , and did not
afterwards destroy them . DAVY-1814-2,5,462.379

When strongly heated , the substance afforded the same results as the
substance procured from the fluid just mentioned .
DAVY-1814-2,5,462.380

The residual solid matter obtained by the action of sulphuric acid on
the triple compound of barium was treated a second time with sulphuric
acid , DAVY-1814-2,5,462.381

yet notwithstanding , when heated to redness , it yielded iodine in
abundance . DAVY-1814-2,5,462.382

I have repeated these experiments very often , because M. Gay Lussac
has stated that an acid compound of oxygen and iodine may be procured by
dropping sulphuric acid into a solution of the triple compound of
<P_5,463> barium ; DAVY-1814-2,5,463.383

but the conclusions of this ingenious chemist seem to have been founded
upon the want of effervescence in the process ; DAVY-1814-2,5,463.384

and his experiments were made at a very early period of the
investigation , DAVY-1814-2,5,463.385

and probably before this time he has found reason to alter his opinion .
DAVY-1814-2,5,463.386

It is probable that a binary compound of iodine and oxygen may be formed
, DAVY-1814-2,5,463.387

but the facts presented by the action of acids on the triple compounds
are not sufficient to prove its existence . DAVY-1814-2,5,463.388

When small quantities of very dilute sulphuric acid are digested on the
triple compounds of potassium and barium , the fluid obtained is always
acid , DAVY-1814-2,5,463.389

and always precipitates muriate of baryta . DAVY-1814-2,5,463.390

I thought it possible that the compound of iodine and oxygen might
possess this property ; DAVY-1814-2,5,463.391

but on collecting the precipitate and examining it , it appeared to be a
mixture of the triple compound and sulphate of baryta ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,463.392

and from all the facts it appears that in the action of acids on the
triple compounds new combinations only are formed .
DAVY-1814-2,5,463.393

I take the liberty of proposing for the triple compounds <P_5,464> the
names of oxy-iodes , because when decomposed by heat , they afford
oxygen and iodine . DAVY-1814-2,5,464.394

Individually they may be named from their bases . DAVY-1814-2,5,464.395

Thus <font> oxy-potassame , <$$font> or oxy-iode of potassium , will
signify the triple compound of potassium , oxygen , and iodine ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,464.396

and <font> oxy-barame , <$$font> or oxy-iode of barium , will denote the
triple compound of barium . DAVY-1814-2,5,464.397

II . <font> Some Observations on Hydroionic Acid , and on the Compound
procured by means of it . <$$font> DAVY-1814-2,5,464.398

1 . I have generally procured the hydroionic acid which I have used in
my experiments by the process referred to in the last section , the
action of hydrophosphoric acid on potassame , DAVY-1814-2,5,464.399

but I have sometimes employed the gas procured from moistened iodine by
phosphorus . DAVY-1814-2,5,464.400

The hydroionic acid gas is rapidly decomposed by being heated in contact
with oxygen , DAVY-1814-2,5,464.401

and a solution of iodine and hydroionic gas in water is formed ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,464.402

and it is slowly decomposed by heat alone , affording a deep red_brown
easily fusible substance , which seems to be a compound of hydroionic
gas and iodine . DAVY-1814-2,5,464.403

When condensed in water , it is instantly decomposed by solution of
nitric acid and iodine precipitated . DAVY-1814-2,5,464.404

The solution of hydroionic acid rapidly absorbs oxygen from the air ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,464.405

and becomes yellow , and at last deep tawny orange ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,464.406

and this absorption is assisted by light and heat ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,464.407

the hydrogen is attracted by the oxygen to form water ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,464.408

and the iodine formed is dissolved in the remaining acid .
DAVY-1814-2,5,464.409

The concentrated hydroionic acid will probably form a good eudiometrical
substance ; DAVY-1814-2,5,464.410

it does not render the vessels in which it is used cloudy like the
hydro-sulphurets <P_5,465> by the deposition of solid matter ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,465.411

and it does not enlarge the volume of the residual air like some other
substances . DAVY-1814-2,5,465.412

The solution of the hydroionic acid is decomposed by being heated with
the hyper-oxymuriate of potassa , DAVY-1814-2,5,465.413

and iodine is produced . DAVY-1814-2,5,465.414

Hydroionic acid gas , as I have mentioned in my last paper , is
decomposed by all the metals I have exposed it to , except gold and
platinum ; DAVY-1814-2,5,465.415

and the same metals that decompose it in its gaseous state , likewise
decompose it when it is in solution , requiring , however , in some
cases , the assistance of heat . DAVY-1814-2,5,465.416

The fluid hydro-ionic acid tarnishes silver at common temperatures ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,465.417

and dissolves mercury slowly when boiled in contact with it .
DAVY-1814-2,5,465.418

2 . It dissolves the alkaline and common earths , DAVY-1814-2,5,465.419

and forms with them compounds very analogous in their properties to the
compounds they produce when acted on by muriatic acid .
DAVY-1814-2,5,465.420

I heated dry quick lime in a small tube filled with hydroionic acid gas
, DAVY-1814-2,5,465.421

a yellow fluid immediately formed , which was coloured by dissolving
hydroionic gas and iodine , DAVY-1814-2,5,465.422

and a fusible compound soluble in water , and which had a bitter taste
similar to muriate of lime , was produced . DAVY-1814-2,5,465.423

I made the same compound by dissolving marble in the hydroionic acid ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,465.424

the compound when heated to redness became fluid , DAVY-1814-2,5,465.425

and when kept in fusion in contact with air emitted iodine ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,465.426

gradually lost its fusibility , DAVY-1814-2,5,465.427

and from being neutral became alkaline , so that at a high temperature
iodine is partly expelled from calcium by oxygen .
DAVY-1814-2,5,465.428

I proved this still more distinctly by fusing the compound in a close
vessel , in which it was confined by mercury . DAVY-1814-2,5,465.429

There was no change . DAVY-1814-2,5,465.430

I admitted a little oxy-potassame , DAVY-1814-2,5,465.431

and caused it to give off oxygen <P_5,466> by heating it :
DAVY-1814-2,5,466.432

as soon as the calcareous compound was fused in contact with oxygen , it
instantly emitted iodine , DAVY-1814-2,5,466.433

and lime was formed on the surface . DAVY-1814-2,5,466.434

The compound formed from hydroionic acid and baryta is an acrid bitter
substance , very similar in its taste to <font> barytane <$$font>
<paren> fused muriate of baryta <$$paren> , not decomposable when heated
to whiteness unless oxygen is present , DAVY-1814-2,5,466.435

but when it is heated in contact with oxygen , oxygen is absorbed , and
a part of its iodine expelled . DAVY-1814-2,5,466.436

Magnesia dissolved in hydroionic acid without effervescence ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,466.437

and the solution evaporated gave a solid substance , having a taste very
similar to muriate of magnesia . DAVY-1814-2,5,466.438

Like that salt , it partly lost its acid by a red heat ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,466.439

but a portion remained not decomposable out of the contact of air , but
which instantly afforded iodine when heated in contact with oxygen .
DAVY-1814-2,5,466.440

I dissolved glucina , ittria , and zircona in the hydroionic acid ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,466.441

they formed neutral saline compounds . DAVY-1814-2,5,466.442

The compound of hydroionic acid and glucina was less soluble , and more
astringent in taste than the muriate of glucina , DAVY-1814-2,5,466.443

and was entirely decomposed when heated in the open air , affording
hydroionic acid and iodine . DAVY-1814-2,5,466.444

The compound formed from ittria was more soluble , and highly astringent
; that formed from zircona astringent , with more of bitterness .
DAVY-1814-2,5,466.445

Both these salts were decomposed when heated in the atmosphere at a low
red heat ; DAVY-1814-2,5,466.446

a smell of hydroionic gas was perceived , DAVY-1814-2,5,466.447

iodine was produced , DAVY-1814-2,5,466.448

and the earths remained . DAVY-1814-2,5,466.449

3 . I mentioned , in a note , Montpellier , Jan. 10 , <paren>
containing a correction for my last communication to the society ,
<$$paren> that the alkaline property which I at first supposed to belong
to the compounds of potassium and sodium with iodine , depended upon
some undecomposed subcarbonate of potassa mixed with the hydrate
<P_5,467> of potassa I employed , DAVY-1814-2,5,467.450

as the subcarbonate of potassa is decomposed by iodine and carbonic acid
set free , I had not thought it probable that the subcarbonate of
potassa could interfere with the result . DAVY-1814-2,5,467.451

But I find that if the subcarbonate exist at all in the lixivium , a
portion of it always remains undecomposed . DAVY-1814-2,5,467.452

I find likewise , that when a solution of iodine in lixivium of potassa
is rendered perfectly neutral , or even slightly acid by hydroionic acid
, a strong red heat renders the solid substance obtained slightly
alkaline , provided it be in contact with air . DAVY-1814-2,5,467.453

Whether the separation of iodine by oxygen , in this instance , depends
upon some effect of the moisture contained in the atmosphere , or upon
the continued action of fresh portions of oxygen on the same surface of
the compound , it is not easy to say ; DAVY-1814-2,5,467.454

but a similar effect I find is produced upon <font> potassile <$$font>
<paren> fluate of potassa <$$paren> ; DAVY-1814-2,5,467.455

this substance gains the power of reddening paper tinged with turmeric ,
by being strongly heated in contact with air . DAVY-1814-2,5,467.456

The power of neutralizing acids does not belong to the true compound of
iodine and potassium , DAVY-1814-2,5,467.457

but depends either on the subcarbonate not decomposed , or upon the
alkali formed during the ignition of the compound ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,467.458

the pure double compound seems to have no power of action on the acids
it does not decompose ; DAVY-1814-2,5,467.459

I fused it in contact with sulphurous acid gas confined by mercury in a
glass tube , DAVY-1814-2,5,467.460

the salt gained a slight tint of yellow , DAVY-1814-2,5,467.461

but did not absorb its own volume of gas ; DAVY-1814-2,5,467.462

after this , it slightly reddened litmus , so that the acid must have
had little more than a mechanical adhesion to the salt .
DAVY-1814-2,5,467.463

When potassane , or iode of potassium , is fused with boracic acid ,
there is a perfect mixture of the two bodies . DAVY-1814-2,5,467.464

In my first researches on this mixture , I conceived that they entered
into chemical union , and <P_5,468> formed a violet-coloured glass , and
that the acid property of the boracic acid was neutralized by the new
compound ; DAVY-1814-2,5,468.465

but I since find that the violet colour of the glass is owing to the
development {TEXT:developement} of iodine , and when the application of
heat is long continued , much iodine is disengaged , and the colour of
the glass changes to olive , and borate of potassa is formed .
DAVY-1814-2,5,468.466

When the glass is dissolved in warm water , an olive_coloured powder
separates , soluble when boiled in the caustic alkalies , so that there
is great reason to suppose that it is boron , and that the boracic acid
is decomposed by the attraction of the potassium combined with the
iodine for oxygen , assisted by the tendency of iodine to assume the
elastic state . DAVY-1814-2,5,468.467

I fused the neutral compound of iodine with silica ;
DAVY-1814-2,5,468.468

no change was effected when the experiment was made in close vessels ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,468.469

but when the mixture was exposed to air , and intensely heated , a
little iodine was evolved , some potassa formed , and some silica
dissolved by it . DAVY-1814-2,5,468.470

<heading>

III . <font> On other Acid Compounds of Iodine . DAVY-1814-2,5,468.472

<$$heading>

1 . I have made several experiments on the combination of iodine and
chlorine , obtained by admitting chlorine in excess to known quantities
of iodine in vessels exhausted of air , and repeatedly heating the
sublimate . DAVY-1814-2,5,468.474

Operating in this way , I find that iodine absorbs less than one-@
@-third of its weight of chlorine . DAVY-1814-2,5,468.475

The compound of iodine and chlorine is a very volatile substance ,
DAVY-1814-2,5,468.476

and in consequence of its action upon mercury , I have not been able to
determine the elastic force of its vapour . DAVY-1814-2,5,468.477

Hence the estimations of its composition from experiments on the
quantity of chlorine absorbed in close vessels must necessarily be
liable to <P_5,469> error . DAVY-1814-2,5,469.478

In one experiment in which I dissolved the sublimate , by admitting a
small quantity of water into the retort , I found that eight grains of
iodine had caused the disappearance of five_and_a_quarter cubical inches
of chlorine . DAVY-1814-2,5,469.479

In another experiment in which the sublimate was not dissolved by water
, and in which the absorption was judged of by the admission of fresh
quantities of the gas , twenty grains caused the disappearance of 9.6
cubical inches of chlorine , the barometer being at 30.1 , and the
thermometer at 57@ @=o= Fahrenheit . DAVY-1814-2,5,469.480

It seems probable , from these experiments , that the chlorionic acid
consists of one proportion of iodine , and one of chlorine .
DAVY-1814-2,5,469.481

The chlorionic acid formed by the sublimation of iodine in chlorine in
great excess is of a bright yellow colour , DAVY-1814-2,5,469.482

when fused it becomes of a deep orange , DAVY-1814-2,5,469.483

and when rendered elastic it forms a deep orange-coloured gas .
DAVY-1814-2,5,469.484

It is capable of combining with much iodine when they are heated
together , DAVY-1814-2,5,469.485

its colour becomes in consequence deeper , DAVY-1814-2,5,469.486

and the chlorionic acid and the iodine rise together in the elastic
state . DAVY-1814-2,5,469.487

The solution of the chlorionic acid in water likewise dissolves large
quantities of iodine , so that it is possible to obtain a fluid
containing very different proportions of iodine and chlorine .
DAVY-1814-2,5,469.488

