<BEGIN_decourcy-1776-2>

<P_5>

<heading>

<font> National Troubles a proper Ground for National Humiliation .
<$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,5.4

Sermon I . DECOURCY-1776-2,5.5

<$$heading>

ii. <font> Chron. <$$font> xx. 3 , 4 . <font> And <$$font>
Jehoshaphat <font> feared , DECOURCY-1776-2,5.7

and set himself to seek the <$$font> Lord , DECOURCY-1776-2,5.8

<font> and proclaimed a <$$font> Fast <font> throughout all Judah :
DECOURCY-1776-2,5.9

and Judah gathered themselves together to ask <$$font> Help <font> of
the <$$font> Lord : DECOURCY-1776-2,5.10

- It is a truth not to be controverted , that public calamities should
dispose us to public humiliation : DECOURCY-1776-2,5.11

and , the frequent practice of the Jewish , no less than of the
Christian church , suggests the propriety of dedicating a set
{TEXT:sett} Day to such public acts of general solemnity ; to the intent
, that the seasons themselves may be stamped with unusual awe , and the
important occasion of them , attended with a more deep and universal
impression ; but especially , that the acknowledgments of our dependence
on the sovereign mercy and over-ruling providence of the Most High God ,
may be the more publicly and the more solemnly recognized .
DECOURCY-1776-2,5.12

To <font> learn righteousness <$$font> from all the dispensations of the
Lord ; more especially , when his <font> judgments are in the earth
<$$font> ; is at once our privilege and our <P_6> duty .
DECOURCY-1776-2,6.13

And , as the Sword is a dreadful minister of divine judgment ; it highly
concerns those who are in any degree affected by the awful visitant ,
<font> to search and try their ways and turn unto the <$$font> Lord .
DECOURCY-1776-2,6.14

In the common incidents of life , wisdom addresses us in a <font> still
small voice : <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,6.15

but , when <font> Jehovah <$$font> intendeth a more emphatic alarm to
the inhabitants of the earth , he lifteth up his voice like thunder ,
DECOURCY-1776-2,6.16

and speaks to them in the <font> famine , <$$font> the <font> pestilence
, <$$font> the <font> earthquake , <$$font> or the <font> sword .
<$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,6.17

God's visitations are frequently accommodated to the degree of impiety ,
which they are designed to punish . DECOURCY-1776-2,6.18

And , though in general his merciful chastisements bear an infinite
disproportion to the number , weight , and measure of our crimes ; yet
the flagitious nature of the one , is frequently characterized by the
severity of the other . DECOURCY-1776-2,6.19

Thus , when a people , through the abuse of those national privileges ,
wherewith they have been indulged ; have arrived at an uncommon pitch of
profaneness , infidelity , or carnal security : When <font> pride ,
fulness of bread , and abundance of idleness , <$$font> which <font> was
the iniquity , <$$font> and consummated the ruin of <font> Sodom ,
<$$font> like a triple floodgate , are opened in torrents of
licentiousness : When to this are added an open or secret contempt of
the institution and law of God , and the no less flagrant crime of
disesteem for the gospel of his dear Son : When a people are thus
abandoned to impiety on the one hand , or sunk in the dregs of
infidelity on the <P_7> other : When privileges , civil and religious ,
are abused to purposes of the highest ingratitude and rebellion against
the benevolent Donor of them : - I say , when the conduct of a people is
marked with such a black series of aggravations ; the Lord is obliged to
have recourse , often , to such means as are best calculated to assert
his dominion upon earth ; to vindicate the honor of his injured laws ;
and to give an awful testimony of his hatred to that abomination , sin .
DECOURCY-1776-2,7.20

In doing this , <font> he awaketh as one out of sleep .
DECOURCY-1776-2,7.21

He whets his glittering sword , DECOURCY-1776-2,7.22

and his hand takes hold on judgment : <$$font> while the design
meditated in such tremendous preparations of affronted Majesty , is , to
<font> render vengeance to his adversaries and to reward them that hate
him . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,7.23

As he is furnished with an infinite variety of armor , for the purpose
of maintaining his controversy with the nations ; he therefore makes
choice of a particular species , according to his own sovereign will and
pleasure ; DECOURCY-1776-2,7.24

and the selection , as wise as awful , never fails of success .
DECOURCY-1776-2,7.25

In a single moment , he can summon to his aid , the elements in their
most dreadful forms : DECOURCY-1776-2,7.26

and of any or all of them can compose his tremendous artillery .
DECOURCY-1776-2,7.27

He can walk on the wings of the <font> whirlwind <$$font> ; find his way
in the flame of a devouring fire ; or make his <font> pavilion round
about him of dark waters , and thick clouds of the skies . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,7.28

He can deal destruction , in the twinkling of an eye , by the
lightning's rapid flash ; and put the <P_8> world in awe , when <font>
he thundereth with the voice of his excellency . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,8.29

If he do but touch the earth , it trembleth , DECOURCY-1776-2,8.30

and the perpetual hills bow at the very intimation of his displeasure .
DECOURCY-1776-2,8.31

When he meaneth to be avenged on a nation because of its rebellions ,
<font> the pestilence that walketh in darkness , <$$font> shall execute
his vindictive purpose : or the <font> destruction that wasteth at
noon-day , <$$font> accomplish his will . DECOURCY-1776-2,8.32

Pale <font> famine , <$$font> that stalks behind , and generally brings
up the rear of God's desolating train ; is a no less formidable , tho'
less expeditious minister of divine judgments , than the <font>
earthquake <$$font> or the <font> plague . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,8.33

But who can recount the variegated scenes of distress , desolation , and
woe , that attend the ravages of war ? DECOURCY-1776-2,8.34

When God gives the sword its awful commission , and saith <font> " Sword
, go through the land <$$font> ; " its path is marked with blood , and
wide-spread depopulation . DECOURCY-1776-2,8.35

No age , rank , or sex , is exempt from the influence of its destructive
edge . DECOURCY-1776-2,8.36

The hoary head , and helpless infant ; the rich and the poor ; the mean
man and the honorable ; are often equal sharers in its promiscuous havoc
. DECOURCY-1776-2,8.37

Though the land before it be as the garden of <font> Eden <$$font> ; yet
behind it the scene resembles the desolate wilderness .
DECOURCY-1776-2,8.38

Cities burned with fire ; towns laid in heaps of ruins ; populous
countries deserted of their inhabitants ; a total stagnation of trade ,
of agriculture ; commercial intercourse obstructed ; the rich , from a
state of opulence , reduced to abject poverty ; bondage , <P_9> the
dreadful substitute for liberty ; national tranquillity changed by sad
vicissitude into uproar and confusion ; the shrieks and lamentations of
the vanquished ; the groans of the dying ; the <font> battle of the
<$$font> victorious <font> warrior , with confused noise , and garments
rolled in blood <$$font> ; the earth strewed with heaps of slain , till
the <font> sword is <$$font> even <font> made drunk with blood <$$font>
; - these , and a_thousand more , are the dreadful concomitants , the
lamentable effects , the gloomy attendants , of the wide-wasting sword .
DECOURCY-1776-2,9.39

And must not the very mention of these things fill every sympathetic
breast with emotions of horror at the <font> evil , <$$font> from whence
they originate ? DECOURCY-1776-2,9.40

Who can hear of the miseries of an <font> enemy , <$$font> involved in
all the calamities of war , and not feel for the unhappy sufferers ?
DECOURCY-1776-2,9.41

But , if the mere <font> recital <$$font> of such scenes of blood can
affect <font> us <$$font> so deeply ; what must be the sensations of
those immediately conversant in them ? DECOURCY-1776-2,9.42

Let us turn our thoughts to the <font> western <$$font> Continent .
DECOURCY-1776-2,9.43

Unhappy <font> America ! <$$font> - Lately blessed with every species
of prosperity , calculated to increase the opulence and grandeur of a
flourishing people . Now , the seat of rebellion , of anarchy , of war
! and a scene of depopulation and blood ! DECOURCY-1776-2,9.44

Surely , our hearts even while they feel the utmost detestation of the
rebellious measures which laid the foundation of the present troubles ;
must nevertheless be actuated with sentiments of commiseration towards
the unhappy <P_10> sufferers themselves . DECOURCY-1776-2,10.45

It would be contrary to the generous nature of <font> Britons , <$$font>
and to the profession of <font> Christians , <$$font> not to sympathize
with an <font> enemy <$$font> in distress , even when that distress , as
in the present case , is self-procured and just . So that , while our
eyes are witnesses to the extravagant claims of independency and
rebellion ; they can@ @not but drop a tear of pity over the miserable
subjects , led astray by the most horrid infatuation .
DECOURCY-1776-2,10.46

But while we are reviewing the <font> calamities <$$font> of the sword ,
let us by all means advert to the <font> Hand , <$$font> by whose
sovereign permission it is unsheathed . DECOURCY-1776-2,10.47

Whatever are the schemes of fallible men ; however wicked in their
origin , or pernicious in their effects : Revelation teacheth us to
believe , that an all-wise God So superintends and over-rules them all ,
as to carry on his own secret counsels of providence and to make them
subservient to his grand purpose of grace , respecting the salvation of
his people . DECOURCY-1776-2,10.48

<font> Many are the devices of men's hearts ; DECOURCY-1776-2,10.49

but the <$$font> Counsel <font> of the <$$font> Lord , That <font> shall
stand . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,10.50

But without presuming to fathom the depth of God's inscrutable
dispensations , or to <font> say unto the <$$font> Almighty , <font> "
What dost thou ? " <$$font> Let us rather apply ourselves to that which
immediately concerns us ; viz. the <font> improvement <$$font> of the
present awful crisis . DECOURCY-1776-2,10.51

- The sword has received its commission . DECOURCY-1776-2,10.52

It has been , and still continues to be , bathed in blood .
DECOURCY-1776-2,10.53

We are involved in all the horrors of war ; of a <font> civil <$$font>
war ; which originated from a wanton abuse <P_11> of liberty , and is
carried on thro' the unyielding obstinacy of false patriotism .
DECOURCY-1776-2,11.54

<font> We , <$$font> as a people , are deeply interested in the progress
and issue of the important struggle ; and , as a <font> sinful <$$font>
people , justly chargeable with heinous provocations of the divine
Majesty , and obnoxious to his merited wrath ; DECOURCY-1776-2,11.55

it is incumbent on us to humble ourselves under his almighty hand ; to
deprecate his displeasure ; to implore his mercy ; and to seek for help
in this important time of need . DECOURCY-1776-2,11.56

Though the British arms have been hitherto crowned with success ; yet ,
as the battle is the Lord's , and as he can in a moment change the scale
of victory , blast all our counsels , and refuse in anger <font> to go
forth with our hosts : <$$font> our eyes should be looking up to this
great Arbiter of life and death , and our hearts elevated in importunate
prayer at his gracious throne ; that he would be pleased , during the
continuance of the war , to assist us with his almighty arm ; that , by
his interposition , a period may be speedily put to the present troubles
, and that there may be a happy restoration of peace and tranquillity ;
that we may be deeply sensible of our national provocations of the
Majesty of heaven ; and that the God of all grace would avert those
judgments , which might be justly inflicted on us , for our grievous
departures from him . DECOURCY-1776-2,11.57

We are more especially , upon the present occasion , called to engage in
these solemn exercises , <P_12> by the Proclamation of our gracious
Sovereign ; who hath appointed this day " for a general Fast and
humiliation before Almighty God , to be observed in most devout and
solemn manner , by sending up our prayers and supplications to the
Divine Majesty : for obtaining pardon of our sins , and for averting
those heavy judgments , which our manifold provocations have most justly
deserved ; and imploring his blessing and assistance on the arms of his
Majesty by sea and land ; and for restoring and perpetuating peace ,
safety , and prosperity to Himself and to his Kingdoms . "
DECOURCY-1776-2,12.58

- These are the particulars recommended to us , on this solemn occasion
, as well by his Majesty's <font> Proclamation , <$$font> as by the
<font> Form of prayer <$$font> transmitted from our ecclesiastical
Governors . DECOURCY-1776-2,12.59

These we are to keep in view , through the several branches of our
humiliation : that , while we are giving a public testimony of our
loyalty to the King , and of our solicitude about the interests of his
government , as well as the success of his arms ; we may be more
especially reminded of the allegiance we owe to the King of kings , and
greatly abased by a consideration of the manifold instances of our
rebellions against him . DECOURCY-1776-2,12.60

It must administer not a little pleasure to every serious mind to
reflect , that the circumstances of the present day of humiliation bear
, in some measure , a striking resemblance to those enjoined <P_13>
throughout the land of <font> Judah , <$$font> upon the commencement of
a war with <font> the children of Moab and the children of Ammon
<$$font> ; and that the proclamation of his Majesty for appointing a
general Fast upon the present awful emergency , comes recommended to us
by the example of so illustrious and pious a Prince , as that of <font>
Jehoshaphat , <$$font> King of <font> Judah . DECOURCY-1776-2,13.61

- And Jehoshaphat feared , DECOURCY-1776-2,13.62

and set himself to seek the <$$font> Lord , DECOURCY-1776-2,13.63

<font> and proclaimed a <$$font> Fast <font> throughout all Judah :
DECOURCY-1776-2,13.64

and Judah gathered themselves together to ask <$$font> Help <font> of
the <$$font> Lord : - In a farther improvement of which words , and of
the solemn occasion to which I have taken the liberty of accommodating
them ; it shall be my business , I. To consider what is implied in
<font> Seeking the <$$font> Lord : II. To point out the nature , end ,
and design of <font> fasting <$$font> in general ; as well as the proper
temper necessary for the performance of this duty when publicly enjoined
: III. To shew that when engaged in solemnities of this nature , we
should never forget , that <font> to ask help of the <$$font> Lord is
among the most " necessary measures of force , " to be used against our
adversaries , whether temporal , or spiritual . DECOURCY-1776-2,13.65

I. I am to consider , what is implied in seeking the Lord .
DECOURCY-1776-2,13.66

- It implies a making application to Him , in every incident , whether
ordinary or extraordinary ; from the common occurrences of life , up to
the more awful and uncommon dispensations of God , which shake the earth
, and spread terror through the inhabitants thereof .
DECOURCY-1776-2,13.67

As <font> praesidet <P_14> singulis tanquam universis & universis
tanquam singulis , <$$font> he presides over the universe and
individuals in it , by an equal superintendency of providence ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,14.68

his hand is to be observed , his overruling power acknowledged , and his
direction sought , as well in the circumscribed sphere of individuals ,
as in the more enlarged and important concerns of states or kingdoms .
DECOURCY-1776-2,14.69

The practical knowledge of this truth at the same time that it enters
deeply into the very essence of Christianity , contributes much also
towards the happiness of its highly-@ @favored votaries .
DECOURCY-1776-2,14.70

For , while it furnishes an antidote to the horrid assaults of Atheism
and Infidelity , it keeps their minds stayed upon the Lord , and their
souls trusting in their provident God . DECOURCY-1776-2,14.71

To this almighty and all-sufficient Friend they commit all their
concerns , great and minute ; DECOURCY-1776-2,14.72

and upon his arm , providence , and grace , they hang , for an
accomplishment of those exceeding great and precious promises , which
relate to the exigencies of the present life , as well as the glories of
the next . DECOURCY-1776-2,14.73

Thus , while the wicked <font> are at their wits end <$$font> ; are
driven to and fro by every blast of temptation , like chaff before the
wind ; while their <font> way is turned upside down <$$font> , and their
minds , like a vessel at the mercy of an outrageous {TEXT:outragious}
storm , are agitated by every wave of adversity , and often plunged in
the gulph of despondency : the righteous , by making application to
their God , are <font> kept in perfect peace , DECOURCY-1776-2,14.74

<$$font> and are enabled to enter into the triumphant song of the church
in the 46th <font> Psalm . <$$font> - <P_15> <font> God is our refuge
and strength , a very present help in trouble . DECOURCY-1776-2,15.75

Therefore will not we fear , though the earth be removed and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,15.76

While faith is in exertion , nothing can intimidate them ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,15.77

and while God is for them , nothing can materially injure them .
DECOURCY-1776-2,15.78

It is their privilege to meet the wreck of nature itself , undaunted ;
and to stand unappalled amidst the terrors of the last great day ; while
the vile apostate trembles in a calm . DECOURCY-1776-2,15.79

Their hearts <font> should not be afraid of evil tidings , standing fast
in the <$$font> Lord ; DECOURCY-1776-2,15.80

for , no vicissitudes in life , however alarming , melancholy , or
sudden , can ever create a change in their state , or shock the
foundation on which their peace resteth . DECOURCY-1776-2,15.81

<font> This is the generation of them that <$$font> Seek <font> him ,
that seek thy face , O Jacob . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,15.82

This application to the Lord , either in a time of public calamity , or
private distress , is at once declarative of our submission to his
dispensations , and of our dependence on Him <font> alone <$$font> for
deliverance . DECOURCY-1776-2,15.83

While heathens fly for refuge to the shrine of idolatry ; while
worldlings seek for succor from the arm of flesh ; while hypocrites
conceal their horrid visage under the convenient mask of religion , and
seek for shelter beneath <font> the Skirt of him that is a Jew , to take
away their reproach <$$font> ; while proud sceptics seek wisdom from
their delusive reason , and thus <font> sacrifice to their own drag
<$$font> ; and Papists have recourse to their bead-roll of <P_16>
fictitious saints and supposititious {COM:sic} mediators : <font> should
not a <$$font> wise <font> people <$$font> Seek <font> to their <$$font>
God ? was the fine expostulation of the prophet to those who were in
danger of seductions from the path of truth . DECOURCY-1776-2,16.84

And in order to enhance our obedience to the divine injunction ,
scripture represents the <font> object <$$font> to whom we should seek ,
in all his glory , power , supremacy , and goodness , as the Creator ,
Governor , and Redeemer of sinners . DECOURCY-1776-2,16.85

Seek <font> the <$$font> Lord <font> and ye shall live . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,16.86

Seek him that <font> maketh the seven stars and Orion , and turneth the
shadow of death into the morning , and maketh the day dark with night ;
that calleth for the waters of the sea , and poureth them Out upon the
face of the earth : DECOURCY-1776-2,16.87

the <$$font> Lord <font> is his name . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,16.88

See this great truth exemplified in the pious conduct of <font>
Jehoshaphat . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,16.89

Tidings are brought to him of a formidable insurrection of the <font>
Moabites <$$font> and <font> Ammonites <$$font> ; DECOURCY-1776-2,16.90

and the intelligence is rendered additionally alarming , by an account
of the prodigious <font> multitude <$$font> of the confederate
insurgents : DECOURCY-1776-2,16.91

for <font> there came some , saying , There cometh a great multitude
against thee from beyond the sea . <$$font> Ver. 2 .
DECOURCY-1776-2,16.92

Is <font> Jehoshaphat <$$font> thrown into any unbecoming agitation by
this unexpected alarm ? DECOURCY-1776-2,16.93

No . But with all that solid composure , which is the characteristic ,
as well of genuine fortitude , as of true piety , he prepares an address
to the fountain of wisdom and strength . DECOURCY-1776-2,16.94

He seems apprehensive of danger it is true : DECOURCY-1776-2,16.95

for it is said he <font> feared . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,16.96

But his <font> fears <$$font> were <P_17> manifestly of the right kind :
DECOURCY-1776-2,17.97

for instead of driving him <font> from , <$$font> they drive him <font>
to <$$font> God . DECOURCY-1776-2,17.98

And <font> happy is the man , who thus feareth always . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,17.99

- Whither does he fly for <font> wisdom ? <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,17.100

To his privy-counsellors , or prime-ministers ? DECOURCY-1776-2,17.101

However he might have made use of their instructions , in his after
determinations ; God has evidently the <font> first <$$font> place in
his address . DECOURCY-1776-2,17.102

His <font> primary <$$font> applications are to Him ; his <font>
secondary <$$font> ones , to his friends . DECOURCY-1776-2,17.103

He makes his ministers know their proper place , by consulting them
<font> last . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,17.104

For , though <font> in the multitude of counsellors there is safety :
<$$font> yet it is only on a supposition , that their counsel is taken
in subordination to the superior direction of Him , who is <font>
Wonderful , Counsellor . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,17.105

In all our measures , consultations , difficulties , or embarrassments ,
" Seek Him First , " should be the favorite motto , and the important
remembrancer to Kings , and all that are placed in authority under them
. DECOURCY-1776-2,17.106

- To what <font> weapons <$$font> has <font> Jehoshaphat <$$font>
recourse ? DECOURCY-1776-2,17.107

To that most important , most neccessary , and most efficacious piece of
divine armor - Prayer . DECOURCY-1776-2,17.108

This engages his attention <font> first <$$font> ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,17.109

preparations of <font> hostile <$$font> weapons were to <font> follow .
<$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,17.110

The eulogium which <font> David <$$font> poured on <font> Goliah's
{COM:sic} sword , <$$font> is applicable to the fervent prayer of a
righteous man , DECOURCY-1776-2,17.111

<font> There is none like it ! <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,17.112

It is that which keeps bright the whole Christian panoply :
DECOURCY-1776-2,17.113

and the King of <font> Judah <$$font> seems to be well acquainted with
the use and advantage of it : DECOURCY-1776-2,17.114

for , while others were furbishing the sword , and <P_18> making ready
the instruments of death , <font> Jehoshaphat sets himself to <$$font>
Seek <font> the <$$font> Lord . DECOURCY-1776-2,18.115

Tho' a <font> King , <$$font> before whom thousands bent the knee ; he
had learned to bend his own , before the throne of the <font> King of
kings . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,18.116

All <font> his <$$font> royalty is relinquished , DECOURCY-1776-2,18.117

is eclipsed , before the infinitely-@ @superior glory of Divine Majesty
. DECOURCY-1776-2,18.118

At his footstool he bows in humble prostration ; DECOURCY-1776-2,18.119

and in the humiliating language of the most necessitous and importunate
suppliant , he spreads the concerns of himself and his people before the
throne of grace . DECOURCY-1776-2,18.120

Had we been eye-witnesses to the reverential piety of this amiable
Monarch , and had we heard the fervent ejaculations that issued from his
heart ; should we not have united to his <font> prayers <$$font> our
<font> wishes , <$$font> and have said , " <font> The <$$font> Lord
<font> grant thee thy heart's desire ! " <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,18.121

But our wishes would have been anticipated by the previous grant of
heaven . DECOURCY-1776-2,18.122

<font> Jehosaphat <$$font> was as <font> successful , <$$font> as he was
importunate , in his intercessions . DECOURCY-1776-2,18.123

For , so wonderfully did God fulfil that promise made by <font> David
<$$font> to <font> Solomon <$$font> his son , <font> If thou <$$font>
Seek <font> him , he will be found of thee <$$font> ; that <font> the
King of Judah had no need to fight in this battle : <$$font> but <font>
stood still and saw <$$font> with astonishment <font> the salvation of
the <$$font> Lord <paren> ver. 17 <$$paren> effected , without his
striking a stroke . DECOURCY-1776-2,18.124

A total discomfiture of his enemies followed his intercessory appeal to
heaven ; and a discomfiture so easy , to <font> Jehoshaphat <$$font> and
his subjects , that their only trouble consisted in bearing away the
immense treasures , which their enemies <P_19> left behind them ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,19.125

for <font> they were three days in gathering of the spoil ; there was so
much . <$$font> Ver. 25 . DECOURCY-1776-2,19.126

What ample encouragement to <font> pray ? <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,19.127

Who would not wish to practice the important duty ? when the exercise
of it is authenticated , and the advantages of it , so eminently
illustrated in the person and successes of the pious King of <font>
Judah ? <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,19.128

Can we see <font> Majesty <$$font> itself in the dust , and not wish to
imitate the royal humiliation ? DECOURCY-1776-2,19.129

Who that possesses the smallest spark of sacred emulation , can refrain
from applauding , and desiring to copy after so bright an example ?
DECOURCY-1776-2,19.130

And while the illustrious petitioner justly merits our applause and
imitation in general ; his pious conduit is stamped with an emphatic
recommendation to <font> Crowned Heads <$$font> in particular .
DECOURCY-1776-2,19.131

<font> Kings reign , DECOURCY-1776-2,19.132

and princes decree justice , <$$font> under the permission and
superintendency of Jehovah . DECOURCY-1776-2,19.133

To Him they are indebted for their crowns ; DECOURCY-1776-2,19.134

to Him they owe their dominion ; DECOURCY-1776-2,19.135

and upon His sovereign providence they hang , for the prosperity of
their kingdoms , the peace of their families , and the success of their
arms . DECOURCY-1776-2,19.136

And since a frown from Jehovah can disconcert the measures of their
wisest counsellors ; render all their well-planned expeditions abortive
; blast with destruction their grandest armaments , to human appearance
invincible ; spread terror and devastation through their countries ; and
make their kingdoms , the seat of war , of captivity , of desolation : O
! with what earnestness , solemnity , and <P_20> humiliation , should
they , like <font> Jehoshaphat , set themselves to <$$font> Seek <font>
the <$$font> Lord <font> of all Lords ! <$$font> and recommend to his
infallible counsel and irresistible arm , the weighty concerns with
which they are entrusted ! DECOURCY-1776-2,20.137

- Ye , who are acquainted with the way of access to the gracious throne
of God , forget not to present <font> supplication , prayers ,
intercessions , for <$$font> Kings , <font> and for all that are in
authority <$$font> especially for those Protestant Princes , whose
banners are erected in opposition to the interests of <font> Paganism ,
<$$font> and of <font> Rome : <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,20.138

and , as ye sit comfortably and securely beneath the shade of <font>
your <$$font> national <font> vine , no one making you afraid , <$$font>
remember the amiable Sovereign , under whose wing , as happy <font>
Britons , <$$font> and free subjects , ye have this inestimable
privilege ascertained to you , by the very nature of an excellent
constitution . DECOURCY-1776-2,20.139

And , while ye look up to the Father of mercies for national blessings ;
spread before his throne , and lay open to his paternal heart your own
grievances , in particular . DECOURCY-1776-2,20.140

Tell him of your trials ; but especially of your own inability to stand
against them . DECOURCY-1776-2,20.141

Seek his <font> counsel , <$$font> in all your embarrassments ; his
<font> strength , <$$font> in all your weaknesses ; and his <font> grace
, <$$font> against all your enemies . DECOURCY-1776-2,20.142

<font> In all your ways acknowledge <$$font> Him , <font> and <$$font>
He <font> shall direct your paths . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,20.143

He is your <font> sun <$$font> to illuminate ; your <font> shield
<$$font> to protect ; and your all-sufficient God to supply all your
wants , according to the riches of his grace in Christ Jesus .
DECOURCY-1776-2,20.144

<font> Seek <$$font> therefore to <font> him whom your soul loveth ,
<$$font> and who loveth you from everlasting to everlasting .
DECOURCY-1776-2,20.145

<P_21>

2 In <font> seeking the <$$font> Lord , is implied , more especially ,
an humble application to him for the blessings of that glorious
redemption which is by Christ Jesus . DECOURCY-1776-2,21.147

It hath pleased the Father , that all the rich treasures of grace and
glory should centre in his Son ; that whosoever is an humble suitor for
the one , or an expectant of the other , should seek for both , only
thro' the Lord Jesus Christ ; and that He therefore should bear the
unrivaled glory of all the happiness conferred on sinners in this world
and in the next . DECOURCY-1776-2,21.148

As He is , <paren> so to speak <$$paren> , the glorious Aggregate of all
the gifts , mercies , and blessings , of a gracious GOD ; they are to be
sought <font> in <$$font> Him as the inexhaustible source and <font>
through <$$font> Him as the only medium of conveyance .
DECOURCY-1776-2,21.149

The smallest drop of consolation on earth , and those rivers of pleasure
that flow at God's right hand , are equally the gift of His grace , and
the purchase of His precious blood . DECOURCY-1776-2,21.150

By Him , in Him , and for Him , are all things . DECOURCY-1776-2,21.151

Therefore , " Amid God's list of blessings infinite , This stand the
foremost - that his Son hath bled ! " And <font> bled <$$font> too ,
for those who themselves deserved to die ! DECOURCY-1776-2,21.152

And <font> bled , <$$font> to procure all those inestimable blessings ,
the possession of which is essential to our happiness here , and
hereafter . DECOURCY-1776-2,21.153

It follows , from a consideration of the freeness , plenitude , and
infinity of that divine grace laid up in the Lord Jesus Christ , that ,
as <font> sinners , <$$font> our
{COM:duplicate_copies_of_pp._20_and_21_omitted} <P_22> primary
solicitude should be to obtain the Favor of God ; which is <font> better
than life . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,22.154

To <font> seek the <$$font> Lord , and at the same time to be impressed
with no sense of our apostasy from him by sin , and to have no respect
to the propitiatory sacrifice of his coequal Son , is at once to
depreciate the only provision made for our guilt , and to treat Jehovah
with solemn mockery . DECOURCY-1776-2,22.155

Christ is the Way ; the Only way of access to God ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,22.156

and <font> none cometh to the Father but by him . <$$font> So that
while the Father of mercies is accessible to the chief of sinners , who
seeks his face thro' the interposing grace and righteousness of the
Mediator ; he is utterly inaccessible to the most decent Pharisee ,
whose hopes of acceptance are grounded either on the fancied sufficiency
of his paultry obedience , or upon some unscriptural , and therefore
delusory , view of mere mercy . DECOURCY-1776-2,22.157

To every sinner who rejects Christ as the reconciling medium between
heaven and earth , the way to the divine throne is barred by the thunder
of God's righteous law ; which , in the hand of inexorable justice ,
like the Cherub's flaming sword that guarded the entrance to <font> Eden
, <$$font> renders an access to the divine Majesty impracticable ; and
every presumptuous effort towards it , infinitely hazardous .
DECOURCY-1776-2,22.158

Nothing therefore can silence the law's thundering curse , but the more
powerful voice of Jesu's {COM:sic} blood : nothing , avert the stroke of
justice but the satisfaction of that glorious Surety of the
New-Testament : DECOURCY-1776-2,22.159

There is no way of recovering the inheritance forfeited thro' the
disobedience of the <font> first Adam , <$$font> but by the <P_23>
obedience of the <font> Second , <$$font> who is the Lord <font> from
heaven : <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,23.160

Nor is there any mode of regaining the <font> favor <$$font> of God ,
but thro' the everlasting righteousness of his Son .
DECOURCY-1776-2,23.161

To <font> seek the <$$font> Lord , is , therefore , emphatically , to
seek for pardon of sin ; justification of our persons ; acceptance of
our duties ; a deliverance from condemnation ; and a title to glory ;
only thro' the atonement and obedience of the blessed Jesus .
DECOURCY-1776-2,23.162

And , to this glorious truth <font> give all the Prophets , <$$font> and
the Apostles , <font> witness . <$$font> Insomuch that if I were to
cite their numerous testimonies I might fill a volume .
DECOURCY-1776-2,23.163

One very apposite and evangelical extract I can@ @not help making from
what some , not improperly style , " the <font> gospel <$$font> of
<font> Isaiah . " <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,23.164

This evangelist of the prophets , rapt up in views of <font> the
<$$font> Day <font> of <$$font> Christ , and the future establishment of
his glorious kingdom , prophecies of the amazing success which should
attend the preaching of his gospel among the Gentiles ; who , in numbers
, and with speed , are represented in the following glorious promise ,
as flocking to Jesus for salvation . DECOURCY-1776-2,23.165

<font> And in that day there shall be a Root of Jesse , which shall
stand for an ensign of the people ; DECOURCY-1776-2,23.166

to it shall the Gentiles <$$font> Seek . DECOURCY-1776-2,23.167

That is ; in Christ , who is at once the root and offspring of <font>
Jesse , <$$font> as God-man , shall Gentile sinners , convinced of their
ruin thro' sin , <font> seek <$$font> for refuge from the storm of
divine vengeance ; <font> seek <$$font> for health , <P_24> peace , and
salvation , thro' the blood of his cross ; DECOURCY-1776-2,24.168

and <font> to <$$font> his banner shall they <font> seek , <$$font> as
volunteers militant in his righteous cause . DECOURCY-1776-2,24.169

This sweet promise is daily accomplishing , in the multitudes , which
flock to this glorious <font> ensign , <$$font> as <font> doves to their
windows : <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,24.170

and it shall receive its final accomplishment , when , upon the bringing
in the remnant of the Jews , and the fulness of the Gentiles , the whole
collective body of God's redeemed people shall be arranged in glorious
order , under their glorified Captain ; <font> and come to Zion with
songs and everlasting joy ! <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,24.171

To <font> seek the <$$font> Lord is a matter of infinite importance ; if
we consider the expression as inclusive of that <font> faith , humility
, <$$font> and <font> sollicitude , <$$font> with which a Sinner ought
to intreat the favor of God through the Son of his love .
DECOURCY-1776-2,24.172

And , in this point of view it behooves {TEXT:behoves} us particularly
to present our addresses to the divine throne , on this day of
humiliation ; one grand end in the appointment of which , is , that we
may be impressed with a sense of the necessity we lie under of " <font>
obtaining pardon for our sins . " <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,24.173

As the pardon of sin is both the <font> gift <$$font> and <font> act
<$$font> of God ; to expect so invaluable a blessing without the
intervention of a Mediator ; is to expect , what is absolutely
inconsistent with the honor of his attributes and his law ;
diametrically opposite to the plan of the gospel-salvation ; and totally
incompatible with that glory which Jesus maintains in his official
capacity as our great High Priest : DECOURCY-1776-2,24.174

yea , such an expectation would at once strike at the very basis of
Revelation <P_25> itself , as well as be subversive of our own eternal
happiness . DECOURCY-1776-2,25.175

A day of humiliation for <font> sin , <$$font> should be a day of
particular application to the only Saviour from sin .
DECOURCY-1776-2,25.176

For , of any solemnity , which is observed without an humble reference
to the blood and intercession of Jesus Christ , we might justly
pronounce in the language of the prophet , <font> It is iniquity even
the solemn meeting . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,25.177

We might as soon expect light , underived from the material sun ; as
hope for pardon of <font> sin , <$$font> independent of the grace , work
, and person of the Lord Jesus Christ . DECOURCY-1776-2,25.178

And people may with equally as good a grace attempt to blot the orb that
rules the day , out of his important station in the firmament ; or argue
, that no such luminary ever existed ; as exclude the <font> Sun of
righteousness <$$font> from the honor due to him in the work of
salvation ; or suppose , that so high a vouchsafement of mercy , as that
of <font> pardon of sin , <$$font> could be obtained , abstractedly from
the consideration of the infinite sufficiency of Him , who <font> is
exalted a <$$font> Prince <font> and a <$$font> Savior , <font> to
<$$font> Give <font> repentance unto Israel and <$$font> Forgiveness of
Sins . DECOURCY-1776-2,25.179

The importance of <font> seeking the <$$font> Lord will farther appear
if we consider , that all our cares about other things are to be
absorbed in our solicitude about <font> this . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,25.180

Therefore our Lord says , <font> Seek ye <$$font> first <font> the
Kingdom of <$$font> God <font> and his righteousness , <$$font> &c.
DECOURCY-1776-2,25.181

The important pursuit must have the <font> first <$$font> place in our
anxiety ; the <font> first <$$font> share in our affections ; <P_26> and
the <font> first <$$font> portion of our time , talents , and assiduity
. DECOURCY-1776-2,26.182

Whatever else may be omitted , neglected , or postponed ; omission ,
negligence , or procrastination , here , may be attended with the most
fatal consequences . DECOURCY-1776-2,26.183

<font> Seek the <$$font> Lord <font> while he may be found , call ye
upon him while he is near , <$$font> is the alarming exhortation of God
in his word . DECOURCY-1776-2,26.184

While therefore the universal inquiry is , <font> What shall we eat ?
Or what shall we drink ? Or wherewithal shall be clothed ? <paren> For
after all these things do the Gentiles seek : <$$paren> <$$font> may the
cry of our hearts be , Lord <font> lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us ! <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,26.185

May we seek God with our whole hearts ! and make him our chiefest good
! DECOURCY-1776-2,26.186

May he be our portion in the land of the living !
DECOURCY-1776-2,26.187

And may our method of seeking him be never , in the smallest degree ,
determined , by the precarious whim , and fluctuating resolutions , of
those infatuated triflers ! whose fatal barter of heaven and happiness
for a little transient gratification , is finely exposed and reprobated
by the poet ! DECOURCY-1776-2,26.188

" Tho' <font> heav'n <$$font> and <font> hell <$$font> depend upon the
choice , A <font> butterfly <$$font> comes 'cross ,
DECOURCY-1776-2,26.189

and both are fled ! " DECOURCY-1776-2,26.190

<font> Seek the <$$font> Lord therefore , with that earnestness ,
importunacy , humility , and faith , which characterize the
gospel-seeker ; DECOURCY-1776-2,26.191

and the encouraging promise is , <font> Seek and ye shall find .
<$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,26.192

Seek to the Father for his love in <font> Jesus <$$font> ; to the Son ,
for his <P_27> salvation ; and to the Holy Spirit , for those gracious
influences , and divine consolations , which he confers on all that
believe . DECOURCY-1776-2,27.193

Seek for peace , pardon , acceptance , righteousness , grace , glory ;
in Christ , through <font> believing . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,27.194

And , after you have sought in God's own way , and joyfully found the
inestimable pearl of great price , you will then be a partaker of that
solid happiness described by <font> Solomon , <$$font> in <font> Prov.
<$$font> ii. 14 , and paraphrased in the following beautiful lines : "
Happy the man , who wisdom gains ! Thrice happy , who his guest retains
! DECOURCY-1776-2,27.195

He owns , and shall for ever own , wisdom and Christ and Heav'n are one
! " DECOURCY-1776-2,27.196

<font> The <$$font> Lord , says the prophet <font> Jeremiah , is good to
the soul that seeketh him . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,27.197

And therefore the psalmist saith , <font> O taste DECOURCY-1776-2,27.198

and see that the <$$font> Lord <font> is good . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,27.199

While all the dispensations of his providence are replete with mercy and
truth ; the manifestations of his grace more brightly display his
goodness towards them that seek him . DECOURCY-1776-2,27.200

Whatever afflictions or trials are their lot ; Divine Goodness
over-rules them to their present welfare ; DECOURCY-1776-2,27.201

and makes them work together for their eternal good .
DECOURCY-1776-2,27.202

Their crosses are lightened by the assistance of his arm ; and sweetened
by the cheering {TEXT:chearing} consolations of his blessed Spirit .
DECOURCY-1776-2,27.203

The gracious goodness of a reconciled God is the source of their peace ,
the spring of their hopes , and the subject of their songs through the
wilderness : <P_28> while a believing <font> sight <$$font> and divine
<font> taste <$$font> of this goodness not only alleviates their burdens
, but also administers a double sweetness to their common comforts ; and
gives them a settled disrelish for all the gratifications of the
sensualist . DECOURCY-1776-2,28.204

Having sought and found happiness in Jesus , they wish to dive deeper
into those inexhaustible mines of grace and love in Him :
DECOURCY-1776-2,28.205

and are never wholly at rest till , by the <font> goodness and mercy
which have followed them all their days , <$$font> they are at last
brought to see and enjoy him without a veil between .
DECOURCY-1776-2,28.206

In the mean time he is good to them in all his works , ways , and
dispensations ; insomuch that they are often constrained to cry out ,
<font> O how great is thy goodness which thou hast laid up for them that
fear thee ! <$$font> A declaration of wonder and praise , which they
take up in time , and shall never drop through eternity .
DECOURCY-1776-2,28.207

<P_29>

<heading>

Sermon II . DECOURCY-1776-2,29.210

<$$heading>

{COM:2_Chron._20,_3,4_omitted}

As there are various ways , and instituted means of <font> seeking
<$$font> the Lord , I proceed to consider the particular one mentioned
in our text ; that of <font> fasting . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,29.213

In prosecuting this part of the subject , I am to point out , II. The
nature of <font> fasting <$$font> in general ; as well as the proper
temper necessary for the performance of this duty when made a <font>
public injunction , in particular . DECOURCY-1776-2,29.214

2 <font> Fasting is a temporary abstinence from food ; which abstinence
is for the time , either <font> total <$$font> or <font> partial ,
<$$font> as the circumstances or particular constitution of the <font>
faster <$$font> may direct . DECOURCY-1776-2,29.215

According to the <font> proper <$$font> import of the term , to <font>
fast , <$$font> is <font> wholly <$$font> to abstain for a season from
<font> all <$$font> kind of food : DECOURCY-1776-2,29.216

for the word {COM:greek_omitted} , which is invariably used throughout
the New Testament for , <font> to fast , <$$font> being compounded
<P_30> of {COM:greek_omitted} and {COM:greek_omitted} , plainly
signifies <font> not to eat . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,30.217

Thus , when the evangelist <font> Matthew <$$font> says <paren> chap.
iv. ver. 2 . <$$paren> that Christ <font> fasted <$$font>
{COM:greek_omitted} forty days and forty nights ; St. <font> Luke
<$$font> informs us <paren> chap. iv. ver. 2 . <$$paren> that
{COM:greek_omitted} <font> he eat <$$font> nothing .
DECOURCY-1776-2,30.218

But , although the derivation of the original word , and the
correspondent practice of our blessed Lord , concur to establish a
<font> total <$$font> abstinence , for a season , from all food , as the
<font> proper <$$font> requisition in fasting : yet , where such
abstinence would be attended with any material injury to the tender
constitutions of invalids ; it may be either wholly avoided ; continued
but for a short time ; or changed into a <font> moderate <$$font> use of
the creatures . DECOURCY-1776-2,30.219

If some think this last mode of <font> partial <$$font> abstinence
inadmissible , from the proper signification <P_31> of the term , as
well as scripture-example : then they must grant , that a <font> total
<$$font> one , which might injure tender constitutions , is not
obligatory on invalids : <paren> 2 <$$paren> Because it is written ,
<font> Thou shalt do no murder : <$$font> <paren> 2 <$$paren> Because
our Lord says , <font> I will have mercy and not sacrifice : <$$font>
<paren> 2 <$$paren> Because <font> proper <$$font> fasting , by injuring
the organs of the body , upon the temperament , contexture , and tone of
which , the exertion of the mental powers so very much depends ; would
manifestly defeat the <font> end <$$font> , which the pious but invalid
ascetic might have in view ; viz. that of a vigorous attendance on the
means of grace . DECOURCY-1776-2,31.220

2 Fasting , as it may be divided into <font> total <$$font> or <font>
partial <$$font> ; so it may , into <font> private <$$font> or <font>
public . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,31.221

As to <font> private <$$font> fasting , though there be no <font>
express precept <$$font> commanding it , yet there is that which is
tantamount thereto . DECOURCY-1776-2,31.222

When the <font> Pharisees <$$font> expressed their astonishment , that
<font> the disciples fasted <$$font> not ; our Lord {TEXT:Lord,} assigns
a reason for this circumstance , founded on that condescending
indulgence wherewith he treated his followers during the infantile state
of their discipleship ; which reason he corroborates by a striking
illustration , taken from the danger and preposterousness of <font>
putting a piece of new cloth upon an old garment , <$$font> or of <font>
putting new wine into old bottles : <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,31.223

and , after observing , that the time of the <font> bridegroom <$$font>
's personal abode on earth , was a season incongruous for <font>
mourning , <$$font> and its relative adjunct , <font> fasting <$$font> ;
he adds what I think , was , not only to determine the conduct of his
disciples immediately after his departure from <P_32> them , but also to
prescribe a rule for his followers to the end of time ; saying , <font>
But the days will come when the bridegroom shall be taken from them ,
DECOURCY-1776-2,32.224

and <$$font> then <font> shall they <$$font> fast .
DECOURCY-1776-2,32.225

It should seem , that the great Apostle of the <font> Gentiles <$$font>
thought this a virtual rule obligatory on the primitive <font>
Christians : <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,32.226

for , among the particular duties he recommended to married professors
in the church of <font> Corinth , <$$font> the <font> giving themselves
up to <$$font> Fasting <font> and prayer <$$font> is mentioned with an
emphasis . DECOURCY-1776-2,32.227

3 If any should yet doubt whether the duty of <font> fasting , <$$font>
which was obligatory on the primitive Christians , is equally binding on
us , I beg they would consider , <paren> 1 <$$paren> That if saints ,
much our superiors in doing and suffering , looked upon themselves as
not <font> above <$$font> fasting ; the consideration of our great
inferiority to them is an additional reason for our more frequent
practice of it . <paren> DECOURCY-1776-2,32.228

2 <$$paren> If the grounds of this duty are equally in force now , as in
former ages of the church , so is consequently the duty itself ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,32.229

but the grounds of it , viz. the necessity of self-denial in general ,
<P_33> seasons of particular humiliation , application to God by prayer
upon important occasions , are still in force ; DECOURCY-1776-2,33.230

consequently the duty itself can@ @not be abolished , or our conformity
to it rescinded . DECOURCY-1776-2,33.231

<paren> 3 <$$paren> It has the sanction of the most eminent saints in
the apostolic aera . DECOURCY-1776-2,33.232

- <font> The prophets and teachers of the church that was at Antioch ,
<$$font> upon consulting the mind of the Lord about the appointment of
<font> Barnabas <$$font> and <font> Saul <$$font> to the work of the
ministry , added <font> Fasting <$$font> to prayer during their
addresses on this head : DECOURCY-1776-2,33.233

and , after the holy Ghost expressed his will concerning their
separation to their ministerial work ; previous to the imposition of
hands , it is said , <font> And when they had <$$font> fasted <font> and
prayed , they laid their hands on them , <$$font> &c. -
DECOURCY-1776-2,33.234

These two apostolic colleagues themselves , in their ordination of
elders in the churches of <font> Lystra , Iconium , and Antioch ,
<$$font> after they <font> had prayed with <$$font> Fasting , <font>
commended them to the <$$font> Lord . DECOURCY-1776-2,33.235

- <font> Anna served God with <$$font> Fastings <font> and prayer .
<$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,33.236

And it is recorded as an influence on the piety of <font> Cornelius ,
<$$font> that he was <font> fasting <$$font> and praying at the time he
was favored with a supernatural direction to <font> Peter .
DECOURCY-1776-2,33.237

<$$font> Examples these , which authenticate the practice , and
recommend it to our imitation . DECOURCY-1776-2,33.238

4 As to the <font> seasons , <$$font> and <font> continuance <$$font> of
private <font> fasts , <$$font> they are purely discretionary ;
according to the circumstances , constitutions , and emergencies of
individuals . DECOURCY-1776-2,33.239

God has no where in the New Testament appointed any particular day of
the week <P_34> for this purpose : DECOURCY-1776-2,34.240

and therefore to attribute a superior sanctity to one day above another
<paren> Lord's day excepted <$$paren> ; is extremely absurd .
DECOURCY-1776-2,34.241

Nor is the particular <font> duration <$$font> of such abstemious
seasons specified in the word of God ; because a rule could not possibly
be laid down , which would suit every individual .
DECOURCY-1776-2,34.242

But , to infer from a silence in scripture respecting these
circumstantials , that the duty itself is wholly abolished ; would be to
suppose , that God has dispensed with a branch of that self-denial ,
which enters deeply into the character of a disciple of Christ :
DECOURCY-1776-2,34.243

and if one branch of mortification may be dispensed with ; why not all ?
DECOURCY-1776-2,34.244

I wish there were no professors in the present day , who flout at <font>
fasting , <$$font> as a musty rule , fit only for <font> legalists :
<$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,34.245

And I should not wonder if such despisers of <font> little things
<$$font> were to <font> perish by little and little , <$$font> and at
last , arrive at such a pitch of sovereign contempt for every species of
mortification , as to look upon all self-denial as not calculated for
the meridian of <paren> what <font> they <$$font> may call <$$paren>
gospel-liberty . DECOURCY-1776-2,34.246

It is impossible to tell where a man will end , when he begins to
quarrel with any branch of the cross . DECOURCY-1776-2,34.247

5 As to the <font> ends <$$font> of fasting , they seem to me to be
principally , these : DECOURCY-1776-2,34.248

<paren> 1 <$$paren> The mortification of some unruly appetite ; the
cravings of which , may be in some measure restrained by universal
<font> temperance <$$font> <paren> which may not improperly be styled
<font> habitual fasting <$$font> <$$paren> or by stated seasons of total
abstinence . DECOURCY-1776-2,34.249

But to expect such a mortification , merely from the <font> opus
operatum <$$font> of fasting , independently <P_35> of the power of
God's Spirit , is monkish ; DECOURCY-1776-2,35.250

and yet to pretend to self-denial , without making a stand against
self-indulgence in its various branches , is down-right Antinomianism .
DECOURCY-1776-2,35.251

The truth lies here between two extremes : <font> Medio tutissimus ibis
. <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,35.252

He who macerates his body , and expects such maceration will kill the
power of sin in his heart , without the Spirit of Christ , rushes into
the former extreme : while the professor , who pampers his flesh , by a
profuse indulgence even in things lawful , and yet <font> talks <$$font>
about spiritual mortification , falls under the latter .
DECOURCY-1776-2,35.253

Let not the disciple of Christ be driven from the path of duty , though
he see some fatally blundering on his right hand and on his left .
DECOURCY-1776-2,35.254

<paren> 2 <$$paren> To give vigor and solemnity to closet-duties is no
inconsiderable end of fasting . DECOURCY-1776-2,35.255

<paren> 3 <$$paren> It gives the believer an occasion of <font> humbling
<$$font> himself more particularly before God . DECOURCY-1776-2,35.256

<font> I humbled my soul with <$$font> Fasting <font> and prayer ,
<$$font> says <font> David : <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,35.257

And again , <font> I wept DECOURCY-1776-2,35.258

and chastened my soul with <$$font> Fasting . DECOURCY-1776-2,35.259

<paren> 4 <$$paren> The believer enters into the sufferings of Jesus ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,35.260

and by a proper improvement of abstinence , he maintains fellowship with
his Savior in his forty-days fast in the wilderness .
DECOURCY-1776-2,35.261

<paren> 5 <$$paren> Fasting is a practical declaration of our forfeiture
of every blessing through sin ; and of our unworthiness of even a morsel
of bread at the hand of God . DECOURCY-1776-2,35.262

<paren> 6 <$$paren> The addition of fasting to prayer is highly
expedient , in special humiliation before the throne of grace ;
particularly <P_36> when any afflictive visitations hang in suspense .
DECOURCY-1776-2,36.263

Thus <font> David , <$$font> at once to importune God for the life of
the illegitimate child he had by <font> Bathsheba , <$$font> and to
humble himself under a sense of that heinous sin , to which it owed its
birth , and under the stroke of that chastising rod , which was about to
deprive him of it ; <font> sought God for the child :
DECOURCY-1776-2,36.264

and David <$$font> Fasted , DECOURCY-1776-2,36.265

<paren> or , as it is in the Hebrew , <font> fasted a fast <$$font> ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,36.266

observed a season of solemn humiliation and total abstinence from food
<$$paren> DECOURCY-1776-2,36.267

<font> and went in DECOURCY-1776-2,36.268

and lay all night upon the earth . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,36.269

<paren> 7 <$$paren> Fasting is a practical acknowledgment of our
renunciation of every sensual delight ; and a profession of our
reconciliation to the hardship connected with the cross of Christ .
DECOURCY-1776-2,36.270

6 As to public fasts , they are equally recommended , by
scripture-example , though not expressly commanded .
DECOURCY-1776-2,36.271

- There does not occur any intimation of fasting , whether public or
private , antecedently to the time of <font> Moses <$$font> ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,36.272

yet it is presumable , that it was observed notwithstanding in the
patriarchal age , at seasons of particular mourning .
DECOURCY-1776-2,36.273

Indeed abstinence from food is a natural consequence of intense grief .
DECOURCY-1776-2,36.274

For , when nature is over-burdened with sorrow , she spontaneously
rejects food , as well as every other species of indulgence , though
calculated to alleviate her burdens ; DECOURCY-1776-2,36.275

and this suggestion of nature , in a state of distress , seems to have
been the origin of fasting among the heathens . DECOURCY-1776-2,36.276

Nor is it supposable , <P_37> that this natural suggestion would have
operated less , on <font> Abraham , <$$font> mourning after <font> Sarah
, <$$font> or on <font> Jacob <$$font> refusing to be comforted , for
the loss of his beloved <font> Joseph . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,37.277

The first probable mention of a public fast under the Old Testament
occurs in <font> Lev. <$$font> xxiii. 27 , 29 : Where upon the great
day of atonement it is recorded , that the children of Israel were so
strictly commanded to <font> afflict their souls <$$font> ; that the
omission of it , was to have been punished with <font> death : <$$font>
in which voluntary afflicting of the soul is probably included fasting
as well as mourning and praying . DECOURCY-1776-2,37.278

But after the time of <font> Moses <$$font> , publick fasts were very
frequent . DECOURCY-1776-2,37.279

A memorable one is mentioned <font> Josh. <$$font> vii. 6 .
DECOURCY-1776-2,37.280

Upon the discomfiture of the <font> Israelites <$$font> by the men of
<$$font> Ai , Joshua <$$font> and the Elders of <font> Israel <$$font>
lay prostrate before the ark from morning till evening .
DECOURCY-1776-2,37.281

- The eleven tribes which had taken up arms against that of <font>
Benjamin , <$$font> finding themselves unable to hold out against the
inhabitants of <font> Gibeah , went up unto the house of <$$font> God ,
<font> DECOURCY-1776-2,37.282

and wept , DECOURCY-1776-2,37.283

and sat there before the <$$font> Lord , <font> DECOURCY-1776-2,37.284

and <$$font> Fasted <font> that day until even . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,37.285

The <font> Israelites <font> in that solemn humiliation enjoined them by
<font> Samuel , <$$font> at <font> Mizpeh , <$$font> added that of
<font> fasting <$$font> to the other demonstrations of their sorrow for
sin . DECOURCY-1776-2,37.286

When <font> Ahasuerus <$$font> 's severe decree was published against
the <font> Jews , Esther <$$font> sought the Lord by prayer and <font>
fasting : DECOURCY-1776-2,37.287

and there was great mourning among the Jews , and <$$font> Fasting
<P_38> and weeping . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,38.288

- The King and inhabitants of <font> Nineveh <$$font> were so affected
by the denunciations of divine wrath delivered by <font> Jonah <$$font>
, that a public <font> fast <$$font> was proclaimed ; which was observed
with such strictness , that <font> neither man nor beast , herd nor
flock were to taste any thing . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,38.289

Yea , with such strictness and universality were the <font> Jews
<$$font> sometimes enjoined to observe seasons of this nature , that
even infants were not exempted in the proclamation .
DECOURCY-1776-2,38.290

Hence the following command by the prophet <font> Joel . Blow ye the
trumpet in Zion , DECOURCY-1776-2,38.291

sanctify a <$$font> Fast ; DECOURCY-1776-2,38.292

<font> call a solemn assembly : DECOURCY-1776-2,38.293

Gather the people , DECOURCY-1776-2,38.294

sanctify the congregation , DECOURCY-1776-2,38.295

assemble the elders ; DECOURCY-1776-2,38.296

gather the children and those that suck the breasts .
DECOURCY-1776-2,38.297

Let the priests , the ministers of the <$$font> Lord , <font> weep
between the porch and the altar , DECOURCY-1776-2,38.298

and let them say , <$$font> Spare thy people , O Lord .
DECOURCY-1776-2,38.299

These memorable instances of public <font> fasting , <$$font> some of
which were enjoined by Royal Proclamation , have served as proper
examples for succeeding nations and Kings to copy after ; in their
publick humiliations before Almighty God . DECOURCY-1776-2,38.300

This nation has had frequent cause to take the hint ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,38.301

and the present lamentable crisis suggests a very awful one .
DECOURCY-1776-2,38.302

In order to a due improvement of the solemn occasion , I will point out
the temper necessary for sanctifying a public <font> fast . <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,38.303

<paren> 1 <$$paren> Deep self-humiliation for our national crimes in
general ought especially to enter into the solemnities of the day :
DECOURCY-1776-2,38.304

and each individual should lament <P_39> his own departures from God in
particular ; by which he has contributed towards an increase of the
national guilt , and provoked the Lord to send those judgments , which
are at once an annunciation of <font> his <$$font> displeasure and of
<font> our <$$font> sin . DECOURCY-1776-2,39.305

And let those who minister in holy things unite in one unanimous
acknowledgment of our grievous provocations of offended Majesty .
DECOURCY-1776-2,39.306

Let us take with us words and say , in the humble language of <font>
Nehemiah <$$font> and <font> Daniel , - O our <$$font> God , <font> the
great , the mighty and the terrible God , who keepest covenant and mercy
; let not all the trouble seem little before thee that hath come upon us
. DECOURCY-1776-2,39.307

Neither have our princes , our priests , nor our fathers kept thy law .
DECOURCY-1776-2,39.308

Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us :
DECOURCY-1776-2,39.309

for thou hast done right : DECOURCY-1776-2,39.310

but we have done wickedly . DECOURCY-1776-2,39.311

- O <$$font> Lord <font> , the great and dreadful <$$font> God , <font>
we have sinned , DECOURCY-1776-2,39.312

and have committed iniquity , DECOURCY-1776-2,39.313

and have done wickedly , DECOURCY-1776-2,39.314

and have rebelled , even by departing from thy precepts and from thy
judgments . DECOURCY-1776-2,39.315

O Lord , righteousness belongeth unto thee , but unto us confusion of
face ; DECOURCY-1776-2,39.316

O God incline thine ear , DECOURCY-1776-2,39.317

and hear : DECOURCY-1776-2,39.318

for <$$font> we do not present our supplications before thee , for our
righteousness , but for thy great mercies . DECOURCY-1776-2,39.319

<font> O Lord hear : DECOURCY-1776-2,39.320

O Lord forgive : DECOURCY-1776-2,39.321

O Lord , hearken , DECOURCY-1776-2,39.322

and do : DECOURCY-1776-2,39.323

defer not for thine own sake . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,39.324

<paren> 2 <$$paren> Besides a verbal confession of our iniquities , and
a mere oral deprecation of divine wrath , we should renounce and forsake
every false way , and fast from Sin . DECOURCY-1776-2,39.325

All pretended <P_40> devotion , without this , is indevout :
DECOURCY-1776-2,40.326

and the strictest abstinence from food , that is not accompanied with
contrition of heart and a departure from evil , deserves no softer name
, than that of horrid insincerity and dissimulation .
DECOURCY-1776-2,40.327

This impious duplicity in sacred things , is particularly condemned by
the prophet <font> Isaiah . DECOURCY-1776-2,40.328

<font> Some in <font> his <$$font> days , who made a prodigious <font>
merit <$$font> of fasting , and expected great things from God , on
account of their mere abstinence from food , are introduced as
addressing him with the following arrogant challenge :
DECOURCY-1776-2,40.329

<font> Wherefore have we fasted , and thou hearest not ? <$$font>
DECOURCY-1776-2,40.330

The Lord expostulates with the malecontent challengers ,
DECOURCY-1776-2,40.331

and lays before them at once their <font> mistakes <$$font> respecting a
proper fast , and the horrid <font> sins <$$font> by which they
disgraced it ; saying <font> Is it such a fast as I have chosen ? a day
for a man to afflict his soul ? DECOURCY-1776-2,40.332

is it to bow down his head as a bulrush ? i.e. <$$font> to assume the
outward appearances of affliction , by abstaining from food , or putting
on of sackcloth , or by any other external signs of mortification ?
DECOURCY-1776-2,40.333

<font> Wilt thou call <$$font> this <font> a <$$font> fast <font> and an
acceptable day to the <$$font> Lord ? DECOURCY-1776-2,40.334

Is not This the fast that I have chosen ? To loose the Bands of
Wickedness ? DECOURCY-1776-2,40.335

To pretend a devout celebration of ordinances and yet to continue " tied
and bound with the chain of our sins ; " is as inconsistent as for a
condemned felon to celebrate his enlargement , while chained to his cell
with links of iron . DECOURCY-1776-2,40.336

To abstain from food , and not throw off the <font> bands <P_41> of
wickedness , <$$font> is no fast ; but downright mockery , and an
abomination before God . DECOURCY-1776-2,41.337

<paren> 3 <$$paren> Our temper upon the present occasion ought to be
<font> pacific . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,41.338

I mean not , that it is a necessary indication of peace for us to
relinquish our <font> views <$$font> respecting the expediency or
inexpediency of the present contest . DECOURCY-1776-2,41.339

Men can no more stop the current of their sentiments on this or any
other subject , than they can suppress thought altogether .
DECOURCY-1776-2,41.340

But since , Christians are much divided in their opinions , they should
agree , notwithstanding , to be at peace one with another , and calmly
<font> to think and let think . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,41.341

Though we can@ @not chain down our thoughts ; yet it is our privilege to
have our <font> corruptions <$$font> put in chains .
DECOURCY-1776-2,41.342

All <font> anger <$$font> therefore <font> and wrath , and clamor and
evil speaking , should be put away from among us , with all malice
<$$font> ; DECOURCY-1776-2,41.343

otherwise , notwithstanding our observance of a day of humiliation , we
shall come under the predicament of those , who , the prophet says ,
<font> fasted for <$$font> strife <font> and debate , and to smite with
the fist of wickedness . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,41.344

We should <font> pray <$$font> for Peace . DECOURCY-1776-2,41.345

And that man ! who will not do this , whatever pretensions he may make
to patriotism is not even a <font> half <$$font> friend to his
fellow-subjects , his country , or his God . DECOURCY-1776-2,41.346

In short , whoever are wrong , the <font> violent ones <$$font> on all
sides are not right . DECOURCY-1776-2,41.347

A flaming patriot may be actuated by as false an <font> impetus ,
<$$font> as a fiery bigot : DECOURCY-1776-2,41.348

and indeed it often happens , that false patriotism and bigotry
originate from the same fire ; and are only one flame , <P_42> parted ;
not to abate their heat , but to scorch the more conveniently .
DECOURCY-1776-2,42.349

That man is to be pitied , who is exposed to such a double flame .
DECOURCY-1776-2,42.350

Christian <font> moderation <$$font> , therefore , is a <font> golden
mean , <$$font> equi-distant from two extremes ; DECOURCY-1776-2,42.351

and there are certain limits , on the right hand and on the left , which
a man can@ @not pass , without commencing <font> immoderate <$$font> in
his zeal . DECOURCY-1776-2,42.352

<paren> 4 <$$paren> Our fasting should be free from all <font>
ostentation . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,42.353

It is mentioned as a stigma on the character of some ostentatious
hypocrites among the Jews , that they affected <font> a sad countenance
<$$font> and <font> disfigured their faces , <$$font>
{COM:greek_omitted} drew them into such unnatural contractions as to
<font> deform <$$font> and <font> alter <$$font> their natural
physiognomy . DECOURCY-1776-2,42.354

They imagined that people would estimate their sanctity according to the
emaciated and gloomy appearance of their visage : and the mighty solemn
state with which they paraded the streets , by attracting the notice of
men , for whose applause they fasted , would flatter their sanctimonious
vanity . DECOURCY-1776-2,42.355

But affected gloom , or disfiguring grimace , are never marks of genuine
piety ; but often the ugly mask of a specious hypocrite or Pharisee .
DECOURCY-1776-2,42.356

<paren> 5 <$$paren> All <font> self-righteous dependence <$$font> on
fasting should be avoided as death . DECOURCY-1776-2,42.357

Pride in its very essence is the root of self-righteousness :
DECOURCY-1776-2,42.358

therefore to observe a fast , the obvious end of which is <font>
Humiliation , <$$font> with a <font> proud <$$font> heart , is such a
species of horrid self_contradiction , as can only be accounted <P_43>
for on a supposition of the most confirmed blindness and enmity against
God . DECOURCY-1776-2,43.359

And yet there are multitudes of this Pharisaic stamp , not only within
the peal of the church of <font> Rome , <$$font> that grand nursery of
human merit ; but likewise among those , denominated <font> Protestants
. <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,43.360

It is the fatal mistake of such , to imagine that their mere fasting
will conciliate the favor of the Most High , avert his displeasure ,
pardon their sins , and give them a title to glory .
DECOURCY-1776-2,43.361

This was the horrid dream of the Pharisees of old ;
DECOURCY-1776-2,43.362

and is no less the infatuation of modern self-justiciaries .
DECOURCY-1776-2,43.363

The dreadful mistakes of both are delineated in the character of that
pompous Pharisee mentioned in <font> Luke <$$font> xviii. 9 ; one
branch of whose fancied righteousness consisted in his <font> fasting
twice in the week . <$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,43.364

But the accursed leaven of self-righteous pride , which leavened the
whole lump of his boasted performances , turned them into an abomination
and an hissing : DECOURCY-1776-2,43.365

and those , whose spirit and practice are a transcript of that hateful
original of self-righteousness , will be sure to meet with a similar
reception from that God , who <font> beholdeth the proud afar off .
<$$font> DECOURCY-1776-2,43.366

I can@ @not conclude this head , better , than in the words of our
church , " To fast with this persuasion of mind , that our fasting can
make us just men , and finally bring us to heaven , is a devilish
persuasion : DECOURCY-1776-2,43.367

and that fast is so far from pleasing of God , that it refuseth his
<font> mercy <$$font> ; and is altogether derogatory to the merit of
Christ's death , and his precious <P_44> blood-shedding .
DECOURCY-1776-2,44.368

This doth the parable of the <font> Pharisee <$$font> and the <font>
Publican <$$font> teach . " DECOURCY-1776-2,44.369

