<BEGIN_defoe-1719-1>

<P_193>

About half an Hour afterwards they came all up in a Body a-stern of us ,
and pretty near us , so near that we could easily discern what they were
, tho' we could not tell their Design : DEFOE-1719-1,193.3

And I easily found they were some of my old Friends , the same Sort of
Savages that I had been used to engage with ; DEFOE-1719-1,193.4

and in a little Time more they row'd a little farther out to Sea , 'till
they came directly Broad-side with us , DEFOE-1719-1,193.5

and then row'd down strait upon us , 'till they came so near , that they
could hear us speak . DEFOE-1719-1,193.6

Upon this I order'd all my Men to keep close , lest they should shoot
any more Arrows , DEFOE-1719-1,193.7

and made all our Guns ready ; DEFOE-1719-1,193.8

but being so near as to be within hearing , I made <font> Friday
<$$font> go out upon the Deck , and call out aloud to them in his
Language to know what they meant , which accordingly he did ;
DEFOE-1719-1,193.9

whether they understood him or not ; that I knew not :
DEFOE-1719-1,193.10

But as soon as he had call'd to them , six of them , who were in the
foremost or nighest Boat to us , turn'd their Canoes from us ,
DEFOE-1719-1,193.11

and stooping down , shew'd us their naked Backsides , just as if in
<font> English <$$font> , saving your Presence , they had <font> bid us
kiss <$$font> - . DEFOE-1719-1,193.12

Whether this was a Defiance or Challenge , we know not ; or whether it
was done in mere {TEXT:meer} Contempt , or as a Signal to the rest ;
DEFOE-1719-1,193.13

but immediately <font> Friday <$$font> cry'd out they were going to
shoot , DEFOE-1719-1,193.14

and unhappily for him poor Fellow ; they let fly about 300 of their
Arrows , DEFOE-1719-1,193.15

and , to my inexpressible Grief , kill'd poor <font> Friday <$$font> ,
no other Man being in their Sight . DEFOE-1719-1,193.16

The poor Fellow was shot with no less than three Arrows
DEFOE-1719-1,193.17

and about three more fell very near him ; such unlucky Marksmen they
were . DEFOE-1719-1,193.18

I was so enrag'd with the Loss of my old Servant , the Companion of all
my Sorrows and Solitudes , that I immediately order'd five Guns to be
loaded with small Shot , and four with great , DEFOE-1719-1,193.19

and <P_194> gave them such a Broad-side , as they had never heard in
their Lives before , to be sure . DEFOE-1719-1,194.20

They were not above half a Cable Length off when we fir'd ;
DEFOE-1719-1,194.21

and our Gunners took their Aim so well , that three or four of their
Canoes were overset , as we had reason to believe , by one Shot only .
DEFOE-1719-1,194.22

The ill Manners of turning up their bare Back-sides to us , gave us no
great Offence ; DEFOE-1719-1,194.23

neither did I know for certain , whether that which would pass for the
greatest Contempt among us , might be understood so by them , or not ;
DEFOE-1719-1,194.24

therefore in Return , I had only resolv'd to have fir'd four or five
Guns at them with Powder only , which I knew would fright them
sufficiently : DEFOE-1719-1,194.25

But when they shot at us directly with all the Fury they were capable of
, and especially as they had kill'd my poor <font> Friday <$$font> ,
whom I so entirely lov'd and valu'd , and who indeed so well deserv'd it
; I not only had been justify'd before God and Man , DEFOE-1719-1,194.26

but would have been very glad , if I could , to have overset every Canoe
there , and drown'd every one of them . DEFOE-1719-1,194.27

I can neither tell how many we kill'd , or how many we wounded at this
Broad-side ; DEFOE-1719-1,194.28

but sure such a Fright and Hurry never was seen among such a Multitude ;
DEFOE-1719-1,194.29

there were 13 or 14 of their Canoes split and overset in all , and the
Men all set a swimming ; DEFOE-1719-1,194.30

the rest frighted out of their Wits , scour'd away as fast as they could
, taking but little Care to save those whose Boats were split or spoiled
with our Shot . DEFOE-1719-1,194.31

So I suppose , that they were many of them lost . DEFOE-1719-1,194.32

And our Men took one poor Fellow swimming for his Life , above an Hour
after they were all gone . DEFOE-1719-1,194.33

Our small Shot from our Cannon must needs kill and wound a great many :
DEFOE-1719-1,194.34

But in short , we <P_195> never knew any Thing how it went with them ;
DEFOE-1719-1,195.35

for they fled so fast , that in three Hours or thereabouts , we could
not see above three or four straggling Canoes ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.36

nor did we ever see the rest any more ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.37

for a Breeze of Wind springing up the same Evening , we weighed
DEFOE-1719-1,195.38

and set Sail for the <font> Brasils . <$$font> DEFOE-1719-1,195.39

We had a Prisoner indeed ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.40

but the Creature was so sullen , that he would neither eat or speak ;
DEFOE-1719-1,195.41

and we all fancy'd he would starve himself to Death :
DEFOE-1719-1,195.42

But I took a Way to cure him ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.43

for I made them take him and turn him into the Longboat ,
DEFOE-1719-1,195.44

and made him believe they would toss him into the Sea again , and so
leave him where they found him , if he would not speak :
DEFOE-1719-1,195.45

Nor would that do ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.46

but they really did throw him into the Sea , DEFOE-1719-1,195.47

and came away from him ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.48

and then he follow'd them ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.49

for he swam like a Cork , DEFOE-1719-1,195.50

and call'd to them in his Tongue , tho' they knew not one Word of what
he said : DEFOE-1719-1,195.51

However , at last they took him in again , DEFOE-1719-1,195.52

and then he began to be more tractable ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.53

nor did I ever design they should drown him . DEFOE-1719-1,195.54

We were now under Sail again ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.55

but I was the most disconsolate Creature alive , for want of my Man
<font> Friday <$$font> , DEFOE-1719-1,195.56

and would have been very glad to have gone back to the Island , to have
taken one of the rest from thence for my Occasion , DEFOE-1719-1,195.57

but it could not be ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.58

so we went on . DEFOE-1719-1,195.59

We had one Prisoner , as I have said ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.60

and 't@ @was a long while before we could make him understand any thing
: DEFOE-1719-1,195.61

But , in time , our Men taught him some <font> English <$$font> ,
DEFOE-1719-1,195.62

and he began to be a little tractable ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.63

afterwards we enquir'd what Country he came from , DEFOE-1719-1,195.64

but could make nothing of what he said ; DEFOE-1719-1,195.65

for his Speech was so odd , all Gutturals , and spoke in the Throat in
such an hollow odd Manner , that we could never form a <P_196> Word from
him ; DEFOE-1719-1,196.66

and we were all of Opinion ; that they might speak that Language as well
, if they were gagg'd , as otherwise : DEFOE-1719-1,196.67

Nor could we perceive that they had any Occasion , either for Teeth ,
Tongue , Lips or Palat ; but form'd their Words , just as a hunting Horn
forms a Tune with an open Throat . DEFOE-1719-1,196.68

He told us however , some time after , when we taught him to speak a
little <font> English <$$font> , that they were going with their Kings
to fight a great Battle . DEFOE-1719-1,196.69

When he said Kings , we ask'd him how many Kings ? DEFOE-1719-1,196.70

He said , they were Five Nation , we could not make him understand the
Plural S . and that they all join'd to go against <font> Two Nation .
<$$font> DEFOE-1719-1,196.71

We ask'd him , what made them come up to us ? DEFOE-1719-1,196.72

He said , <font> to makee to great Wonder look : <$$font> Where it is to
be observ'd , That all those Natives , as also those of <font> Africa
<$$font> , when they learn <font> English <$$font> , they always add two
E's at the End of the Words where we use one , and make the Accent upon
them , as <font> makèè takèè <$$font> , and the like ;
DEFOE-1719-1,196.73

and we could not break them of it ; DEFOE-1719-1,196.74

nay , I could hardly make <font> Friday <$$font> leave it off , tho' at
last he did . DEFOE-1719-1,196.75

And now I name the poor Fellow once more , I must take my last Leave of
him ; poor honest <font> Friday ! <$$font> DEFOE-1719-1,196.76

We buried him with all the Decency and Solemnity possible , by putting
him into a Coffin , and throwing him into the Sea : DEFOE-1719-1,196.77

And I caus'd 'em to fire eleven Guns for him ; DEFOE-1719-1,196.78

and so ended the Life of the most grateful , faithful , honest , and
most affectionate Servant that ever Man had . DEFOE-1719-1,196.79

We went now away with a fair Wind for <font> Brasil <$$font> ,
DEFOE-1719-1,196.80

and in about twelve Days Time we made Land in the Latitude of five
Degrees South of the Line , being the North_Eastermost Land of all that
Part of <font> America . <$$font> DEFOE-1719-1,196.81

We kept on S. by E. in Sight of the Shore four Days , when we made
<font> Cape St. Augustine <$$font> , DEFOE-1719-1,196.82

and in three Days came to an Anchor off of <P_197> the <font> Bay of All
Saints <$$font> , the old Place of my Deliverance , from whence came
both my good and evil Fate . DEFOE-1719-1,197.83

Never Ship came to this Part that had less Business than I had ;
DEFOE-1719-1,197.84

and yet it was with great Difficulty that we were admitted to hold the
least Correspondence on Shore , DEFOE-1719-1,197.85

not my Planter himself , who was alive , and made a great Figure among
them ; not my two Merchants Trustees , not the Fame of my wonderful
Preservation in that Island , could obtain me that Favour :
DEFOE-1719-1,197.86

But my Partner remembring , that I had given 500 Moidores to the Prior
of the Monastery of the <font> Augustines <$$font> , and 272 to the Poor
, went to the Monastery , DEFOE-1719-1,197.87

and oblig'd the Prior that then was , to go to the Governor , and get
Leave for me personally , with the Captain and one more , besides eight
Seamen , to come on Shore , and no more ; and this upon Condition
absolutely capitulated for , that we should not offer to land any Goods
out of the Ship , or to carry any Person away without Licence .
DEFOE-1719-1,197.88

They were so strict with us , as to landing any Goods , that it was with
extream Difficulty that I got on Shore three Bales of <font> English
<$$font> Goods , such as , fine broad_Cloaths , Stuffs , and some Linnen
, which I had brought for a Present to my Partner . DEFOE-1719-1,197.89

He was a very generous , broad-hearted Man , tho' like me , he came from
little at first ; DEFOE-1719-1,197.90

and tho' he knew not that I had the least Design of giving him any Thing
, he sent me on Board a Present of fresh Provisions , Wine , and
Sweat-meats , worth above 30 Moidores , including some Tobacco , and
three or four fine Medals in Gold : DEFOE-1719-1,197.91

But I was even with him in my Present , which , as I have said ,
consisted of fine broad_Cloath , <font> English <$$font> Stuffs , Lace ,
and fine Hollands . DEFOE-1719-1,197.92

Also I deliver'd him about the Value of 100 <font> lib. Sterl.
<$$font> in the same <P_198> Goods , for other Uses ;
DEFOE-1719-1,198.93

and I oblig'd him to set up the Sloop which I had brought with me from
<font> England <$$font> , as I have said , for the Use of my Colony , in
order to send the Refreshments I intended to my Plantation .
DEFOE-1719-1,198.94

Accordingly , he got Hands , DEFOE-1719-1,198.95

and finish'd the Sloop in a very few Days , DEFOE-1719-1,198.96

for she was ready fram'd DEFOE-1719-1,198.97

and I gave the Master of her such Instructions , as he could not miss
the Place , DEFOE-1719-1,198.98

<font> nor did he miss them , as I had an Account from my Partner
afterwards . <$$font> DEFOE-1719-1,198.99

I got him soon loaded with the small Cargo I sent them ;
DEFOE-1719-1,198.100

and one of our Seamen that had been on Shore with me there , offer'd to
go with the Sloop , and settle there upon my Letter to the Governour
<font> Spaniard <$$font> , to allot him a sufficient Quantity of Land
for a Plantation ; DEFOE-1719-1,198.101

and giving him some Clothes , and Tools for his Planting-Work , which he
said he understood , having been an old Planter at <font> Maryland
<$$font> , and a Buccaneer into the Bargain . I encouraged the Fellow ,
by granting all he desired ; DEFOE-1719-1,198.102

and as an Addition , I gave him the Savage , which we had taken Prisoner
of War , to be his Slave , DEFOE-1719-1,198.103

and order'd the Governour <font> Spaniard <$$font> to give him his Share
of every thing he wanted , with the rest . DEFOE-1719-1,198.104

When we came to fit this Man out , my old Partner told me , there was a
certain very honest Fellow , a <font> Brasil <$$font> Planter of his
Acquaintance , who had fallen into the Displeasure of the Church ;
DEFOE-1719-1,198.105

I know not what the Matter is with him , <font> says he <$$font> ;
DEFOE-1719-1,198.106

but on my Conscience , I think he is a Heretick in his Heart , and he
has been obliged to conceal himself for fear of the Inquisition ; that
he would be very glad of such an Opportunity to make his Escape , with
his Wife and two Daughters ; and if I would let them go to the Island ,
and allot them <P_199> a Plantation , he would give them a small Stock
to begin with ; DEFOE-1719-1,199.107

for the Officers of the Inquisition had seiz'd all his Effects and
Estate , DEFOE-1719-1,199.108

and he had nothing left but a little Houshold-Stuff , and two Slaves .
DEFOE-1719-1,199.109

And , <font> adds he <$$font> , Tho' I hate his Principles , yet I would
not have him fall into their Hands ; DEFOE-1719-1,199.110

for he would assuredly be burnt alive , if he does .
DEFOE-1719-1,199.111

I granted this presently , DEFOE-1719-1,199.112

and join'd my <font> English <$$font> Man with them ,
DEFOE-1719-1,199.113

and we conceal'd the Man , and his Wife and Daughters on board our Ship
, till the Sloop put out to go to Sea ; DEFOE-1719-1,199.114

and then <paren> having put all their Goods on board the Sloop , some
time before <$$paren> we put them on board the Sloop , after he was got
out of the Bay . DEFOE-1719-1,199.115

Our Seaman was mightily pleas'd with this new Partner ;
DEFOE-1719-1,199.116

and their Stock indeed was much alike rich in Tools , in Preparations ,
and a Farm , but nothing to begin with , but as above :
DEFOE-1719-1,199.117

However , they carried over with them , which was worth all the rest ,
some Materials for planting Sugar-Canes , with some Plants of Canes ;
which he , I meant , the <font> Portugal <$$font> Man , understood very
well . DEFOE-1719-1,199.118

Among the rest of the Supplies sent my Tenants in the Island , I sent
them by their Sloop , three Milch Cows , and five Calves , about 22 Hogs
among 'em , three Sows big with Pig , two Mares , and a Stone-Horse .
DEFOE-1719-1,199.119

For my <font> Spaniards <$$font> , according to my Promise , I engag'd
three <font> Portugal <$$font> Women to go , DEFOE-1719-1,199.120

and recommended it to them to marry them , and use them kindly .
DEFOE-1719-1,199.121

I could have procured more Women , DEFOE-1719-1,199.122

but I remember'd , that the poor persecuted Man had two Daughters ,
DEFOE-1719-1,199.123

and there was but five of the <font> Spaniards <$$font> that wanted ;
DEFOE-1719-1,199.124

the rest had Wives of their own , tho' in another Country .
DEFOE-1719-1,199.125

All this Cargo arriv'd safe , and as you may easily suppose , very
welcome to my old Inhabitants <P_200> who were now , with this Addition
, between sixty and seventy People , besides little Children ; of which
, there was a great many . DEFOE-1719-1,200.126

I found Letters at <font> London <$$font> from them all by the Way of
<font> Lisbon <$$font> , when I came back to <font> England <$$font> ;
of which I shall also take some Notice immediately .
DEFOE-1719-1,200.127

I have now done with my Island , and all Manner of Discourse about it ;
DEFOE-1719-1,200.128

and whoever reads the rest of my <font> Memorandums <$$font> , would do
well to turn his Thoughts entirely from it , and expect to read of the
Follies of an old Man , not warn'd by his own Harms , much less by those
of other Men , to beware of the like ; not cool'd by almost forty Years
Misery and Disappointments , not satisfy'd with Prosperity beyond
Expectation , not made cautious by Affliction and Distress beyond
Imitation . DEFOE-1719-1,200.129

I had no more Business to go to the <font> East-Indies <$$font> , than a
Man at full Liberty , and having committed no Crime , has to go to the
Turn-key at <font> Newgate <$$font> , and desire him to lock him up
among the Prisoners there , and starve him . DEFOE-1719-1,200.130

Had I taken a small Vessel from <font> England <$$font> , and went
directly to the Island ; had I loaded her , as I did the other Vessel ,
with all the Necessaries for the Plantation , and for my People took a
Patent from the Governour here , to have secur'd my Property , in
Subjection only to that of <font> England <$$font> ; had I carried over
Cannon and Ammunition , Servants and People , to plant , and taking
Possession of the Place , fortified and strengthen'd it in the Name of
<font> England <$$font> , and increas'd it with People , as I might
easily have done ; had I then settl'd my self there , and sent the Ship
back , loaden with good Rice , as I might also have done in six Months
time , and order'd my Friends to have fitted her out , again for our
Supply ; had I done this , and staid there my self , I had , at least ,
acted like a Man of common sense ; DEFOE-1719-1,200.131

but I was possest <P_201> with a wandering Spirit , DEFOE-1719-1,201.132

scorn'd all Advantages ; DEFOE-1719-1,201.133

I pleased my self with being the Patron of those People I placed there ,
and doing for them in a Kind of haughty majestick Way , like an old
Patriarchal Monarch ; providing for them , as if I had been Father of
the whole Family , as well as of the Plantation . DEFOE-1719-1,201.134

But I never so much as pretended to plant in the Name of any Government
or Nation , or to acknowledge any Prince , or to call my People Subjects
to any one Nation more than another ; DEFOE-1719-1,201.135

nay , I never so much as gave the Place a Name , DEFOE-1719-1,201.136

but left it as I found it , belonging to no Man ; and the People under
no Discipline or Government but my own ; who , though I had Influence
over them as Father and Benefactor , had no Authority or Power , to act
or command one way or other , farther than voluntary {TEXT:voluntarily}
Consent moved them to comply . DEFOE-1719-1,201.137

Yet even this , had I stay'd there , would have done well enough ;
DEFOE-1719-1,201.138

but as I rambled from them , and came there no more , the last Letters I
had from any of them , was by my Partner's Means ; who afterwards sent
another Sloop to the Place , and who sent me Word , tho' I had not the
Letter till five Years after it was written , that they went on but
poorly , were malecontent with their long Stay there . That <font>
Will. Atkins <$$font> was dead : That five of the <font> Spaniards
<$$font> were come away , and that tho' they had not been much molested
by the Savages , yet they had some Skirmishes with them ; that they
begged of him to write to me , to think of the Promise I had made , to
fetch them away , that they might see their own Country again before
they dy'd . DEFOE-1719-1,201.139

But I was gone <font> a Wild-Goose Chase indeed <$$font> ;
DEFOE-1719-1,201.140

and they that will have any more of me , must be content to follow me
thro' a new Variety of Follies , <P_202> Hardships , and wild Adventers
; wherein the Justice of Providence may be duly observed , and we may
see how easily Heaven can gorge us with our own Desires , make the
strongest of our Wishes be our Affliction , and punish us most severely
with those very Things which we think , it would be our utmost Happiness
to be allowed in . DEFOE-1719-1,202.141

Let no wise Man flatter himself with the Strength of his own Judgment ,
as if he was able to chuse any particular Station of Life for himself .
DEFOE-1719-1,202.142

Man is a short-sighted Creature , DEFOE-1719-1,202.143

sees but a very little Way before him ; DEFOE-1719-1,202.144

and as his Passions are none of his best Friends , so his particular
Affections are generally his worst Counsellors . DEFOE-1719-1,202.145

I say this with Respect to the impetuous Desire I had from a Youth , to
wander into the World ; DEFOE-1719-1,202.146

and how evident it now was , that this Principle was preserv'd in me for
my Punishment . DEFOE-1719-1,202.147

How it came on , the Manner , the Circumstance , and the Conclusion of
it , it is easie to give you Historically , and with its utmost Variety
of Particulars . DEFOE-1719-1,202.148

But the secret Ends of Divine Power , in thus permitting us , to be
hurried down the Stream of our own Desires , is only to be understood of
those who can listen to the Voice of Providence , and draw religious
Consequences from God's Justice , and their own Mistakes .
DEFOE-1719-1,202.149

Be it , I had Business , or no Business , away I went .
DEFOE-1719-1,202.150

'T@ @is no Time now to enlarge any farther upon the Reasons , or
Absurdity of my own Conduct . DEFOE-1719-1,202.151

But to come to the History . I was embarked for the Voyage ,
DEFOE-1719-1,202.152

and the Voyage I went . DEFOE-1719-1,202.153

I should only add here , that my honest and truly pious Clergyman left
me here ; DEFOE-1719-1,202.154

a Ship being ready to go to <font> Lisbon <$$font> , he ask'd me Leave
to go thither , being still , as he observed , bound never to finish any
Voyage he began . DEFOE-1719-1,202.155

How happy had it been for me , if I had gone with him !
DEFOE-1719-1,202.156

<P_203>

But it was too late now . DEFOE-1719-1,203.158

All things Heaven appoints are best . DEFOE-1719-1,203.159

Had I gone with him , I had never had so many Things to be thankful for
, DEFOE-1719-1,203.160

and you had never heard of the Second Part of the Travels and Adventures
of <font> Robinson Crusoe . <$$font> DEFOE-1719-1,203.161

So I must leave here the fruitless exclaiming at my self , and go on
with my Voyage . DEFOE-1719-1,203.162

From the <font> Brasils <$$font> , we made directly away over the <font>
Atlantick Sea <$$font> , to the <font> Cape de bon Esperance <$$font> ,
or as we call it , <font> The Cape of Good Hope <$$font> ;
DEFOE-1719-1,203.163

and had a tolerable good Voyage , our Course generally <font> South-East
<$$font> ; DEFOE-1719-1,203.164

now and then a Storm , and some contrary Winds , DEFOE-1719-1,203.165

but my Disasters at Sea were at an End ; DEFOE-1719-1,203.166

my future Rubs and cross Events were to befall {TEXT:befal} me on Shore
; that it might appear the Land was as well prepared to be our Scourge ,
as the Sea , when Heaven , who directs the Circumstances of Things ,
pleases to appoint it to be so . DEFOE-1719-1,203.167

Our Ship was on a Trading Voyage , DEFOE-1719-1,203.168

and had a <font> Supra_Cargo <$$font> on board , who was to direct all
her Motions after she arrived at the <font> Cape <$$font> ; only being
limited {TEXT:limied} to certain Numbers of Days , for Stay , by
Charter-party , at the several Ports she was to go to .
DEFOE-1719-1,203.169

This was none of my Business , DEFOE-1719-1,203.170

neither did I meddle with it at all . My Nephew , the Captain , and the
<font> Supra-Cargo <$$font> adjusting all those things between them , as
they thought fit . DEFOE-1719-1,203.171

We made no Stay at the <font> Cape <$$font> longer than was needful , to
take in fresh Water , DEFOE-1719-1,203.172

but made the best of our Way for the Coast of <font> Coromandel .
<$$font> DEFOE-1719-1,203.173

We were indeed inform'd , that a <font> French <$$font> Man of War of
fifty Guns , and two large Merchant Ships , were gone for the <font>
Indies <$$font> , DEFOE-1719-1,203.174

and as I knew we were at War with <font> France <$$font> , I had some
Apprehensions of them . DEFOE-1719-1,203.175

But they went their Way , DEFOE-1719-1,203.176

and we heard no more of them . DEFOE-1719-1,203.177

<P_204>

I shall not pester my Account , or the Reader , with Descriptions of
Places , Journals of our Voyages , Variations of Compass , Latitudes ,
Meridian-Distances , Trade-Winds , Situation of Ports , and the like ;
such as almost all the Histories of long Navigation are full of , and
makes the Reading tiresome enough , and are perfectly unprofitable to
all that read it , except only to those who are to go to those Places
themselves . DEFOE-1719-1,204.179

It is enough to name the Ports and Places , which we touch'd at , and
what occurred to us upon our passing from one to another ,
DEFOE-1719-1,204.180

We touch'd first at the Island of <font> Madagascar <$$font> ; where ,
tho' the People are fierce and treacherous , and in particular , very
well armed with Lances and Bows , which they use with inconceivable
Dexterity ; yet we fared very well with them a while ,
DEFOE-1719-1,204.181

they treated us very civily ; DEFOE-1719-1,204.182

and for some Trifles which we gave them , such as Knives , Scissars ,
&c. they brought us eleven good fat Bullocks , middling in Size , but
very good in Flesh ; which we took in partly for fresh Provisions for
our present Spending , and the rest , to Salt for the Ship's Use .
DEFOE-1719-1,204.183

We were obliged to stay here some Time after we had furnish'd our selves
with Provisions ; DEFOE-1719-1,204.184

and I , that was always too curious , to look into every Nook of the
World wherever I came , was for going on Shore as fast as I could .
DEFOE-1719-1,204.185

It was on the <font> East <$$font> Side of the Island that we went on
Shore one Evening ; DEFOE-1719-1,204.186

and the People , who by the Way are very numerous , came thronging about
us , DEFOE-1719-1,204.187

and stood gazing at us at a Distance ; DEFOE-1719-1,204.188

but as we had traded freely with them , and had been kindly used , we
thought our selves in no Danger : DEFOE-1719-1,204.189

But when we saw the People , we cut three Boughs out of a Tree ,
DEFOE-1719-1,204.190

and stuck them up at a Distance from us , which it seems , is a Mark in
the Country , not <P_205> only of Truce and Friendship , but when it is
accepted , the other Side set up three Poles or Boughs , which is a
Signal , that they accept the Truce too ; DEFOE-1719-1,205.191

but then , this is a known Condition of the Truce , that you are not to
pass between their three Poles towards them , nor they to come past your
three Poles or Boughs , towards you ; so that you are perfectly secure
within the three Poles , DEFOE-1719-1,205.192

and all the Space between your Poles and theirs , is allow'd like a
Market , for free Converse , Traffick , and Commerce .
DEFOE-1719-1,205.193

When you go there , you must not carry your Weapons with you ;
DEFOE-1719-1,205.194

and if they come into that Space , they flick up their Javelins and
Launces , all at the first Poles , DEFOE-1719-1,205.195

and come on unarm'd ; DEFOE-1719-1,205.196

but if any Violence is offer'd them , and the Truce thereby broken ,
away they run to the Poles , DEFOE-1719-1,205.197

and lay hold of their Weapons , DEFOE-1719-1,205.198

and then the Truce is at an End . DEFOE-1719-1,205.199

It happen'd one Evening when we went on Shore , that a greater Number of
their People came down than usual , DEFOE-1719-1,205.200

but all was very friendly and civil , DEFOE-1719-1,205.201

and they brought in several Kinds of Provisions , for which we satisfied
them , with such Toys as we had ; DEFOE-1719-1,205.202

their Women also brought us Milk , and Roots , and several Things very
acceptable to us , DEFOE-1719-1,205.203

and all was quiet ; DEFOE-1719-1,205.204

and we made us a little Tent or Hut , of some Boughs of Trees ,
DEFOE-1719-1,205.205

and lay on Shore all Night . DEFOE-1719-1,205.206

I knew not what was the Occasion , DEFOE-1719-1,205.207

but I was not so well satisfied to lye on Shore as the rest ;
DEFOE-1719-1,205.208

and the Boat lying at an Anchor , about a Stone-cast from the Land ,
with two Men in her to take Care of her , I made one of them come on
Shore , DEFOE-1719-1,205.209

and getting some Boughs of Trees to cover us also in the Boat , I spread
the Sail on the Bottom of the Boat , DEFOE-1719-1,205.210

and lay under the Cover of the Branches of Trees all Night in the Boat .
DEFOE-1719-1,205.211

<P_206>

About two a-clock in the Morning , we heard one of our Men make a
terrible Noise on the Shore , calling out for God's Sake , to bring the
Boat in , and come and help them , DEFOE-1719-1,206.213

for they were all like to be murther'd ; DEFOE-1719-1,206.214

at the same Time I heard the firing of five Muskets , which was the
Number of the Guns they had , and that , three Times over ;
DEFOE-1719-1,206.215

for it seems , the Natives here were not so easily frighted with Guns ,
as the Savages were in <font> America <$$font> , where I had to do with
them . DEFOE-1719-1,206.216

All this while , I knew not what was the Matter ; DEFOE-1719-1,206.217

but rouzing immediately from Sleep with the Noise , I caus'd the Boat to
be thrust in , DEFOE-1719-1,206.218

and resolved , with three Fuzees we had on board , to land and assist
our Men . DEFOE-1719-1,206.219

We got the Boat soon to the Shore , DEFOE-1719-1,206.220

but our Men were in too much Haste ; DEFOE-1719-1,206.221

for being come to the Shore , they plunged into the Water to get to the
Boat with all the Expedition they could , being pursued by between three
and four_hundred Men . DEFOE-1719-1,206.222

Our Men were but nine in all , DEFOE-1719-1,206.223

and only five of them had Fuzees with them ; DEFOE-1719-1,206.224

the rest had indeed Pistols and Swords , DEFOE-1719-1,206.225

but they were of small Use to them . DEFOE-1719-1,206.226

We took up seven of our Men , and with Difficulty enough too , three of
them being very ill wounded ; DEFOE-1719-1,206.227

and that which was still worse , was that while we stood in the Boat to
take our Men in , we were in as much Danger as they were in on Shore ;
DEFOE-1719-1,206.228

for they pour'd their Arrows in upon us so thick , that we were fain to
barricade the Side of the Boat up with the Benches , and two or three
loose Boards , which to our great Satisfaction we had by mere Accident
or Providence in the Boat . DEFOE-1719-1,206.229

And yet , had it been Day-light , they are it seems such exact Marks-men
, that if they could <P_207> have seen but the least Part of any of us ,
they would have been sure of us . DEFOE-1719-1,207.230

We had by the Light of the Moon a little Sight of them , as they stood
pelting us from the Shore with Darts and Arrows ; DEFOE-1719-1,207.231

and having got ready our Fire-Arms , we gave them a Volley , that we
could hear by the Cries of some of them , that we had wounded several ;
DEFOE-1719-1,207.232

however , they stood thus in Battle Array on the Shore till Break of Day
, which we suppose was , that they might see the better to take their
Aim at us . DEFOE-1719-1,207.233

In this Condition {TEXT:Conditon} we lay , DEFOE-1719-1,207.234

and could not tell how to weigh our Anchor , or set up our Sail ,
because we must needs stand up in the Boat , DEFOE-1719-1,207.235

and they were as sure to hit us , as we were to hit a Bird in a Tree
with small Shot . DEFOE-1719-1,207.236

We made Signals of Distress to the Ship , which , tho' we rode
{TEXT:road} a League off , yet my Nephew , the Captain , hearing our
Firing , and by Glasses perceiving the Posture we lay in , and that we
fir'd towards the Shore , pretty well understood us ;
DEFOE-1719-1,207.237

and weighing Anchor , with all Speed , he stood as near the Shore as he
durst with the Ship , DEFOE-1719-1,207.238

and then sent another Boat with ten Hands in her to assist us ;
DEFOE-1719-1,207.239

but we call'd to them not to come too near , telling them what Condition
we were in : DEFOE-1719-1,207.240

However , they stood in nearer to us ; DEFOE-1719-1,207.241

and one of the Men taking the End of a Tow-Line in his Hand , and
keeping our Boat between him and the Enemy , so that they could not
perfectly see him , swam on board us , DEFOE-1719-1,207.242

and made fast the Line to the Boat ; upon which we slipp'd our little
Cable , DEFOE-1719-1,207.243

and leaving our Anchor behind , they tow'd us out of Reach of the Arrows
, we all the while lying close behind the Barricado we had made .
DEFOE-1719-1,207.244

As soon as we were got from between the Ship and the Shore , that she
could lay her Side to the <P_208_misnumbered_as_228> Shore , she run
{COM:sic} along just by them , DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.245

and we pour'd in a Broad-side among them loaden with Pieces of Iron and
Lead , small Bullets , and such Stuff , besides the great Shot , which
made a terrible Havock amongst them .
DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.246

When we were got on board , and out of Danger , we had Time to examine
into the Occasion of this Fray ; DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.247

and indeed our <font> Supra-Cargo <$$font> who had been often in those
Parts , put me upon it ; DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.248

for he said , he was sure the Inhabitants would not have touch'd us
after we had made a Truce , if we had not done something to provoke them
to it . DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.249

At length it came out , <font> <paren> viz. <$$paren> <$$font> that an
old Woman who had come to sell us some Milk , had brought it within our
Poles , with a young Woman with her , who also brought some Roots or
Herbs ; DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.250

and while the old Woman , whether she was Mother to the young Woman or
no , they could not tell , was selling us the Milk , one of our Men
offer'd some Rudeness to the Wench that was with her , at which the old
Woman made a great Noise . DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.251

However , the Seaman would not quit his Prize ,
DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.252

but carry'd her out of the old Woman's Sight among the Trees , it being
almost dark . DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.253

The old Woman went away without her ,
DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.254

and as we suppose , made an Out-cry among the People she came from ; who
upon Notice , rais'd this great Army upon us in three or four Hours ;
DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.255

and it was great Odds , but we had been all destroy'd .
DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.256

One of our Men was kill'd with a Launce thrown at him just at the
Beginning of the Attack , as he sally'd out of the Tent they had made ;
DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.257

the rest came off free , all but the Fellow who was the Occasion of all
the Mischief , who paid dear enough for his black Mistress ;
DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.258

for we could not hear what became of him a great while .
DEFOE-1719-1,208_misnumbered_as_228.259

We lay <P_209> upon the Shore two Days after , tho' the Wind presented ,
DEFOE-1719-1,209.260

and made Signals for him ; DEFOE-1719-1,209.261

made our Boat sail up Shore and down Shore , several Leagues , but in
vain ; DEFOE-1719-1,209.262

so we were oblig'd to give him over , DEFOE-1719-1,209.263

and if he alone had suffer'd for it , the Loss had been the less .
DEFOE-1719-1,209.264

I could not satisfie my self , however , without venturing on Shore once
more , to try if I could learn any Thing of him or them ;
DEFOE-1719-1,209.265

it was the third Night after the Action , that I had a great Mind to
learn , if I could by any Means , what Mischief we had done , and how
the Game stood on the <font> Indians <$$font> Side :
DEFOE-1719-1,209.266

I was careful to do it in the Dark , lest we should be attack'd again ;
DEFOE-1719-1,209.267

but I ought indeed to have been sure , that the Men I went with had been
under my Command , before I engag'd in a Thing so hazardous and
mischievous as I was brought into by it , without my Knowledge or Design
. DEFOE-1719-1,209.268

We took twenty stout Fellows with us as any in the Ship , besides the
Supra-Cargo and my self , DEFOE-1719-1,209.269

and we landed two Hours before Midnight , at the same Place where the
<font> Indians <$$font> stood drawn up the Evening before .
DEFOE-1719-1,209.270

I landed here , because my Design , as I have said , was chiefly to see
if they had quitted the Field , and if they had left any Marks behind
them of the Mischief we had done them ; DEFOE-1719-1,209.271

and I thought , if we could surprize one or two of them , perhaps we
might get our Man again by Way of Exchange . DEFOE-1719-1,209.272

We landed without any Noise , DEFOE-1719-1,209.273

and divided our Men into two Bodies , whereof the Boatswain commanded
one , and I the other ; DEFOE-1719-1,209.274

we neither saw or heard any Body stir when we landed ,
DEFOE-1719-1,209.275

and we march'd up one Body at a Distance from the other , to the Place ,
DEFOE-1719-1,209.276

but at first could see nothing , it being very dark ; till by_and_by ,
our Boatswain <P_210> that led the first Party , stumbled , and fell
over a dead Boy . DEFOE-1719-1,210.277

This made them halt a while , DEFOE-1719-1,210.278

for knowing by the Circumstances that they were at the Place , where the
<font> Indians <$$font> had stood , they waited for my coming up .
DEFOE-1719-1,210.279

Here we concluded to halt till the Moon began to rise , which we knew
would be in less than an Hour , when we could easily discern the Havock
we had made among them ; DEFOE-1719-1,210.280

we told two_and_thirty Bodies upon the Ground , whereof two were not
quite dead : DEFOE-1719-1,210.281

Some had an Arm , and some a Leg shot off , and one his Head ;
DEFOE-1719-1,210.282

those that were wounded we suppos'd they had carried away .
DEFOE-1719-1,210.283

When we had made , as I thought , a full Discovery of all we could come
at the Knowledge of , I was resolv'd for going on Board ;
DEFOE-1719-1,210.284

but the Boatswain and his Party sent me Word , that they were resolv'd
to make a Visit to the <font> Indian <$$font> Town , where these Dogs ,
as they call'd them , dwelt , DEFOE-1719-1,210.285

and ask'd me to go along with them ; DEFOE-1719-1,210.286

and if they could find them , as still they fancied they would , they
did not doubt getting a good Booty , DEFOE-1719-1,210.287

and it might be , they might find <font> Tho. Jeffery <$$font> there ,
DEFOE-1719-1,210.288

<font> that was the Man's Name we had lost . <$$font>
DEFOE-1719-1,210.289

Had they sent to ask my Leave to go , I knew well enough what Answer to
have given them ; DEFOE-1719-1,210.290

for I would have commanded them instantly on Board , knowing it was not
a Hazard fit for us to run , who had a Ship , and Ship-loading in our
Charge , and a Voyage to make , which depended very much upon the Lives
of the Men ; DEFOE-1719-1,210.291

but as they sent me Word they were resolved to go , and only ask'd me
and my Company to go along with them , I positively refus'd it ,
DEFOE-1719-1,210.292

and rose up , <font> for I was sitting on the Ground <$$font> , in Order
to go to the Boat . DEFOE-1719-1,210.293

One or two of the Men began to importune <P_211> me to go ,
DEFOE-1719-1,211.294

and when I refus'd positively , began to grumble , and say they were not
under my Command , and they would go : DEFOE-1719-1,211.295

Come <font> Jack <$$font> , says one of the Men , will you go with me ?
DEFOE-1719-1,211.296

I@ @'ll go for one ; DEFOE-1719-1,211.297

<font> Jack <$$font> said he would , DEFOE-1719-1,211.298

and another followed , and then another : DEFOE-1719-1,211.299

And in a Word , they all left me but one , whom I persuaded to stay ,
and a Boy left in the Boat ; DEFOE-1719-1,211.300

so the Supra-Cargo and I , with the third Man , went back to the Boat ,
where we told them we would stay for them , and take Care to take in as
many of them as should be left ; DEFOE-1719-1,211.301

for I told them it was a mad Thing they were going about ,
DEFOE-1719-1,211.302

and supposed most of them would run the Fate of <font> Thomas Jeffery .
<$$font> DEFOE-1719-1,211.303

They told me , like Seamen , they@ @'d warrant it they would come off
again , and they would take Care , &c. DEFOE-1719-1,211.304

So away they went : DEFOE-1719-1,211.305

I entreated 'em to consider the Ship and Voyage ; that their Lives were
not their own , and that they were entrusted with the Voyage in some
Measure that if they miscarry'd , the Ship might be lost for want of
their Help , and that they could not answer it to God or Man .
DEFOE-1719-1,211.306

I said a great deal more to 'em on that Head , DEFOE-1719-1,211.307

but I might as well have talk'd to the Main Mast of the Ship ;
DEFOE-1719-1,211.308

they were mad upon their Journey , DEFOE-1719-1,211.309

only they gave me good Words , DEFOE-1719-1,211.310

and begg'd I would not be angry : That they would be very cautious , and
they did not doubt but they would be back again in about an
{TEXT:an_about} Hour at farthest ; DEFOE-1719-1,211.311

for the <font> Indian <$$font> Town , they said , was not above half a
Mile off , though they found it above two Miles before they got to it .
DEFOE-1719-1,211.312

Well , they all went away , as above ; DEFOE-1719-1,211.313

and tho' the Attempt was desperate , and such , as none but mad Men
would have gone about , yet to give them their due , they went about it
as warily <P_212> as boldly : DEFOE-1719-1,212.314

They were gallantly armed , that@ @'s true ; DEFOE-1719-1,212.315

for they had every Man a Fuzee or Musket , a Bayonet , every Man a
Pistol ; DEFOE-1719-1,212.316

some of them had broad Cutlasses , some of them Hangers ,
DEFOE-1719-1,212.317

and the Boatswain and Two more , had Pole-Axes : Besides all which ,
they had among them thirteen Hand-Grenadoes . DEFOE-1719-1,212.318

Bolder Fellows , and better provided , never went about any wicked Work
in the World . DEFOE-1719-1,212.319

When they went out , their chief Design was plunder ,
DEFOE-1719-1,212.320

and they were in mighty hopes of finding Gold there ;
DEFOE-1719-1,212.321

but a Circumstance which none of them were aware of , set them on Fire
with Revenge , DEFOE-1719-1,212.322

and made Devils of them all . DEFOE-1719-1,212.323

When they came to the few <font> Indian <$$font> Houses which they
thought had been the Town , which was not above half a Mile off ; they
were under a great Disappointment ; DEFOE-1719-1,212.324

for there were not above 12 or 13 Houses ; DEFOE-1719-1,212.325

and where the Town was , or how big , they knew not :
DEFOE-1719-1,212.326

They consulted therefore what to do , DEFOE-1719-1,212.327

and were some time before they could resolve : DEFOE-1719-1,212.328

For if they fell upon these , they must cut all their Throats ,
DEFOE-1719-1,212.329

and it was ten to one but some of them might escape , it being in the
Night , tho' the Moon was up ; DEFOE-1719-1,212.330

and if one escaped , he would run away , and raise all the Town , so
they should have a whole Army upon them : DEFOE-1719-1,212.331

Again , on the other hand , if they went away , and left those untouch'd
<paren> for the People were all asleep <$$paren> they could not tell
which Way to look for the Town . DEFOE-1719-1,212.332

However , the last was the best Advice ; DEFOE-1719-1,212.333

so they resolved to leave them , and look for the Town as well as they
could . DEFOE-1719-1,212.334

They went on a little Way , DEFOE-1719-1,212.335

and found a Cow tied to a Tree ; DEFOE-1719-1,212.336

this they presently concluded , would be a good Guide to them ;
DEFOE-1719-1,212.337

for they said , the Cow certainly <P_213> belong'd to the Town before
them , or the Town behind them ; DEFOE-1719-1,213.338

and if they untied her , they should see which Way she went ;
DEFOE-1719-1,213.339

if she went back they had nothing to say to her ; DEFOE-1719-1,213.340

but if she went forward , they had nothing to do but to follow her :
DEFOE-1719-1,213.341

So they cut the Cord , which was made of twisted Flags ,
DEFOE-1719-1,213.342

and the Cow went on before them , DEFOE-1719-1,213.343

in a Word , the Cow led them directly to the Town , which as they report
, consisted of above 200 Houses , or Huts ; DEFOE-1719-1,213.344

and in some of these , they found several Families living together .
DEFOE-1719-1,213.345

Here they found all in Silence , as profoundly secure , as Sleep , and a
Country that had never seen an Enemy of that Kind could make them ;
DEFOE-1719-1,213.346

and first , they call'd another Council , to consider what they had to
do ; DEFOE-1719-1,213.347

and in a Word , they resolv'd to divide themselves into three Bodies ,
and to set three Houses on Fire in three Parts of the Town ; and as the
Men came out , to seize them and bind them ; if any resisted , they need
not be ask'd what to do then , and so to search the rest of the Houses
for Plunder ; DEFOE-1719-1,213.348

but they resolv'd to march silently first , thro' the Town , and see
what Dimensions it was of , and if they might venture upon it or no .
DEFOE-1719-1,213.349

They did so , DEFOE-1719-1,213.350

and desperately resolv'd that they would venture upon them ;
DEFOE-1719-1,213.351

but while they were animating one another to the Work , three of them
that were a little before the rest , call'd out aloud to them ,
DEFOE-1719-1,213.352

and told them they had found <font> Tom. Jeffery <$$font> ;
DEFOE-1719-1,213.353

they all run {COM:sic} up to the Place , DEFOE-1719-1,213.354

and so it was indeed ; DEFOE-1719-1,213.355

for there they found the poor Fellow hang'd up naked by one Arm , and
his Throat cut ; DEFOE-1719-1,213.356

there was an <font> Indian <$$font> House just by the Tree , where they
found sixteen or seventeen of the principal <font> Indians <$$font> who
had been concern'd in <P_214> the Fray with us before ; and two or three
of them wounded with our Shot ; DEFOE-1719-1,214.357

and our Men found they were awake , and talking one to another in that
House , DEFOE-1719-1,214.358

but knew not their Number . DEFOE-1719-1,214.359

The Sight of their poor mangled Comrade so enrag'd 'em , as before ,
that they swore to one another they would be reveng'd , and that not an
<font> Indian <$$font> who came into their Hands should have Quarter ,
DEFOE-1719-1,214.360

and to Work they went immediately ; and yet not so madly as by the Rage
and Fury they were in might be expected . DEFOE-1719-1,214.361

Their first Care was to get something that would soon take Fire ;
DEFOE-1719-1,214.362

but after a little Search , they found that would be to no Purpose ;
DEFOE-1719-1,214.363

but most of the Houses were low , and thatch'd with Flags or Rushes , of
which the Country is full ; DEFOE-1719-1,214.364

so they presently made some wild Fire , as we call it , by wetting a
little Powder in the Palms of their hands , DEFOE-1719-1,214.365

and in a Quarter of an Hour they set the Town on fire in four or five
Places ; and particularly that House where the <font> Indians <$$font>
were not gone to Bed . DEFOE-1719-1,214.366

As soon as the Fire began to blaze , the poor frighted Creatures began
to rush out to save their Lives ; DEFOE-1719-1,214.367

but met with their Fate in the Attempt , and especially at the Door ,
where they drove 'em back , the Boatswain himself killing one or two
with his Pole-Axe . DEFOE-1719-1,214.368

The House being large , and many in it , he did not care to go in ,
DEFOE-1719-1,214.369

but call'd for a Hand-Grenado , DEFOE-1719-1,214.370

and threw it among 'em , which at first frighted 'em ; but when it burst
, made such Havock among 'em , that they cried out in a hideous manner .
DEFOE-1719-1,214.371

In short , most of the <font> Indians <$$font> who were in the open Part
of the House , were killed or hurt with the Grenado , except two or
three more who press'd to the Door , which the Boatswain and two more
kept with their Bayonets in the Muzzles of <P_215> their Pieces , and
dispatch'd all who came that Way . DEFOE-1719-1,215.372

But there was another Apartment in the House where the Prince or King ,
or whatever he was , and several other {COM:sic} were ,
DEFOE-1719-1,215.373

and these they kept in till the House , which was by this time all of a
light Flame , fell in upon them , and they were smother'd or burnt
together . DEFOE-1719-1,215.374

All this while they fir'd not a Gun , because they would not waken the
People faster than they could master them ; DEFOE-1719-1,215.375

but the Fire began to waken them fast enough , DEFOE-1719-1,215.376

and our Fellows were glad to keep a little together in Bodies ;
DEFOE-1719-1,215.377

for the Fire grew so raging , all the Houses being made of light
combustible Stuff , that they could hardly bear the Street between them
, DEFOE-1719-1,215.378

and their Business was to follow the Fire for the surer Execution .
DEFOE-1719-1,215.379

As fast as the Fire either forc'd the People out of those Houses which
were burning , or frighted them out of others , our People were ready at
their Doors to knock them on the Head , still calling and hallooing to
one another , to remember <font> Thom. Jeffery . <$$font>
DEFOE-1719-1,215.380

While this was doing , I must confess I was very uneasie , and
especially when I saw the Flames of the Town , which , it being Night ,
seem'd to be just by me . DEFOE-1719-1,215.381

My Nephew , the Captain , who was rouz'd by his Men too , seeing such a
Fire , was very uneasie , not knowing what the Matter was , or what
Danger I was in ; especially hearing the Guns too ; DEFOE-1719-1,215.382

for by this time they began to use their Fire-Arms ;
DEFOE-1719-1,215.383

a_thousand Thoughts opprest his Mind concerning me and the Supra-Cargo
what should become of us : DEFOE-1719-1,215.384

And at last , tho' he could ill spare any more Men , yet not knowing
what Exigence we might be in , he takes another Boat ,
DEFOE-1719-1,215.385

and with 13 Men and himself , come {COM:sic} on Shore to me .
DEFOE-1719-1,215.386

<P_216>

He was surpriz'd to see me and the Supra-Cargo in the Boat with no more
than two Men ; DEFOE-1719-1,216.388

and tho' he was glad that we were well , yet he was in the same
Impatience with us to know what was doing ; DEFOE-1719-1,216.389

for the Noise continu'd , DEFOE-1719-1,216.390

and the Flame encreas'd : DEFOE-1719-1,216.391

In short it was next to an Impossibility for any Men in the World , to
restrain their Curiosity , to know what had happen'd , or their Concern
for the Safety of the Men : DEFOE-1719-1,216.392

In a Word , the Captain told me , he would go and help his Men , let
what would come . DEFOE-1719-1,216.393

I argu'd with him , as I did before with the Men , the Safety of the
Ship , the Danger of the Voyage , the Interest of the Owners and
Merchants , &c. DEFOE-1719-1,216.394

and told him , I would go , and the two Men , and only see if we could
at a Distance learn what was like to be the Event , and come back and
tell him . DEFOE-1719-1,216.395

It was all one , to talk to my Nephew , as it was to talk to the rest
before ; DEFOE-1719-1,216.396

he would go , he said , DEFOE-1719-1,216.397

and he only wish'd he had left but ten Men in the Ship ;
DEFOE-1719-1,216.398

for he could not think of having his Men lost for want of Help ,
DEFOE-1719-1,216.399

he had rather lose the Ship , the Voyage , and his Life and all ;
DEFOE-1719-1,216.400

and away went he . DEFOE-1719-1,216.401

In a Word , I was no more able to stay behind now , than I was to
perswade them not to go ; DEFOE-1719-1,216.402

so in short , the Captain order'd two Men to row back the Pinnace , and
fetch twelve Men more , leaving the Long-Boat at an Anchor , and that
when they came back , six Men should keep the two Boats , and six more
come after us ; so that he left only 16 Men in the Ship ;
DEFOE-1719-1,216.403

for the whole Ship's Company consisted of 65 Men , whereof two were lost
in the last Quarrel , which brought this Mischief on .
DEFOE-1719-1,216.404

Being now on the March , you may be sure we felt little of the Ground we
trode on ; DEFOE-1719-1,216.405

and being <P_217> guided by the Fire , we kept no Path ,
DEFOE-1719-1,217.406

but went directly to the Place of the Flame . DEFOE-1719-1,217.407

If the Noise of the Guns was surprizing to us before , the Cries of the
poor People were now of quite another Nature , DEFOE-1719-1,217.408

and fill'd us with Horror . DEFOE-1719-1,217.409

I must confess , I never was at the Sacking a City , or at the Taking a
Town by Storm . DEFOE-1719-1,217.410

I had heard of <font> Oliver Cromwell's <$$font> , taking <font>
Drogheda <$$font> in <font> Ireland <$$font> , and killing Man , Woman ,
and Child . DEFOE-1719-1,217.411

And I had read of Count <font> Tilly's <$$font> sacking of the City of
<font> Magdeburgh <$$font> , and cutting the Throats of 22000 of all
Sexes . DEFOE-1719-1,217.412

But I never had an Idea of the Thing it self before ,
DEFOE-1719-1,217.413

nor is it possible to describe it , or the Horror which was upon our
Minds at hearing it . DEFOE-1719-1,217.414

However , we went on , DEFOE-1719-1,217.415

and at length came to the Town , tho' there was no entring the Streets
of it for the Fire . DEFOE-1719-1,217.416

The first Object we met with , was the Ruins of a Hut or House , or
rather the Ashes of it , DEFOE-1719-1,217.417

for the House was consumed ; DEFOE-1719-1,217.418

and just before it , plain now to be seen by the Light of the Fire , lay
four Men and three Women kill'd ; DEFOE-1719-1,217.419

and as we thought , one or two more lay in the Heap among the Fire .
DEFOE-1719-1,217.420

In short , there were such Instances of a Rage altogether barbarous ,
and of a Fury , something beyond what was human , that we thought it
impossible our Men could be guilty of it , DEFOE-1719-1,217.421

or if they were the Authors of it , we thought they ought to be every
one of them put to the worst of Deaths . DEFOE-1719-1,217.422

But this was not all , DEFOE-1719-1,217.423

we saw the Fire encreas'd forward , DEFOE-1719-1,217.424

and the Cry went on just as the Fire went on ; so that we were in the
utmost Confusion . DEFOE-1719-1,217.425

We advanced a little Way farther , DEFOE-1719-1,217.426

and behold , to our Astonishment , three Women naked , and crying in a
most dreadful Manner , come flying , as if they had indeed had Wings ,
and after them sixteen or seventeen Men , Natives , in the same Terror
and Consternation , with three <P_218> of our <font> English <$$font>
Butchers , for I can call them no better , in their Rear , who , when
they could not overtake them , fired in among them ,
DEFOE-1719-1,218.427

and one that was killed by their Shot , fell down in our Sight .
DEFOE-1719-1,218.428

When the rest saw us , believing us to be their Enemies , and that we
would murder them as well as those that pursued them , they set up a
most dreadful Shriek , especially the Women ; DEFOE-1719-1,218.429

and two of them fell down as if already dead with the Fright .
DEFOE-1719-1,218.430

My very Soul shrunk within me , DEFOE-1719-1,218.431

and my Blood run chill in my Veins , when I saw this ;
DEFOE-1719-1,218.432

and I believe , had the three <font> English <$$font> Sailors that
pursued them come on , I had made our Men kill them all .
DEFOE-1719-1,218.433

However , we took some Ways to let the poor flying Creatures know , that
we would not hurt them , DEFOE-1719-1,218.434

and immediately they came up to us , DEFOE-1719-1,218.435

and kneeling down , with their Hands lifted up , made piteous
Lamentation to us to save them , which we let them know we would :
Whereupon they crept altogether in a Huddle close behind us , as for
Protection . DEFOE-1719-1,218.436

I left my Men drawn up together , DEFOE-1719-1,218.437

and charg'd them to hurt no Body , but if possible to get at some of our
People , and see what Devil it was possess'd them , and what they
intended to do ; and in a Word , to command them off ; assuring them ,
that if they stay'd till Day-light , they would have an_hundred_thousand
Men about their Ears . DEFOE-1719-1,218.438

I say , I left them , and went among those flying People , taking only
two of our Men with me ; DEFOE-1719-1,218.439

and there was indeed a piteous Spectacle among them .
DEFOE-1719-1,218.440

Some of them had their Feet terribly burnt with trampling and running
thro' the Fire , others their Hands burnt ; DEFOE-1719-1,218.441

one of the Women had fallen down in the Fire , DEFOE-1719-1,218.442

and was very much burnt before she could get out again ;
DEFOE-1719-1,218.443

and two or three of the Men had Cuts in their Backs and <P_219> Thighs
from our Men pursuing ; DEFOE-1719-1,219.444

and another was shot thro' the Body , DEFOE-1719-1,219.445

and died while I was there . DEFOE-1719-1,219.446

I would fain have learned what the Occasion of all this was ,
DEFOE-1719-1,219.447

but I could not understand one Word they said ; tho' by Signs I
perceived that some of them knew not what was the Occasion themselves .
DEFOE-1719-1,219.448

I was so terrified in my Thoughts at this outrageous Attempt , that I
could not stay there , but went back to my own Men ,
DEFOE-1719-1,219.449

and resolved to go into the Middle of the Town thro' the Fire , or
whatever might be in the Way , and put an End to it , cost what it would
. DEFOE-1719-1,219.450

Accordingly , as soon as I came back to my Men , I told them my
Resolution , DEFOE-1719-1,219.451

and commanded them to follow me , when in the very Moment came four of
our Men with the Boatswain at their Head , roving over the Heaps of
Bodies they had killed , all covered with Blood and Dust , as if they
wanted more People to Massacre , when our Men halloo'd to them as loud
as they could halloo , DEFOE-1719-1,219.452

and with much ado one of them made them hear ; so that they knew who we
were , DEFOE-1719-1,219.453

and came up to us . DEFOE-1719-1,219.454

As soon as the Boatswain saw us , he set up a Halloo like a Shout of
Triumph , for having , as he thought , more Help come ,
DEFOE-1719-1,219.455

and without bearing to hear me , Captain , <font> Says he <$$font> ,
noble Captain , I am glad you are come ! DEFOE-1719-1,219.456

We have not half done yet , villainous Hell-hound Dogs !
DEFOE-1719-1,219.457

I@ @'ll kill as many of them as poor <font> Tom. <$$font> has Hairs
upon his Head . DEFOE-1719-1,219.458

We have sworn to spare none of them , DEFOE-1719-1,219.459

we@ @'ll root out the very Nation of 'em from the Earth .
DEFOE-1719-1,219.460

And thus he run on , out of Breath too with Action ,
DEFOE-1719-1,219.461

and would not give us Leave to speak a Word . DEFOE-1719-1,219.462

At last , raising my Voice , that I might silence him a little ,
Barbarous Dog , <font> said I <$$font> , what are you doing ?
DEFOE-1719-1,219.463

I wo@ @n't have one Creature touch'd more , upon Pain of Death ,
DEFOE-1719-1,219.464

I charge you upon your <P_220> Life , to stop your Hands , and stand
still here , DEFOE-1719-1,220.465

or you are a dead Man this Minute . DEFOE-1719-1,220.466

Why , Sir , <font> says he <$$font> , do you know what you do , or what
they have done ? DEFOE-1719-1,220.467

If you want a Reason for what we have done , come hither .
DEFOE-1719-1,220.468

And with that he shewed , me the poor Fellow hanging with his Throat cut
, DEFOE-1719-1,220.469

I confess , I was urged then my self , and at another Time would have
been forward enough ; DEFOE-1719-1,220.470

but I thought they had carried their Rage too far , DEFOE-1719-1,220.471

and I thought of <font> Jacob's <$$font> Words to his Sons <font> Simon
<$$font> and <font> Levi . DEFOE-1719-1,220.472

Cursed be their Anger , for it was Fierce ; and their Wrath for it was
Cruel . <$$font> DEFOE-1719-1,220.473

But I had now a new Task upon my Hands ; DEFOE-1719-1,220.474

for when the Men I carried with me saw the Sight , as I had done , I had
as much to do to restrain them , as I should have had with the other .
DEFOE-1719-1,220.475

Nay , my Nephew himself fell in with them , DEFOE-1719-1,220.476

and told me in their Hearing , that he was only concerned for Fear of
the Men being overpowered ; DEFOE-1719-1,220.477

for as to the People , he thought not one of 'em ought to live ; for
they had all glutted themselves with the Murder of the poor Man , and
that they ought to be used like Murderers . DEFOE-1719-1,220.478

Upon these Words , away run eight of my Men with the Boatswain and his
Crew , to complete their bloody Work ; DEFOE-1719-1,220.479

and I seeing it quite out of my Power to restrain them , came away
pensive and sad ; DEFOE-1719-1,220.480

for I could not bear the Sight , much less the horrible Noise and Cries
of the poor Wretches that fell into their Hands . DEFOE-1719-1,220.481

I got no Body to come back with me but the <font> Supra-Cargo <$$font>
and two Men ; DEFOE-1719-1,220.482

and with these I walk'd back to the Boats . DEFOE-1719-1,220.483

It was a very great Piece of Folly in me , I confess , to venture back ,
as it were alone ; DEFOE-1719-1,220.484

for as it began now to be almost Day , and the Alarm had run over the
Country , there stood above forty Men armed with Lances <P_221> and Bows
at the little Place where the 12 or 13 Houses stood mention'd before ;
DEFOE-1719-1,221.485

but by Accident I miss'd the Place , DEFOE-1719-1,221.486

and came directly to the Sea-side ; DEFOE-1719-1,221.487

and by the Time I got to the Sea-side it was broad Day .
DEFOE-1719-1,221.488

Immediately I took the Pinnace , DEFOE-1719-1,221.489

and went aboard , DEFOE-1719-1,221.490

and sent her back to assist the Men in what might happen .
DEFOE-1719-1,221.491

I observ'd about the Time that I came to the Boat-side , that the Fire
was pretty well out , and the Noise abated ; DEFOE-1719-1,221.492

but in about half an Hour after I got on Board , I heard a Volley of our
Mens Fire-Arms , DEFOE-1719-1,221.493

and saw a great Smoke ; DEFOE-1719-1,221.494

this , as I understood afterwards , was our Men falling upon the Men ,
who , as I said , stood at the few Houses on the Way , of whom they
kill'd sixteen or seventeen , and set all those Houses on Fire , but did
not meddle with the Women or Children . DEFOE-1719-1,221.495

