<BEGIN_dickens-1837-1>

<P_544>

<heading>

Chapter 40 DICKENS-1837-1,544.4

<font> What befel Mr Pickwick when he got into the Fleet ; what Debtors
he saw there ; and how he passed the Night <$$font> DICKENS-1837-1,544.5

<$$heading>

Mr Tom Roker , the gentleman who had accompanied Mr Pickwick into the
prison , turned sharp round to the right when he got to the bottom of
the little flight of steps , DICKENS-1837-1,544.7

and led the way through an iron gate which stood open , and up another
short flight of steps , into a long narrow gallery , dirty and low ,
paved with stone , and very dimly lighted by a window at each remote end
. DICKENS-1837-1,544.8

' This , ' said the gentleman , thrusting his hands into his pockets ,
and looking carelessly over his shoulder to Mr Pickwick , ' This here is
the hall flight . ' DICKENS-1837-1,544.9

' Oh , ' replied Mr Pickwick , looking down a dark and filthy staircase
, which appeared to lead to a range of damp and gloomy stone vaults
beneath the ground , DICKENS-1837-1,544.10

' and those , I suppose , are the little cellars where the prisoners
keep their small quantities of coals . DICKENS-1837-1,544.11

Ah ! unpleasant places to have to go down to ; but very convenient , I
dare say . ' DICKENS-1837-1,544.12

' Yes , I should@ @n't wonder if they was convenient , ' replied the
gentleman , ' seeing that a few people live there pretty snug .
DICKENS-1837-1,544.13

That@ @'s the Fair , that is . ' DICKENS-1837-1,544.14

' My friend , ' said Mr Pickwick , ' you do@ @n't really mean to say
that human beings live down in those wretched dungeons ? '
DICKENS-1837-1,544.15

' Do@ @n't I ? ' replied Mr Roker , with indignant astonishment ;
DICKENS-1837-1,544.16

' why should@ @n't I ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,544.17

<P_545>

' Live ! - live down there ! ' exclaimed Mr Pickwick . ' Live down
there ! DICKENS-1837-1,545.19

yes , and die down there , too , wery often ! ' replied Mr Roker ;
DICKENS-1837-1,545.20

' and what of that ? DICKENS-1837-1,545.21

Who@ @'s got to say anything agin it ? DICKENS-1837-1,545.22

Live down there ! DICKENS-1837-1,545.23

- yes , and a wery good place it is to live in , ai@ @n't it ? '
DICKENS-1837-1,545.24

As Roker turned somewhat fiercely upon Mr Pickwick in saying this , and
moreover muttered , in an excited fashion , certain unpleasant
invocations concerning his own eyes , limbs , and circulating fluids ,
the latter gentleman deemed it advisable to pursue the discourse no
further . DICKENS-1837-1,545.25

Mr Roker then proceeded to mount another staircase , as dirty as that
which led to the place which had just been the subject of discussion ,
in which ascent he was closely followed by Mr Pickwick and Sam .
DICKENS-1837-1,545.26

' There , ' said Mr Roker , pausing for breath when they reached another
gallery of the same dimensions as the one below , ' this is the
coffee-room flight : DICKENS-1837-1,545.27

the one above@ @'s the third , DICKENS-1837-1,545.28

and the one above that@ @'s the top ; DICKENS-1837-1,545.29

and the room where you@ @'re a going to sleep to-night is the warden's
room , DICKENS-1837-1,545.30

and it@ @'s this way - DICKENS-1837-1,545.31

come on . ' DICKENS-1837-1,545.32

Having said all this in a breath , Mr Roker mounted another flight of
stairs , with Mr Pickwick and Sam Weller following at his heels .
DICKENS-1837-1,545.33

These staircases received light from sundry windows placed at some
little distance above the floor , and looking into a gravelled area
bounded by a high brick wall , with iron <font> chevaux-de-frise
<$$font> at the top . DICKENS-1837-1,545.34

This area , it appeared from Mr Roker's statement , was the
racket-ground ; DICKENS-1837-1,545.35

and it further appeared , on the testimony of the same gentleman , that
there was a smaller area in that portion of the prison which was nearest
Farringdon-street , denominated and called ' the Painted Ground , ' from
the fact of its walls having once displayed the semblances of various
men-of-war in full sail , and other artistical effects , achieved in
bygone times by some imprisoned draughtsman in his leisure hours .
DICKENS-1837-1,545.36

Having communicated this piece of information , apparently more for the
purpose of discharging his bosom of an important fact , than with any
specific view of enlightening Mr Pickwick , the guide , having at length
reached another gallery , led the way into a small passage at the
extreme end ; DICKENS-1837-1,545.37

opened a door , DICKENS-1837-1,545.38

and disclosed an apartment of an appearance by no means inviting ,
containing eight or nine iron bedsteads . DICKENS-1837-1,545.39

' There , ' said Mr Roker , holding the door open , and looking
triumphantly round at Mr Pickwick , DICKENS-1837-1,545.40

' There@ @'s a room ! ' DICKENS-1837-1,545.41

Mr Pickwick's face , however , betokened such a very trifling portion of
satisfaction at the appearance of his lodging , that Mr Roker looked for
a reciprocity of feeling into the countenance of Samuel Weller , who ,
until now , had observed a dignified silence . DICKENS-1837-1,545.42

<P_546>

' There@ @'s a room , young man , ' observed Mr Roker .
DICKENS-1837-1,546.44

' I see it , ' replied Sam , with a placid nod of the head .
DICKENS-1837-1,546.45

' You would@ @n't think to find such a room as this , in the Farringdon
Hotel , would you ? ' said Mr Roker , with a complacent smile .
DICKENS-1837-1,546.46

To this Mr Weller replied with an easy and unstudied closing of one eye
; which might be considered to mean , either that he would have thought
it , or that he would not have thought it , or that he had never thought
anything at all about it , just as the observer's imagination suggested
. DICKENS-1837-1,546.47

Having executed this feat , and re-opened his eye , Mr Weller proceeded
to inquire which was the individual bedstead that Mr Roker had so
flatteringly described as an out-and-outer to sleep in .
DICKENS-1837-1,546.48

' That@ @'s it , ' replied Mr Roker , pointing to a very rusty one in a
corner . DICKENS-1837-1,546.49

' It would make any one go to sleep , that bedstead would , whether they
wanted to or not . ' DICKENS-1837-1,546.50

' I should think , ' said Sam , eyeing the piece of furniture in
question with a look of excessive disgust , ' I should think poppies was
nothin' to it . ' DICKENS-1837-1,546.51

' Nothing at all , ' said Mr Roker . DICKENS-1837-1,546.52

' And I s'pose , ' said Sam , with a sidelong glance at his master , as
if to see whether there were any symptoms of his determination being
shaken by what passed , ' I s'pose the other gen'l'men as sleeps here ,
<font> are <$$font> gen'l'men . ' DICKENS-1837-1,546.53

' Nothing but it , ' said Mr Roker . DICKENS-1837-1,546.54

' One of 'em takes his twelve pints of ale a-day , DICKENS-1837-1,546.55

and never leaves off smoking , even at his meals . '
DICKENS-1837-1,546.56

' He must be a first-rater , ' said Sam . DICKENS-1837-1,546.57

' A_,_1 , ' replied Mr Roker . DICKENS-1837-1,546.58

Nothing daunted , even by this intelligence , Mr Pickwick smilingly
announced his determination to test the powers of the narcotic bedstead
for that night ; DICKENS-1837-1,546.59

and Mr Roker , after informing him that he could retire to rest at
whatever hour he thought proper without any further notice or formality
, walked off , leaving him standing with Sam in the gallery .
DICKENS-1837-1,546.60

It was getting dark ; that is to say , a few gas jets were kindled in
this place , which was never light , by way of compliment to the evening
, which had set in outside . DICKENS-1837-1,546.61

As it was rather warm , some of the tenants of the numerous little rooms
which opened into the gallery on either hand , had set their doors ajar
. DICKENS-1837-1,546.62

Mr Pickwick peeped into them as he passed along , with great curiosity
and interest . DICKENS-1837-1,546.63

Here , four or five great hulking fellows , just visible through a cloud
of tobacco-smoke , were engaged in noisy and riotous conversation over
half-emptied pots of beer , or playing at all-fours with a very greasy
pack of cards . DICKENS-1837-1,546.64

In the adjoining room , some solitary tenant might be seen , poring , by
the light of a feeble tallow candle , over a bundle of soiled and
tattered papers , yellow with dust and dropping to pieces from <P_547>
age , writing , for the hundredth time , some lengthened statement of
his grievances , for the perusal of some great man whose eyes it would
never reach , or whose heart it would never touch .
DICKENS-1837-1,547.65

In a third , a man , with his wife and a whole crowd of children , might
be seen making up a scanty bed on the ground , or upon a few chairs ,
for the younger ones to pass the night in . DICKENS-1837-1,547.66

And in a fourth , and a fifth , and a sixth , and a seventh , the noise
, and the beer , and the tobacco-smoke , and the cards , all came over
again in greater force than before . DICKENS-1837-1,547.67

In the galleries themselves , and more especially on the staircases ,
there lingered a great number of people , who came there , some because
their rooms were empty and lonesome ; others because their rooms were
full and hot ; and the greater part because they were restless and
uncomfortable , and not possessed of the secret of exactly knowing what
to do with themselves . DICKENS-1837-1,547.68

There were many classes of people here , from the labouring man in his
fustian jacket , to the broken_down spendthrift in his shawl
dressing-gown , most appropriately out at elbows ; DICKENS-1837-1,547.69

but there was the same air about them all - a kind of listless ,
jail-bird , careless swagger ; a vagabondish who's-afraid sort of
bearing , which is wholly indescribable in words ; but which any man can
understand in one moment if he wishes , by just setting foot in the
nearest debtors' prison , and looking at the very first group of people
he sees there , with the same interest as Mr Pickwick did .
DICKENS-1837-1,547.70

' It strikes me , Sam , ' said Mr Pickwick , leaning over the iron-rail
at the stair-head , ' It strikes me , Sam , that imprisonment for debt
is scarcely any punishment at all . ' DICKENS-1837-1,547.71

' Think not , Sir ? ' inquired Mr Weller . DICKENS-1837-1,547.72

' You see how these fellows drink , and smoke , and roar , ' replied Mr
Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,547.73

' It@ @'s quite impossible that they can mind it much . '
DICKENS-1837-1,547.74

' Ah , that@ @'s just the wery thing , Sir , ' rejoined Sam ,
DICKENS-1837-1,547.75

' <font> they <$$font> do@ @n't mind it ; DICKENS-1837-1,547.76

it@ @'s a reg'lar holiday to them - all porter and skettles .
DICKENS-1837-1,547.77

It@ @'s the t'other vuns as gets done over vith this sort o' thing :
them down-hearted fellers as ca@ @n't svig avay at the beer , nor play
skettles neither ; them as vould pay if they could , and gets low by
being boxed up . DICKENS-1837-1,547.78

I@ @'ll tell you wot it is , Sir ; DICKENS-1837-1,547.79

them as is always a idlin' in public houses it do@ @n't damage at all ,
DICKENS-1837-1,547.80

and them as is alvays a vorkin' ven they can , it damages too much .
DICKENS-1837-1,547.81

" It@ @'s unekal , " as my father used to say ven his grog wor@ @n't
made half-and-half - DICKENS-1837-1,547.82

" It@ @'s unekal , DICKENS-1837-1,547.83

and that@ @'s the fault on it . " ' DICKENS-1837-1,547.84

' I think you@ @'re right , Sam , ' said Mr Pickwick , after a few
moments' reflection , ' quite right . ' DICKENS-1837-1,547.85

' P'raps , now and then , there@ @'s some honest people as likes it , '
observed Mr Weller , in a ruminative tone , DICKENS-1837-1,547.86

' but I never heerd o' one as I can call to <P_548> mind , 'cept the
little dirty-faced man in the brown coat , DICKENS-1837-1,548.87

and that was force of habit . ' DICKENS-1837-1,548.88

' And who was he ? ' inquired Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,548.89

' Vy , that@ @'s just the wery point as nobody never know'd , ' replied
Sam . DICKENS-1837-1,548.90

' But what did he do ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,548.91

' Vy he did wot many men as has been much better know'd has done in
their time , Sir , ' replied Sam , DICKENS-1837-1,548.92

' he run a match agin the constable , DICKENS-1837-1,548.93

and vun it . ' DICKENS-1837-1,548.94

' In other words , I suppose , ' said Mr Pickwick , ' he got into debt ?
' DICKENS-1837-1,548.95

' Just that , Sir , ' replied Sam , DICKENS-1837-1,548.96

' and in course o' time he come here in consekens .
DICKENS-1837-1,548.97

It war@ @n't much - execution for nine pound nothin' , multiplied by
five for costs ; DICKENS-1837-1,548.98

but hows'ever here he stopped for seventeen year .
DICKENS-1837-1,548.99

If he got any wrinkles in his face , they was stopped up vith the dirt ,
DICKENS-1837-1,548.100

for both the dirty face and the brown coat wos just the same at the end
o' that time as they wos at the beginnin' . DICKENS-1837-1,548.101

He wos a wery peaceful inoffendin' little creetur ,
DICKENS-1837-1,548.102

and wos alvays a bustlin' about for somebody , or playin' rackets and
never vinnin' ; till at last the turnkeys they got quite fond on him ,
DICKENS-1837-1,548.103

and he wos in the lodge ev'ry night , a chattering vith 'em , and
tellin' stories , and all that 'ere . DICKENS-1837-1,548.104

Vun night he wos in there as usual , alone vith a wery old friend of his
, as wos on the lock , ven he says all of a sudden , " I ai@ @n't seen
the market outside , Bill , " he says <paren> Fleet Market wos there at
that time <$$paren> - " I ai@ @n't seen the market outside , Bill , " he
says , " for seventeen year . " DICKENS-1837-1,548.105

" I know you ai@ @n't , " says the turnkey , smoking his pipe .
DICKENS-1837-1,548.106

" I should like to see it for a minit , Bill , " he says .
DICKENS-1837-1,548.107

" Wery probable , " says the turnkey , smoking his pipe wery fierce ,
and making believe he war@ @n't up to wot the little man wanted .
DICKENS-1837-1,548.108

" Bill , " says the little man , more abrupt than afore , " I@ @'ve got
the fancy in my head . DICKENS-1837-1,548.109

Let me see the public street once more afore I die ; and if I ai@ @n't
struck with apoplexy , I@ @'ll be back in five minits by the clock . "
DICKENS-1837-1,548.110

" And wot 'ud become o' me if you <font> wos <$$font> struck with
apoplexy ? " said the turnkey . DICKENS-1837-1,548.111

" Vy , " says the little creetur , " whoever found me , 'ud bring me
home , DICKENS-1837-1,548.112

for I@ @'ve got my card in my pocket , Bill , " he says ,
DICKENS-1837-1,548.113

" No. 20 , Coffee-room Flight : " DICKENS-1837-1,548.114

and that wos true , sure enough , DICKENS-1837-1,548.115

for ven he wanted to make the acquaintance of any new_comer , he used to
pull out a little limp card vith them words on it and nothin' else ; in
consideration o' vich , he wos alvays called Number Tventy .
DICKENS-1837-1,548.116

The turnkey takes a fixed look at him , DICKENS-1837-1,548.117

and at last he says in a solemn manner , " Tventy , " he says , " I@
@'ll trust you ; DICKENS-1837-1,548.118

you wo@ @n't get your old friend into trouble . "
DICKENS-1837-1,548.119

" No , my boy ; I hope I@ @'ve somethin' better behind here , " says the
little man , DICKENS-1837-1,548.120

and as he said it , he hit his little veskit wery hard ,
DICKENS-1837-1,548.121

and then a tear started out o' each eye , which wos wery extraordinary ;
DICKENS-1837-1,548.122

for it <P_549> wos supposed as water never touched his face .
DICKENS-1837-1,549.123

He shook the turnkey by the hand ; DICKENS-1837-1,549.124

out he vent - ' DICKENS-1837-1,549.125

' And never came back again , ' said Mr Pickwick .
DICKENS-1837-1,549.126

' Wrong for vunce , Sir , ' replied Mr Weller , DICKENS-1837-1,549.127

' for back he come two minits afore the time , a bilin' vith rage ,
sayin' how he@ @'d been nearly run over by a hackney coach ; that he
war@ @n't used to it , and he wos blowed if he would@ @n't write to the
Lord Mayor . DICKENS-1837-1,549.128

They got him pacified at last ; DICKENS-1837-1,549.129

and for five year arter that , he never even so much as peeped out o'
the lodge-gate . ' DICKENS-1837-1,549.130

' At the expiration of that time he died , I suppose , ' said Mr
Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,549.131

' No he did@ @n't , Sir , ' replied Sam . DICKENS-1837-1,549.132

' He got a curiosity to go and taste the beer at a new public-house over
the way , on the premises ; DICKENS-1837-1,549.133

and it wos such a wery nice parlour , that he took it into his head to
go there every night , which he did for a long time , alvays comin' back
reg'lar about a quarter of an hour afore the gate shut , which wos all
wery snug and comfortable . DICKENS-1837-1,549.134

At last he began to get so precious jolly , that he used to forget how
the time vent , or care nothin' at all about it , DICKENS-1837-1,549.135

and he vent on gettin' later and later , till vun night his old friend
wos just a shuttin' the gate - had turned the key in fact - ven he come
up . DICKENS-1837-1,549.136

" Hold hard , Bill , " he says . DICKENS-1837-1,549.137

" Wot , ai@ @n't you come home yet , Tventy ? " says the turnkey ,
DICKENS-1837-1,549.138

" I thought you was in long ago . " DICKENS-1837-1,549.139

" No I was@ @n't , " says the little man , vith a smile .
DICKENS-1837-1,549.140

" Vell then , I@ @'ll tell you wot it is , my friend , " says the
turnkey , openin' the gate wery slow and sulky , DICKENS-1837-1,549.141

" it@ @'s my 'pinion as you@ @'ve got into bad company o' late , which
I@ @'m wery sorry to see . DICKENS-1837-1,549.142

Now I do@ @n't wish to do anything harsh , " he says ,
DICKENS-1837-1,549.143

" but if you ca@ @n't confine yourself to steady circles , and find your
vay back at reg'lar hours , as sure as you@ @'re a standin' there , I@
@'ll shut you out altogether ! " DICKENS-1837-1,549.144

The little man was seized vith a wiolent fit o' tremblin' ,
DICKENS-1837-1,549.145

and never vent outside the prison walls artervards ! '
DICKENS-1837-1,549.146

As Sam concluded , Mr Pickwick slowly retraced his steps down stairs .
DICKENS-1837-1,549.147

After a few thoughtful turns in the Painted Ground , which , as it was
now dark , was nearly deserted , he intimated to Mr Weller that he
thought it high time for him to withdraw for the night ; requesting him
to seek a bed in some adjacent public house , and return early in the
morning , to make arrangements for the removal of his master's wardrobe
from the George and Vulture . DICKENS-1837-1,549.148

This request Mr Samuel Weller prepared to obey , with as good a grace as
he could assume , but with a very considerable show of reluctance
nevertheless . DICKENS-1837-1,549.149

He even went so far as to essay sundry ineffectual hints regarding the
expediency of stretching himself on the gravel for that night ;
DICKENS-1837-1,549.150

but finding Mr Pickwick obstinately deaf to any such suggestions ,
finally withdrew . DICKENS-1837-1,549.151

There is no disguising the fact that Mr Pickwick felt very low-spirited
<P_550> and uncomfortable - not for lack of society ,
DICKENS-1837-1,550.152

for the prison was very full , DICKENS-1837-1,550.153

and a bottle of wine would at once have purchased the utmost
good-fellowship of a few choice spirits , without any more formal
ceremony of introduction ; DICKENS-1837-1,550.154

but he was alone in the coarse vulgar crowd , DICKENS-1837-1,550.155

and felt the depression of spirit and sinking of heart , naturally
consequent upon the reflection that he was cooped and caged up without a
prospect of liberation . DICKENS-1837-1,550.156

As to the idea of releasing himself by ministering to the sharpness of
Dodson & Fogg , it never for an instant entered his thoughts .
DICKENS-1837-1,550.157

In this frame of mind he turned again into the coffee-room gallery ,
DICKENS-1837-1,550.158

and walked slowly to and fro . DICKENS-1837-1,550.159

The place was intolerably dirty , and the smell of tobacco smoke
perfectly suffocating . DICKENS-1837-1,550.160

There was a perpetual slamming and banging of doors as the people went
in and out , DICKENS-1837-1,550.161

and the noise of their voices and footsteps echoed and re-echoed through
the passages constantly . DICKENS-1837-1,550.162

A young woman , with a child in her arms , who seemed scarcely able to
crawl , from emaciation and misery , was walking up and down the passage
in conversation with her husband , who had no other place to see her in
. DICKENS-1837-1,550.163

As they passed Mr Pickwick , he could hear the female sob bitterly ;
DICKENS-1837-1,550.164

and once she burst into such a passion of grief , that she was compelled
to lean against the wall for support , while the man took the child in
his arms , and tried to soothe her . DICKENS-1837-1,550.165

Mr Pickwick's heart was really too full to bear it ,
DICKENS-1837-1,550.166

and he went up stairs to bed . DICKENS-1837-1,550.167

Now , although the warden's room was a very uncomfortable one , being ,
in every point of decoration and convenience , several hundred degrees
inferior to the commonest infirmary of a county gaol , it had at present
the merit of being wholly deserted , save by Mr Pickwick himself .
DICKENS-1837-1,550.168

So , he sat down at the foot of his little iron bedstead ,
DICKENS-1837-1,550.169

and began to wonder how much a year the warden made out of the dirty
room . DICKENS-1837-1,550.170

Having satisfied himself , by mathematical calculation , that the
apartment was about equal in annual value to the freehold of a small
street in the suburbs of London , he took to wondering what possible
temptation could have induced a dingy-looking fly that was crawling over
his pantaloons , to come into a close prison , when he had the choice of
so many airy situations - a course of meditation which led him to the
irresistible conclusion that the insect was insane .
DICKENS-1837-1,550.171

After settling this point , he began to be conscious that he was getting
sleepy ; whereupon he took his nightcap out of the pocket in which he
had had the precaution to stow it in the morning , and , leisurely
undressing himself , got into bed , and fell asleep .
DICKENS-1837-1,550.172

' Bravo ! Heel over toe - DICKENS-1837-1,550.173

cut and shuffle - DICKENS-1837-1,550.174

pay away at it , Zephyr ! DICKENS-1837-1,550.175

I@ @'m smothered if the Opera House is@ @n't your proper hemisphere .
DICKENS-1837-1,550.176

Keep it up . Hooray ! ' DICKENS-1837-1,550.177

These expressions , delivered in a most boisterous tone , and <P_551>
accompanied with loud peals of laughter , roused Mr Pickwick from one of
those sound slumbers which , lasting in reality some half hour , seem to
the sleeper to have been protracted for about three weeks or a month .
DICKENS-1837-1,551.178

The voice had no sooner ceased than the room was shaken with such
violence that the windows rattled in their frames , and the bedsteads
trembled again . DICKENS-1837-1,551.179

Mr Pickwick started up , DICKENS-1837-1,551.180

and remained for some minutes fixed in mute astonishment at the scene
before him . DICKENS-1837-1,551.181

On the floor of the room , a man in a broad-skirted green coat , with
corduroy {TEXT:corderoy} knee smalls and grey cotton stockings , was
performing the most popular steps of a hornpipe , with a slang and
burlesque caricature of grace and lightness , which , combined with the
very appropriate character of his costume , was inexpressibly absurd .
DICKENS-1837-1,551.182

Another man , evidently very drunk , who had probably been tumbled into
bed by his companions , was sitting up between the sheets , warbling as
much as he could recollect of a comic song , with the most intensely
sentimental feeling and expression ; while a third , seated on one of
the bedsteads , was applauding both performers with the air of a
profound connoisseur , and encouraging them by such ebullitions of
feeling as had already roused Mr Pickwick from his sleep .
DICKENS-1837-1,551.183

This last man was an admirable specimen of a class of gentry which never
can be seen in full perfection but in such places ;
DICKENS-1837-1,551.184

- they may be met with , in an imperfect state , occasionally about
stable-yards and public houses ; DICKENS-1837-1,551.185

but they never attain their full bloom except in these hot-beds , which
would almost seem to be considerately provided by the Legislature for
the sole purpose of rearing them . DICKENS-1837-1,551.186

He was a tall fellow , with an olive complexion , long dark hair , and
very thick bushy whiskers meeting under his chin .
DICKENS-1837-1,551.187

He wore no neckerchief , as he had been playing rackets all day ,
DICKENS-1837-1,551.188

and his open shirt collar displayed their full luxuriance .
DICKENS-1837-1,551.189

On his head he wore one of the common eighteenpenny French skull-caps ,
with a gawdy tassel dangling therefrom , very happily in keeping with a
common fustian coat . DICKENS-1837-1,551.190

His legs , which , being long , were afflicted with weakness , graced a
pair of Oxford-mixture trousers , made to show the full symmetry of the
limbs . DICKENS-1837-1,551.191

Being somewhat negligently braced , however , and , moreover , but
imperfectly buttoned , they fell in a series of not the most graceful
folds over a pair of shoes sufficiently down at heel to display a pair
of very soiled white stockings . DICKENS-1837-1,551.192

There was a rakish vagabond smartness , and a kind of boastful rascality
, about the whole man , that was worth a mine of gold .
DICKENS-1837-1,551.193

This figure was the first to perceive that Mr Pickwick was looking on ;
upon which he winked to the Zephyr , and entreated him , with mock
gravity , not to wake the gentleman . DICKENS-1837-1,551.194

<P_552>

{COM:illustration_omitted}

<P_553>

' Why , bless the gentleman's honest heart and soul ! ' said the Zephyr
, turning round and affecting the extremity of surprise ;
DICKENS-1837-1,553.198

' the gentleman <font> is <$$font> awake . DICKENS-1837-1,553.199

Hem ; Shakspeare . How do you do , Sir ? DICKENS-1837-1,553.200

How is Mary and Sarah , Sir ? and the dear old lady at home , Sir - eh
, Sir ? DICKENS-1837-1,553.201

Will you have the kindness to put my compliments into the first little
parcel you@ @'re sending that way , Sir , and say that I would have sent
'em before , only I was afraid they might be broken in the waggon , Sir
? ' DICKENS-1837-1,553.202

' Do@ @n't overwhelm the gentleman with ordinary civilities when you see
he@ @'s anxious to have something to drink , ' said the gentleman with
the whiskers , with a jocose air . DICKENS-1837-1,553.203

' Why do@ @n't you ask the gentleman what he@ @'ll take ? '
DICKENS-1837-1,553.204

' Dear me - I quite forgot , ' replied the other .
DICKENS-1837-1,553.205

' What <font> will <$$font> you take , Sir ? DICKENS-1837-1,553.206

Will you take port wine , Sir , or sherry wine , Sir ?
DICKENS-1837-1,553.207

I can recommend the ale , Sir ; DICKENS-1837-1,553.208

or perhaps you@ @'d like to taste the porter , Sir ?
DICKENS-1837-1,553.209

Allow me to have the felicity of hanging up your nightcap , Sir . '
DICKENS-1837-1,553.210

With this , the speaker snatched that article of dress from Mr
Pickwick's head , DICKENS-1837-1,553.211

and fixed it in a twinkling on that of the drunken man , who , firmly
impressed with the belief that he was delighting a numerous assembly ,
continued to hammer away at the comic song in the most melancholy
strains imaginable . DICKENS-1837-1,553.212

Taking a man's nightcap from his brow by violent means , and adjusting
it on the head of an unknown gentleman of dirty exterior , however
ingenious a witticism in itself , is unquestionably one of those which
come under the denomination of practical jokes . DICKENS-1837-1,553.213

Viewing the matter precisely in this light , Mr Pickwick , without the
slightest intimation of his purpose , sprang vigorously out of bed ;
DICKENS-1837-1,553.214

struck the Zephyr so smart a blow in the chest , as to deprive him of a
considerable portion of the commodity which sometimes bears his name ;
DICKENS-1837-1,553.215

and then , recapturing his nightcap , boldly placed himself in an
attitude of defence . DICKENS-1837-1,553.216

' Now , ' said Mr Pickwick , gasping no less from excitement than from
the expenditure of so much energy , ' come on - both of you - both of
you . ' DICKENS-1837-1,553.217

And with this liberal invitation the worthy gentleman communicated a
revolving motion to his clenched fists , by way of appalling his
antagonists with a display of science . DICKENS-1837-1,553.218

It might have been Mr Pickwick's very unexpected gallantry , or it might
have been the complicated manner in which he had got himself out of bed
, and fallen all in a mass upon the hornpipe man , that touched his
adversaries . DICKENS-1837-1,553.219

Touched they were ; DICKENS-1837-1,553.220

for , instead of then and there making an attempt to commit manslaughter
, as Mr Pickwick implicitly believed they would have done , they paused
, DICKENS-1837-1,553.221

stared at each other a short time , DICKENS-1837-1,553.222

and finally laughed outright . DICKENS-1837-1,553.223

<P_554>

' Well ; you@ @'re a trump , DICKENS-1837-1,554.225

and I like you all the better for it , ' said the Zephyr .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.226

' Now jump into bed again , or you@ @'ll catch the rheumatics .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.227

No malice , I hope ? ' said the man , extending a hand about the size
of the yellow clump of fingers which sometimes swings over a glover's
door . DICKENS-1837-1,554.228

' Certainly not , ' said Mr Pickwick , with great alacrity ;
DICKENS-1837-1,554.229

for , now that the excitement was over , he began to feel rather cool
about the legs . DICKENS-1837-1,554.230

' Allow me the honour , Sir ? ' said the gentleman with the whiskers ,
presenting his dexter hand , and aspirating the h .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.231

' With much pleasure , Sir , ' said Mr Pickwick ; DICKENS-1837-1,554.232

and having executed a very long and solemn shake , he got into bed again
. DICKENS-1837-1,554.233

' My name is Smangle , Sir , ' said the man with the whiskers .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.234

' Oh , ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,554.235

' Mine is Mivins , ' said the man in the stockings .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.236

' I am delighted to hear it , Sir , ' said Mr Pickwick .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.237

' Hem , ' coughed Mr Smangle . DICKENS-1837-1,554.238

' Did you speak , Sir ? ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,554.239

' No , I did not , Sir , ' said Mr Smangle . DICKENS-1837-1,554.240

' I thought you did , Sir , ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,554.241

All this was very genteel and pleasant ; DICKENS-1837-1,554.242

and , to make matters still more comfortable , Mr Smangle assured Mr
Pickwick a great many times that he entertained a very high respect for
the feelings of a gentleman ; which sentiment , indeed , did him
infinite credit , as he could be in no wise supposed to understand them
. DICKENS-1837-1,554.243

' Are you going through the Court , Sir ? ' inquired Mr Smangle .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.244

' Through the what ? ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,554.245

' Through the Court - Portugal Street - the Court for the Relief of -
you know . ' DICKENS-1837-1,554.246

' Oh , no , ' replied Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,554.247

' No , I am not . ' DICKENS-1837-1,554.248

' Going out , perhaps ? ' suggested Mivins . DICKENS-1837-1,554.249

' I fear not , ' replied Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,554.250

' I refuse to pay some damages , DICKENS-1837-1,554.251

and am here in consequence . ' DICKENS-1837-1,554.252

' Ah , ' said Mr Smangle , DICKENS-1837-1,554.253

' paper has been my ruin . ' DICKENS-1837-1,554.254

' A stationer , I presume , Sir ? ' said Mr Pickwick , innocently .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.255

' Stationer ! DICKENS-1837-1,554.256

No , no ; confound and curse me ! DICKENS-1837-1,554.257

- not so low as that . DICKENS-1837-1,554.258

No trade . DICKENS-1837-1,554.259

When I say paper , I mean bills . ' DICKENS-1837-1,554.260

' Oh , you use the word in that sense . I see , ' said Mr Pickwick .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.261

' Dam@ @me ! a gentleman must expect reverses , ' said Smangle .
DICKENS-1837-1,554.262

' What of that ? DICKENS-1837-1,554.263

Here am I in the Fleet Prison . DICKENS-1837-1,554.264

Well ; good . DICKENS-1837-1,554.265

What then ? DICKENS-1837-1,554.266

I@ @'m none the worse for that , am I ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,554.267

' Not a bit , ' replied Mr Mivins . DICKENS-1837-1,554.268

And he was quite right ; DICKENS-1837-1,554.269

for , so far from <P_555> Mr Smangle being any the worse for it , he was
something the better , inasmuch as to qualify himself for the place , he
had attained gratuitous possession of certain articles of jewellery ,
which , long before that , had found their way to the pawnbroker's .
DICKENS-1837-1,555.270

' Well ; but come , ' said Mr Smangle ; DICKENS-1837-1,555.271

' this is dry work . DICKENS-1837-1,555.272

Let@ @'s rinse our mouths with a drop of burnt sherry ;
DICKENS-1837-1,555.273

the last comer shall stand it , DICKENS-1837-1,555.274

Mivins shall fetch it , DICKENS-1837-1,555.275

and I@ @'ll help to drink it . DICKENS-1837-1,555.276

That@ @'s a fair and gentlemanlike division of labour , any how - curse
me ! ' DICKENS-1837-1,555.277

Unwilling to hazard another quarrel , Mr Pickwick gladly assented to the
proposition , DICKENS-1837-1,555.278

and consigned the money to Mr Mivins , who , as it was nearly eleven
o'clock , lost no time in repairing to the coffee-room on his errand .
DICKENS-1837-1,555.279

' I say , ' whispered Smangle , the moment his friend had left the room
; ' what did you give him ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,555.280

' Half a sovereign , ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,555.281

' He@ @'s a devilish pleasant gentlemanly dog , ' said Mr Smangle ; - '
infernal pleasant . DICKENS-1837-1,555.282

I do@ @n't know anybody more so ; DICKENS-1837-1,555.283

but - ' DICKENS-1837-1,555.284

Here Mr Smangle stopped short , DICKENS-1837-1,555.285

and shook his head dubiously . DICKENS-1837-1,555.286

' You do@ @n't think there is any probability of his appropriating the
money to his own use ? ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,555.287

' Oh , no - mind , I do@ @n't say that ; DICKENS-1837-1,555.288

I expressly say that he@ @'s a devilish gentlemanly fellow , ' said Mr
Smangle . DICKENS-1837-1,555.289

' But I think , perhaps , if somebody went down , just to see that he
did@ @n't drop his beak into the jug by accident , or make some
confounded mistake in losing the money as he came up stairs , it would
be as well . DICKENS-1837-1,555.290

Here , you Sir , just run down stairs , DICKENS-1837-1,555.291

and look after that gentleman , will you ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,555.292

This request was addressed to a little , timid-looking , nervous man ,
whose appearance bespoke great poverty , and who had been crouching on
his bedstead all this while , apparently quite stupified by the novelty
of his situation . DICKENS-1837-1,555.293

' You know where the coffee-room is , ' said Smangle ;
DICKENS-1837-1,555.294

' just run down , DICKENS-1837-1,555.295

and tell that gentleman you@ @'ve come to help him up with the jug .
DICKENS-1837-1,555.296

Or - stop - I@ @'ll tell you what - I@ @'ll tell you how we@ @'ll do him
, ' said Smangle , with a cunning look . DICKENS-1837-1,555.297

' How ? ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,555.298

' Send down word that he@ @'s to spend the change in cigars .
DICKENS-1837-1,555.299

Capital thought . DICKENS-1837-1,555.300

Run DICKENS-1837-1,555.301

and tell him that ; d'@ @ye hear ? DICKENS-1837-1,555.302

They sha@ @n't be wasted , ' continued Smangle , turning to Mr Pickwick
. DICKENS-1837-1,555.303

' <font> I@ @'ll <$$font> smoke 'em . ' DICKENS-1837-1,555.304

This manoeuvring was so exceedingly ingenious , and , withal , performed
with such immoveable composure and coolness , that Mr Pickwick would
<P_556> have had no wish to disturb it , even if he had had the power .
DICKENS-1837-1,556.305

In a short time Mr Mivins returned , bearing the sherry , which Mr
Smangle dispensed in two little cracked mugs ; considerately remarking ,
with reference to himself , that a gentleman must not be particular
under such circumstances , and , for his part , he was not too proud to
drink out of the jug ; in which , to show his sincerity , he forthwith
pledged the company in a draught which half emptied it .
DICKENS-1837-1,556.306

An excellent understanding having been , by these means , promoted , Mr
Smangle proceeded to entertain his hearers with a relation of divers
romantic adventures in which he had been from time to time engaged ,
involving various interesting anecdotes of a thorough-bred horse , and a
magnificent Jewess , both of surpassing beauty , and much coveted by the
nobility and gentry of these kingdoms . DICKENS-1837-1,556.307

Long before these elegant extracts from the biography of a gentleman
were concluded , Mr Mivins had betaken himself to bed , and set in
snoring for the night : leaving the timid stranger and Mr Pickwick to
the full benefit of Mr Smangle's experiences . DICKENS-1837-1,556.308

Nor were the two last-named gentlemen as much edified as they might have
been by the moving passages which were narrated .
DICKENS-1837-1,556.309

Mr Pickwick had been in a state of slumber for some time , when he had a
faint perception of the drunken man bursting out afresh with the comic
song , and receiving from Mr Smangle a gentle intimation , through the
medium of the water jug , that his audience were not musically disposed
. DICKENS-1837-1,556.310

He then once again dropped off to sleep , with a confused consciousness
that Mr Smangle was still engaged in relating a long story , the chief
point of which appeared to be , that , on some occasion particularly
stated and set forth , he had ' done ' a bill and a gentleman at the
same time . DICKENS-1837-1,556.311

<P_557>

<heading>

Chapter 41 DICKENS-1837-1,557.314

<font> Illustrative , like the preceding one , of the old Proverb , that
Adversity brings a Man acquainted with strange Bed-fellows .
DICKENS-1837-1,557.315

Likewise containing Mr Pickwick's extraordinary and startling
announcement to Mr Samuel Weller <$$font> DICKENS-1837-1,557.316

<$$heading>

When Mr Pickwick opened his eyes next morning , the first object upon
which they rested was Samuel Weller , seated upon a small black
portmanteau , intently regarding , apparently in a condition of profound
abstraction , the stately figure of the dashing Mr Smangle , while Mr
Smangle himself , who was already partially dressed , was seated on his
bedstead , occupied in the desperately hopeless attempt of staring Mr
Weller out of countenance . DICKENS-1837-1,557.318

We say desperately hopeless , because Sam , with a comprehensive gaze ,
which took in Mr Smangle's cap , feet , head , face , legs , and
whiskers , all at the same time , continued to look steadily on with
every demonstration of lively satisfaction , but with no more regard to
Mr Smangle's personal sentiments on the subject , than he would have
displayed had he been inspecting a wooden statue , or a straw-embowelled
Guy Faux . DICKENS-1837-1,557.319

' Well ; will you know me again ? ' said Mr Smangle , with a frown .
DICKENS-1837-1,557.320

' I@ @'d svear to you any veres , Sir , ' replied Sam , cheerfully .
DICKENS-1837-1,557.321

' Do@ @n't be impertinent to a gentleman , Sir , ' said Mr Smangle .
DICKENS-1837-1,557.322

' Not on no account , ' replied Sam . DICKENS-1837-1,557.323

' If you@ @'ll tell me ven he wakes , I@ @'ll be upon the wery best
extra-super behaviour ! ' DICKENS-1837-1,557.324

This observation , having a remote tendency to imply that Mr Smangle was
no gentleman , rather kindled his ire . DICKENS-1837-1,557.325

' Mivins ! ' said Mr Smangle , with a passionate air .
DICKENS-1837-1,557.326

' What@ @'s the office ? ' replied that gentleman from his couch .
DICKENS-1837-1,557.327

' Who the devil is this fellow ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,557.328

' Gad , ' said Mr Mivins , looking lazily out from under the bedclothes
, DICKENS-1837-1,557.329

' I ought to ask <font> you <$$font> that . DICKENS-1837-1,557.330

Has@ @n't he any business here ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,557.331

' No , ' replied Mr Smangle . DICKENS-1837-1,557.332

' Then knock him down stairs , DICKENS-1837-1,557.333

and tell him not to presume to get up till I come and kick him , '
rejoined Mr Mivins ; DICKENS-1837-1,557.334

and with this prompt advice , that excellent gentleman again betook
himself to slumber . DICKENS-1837-1,557.335

The conversation exhibiting these unequivocal symptoms of rather verging
on the personal , Mr Pickwick deemed it a fit point at which to
interpose . DICKENS-1837-1,557.336

' Sam , ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,557.337

<P_558>

' Sir , ' rejoined that gentleman . DICKENS-1837-1,558.339

' Has anything new occurred since last night ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,558.340

' Nothin' partickler , Sir , ' replied Sam , glancing at Mr Smangle's
whiskers ; DICKENS-1837-1,558.341

' the late prewailance of a close and confined atmosphere has been
rayther favourable to the growth of veeds , of an alarmin' and
sangvinary nature {TEXT:natur} ; DICKENS-1837-1,558.342

but vith that 'ere exception things is quiet enough . '
DICKENS-1837-1,558.343

' I shall get up , ' said Mr Pickwick ; DICKENS-1837-1,558.344

' give me some clean things . ' DICKENS-1837-1,558.345

Whatever hostile intentions Mr Smangle might have entertained , his
thoughts were speedily diverted by the unpacking of the portmanteau ;
the contents of which appeared to impress him at once with a most
favourable opinion , not only of Mr Pickwick , but of Sam also , who ,
he took an early opportunity of declaring , in a tone of voice loud
enough for that eccentric personage to overhear , was a regular
thorough-bred original , and consequently the very man after his own
heart . DICKENS-1837-1,558.346

As to Mr Pickwick , the affection he conceived for him knew no limits .
DICKENS-1837-1,558.347

' Now is there anything I can do for you , my dear Sir ? ' said Smangle
. DICKENS-1837-1,558.348

' Nothing that I am aware of , DICKENS-1837-1,558.349

I am obliged to you , ' replied Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,558.350

' No linen that you want sent to the washerwoman's ?
DICKENS-1837-1,558.351

I know a delightful washerwoman outside , that comes for my things twice
a week , DICKENS-1837-1,558.352

and , by Jove ! - how devilish lucky ! - this is the very day she
calls . DICKENS-1837-1,558.353

Shall I put any of those little things up with mine ?
DICKENS-1837-1,558.354

Do@ @n't say anything about the trouble . DICKENS-1837-1,558.355

Confound and curse it ! DICKENS-1837-1,558.356

if one gentleman under a cloud is not to put himself a little out of the
way to assist another gentleman in the same condition , what@ @'s human
nature ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,558.357

Thus spake Mr Smangle , edging himself meanwhile as near as possible to
the portmanteau , and beaming forth looks of the most fervent and
disinterested friendship . DICKENS-1837-1,558.358

' There@ @'s nothing you want to give out for the man to brush , my dear
creature , is there ? ' resumed Smangle . DICKENS-1837-1,558.359

' Nothin' whoever , my fine feller , ' rejoined Sam , taking the reply
into his own mouth . DICKENS-1837-1,558.360

' P'raps if vun of us wos to brush , without troubling the man , it 'ud
be more agreeable for all parties , as the school-master said ven the
young gentleman objected to being flogged by the butler . '
DICKENS-1837-1,558.361

' And there@ @'s nothing that I can send in my little box to the
washerwoman's , is there ? ' said Smangle , turning from Sam to Mr
Pickwick with an air of some discomfiture . DICKENS-1837-1,558.362

' Nothin' whatever , Sir , ' retorted Sam ; DICKENS-1837-1,558.363

' I@ @'m afeerd the little box must be chock_full o' your own as it is .
' DICKENS-1837-1,558.364

This speech was accompanied with such a very expressive look at that
particular portion of Mr Smangle's attire , by the appearance of which
the <P_559> skill of laundresses in getting up gentlemen's linen is
generally tested , that he was fain to turn upon his heel , and , for
the present at any rate , to give up all design on Mr Pickwick's purse
and wardrobe . DICKENS-1837-1,559.365

He accordingly retired in dudgeon to the racket-ground , where he made a
light and wholesome breakfast upon a couple of the cigars which had been
purchased on the previous night . DICKENS-1837-1,559.366

Mr Mivins , who was no smoker , and whose account for small articles of
chandlery had also reached down to the bottom of the slate , and been '
carried over ' to the other side , remained in bed ,
DICKENS-1837-1,559.367

and , in his own words , ' took it out in sleep . '
DICKENS-1837-1,559.368

After breakfasting in a small closet attached to the coffee-room , which
bore the imposing title of the Snuggery , the temporary inmate of which
, in consideration of a small additional charge , has the unspeakable
advantage of overhearing all the conversation in the coffee-room
aforesaid ; and after despatching Mr Weller on some necessary errands ,
Mr Pickwick repaired to the Lodge , to consult Mr Roker concerning his
future accommodation . DICKENS-1837-1,559.369

' Accommodation , eh ? ' said that gentleman , consulting a large book
; DICKENS-1837-1,559.370

' Plenty of that , Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,559.371

Your chummage ticket will be on twenty-seven , in the third . '
DICKENS-1837-1,559.372

' Oh , ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,559.373

' My what , did you say ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,559.374

' Your chummage ticket , ' replied Mr Roker ; DICKENS-1837-1,559.375

' you@ @'re up to that ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,559.376

' Not quite , ' replied Mr Pickwick , with a smile .
DICKENS-1837-1,559.377

' Why , ' said Mr Roker , ' it@ @'s as plain as Salisbury .
DICKENS-1837-1,559.378

You@ @'ll have a chummage ticket upon twenty-seven in the third ,
DICKENS-1837-1,559.379

and them as is in the room will be your chums . '
DICKENS-1837-1,559.380

' Are there many of them ? ' inquired Mr Pickwick , dubiously .
DICKENS-1837-1,559.381

' Three , ' replied Mr Roker . DICKENS-1837-1,559.382

Mr Pickwick coughed . DICKENS-1837-1,559.383

' One of 'em@ @'s a parson , ' said Mr Roker , filling up a little piece
of paper as he spoke , DICKENS-1837-1,559.384

' another@ @'s a butcher . ' DICKENS-1837-1,559.385

' Eh ? ' exclaimed Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,559.386

' A butcher , ' repeated Mr Roker , giving the nib of his pen a tap on
the desk to cure it of a disinclination to mark .
DICKENS-1837-1,559.387

' What a thorough-paced goer he used to be surely {TEXT:sure-ly} !
DICKENS-1837-1,559.388

You remember Tom Martin , Neddy ? ' said Roker , appealing to another
man in the lodge , who was paring the mud off his shoes with a
five-and-twenty bladed pocket knife . DICKENS-1837-1,559.389

' I should think so , ' replied the party addressed , with a strong
emphasis on the personal pronoun . DICKENS-1837-1,559.390

' Bless my dear eyes , ' said Mr Roker , shaking his head slowly from
side to side , and gazing abstractedly out of the grated window before
him , as if <P_560> he were fondly recalling some peaceful scene of his
early youth ; ' it seems but yesterday that he whopped the coal-heaver
down Fox-under-the-Hill by the wharf there . DICKENS-1837-1,560.391

I think I can see him now , a coming up the Strand between the two
street-keepers , a little sobered by the bruising , with a patch o'
winegar and brown paper over his right eyelid , and that 'ere lovely
bull-dog , as pinned the little boy arterwards , a following at his
heels . DICKENS-1837-1,560.392

What a rum thing time is , ai@ @n't it , Neddy ? '
DICKENS-1837-1,560.393

The gentleman to whom these observations were addressed , who appeared
of a taciturn and thoughtful cast , merely echoed the inquiry ;
DICKENS-1837-1,560.394

and Mr Roker , shaking off the poetical and gloomy train of thought into
which he had been betrayed , descended to the common business of life ,
DICKENS-1837-1,560.395

and resumed his pen . DICKENS-1837-1,560.396

' Do you know what the third gentleman is ? ' inquired Mr Pickwick ,
not very much gratified by this description of his future associates .
DICKENS-1837-1,560.397

' What is that Simpson , Neddy ? ' said Mr Roker , turning to his
companion . DICKENS-1837-1,560.398

' What Simpson ? ' said Neddy . DICKENS-1837-1,560.399

' Why him in twenty-seven in the third , that this gentleman@ @'s going
to be chummed on . ' DICKENS-1837-1,560.400

' Oh , him ! ' replied Neddy : DICKENS-1837-1,560.401

' he@ @'s nothing exactly . DICKENS-1837-1,560.402

He <font> was <$$font> a horse chaunter : DICKENS-1837-1,560.403

he@ @'s a leg now . ' DICKENS-1837-1,560.404

' Ah , so I thought , ' rejoined Mr Roker , closing the book , and
placing the small piece of paper in Mr Pickwick's hands -
DICKENS-1837-1,560.405

' That@ @'s the ticket , Sir . ' DICKENS-1837-1,560.406

Very much perplexed by this summary disposition of his person , Mr
Pickwick walked back into the prison , revolving in his mind what he had
better do . DICKENS-1837-1,560.407

Convinced , however , that before he took any other steps it would be
advisable to see , and hold personal converse with , the three gentlemen
with whom it was proposed to quarter him , he made the best of his way
to the third flight . DICKENS-1837-1,560.408

After groping about in the gallery for some time , attempting in the dim
light to decipher the numbers on the different doors , he at length
appealed to a potboy , who happened to be pursuing his morning
occupation of gleaning for pewter . DICKENS-1837-1,560.409

' Which is twenty-seven , my good fellow ? ' said Mr Pickwick .
DICKENS-1837-1,560.410

' Five doors further on , ' replied the potboy . DICKENS-1837-1,560.411

' There@ @'s the likeness of a man being hung , and smoking a pipe the
while , chalked outside the door . ' DICKENS-1837-1,560.412

Guided by this direction , Mr Pickwick proceeded slowly along the
gallery until he encountered the ' portrait of a gentleman , ' above
described , upon whose countenance he tapped , with the knuckle of his
fore-finger - gently at first , and then more audibly .
DICKENS-1837-1,560.413

After repeating this process several times without effect , he ventured
to open the door and peep in . DICKENS-1837-1,560.414

<P_561>

There was only one man in the room , DICKENS-1837-1,561.416

and he was leaning out of {COM:missing_"the"} window as far as he could
without over-balancing himself , endeavouring with great perseverance to
spit upon the crown of the hat of a personal friend on the parade below
. DICKENS-1837-1,561.417

As neither speaking , coughing , sneezing , knocking , nor any other
ordinary mode of attracting attention , made this person aware of the
presence of a visitor {TEXT:visiter} , Mr Pickwick , after some delay ,
stepped up to the window , DICKENS-1837-1,561.418

and pulled him gently by the coat-tail . DICKENS-1837-1,561.419

The individual brought in his head and shoulders with great swiftness ,
DICKENS-1837-1,561.420

and surveying Mr Pickwick from head to foot , demanded in a surly tone
what the - something beginning with a capital H - he wanted .
DICKENS-1837-1,561.421

' I believe , ' said Mr Pickwick , consulting his ticket , ' I believe
this is twenty-seven in the third . ' DICKENS-1837-1,561.422

' Well ? ' replied the gentleman . DICKENS-1837-1,561.423

' I have come here in consequence of receiving this bit of paper , '
rejoined Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,561.424

' Hand it over , ' said the gentleman . DICKENS-1837-1,561.425

Mr Pickwick complied . DICKENS-1837-1,561.426

' I think Roker might have chummed you somewhere else , ' said Mr
Simpson <paren> for it was the leg <$$paren> , after a very discontented
sort of a pause . DICKENS-1837-1,561.427

Mr Pickwick thought so also ; DICKENS-1837-1,561.428

but , under all the circumstances , he considered it a matter of sound
policy to be silent . DICKENS-1837-1,561.429

Mr Simpson mused for a few moments after this , DICKENS-1837-1,561.430

and then , thrusting his head out of the window , gave a shrill whistle
, DICKENS-1837-1,561.431

and pronounced some word aloud several times . DICKENS-1837-1,561.432

What the word was , Mr Pickwick could not distinguish ;
DICKENS-1837-1,561.433

but he rather inferred that it must be some nickname which distinguished
Mr Martin , from the fact of a great number of gentlemen on the ground
below , immediately proceeding to cry ' Butcher , ' in imitation of the
tone in which that useful class of society are wont diurnally to make
their presence known at area railings . DICKENS-1837-1,561.434

Subsequent occurrences confirmed the accuracy of Mr Pickwick's
impression ; DICKENS-1837-1,561.435

for , in a few seconds , a gentleman , prematurely broad for his years ,
clothed in a professional blue jean frock , and top-boots with circular
toes , entered the room nearly out of breath , closely followed by
another gentleman in very shabby black , and a seal-skin cap .
DICKENS-1837-1,561.436

The latter gentleman , who fastened his coat all the way up to his chin
by means of a pin and a button alternately , had a very coarse red face
, DICKENS-1837-1,561.437

and looked like a drunken chaplain , which , indeed , he was .
DICKENS-1837-1,561.438

These two gentlemen having by turns perused Mr Pickwick's billet , the
one expressed his opinion that it was ' a rig , ' and the other his
conviction that it was ' a go . ' DICKENS-1837-1,561.439

Having recorded their feelings in these very <P_562> intelligible terms
, they looked at Mr Pickwick and each other in awkward silence .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.440

' It@ @'s an aggravating thing , just as we got the beds so snug , '
said the chaplain , looking at three dirty mattresses , each rolled up
in a blanket , which occupied one corner of the room during the day ,
and formed a kind of slab , on which were placed an old cracked basin ,
ewer , and soap-dish , of common yellow earthenware , with a blue flower
: ' Very aggravating . ' DICKENS-1837-1,562.441

Mr Martin expressed the same opinion , in rather stronger terms ;
DICKENS-1837-1,562.442

Mr Simpson , after having let a variety of expletive adjectives loose
upon society without any substantive to accompany them , tucked up his
sleeves , DICKENS-1837-1,562.443

and began to wash the greens for dinner . DICKENS-1837-1,562.444

While this was going on , Mr Pickwick had been eyeing the room , which
was filthily dirty , and smelt intolerably close .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.445

There was no vestige of either carpet , curtain , or blind .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.446

There was not even a closet in it . DICKENS-1837-1,562.447

Unquestionably there were but few things to put away , if there had been
one ; DICKENS-1837-1,562.448

but , however few in number , or small in individual amount , still
remnants of loaves , and pieces of cheese , and damp towels , and scraps
of meat , and articles of wearing_apparel , and mutilated crockery , and
bellows without nozzles , and toasting-forks without prongs , <font> do
<$$font> present something of an uncomfortable appearance when they are
scattered about the floor of a small apartment , which is the common
sitting and sleeping room of three idle men . DICKENS-1837-1,562.449

' I suppose this can be managed somehow , ' said the butcher , after a
pretty long silence . DICKENS-1837-1,562.450

' What will you take to go out ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,562.451

' I beg your pardon , ' replied Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,562.452

' What did you say ? DICKENS-1837-1,562.453

I hardly understand you . ' DICKENS-1837-1,562.454

' What will you take to be paid out ? ' said the butcher .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.455

' The regular chummage is two-@ @and-@ @sixpence .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.456

Will you take three bob ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,562.457

' - And a bender , ' suggested the clerical gentleman .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.458

' Well , I do@ @n't mind that ; DICKENS-1837-1,562.459

it@ @'s only twopence a-piece more , ' said Mr Martin .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.460

' What do you say now ? DICKENS-1837-1,562.461

We@ @'ll pay you out for three-@ @and-@ @sixpence a week .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.462

Come . ' DICKENS-1837-1,562.463

' And stand a gallon of beer down , ' chimed in Mr Simpson .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.464

' There . ' DICKENS-1837-1,562.465

' And drink it on the spot , ' said the chaplain .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.466

' Now . ' DICKENS-1837-1,562.467

' I really am so wholly ignorant of the rules of this place , ' returned
Mr Pickwick , ' that I do not yet comprehend you .
DICKENS-1837-1,562.468

<font> Can <$$font> I live anywhere else ? DICKENS-1837-1,562.469

I thought I could not . ' DICKENS-1837-1,562.470

At this inquiry Mr Martin looked with a countenance of excessive
surprise at his two friends , DICKENS-1837-1,562.471

and then each gentleman pointed with his right thumb over his left
shoulder . DICKENS-1837-1,562.472

This action , imperfectly described in words by the very feeble term of
' over the left , ' when performed by any number of ladies <P_563> or
gentlemen who are accustomed to act in unison , has a very graceful and
airy effect ; DICKENS-1837-1,563.473

its expression is one of light and playful sarcasm .
DICKENS-1837-1,563.474

' <font> Can <$$font> you ! ' repeated Mr Martin , with a smile of pity
. DICKENS-1837-1,563.475

' Well , if I knew as little of life as that , I@ @'d eat my hat and
swallow the buckle , ' said the clerical gentleman .
DICKENS-1837-1,563.476

' So would I , ' added the sporting one , solemnly .
DICKENS-1837-1,563.477

After this introductory preface , the three chums informed Mr Pickwick
in a breath , that money was , in the Fleet , just what money was out of
it ; that it would instantly procure him almost anything he desired ;
and that , supposing he had got it , and had no objection to spend it ,
if he only signified his wish to have a room to himself , he might take
possession of one , furnished and fitted to boot , in half an hour's
time . DICKENS-1837-1,563.478

With this , the parties separated , very much to their mutual
satisfaction ; Mr Pickwick once more retracing his steps to the lodge ,
and the three companions adjourning to the coffee-room , there to expend
the five shillings which the clerical gentleman had , with admirable
prudence and foresight , borrowed of him for the purpose .
DICKENS-1837-1,563.479

' I knowed it ! ' said Mr Roker , with a chuckle , when Mr Pickwick
stated the object with which he had returned . DICKENS-1837-1,563.480

' Did@ @n't I say so , Neddy ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,563.481

The philosophical owner of the universal penknife growled an affirmative
. DICKENS-1837-1,563.482

' I knowed you@ @'d want a room for yourself , bless you ! ' said Mr
Roker . DICKENS-1837-1,563.483

' Let me see . You@ @'ll want some furniture . DICKENS-1837-1,563.484

You@ @'ll hire that of me , I suppose ? DICKENS-1837-1,563.485

That@ @'s the reg'lar thing . ' DICKENS-1837-1,563.486

' With great pleasure , ' replied Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,563.487

' There@ @'s a capital room up in the coffee-room flight , that belongs
to a Chancery prisoner , ' said Mr Roker . DICKENS-1837-1,563.488

' It@ @'ll stand you in a pound a-week . DICKENS-1837-1,563.489

I suppose you do@ @n't mind that ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,563.490

' Not at all , ' said Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,563.491

' Just step there with me , ' said Roker , taking up his hat with great
alacrity ; DICKENS-1837-1,563.492

' the matter@ @'s settled in five minutes . DICKENS-1837-1,563.493

Lord ! why did@ @n't you say at first that you was willing to come down
handsome ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,563.494

The matter was soon arranged , as the turnkey had foretold .
DICKENS-1837-1,563.495

The Chancery prisoner had been there long enough to have lost friends ,
fortune , home , and happiness , and to have acquired the right of
having a room to himself . DICKENS-1837-1,563.496

As he laboured , however , under the slight inconvenience of often
wanting a morsel of bread , he eagerly listened to Mr Pickwick's
proposal to rent the apartment ; DICKENS-1837-1,563.497

and readily covenanted and agreed to yield him up the sole and
undisturbed possession thereof , in consideration of the weekly payment
of twenty shillings ; from which fund he furthermore contracted to pay
out any person or persons that might be chummed upon it .
DICKENS-1837-1,563.498

<P_564>

As they struck the bargain , Mr Pickwick surveyed him with a painful
interest . DICKENS-1837-1,564.500

He was a tall , gaunt , cadaverous man , in an old great coat and
slippers , with sunken cheeks , and a restless , eager eye .
DICKENS-1837-1,564.501

His lips were bloodless , and his bones sharp and thin .
DICKENS-1837-1,564.502

God help him ! DICKENS-1837-1,564.503

the iron teeth of confinement and privation had been slowly filing them
down for twenty years . DICKENS-1837-1,564.504

' And where will you live meanwhile , Sir ? ' said Mr Pickwick , as he
laid the amount of the first week's rent in advance on the tottering
table . DICKENS-1837-1,564.505

The man gathered up the money with a trembling hand ,
DICKENS-1837-1,564.506

and replied that he did@ @n't know yet ; DICKENS-1837-1,564.507

he must go and see where he could move his bed to .
DICKENS-1837-1,564.508

' I am afraid , Sir , ' said Mr Pickwick , laying his hand gently and
compassionately on his arm ; - ' I am afraid you will have to live in
some noisy crowded place . DICKENS-1837-1,564.509

Now , pray , consider this room your own when you want quiet , or when
any of your friends come to see you . ' DICKENS-1837-1,564.510

' Friends ! ' interposed the man , in a voice which rattled in his
throat . DICKENS-1837-1,564.511

' If I lay dead at the bottom of the deepest mine in the world , tight
screwed down and soldered in my coffin , rotting in the dark and filthy
ditch that drags its slime along beneath the foundations of this prison
, I could not be more forgotten or unheeded than I am here .
DICKENS-1837-1,564.512

I am a dead man - dead to society , without the pity they bestow on
those whose souls have passed to judgment . DICKENS-1837-1,564.513

Friends to see <font> me ! <$$font> DICKENS-1837-1,564.514

My God ! I have sunk from the prime of life into old age in this place
, DICKENS-1837-1,564.515

and there is not one to raise his hand above my bed , when I lie dead
upon it , and say , " It is a blessing he is gone ! " '
DICKENS-1837-1,564.516

The excitement , which had cast an unwonted light over the man's face
while he spoke , subsided as he concluded ; DICKENS-1837-1,564.517

and , pressing his withered hands together in a hasty and disordered
manner , he shuffled from the room . DICKENS-1837-1,564.518

' Rides rather rusty , ' said Mr Roker , with a smile .
DICKENS-1837-1,564.519

' Ah ! they@ @'re like the elephants ; DICKENS-1837-1,564.520

they feel it now and then , DICKENS-1837-1,564.521

and it makes 'em wild ! ' DICKENS-1837-1,564.522

Having made this deeply-@ @sympathizing remark , Mr Roker entered upon
his arrangements with such expedition , that in a short time the room
was furnished with a carpet , six chairs , a table , a sofa bedstead , a
tea-kettle , and various small <font> et_ceteras <$$font> , on hire , at
the very reasonable rate of seven-and-twenty shillings and sixpence per
week . DICKENS-1837-1,564.523

' Now , is there anything more we can do for you ? ' inquired Mr Roker
, looking round with great satisfaction , and gaily chinking the first
week's hire in his closed fist . DICKENS-1837-1,564.524

' Why , yes , ' said Mr Pickwick , who had been musing deeply for some
time . DICKENS-1837-1,564.525

' Are there any people here who run on errands , and so forth ? '
DICKENS-1837-1,564.526

' Outside , do you mean ? ' inquired Mr Roker . DICKENS-1837-1,564.527

' Yes ; I mean who are able to go outside . DICKENS-1837-1,564.528

Not prisoners . ' DICKENS-1837-1,564.529

<P_565>

' Yes , there is , ' said Roker . DICKENS-1837-1,565.531

' There@ @'s an unfortunate devil , who has got a friend on the poor
side , that@ @'s glad to do anything of that sort .
DICKENS-1837-1,565.532

He@ @'s been running odd jobs , and that , for the last two months .
DICKENS-1837-1,565.533

Shall I send him ? ' DICKENS-1837-1,565.534

' If you please , ' rejoined Mr Pickwick . DICKENS-1837-1,565.535

' Stay ; DICKENS-1837-1,565.536

- no . DICKENS-1837-1,565.537

The poor side , you say . DICKENS-1837-1,565.538

I should like to see it ; DICKENS-1837-1,565.539

- I@ @'ll go to him myself . ' DICKENS-1837-1,565.540

The poor side of a debtor's prison is , as its name imports , that in
which the most miserable and abject class of debtors are confined .
DICKENS-1837-1,565.541

A prisoner having declared upon the poor side , pays neither rent nor
chummage . DICKENS-1837-1,565.542

His fees , upon entering and leaving the gaol , are reduced in amount ,
DICKENS-1837-1,565.543

and he becomes entitled to a share of some small quantities of food ; to
provide which , a few charitable persons have , from time to time , left
trifling legacies in their wills . DICKENS-1837-1,565.544

Most of our readers will remember , that , until within a very few years
past , there was a kind of iron cage in the wall of the Fleet Prison ,
within which was posted some man of hungry looks , who , from time to
time , rattled a money-box , and exclaimed , in a mournful voice , '
Pray , remember the poor debtors ; pray , remember the poor debtors . '
DICKENS-1837-1,565.545

The receipts of this box , when there were any , were divided among the
poor prisoners , DICKENS-1837-1,565.546

and the men on the poor side relieved each other in this degrading
office . DICKENS-1837-1,565.547

Although this custom has been abolished , and the cage is now boarded up
, the miserable and destitute condition of these unhappy persons remains
the same . DICKENS-1837-1,565.548

We no longer suffer them to appeal at the prison gates to the charity
and compassion of the passers_by ; DICKENS-1837-1,565.549

but we still leave unblotted in the leaves of our statute book , for the
reverence and admiration of succeeding ages , the just and wholesome law
which declares that the sturdy felon shall be fed and clothed , and that
the penniless debtor shall be left to die of starvation and nakedness .
DICKENS-1837-1,565.550

This is no fiction . DICKENS-1837-1,565.551

Not a week passes over our heads but , in every one of our prisons for
debt , some of these men must inevitably expire in the slow agonies of
want , if they were not relieved by their fellow-prisoners .
DICKENS-1837-1,565.552

Turning these things in his mind , as he mounted the narrow staircase at
the foot of which Roker had left him , Mr Pickwick gradually worked
himself to the boiling-over point ; DICKENS-1837-1,565.553

and so excited was he with his reflections on this subject , that he had
burst into the room to which he had been directed , before he had any
distinct recollection either of the place in which he was , or of the
object of his visit . DICKENS-1837-1,565.554

The general aspect of the room recalled him to himself at once ;
DICKENS-1837-1,565.555

but he had no sooner cast his eyes on the figure of a man who was
brooding over the dusty fire , than , letting his hat fall on the floor
, he stood perfectly fixed and immoveable with astonishment .
DICKENS-1837-1,565.556

Yes , in tattered garments , and without a coat ; his common calico
shirt <P_566> yellow and in rags ; his hair hanging over his face ; his
features changed with suffering , and pinched with famine , - there sat
Mr Alfred Jingle ; his head resting upon his hand , his eyes fixed upon
the fire , and his whole appearance denoting misery and dejection !
DICKENS-1837-1,566.557

Near him , leaning listlessly against the wall , stood a strong-built
countryman , flicking with a worn-out hunting-whip the top-boot that
adorned his right foot : his left being thrust into an old slipper .
DICKENS-1837-1,566.558

Horses , dogs , and drink had brought him there pell-mell .
DICKENS-1837-1,566.559

There was a rusty spur on the solitary boot , which he occasionally
jerked into the empty air , at the same time giving the boot a smart
blow , and muttering some of the sounds by which a sportsman encourages
his horse . DICKENS-1837-1,566.560

He was riding , in imagination , some desperate steeple-chace at that
moment . DICKENS-1837-1,566.561

Poor wretch ! he never rode a match on the swiftest animal in his
costly stud , with half the speed at which he had torn along the course
that ended in the Fleet . DICKENS-1837-1,566.562

On the opposite side of the room an old man was seated on a small wooden
box , with his eyes rivetted on the floor , and his face settled into an
expression of the deepest and most hopeless despair .
DICKENS-1837-1,566.563

