<BEGIN_disraeli-1827-2>

<P_223>

<heading>

Book VII . DISRAELI-1827-2,223.4

Chapter I . DISRAELI-1827-2,223.5

Surprising News . DISRAELI-1827-2,223.6

<$$heading>

As Vivian left the room Mr. Beckendorff was seized with an unusual
desire to converse with the Prince of Little Lilliput ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,223.8

and his Highness was consequently debarred the consolation of walking
with his friend as far as the horses . DISRAELI-1827-2,223.9

At the little gate Vivian and Essper encountered the only male attendant
who was allowed to approach the house of Mr. Beckendorff .
DISRAELI-1827-2,223.10

As Vivian quietly walked his horse up the rough turf road , he could not
refrain from recurring to his conversation of the previous night ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,223.11

and when he called to mind the adventures of the last six days , he had
new cause to wonder at , and perhaps to lament over , his singular fate
. DISRAELI-1827-2,223.12

In that short time he had saved the life of a powerful Prince ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,223.13

and being immediately signalled out , without any exertion on his part ,
as the object of that Prince's friendship , the moment he arrives at his
castle , by a wonderful contingency , he becomes the depositary of state
secrets , DISRAELI-1827-2,223.14

and assists in <P_224> a consultation of importance with one of the most
powerful Ministers in Europe . DISRAELI-1827-2,224.15

And now the object of so much friendship , confidence , and honour , he
is suddenly on the road to the capital of the State of which his late
host is the Prime Minister and his friend the chief subject , without
even the convenience of a common letter of introduction ; and with
little prospect of viewing , with even the usual advantages of a common
traveller , one of the most interesting of European Courts .
DISRAELI-1827-2,224.16

When he had proceeded about half-way up the turf lane he found a private
road to his right , which , with that spirit of adventure for which
Englishmen are celebrated , he immediately resolved must not only lead
to Reisenburg , but also carry him to that city much sooner than the
regular high road . DISRAELI-1827-2,224.17

He had not advanced far up this road before he came to the gate at which
he had parted with Beckendorff on the morning that gentleman had roused
him so unexpectedly from his reverie in a green lane .
DISRAELI-1827-2,224.18

He was surprised to find a horseman dismounting at the gate .
DISRAELI-1827-2,224.19

Struck by this singular circumstance , the appearance of the stranger
was not unnoticed . DISRAELI-1827-2,224.20

He was a tall and well proportioned man , DISRAELI-1827-2,224.21

and as the traveller passed he stared Vivian so fully in the face that
our hero did not fail to remark his handsome countenance , the
expression of which , however , was rather vacant and unpleasing .
DISRAELI-1827-2,224.22

He was dressed in a riding-coat exactly similar to the one always worn
by Beckendorff's messenger , DISRAELI-1827-2,224.23

and had Vivian not seen him so distinctly he would have mistaken him for
that person . DISRAELI-1827-2,224.24

The stranger was rather indifferently mounted , DISRAELI-1827-2,224.25

and carried his cloak and a small portmanteau at the back of his saddle
. DISRAELI-1827-2,224.26

<P_225>

' I suppose it is the butler , ' said Essper George , who now spoke for
the first time since his dismissal from the room .
DISRAELI-1827-2,225.28

Vivian did not answer him ; not because he entertained any angry feeling
on account of his exceedingly unpleasant visit . By no means :
DISRAELI-1827-2,225.29

it was impossible for a man like Vivian Grey to cherish an irritated
feeling for a second . DISRAELI-1827-2,225.30

But he did not exchange a syllable with Essper George , merely because
he was not in the humour to speak . DISRAELI-1827-2,225.31

He could not refrain from musing on the singular events of the last few
days ; DISRAELI-1827-2,225.32

and , above all , the character of Beckendorff particularly engrossed
his meditation . DISRAELI-1827-2,225.33

Their conversation of the preceding night excited in his mind new
feelings of wonder , DISRAELI-1827-2,225.34

and revived emotions which he thought were dead or everlastingly dormant
. DISRAELI-1827-2,225.35

Apparently , the philosophy on which Beckendorff had regulated his
career , and by which he had arrived at his pitch of greatness , was
exactly the same with which he himself , Vivian Grey , had started in
life ; which he had found so fatal in its consequences ; which he
believed to be so vain in its principles . DISRAELI-1827-2,225.36

How was this ? DISRAELI-1827-2,225.37

What radical error had he committed ? DISRAELI-1827-2,225.38

It required little consideration . DISRAELI-1827-2,225.39

Thirty , and more than thirty years had passed over the head of
Beckendorff ere the world felt his power , or indeed was conscious of
his existence . DISRAELI-1827-2,225.40

A deep student , not only of man in detail , but of man in groups ; not
only of individuals , but of nations ; Beckendorff had hived up his
ample knowledge of all subjects which could interest his
fellow-creatures , DISRAELI-1827-2,225.41

and when that opportunity which in this world occurs to all men occurred
to Beckendorff he was prepared . DISRAELI-1827-2,225.42

With acquirements equal to his genius , Beckendorff depended only upon
himself , DISRAELI-1827-2,225.43

and succeeded . DISRAELI-1827-2,225.44

Vivian Grey , with a mind inferior to no <P_226> man's , dashed on the
stage , in years a boy , though in feelings a man .
DISRAELI-1827-2,226.45

Brilliant as might have been his genius , his acquirements necessarily
were insufficient . DISRAELI-1827-2,226.46

He could not depend only upon himself ; DISRAELI-1827-2,226.47

a consequent necessity arose to have recourse to the assistance of
others ; to inspire them with feelings which they could not share ; and
humour and manage the petty weaknesses which he himself could not
experience . DISRAELI-1827-2,226.48

His colleagues were , at the same time , to work for the gratification
of their own private interests , the most palpable of all abstract
things ; and to carry into execution a great purpose , which their
feeble minds , interested only by the first point , cared not to
comprehend . DISRAELI-1827-2,226.49

The unnatural combination failed , DISRAELI-1827-2,226.50

and its originator fell . DISRAELI-1827-2,226.51

To believe that he could recur again to the hopes , the feelings , the
pursuits of his boyhood , he felt to be the vainest of delusions .
DISRAELI-1827-2,226.52

It was the expectation of a man like Beckendorff , whose career , though
difficult , though hazardous , had been uniformly successful ; of a man
who mistook cares for grief , and anxiety for sorrow .
DISRAELI-1827-2,226.53

The travellers entered the city at sunset . DISRAELI-1827-2,226.54

Proceeding through an ancient and unseemly town , full of long , narrow
, and ill-paved streets , and black unevenly built houses , they
ascended the hill , on the top of which was situated the new and
Residence town of Reisenburg . DISRAELI-1827-2,226.55

The proud palace , the white squares , the architectural streets , the
new churches , the elegant opera house , the splendid hotels , and the
gay public gardens , full of busts , vases , and statues , and
surrounded by an iron railing cast out of the cannon taken from both
sides during the war by the Reisenburg troops , and now formed into
pikes and fasces , glittering with gilded heads : all these , shining
<P_227> in the setting sun , produced an effect which , at any time and
in any place , would have been beautiful and striking ; but on the
present occasion were still more so , from the remarkable contrast they
afforded to the ancient , gloomy , and filthy town through which Vivian
had just passed , and where , from the lowness of its situation , the
sun had already set . DISRAELI-1827-2,227.56

There was as much difference between the old and new town of Reisenburg
as between the old barbarous Margrave and the new and noble Grand Duke .
DISRAELI-1827-2,227.57

On the second day after his arrival at Reisenburg , Vivian received the
following letter from the Prince of Little Lilliput .
DISRAELI-1827-2,227.58

His luggage did not accompany the epistle . DISRAELI-1827-2,227.59

' My dear Friend , By the time you have received this I shall have
returned to Turriparva . DISRAELI-1827-2,227.60

My visit to a certain gentleman was prolonged for one day .
DISRAELI-1827-2,227.61

I never can convey to you by words the sense I entertain of the value of
your friendship and of your services ; DISRAELI-1827-2,227.62

I trust that time will afford me opportunities of testifying it by my
actions . DISRAELI-1827-2,227.63

I return home by the same road by which we came ; DISRAELI-1827-2,227.64

you remember how excellent the road was , as indeed are all the roads in
Reisenburg ; that must be confessed by all . DISRAELI-1827-2,227.65

I fear that the most partial admirers of the old regime can@ @not say as
much for the convenience of travelling in the time of our fathers .
DISRAELI-1827-2,227.66

Good roads are most excellent things , and one of the first marks of
civilisation and prosperity . DISRAELI-1827-2,227.67

The Emperor Napoleon , who , it must be confessed , had , after all , no
common mind , was celebrated for his roads . DISRAELI-1827-2,227.68

You have doubtless admired the Route Napoleon on the Rhine ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,227.69

and if you travel into Italy I am informed <P_228> that you will be
equally , and even more , struck by the passage over the Simplon and the
other Italian roads . DISRAELI-1827-2,228.70

Reisenburg has certainly kept pace with the spirit of the time ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,228.71

nobody can deny that ; DISRAELI-1827-2,228.72

and I confess to you that the more I consider the subject it appears to
me that the happiness , prosperity , and content of a state are the best
evidences of the wisdom and beneficent rule of a government .
DISRAELI-1827-2,228.73

Many things are very excellent in theory , which are quite the reverse
in practice , and even ludicrous . DISRAELI-1827-2,228.74

And while we should do our most to promote the cause and uphold the
interests of rational liberty , still , at the same time , we should
ever be on our guard against the crude ideas and revolutionary systems
of those who are quite inexperienced in that sort of particular
knowledge which is necessary for all statesmen . DISRAELI-1827-2,228.75

Nothing is so easy as to make things look fine on paper ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,228.76

we should never forget that : DISRAELI-1827-2,228.77

there is a great difference between high-sounding generalities and
laborious details . DISRAELI-1827-2,228.78

Is it reasonable to expect that men who have passed their lives dreaming
in colleges and old musty studies should be at all calculated to take
the head of affairs , or know what measures those at the head of affairs
ought to adopt ? DISRAELI-1827-2,228.79

I think not . DISRAELI-1827-2,228.80

A certain personage , who by-@ @the-@ @bye is one of the most
clear-headed and most perfect men of business that I ever had the
pleasure of being acquainted with ; a real practical man , in short ; he
tells me that Professor Skyrocket , whom you will most likely see at
Reisenburg , wrote an article in the Military Quarterly Review , which
is published there , on the probable expenses of a war between Austria
and Prussia , and forgot the commissariat altogether .
DISRAELI-1827-2,228.81

Did you ever know anything so ridiculous ? DISRAELI-1827-2,228.82

What business <P_229> have such fellows to meddle with affairs of state
? DISRAELI-1827-2,229.83

They should certainly be put down : DISRAELI-1827-2,229.84

that , I think , none can deny . DISRAELI-1827-2,229.85

A liberal spirit in government is certainly a most excellent thing ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,229.86

but we must always remember that liberty may degenerate into
licentiousness . DISRAELI-1827-2,229.87

Liberty is certainly an excellent thing , DISRAELI-1827-2,229.88

that all admit ; DISRAELI-1827-2,229.89

but , as a certain person very well observed , so is physic ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,229.90

and yet it is not to be given at all times , but only when the frame is
in a state to require it . DISRAELI-1827-2,229.91

People may be as unprepared for a wise and discreet use of liberty , as
a vulgar person may be for the management of a great estate unexpectedly
inherited : DISRAELI-1827-2,229.92

there is a great deal in this , DISRAELI-1827-2,229.93

and , in my opinion , there are cases in which to force liberty down a
people's throat is presenting them , not with a blessing , but a curse .
DISRAELI-1827-2,229.94

I shall send your luggage on immediately ; DISRAELI-1827-2,229.95

it is very probable that I may be in town at the end of the week , for a
short time . DISRAELI-1827-2,229.96

I wish much to see and to consult you , DISRAELI-1827-2,229.97

and therefore hope that you will not leave Reisenburg before you see
Your faithful and obliged friend , Little Lilliput . '
DISRAELI-1827-2,229.98

Two days after the receipt of this letter Essper George ran into the
room with a much less solemn physiognomy than he had thought proper to
assume since his master's arrival at Reisenburg .
DISRAELI-1827-2,229.99

' Lord , sir ! whom do you think I have just met ? '
DISRAELI-1827-2,229.100

' Whom ? ' asked Vivian with eagerness , DISRAELI-1827-2,229.101

for , as is always the case when such questions are asked us , he was
thinking of every person in the world except the right one .
DISRAELI-1827-2,229.102

' It might be - ' DISRAELI-1827-2,229.103

' To think that I should see him ! ' continued Essper .
DISRAELI-1827-2,229.104

<P_230>

' It is a man , then , ' thought Vivian ; DISRAELI-1827-2,230.106

' who is it at once , Essper ? ' DISRAELI-1827-2,230.107

' I thought you would not guess , sir ! DISRAELI-1827-2,230.108

It will quite cure you to hear it ; DISRAELI-1827-2,230.109

Master Rodolph ! ' DISRAELI-1827-2,230.110

' Master Rodolph ! ' DISRAELI-1827-2,230.111

' Ay ! and there@ @'s great news in the wind . ' ' Which of course you
have confidentially extracted from him . DISRAELI-1827-2,230.112

Pray let us have it . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,230.113

' The Prince of Little Lilliput is coming to Reisenburg , ' said Essper
. DISRAELI-1827-2,230.114

' Well ! I had some idea of that before , ' said Vivian .
DISRAELI-1827-2,230.115

' Oh ! then , you know it all , sir , I suppose , ' said Essper , with
a look of great disappointment . DISRAELI-1827-2,230.116

' I know nothing more than I have mentioned , ' said his master .
DISRAELI-1827-2,230.117

' What ! do you not know , sir , that the Prince has come over ; that
he is going to live at Court ; and be , Heaven knows what ! That he is
to carry a staff every day before the Grand Duke at dinner ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,230.118

does not my master know that ? ' DISRAELI-1827-2,230.119

' I know nothing of all this ; DISRAELI-1827-2,230.120

and so tell me in plain German what the case is . '
DISRAELI-1827-2,230.121

' Well , then , ' continued Essper , ' I suppose you do not know that
his Highness the Prince is to be his Excellency the Grand Marshal , that
unfortunate but principal officer of state having received his dismissal
yesterday . DISRAELI-1827-2,230.122

They are coming up immediately . DISRAELI-1827-2,230.123

Not a moment is to be lost , which seems to me very odd .
DISRAELI-1827-2,230.124

Master Rodolph is arranging everything ; DISRAELI-1827-2,230.125

and he has this morning purchased from his master's predecessor his
palace , furniture , wines , and pictures ; in short , his whole
establishment : the late Grand Marshal consoling himself for his loss of
office , and revenging <P_231> himself on his successor , by selling him
his property at a_hundred per_cent. profit . DISRAELI-1827-2,231.126

However , Master Rodolph seems quite contented with his bargain ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,231.127

and your luggage is come , sir . DISRAELI-1827-2,231.128

His Highness , the Prince , will be in town at the end of the week ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,231.129

and all the men are to be put in new livery . DISRAELI-1827-2,231.130

Mr. Arnelm is to be his Highness's chamberlain , and Von Neuwied master
of the horse . DISRAELI-1827-2,231.131

So you see , sir , you were right ; and that old puss-@ @in-@ @boots was
no traitor , after all . DISRAELI-1827-2,231.132

Upon my soul , I did not much believe you , sir , until I heard all this
good news . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,231.133

<P_232>

<heading>

Chapter II . DISRAELI-1827-2,232.136

Vivian at Court . DISRAELI-1827-2,232.137

<$$heading>

About a week after his arrival at Reisenburg , as Vivian was at
breakfast , the door opened , DISRAELI-1827-2,232.139

and Mr. Sievers entered . DISRAELI-1827-2,232.140

' I did not think that our next meeting would be in this city , ' said
Mr. Sievers , smiling . DISRAELI-1827-2,232.141

' His Highness , of course , informed me of your arrival , ' said Vivian
, as he greeted him cordially . DISRAELI-1827-2,232.142

' You , I understand , are the diplomatist whom I am to thank for
finding myself again at Reisenburg . DISRAELI-1827-2,232.143

Let me , at the same time , express my gratitude for your kind offices
to me , and congratulate you on the brilliancy of your talents for
negotiation . DISRAELI-1827-2,232.144

Little did I think when I was giving you , the other day , an account of
Mr. Beckendorff , that the information would have been of such service
to you . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,232.145

' I am afraid you have nothing to thank me for ; though , certainly ,
had the office of arranging the terms between the parties devolved on me
, my first thoughts would have been for a gentleman for whom I have so
much regard and respect as Mr. Sievers . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,232.146

' Sir ! I feel honoured : DISRAELI-1827-2,232.147

you already speak like a finished courtier . DISRAELI-1827-2,232.148

Pray , what is to be your office ? ' DISRAELI-1827-2,232.149

<P_233>

' I fear Mr. Beckendorff will not resign in my favour ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,233.151

and my ambition is so exalted that I can@ @not condescend to take
anything under the Premiership . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,233.152

' You are not to be tempted by a Grand Marshalship ! ' said Mr.
Sievers . DISRAELI-1827-2,233.153

' You hardly expected , when you were at Turriparva , to witness such a
rapid termination of the patriotism of our good friend .
DISRAELI-1827-2,233.154

I think you said you have seen him since your arrival :
DISRAELI-1827-2,233.155

the interview must have been piquant ! ' DISRAELI-1827-2,233.156

' Not at all . DISRAELI-1827-2,233.157

I immediately congratulated him on the judicious arrangements which had
been concluded ; DISRAELI-1827-2,233.158

and , to relieve his awkwardness , took some credit to myself for having
partially assisted in bringing about the result .
DISRAELI-1827-2,233.159

The subject was not again mentioned , DISRAELI-1827-2,233.160

and I dare say never will be . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,233.161

' It is a curious business , ' said Sievers . DISRAELI-1827-2,233.162

' The Prince is a man who , rather than have given me up to the Grand
Duke ; me , with whom he was not connected , and who , of my own accord
, sought his hospitality ; sooner , I repeat , than have delivered me up
, he would have had his castle razed to the ground and fifty swords
through his heart ; DISRAELI-1827-2,233.163

and yet , without the slightest compunction , has this same man deserted
, with the greatest coolness , the party of which , ten days ago , he
was the zealous leader . DISRAELI-1827-2,233.164

How can you account for this , except it be , as I have long suspected ,
that in politics there positively is no feeling of honour ?
DISRAELI-1827-2,233.165

Every one is conscious that not only himself , but his colleagues and
his rivals , are working for their own private purpose ; and that
however a party may apparently be assisting in bringing about a result
of common benefit , that nevertheless , and in fact , each is conscious
that he is the tool of another . DISRAELI-1827-2,233.166

With <P_234> such an understanding , treason is an unexpected affair ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,234.167

and the only point to consider is , who shall be so unfortunate as to be
the deserted , instead of the deserter . DISRAELI-1827-2,234.168

It is only fair to his Highness to state that Beckendorff gave him
incontestable evidence that he had had a private interview with every
one of the mediatised Princes . DISRAELI-1827-2,234.169

They were the dupes of the wily Minister . DISRAELI-1827-2,234.170

In these negotiations he became acquainted with their plans and
characters , DISRAELI-1827-2,234.171

and could estimate the probability of their success .
DISRAELI-1827-2,234.172

The golden bribe , which was in turn dandled before the eyes of all ,
had been always reserved for the most powerful , our friend .
DISRAELI-1827-2,234.173

His secession and the consequent desertion of his relatives destroy the
party for ever ; while , at the same time , that party have not even the
consolation of a good conscience to uphold them in their adversity ; but
feel that in case of their clamour , or of any attempt to stir up the
people by their hollow patriotism , it is in the power of the Minister
to expose and crush them for ever . DISRAELI-1827-2,234.174

' All this , ' said Vivian , ' makes me the more rejoice that our friend
has got out of their clutches ; DISRAELI-1827-2,234.175

he will make an excellent Grand Marshal ; DISRAELI-1827-2,234.176

and you must not forget , my dear sir , that he did not forget you .
DISRAELI-1827-2,234.177

To tell you the truth , although I did not flatter myself that I should
benefit during my stay at Reisenburg by his influence , I am not the
least surprised at the termination of our visit to Mr. Beckendorff .
DISRAELI-1827-2,234.178

I have seen too many of these affairs not to have been quite aware , the
whole time , that it would require very little trouble , and very few
sacrifices on the part of Mr. Beckendorff , to quash the whole cabal .
DISRAELI-1827-2,234.179

By-@ @the-@ @bye , our visit to him was highly amusing ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,234.180

he is a singular man . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,234.181

<P_235>

' He has had , nevertheless , ' said Sievers , ' a difficult part to
play . DISRAELI-1827-2,235.183

Had it not been for you , the Prince would have perhaps imagined that he
was only trifling with him again , and terminated the interview abruptly
and in disgust . DISRAELI-1827-2,235.184

Having brought the Grand Duke to terms , and having arranged the
interview , Beckendorff of course imagined that all was finished .
DISRAELI-1827-2,235.185

The very day that you arrived at his house he had received despatches
from his Royal Highness , recalling his promise , and revoking
Beckendorff's authority to use his unlimited discretion in this business
. DISRAELI-1827-2,235.186

The difficulty then was to avoid discussion with the Prince , with whom
he was not prepared to negotiate ; and , at the same time , without
letting his Highness out of his sight , to induce the Grand Duke to
resume his old view of the case . DISRAELI-1827-2,235.187

The first night that you were there Beckendorff rode up to Reisenburg ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,235.188

saw the Grand Duke , DISRAELI-1827-2,235.189

was refused , through the intrigues of Madame Carolina , the requested
authority , DISRAELI-1827-2,235.190

and resigned his power . DISRAELI-1827-2,235.191

When he was a mile on his return , he was summoned back to the palace ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,235.192

and his Royal Highness asked , as a favour from his tutor ,
four-and-twenty hours' consideration . DISRAELI-1827-2,235.193

This Beckendorff granted , on the condition that , in case the Grand
Duke assented to the terms proposed , his Royal Highness should himself
be the bearer of the proposition ; and that there should be no more
written promises to recall , and no more written authorities to revoke .
DISRAELI-1827-2,235.194

The terms were hard , DISRAELI-1827-2,235.195

but Beckendorff was inflexible . DISRAELI-1827-2,235.196

On the second night of your visit a messenger arrived with a despatch ,
advising Beckendorff of the intended arrival of his Royal Highness on
the next morning . DISRAELI-1827-2,235.197

The ludicrous intrusion of your amusing servant prevented you from being
present at the great interview , <P_236> in which I understand
Beckendorff for the moment laid aside all his caprices .
DISRAELI-1827-2,236.198

Our friend acted with great firmness and energy .
DISRAELI-1827-2,236.199

He would not be satisfied even with the personal pledge and written
promise of the Grand Duke , DISRAELI-1827-2,236.200

but demanded that he should receive the seals of office within a week ;
so that , had the Court not been sincere , his situation with his former
party would not have been injured . DISRAELI-1827-2,236.201

It is astonishing how very acute even a dull man is when his own
interests are at stake ! DISRAELI-1827-2,236.202

Had his Highness been the agent of another person , he would probably
have committed many blunders , have made disadvantageous terms , or
perhaps have been thoroughly duped . DISRAELI-1827-2,236.203

Self-interest is the finest eye-water . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,236.204

' And what says Madame Carolina to all this ? ' DISRAELI-1827-2,236.205

' Oh ! according to custom , she has changed already ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,236.206

and thinks the whole business admirably arranged .
DISRAELI-1827-2,236.207

His Highness is her grand favourite , and my little pupil Max her pet .
DISRAELI-1827-2,236.208

I think , however , on the whole , the boy is fondest of the Grand Duke
, whom , if you remember , he was always informing you in confidence
that he intended to assassinate . DISRAELI-1827-2,236.209

And as for your obedient servant , ' said Sievers {COM:missing_comma}
bowing , ' here am I once more the Aristarchus of her coterie .
DISRAELI-1827-2,236.210

Her friends , by-@ @the-@ @bye , view the accession of the Prince with
no pleased eyes ; DISRAELI-1827-2,236.211

and , anticipating that his juncture with the Minister is only a prelude
to their final dispersion , they are compensating for the approaching
termination of their career by unusual violence and fresh fervour ,
stinging like mosquitoes before a storm , conscious of their impending
destruction from the clearance of the atmosphere .
DISRAELI-1827-2,236.212

As for myself , I have nothing more to do with them .
DISRAELI-1827-2,236.213

Liberty and philosophy are fine words ; DISRAELI-1827-2,236.214

but until I find men are prepared <P_237> to cultivate them both in a
wiser spirit I shall remain quiet . DISRAELI-1827-2,237.215

I have no idea of being banished and imprisoned because a parcel of
knaves are making a vile use of the truths which I disseminate .
DISRAELI-1827-2,237.216

In my opinion , philosophers have said enough ; DISRAELI-1827-2,237.217

now let men act . DISRAELI-1827-2,237.218

But all this time I have forgotten to ask you how you like Reisenburg .
' DISRAELI-1827-2,237.219

' I can hardly say ; DISRAELI-1827-2,237.220

with the exception of yesterday , when I rode Max round the ramparts , I
have not been once out of the hotel . DISRAELI-1827-2,237.221

But to-day I feel so well that , if you are disposed for a lounge , I
should like it above all things . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,237.222

' I am quite at your service ; DISRAELI-1827-2,237.223

but I must not forget that I am the bearer of a missive to you from his
Excellency the Grand Marshal . DISRAELI-1827-2,237.224

You are invited to join the court dinner to-day , and be presented - '
DISRAELI-1827-2,237.225

' Really , my dear sir , an invalid - ' DISRAELI-1827-2,237.226

' Well ! if you do not like it , you must make your excuses to him ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,237.227

but it really is the pleasantest way of commencing your acquaintance at
Court , and only allowed to distingués ; among which , as you are the
friend of the new Grand Marshal , you are of course considered .
DISRAELI-1827-2,237.228

No one is petted so much as a political apostate , except , perhaps , a
religious one ; DISRAELI-1827-2,237.229

so at present we are all in high feather . DISRAELI-1827-2,237.230

You had better dine at the palace to-day . DISRAELI-1827-2,237.231

Everything quite easy ; DISRAELI-1827-2,237.232

and , by an agreeable relaxation of state , neither swords , bags , nor
trains are necessary . DISRAELI-1827-2,237.233

Have you seen the palace ? DISRAELI-1827-2,237.234

I suppose not . DISRAELI-1827-2,237.235

We will look at it , and then call on the Prince . '
DISRAELI-1827-2,237.236

The gentlemen accordingly left the hotel ; DISRAELI-1827-2,237.237

and proceeding down the principal street of the New Town , they came
into a large square , or Place d'Armes . DISRAELI-1827-2,237.238

A couple of regiments of infantry were exercising in it .
DISRAELI-1827-2,237.239

<P_238>

' A specimen of our standing army , ' said Sievers .
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.241

' In the war time , this little State brought thirty_thousand highly-@
@disciplined and well-appointed troops into the field .
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.242

This efficient contingent was , at the same time , the origin of our
national prosperity and our national debt . DISRAELI-1827-2,238.243

For we have a national debt , sir ! DISRAELI-1827-2,238.244

I assure you we are proud of it , and consider it the most decided sign
of being a great people . DISRAELI-1827-2,238.245

Our force in times of peace is , of course , much reduced .
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.246

We have , however , still eight_thousand men , who are perfectly
unnecessary . DISRAELI-1827-2,238.247

The most curious thing is , that , to keep up the patronage of the Court
and please the nobility , though we have cut down our army two-thirds ,
we have never reduced the number of our generals ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.248

and so , at this moment , among our eight_thousand men , we count about
forty general officers , being one to every two_hundred privates .
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.249

We have , however , which perhaps you would not suspect , one military
genius among our multitude of heroes . DISRAELI-1827-2,238.250

The Count von Sohnspeer is worthy of being one of Napoleon's marshals .
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.251

Who he is no one exactly knows ; DISRAELI-1827-2,238.252

some say an illegitimate son of Beckendorff . DISRAELI-1827-2,238.253

Certain it is that he owes his nobility to his sword ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.254

and as certain is it that he is to be counted among the very few who
share the Minister's confidence . DISRAELI-1827-2,238.255

Von Sohnspeer has certainly performed a_thousand brilliant exploits ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.256

yet , in my opinion , the not least splendid day of his life was that of
the battle of Leipsic . DISRAELI-1827-2,238.257

He was on the side of the French , DISRAELI-1827-2,238.258

and fought against the Allies with desperate fury .
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.259

When he saw that all was over , and the Allies triumphant , calling out
" Germany for ever ! " he dashed against his former friends ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.260

and captured from the flying Gauls a_hundred pieces of cannon .
DISRAELI-1827-2,238.261

He hastened <P_239> to the tent of the Emperors with his blood-red sword
in his hand , DISRAELI-1827-2,239.262

and at the same time congratulated them on the triumph of their cause ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,239.263

and presented them with his hard-earned trophies .
DISRAELI-1827-2,239.264

The manoeuvre was perfectly successful ; DISRAELI-1827-2,239.265

and the troops of Reisenburg , complimented as true Germans , were
pitied for their former unhappy fate in being forced to fight against
their fatherland , DISRAELI-1827-2,239.266

and were immediately enrolled in the allied army ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,239.267

as such , they received a due share of all the plunder .
DISRAELI-1827-2,239.268

He is a grand genius , young Master von Sohnspeer ? '
DISRAELI-1827-2,239.269

' Decidedly ! DISRAELI-1827-2,239.270

Worthy of being a companion of the fighting bastards of the middle ages
. DISRAELI-1827-2,239.271

This is a fine square . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,239.272

' Very grand indeed ! DISRAELI-1827-2,239.273

Precedents for some of the architectural combinations could hardly be
found at Athens or Rome ; DISRAELI-1827-2,239.274

nevertheless the general effect is magnificent .
DISRAELI-1827-2,239.275

Do you admire this plan of making every elevation of an order consonant
with the purpose of the building ? DISRAELI-1827-2,239.276

See , for instance , on the opposite side of the square is the palace .
DISRAELI-1827-2,239.277

The Corinthian order , which is evident in all its details , suits well
the character of the structure . DISRAELI-1827-2,239.278

It accords with royal pomp and elegance , with fêtes and banquets , and
interior magnificence . DISRAELI-1827-2,239.279

On the other hand , what a happy contrast is afforded to this gorgeous
structure by the severe simplicity of this Tuscan Palace of Justice .
DISRAELI-1827-2,239.280

The School of Arts , in the farthest corner of the square , is properly
entered through an Ionic portico . DISRAELI-1827-2,239.281

Let us go into the palace . DISRAELI-1827-2,239.282

Here not only does our monarch reside , DISRAELI-1827-2,239.283

but <paren> an arrangement which I much admire <$$paren> here are
deposited , in a gallery worthy of the treasures it contains , our
superb collection of pictures . DISRAELI-1827-2,239.284

They are the private property of his Royal Highness ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,239.285

<P_240>

but , as is usually the case under despotic Princes , the people ,
equally his property , are flattered by the collection being styled the
" Public Gallery . ' " DISRAELI-1827-2,240.287

The hour of the court dinner at Reisenburg was two o'clock , about which
time , in England , a man first remembers the fatal necessity of shaving
; though , by-@ @the-@ @bye , this allusion is not a very happy one ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,240.288

for in this country shaving is a ceremony at present somewhat obsolete .
DISRAELI-1827-2,240.289

At two o'clock , however , our hero , accompanying the Grand Marshal and
Mr. Sievers , reached the palace . DISRAELI-1827-2,240.290

In the saloon were assembled various guests , chiefly attached to the
Court . DISRAELI-1827-2,240.291

Immediately after the arrival of our party , the Grand Duke and Madame
Carolina , followed by their chamberlains and ladies-in-waiting ,
entered . DISRAELI-1827-2,240.292

The little Prince Maximilian strutted in between his Royal Highness and
his fair consort , having hold of a hand of each .
DISRAELI-1827-2,240.293

The urchin was much changed in appearance since Vivian first saw him ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,240.294

he was dressed in the complete uniform of a captain of the Royal Guards
, having been presented with a commission on the day of his arrival at
Court . DISRAELI-1827-2,240.295

A brilliant star glittered on his scarlet coat , DISRAELI-1827-2,240.296

and paled the splendour of his golden epaulettes .
DISRAELI-1827-2,240.297

The duties , however , of the princely captain were at present confined
to the pleasing exertion of carrying the bon-bon box of Madame Carolina
, the contents of which were chiefly reserved for his own gratification
. DISRAELI-1827-2,240.298

In the Grand Duke Vivian was not surprised to recognise the horseman
whom he had met in the private road on the morning of his departure from
Mr. Beckendorff's ; DISRAELI-1827-2,240.299

his conversation with Sievers had prepared him for this .
DISRAELI-1827-2,240.300

Madame Carolina was in appearance Parisian of the highest order : that
is to say , an exquisite figure and an indescribable tournure , <P_241>
an invisible foot , a countenance full of <font> esprit <$$font> and
intelligence , without a single regular feature , and large and very
bright black eyes . DISRAELI-1827-2,241.301

Madame's hair was of the same colour , and arranged in the most
effective manner . DISRAELI-1827-2,241.302

Her cashmere would have graced the Feast of Roses ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,241.303

and so engrossed your attention that it was long before you observed the
rest of her costume , in which , however , traces of a creative genius
were immediately visible ; DISRAELI-1827-2,241.304

in short , Madame Carolina was not fashionable , but fashion herself .
DISRAELI-1827-2,241.305

In a subsequent chapter , at a ball which we have in preparation , we
will make up for this brief notice of her costume by publishing her
court dress . DISRAELI-1827-2,241.306

For the sake of our fair readers , however , we will not pass over the
ornament in her hair . DISRAELI-1827-2,241.307

The comb which supported her elaborate curls was invisible , except at
each end , whence it threw out a large Psyche's wing of golden web , the
eyes of which were formed of rubies encircled with turquoises .
DISRAELI-1827-2,241.308

The royal party made a progress round the circle .
DISRAELI-1827-2,241.309

Madame Carolina first presented her delicate and faintly-@ @rouged cheek
to the hump-backed Crown Prince , who scarcely raised his eyes from the
ground as he performed the accustomed courtesy .
DISRAELI-1827-2,241.310

One or two royal relatives , who were on a visit at the palace , were
honoured by the same compliment . DISRAELI-1827-2,241.311

The Grand Duke bowed graciously and gracefully to every individual ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,241.312

and his lady accompanied the bow by a speech , which was at the same
time personal and piquant . DISRAELI-1827-2,241.313

The first great duty of a monarch is to know how to bow skilfully !
DISRAELI-1827-2,241.314

nothing is more difficult , and nothing more important .
DISRAELI-1827-2,241.315

A royal bow may often quell a rebellion , and sometimes crush a
conspiracy . DISRAELI-1827-2,241.316

It should at the same time be both general and individual ; <P_242>
equally addressed to the company assembled , and to every single person
in the assembly . DISRAELI-1827-2,242.317

Our own sovereign bows to perfection . DISRAELI-1827-2,242.318

His bow is eloquent , DISRAELI-1827-2,242.319

and will always render an oration on his part unnecessary ; which is a
great point , DISRAELI-1827-2,242.320

for harangues are not regal . DISRAELI-1827-2,242.321

Nothing is more undignified than to make a speech .
DISRAELI-1827-2,242.322

It is from the first an acknowledgment that you are under the necessity
of explaining , or conciliating , or convincing , or confuting ; in
short , that you are not omnipotent , but opposed .
DISRAELI-1827-2,242.323

The bow of the Grand Duke of Reisenburg was a first-rate bow ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,242.324

and always produced a great sensation with the people , particularly if
it were followed up by a proclamation for a public fête or fireworks ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,242.325

then his Royal Highness's popularity was at its height .
DISRAELI-1827-2,242.326

But Madame Carolina , after having by a few magic sentences persuaded
the whole room that she took a peculiar interest in the happiness of
every individual present , has reached Vivian , who stood next to his
friend the Grand Marshal . DISRAELI-1827-2,242.327

He was presented by that great officer , and received most graciously .
DISRAELI-1827-2,242.328

For a moment the room thought that his Royal Highness was about to speak
; DISRAELI-1827-2,242.329

but he only smiled . DISRAELI-1827-2,242.330

Madame Carolina , however , said a great deal ; DISRAELI-1827-2,242.331

and stood not less than sixty seconds complimenting the English nation ,
and particularly the specimen of that celebrated people who now had the
honour of being presented to her . DISRAELI-1827-2,242.332

No one spoke more in a given time than Madame Carolina ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,242.333

and as , while the eloquent words fell from her deep red lips , her
bright eyes were invariably fixed on those of the person she addressed ,
what she did say , as invariably , was very effective .
DISRAELI-1827-2,242.334

Vivian had only time to give a nod of recognition to his friend Max ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,242.335

for the company , arm-in-arm , now <P_243> formed into a procession to
the dining saloon . DISRAELI-1827-2,243.336

Vivian was parted from the Grand Marshal , who , as the highest officer
of state present , followed immediately after the Grand Duke .
DISRAELI-1827-2,243.337

Our hero's companion was Mr. Sievers . DISRAELI-1827-2,243.338

Although it was not a state dinner , the party , from being swelled by
the suites of the royal visitors , was numerous ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,243.339

and as the Court occupied the centre of the table , Vivian was too
distant to listen to the conversation of Madame , who , however , he
well perceived , from the animation of her countenance , was delighted
and delighting . DISRAELI-1827-2,243.340

The Grand Duke spoke little , DISRAELI-1827-2,243.341

but listened , like a lover of three days , to the accents of his
accomplished consort . DISRAELI-1827-2,243.342

The arrangement of a German dinner promotes conversation .
DISRAELI-1827-2,243.343

The numerous dishes are at once placed upon the table ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,243.344

and when the curious eye has well examined their contents , the whole
dinner , untouched , disappears . DISRAELI-1827-2,243.345

Although this circumstance is rather alarming to a novice , his terror
soon gives place to self-congratulation when he finds the banquet
reappear , each dish completely carved and cut up .
DISRAELI-1827-2,243.346

' Not being Sunday , ' said Mr. Sievers , ' there is no opera to-night
. DISRAELI-1827-2,243.347

We are to meet again , I believe , at the palace in a few hours , at
Madame Carolina's soirée . DISRAELI-1827-2,243.348

In the meantime , you had better accompany his Excellency to the public
gardens ; DISRAELI-1827-2,243.349

that is the fashionable drive . DISRAELI-1827-2,243.350

I shall go home and smoke a pipe . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,243.351

The circle of the public gardens of Reisenburg exhibited exactly ,
although upon a smaller scale , the same fashions and the same
frivolities , the same characters and the same affectations , as the
Hyde Park of London , or the Champs Elysées of Paris , the Prater of
Vienna , the Corso of Rome or Milan , or the Cascine of Florence .
DISRAELI-1827-2,243.352

There was the female leader of <font> ton , <$$font> <P_244> hated by
her own sex and adored by the other , and ruling both ; ruling both by
the same principle of action , and by the influence of the same quality
which creates the arbitress of fashion in all countries , by courage to
break through the conventional customs of an artificial class , and by
talents to ridicule all those who dare follow her innovating example ;
attracting universal notice by her own singularity , and at the same
time conciliating the support of those from whom she dares to differ ,
by employing her influence in preventing others from violating their
laws . DISRAELI-1827-2,244.353

The arbitress of fashion is one who is allowed to be singular , in order
that she may suppress singularity ; DISRAELI-1827-2,244.354

she is exempted from all laws ; DISRAELI-1827-2,244.355

but , by receiving the dictatorship , she ensures the despotism .
DISRAELI-1827-2,244.356

Then there was that mysterious being whose influence is perhaps even
more surprising than the dominion of the female despot of manners ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,244.357

for she wields a power which can be analysed and comprehended ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,244.358

I mean the male authority in coats , cravats , and chargers ; who ,
without fortune and without rank , and sometimes merely through the bold
obtrusion of a fantastic taste , becomes the glass of fashion in which
even royal dukes and the most aristocratic nobles hasten to adjust
themselves , and the mould by which the ingenious youth of a whole
nation is enthusiastically formed . DISRAELI-1827-2,244.359

There is a Brummel in every country . DISRAELI-1827-2,244.360

Vivian , who , after a round or two with the Grand Marshal , had mounted
Max , was presented by the young Count von Bernstorff , the son of the
Grand Chamberlain , to whose care he had been specially commended by the
Prince , to the lovely Countess von S- . DISRAELI-1827-2,244.361

The examination of this high authority was rigid and her report
satisfactory . DISRAELI-1827-2,244.362

When Vivian quitted <P_245> the side of her britzska half_a_dozen
dandies immediately rode up to learn the result ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,245.363

and , on being informed , they simultaneously cantered up to young Von
Bernstorff , DISRAELI-1827-2,245.364

and requested to have the honour of being introduced to his highly
interesting friend . DISRAELI-1827-2,245.365

All these exquisites wore white hats lined with crimson , in consequence
of the head of the all-influential Emilius von Aslingen having , on the
preceding day , been kept sacred from the profaning air by that most
tasteful covering . DISRAELI-1827-2,245.366

The young lords were loud in their commendations of this latest evidence
of Von Aslingen's happy genius , DISRAELI-1827-2,245.367

and rallied with unmerciful spirit the unfortunate Von Bernstorff for
not having yet mounted the all-perfect chapeau .
DISRAELI-1827-2,245.368

Like all Von Aslingen's introductions , it was as remarkable for good
taste as for striking singularity ; DISRAELI-1827-2,245.369

they had no doubt it would have a great run , exactly the style of thing
for a hot autumn , DISRAELI-1827-2,245.370

and it suited so admirably with the claret-coloured riding coat which
Madame considered Von Aslingen's <font> chef-d'-oeuvre <$$font> .
DISRAELI-1827-2,245.371

Inimitable Von Aslingen ! DISRAELI-1827-2,245.372

As they were in these raptures , to Vivian's delight and to their dismay
, the object of their admiration appeared . DISRAELI-1827-2,245.373

Our hero was , of course , anxious to see so interesting a character ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,245.374

but he could scarcely believe that he , in fact , beheld the ingenious
introducer of white and crimson hats , and the still happier inventor of
those <font> chef-d'-oeuvres <$$font> , claret-coloured riding coats ,
when his attention was directed to a horseman who wore a peculiarly high
heavy black hat and a frogged and furred frock , buttoned up , although
it was a most sultry day , to his very nose . DISRAELI-1827-2,245.375

How singular is the slavery of fashion ! DISRAELI-1827-2,245.376

Notwithstanding their mortification , the unexpected costume of Von
Aslingen appeared only to increase <P_246> the young lords' admiration
of his character and accomplishments ; DISRAELI-1827-2,246.377

and instead of feeling that he was an insolent pretender , whose fame
originated in his insulting their tastes , and existed only by their
sufferance , all cantered away with the determination of wearing on the
next day , even if it were to cost them each a calenture , furs enough
to keep a man warm during a winter party at St. Petersburg , not that
winter parties ever take place there ; DISRAELI-1827-2,246.378

on the contrary , before the winter sets in , the Court moves on to
Moscow , which , from its situation and its climate , will always , in
fact , continue the real capital of Russia . DISRAELI-1827-2,246.379

The royal carriage , drawn by six horses and backed by three men
servants , who would not have disgraced the fairy equipage of Cinderella
, has now left the gardens . DISRAELI-1827-2,246.380

<P_247>

<heading>

Chapter III . DISRAELI-1827-2,247.383

Madame Carolina Favours Vivian . DISRAELI-1827-2,247.384

<$$heading>

Madame Carolina held her soirée in her own private apartments , the
Grand Duke himself appearing in the capacity of a visitor .
DISRAELI-1827-2,247.386

The company was numerous and brilliant . DISRAELI-1827-2,247.387

His Royal Highness , surrounded by a select circle , dignified one
corner of the saloon ; DISRAELI-1827-2,247.388

Madame Carolina at the other end of the room , in the midst of poets ,
philosophers , and politicians , in turn decided upon the most
interesting and important topics of poetry , philosophy , and politics .
DISRAELI-1827-2,247.389

Boston , and Zwicken , and whist interested some , and puzzles and other
ingenious games others . DISRAELI-1827-2,247.390

A few were above conversing , or gambling , or guessing ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,247.391

superior intelligences , who would neither be interested nor amused ,
among these Emilius von Aslingen was most prominent .
DISRAELI-1827-2,247.392

He leant against a door in full uniform , with his vacant eyes fixed on
no object . DISRAELI-1827-2,247.393

The others were only awkward copies of an easy original ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,247.394

and among these , stiff or stretching , lounging on a chaise-lounge , or
posted against the wall , Vivian's quick eye recognized more than one of
the unhappy votaries of white hats lined with crimson .
DISRAELI-1827-2,247.395

<P_248>

When Vivian made his bow to the Grand Duke he was surprised by his Royal
Highness coming forward a few steps from the surrounding circle and
extending to him his hand . DISRAELI-1827-2,248.397

His Royal Highness continued conversing with him for upwards of a
quarter of an hour ; DISRAELI-1827-2,248.398

expressed the great pleasure he felt at seeing at his Court a gentleman
of whose abilities he had the highest opinion ; DISRAELI-1827-2,248.399

and , after a variety of agreeable compliments <paren> compliments are
doubly agreeable from crowned heads <$$paren> , the Grand Duke retired
to a game of Boston with his royal visitors . DISRAELI-1827-2,248.400

Vivian's reception made a sensation through the room .
DISRAELI-1827-2,248.401

Various rumours were immediately afloat . DISRAELI-1827-2,248.402

' Who can he be ? ' DISRAELI-1827-2,248.403

' Do@ @n't you know ? DISRAELI-1827-2,248.404

Oh ! most curious story . DISRAELI-1827-2,248.405

Killed a boar as big as a bonasus , which was ravaging half Reisenburg ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,248.406

and saved the lives of his Excellency the Grand Marshal and his whole
suite . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,248.407

' What is that about the Grand Marshal and a boar as big as a bonasus ?
DISRAELI-1827-2,248.408

Quite wrong ; DISRAELI-1827-2,248.409

natural son of Beckendorff ; DISRAELI-1827-2,248.410

know it for a fact . DISRAELI-1827-2,248.411

Do@ @n't you see he is being introduced to Von Sohnspeer !
DISRAELI-1827-2,248.412

brothers , you know , DISRAELI-1827-2,248.413

managed the whole business about the leagued Princes ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,248.414

not a son of Beckendorff , only a particular friend ; the son of the
late General - DISRAELI-1827-2,248.415

, I forget his name exactly . DISRAELI-1827-2,248.416

Killed at Leipsic , you know ; DISRAELI-1827-2,248.417

that famous general ; what was his name ? DISRAELI-1827-2,248.418

that very famous general ; DISRAELI-1827-2,248.419

do@ @n't you remember ? DISRAELI-1827-2,248.420

Never mind ; DISRAELI-1827-2,248.421

well ! he is his son ; father particular friend of Beckendorff ;
college friend , brought up the orphan ; DISRAELI-1827-2,248.422

very handsome of him ! DISRAELI-1827-2,248.423

They say he does handsome things sometimes . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,248.424

' Ah ! well , I@ @'ve heard so too ; DISRAELI-1827-2,248.425

and so this young man is to be the new under-secretary ! very much
approved by the Countess von S- . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,248.426

<P_249>

' No , it ca@ @n't be ! DISRAELI-1827-2,249.428

your story is quite wrong . DISRAELI-1827-2,249.429

He is an Englishman . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,249.430

' An Englishman ! DISRAELI-1827-2,249.431

no ! ' DISRAELI-1827-2,249.432

' Yes he is . DISRAELI-1827-2,249.433

I had it from Madame ; DISRAELI-1827-2,249.434

high rank incog. ; DISRAELI-1827-2,249.435

going to Vienna ; DISRAELI-1827-2,249.436

secret mission . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,249.437

' Something to do with Greece , of course ; DISRAELI-1827-2,249.438

independence recognised ? ' DISRAELI-1827-2,249.439

' Oh ! certainly ; DISRAELI-1827-2,249.440

pay a tribute to the Porte , DISRAELI-1827-2,249.441

and governed by a hospodar . DISRAELI-1827-2,249.442

Admirable arrangement ! DISRAELI-1827-2,249.443

have to support their own government and a foreign one besides ! '
DISRAELI-1827-2,249.444

It was with pleasure that Vivian at length observed Mr. Sievers enter
the room , DISRAELI-1827-2,249.445

and extricating himself from the enlightened and enthusiastic crowd who
were disserting around the tribunal of Madame , he hastened to his
amusing friend . DISRAELI-1827-2,249.446

' Ah ! my dear sir , how glad I am to see you !
DISRAELI-1827-2,249.447

I have , since we met last , been introduced to your fashionable ruler ,
and some of her most fashionable slaves . DISRAELI-1827-2,249.448

I have been honoured by a long conversation with his Royal Highness ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,249.449

and have listened to some of the most eloquent of the Carolina coterie .
DISRAELI-1827-2,249.450

What a Babel ! DISRAELI-1827-2,249.451

there all are , at the same time , talkers and listeners .
DISRAELI-1827-2,249.452

To what a pitch of perfection may the " science " of conversation be
carried ! DISRAELI-1827-2,249.453

My mind teems with original ideas , to which I can annex no definite
meaning . DISRAELI-1827-2,249.454

What a variety of contradictory theories , which are all apparently
sound ! DISRAELI-1827-2,249.455

I begin to suspect that there is a great difference between reasoning
and reason ! ' DISRAELI-1827-2,249.456

' Your suspicion is well founded , my dear sir , ' said Mr. Sievers ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,249.457

' and I know no circumstance which would sooner prove it than listening
for a few minutes to this little man in a snuff-coloured coat near
<P_250> me . DISRAELI-1827-2,250.458

But I will save you from so terrible a demonstration .
DISRAELI-1827-2,250.459

He has been endeavouring to catch my eye these last ten minutes ,
DISRAELI-1827-2,250.460

and I have as studiously avoided seeing him . DISRAELI-1827-2,250.461

Let us move . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,250.462

' Willingly ; DISRAELI-1827-2,250.463

who may this fear-inspiring monster be ? ' DISRAELI-1827-2,250.464

' A philosopher , ' said Mr. Sievers , ' as most of us call ourselves
here ; that is to say , his profession is to observe the course of
Nature ; DISRAELI-1827-2,250.465

and if by chance he can discover any slight deviation of the good dame
from the path which our ignorance has marked out as her only track , he
claps his hands , DISRAELI-1827-2,250.466

cries {COM:greek_word_omitted} ! DISRAELI-1827-2,250.467

and is dubbed " illustrious " on the spot . DISRAELI-1827-2,250.468

Such is the world's reward for a great discovery , which generally , in
a twelvemonth's time , is found out to be a blunder of the philosopher ,
and not an eccentricity of Nature . DISRAELI-1827-2,250.469

I am not underrating those great men who , by deep study , or rather by
some mysterious inspiration , have produced combinations and effected
results which have materially assisted the progress of civilisation and
the security of our happiness . DISRAELI-1827-2,250.470

No , no ! to them be due adoration . DISRAELI-1827-2,250.471

Would that the reverence of posterity could be some consolation to these
great spirits for neglect and persecution when they lived !
DISRAELI-1827-2,250.472

I have invariably observed of great natural philosophers , that if they
lived in former ages they were persecuted as magicians , and in periods
which profess to be more enlightened they have always been ridiculed as
quacks . DISRAELI-1827-2,250.473

The succeeding century the real quack arises . DISRAELI-1827-2,250.474

He adopts and developes the suppressed , and despised , and forgotten
discovery of his unfortunate predecessor ! DISRAELI-1827-2,250.475

and Fame trumpets this resurrection-man of science with as loud a blast
of rapture as if , instead of being merely the accidental <P_251>
animator of the corpse , he were the cunning artist himself who had
devised and executed the miraculous machinery which the other had only
wound up . " DISRAELI-1827-2,251.476

' But in this country , ' said Vivian , 'surely you have no reason to
complain of the want of moral philosophers , or of the respect paid to
them . DISRAELI-1827-2,251.477

The country of Kant - of - ' DISRAELI-1827-2,251.478

' Yes , yes ! we have plenty of metaphysicians , if you mean them .
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.479

Watch that lively-looking gentleman , who is stuffing <font> kalte
schale <$$font> so voraciously in the corner . DISRAELI-1827-2,251.480

The leader of the Idealists , a pupil of the celebrated Fichte !
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.481

To gain an idea of his character , know that he out-Herods his master ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.482

and Fichte is to Kant what Kant is to the unenlightened vulgar .
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.483

You can now form a slight conception of the spiritual nature of our
friend who is stuffing <font> kalte schale <$$font> .
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.484

The first principle of his school is to reject all expressions which
incline in the slightest degree to substantiality .
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.485

Existence , is in his opinion , a word too absolute .
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.486

Being , principle , essence , are terms scarcely sufficiently ethereal
even to indicate the subtle {TEXT:subtile} shadowings of his opinions .
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.487

Some say that he dreads the contact of all real things , and that he
makes it the study of his life to avoid them . DISRAELI-1827-2,251.488

Matter is his great enemy . DISRAELI-1827-2,251.489

When you converse with him you lose all consciousness of this world .
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.490

My dear sir , ' continued Mr. Sievers , ' observe how exquisitely
Nature revenges herself upon these capricious and fantastic children .
DISRAELI-1827-2,251.491

Believe me , Nature is the most brilliant of wits ; and that no
repartees that were ever inspired by hate , or wine , or beauty , ever
equalled the calm effects of her indomitable power upon those who are
rejecting her authority . DISRAELI-1827-2,251.492

You understand me ? DISRAELI-1827-2,251.493

Me@ @thinks that the best answer to <P_252> the idealism of M. Fichte
is to see his pupil devouring <font> kalte schale ! <$$font> '
DISRAELI-1827-2,252.494

' And this is really one of your great lights ? '
DISRAELI-1827-2,252.495

' Verily ! His works are the most famous and the most unreadable in all
Germany . DISRAELI-1827-2,252.496

Surely you have heard of his " Treatise on Man ? " A treatise on a
subject in which every one is interested , written in a style which no
one can understand . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,252.497

' You think , then , ' said Vivian , ' that posterity may rank the
German metaphysicians with the later Platonists ? '
DISRAELI-1827-2,252.498

' I hardly know ; DISRAELI-1827-2,252.499

they are a body of men not less acute , DISRAELI-1827-2,252.500

but I doubt whether they will be as celebrated .
DISRAELI-1827-2,252.501

In this age of print , notoriety is more attainable than in the age of
manuscript ; DISRAELI-1827-2,252.502

but lasting fame certainly is not . DISRAELI-1827-2,252.503

That tall thin man in black that just bowed to me is the editor of one
of our great Reisenburg reviews . DISRAELI-1827-2,252.504

The journal he edits is one of the most successful periodical
publications ever set afloat . DISRAELI-1827-2,252.505

Among its contributors may assuredly be classed many men of eminent
talents ; DISRAELI-1827-2,252.506

yet to their abilities the surprising success and influence of this work
is scarcely to be ascribed . DISRAELI-1827-2,252.507

It is the result rather of the consistent spirit which has always
inspired its masterly critiques . DISRAELI-1827-2,252.508

One principle has ever regulated its management ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,252.509

it is a simple rule , but an effective one : DISRAELI-1827-2,252.510

every author is reviewed by his personal enemy .
DISRAELI-1827-2,252.511

You may imagine the point of the critique ; DISRAELI-1827-2,252.512

but you would hardly credit , if I were to inform you , the circulation
of the review . DISRAELI-1827-2,252.513

You will tell me that you are not surprised , and talk of the natural
appetite of our species for malice and slander .
DISRAELI-1827-2,252.514

Be not too quick . DISRAELI-1827-2,252.515

The rival of this review , both in influence and in sale , is conducted
on as simple a principle , but not <P_253> a similar one .
DISRAELI-1827-2,253.516

In this journal every author is reviewed by his personal friend ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,253.517

of course , perfect panegyric . DISRAELI-1827-2,253.518

Each number is flattering as a lover's tale ; every article an <font>
éloge . <$$font> DISRAELI-1827-2,253.519

What say you to this ? DISRAELI-1827-2,253.520

These are the influential literary and political journals of Reisenburg
. DISRAELI-1827-2,253.521

There was yet another ; DISRAELI-1827-2,253.522

it was edited by an eloquent scholar ; DISRAELI-1827-2,253.523

all its contributors were , at the same time , brilliant and profound .
DISRAELI-1827-2,253.524

It numbered among its writers some of the most celebrated names in
Germany ; DISRAELI-1827-2,253.525

its critiques and articles were as impartial as they were able , as
sincere as they were sound ; DISRAELI-1827-2,253.526

it never paid the expense of the first number . DISRAELI-1827-2,253.527

As philanthropists and admirers of our species , my dear sir , these are
gratifying results ; DISRAELI-1827-2,253.528

they satisfactorily demonstrate that mankind have no innate desire for
scandal , calumny , and backbiting ; DISRAELI-1827-2,253.529

it only proves that they have an innate desire to be gulled and deceived
. ' DISRAELI-1827-2,253.530

' And who is that ? ' said Vivian . DISRAELI-1827-2,253.531

' That is Von Chronicle , our great historical novelist .
DISRAELI-1827-2,253.532

When I first came to Reisenburg , now eight years ago , the popular
writer of fiction was a man , the most probable of whose numerous
romances was one in which the hero sold his shadow to a demon over the
dice-box ; then married an unknown woman in a churchyard ; afterwards
wedded a river nymph ; and , having committed bigamy , finally stabbed
himself , to enable his first wife to marry his own father .
DISRAELI-1827-2,253.533

He and his works are quite obsolete ; DISRAELI-1827-2,253.534

and the star of his genius , with those of many others , has paled
before the superior brilliancy of that literary comet , Mr. von
Chronicle . DISRAELI-1827-2,253.535

According to Von Chronicle , we have all , for a long time , been under
a mistake . DISRAELI-1827-2,253.536

We have ever considered that the first point to be studied in novel
writing is character : DISRAELI-1827-2,253.537

miserable error ! DISRAELI-1827-2,253.538

It is <P_254> costume . DISRAELI-1827-2,254.539

Variety of incident , novelty , and nice discrimination of character ;
interest of story , and all those points which we have hitherto looked
upon as necessary qualities of a fine novel , vanish before the superior
attractions of variety of dresses , exquisite descriptions of the cloak
of a signor , or the trunk-hose of a serving man .
DISRAELI-1827-2,254.540

Amuse yourself while you are at Reisenburg by turning over some volumes
which every one is reading ; Von Chronicle's last great historical novel
. DISRAELI-1827-2,254.541

The subject is a magnificent one , Rienzi ; DISRAELI-1827-2,254.542

yet it is strange that the hero only appears in the first and the last
scenes . DISRAELI-1827-2,254.543

You look astonished . DISRAELI-1827-2,254.544

Ah ! I see you are not a great historical novelist .
DISRAELI-1827-2,254.545

You forget the effect which is produced by the contrast of the costume
of Master Nicholas , the notary in the quarter of the Jews , and that of
Rienzi , the tribune , in his robe of purple , at his coronation in the
Capitol . DISRAELI-1827-2,254.546

Conceive the effect , the contrast . DISRAELI-1827-2,254.547

With that coronation Von Chronicle's novel terminates ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,254.548

for , as he well observes , after that , what is there in the career of
Rienzi which would afford matter for the novelist ?
DISRAELI-1827-2,254.549

Nothing ! DISRAELI-1827-2,254.550

All that afterwards occurs is a mere contest of passions and a
development of character ; DISRAELI-1827-2,254.551

but where is a procession , a triumph , or a marriage ?
DISRAELI-1827-2,254.552

One of Von Chronicle's great characters in this novel is a Cardinal .
DISRAELI-1827-2,254.553

It was only last night that I was fortunate enough to have the beauties
of the work pointed out to me by the author himself .
DISRAELI-1827-2,254.554

He entreated , and gained my permission to read to me what he himself
considered " the great scene . " DISRAELI-1827-2,254.555

I settled myself in my chair , DISRAELI-1827-2,254.556

took out my handkerchief , DISRAELI-1827-2,254.557

and prepared my mind for the worst . DISRAELI-1827-2,254.558

While I was anticipating the terrors of a heroine he introduced me
<P_255> to his Cardinal . DISRAELI-1827-2,255.559

Thirty pages were devoted to the description of the prelate's costume .
DISRAELI-1827-2,255.560

Although clothed in purple , still , by a skilful adjustment of the
drapery , Von Chronicle managed to bring in six other petticoats .
DISRAELI-1827-2,255.561

I thought this beginning would never finish , DISRAELI-1827-2,255.562

but to my surprise , when he had got to the seventh petticoat , he shut
his book , DISRAELI-1827-2,255.563

and leaning over the table , asked me what I thought of his " great
scene . " DISRAELI-1827-2,255.564

" My friend , " said I , " you are not only the greatest historical
novelist that ever lived , but that ever will live . " '
DISRAELI-1827-2,255.565

' I shall certainly get Rienzi , ' said Vivian ; DISRAELI-1827-2,255.566

' it seems to me to be an original work . ' DISRAELI-1827-2,255.567

' Von Chronicle tells me that he looks upon it as his masterpiece , and
that it may be considered as the highest point of perfection to which
his system of novel-writing can be carried . DISRAELI-1827-2,255.568

Not a single name is given in the work , down even to the rabble , for
which he has not contemporary authority ; DISRAELI-1827-2,255.569

but what he is particularly proud of are his oaths .
DISRAELI-1827-2,255.570

Nothing , he tells me , has cost him more trouble than the management of
the swearing ; DISRAELI-1827-2,255.571

and the Romans you know , are a most profane nation .
DISRAELI-1827-2,255.572

The great difficulty to be avoided was using the ejaculations of two
different ages . DISRAELI-1827-2,255.573

The " ' sblood " of the sixteenth century must not be confounded with
the " zounds " of the seventeenth . DISRAELI-1827-2,255.574

Enough of Von Chronicle ! DISRAELI-1827-2,255.575

The most amusing thing , ' continued Mr. Sievers , ' is to contrast
this mode of writing works of fiction with the prevalent and fashionable
method of writing works of history . DISRAELI-1827-2,255.576

Contrast the " Rienzi " of Von Chronicle with the " Haroun-al-Raschid "
of Madame Carolina . DISRAELI-1827-2,255.577

Here we write novels like history , and history like novels :
DISRAELI-1827-2,255.578

all our facts are fancy , and all our imagination reality . '
DISRAELI-1827-2,255.579

So saying , Mr. Sievers rose , DISRAELI-1827-2,255.580

and , wishing Vivian <P_256> good night , quitted the room .
DISRAELI-1827-2,256.581

He was one of those prudent geniuses who always leave off with a point .
DISRAELI-1827-2,256.582

Mr. Sievers had not left Vivian more than a minute when the little
Prince Maximilian came up and bowed to him in a condescending manner .
DISRAELI-1827-2,256.583

Our hero , who had not yet had an opportunity of speaking with him ,
thanked him cordially for his handsome present , DISRAELI-1827-2,256.584

and asked him how he liked the Court . DISRAELI-1827-2,256.585

' Oh , delightful ! DISRAELI-1827-2,256.586

I pass all my time with the Grand Duke and Madame : '
DISRAELI-1827-2,256.587

and here the young apostate settled his military stock
DISRAELI-1827-2,256.588

and arranged the girdle of his sword . DISRAELI-1827-2,256.589

' Madame Carolina , ' continued he , ' has commanded me to inform you
that she desires the pleasure of your attendance . '
DISRAELI-1827-2,256.590

The summons was immediately obeyed , DISRAELI-1827-2,256.591

and Vivian had the honour of a long conversation with the interesting
consort of the Grand Duke . DISRAELI-1827-2,256.592

He was , for a considerable time , complimented by her enthusiastic
panegyric of England , her original ideas of the character and genius of
Lord Byron , her veneration for Sir Humphry Davy , and her admiration of
Sir Walter Scott . DISRAELI-1827-2,256.593

Not remiss was Vivian in paying , in his happiest manner , due
compliments to the fair and royal authoress of the Court of Charlemagne
. DISRAELI-1827-2,256.594

While she spoke his native tongue , he admired her accurate English ;
DISRAELI-1827-2,256.595

and while she professed to have derived her imperfect knowledge of his
perfect language from a study of its best authors , she avowed her
belief of the impossibility of ever speaking it correctly without the
assistance of a native . DISRAELI-1827-2,256.596

Conversation became more interesting . DISRAELI-1827-2,256.597

When Vivian left the palace he was not unmindful of an engagement to
return there the next day , to give a first lesson in English
pronunciation to Madame Carolina . DISRAELI-1827-2,256.598

<P_257>

<heading>

Chapter IV . DISRAELI-1827-2,257.601

A Royal Blue-Stocking . DISRAELI-1827-2,257.602

<$$heading>

Vivian duly kept his apointment with Madame Carolina .
DISRAELI-1827-2,257.604

The chamberlain ushered him into a library , where Madame Carolina was
seated at a large table covered with books and manuscripts .
DISRAELI-1827-2,257.605

Her costume and her countenance were equally engaging .
DISRAELI-1827-2,257.606

Fascination was alike in her smile , and her sash , her bow , and her
buckle . DISRAELI-1827-2,257.607

What a delightful pupil to perfect in English pronounciation !
DISRAELI-1827-2,257.608

Madame pointed , with a pride pleasing to Vivian's feelings as an
Englishman , to her shelves , graced with the most eminent of English
writers . DISRAELI-1827-2,257.609

Madame Carolina was not like one of those admirers of English literature
whom you often meet on the Continent : people who think that Beattie's "
Minstrel " is our most modern and fashionable poem ; that the " Night
Thoughts " is the masterpiece of our literature ; and that Richardson is
our only novelist . DISRAELI-1827-2,257.610

Oh no ! DISRAELI-1827-2,257.611

Madame Carolina would not have disgraced May Fair .
DISRAELI-1827-2,257.612

She knew Childe Harold by rote , DISRAELI-1827-2,257.613

and had even peeped into Don Juan . DISRAELI-1827-2,257.614

Her admiration of the Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviews was great and
similar . DISRAELI-1827-2,257.615

