<BEGIN_doddridge-1747-1>

<P_1>

<heading>

Some Remarkable Passages in the Life of the Honourable Col. James
Gardiner . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,1.4

<$$heading>

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 1 . {TEXT:,} DODDRIDGE-1747-1,1.6

When I promised the Publick some larger Account of the Life and
Character of this illustrious Person than I could conveniently insert in
my <font> Sermon <$$font> on the sad Occasion of his Death ; I was
secure , that , if Providence continued my Capacity of writing , I
should not wholly disappoint the Expectation . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,1.7

For I was furnished with a Variety of Particulars , which appeared to me
worthy of general Notice , in Consequence of that intimate Friendship
with which he had honoured me during the Six last Years of his Life ; a
Friendship , <P_2> which led him to open his Heart to me in repeated
<font> Conversations <$$font> with an unbounded Confidence , <paren> as
he then assured me , beyond what he had used with any other Man living ,
<$$paren> so far as Religious Experiences were concerned ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,2.8

And I had also received several very valuable <font> Letters <$$font>
from him , during the Time of our Absence from each other , which
contained most genuine and edifying Traces of his Christian Character .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,2.9

But I hoped farther to learn many valuable Particulars , from the <font>
Papers <$$font> of his own Closet ; and from his <font> Letters <$$font>
to other Friends , as well as from what they more circumstantially knew
concerning him : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,2.10

I therefore determined to delay the Execution of my Promise , till I
could enjoy these Advantages for performing it in the most satisfactory
Manner ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,2.11

nor have I , on the whole , Reason to regret that Determination .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,2.12

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 2 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,2.13

I shall not trouble my Reader with all the Causes , which concurred to
retard these expected Assistances for almost a whole Year ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,2.14

The chief of them were , the tedious languishing Illness of his
afflicted <font> Lady <$$font> , thro' whose Hands it was proper the
<font> Papers <$$font> should pass ; together with the Confusion into
which the <font> Rebels <$$font> had thrown them , when they ransacked
his Seat at <font> Bankton <$$font> , where most of them were deposited
. DODDRIDGE-1747-1,2.15

But having now received such of them as have escaped their rapacious
Hands , and could conveniently be collected and transmitted , I set
myself with <P_3> the greatest Pleasure to perform what I esteem not
merely a Tribute of Gratitude to the Memory of my invaluable Friend ,
<paren> though never was the Memory of any mortal Man more precious and
sacred to me ; <$$paren> but of Duty to God , and to my Fellow-Creatures
: DODDRIDGE-1747-1,3.16

For I have a most chearful Hope , that the Narrative I am now to write
will , under the Divine Blessing , be a Means of spreading , what of all
Things in the World , every benevolent Heart will most desire to spread
, a warm and lively sense of Religion . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,3.17

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 3 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,3.18

My own Heart has been so much edified and animated by what I have read
in the <font> Memoirs <$$font> of Persons who have been eminent for
Wisdom and Piety , that I can@ @not but wish the Treasure may be more
and more increased : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,3.19

And I would hope , the World may gather the like valuable Fruits from
the <font> Life <$$font> I am now attempting ; not only as it will
contain very singular Circumstances , which may excite a general
Curiosity , but as it comes attended with some other particular
Advantages . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,3.20

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 4 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,3.21

The Reader is here to survey a Character of such eminent and various
Goodness , as might demand Veneration , and inspire him with a Desire to
imitate it too , had it appeared in the obscurest Rank :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,3.22

But it will surely command some peculiar Regard , when viewed in so
elevated and important a Station ; especially as it shone , not in
Ecclesiastical , but <font> Military Life <$$font> , where the
Temptations are so <P_4> many , and the Prevalency of the contrary
Character so great , that it may seem no inconsiderable Praise and
Felicity to be free from dissolute Vice , and to retain what in most
other Professions might be esteemed only a <font> Mediocrity of Virtue
<$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,4.23

It may surely with the highest Justice be expected , that the Title and
Bravery of <$$font> Colonel <$$font> Gardiner will invite many of our
<font> Officers <$$font> and <font> Soldiers <$$font> , to whom his Name
has long been honourable and dear , to peruse this Account of him with
some peculiar Attention : In Consequence of which , it may be a Means of
increasing the Number , and brightening the Character , of those who are
already adorning their Office , their Country , and their Religion ; and
of reclaiming those who will see rather what they ought to be , than
what they are . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,4.24

On the Whole , to the <font> Gentlemen of the Sword <$$font> I would
particularly offer these <font> Memoirs <$$font> , as theirs by so
distinguished a Title : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,4.25

Yet I am firmly persuaded there are <font> none <$$font> , whose Office
is so sacred , or whose Proficiency in the Religious Life is so advanced
, but they may find something to demand their Thankfulness , and to
awaken their Emulation . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,4.26

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 5 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,4.27

<font> Colonel <$$font> James Gardiner , of whom we write , was the Son
of <font> Captain Patrick Gardiner <$$font> , of the Family of
Torwood-Head , by <$$font> Mrs. Mary Hodge <$$font> , of the Family of
<$$font> Gladsmuir <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,4.28

The <font> Captain <$$font> , who was Master of a handsome Estate ,
served many Years in <P_5> the Army of <font> King William <$$font> and
<font> Queen Anne <$$font> , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,5.29

and died abroad with the <font> British <$$font> Forces in <font>
Germany <$$font> , quickly after the Battle of <$$font> Hochstet
<$$font> , through the Fatigues he underwent in the Duties of that
celebrated Campaign . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,5.30

He had a Company in the Regiment of <font> Foot <$$font> , once
commanded by <font> Colonel Hodge <$$font> , his valiant Brother-in-law
, who was slain at the Head of that Regiment , <paren> my Memorial from
<font> Scotland <$$font> says <$$paren> at the Battle of <$$font>
Steenkirk <$$font> , which was fought in the Year 1692 .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,5.31

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 6 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,5.32

<font> Mrs. Gardiner <$$font> , our Colonel's <font> Mother <$$font> ,
was a Lady of a very valuable Character ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,5.33

but it pleased God to exercise her with very uncommon Trials :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,5.34

For she not only lost her Husband and her Brother in the Service of
their Country , as before related , but also her eldest Son , <$$font>
Mr. Robert Gardiner <$$font> , on the Day which completed the 16th Year
of his Age , at the Siege of <font> Namur <$$font> in 1695 .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,5.35

But there is great Reason to believe , God blessed these various and
heavy Afflictions , as the Means of forming her to that eminent Degree
of Piety , which will render her Memory honourable as long as it
continues . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,5.36

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 7 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,5.37

Her Second Son , the worthy Person of whom I am now to give a more
particular Account , was born at <font> Carriden <$$font> , in <font>
Linlithgow-Shire <$$font> {COM:font_change_around_"Linlithgow"} , on the
10th of <font> January <$$font> , A.D. 1687 - 8 , the memorable Year of
that glorious <font> Revolution <$$font> which he justly esteem'd among
the happiest of all Events . So that , when he was <P_6> slain in the
Defence of those Liberties , which God then by so gracious a Providence
rescued from utter Destruction , <font> i.e. <$$font> on the 21st of
<font> September <$$font> 1745 , he was aged 57 Years , 8 Months , and
11 Days . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,6.38

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 8 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,6.39

The Annual Return of his <font> Birth-Day <$$font> was observed by him ,
in the latter and better Years of his Life , in a Manner very different
from what is commonly practised ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,6.40

For instead of making it a Day of Festivity , I am told , he rather
distinguished it as a Season of more than ordinary Humiliation before
God ; both in Commemoration of those Mercies which he received in the
first Opening of Life , and under an affectionate Sense , as well of his
long Alienation from the Great Author and Support of his Being , as of
the many Imperfections which he lamented in the best of his Days and
Services . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,6.41

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 9 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,6.42

I have not met with many Things remarkable concerning the early Years of
his Life ; only that his <font> Mother <$$font> took Care to instruct
him with great Tenderness and Affection , in the Principles of true
Christianity . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,6.43

He was also trained up in Human Literature at the School at <font>
Linlithgow <$$font> , where he made a very considerable Progress in the
Languages . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,6.44

I remember to have heard him quote some Passages of the Latin Classicks
very pertinently ; though his Employment in Life , and the various Turns
which his Mind took under different <P_7> Impulses in succeeding Years ,
prevented him from cultivating such Studies . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,7.45

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 10 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,7.46

The good Effects of his <font> Mother <$$font> 's prudent and exemplary
Care were not so conspicuous , as she wished and hoped , in the younger
Part of her Son's Life ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,7.47

yet there is great Reason to believe , they were not entirely lost .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,7.48

As they were probably the Occasion of many Convictions which in his
younger Years were overborne ; so I doubt not , that , when Religious
Impressions took that strong Hold of his Heart which they afterwards did
, that Stock of Knowledge which had been so early laid up in his Mind ,
was found of considerable Service . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,7.49

And I have heard him make the Observation , as an Encouragement to
Parents , and other pious Friends , to do their Duty , and to hope for
those good Consequences of it which may not immediately appear .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,7.50

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 11 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,7.51

Could his <font> Mother <$$font> , or a very religious <font> Aunt
<$$font> , <paren> of whose good Instructions and Exhortations I have
often heard him speak with Pleasure <$$paren> have prevailed , he would
not have thought of a <font> Military Life <$$font> ; from which , it is
no Wonder , these Ladies endeavoured to dissuade him , considering the
mournful Experience they had of the Dangers attending it , and the dear
Relatives they had lost already by it . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,7.52

But it suited his Taste ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,7.53

and the Ardor of his Spirit , animated by the Persuasions of a <P_8>
Friend who greatly urged it {COM:footnote_omitted} , was not to be
restrained . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,8.54

Nor will the Reader wonder , that , thus excited and supported , it
easily overbore their tender Remonstrances , when he knows , that this
lively Youth fought <font> Three Duels <$$font> before he attained to
the Stature of a Man ; in one of which , when he was but Eight Years old
, he received from a Boy much older than himself , a Wound in his Right
Cheek , the Scar of which was always very apparent .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,8.55

The false Sense of Honour which instigated him to it , might seem indeed
something excusable in those unripened Years , and considering the
Profession of his Father , Brother , and Uncle ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,8.56

but I have often heard him mention this Rashness with that Regret ,
which the Reflection would naturally give to so wise and good a Man in
the Maturity of Life . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,8.57

And I have been informed , that , after his remarkable Conversion , he
declined accepting a Challenge , with this calm and truly great Reply ,
which in a Man of his experienced Bravery was exceedingly graceful ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,8.58

" I fear Sinning , though you know I do not fear Fighting . "
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,8.59

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 12 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,8.60

He served first as a <font> Cadet <$$font> , which must have been very
early ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,8.61

and then , at 14 Years old , he bore an <font> Ensign <$$font> 's
Commission in a <font> Scotish <$$font> Regiment in the <font> Dutch
<$$font> Service ; in which he continued till the Year <P_9> 1702 , when
<paren> if my Information be right <$$paren> he received an <font>
Ensign <$$font> 's Commission from <font> Queen Anne <$$font> , which he
bore in the Battle of <font> Ramillies <$$font> , being then in the 16th
Year of his Age . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.62

In this ever-@ @memorable Action , he received a Wound in his Mouth by a
Musket Ball , which hath often been reported to be the Occasion of his
Conversion . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.63

That Report was a mistaken one ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.64

but as some very remarkable Circumstances attended this Affair , which I
have had the Pleasure of hearing more than once from his own Mouth , I
hope my Reader will excuse me , if I give him so uncommon a Story at
large . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.65

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 13 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.66

Our young Officer was of a Party in the Forlorn Hope ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.67

and was commanded on what seemed almost a desperate Service , to
dispossess the <font> French <$$font> of the Church-Yard at <font>
Ramillies <$$font> , where a considerable Number of them were posted to
remarkable Advantage . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.68

They succeeded much better than was expected ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.69

and it may well be supposed that Mr. <font> Gardiner <$$font> , who had
before been in several Encounters , and had the View of making his
Fortune , to animate the natural Intrepidity of his Spirit , was glad of
such an Opportunity of signalizing himself . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.70

Accordingly he had planted his Colours on an advanced Ground ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,9.71

and while he was calling to his Men , <paren> probably in that horrid
Language , which is so peculiar a Disgrace to our Soldiery , and so
absurdly common in such Articles of extreme <P_10> Danger <$$paren> he
received a Shot into his Mouth ; which , without beating out any of his
Teeth , or touching the Fore-part of his Tongue , went through his Neck
, and came out about an Inch and an half on the Left-side of the <font>
Vertebrae <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,10.72

Not feeling at first the Pain of the Stroke , he wondered what was
become of the Ball , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,10.73

and in the Wildness of his Surprize began to suspect he had swallowed it
; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,10.74

but , dropping soon after , he traced the Passage of it by his Finger ,
when he could discover it no other Way : Which I mention as one
Circumstance , among many which occur , to make it probable , that the
greater Part of those who fall in Battle by these Instruments of Death ,
feel very little Anguish from the most mortal Wounds .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,10.75

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 14 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,10.76

This Accident happened about Five or Six in the Evening , on the 23d Day
of <font> May <$$font> , in the Year 1706 ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,10.77

and the Army pursuing its Advantages against the <font> French <$$font>
, without ever regarding the Wounded , <paren> which was , it seems ,
the Duke of <font> Marlborough <$$font> 's constant Method <$$paren> our
young Officer lay all Night on the Field ; agitated , as may well be
supposed , with a great Variety of Thoughts . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,10.78

He assured me , that when he reflected upon the Circumstances of his
Wound , that a Ball should , as he then conceived it , go through his
Head without killing him , he thought God had preserved him by Miracle ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,10.79

and therefore assuredly concluded that he should live , abandoned and
<P_11> desperate as his State then seemed to be .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,11.80

Yet <paren> which to me appeared very astonishing <$$paren> he had
little Thoughts of humbling himself before God , and returning to him
after the Wanderings of a Life so licentiously begun .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,11.81

But , expecting to recover , his Mind was taken up with Contrivances to
secure his Gold , of which he had a pretty deal about him ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,11.82

and he had Recourse to a very odd Expedient , which proved successful .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,11.83

Expecting to be stripped , he first took out a Handful of that clotted
Gore , of which he was frequently obliged to clear his Mouth , or he
would have been choaked ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,11.84

and putting it into his Left-hand , he took out his Money , <paren>
which I think was about 16 Pistoles <$$paren> DODDRIDGE-1747-1,11.85

and shutting his Hand , and besmearing the back Part of it with Blood ,
he kept in this Position till the Blood dried in such a Manner , that
his Hand could not easily fall open , though any sudden Surprize should
happen , in which he might lose the Presence of Mind which that
Concealment otherwise would have required . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,11.86

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 15 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,11.87

In the Morning the <font> French <$$font> , who were Masters of that
Spot , though their Forces were defeated at some Distance , came to
plunder the Slain ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,11.88

and seeing him to Appearance almost expiring , one of them was just
applying a Sword to his Breast , to destroy the little Remainder of Life
; when , in the critical Moment , upon which all the extraordinary
Events of such a Life as his afterwards proved <P_12> were suspended , a
<font> Cordelier <$$font> , who attended the Plunderers , interposed ,
taking him by his Dress for a <font> Frenchman <$$font> ; and said , "
Do not kill that poor Child . " DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.89

Our young Soldier heard all that passed , though he was not able to
speak one Word ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.90

and , opening his Eyes , made a Sign for something to drink .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.91

They gave him a Sup of some spirituous Liquor , which happened to be at
hand ; by which he said he found a more sensible Refreshment than he
could remember from any Thing he had tasted either before or since .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.92

Then signifying to the <font> Fryar <$$font> to lean down his Ear to his
Mouth , he employed the first Efforts of his feeble Breath in telling
him , <paren> what , alas , was a contrived Falshood <$$paren> that he
was Nephew to the Governor of <font> Huy <$$font> , a neutral Town in
the Neighbourhood ; and that , if he could take any Method of conveying
him thither , he did not doubt but his Uncle would liberally reward him
. DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.93

He had indeed a Friend at <font> Huy <$$font> <paren> who , I think ,
was Governor , and , if I mistake not , had been acquainted with the
<font> Captain <$$font> his Father <$$paren> from whom he expected a
kind Reception ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.94

but the Relation was only pretended . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.95

On hearing this , they laid him on a Sort of Hand-barrow ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.96

and sent him by a File of Musqueteers towards the Place ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.97

but the Men lost their Way , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.98

and got into a Wood towards the Evening , in which they were obliged to
continue all Night . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,12.99

The poor Patient's Wound being still undressed , it is not to be <P_13>
wondered at that by this Time it raged violently .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.100

The Anguish of it engaged him earnestly to beg that they would either
kill him outright , or leave him there to die , without the Torture of
any farther Motion ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.101

and indeed , they were obliged to rest for a considerable Time , on
Account of their own Weariness . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.102

Thus he spent the Second Night in the open Air , without any Thing more
than a common Bandage to stanch the Blood . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.103

He has often mentioned it as a most astonishing Providence , that he did
not bleed to Death , which , under God , he ascribed to the remarkable
Coldness of these two Nights . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.104

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 16 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.105

Judging it quite unsafe to attempt carrying him to <font> Huy <$$font> ,
from whence they were now several Miles distant , his Convoy took him
early in the Morning to a <font> Convent <$$font> in the Neighbourhood ;
where he was hospitably received , and treated with great Kindness and
Tenderness . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.106

But the Cure of his Wound was committed to an ignorant Barber-Surgeon ,
who lived near the House ; the best Shift that could then be made , at a
Time when it may easily be supposed Persons of Ability in their
Profession had their Hands full of Employment . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.107

The Tent which this Artist applied , was almost like a Peg driven into
the Wound ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.108

and Gentlemen of Skill and Experience , when they came to hear of the
Manner in which he was treated , wondered how he could possibly survive
such Management . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,13.109

But by the Blessing <P_14> of God on these Applications , rough as they
were , he recovered in a few Months . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,14.110

The Lady <font> Abbess <$$font> , who call'd him her Son , treated him
with the Affection and Care of a Mother ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,14.111

and he always declared , that every Thing which he saw within these
Walls , was conducted with the strictest Decency and Decorum .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,14.112

He received a great many devout Admonitions from the Ladies there ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,14.113

and they would fain have persuaded him to acknowledge what they thought
so miraculous a Deliverance , by embracing the <font> Catholic Faith
<$$font> , as they were pleased to call it . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,14.114

But they could not succeed ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,14.115

for though no Religion lay near his Heart , yet he had too much of the
Spirit of a Gentleman , lightly to change that Form of Religion , which
he wore <paren> as it were <$$paren> loose about him ; as well as too
much good Sense to swallow those monstrous Absurdities of Popery , which
immediately presented themselves to him , unacquainted as he was with
the Niceties of the Controversy . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,14.116

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 17 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,14.117

When his Liberty was regained by an Exchange of Prisoners , and his
Health thoroughly established , he was far from <$$font> rendering unto
the Lord <$$font> according to that wonderful Display of Divine Mercy
which he had experienced . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,14.118

I know very little of the Particulars of those wild , thoughtless , and
wretched Years , which lay between the 16th and 30th of his Life ;
except it be , that he frequently experienced the Divine Goodness in
renewed <P_15> Instances , particularly in preserving him in several hot
Military Actions , in all which , he never received so much as a Wound
after this , forward as he was in tempting Danger ; and yet , that all
these Years were spent in an entire Alienation from God , and an eager
Pursuit of Animal Pleasure , as his Supreme Good .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,15.119

The Series of <font> criminal Amours <$$font> , in which he was almost
incessantly engaged during this Time , must probably have afforded some
remarkable Adventures and Occurrences ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,15.120

but the Memory of them is perished . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,15.121

Nor do I think it unworthy Notice here , that amidst all the Intimacy of
this Friendship , and the many hours of cheerful {TEXT:chearful} , as
well as serious Converse , which we spent together , I never remember to
have heard him speak of any of these Intrigues otherwise than in the
general with deep and solemn Abhorrence . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,15.122

This I the rather mention , as it seemed a most genuine proof of his
unfeigned Repentance ; which , I think , there is great Reason to
suspect , when People seem to take a Pleasure in relating and describing
Scenes of vicious Indulgence , which they yet profess to have
disapproved and forsaken . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,15.123

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 18 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,15.124

Amidst all these pernicious Wanderings from the Paths of Religion ,
Virtue , and Happiness , he approved himself so well in his Military
Character , that he was made a <font> Lieutenant <$$font> in that Year ,
<font> viz. <$$font> 1706 : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,15.125

And I am told , he was very quickly after promoted to <P_16> a <font>
Cornet <$$font> 's commission in <$$font> Lord Stair <$$font> 's
Regiment of the <font> Scotch Greys <$$font> ; and on the 31st of <font>
January <$$font> , in the Year 1714 - 15 , was made <font>
Captain-Lieutenant <$$font> in <font> Colonel Ker <$$font> 's Regiment
of Dragoons . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,16.126

He had the Honour of being known to the <font> Earl <$$font> of <font>
Stair <$$font> some Time before , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,16.127

and was made his <font> Aide_de_Camp {TEXT:Aid_de_Camp} <$$font> ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,16.128

and when , upon his Lordship's being appointed <font> Ambassador
<$$font> from his late Majesty to the Court of <font> France <$$font> ,
he made so splendid an Entrance into <font> Paris <$$font> , <font>
Captain Gardiner <$$font> was his <font> Master of the Horse <font> ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,16.129

and I have been told , that a great deal of the Care of that admirably
well adjusted Ceremony fell upon him ; so that he gained great Credit by
the Manner in which he conducted it . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,16.130

Under the benign Influences of his Lordship's Favour , <paren> which to
the last Day of his Life he retained <$$paren> a <font> Captain <$$font>
's Commission was procured for him , <paren> dated <font> July <$$font>
22 , in the Year 1715 <$$paren> in the Regiment of Dragoons , commanded
by <font> Colonel Stanhope <$$font> , <paren> now <font> Earl of
Harrington <$$font> ; <$$paren> DODDRIDGE-1747-1,16.131

and , in the Year 1717 , he was advanced to the <font> Majority <$$font>
of that Regiment ; in which office he continued till it was reduced on
<font> November <$$font> the 10th 1718 , when he was put out of
Commission . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,16.132

But then his Majesty <font> King George <$$font> I. was so thoroughly
apprised of his faithful and important Services , that he gave him his
<font> Sign-Manual <$$font> , intitling him to the first <font> Majority
<$$font> that should become vacant in any Regiment of Horse or Dragoons
; which happened , about five Years after , <P_17> to be in <font> Croft
<$$font> 's Regiment of Dragoons , in which he received a Commission ,
dated <font> June <$$font> the 1st 1724 ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,17.133

and on the 20th of <font> July <$$font> the same Year , he was made
<$$font> Major <$$font> of an older Regiment , commanded by the <font>
Earl of Stair <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,17.134

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 19 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,17.135

As I am now speaking of so many of his <font> Military Preferments
<$$font> , I will dispatch the Account of them by observing , that , on
the 24th of <font> January <$$font> 1729 - 30 , he was advanced to the
Rank of <font> Lieutenant-Colonel <$$font> in the same Regiment , long
under the command of <font> Lord Cadogan <$$font> ; with whose
Friendship this brave and vigilant Officer was also honoured for many
Years . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,17.136

And he continued in this Rank , and Regiment till the 19th of <font>
April <$$font> 1743 ; when he received a <font> Colonel <$$font> 's
Commission over a Regiment of Dragoons , lately commanded by <font>
Brigadier Bland <$$font> ; at the Head of which he valiantly fell , in
the Defence of his Sovereign and his Country , about Two Years and a
half after he received it . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,17.137

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 20 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,17.138

We will now return to that Period of his Life which was passed at <font>
Paris <$$font> , the Scene of such remarkable and important Events .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,17.139

He continued <paren> if I remember right <$$paren> several Years under
the roof of the brave and generous <font> Earl of Stair <$$font> ; to
whom he endeavoured to approve himself by every Instance of diligent and
faithful Service : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,17.140

and his Lordship gave no inconsiderable Proof of the Dependence which he
had upon him , when , in the Beginning <P_18> of the Year 1715 , he
intrusted him with the important Dispatches , relating to a Discovery ,
which by a Series of admirable Policy he had made , of a Design which
the <font> French <$$font> King was then forming , for invading <font>
Great Britain <$$font> in favour of the <font> Pretender <$$font> ; in
which the <font> French <$$font> apprehended they were so sure of
Success , that it seemed a Point of Friendship in one of the chief
Counsellors of that Court , to dissuade a Dependent of his from
accepting some Employment under his <font> Britannick Majesty <$$font> ,
when proposed by his Envoy there ; because it was said , that in less
than Six Weeks there would be a <font> Revolution <$$font> , in favour
of what they called the Family of the <font> Stewarts <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,18.141

The <font> Captain <$$font> dispatched his Journey with the utmost Speed
; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,18.142

a Variety of Circumstances happily concurred to accelerate it ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,18.143

and they , who remember how soon the Regiments which that Emergency
required were raised and armed , will , I doubt not , esteem it a
memorable Instance , both of the most cordial Zeal in the Friends of the
Government , and of the gracious Care of Divine Providence over the
House of <font> Hanover <$$font> and the <font> British <$$font>
Liberties , so inseparably connected with its Interest .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,18.144

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 21 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,18.145

While <font> Captain Gardiner <$$font> was at <font> London <$$font> ,
in one of the Journies he made upon this Occasion , he , with that
Frankness which was natural to him , and which in those Days was not
always under the most prudent Restraint , <P_19> ventured to predict ,
from what he knew of the bad State of the <font> French King <$$font> 's
Health , that <font> he would not live Six Weeks <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.146

This was made known by some Spies who were at <font> St. James <$$font>
's , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.147

and came to be reported at the Court of <font> Versailles <$$font> ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.148

for he received Letters from some Friends at <font> Paris <$$font> ,
advising him not to return thither , unless he could reconcile himself
to a lodging in the <font> Bastile <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.149

But he was soon free from that Apprehension ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.150

for , if I mistake not , before half that time was accomplished , <font>
Lewis <$$font> XIV. died {COM:footnote_omitted} ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.151

and it is generally thought , his Death was hastened {TEXT:hastned} by a
very accidental Circumstance , which had some Reference to the <font>
Captain <$$font> 's Prophecy . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.152

For the last Time he ever dined in Publick , which was a very little
while after the Report of it had been made there , he happened to
discover <font> our British Envoy <$$font> among the Spectators .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.153

The Penetration of this illustrious Person was too great , and his
Attachment to the Interest of his Royal Master too well known , not to
render him very disagreeable to that crafty and tyrannical Prince , whom
God had so long suffered to be the Disgrace of Monarchy , and the
Scourge of <font> Europe <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.154

He at first appeared very languid , as indeed he was ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.155

but on casting his Eye upon the <font> Earl of Stair <$$font> , he
affected to appear before him in a much better State of Health than he
really was ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,19.156

and therefore , as if he had been awaken'd <P_20> on a sudden from some
deep <font> Reverie <$$font> , he immediately put himself into an erect
Posture , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.157

called up a laboured Vivacity into his Countenance ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.158

and eat {COM:sic} much more heartily than was by any Means advisable ,
repeating it two or three Times to a Nobleman <paren> I think the <font>
Duke of Bourbon <$$font> <$$paren> then in waiting , " Me@ @thinks I eat
very well for a Man who is to die so soon . " DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.159

But this Inroad upon that Regularity of living which he had for some
Time observed , agreed so ill with him , that he never recovered this
Meal , but died in less than a Fortnight . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.160

This gave Occasion for some humorous People to say , that <font> Old
Lewis <$$font> , after all , was killed by a <font> Briton <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.161

But , if this Story be true , <paren> which I think there can be no Room
to doubt , as the <font> Colonel <$$font> , from whom I have often heard
it , though absent , could scarce be misinformed <$$paren> it might more
properly be said that he fell by <font> his own Vanity <$$font> ; in
which View I thought it so remarkable , as not to be unworthy of a Place
in these Memoirs . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.162

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 22 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.163

The <font> Captain <$$font> quickly returned , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.164

and continued with small Interruptions at <font> Paris <$$font> , at
least till the Year 1720 , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.165

and how much longer I do not certainly know . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,20.166

The <font> Earl <$$font> 's Favour and Generosity made him easy in his
Affairs , though he was <paren> as has been observed above <$$paren>
Part of the Time <font> out of Commission <$$font> , <P_21> by breaking
the Regiment to which he belonged , of which before he was <font> Major
<$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,21.167

This was in all Probability the gayest Part of his Life , and the most
criminal . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,21.168

Whatever wise and good Examples he might find in the Family where he had
the Honour to reside , it is certain that the <font> French <$$font>
Court , during the Regency of the <font> Duke of Orleans <$$font> , was
one of the most dissolute under Heaven . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,21.169

What , by a wretched Abuse of Language , have been called <font>
Intrigues of Love and Gallantry <$$font> , were so entirely to the
<font> Major <$$font> 's then degenerate Taste , that if not the whole
<font> Business <$$font> , at least the whole <font> Happiness ,
<$$font> of his Life consisted in them ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,21.170

and he had now too much Leisure , for one who was so prone to abuse it .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,21.171

His fine Constitution , than which perhaps there was hardly ever a
better , gave him great Opportunities of indulging himself in these
Excesses ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,21.172

and his good Spirits enabled him to pursue his Pleasures of every Kind ,
in so alert and sprightly a manner , that Multitudes envied him , and
called him , by a dreadful Kind of Compliment , the <font> Happy Rake
<$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,21.173

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 23 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,21.174

Yet still the Checks of Conscience , and some remaining Principles of so
good an Education , would break in upon his most licentious Hours ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,21.175

and I particularly remember he told me , that when some of his dissolute
Companions were once congratulating him on his distinguished Felicity ,
a <font> Dog <$$font> happening at that Time to come into the Room ,
<P_22> he could not forbear groaning inwardly , and saying to himself ,
" Oh that I were that Dog ! " DODDRIDGE-1747-1,22.176

Such was then his <font> Happiness <$$font> ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,22.177

and such perhaps is that of Hundreds more , who bear themselves highest
in the Contempt of Religion , and glory in that infamous <font>
Servitude <$$font> which they affect to call Liberty .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,22.178

But these Remonstrances of Reason and Conscience were in vain ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,22.179

and , in short , he carried Things so far , in this wretched Part of his
Life , that I am well assured , some sober <font> English <$$font>
gentlemen , who made no great Pretences to Religion , how agreeable
soever he might have been to them on other Accounts , rather declined
than sought his Company , as fearing they might have been insnared and
corrupted by it . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,22.180

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 24 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,22.181

Yet I can@ @not find , in these most abandoned Days he was fond of
<font> Drinking <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,22.182

Indeed he never had any natural Relish for that Kind of Intemperance ,
from which he used to think a manly Pride might be sufficient to
preserve Persons of Sense and Spirit ; as by it they give up every Thing
that distinguishes them from the meanest of their Species , or indeed
from Animals the most below it . So that , if ever he fell into any
Excesses of this Kind , it was merely out of Complaisance to his Company
, and that he might not appear stiff and singular .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,22.183

His frank , obliging and generous Temper procured him many Friends ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,22.184

and these Principles , which rendered <P_23> him amiable to others , not
being under the Direction of true Wisdom and Piety , sometimes made him
, in the Ways of Living he pursued , more uneasy in himself , than he
might perhaps have been if he could have entirely overcome them ;
especially as he never was a <font> Sceptick <$$font> in his Principles
, but still retained a secret Apprehension , that Natural and Revealed
Religion , though he did not much care to think of either , were founded
in Truth . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,23.185

And , with this Conviction , his nefarious Violations of the most
essential Precepts of both could not but occasion some secret Misgivings
of Heart . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,23.186

His continual Neglect of the great Author of his Being , of whose
Perfections he could not doubt , and to whom he knew himself to be under
daily and perpetual Obligations , gave him , in some Moments of
involuntary reflection , inexpressible Remorse ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,23.187

and this , at Times , wrought upon him to such a Degree , that he
resolved he would attempt to pay him some Acknowledgments .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,23.188

Accordingly for a few Mornings he did it ; repeating in Retirement some
Passages out of the <font> Psalms <$$font> , and perhaps other
Scriptures , which he still retained in his Memory ; and owning , in a
few strong Words , the many Mercies and Deliverances he had received ,
and the ill Returns he had made for them . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,23.189

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 25 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,23.190

I find , among the other <font> Papers <$$font> transmitted to me , the
following <font> Verses <$$font> , which <P_24> I have heard him repeat
, as what had impressed him a good deal in his unconverted State ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,24.191

and , as I suppose , they did something towards setting him on this
Effort towards Devotion , and might probably furnish out a Part of these
Orisons , I hope I need not make any Apology to my Reader for inserting
them , especially as I do not recollect that I have seen them any where
else , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,24.192

{COM:verses_omitted}

<P_25>

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 26 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.195

But these Strains were too devout , to continue long in a Heart as yet
quite unsanctified ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.196

for how readily soever he could repeat such Acknowledgments of the
Divine Power , Presence , and Goodness , and own his own Follies and
Faults ; he was stopped {TEXT:stop} short by the Remonstrances of his
Conscience , as to the flagrant absurdity , of confessing Sins he did
not desire to forsake , and of pretending to praise God for his Mercies
, when he did not endeavour to live to his Service , and to behave in
such a Manner as Gratitude , if sincere , would plainly dictate .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.197

A Model of Devotion , where such Sentiments made no Part , his good
Sense could not digest ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.198

and the Use of such Language before a Heart-searching God , merely as an
hypocritical Form , while the Sentiments of his Soul were contrary to it
, justly appeared to him such daring Profaneness , that , irregular as
the State of his Mind was , the Thought of it struck him with Horror .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.199

He therefore , determined to make no more Attempts of this Sort ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.200

and was perhaps one of the first , that deliberately laid aside Prayer ,
from some Sense of God's Omniscience , and some natural Principle of
Honour and Conscience . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.201

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 27 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.202

These secret Debates with himself , and ineffectual Efforts , would
sometimes return ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.203

but they were over-borne again and again , by the Force of Temptation ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,25.204

and it is no Wonder , that in Consequence of them <P_26> his heart grew
yet harder . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.205

Nor was it softened {TEXT:softned} , or awakened by some very memorable
<font> Deliverances <$$font> , which at this Time he received -
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.206

He was in extreme Danger by a Fall from his Horse ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.207

as he was riding Post , <paren> I think , in the streets of <font>
Calais <$$font> <$$paren> when going down a Hill , the Horse threw him
over his Head , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.208

and pitched over him ; so that , when he rose , the Beast lay beyond him
, and almost dead . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.209

Yet though he received not the least Harm , it made no serious
Impression on his Mind - DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.210

In his Return from <font> England <$$font> in the packet boat , <paren>
if I remember right , but a few Weeks after the former Accident
<$$paren> a violent Storm that drove them up to <font> Harwich <$$font>
, tossed them from thence for several Hours in a dark Night on the coast
of <font> Holland <$$font> , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.211

and brought them into such Extremity , that the Captain of the Vessel
urged him to go to Prayers immediately , if he ever intended to do it at
all : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.212

for he concluded , they would in a few Minutes be at the Bottom of the
Sea . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.213

In this Circumstance he did pray , and that very fervently too :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.214

And it was very remarkable , that , while he was thus crying to God for
Deliverance , the Wind fell , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.215

and quickly after they arrived at <font> Calais <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,26.216

But the <font> Major <$$font> was so little affected with what had
befallen him , that when some of his gay Friends , on hearing the Story
, rallied him upon the Efficacy of his Prayers , he excused himself from
the scandal of being thought much in earnest , by saying , " That it was
<P_27> at Midnight , an Hour when his good <font> Mother <$$font> and
<font> Aunt <$$font> were asleep ; or else he should have left that Part
of the Business to them . " A Speech , which I should not have
mentioned , but as it shews in so lively a view the wretch'd Situation
of his Mind at that Time , though his great Deliverance from the Power
of Darkness was then nearly approaching . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,27.217

He recounted these Things to me with the greatest Humility , as showing
how utterly unworthy he was of that Miracle of Divine Grace , by which
he was quickly after brought to so true and so prevalent , a Sense of
Religion . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,27.218

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 28 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,27.219

And now I am come to that astonishing Part of his Story , the Account of
<font> his Conversion <$$font> ; which I can@ @not enter upon without
assuring my Reader , that I have sometimes been tempted to suppress many
Circumstances of it ; not only as they may seem incredible to some , and
enthusiastical to others ; but I am very sensible they are liable to
great Abuses ; which was the Reason that he gave me for concealing the
most extraordinary from many Persons , to whom he mentioned some of the
rest . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,27.220

And I believe it was this , together with the Desire of avoiding every
Thing that might look like Ostentation on this Head , that prevented his
leaving a written Account of it ; though I have often intreated him to
do it ; as I particularly {TEXT:particulary} remember I did , in the
very last Letter I ever wrote him , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,27.221

and pleaded the <P_28> Possibility of his falling amidst those Dangers
to which I knew his Valour might in such Circumstances naturally expose
him . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,28.222

I was not so happy as to receive any Answer to this Letter , which
reached him but a few Days before his Death : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,28.223

nor can I certainly say whether he had , or had not , complied with my
Request ; as it is very possible , a Paper of this Kind , if it were
written , might be lost amidst the Ravages which the <font> Rebels
<$$font> made , when they plundered <font> Bankton <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,28.224

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 29 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,28.225

The Story however was so remarkable , that I had little Reason to
apprehend I should ever forget it ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,28.226

and yet , to guard against all Contingencies of that Kind , I wrote it
down that very Evening , as I heard it from his own Mouth :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,28.227

And I have now before me the Memoirs of that Conversation , dated <font>
Aug. <$$font> 14. 1739 . which conclude with these Words ; <paren>
which I added , that , if we should both have died that Night , the
World might not have lost this edifying and affecting History , or have
wanted any Attestation of it I was capable of giving <$$paren>
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,28.228

" <font> N.B. <$$font> I have written down this Account with all the
Exactness I am capable of , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,28.229

and could safely take an Oath of it as to the Truth of every
Circumstance , to the best of my Remembrance , as the <font> Colonel
<$$font> related it to me a few Hours ago . " DODDRIDGE-1747-1,28.230

I do not know , that I had reviewed this Paper since I wrote it , till I
set myself thus publickly to record this <P_29> extraordinary Fact ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,29.231

but I find it punctually to agree with what I have often related from my
Memory , which I charged carefully with so wonderful and important a
Fact . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,29.232

It is with all Solemnity that I now deliver it down to Posterity , as in
the Sight and Presence of God ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,29.233

and I chuse deliberately to expose myself to those severe Censures ,
which the haughty , but empty , scorn of <font> Infidelity <$$font> , or
Principles nearly approaching it , and effectually doing its pernicious
Work , may very probably dictate upon the Occasion ; rather than to
smother a Relation , which may , in the Judgment of my Conscience , be
like to conduce so much to the Glory of God , the Honour of the Gospel ,
and the Good of Mankind . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,29.234

One Thing more I will only premise , That I hope none who have heard the
<font> Colonel <$$font> himself speak something of this wonderful Scene
, will be surprized if they find some new Circumstances here ; because
he assured me , at the Time he first gave me the whole Narration ,
<paren> which was in the very Room in which I now write <$$paren> that
he had never imparted it so fully to any man living before .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,29.235

Yet , at the same Time , he gave me full Liberty to communicate it to
whomsoever I should in my Conscience judge it might be useful to do it ,
whether before , or after his Death . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,29.236

Accordingly I did , while he was alive , recount almost every
Circumstance I am now going to write , to several pious <P_30> Friends ;
referring them at the same Time to the <font> Colonel <$$font> himself ,
whenever they might have an Opportunity of seeing or writing to him ,
for a further Confirmation of what I told them , if they judged it
requisite . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.237

They <font> glorified God in him <$$font> ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.238

and I humbly hope , many of my Readers will also do it .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.239

They will soon perceive the Reason of so much Caution in my Introduction
to this Story , for which therefore I shall make no further Apology
{COM:footnote_omitted} . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.240

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 30 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.241

This memorable Event happened towards the Middle of <font> July <$$font>
1719 , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.242

but I can@ @not be exact as to the Day . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.243

The <font> Major <$$font> had spent the Evening <paren> and if I mistake
not , it was the Sabbath <$$paren> in some gay Company ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.244

and had an unhappy Assignation with a married Woman , of what Rank or
Quality I did not particularly inquire , whom he was to attend exactly
at Twelve . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.245

The Company broke up about Eleven ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,30.246

and , not judging it <P_31> convenient to anticipate the Time appointed
, he went into his Chamber , to <font> kill the tedious Hour <$$font> ,
perhaps with some amusing Book , or some other Way .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.247

But it very accidentally happened , that he took up a religious Book ,
which his good <font> Mother <$$font> or <font> Aunt <$$font> had ,
without his Knowledge , slipped into his Portmanteau .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.248

It was called , if I remember the Title exactly , <font> The Christian
Soldier , or Heaven taken by Storm <$$font> ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.249

and was written by Mr. <font> Thomas Watson <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.250

Guessing by the Title of it , that he should find some Phrases of his
own Profession spiritualized , in a Manner which he thought might afford
him some Diversion , he resolved to dip into it ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.251

but he took no serious Notice of any Thing he read in it :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.252

And yet , while this Book was in his Hand , an Impression was made upon
his Mind , <paren> perhaps God only knows how <$$paren> which drew after
it a Train of the most important and happy Consequences .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.253

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 31 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.254

There is indeed a Possibility , that while he was sitting in this
Attitude , and reading in this careless and profane Manner , he might
suddenly fall asleep , and only <font> dream <$$font> of what he
apprehended he saw . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.255

But nothing can be more certain , than that , when he gave me this
Relation , he judged himself to have been as broad awake during the
whole Time , as he ever was in any Part of his Life ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,31.256

and he mentioned it to me several Times <P_32> afterwards as what
undoubtedly passed , not only in his Imagination , but before his Eyes
{COM:footnote_omitted} . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,32.257

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 32 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,32.258

He thought , he saw an unusual Blaze of Light fall on the Book while he
was reading , which he at first imagined might happen by some Accident
in the Candle . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,32.259

But , lifting up his Eyes , he apprehended , to his extreme Amazement ,
that there was before him , as it were suspended in the Air , a visible
Representation of the Lord Jesus Christ upon the Cross , surrounded on
all Sides with a Glory ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,32.260

and was impressed as if a Voice , or something equivalent to a Voice ,
had come to him to this Effect , <paren> for he was not confident as to
the very Words <$$paren> " Oh , sinner ! did I suffer this for thee ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,32.261

and are these the Returns ? " DODDRIDGE-1747-1,32.262

But whether this were an audible Voice , or only a strong Impression on
his Mind equally striking , he did not seem very confident ; though , to
the best of my <P_33> Remembrance , he rather judged it to be the former
. DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.263

Struck with so amazing a <font> Phenomenon <$$font> as this , there
remained hardly any Life in him , so that he sunk down in the Arm-Chair
in which he sat , and continued , he knew not exactly how long ,
insensible ; <paren> which was one Circumstance , that made me several
Times take the Liberty to suggest , that he might possibly be all this
while asleep : <$$paren> DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.264

But , however that were , he quickly after opened his Eyes ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.265

and saw nothing more than usual . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.266

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 33 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.267

It may easily be supposed , he was in no Condition to make any
Observation upon the Time in which he had remained in an insensible
State , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.268

nor did he , throughout all the Remainder of the Night , once recollect
that criminal and detestable Assignation , which had before engrossed
all his Thoughts . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.269

He rose in a Tumult of Passions , not to be conceived ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.270

and walked to and fro in his Chamber till he was ready to drop down , in
unutterable Astonishment and Agony of Heart ; appearing to himself the
vilest Monster in the Creation of God , who had all his lifetime been
<font> crucifying Christ afresh <$$font> by his sins , and now <font>
saw <$$font> , as he assuredly believed , <font> by a miraculous Vision
<$$font> , the Horror of what he had done . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.271

With this was connected such a View , both of the Majesty and Goodness
of God , as caused him to loathe and <font> abhor himself <$$font> , and
to <font> repent as in Dust and Ashes <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,33.272

He immediately gave Judgment against himself , that he was <P_34> most
justly worthy of Eternal Damnation : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,34.273

He was astonished , that he had not been immediately struck dead in the
Midst of his Wickedness : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,34.274

And <paren> which I think deserves particular Remark <$$paren> though he
assuredly believed that he should ere long be in Hell , and settled it
as a Point with himself for several Months , that the Wisdom and Justice
of God did almost necessarily require , that such an enormous Sinner
should be made an Example of everlasting Vengeance , and a <font>
Spectacle <$$font> as such <font> both to Angels and Men <$$font> , so
that he hardly durst presume to pray for Pardon ; yet what he then
suffered , was not so much from the Fear of Hell , though he concluded
it would soon be his Portion , as from a Sense of that horrible
Ingratitude he had shown to the God of his Life , and to that Blessed
Redeemer who had been in so affecting a Manner <font> set forth as
crucified before him <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,34.275

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 34 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,34.276

To this he refers in a Letter , dated from Douglas , <font> April
<$$font> 1. 1725 , communicated to me by <font> his Lady <$$font>
{COM:footnote_omitted} ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,34.277

but I know not to whom <P_35> it was addressed .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,35.278

His Words are these DODDRIDGE-1747-1,35.279

" One thing relating to my Conversion , and a remarkable Instance of the
Goodness of God to me <font> the chief of Sinners <$$font> , I do not
remember that I ever told to any other Person . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,35.280

It was this ; That after the Astonishing Sight I had of my blessed Lord
, the terrible Condition in which I was , proceeded not so much from the
Terrors of the Law , as from a Sense of having been so ungrateful a
Monster to Him whom I thought I saw pierced for my Transgressions . "
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,35.281

I the rather insert these words , as they evidently attest the
Circumstance which may seem most amazing in this Affair , and contain so
express a Declaration of his own Apprehension concerning it .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,35.282

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 35 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,35.283

In this View it may naturally be supposed , that he passed the Remainder
of the Night waking ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,35.284

and he could get but little Rest in several that followed .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,35.285

His Mind was continually taken up in reflecting on the Divine Purity and
Goodness ; the Grace which had been proposed to him in the Gospel , and
<P_36> which he had rejected ; the singular Advantages he had enjoyed
and abused ; and the many Favours of Providence which he had received ,
particularly in rescuing him from so many imminent Dangers of Death ,
which he now saw must have been attended with such dreadful and hopeless
Destruction . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,36.286

The Privileges of his Education , which he had so much despised , now
lay with an almost insupportable Weight on his Mind ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,36.287

and the Folly of that Career of sinful Pleasure , which he had so many
years been running with desperate Eagerness and unworthy Delight , now
filled him with Indignation against himself , and against the great
Deceiver , by whom <paren> to use his own Phrase <$$paren> he had been "
so wretchedly and scandalously befooled . " DODDRIDGE-1747-1,36.288

This he used often to express in the strongest Terms ; which I shall not
repeat so particularly , as I can recollect some of them .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,36.289

But , on the whole , it is certain , that , by what passed before he
left his Chamber the next Day , the whole Frame and Disposition of his
Soul was new-modelled and changed ; so that he became , and continued to
the last Day of his Exemplary and truly Christian Life , the very
Reverse of what he had been before . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,36.290

A Variety of Particulars , which I am afterwards to mention , will
illustrate this in the most convincing Manner . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,36.291

But I can@ @not proceed to them , without {TEXT:with} pausing a while ,
to adore so illustrious an Instance of the Power and Freedom of Divine
Grace , <P_37> and intreating my Reader seriously to reflect upon it ,
that his own Heart may be suitably affected . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,37.292

For surely , if the Truth of the Fact be admitted , in the lowest Views
in which it can be placed , <paren> that is , supposing the first
impression to have passed in a <font> Dream <$$font> <$$paren> it must
be allowed to have been little , if any thing , less than <font>
miraculous <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,37.293

It can@ @not in the Course of Nature be imagined , how <font> such a
Dream <$$font> should arise in a Mind , full of the most impure Ideas
and Affections , and <paren> as he himself often pleaded <$$paren> more
alienated from the Thoughts of a <font> crucified Saviour <$$font> ,
than from any other Object that can be conceived :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,37.294

Nor can we surely suppose it should , without a mighty Energy of the
Divine Power , be effectual to produce not only some transient Flow of
Passion , but so entire and permanent {TEXT:perminent} a Change in
Character and Conduct . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,37.295

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 36 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,37.296

On the whole therefore , I must beg Leave to express my own Sentiments
of the Matter , by repeating on this Occasion what I wrote many Years
ago , in my <font> Eighth Sermon on Regeneration <$$font> , in a Passage
dictated chiefly by the circumstantial Knowledge which I had of this
amazing Story , and , me@ @thinks , sufficiently vindicated by it , if
it stood entirely alone ; which yet , I must take the Liberty to say ,
it does not : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,37.297

For I hope the World will be particularly informed , that there is at
least a Second , that very nearly approaches it , whenever the
Established <font> Church of England <P_38> <$$font> shall lose one of
its brightest living Ornaments , and one of the most useful Members ,
which that , or perhaps any other Christian Communion , can boast :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,38.298

In the mean Time , may his exemplary Life be long continued , and his
zealous Ministry abundantly prospered ! DODDRIDGE-1747-1,38.299

I beg my Reader's Pardon for this Digression . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,38.300

The Passage I referred to above is remarkably , though not equally ,
applicable to both the Cases , as it stands in <font> Page <$$font> 263.
of the First Edition , and <font> Page <$$font> 160. of the Second ;
under that Head , where I am showing , that God sometimes accomplishes
the great Work of which we speak by <font> secret <$$font> and <font>
immediate impressions on the Mind <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,38.301

After preceding Illustrations , there are the following Words , on which
the <font> Colonel <$$font> 's Conversion will throw the justest Light :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,38.302

" Yea , I have known those of distinguished Genius , polite Manners ,
and great Experience in Human Affairs , who , after having outgrown all
the Impressions of a Religious Education ; after having been hardned ,
rather than subdued , by the most singular Mercies , even various ,
repeated , and astonishing Deliverances , which have appeared to
themselves as no less than miraculous ; after having lived for Years
<font> without God in the world <$$font> , notoriously corrupt
themselves , and labouring to the utmost to corrupt others , have been
stopt on a sudden in the full Career of their Sin , and have felt such
<font> Rays <$$font> of the <font> Divine <P_39> Presence <$$font> , and
of <font> Redeeming Love <$$font> , darting in upon their Minds , almost
like Lightning from Heaven , as have at once rouzed , over-powered , and
transformed them : So that they have come out of their <font> Secret
Chambers <$$font> with an irreconcilable Enmity to those Vices , to
which , when they entered them , they were the tamest and most abandoned
Slaves ; and have appeared from that very Hour the Votaries , the
Patrons , the Champions of Religion ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,39.303

and after a Course of the most resolute Attachment to it , in spite of
all the Reasonings or the Railleries , the Importunities or the
Reproaches of its Enemies , they have continued to this Day some of its
brightest Ornaments : A Change which I behold with equal Wonder and
Delight , and which , if a Nation should join in deriding it , I would
adore as <font> the Finger of <$$font> God . " DODDRIDGE-1747-1,39.304

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 37 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,39.305

The Mind of <font> Major Gardiner <$$font> continued from this
remarkable Time till towards the End of <font> October <$$font> <paren>
that is , rather more than three Months , but especially the two
{TEXT:Two} first of them <$$paren> in as extraordinary a Situation as
one can well imagine . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,39.306

He knew nothing of the Joys arising from a Sense of Pardon ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,39.307

but , on the contrary , took it for granted , that he must , in all
Probability , quickly perish . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,39.308

Nevertheless , he had such a Sense of the Evil of Sin , of the Goodness
of the Divine Being , and of the admirable Tendency of <P_40> the
Christian revelation , that he resolved to spend the Remainder of his
Life , while God continued him out of Hell , in as rational and as
useful a Manner as he could ; and to continue casting himself at the
Feet of Divine Mercy , every day , and often in a day , <font> if
peradventure there might be Hope <$$font> of Pardon , of which all that
he could say was , that he <font> did not absolutely despair <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,40.309

He had at that Time such a Sense of the Degeneracy of his own Heart ,
that he hardly durst form any determinate Resolution against Sin , or
pretend to engage himself by any Vow in the Presence of God ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,40.310

but he was continually crying to him , that he would deliver him from
the Bondage of Corruption . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,40.311

He perceived in himself a most surprizing Alteration with regard to the
Dispositions of his Heart ; so that , though he felt little of the
Delight of Religious Duties , he extremely desired Opportunities of
being engaged in them ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,40.312

and those <font> licentious Pleasures <$$font> , which had before been
his Heaven , were now absolutely his Aversion . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,40.313

And indeed , when I consider how habitual all those criminal Indulgences
were grown to him , and that he was now in the Prime of Life , and all
this while in high Health too , I can@ @not but be astonished to reflect
upon it , that he should be so wonderfully <font> sanctified in Body
<$$font> , as well as <font> in Soul and Spirit <$$font> , as that , for
all the future Years of his Life , he , from that Hour should find so
constant <P_41> a Disinclination to , and Abhorrence of , those criminal
Sensualities , to which he fancied he was before so invincibly impelled
by his very Constitution , that he was used strangely to think , and to
say , that Omnipotence itself could not reform him , without destroying
that Body , and giving him another {COM:footnote_omitted} .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,41.314

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 38 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,41.315

Nor was he only delivered from that Bondage of Corruption , which had
been habitual to him for so many Years , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,41.316

but felt in <P_42> his Breast so contrary a Disposition , that he was
grieved to see Human Nature , in those to whom he was most entirely a
Stranger , prostituted to such low and contemptible Pursuits .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,42.317

He therefore exerted his natural Courage in a very new Kind of Combat ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,42.318

and became an open <font> Advocate for Religion <$$font> , in all its
Principles , so far as he was acquainted with them , and all its
Precepts , relating to <font> Sobriety , Righteousness <$$font> , and
<font> Godliness <$$font> . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,42.319

Yet he was very desirous and cautious that he might not run into an
Extreme ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,42.320

and made it one of his first Petitions to God , the very Day after these
amazing Impressions had been wrought in his Mind , that he might not be
suffered to behave with such an affected Strictness and Preciseness , as
would lead others about him into mistaken Notions of Religion , and
expose it to Reproach or Suspicion , as if it were an unlovely or
uncomfortable Thing . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,42.321

For this Reason , he endeavoured to appear as cheerful in Conversation ,
as he conscientiously could ; though , in Spight of all his Precautions
, some Traces of that deep inward Sense which he had of his Guilt and
Misery , would at Times appear . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,42.322

He made no Secret of it however , that his Views were <P_43> entirely
changed , tho' he concealed the particular Circumstances attending that
Change . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,43.323

He told his most intimate Companions freely , that he had reflected on
the Course of Life in which he had so long joined them , and found it to
be Folly and Madness , unworthy a Rational Creature , and much more
unworthy persons calling themselves <font> Christians <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,43.324

And he <font> set up his Standard <$$font> , upon all Occasions ,
against Principles of Infidelity , and Practices of Vice , as
determinately and as boldly , as ever he displayed or planted his <font>
Colours <$$font> , when he bore them with so much Honour in the Field .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,43.325

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 39 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,43.326

I can@ @not forbear mentioning one Struggle of this Kind , which he
described to me with a large Detail of Circumstances , the first Day of
our Acquaintance . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,43.327

There was at that time in <font> Paris <$$font> a certain <font> Lady
<$$font> , <paren> whose Name , then well known in the grand and the gay
World , I must beg Leave to conceal <$$paren> who had imbibed the
Principles of <font> Deism <$$font> , and valued herself much upon being
an avowed Advocate for them . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,43.328

The <font> Major <$$font> , with his usual Frankness , <paren> tho' I
doubt not with that Politeness of Manners , which was so habitual to him
, and which he retained throughout his whole Life , <$$paren> answered
her , like a Man who perfectly saw through the Fallacy of her Arguments
, and was grieved to the Heart for her Delusion .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,43.329

On this she briskly challenged him to debate the Matter at large , and
to fix <P_44> upon a Day for that Purpose , when he should dine with her
, attended by any <font> Clergyman <$$font> he might chuse , whether of
the <font> Protestant <$$font> or <font> Catholick <$$font> Communion .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,44.330

A Sense of Duty would not allow him to decline this Challenge ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,44.331

and yet he had no sooner accepted it , but he was thrown into great
Perplexity and Distress , lest being <paren> as I remember he expressed
it , when he told me the Story <$$paren> only <font> a Christian of Six
Weeks old <$$font> , he should prejudice a good Cause , by his unskilful
Manner of defending it . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,44.332

However , he sought his Refuge in earnest and repeated Prayers to God ,
that He who can <font> ordain strength <$$font> , and <font> perfect
Praise , out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings <$$font> , would
graciously enable him on this Occasion , to vindicate his Truths in a
Manner which might carry Conviction along with it .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,44.333

He then endeavoured to marshal the Arguments in his own Mind , as well
as he could ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,44.334

and apprehending that he could not speak with so much Freedom before a
Number of Persons , especially before such whose Province he might in
that Case seem to invade , if he had not devolved the principal Part of
the Discourse upon them , he easily admitted the Apology of a <font>
Clergyman <$$font> or two , to whom he mentioned the Affair ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,44.335

and waited on the <font> Lady <$$font> alone upon the Day appointed .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,44.336

But his Heart was so set upon the Business , that he came earlier than
he was <P_45> expected , and Time enough to have two Hours Discourse
before Dinner ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,45.337

nor did he at all decline having Two young Persons , nearly related to
the <font> Lady <$$font> , present during the Conference .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,45.338

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 40 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,45.339

The <font> Major <$$font> opened it , with a View of such Arguments for
the Christian Religion as he had digested in his own Mind , to prove
that the Apostles were not mistaken themselves , and that they could not
have intended to impose upon us in the Accounts they give of the grand
Facts they attest : with the Truth of which Facts , that of the
Christian Religion is most apparently connected .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,45.340

And it was a great Encouragement to him , to find , that , unaccustomed
as he was to Discourses of this Nature , he had an unusual Command ,
both of Thought , and Expression ; so that he recollected , and uttered
every Thing , as he could have wished . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,45.341

The <font> Lady <$$font> heard with Attention ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,45.342

and tho' he paused between every Branch of the Argument , she did not
interrupt the Course of it , till he told her , he had finished his
Design , and waited for her Reply . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,45.343

She then produced some of her Objections , which he took up and
canvassed in such a Manner , that at length she burst out into Tears ,
allowed the Force of his Arguments and Replies , and appeared , for some
Time after , so deeply impressed with the Conversation , that it was
observed by several of her Friends : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,45.344

And there is Reason to believe , <P_46> that the Impression continued ,
at least so far as to prevent her from ever appearing under the
Character of an Unbeliever or a Sceptick . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.345

Section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 41 . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.346

This is only one Specimen , among many , of the Battles he was almost
daily called out to fight , in the Cause of Religion and Virtue ; with
relation to which I find him expressing himself thus , in a <font>
Letter <$$font> to <font> Mrs. Gardiner <$$font> , his good <font>
Mother <$$font> , dated from <font> Paris <$$font> the 25th of <font>
January <$$font> following , that is , 1719 - 20 . in Answer to one ,
in which she had warned him to expect such Trials :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.347

" I have <paren> says he , <$$paren> already met with them ,
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.348

and am obliged to fight , and to dispute every Inch of Ground :
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.349

But , all Thanks and Praise to the great <font> Captain of my Salvation
<$$font> , DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.350

he fights for me ; DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.351

and then it is no Wonder that I come off <font> more than Conqueror
<$$font> ; " DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.352

By which last Expression I suppose he meant to insinuate , that he was
strengthned and established , rather than over-borne , by this
Opposition . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.353

Yet it was not <font> immediately <$$font> that he gained such Fortitude
. DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.354

He has often told me , how much he felt in those Days of the <font>
Emphasis <$$font> of those well-chosen Words of the Apostle , in which
he ranks the <font> Trial of cruel Mockings <$$font> , with <font>
Scourgings , and Bonds , and Imprisonments <$$font> .
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,46.355

The continual Railleries with which he was received , in almost all
Companies where he had been most familiar before , did often distress
him beyond Measure ; <P_47> so that he has several Times declared , he
would much rather march up to a Battery of the Enemy's Cannon , than
have been obliged , so continually as he was , to face such Artillery as
this . DODDRIDGE-1747-1,47.356

But , like a brave Soldier in the first Action wherein he is engaged ,
he continued resolute , tho' shuddering at the Terror of the Assault ;
DODDRIDGE-1747-1,47.357

and quickly overcame those Impressions , which it is not perhaps in
Nature wholly to avoid : DODDRIDGE-1747-1,47.358

And therefore I find him , in the <font> Letter <$$font> referred to
above , which was written about half a Year after his Conversion , "
quite ashamed to think of the Uneasiness which these Things once gave
him . " DODDRIDGE-1747-1,47.359

In a Word , he went on , as every resolute Christian by Divine Grace may
do , till he turned Ridicule and Opposition into Respect and Veneration
. DODDRIDGE-1747-1,47.360

