<BEGIN_doyle-1905-2>

<P_26>

<heading>

<font> The Norwood Builder <$$font> DOYLE-1905-2,26.4

<$$heading>

' From the point of view of the criminal expert , ' said Mr Sherlock
Holmes , ' London has become a singularly uninteresting city since the
death of the late lamented Professor Moriarty . ' DOYLE-1905-2,26.6

' I can hardly think that you would find many decent citizens to agree
with you , ' I answered . DOYLE-1905-2,26.7

' Well , well , I must not be selfish , ' said he , with a smile , as he
pushed back his chair from the breakfast-table . DOYLE-1905-2,26.8

' The community is certainly the gainer , and no one the loser , save
the poor out-of-work specialist , whose occupation has gone .
DOYLE-1905-2,26.9

With that man in the field one's morning paper presented infinite
possibilities . DOYLE-1905-2,26.10

Often it was only the smallest trace , Watson , the faintest indication
, DOYLE-1905-2,26.11

and yet it was enough to tell me that the great malignant brain was
there , as the gentlest tremors of the edges of the web remind one of
the foul spider which lurks in the centre . DOYLE-1905-2,26.12

Petty thefts , wanton assaults , purposeless outrage - to the man who
held the clue all could be worked into one connected whole .
DOYLE-1905-2,26.13

To the scientific student of the higher criminal world no capital in
Europe offered the advantages which London then possessed .
DOYLE-1905-2,26.14

But now - ' DOYLE-1905-2,26.15

He shrugged his shoulders in humorous deprecation of the state of things
which he had himself done so much to produce . DOYLE-1905-2,26.16

At the time of which I speak , Holmes had been back for some months ,
DOYLE-1905-2,26.17

and I , at his request , had sold my practice and returned to share the
old quarters in Baker Street . DOYLE-1905-2,26.18

A young doctor , named Verner , had purchased my small Kensington
practice , and given with astonishingly little demur the highest price
that I ventured to ask - an incident which only explained itself some
years later , when I found that Verner was a distant relation of
Holmes's , and that it was my friend who had really found the money .
DOYLE-1905-2,26.19

<P_27>

Our months of partnership had not been so uneventful as he had stated ,
DOYLE-1905-2,27.21

for I find , on looking over my notes , that this period includes the
case of the papers of ex-President Murillo , and also the shocking
affair of the Dutch steamship <font> Friesland <$$font> , which so
nearly cost us both our lives . DOYLE-1905-2,27.22

His cold and proud nature was always averse , however , to anything in
the shape of public applause , DOYLE-1905-2,27.23

and he bound me in the most stringent terms to say no further word of
himself , his methods , or his successes - a prohibition which , as I
have explained , has only now been removed . DOYLE-1905-2,27.24

Mr Sherlock Holmes was leaning back in his chair after his whimsical
protest , DOYLE-1905-2,27.25

and was unfolding his morning paper in a leisurely fashion , when our
attention was arrested by a tremendous ring at the bell , followed
immediately by a hollow drumming sound , as if someone were beating on
the outer door with his fist . DOYLE-1905-2,27.26

As it opened there came a tumultuous rush into the hall ,
DOYLE-1905-2,27.27

rapid feet clattered up the stair , DOYLE-1905-2,27.28

and an instant later a wild-eyed and frantic young man , pale ,
dishevelled , and palpitating , burst into the room .
DOYLE-1905-2,27.29

He looked from one to the other of us , DOYLE-1905-2,27.30

and under our gaze of inquiry he became conscious that some apology was
needed for this unceremonious entry . DOYLE-1905-2,27.31

' I@ @'m sorry , Mr Holmes , ' he cried . DOYLE-1905-2,27.32

' You must@ @n't blame me . DOYLE-1905-2,27.33

I am nearly mad . DOYLE-1905-2,27.34

Mr Holmes , I am the unhappy John Hector McFarlane . '
DOYLE-1905-2,27.35

He made the announcement as if the name alone would explain both his
visit and its manner , DOYLE-1905-2,27.36

but I could see by my companion's unresponsive face that it meant no
more to him than to me . DOYLE-1905-2,27.37

' Have a cigarette , Mr McFarlane , ' said he , pushing his case across
. DOYLE-1905-2,27.38

' I am sure that with your symptoms my friend Dr Watson here would
prescribe a sedative . DOYLE-1905-2,27.39

The weather has been so very warm these last few days .
DOYLE-1905-2,27.40

Now , if you feel a little more composed , I should be glad if you would
sit down in that chair and tell us very slowly and quietly who you are
and what it is that you want . DOYLE-1905-2,27.41

You mentioned your name as if I should recognize it , DOYLE-1905-2,27.42

but I assure you that , beyond the {TEXT:missing_"the"} obvious facts
that you are a bachelor , a solicitor , a <P_28> Freemason , and an
asthmatic , I know nothing whatever about you . ' DOYLE-1905-2,28.43

Familiar as I was with my friend's methods , it was not difficult for me
to follow his deductions , and to observe the untidiness of attire , the
sheaf of legal papers , the watch-charm , and the breathing which had
prompted them . DOYLE-1905-2,28.44

Our client , however , stared in amazement . DOYLE-1905-2,28.45

' Yes , I am all that , Mr Holmes , DOYLE-1905-2,28.46

and in addition I am the most unfortunate man at this moment in London .
DOYLE-1905-2,28.47

For God's sake do@ @n't abandon me , Mr Holmes ! DOYLE-1905-2,28.48

If they come to arrest me before I have finished my story , make them
give me time , so that I may tell you the whole truth .
DOYLE-1905-2,28.49

I could go to gaol happy if I knew that you were working for me outside
. ' DOYLE-1905-2,28.50

' Arrest you ! ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,28.51

' This is really most grati- most interesting . DOYLE-1905-2,28.52

On what charge do you expect to be arrested ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,28.53

' Upon the charge of murdering Mr Jonas Oldacre , of Lower Norwood . '
DOYLE-1905-2,28.54

My companion's expressive face showed a sympathy which was not , I am
afraid , entirely unmixed with satisfaction . DOYLE-1905-2,28.55

' Dear me ! ' said he ; DOYLE-1905-2,28.56

' it was only this moment at breakfast that I was saying to my friend ,
Dr Watson , that sensational cases had disappeared out of our papers .
' DOYLE-1905-2,28.57

Our visitor stretched forward a quivering hand DOYLE-1905-2,28.58

and picked up the <font> Daily Telegraph , <$$font> which still lay upon
Holmes's knee . DOYLE-1905-2,28.59

' If you had looked at it , sir , you would have seen at a glance what
the errand is on which I have come to you this morning .
DOYLE-1905-2,28.60

I feel as if my name and my misfortune must be in every man's mouth . '
DOYLE-1905-2,28.61

He turned it over to expose the central page . DOYLE-1905-2,28.62

' Here it is , DOYLE-1905-2,28.63

and with your permission I will read it to you . DOYLE-1905-2,28.64

Listen to this , Mr Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,28.65

The headlines are : Mysterious Affair at Lower Norwood . Disappearance
of a Well-known Builder . Suspicion of Murder and Arson . A Clue to
the Criminal . DOYLE-1905-2,28.66

That is the clue which they are already following , Mr Holmes ,
DOYLE-1905-2,28.67

and I know that it leads infallibly to me . DOYLE-1905-2,28.68

I have been followed from London Bridge Station , DOYLE-1905-2,28.69

and I am sure that they are only waiting for the warrant to arrest me .
DOYLE-1905-2,28.70

It will break my mother's heart - DOYLE-1905-2,28.71

it will break her heart ! ' DOYLE-1905-2,28.72

He <P_29> wrung his hands in an agony of apprehension ,
DOYLE-1905-2,29.73

and swayed backwards and forwards in his chair . DOYLE-1905-2,29.74

I looked with interest upon this man , who was accused of being the
perpetrator of a crime of violence . DOYLE-1905-2,29.75

He was flaxen-haired and handsome in a washed-out , negative fashion ,
with frightened blue eyes and a clean-shaven face , with a weak ,
sensitive mouth . DOYLE-1905-2,29.76

His age may have been about twenty-seven ; his dress and bearing , that
of a gentleman . DOYLE-1905-2,29.77

From the pocket of his light summer overcoat protruded the bundle of
endorsed papers which proclaimed his profession . DOYLE-1905-2,29.78

' We must use what time we have , ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,29.79

' Watson , would you have the kindness to take the paper and to read me
the paragraph in question ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,29.80

Underneath the vigorous headlines which our client had quoted I read the
following suggestive narrative : DOYLE-1905-2,29.81

' Late last night , or early this morning , an incident occurred at
Lower Norwood which points , it is feared , to a serious crime .
DOYLE-1905-2,29.82

Mr Jonas Oldacre is a well-known resident of that suburb , where he has
carried on his business as a builder for many years .
DOYLE-1905-2,29.83

Mr Oldacre is a bachelor , fifty-two years of age , DOYLE-1905-2,29.84

and lives in Deep Dene House , at the Sydenham end of the road of that
name . DOYLE-1905-2,29.85

He has had the reputation of being a man of eccentric habits , secretive
and retiring . DOYLE-1905-2,29.86

For some years he has practically withdrawn from the business , in which
he is said to have amassed considerable wealth . DOYLE-1905-2,29.87

A small timber-yard still exists , however , at the back of the house ,
DOYLE-1905-2,29.88

and last night , about twelve o'clock , an alarm was given that one of
the stacks was on fire . DOYLE-1905-2,29.89

The engines were soon upon the spot , DOYLE-1905-2,29.90

but the dry wood burned with great fury , DOYLE-1905-2,29.91

and it was impossible to arrest the conflagration until the stack had
been entirely consumed . DOYLE-1905-2,29.92

Up to this point the incident bore the appearance of an ordinary
accident , DOYLE-1905-2,29.93

but fresh indications seem to point to serious crime .
DOYLE-1905-2,29.94

Surprise was expressed at the absence of the master of the establishment
from the scene of the fire , DOYLE-1905-2,29.95

and an inquiry followed , which showed that he had disappeared from the
house . DOYLE-1905-2,29.96

An examination of his room revealed that <P_30> the bed had not been
slept in , that a safe which stood in it was open , that a number of
important papers were scattered about the room , and , finally , that
there were signs of a murderous struggle , slight traces of blood being
found within the room , and an oaken walking-stick which also showed
stains of blood upon the handle . DOYLE-1905-2,30.97

It is known that Mr Jonas Oldacre had received a late visitor in his
bedroom upon that night , DOYLE-1905-2,30.98

and the stick found has been identified as the property of this person ,
who is a young London solicitor named John Hector McFarlane , junior
partner of Graham & McFarlane , of 426 Gresham Buildings , EC
DOYLE-1905-2,30.99

The police believe that they have evidence in their possession which
supplies a very convincing motive for the crime , DOYLE-1905-2,30.100

and altogether it can@ @not be doubted that sensational developments
will follow . ' DOYLE-1905-2,30.101

LATER - DOYLE-1905-2,30.102

It is rumoured as we go to press that Mr John Hector McFarlane has
actually been arrested on the charge of the murder of Mr Jonas Oldacre .
DOYLE-1905-2,30.103

It is at least certain that a warrant has been issued .
DOYLE-1905-2,30.104

There have been further and sinister developments in the investigation
at Norwood . DOYLE-1905-2,30.105

Besides the signs of a struggle in the room of the unfortunate builder ,
it is now known that the French windows of his bedroom <paren> which is
on the ground floor <$$paren> were found to be open , that there were
marks as if some bulky object had been dragged across to the wood-pile ,
DOYLE-1905-2,30.106

and , finally , it is asserted that charred remains have been found
among the charcoal ashes of the fire . DOYLE-1905-2,30.107

The police theory is that a most sensational crime has been committed ,
that the victim was clubbed to death in his own bedroom , his papers
rifled , and his dead body dragged across to the wood-stack , which was
then ignited so as to hide all traces of the crime .
DOYLE-1905-2,30.108

The conduct of the criminal investigation has been left in the
experienced hands of Inspector Lestrade , of Scotland Yard , who is
following up the clues with his accustomed energy and sagacity . '
DOYLE-1905-2,30.109

Sherlock Holmes listened with closed eyes and finger-tips together to
this remarkable account . DOYLE-1905-2,30.110

<P_31>

' The case has certainly some points of interest , ' said he , in his
languid fashion . DOYLE-1905-2,31.112

' May I ask , in the first place , Mr McFarlane , how it is that you are
still at liberty , since there appears to be enough evidence to justify
your arrest ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,31.113

' I live at Torrington Lodge , Blackheath , with my parents , Mr Holmes
; DOYLE-1905-2,31.114

but last night , having to do business very late with Mr Jonas Oldacre ,
I stayed at an hotel in Norwood , DOYLE-1905-2,31.115

and came to my business from there . DOYLE-1905-2,31.116

I knew nothing of this affair until I was in the train , when I read
what you have just heard . DOYLE-1905-2,31.117

I at once saw the horrible danger of my position , DOYLE-1905-2,31.118

and I hurried to put the case into your hands . DOYLE-1905-2,31.119

I have no doubt that I should have been arrested either at my City
office or at my home . DOYLE-1905-2,31.120

A man followed me from London Bridge Station , DOYLE-1905-2,31.121

and I have no doubt - DOYLE-1905-2,31.122

Great heaven , what is that ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,31.123

It was a clang of the bell , followed instantly by heavy steps upon the
stair . DOYLE-1905-2,31.124

A moment later our old friend Lestrade appeared in the doorway .
DOYLE-1905-2,31.125

Over his shoulder I caught a glimpse of one or two uniformed policemen
outside . DOYLE-1905-2,31.126

' Mr John Hector McFarlane , ' said Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,31.127

Our unfortunate client rose with a ghastly face . DOYLE-1905-2,31.128

' I arrest you for the wilful murder of Mr Jonas Oldacre of Lower
Norwood . ' DOYLE-1905-2,31.129

McFarlane turned to us with a gesture of despair , DOYLE-1905-2,31.130

and sank into his chair once more like one who is crushed .
DOYLE-1905-2,31.131

' One moment , Lestrade , ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,31.132

' Half an hour more or less can make no difference to you ,
DOYLE-1905-2,31.133

and the gentleman was about to give us an account of this very
interesting affair , which might aid us in clearing it up . '
DOYLE-1905-2,31.134

' I think there will be no difficulty in clearing it up , ' said
Lestrade grimly . DOYLE-1905-2,31.135

' None the less , with your permission , I should be much interested to
hear his account . ' DOYLE-1905-2,31.136

' Well , Mr Holmes , it is difficult for me to refuse you anything ,
DOYLE-1905-2,31.137

for you have been of use to the Force once or twice in the past ,
DOYLE-1905-2,31.138

and we owe you a good turn at Scotland Yard , ' said Lestrade .
DOYLE-1905-2,31.139

' At the same time , I must remain with my prisoner ,
DOYLE-1905-2,31.140

and I am bound to warn him that anything he may say will appear in
evidence against him . ' DOYLE-1905-2,31.141

<P_32>

' I wish nothing better , ' said our client . DOYLE-1905-2,32.143

' All I ask is that you should hear and recognize the absolute truth .
' DOYLE-1905-2,32.144

Lestrade looked at his watch . DOYLE-1905-2,32.145

' I@ @'ll give you half an hour , ' said he . DOYLE-1905-2,32.146

' I must explain first , ' said McFarlane , ' that I knew nothing of Mr
Jonas Oldacre . DOYLE-1905-2,32.147

His name was familiar to me ; DOYLE-1905-2,32.148

for many years ago my parents were acquainted with him ,
DOYLE-1905-2,32.149

but they drifted apart . DOYLE-1905-2,32.150

I was very much surprised , therefore , when yesterday , about three
o'clock in the afternoon , he walked into my office in the City .
DOYLE-1905-2,32.151

But I was still more astonished when he told me the object of his visit
. DOYLE-1905-2,32.152

He had in his hand several sheets of a note-book , covered with
scribbled writing - DOYLE-1905-2,32.153

here they are - DOYLE-1905-2,32.154

and he laid them on my table . ' DOYLE-1905-2,32.155

" Here is my will , " said he . DOYLE-1905-2,32.156

" I want you , Mr McFarlane , to cast it into proper legal shape .
DOYLE-1905-2,32.157

I will sit here while you do so . " DOYLE-1905-2,32.158

' I set myself to copy it , DOYLE-1905-2,32.159

and you can imagine my astonishment when I found that , with some
reservations , he had left all his property to me . DOYLE-1905-2,32.160

He was a strange , little , ferret-like man , with white eyelashes ,
DOYLE-1905-2,32.161

and when I looked up at him I found his keen grey eyes fixed upon me
with an amused expression . DOYLE-1905-2,32.162

I could hardly believe my own senses as I read the terms of the will ;
DOYLE-1905-2,32.163

but he explained that he was a bachelor with hardly any living relation
, that he had known my parents in his youth , and that he had always
heard of me as a very deserving young man , and was assured that his
money would be in worthy hands . DOYLE-1905-2,32.164

Of course , I could only stammer out my thanks . DOYLE-1905-2,32.165

The will was duly finished , signed , and witnessed by my clerk .
DOYLE-1905-2,32.166

This is it on the blue paper , DOYLE-1905-2,32.167

and these slips , as I have explained , are the rough draft .
DOYLE-1905-2,32.168

Mr Jonas Oldacre then informed me that there were a number of documents
- building leases , title-deeds , mortgages , scrip , and so forth -
which it was necessary that I should see and understand .
DOYLE-1905-2,32.169

He said that his mind would not be easy until the whole thing was
settled , DOYLE-1905-2,32.170

and he begged me to come out to his house at Norwood that night ,
bringing the will with me , and to arrange matters .
DOYLE-1905-2,32.171

" Remember , <P_33> my boy , not one word to your parents about the
affair until everything is settled . DOYLE-1905-2,33.172

We will keep it as a little surprise for them . " DOYLE-1905-2,33.173

He was very insistent upon this point , DOYLE-1905-2,33.174

and made me promise it faithfully . DOYLE-1905-2,33.175

' You can imagine , Mr Holmes , that I was not in a humour to refuse him
anything that he might ask . DOYLE-1905-2,33.176

He was my benefactor , DOYLE-1905-2,33.177

and all my desire was to carry out his wishes in every particular .
DOYLE-1905-2,33.178

I sent a telegram home , therefore , to say that I had important
business on hand , and that it was impossible for me to say how late I
might be . DOYLE-1905-2,33.179

Mr Oldacre had told me that he would like me to have supper with him at
nine , as he might not be home before that hour . DOYLE-1905-2,33.180

I had some difficulty in finding his house , however ,
DOYLE-1905-2,33.181

and it was nearly half-@ @past before I reached it .
DOYLE-1905-2,33.182

I found him - ' DOYLE-1905-2,33.183

' One moment ! ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,33.184

' Who opened the door ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,33.185

' A middle-aged woman , who was , I suppose , his house-keeper . '
DOYLE-1905-2,33.186

' And it was she , I presume , who mentioned your name ? '
DOYLE-1905-2,33.187

' Exactly , ' said McFarlane . DOYLE-1905-2,33.188

' Pray proceed . ' DOYLE-1905-2,33.189

Mr McFarlane wiped his damp brow , DOYLE-1905-2,33.190

and then continued his narrative : DOYLE-1905-2,33.191

' I was shown by this woman into a sitting-room , where a frugal supper
was laid out . DOYLE-1905-2,33.192

Afterwards Mr Jonas Oldacre led me into his bedroom , in which there
stood a heavy safe . DOYLE-1905-2,33.193

This he opened DOYLE-1905-2,33.194

and took out a mass of documents , which we went over together .
DOYLE-1905-2,33.195

It was between eleven and twelve when we finished . DOYLE-1905-2,33.196

He remarked that we must not disturb the housekeeper .
DOYLE-1905-2,33.197

He showed me out through his own French window , which had been open all
this time . ' DOYLE-1905-2,33.198

' Was the blind down ? ' asked Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,33.199

' I will not be sure , DOYLE-1905-2,33.200

but I believe that it was only half down . DOYLE-1905-2,33.201

Yes , I remember how he pulled it up in order to swing open the window .
DOYLE-1905-2,33.202

I could not find my stick , DOYLE-1905-2,33.203

and he said , " Never mind , my boy ; DOYLE-1905-2,33.204

I shall see a good deal of you now , I hope , DOYLE-1905-2,33.205

and I will keep your stick until you come back to claim it . "
DOYLE-1905-2,33.206

I left him there , the safe open , and the papers made up in packets
upon the table . DOYLE-1905-2,33.207

It was so late that I could not get <P_34> back to Blackheath ,
DOYLE-1905-2,34.208

so I spent the night at the Anerley Arms , DOYLE-1905-2,34.209

and I knew nothing more until I read of this horrible affair in the
morning . ' DOYLE-1905-2,34.210

' Anything more that you would like to ask , Mr Holmes ? ' said
Lestrade , whose eyebrows had gone up once or twice during this
remarkable explanation . DOYLE-1905-2,34.211

' Not until I have been to Blackheath . ' DOYLE-1905-2,34.212

' You mean to Norwood , ' said Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,34.213

' Oh , yes ; no doubt that is what I must have meant , ' said Holmes ,
with his enigmatical smile . DOYLE-1905-2,34.214

Lestrade had learned by more experiences than he would care to
acknowledge that that razor-like brain could cut through that which was
impenetrable to him . DOYLE-1905-2,34.215

I saw him look curiously at my companion . DOYLE-1905-2,34.216

' I think I should like to have a word with you presently , Mr Sherlock
Holmes , ' said he . DOYLE-1905-2,34.217

' Now , Mr McFarlane , two of my constables are at the door ,
DOYLE-1905-2,34.218

and there is a four-wheeler waiting . ' DOYLE-1905-2,34.219

The wretched young man arose , DOYLE-1905-2,34.220

and with a last beseeching glance at us he walked from the room .
DOYLE-1905-2,34.221

The officers conducted him to the cab , DOYLE-1905-2,34.222

but Lestrade remained . DOYLE-1905-2,34.223

Holmes had picked up the pages which formed the rough draft of the will
, DOYLE-1905-2,34.224

and was looking at them with the keenest interest upon his face .
DOYLE-1905-2,34.225

' There are some points about that document , Lestrade , are there not ?
' said he , pushing them over DOYLE-1905-2,34.226

. The official looked at them with a puzzled expression .
DOYLE-1905-2,34.227

' I can read the first few lines , and these in the middle of the second
page , and one or two at the end . DOYLE-1905-2,34.228

Those are as clear as print , ' said he ; DOYLE-1905-2,34.229

' but the writing in between is very bad , DOYLE-1905-2,34.230

and there are three places where I can@ @not read it at all . '
DOYLE-1905-2,34.231

' What do you make of that ? ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,34.232

' Well , what do <font> you <$$font> make of it ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,34.233

' That it was written in a train ; DOYLE-1905-2,34.234

the good writing represents stations , the bad writing , movement , and
the very bad writing , passing over points . DOYLE-1905-2,34.235

A scientific expert would pronounce at once that this was drawn up on a
suburban line , since nowhere save in the immediate vicinity of a great
city <P_35> could there be so quick a succession of points .
DOYLE-1905-2,35.236

Granting that his whole journey was occupied in drawing up the will ,
then the train was an express , only stopping once between Norwood and
London Bridge . ' DOYLE-1905-2,35.237

Lestrade began to laugh . DOYLE-1905-2,35.238

' You are too many for me when you begin to get on your theories , Mr
Holmes , ' said he . DOYLE-1905-2,35.239

' How does this bear on the case ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,35.240

' Well , it corroborates the young man's story to the extent that the
will was drawn up by Jonas Oldacre in his journey yesterday .
DOYLE-1905-2,35.241

It is curious - is it not ? - that a man should draw up so important a
document in so haphazard a fashion . DOYLE-1905-2,35.242

It suggests that he did not think it was going to be of much practical
importance . DOYLE-1905-2,35.243

If a man drew up a will which he did not intend ever to be effective he
might do it so . ' DOYLE-1905-2,35.244

' Well , he drew up his own death-warrant at the same time , ' said
Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,35.245

' Oh , you think so ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,35.246

' Do@ @n't you ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,35.247

' Well , it is quite possible ; DOYLE-1905-2,35.248

but the case is not clear to me yet . ' DOYLE-1905-2,35.249

' Not clear ? DOYLE-1905-2,35.250

Well , if that is@ @n't clear , what <font> could <$$font> be clearer ?
DOYLE-1905-2,35.251

Here is a young man who learns suddenly that if a certain older man dies
he will succeed to a fortune . DOYLE-1905-2,35.252

What does he do ? DOYLE-1905-2,35.253

He says nothing to anyone , DOYLE-1905-2,35.254

but he arranges that he shall go out on some pretext to see his client
that night ; DOYLE-1905-2,35.255

he waits until the only other person in the house is in bed ,
DOYLE-1905-2,35.256

and then in the solitude of the man's room he murders him ,
DOYLE-1905-2,35.257

burns his body in the wood-pile , DOYLE-1905-2,35.258

and departs to a neighbouring hotel . DOYLE-1905-2,35.259

The blood-stains in the room and also on the stick are very slight .
DOYLE-1905-2,35.260

It is probable that he imagined his crime to be a bloodless one , and
hoped that if the body were consumed it would hide all traces of the
method of his death - traces which for some reason must have pointed to
him . DOYLE-1905-2,35.261

Is all this not obvious ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,35.262

' It strikes me , my good Lestrade , as being just a trifle too obvious
, ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,35.263

' You do not add imagination to your other great qualities ;
DOYLE-1905-2,35.264

but if you could for one moment put <P_36> yourself in the place of this
young man , would you choose the very night after the will had been made
to commit your crime ? DOYLE-1905-2,36.265

Would it not seem dangerous to you to make so very close a relation
between the two incidents ? DOYLE-1905-2,36.266

Again , would you choose an occasion when you are known to be in the
house , when a servant has let you in ? DOYLE-1905-2,36.267

And , finally , would you take the great pains to conceal the body and
yet leave your own stick as a sign that you were the criminal ?
DOYLE-1905-2,36.268

Confess , Lestrade , that all this is very unlikely '
DOYLE-1905-2,36.269

' As to the stick , Mr Holmes , you know as well as I do that a criminal
is often flurried and does things which a cool man would avoid .
DOYLE-1905-2,36.270

He was very likely afraid to go back to the room . DOYLE-1905-2,36.271

Give me another theory that would fit the facts . ' DOYLE-1905-2,36.272

' I could very easily give you half_a_dozen , ' said Holmes .
DOYLE-1905-2,36.273

' Here , for example , is a very possible and even probable one .
DOYLE-1905-2,36.274

I make you a free present of it . DOYLE-1905-2,36.275

The older man is showing documents which are of evident value .
DOYLE-1905-2,36.276

A passing tramp sees them through the window , the blind of which is
only half down . DOYLE-1905-2,36.277

Exit the solicitor . DOYLE-1905-2,36.278

Enter the tramp ! DOYLE-1905-2,36.279

He seizes a stick , which he observes there , DOYLE-1905-2,36.280

kills Oldacre , DOYLE-1905-2,36.281

and departs after burning the body . ' DOYLE-1905-2,36.282

' Why should the tramp burn the body ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,36.283

' For the matter of that , why should McFarlane ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,36.284

' To hide some evidence . DOYLE-1905-2,36.285

' Possibly the tramp wanted to hide that any murder at all had been
committed . ' DOYLE-1905-2,36.286

' And why did the tramp take nothing ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,36.287

' Because they were papers that he could not negotiate . '
DOYLE-1905-2,36.288

Lestrade shook his head , though it seemed to me that his manner was
less absolutely assured than before . DOYLE-1905-2,36.289

' Well , Mr Sherlock Holmes , you may look for your tramp ,
DOYLE-1905-2,36.290

and while you are finding him we will hold on to our man .
DOYLE-1905-2,36.291

The future will show which is right . DOYLE-1905-2,36.292

Just notice this point , Mr Holmes - that so far as we know none of the
papers were removed , and that the prisoner is the one man in the world
who had no reason for removing them since he was heir-at-law and would
come into them in any case . ' DOYLE-1905-2,36.293

My friend seemed struck by this remark . DOYLE-1905-2,36.294

<P_37>

' I do@ @n't mean to deny that the evidence is in some ways very
strongly in favour of your theory , ' said he . DOYLE-1905-2,37.296

' I only wish to point out that there are other theories possible .
DOYLE-1905-2,37.297

As you say , the future will decide . DOYLE-1905-2,37.298

Good morning ! DOYLE-1905-2,37.299

I dare say that in the course of the day I shall drop in at Norwood and
see how you are getting on . ' DOYLE-1905-2,37.300

When the detective departed my friend rose DOYLE-1905-2,37.301

and made his preparations for the day's work with the alert air of a man
who has a congenial task before him . DOYLE-1905-2,37.302

' My first movement , Watson , ' said he , as he bustled into his
frock-coat , ' must , as I said , be in the direction of Blackheath . '
DOYLE-1905-2,37.303

' And why not Norwood ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,37.304

' Because we have in this case one singular incident coming close to the
heels of another singular incident . DOYLE-1905-2,37.305

The police are making the mistake of concentrating their attention upon
the second because it happens to be the one which is actually criminal .
DOYLE-1905-2,37.306

But it is evident to me that the logical way to approach the case is to
begin by trying to throw some light upon the first incident - the
curious will , so suddenly made , and to so unexpected an heir .
DOYLE-1905-2,37.307

It may do something to simplify what followed . DOYLE-1905-2,37.308

No , my dear fellow , I do@ @n't think you can help me .
DOYLE-1905-2,37.309

There is no prospect of danger , DOYLE-1905-2,37.310

or I should not dream of stirring out without you . DOYLE-1905-2,37.311

I trust that when I see you in the evening I will be able to report that
I have been able to do something for this unfortunate youngster who has
thrown himself upon my protection . ' DOYLE-1905-2,37.312

It was late when my friend returned , DOYLE-1905-2,37.313

and I could see by a glance at his haggard and anxious face that the
high hopes with which he had started had not been fulfilled .
DOYLE-1905-2,37.314

For an hour he droned away upon his violin , endeavouring to soothe his
own ruffled spirits . DOYLE-1905-2,37.315

At last he flung down the instrument DOYLE-1905-2,37.316

and plunged into a detailed account of his misadventures .
DOYLE-1905-2,37.317

' It@ @'s all going wrong , Watson - all as wrong as it can go .
DOYLE-1905-2,37.318

I kept a bold face before Lestrade , DOYLE-1905-2,37.319

but , upon my soul , I believe that for once the fellow is on the right
track and we <P_38> are on the wrong . DOYLE-1905-2,38.320

All my instincts are one way , DOYLE-1905-2,38.321

and all the facts are the other , DOYLE-1905-2,38.322

and I much fear that British juries have not yet attained that pitch of
intelligence when they will give the preference to my theories over
Lestrade's facts . ' DOYLE-1905-2,38.323

' Did you go to Blackheath ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,38.324

' Yes , Watson , I went there , DOYLE-1905-2,38.325

and I found very quickly that the late lamented Oldacre was a pretty
considerable blackguard . DOYLE-1905-2,38.326

The father was away in search of his son . DOYLE-1905-2,38.327

The mother was at home - a little , fluffy , blue-eyed person , in a
tremor of fear and indignation . DOYLE-1905-2,38.328

Of course , she would not admit even the possibility of his guilt .
DOYLE-1905-2,38.329

But she would not express either surprise or regret over the fate of
Oldacre . DOYLE-1905-2,38.330

On the contrary , she spoke of him with such bitterness that she was
unconsciously considerably strengthening the case of the police ;
DOYLE-1905-2,38.331

for , of course , if the son had heard her speak of the man in that
fashion it would predispose him towards hatred and violence .
DOYLE-1905-2,38.332

" He was more like a malignant and cunning ape than a human being , "
said she , DOYLE-1905-2,38.333

" and he always was , ever since he was a young man . "
DOYLE-1905-2,38.334

' " You knew him at the time ? " said I . ' DOYLE-1905-2,38.335

" Yes , I knew him well ; DOYLE-1905-2,38.336

in fact , he was an old suitor of mine . DOYLE-1905-2,38.337

Thank God that I had the sense to turn away from him and to marry a
better , if a poorer , man . DOYLE-1905-2,38.338

I was engaged to him , Mr Holmes , when I heard a shocking story of how
he had turned a cat loose in an aviary , DOYLE-1905-2,38.339

and I was so horrified at his brutal cruelty that I would have nothing
more to do with him . " DOYLE-1905-2,38.340

She rummaged in a bureau , DOYLE-1905-2,38.341

and presently she produced a photograph of a woman , shamefully defaced
and mutilated with a knife . DOYLE-1905-2,38.342

" That is my own photograph , " said she . DOYLE-1905-2,38.343

" He sent it to me in that state , with his curse , upon my wedding
morning . " DOYLE-1905-2,38.344

' " Well , " said I , " at least he has forgiven you now , since he has
left all his property to your son . " DOYLE-1905-2,38.345

' " Neither my son nor I want anything from Jonas Old-acre , dead or
alive , " she cried , with a proper spirit . DOYLE-1905-2,38.346

" There is a God in heaven , Mr Holmes , DOYLE-1905-2,38.347

and that same God who has punished that wicked man will show in His own
good time that my son's hands are guiltless of his blood . "
DOYLE-1905-2,38.348

<P_39>

' Well , I tried one or two leads , DOYLE-1905-2,39.350

but could get at nothing which would help our hypothesis , and several
points which would make against it . DOYLE-1905-2,39.351

I gave it up at last , DOYLE-1905-2,39.352

and off I went to Norwood . DOYLE-1905-2,39.353

' This place , Deep Dene House , is a big modern villa of staring brick
, standing back in its own grounds , with a laurel-clumped lawn in front
of it . DOYLE-1905-2,39.354

To the right and some distance back from the road was the timber-yard
which had been the scene of the fire . DOYLE-1905-2,39.355

Here@ @'s a rough plan on a leaf of my note-book . DOYLE-1905-2,39.356

This window on the left is the one which opens into Oldacre's room .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.357

You can look into it from the road , you see . DOYLE-1905-2,39.358

That is about the only bit of consolation I have had to-day .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.359

Lestrade was not there , DOYLE-1905-2,39.360

but his head constable did the honours . DOYLE-1905-2,39.361

They had just made a great treasure-trove . DOYLE-1905-2,39.362

They had spent the morning raking among the ashes of the burned
wood-pile DOYLE-1905-2,39.363

and besides the charred organic remains they had secured several
discoloured metal discs . DOYLE-1905-2,39.364

I examined them with care , DOYLE-1905-2,39.365

and there was no doubt that they were trouser buttons .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.366

I even distinguished that one of them was marked with the name of "
Hyams " , who was Oldacre's tailor . DOYLE-1905-2,39.367

I then worked the lawn very carefully for signs and traces ,
DOYLE-1905-2,39.368

but this drought has made everything as hard as iron .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.369

Nothing was to be seen save that somebody or a bundle had been dragged
through a low privet hedge which is in a line with the wood-pile .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.370

All that , of course , fits in with the official theory .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.371

I crawled about the lawn with an August sun on my back .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.372

But I got up at the end of an hour no wiser than before .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.373

' Well , after this fiasco I went into the bedroom DOYLE-1905-2,39.374

and examined that also . DOYLE-1905-2,39.375

The blood-stains were very slight , mere smears and discolorations , but
undoubtedly fresh . DOYLE-1905-2,39.376

The stick had been removed , DOYLE-1905-2,39.377

but there also the marks were slight . DOYLE-1905-2,39.378

There is no doubt about the stick belonging to our client .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.379

He admits it . DOYLE-1905-2,39.380

Footmarks of both men could be made out on the carpet , but none of any
third person , which again is a trick for the other side .
DOYLE-1905-2,39.381

They were piling up their score all the time , DOYLE-1905-2,39.382

and we were at a standstill . DOYLE-1905-2,39.383

' Only one little gleam of hope did I get - DOYLE-1905-2,39.384

and yet it amounted to nothing . DOYLE-1905-2,39.385

I examined the contents of the safe , <P_40> most of which had been
taken out and left on the table . DOYLE-1905-2,40.386

The papers had been made up into sealed envelopes , one or two of which
had been opened by the police . DOYLE-1905-2,40.387

They were not , so far as I could judge , of any great value ,
DOYLE-1905-2,40.388

nor did the bankbook show that Mr Oldacre was in such very affluent
circumstances . DOYLE-1905-2,40.389

But it seemed to me that all the papers were not there .
DOYLE-1905-2,40.390

There were allusions to some deeds - possibly the more valuable - which
I could not find . DOYLE-1905-2,40.391

This , of course , if we could definitely prove it , would turn
Lestrade's argument against himself , DOYLE-1905-2,40.392

for who would steal a thing if he knew that he would shortly inherit it
? DOYLE-1905-2,40.393

' Finally , having drawn every other cover and picked up no scent , I
tried my luck with the housekeeper . DOYLE-1905-2,40.394

Mrs Lexington is her name , a little , dark , silent person , with
suspicious and sidelong eyes . DOYLE-1905-2,40.395

She could tell us something if she would - DOYLE-1905-2,40.396

I am convinced of it . DOYLE-1905-2,40.397

But she was as close as wax . DOYLE-1905-2,40.398

Yes , she had let Mr McFarlane in at half-@ @past nine .
DOYLE-1905-2,40.399

She wished her hand had withered before she had done so .
DOYLE-1905-2,40.400

She had gone to bed at half-@ @past ten . DOYLE-1905-2,40.401

Her room was at the other end of the house , DOYLE-1905-2,40.402

and she could hear nothing of what passed . DOYLE-1905-2,40.403

Mr McFarlane had left his hat , and to the best of her belief his stick
, in the hall . DOYLE-1905-2,40.404

She had been awakened by the alarm of fire . DOYLE-1905-2,40.405

Her poor , dear master had certainly been murdered .
DOYLE-1905-2,40.406

Had he any enemies ? DOYLE-1905-2,40.407

Well , every man had enemies , DOYLE-1905-2,40.408

but Mr Oldacre kept himself very much to himself , DOYLE-1905-2,40.409

and only met people in the way of business . DOYLE-1905-2,40.410

She had seen the buttons , DOYLE-1905-2,40.411

and was sure that they belonged to the clothes which he had worn last
night . DOYLE-1905-2,40.412

The wood-pile was very dry , DOYLE-1905-2,40.413

for it had not rained for a month . DOYLE-1905-2,40.414

It burned like a tinder , DOYLE-1905-2,40.415

and by the time she reached the spot nothing could be seen but flames .
DOYLE-1905-2,40.416

She and all the firemen smelled the burned flesh from inside it .
DOYLE-1905-2,40.417

She knew nothing of the papers , nor of Mr Oldacre's private affairs .
DOYLE-1905-2,40.418

' So , my dear Watson , there@ @'s my report of a failure .
DOYLE-1905-2,40.419

And yet - and yet ' - he clenched his thin hands in a paroxysm of
conviction - ' I <font> know <$$font> it@ @'s all wrong .
DOYLE-1905-2,40.420

I feel it in my bones . DOYLE-1905-2,40.421

There is something that has not come out , DOYLE-1905-2,40.422

and that housekeeper knows it . DOYLE-1905-2,40.423

There was a sort of sulky defiance in her <P_41> eyes which only goes
with guilty knowledge . DOYLE-1905-2,41.424

However , there@ @'s no good talking any more about it , Watson ;
DOYLE-1905-2,41.425

but unless some lucky chance comes our way I fear that the Norwood
Disappearance Case will not figure in that chronicle of our successes
which I foresee that a patient public will sooner or later have to
endure ' DOYLE-1905-2,41.426

' Surely , ' said I , ' the man's appearance would go far with any jury
? ' DOYLE-1905-2,41.427

' That is a dangerous argument , my dear Watson . DOYLE-1905-2,41.428

You remember that terrible murderer , Bert Stevens , who wanted us to
get him off in '87 ? DOYLE-1905-2,41.429

Was there ever a more mild-mannered , Sunday-school young man ? '
DOYLE-1905-2,41.430

' It is true . ' DOYLE-1905-2,41.431

' Unless we succeed in establishing an alternative theory , this man is
lost . DOYLE-1905-2,41.432

You can hardly find a flaw in the case which can now be presented
against him , DOYLE-1905-2,41.433

and all further investigation has served to strengthen it .
DOYLE-1905-2,41.434

By the way , there is one curious little point about those papers which
may serve us as the starting-point for an inquiry . DOYLE-1905-2,41.435

On looking over the bank book I found that the low state of the balance
was principally due to large cheques which have been made out during the
last year to Mr Cornelius . DOYLE-1905-2,41.436

I confess that I should be interested to know who this Mr Cornelius may
be with whom a retired builder has such very large transactions .
DOYLE-1905-2,41.437

Is it possible that he has had a hand in the affair ?
DOYLE-1905-2,41.438

Cornelius might be a broker , DOYLE-1905-2,41.439

but we have found no scrip to correspond with these large payments .
DOYLE-1905-2,41.440

Failing any other indication , my researches must now take the direction
of an inquiry at the bank for the gentleman who has cashed these cheques
. DOYLE-1905-2,41.441

But I fear , my dear fellow , that our case will end ingloriously by
Lestrade hanging our client , which will certainly be a triumph for
Scotland Yard . ' DOYLE-1905-2,41.442

I do not know how far Sherlock Holmes took any sleep that night ,
DOYLE-1905-2,41.443

but when I came down to breakfast I found him pale and harassed , his
bright eyes the brighter for the dark shadows round them .
DOYLE-1905-2,41.444

The carpet round his chair was littered with cigarette ends and with the
early editions of the morning papers . DOYLE-1905-2,41.445

An open telegram lay upon the table . DOYLE-1905-2,41.446

<P_42>

' What do you think of this , Watson ? ' he asked , tossing it across .
DOYLE-1905-2,42.448

It was from Norwood , DOYLE-1905-2,42.449

and ran as follows : DOYLE-1905-2,42.450

IMPORTANT FRESH EVIDENCE TO HAND . DOYLE-1905-2,42.451

MCFARLANE'S GUILT DEFINITELY ESTABLISHED . DOYLE-1905-2,42.452

ADVISE YOU TO ABANDON CASE . DOYLE-1905-2,42.453

LESTRADE DOYLE-1905-2,42.454

' This sounds serious , ' said I . DOYLE-1905-2,42.455

' It is Lestrade's little cock-a-doodle of victory , ' Holmes answered ,
with a bitter smile . DOYLE-1905-2,42.456

' And yet it may be premature to abandon the case . DOYLE-1905-2,42.457

After all , important fresh evidence is a two-edged thing ,
DOYLE-1905-2,42.458

and may possibly cut in a very different direction to that which
Lestrade imagines . DOYLE-1905-2,42.459

Take your breakfast , Watson , DOYLE-1905-2,42.460

and we will go out together and see what we can do .
DOYLE-1905-2,42.461

I feel as if I shall need your company and your moral support to-day .
' DOYLE-1905-2,42.462

My friend had no breakfast himself , DOYLE-1905-2,42.463

for it was one of his peculiarities that in his more intense moments he
would permit himself no food , DOYLE-1905-2,42.464

and I have known him presume upon his iron strength until he has fainted
from pure inanition . DOYLE-1905-2,42.465

' At present I can@ @not spare energy and nerve force for digestion , '
he would say , in answer to my medical remonstrances .
DOYLE-1905-2,42.466

I was not surprised , therefore , when this morning he left his
untouched meal behind him and started with me for Norwood .
DOYLE-1905-2,42.467

A crowd of morbid sightseers were still gathered round Deep Dene House ,
which was just such a suburban villa as I had pictured .
DOYLE-1905-2,42.468

Within the gates Lestrade met us , his face flushed with victory , his
manner grossly triumphant . DOYLE-1905-2,42.469

' Well , Mr Holmes , have you proved us to be wrong yet ?
DOYLE-1905-2,42.470

Have you found your tramp ? ' he cried . DOYLE-1905-2,42.471

' I have formed no conclusion whatever , ' my companion answered .
DOYLE-1905-2,42.472

' But we formed ours yesterday , DOYLE-1905-2,42.473

and now it proves to be correct ; DOYLE-1905-2,42.474

so you must acknowledge that we have been a little in front of you this
time , Mr Holmes . ' DOYLE-1905-2,42.475

' You certainly have the air of something unusual having occurred , '
said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,42.476

<P_43>

Lestrade laughed loudly . DOYLE-1905-2,43.478

' You do@ @n't like being beaten any more than the rest of us do , '
said he . DOYLE-1905-2,43.479

' A man ca@ @n't expect always to have it his own way - can he , Dr
Watson ? DOYLE-1905-2,43.480

Step this way , if you please , gentlemen , DOYLE-1905-2,43.481

and I think I can convince you once for all that it was John McFarlane
who did this crime . ' DOYLE-1905-2,43.482

He led us through the passage and out into a dark hall beyond .
DOYLE-1905-2,43.483

' This is where young McFarlane must have come out to get his hat after
the crime was done , ' said he . DOYLE-1905-2,43.484

' Now look at this . ' DOYLE-1905-2,43.485

With dramatic suddenness he struck a match , DOYLE-1905-2,43.486

and by its light exposed a stain of blood upon the whitewashed wall .
DOYLE-1905-2,43.487

As he held the match nearer I saw that it was more than a stain .
DOYLE-1905-2,43.488

It was the well-marked print of a thumb . DOYLE-1905-2,43.489

' Look at that with your magnifying glass , Mr Holmes . '
DOYLE-1905-2,43.490

' Yes , I am doing so . ' DOYLE-1905-2,43.491

' You are aware that no two thumb-marks are alike ? '
DOYLE-1905-2,43.492

' I have heard something of the kind . ' DOYLE-1905-2,43.493

' Well , then , will you please compare that print with this wax
impression of young McFarlane's right thumb , taken by my orders this
morning ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,43.494

As he held the waxen print close to the blood-stain it did not take a
magnifying glass to see that the two were undoubtedly from the same
thumb . DOYLE-1905-2,43.495

It was evident to me that our unfortunate client was lost .
DOYLE-1905-2,43.496

' That is final , ' said Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,43.497

' Yes , that is final , ' I involuntarily echoed . DOYLE-1905-2,43.498

' It is final , ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,43.499

Something in his tone caught my ear , DOYLE-1905-2,43.500

and I turned to look at him . DOYLE-1905-2,43.501

An extraordinary change had come over his face . DOYLE-1905-2,43.502

It was writhing with inward merriment . DOYLE-1905-2,43.503

His two eyes were shining like stars . DOYLE-1905-2,43.504

It seemed to me that he was making desperate efforts to restrain a
convulsive attack of laughter . DOYLE-1905-2,43.505

' Dear me ! Dear me ! ' he said at last . DOYLE-1905-2,43.506

' Well , now , who would have thought it ? DOYLE-1905-2,43.507

And how deceptive appearances may be , to be sure ! DOYLE-1905-2,43.508

Such a nice young man to look at ! DOYLE-1905-2,43.509

It is a lesson to us not to trust our own judgement - is it not ,
Lestrade ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,43.510

<P_44>

' Yes , some of us are a little too much inclined to be cock-sure , Mr
Holmes , ' said Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,44.512

The man's insolence was maddening , DOYLE-1905-2,44.513

but we could not resent it . DOYLE-1905-2,44.514

' What a providential thing that this young man should press his right
thumb against the wall in taking his hat from the peg !
DOYLE-1905-2,44.515

Such a very natural action , too , if you come to think of it . '
DOYLE-1905-2,44.516

Holmes was outwardly calm , DOYLE-1905-2,44.517

but his whole body gave a wriggle of suppressed excitement as he spoke .
DOYLE-1905-2,44.518

' By the way , Lestrade , who made this remarkable discovery ? '
DOYLE-1905-2,44.519

' It was the housekeeper , Mrs Lexington , who drew the night
constable's attention to it . ' DOYLE-1905-2,44.520

' Where was the night constable ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,44.521

' He remained on guard in the bedroom where the crime was committed , so
as to see that nothing was touched . ' DOYLE-1905-2,44.522

' But why did@ @n't the police see this mark yesterday ? '
DOYLE-1905-2,44.523

' Well , we had no particular reason to make a careful examination of
the hall . DOYLE-1905-2,44.524

Besides , it@ @'s not in a very prominent place , as you see . '
DOYLE-1905-2,44.525

' No , no , of course not . DOYLE-1905-2,44.526

I suppose there is no doubt that the mark was there yesterday ? '
DOYLE-1905-2,44.527

Lestrade looked at Holmes as if he thought he was going out of his mind
. DOYLE-1905-2,44.528

I confess that I was myself surprised both at his hilarious manner and
at his rather wild observation . DOYLE-1905-2,44.529

' I do@ @n't know whether you think that McFarlane came out of gaol in
the dead of the night in order to strengthen the evidence against
himself , ' said Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,44.530

' I leave it to any expert in the world whether that is not the mark of
his thumb . ' DOYLE-1905-2,44.531

' It is unquestionably the mark of his thumb . ' DOYLE-1905-2,44.532

' There , that@ @'s enough , ' said Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,44.533

' I am a practical man , Mr Holmes , DOYLE-1905-2,44.534

and when I have got my evidence I come to my conclusions .
DOYLE-1905-2,44.535

If you have anything to say you will find me writing my report in the
sitting-room . ' DOYLE-1905-2,44.536

Holmes had recovered his equanimity , though I still seemed to detect
gleams of amusement in his expression . DOYLE-1905-2,44.537

' Dear me , this is a very sad development , Watson , is it not ? '
said he . DOYLE-1905-2,44.538

' And yet there are singular points about it which hold out some hopes
for our client . ' DOYLE-1905-2,44.539

<P_45>

' I am delighted to hear it , ' said I heartily . DOYLE-1905-2,45.541

' I was afraid it was all up with him . ' DOYLE-1905-2,45.542

' I would hardly go so far as to say that , my dear Watson .
DOYLE-1905-2,45.543

The fact is that there is one really serious flaw in this evidence to
which our friend attaches so much importance . ' DOYLE-1905-2,45.544

' Indeed , Holmes ! What is it ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,45.545

' Only this - that I <font> know <$$font> that that mark was not there
when I examined the hall yesterday . DOYLE-1905-2,45.546

And now , Watson , let us have a little stroll round in the sunshine .
' DOYLE-1905-2,45.547

With a confused brain , but with a heart into which some warmth of hope
was returning , I accompanied my friend in a walk round the garden .
DOYLE-1905-2,45.548

Holmes took each face of the house in turn DOYLE-1905-2,45.549

and examined it with great interest . DOYLE-1905-2,45.550

He then led the way inside , DOYLE-1905-2,45.551

and went over the whole building from basement to attics .
DOYLE-1905-2,45.552

Most of the rooms were unfurnished , DOYLE-1905-2,45.553

but none the less Holmes inspected them all minutely .
DOYLE-1905-2,45.554

Finally , on the top corridor , which ran outside three untenanted
bedrooms , he again was seized with a spasm of merriment .
DOYLE-1905-2,45.555

' There are really some very unique features about this case , Watson ,
' said he . DOYLE-1905-2,45.556

' I think it is time now that we took our friend Lestrade into our
confidence . DOYLE-1905-2,45.557

He has had his little smile at our expense , DOYLE-1905-2,45.558

and perhaps we may do as much by him if my reading of this problem
proves to be correct . DOYLE-1905-2,45.559

Yes , yes ; I think I see how we should approach it . '
DOYLE-1905-2,45.560

The Scotland Yard inspector was still writing in the parlour when Holmes
interrupted him . DOYLE-1905-2,45.561

' I understood that you were writing a report of this case , ' said he .
DOYLE-1905-2,45.562

' So I am . ' DOYLE-1905-2,45.563

' Do@ @n't you think it may be a little premature ? DOYLE-1905-2,45.564

I ca@ @n't help thinking that your evidence is not complete . '
DOYLE-1905-2,45.565

Lestrade knew my friend too well to disregard his words .
DOYLE-1905-2,45.566

He laid down his pen DOYLE-1905-2,45.567

and looked curiously at him . DOYLE-1905-2,45.568

' What do you mean , Mr Holmes ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,45.569

' Only that there is an important witness whom you have not seen . '
DOYLE-1905-2,45.570

' Can you produce him ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,45.571

<P_46>

' I think I can . ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.573

' Then do so . ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.574

' I will do my best . DOYLE-1905-2,46.575

How many constables have you ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.576

' There are three within call . ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.577

' Excellent ! ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,46.578

' May I ask if they are all large , able-bodied men with powerful voices
? ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.579

' I have no doubt they are , though I fail to see what their voices have
to do with it . ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.580

' Perhaps I can help you to see that , and one or two other things as
well , ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,46.581

' Kindly summon your men , DOYLE-1905-2,46.582

and I will try . ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.583

Five minutes later three policemen had assembled in the hall .
DOYLE-1905-2,46.584

' In the outhouse you will find a considerable quantity of straw , '
said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,46.585

' I will ask you to carry in two bundles of it . DOYLE-1905-2,46.586

I think it will be of the greatest assistance in producing the witness
whom I require . DOYLE-1905-2,46.587

Thank you very much . DOYLE-1905-2,46.588

I believe you have some matches in your pocket , Watson .
DOYLE-1905-2,46.589

Now , Mr Lestrade , I will ask you all to accompany me to the top
landing . ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.590

As I have said , there was a broad corridor there , which ran outside
three empty bedrooms . DOYLE-1905-2,46.591

At one end of the corridor we were all marshalled by Sherlock Holmes ,
the constables grinning , and Lestrade staring at my friend with
amazement , expectation , and derision chasing each other across his
features . DOYLE-1905-2,46.592

Holmes stood before us with an air of a conjurer who is performing a
trick . DOYLE-1905-2,46.593

' Would you kindly send one of your constables for two buckets of water
? DOYLE-1905-2,46.594

Put the straw on the floor here , free from the wall on either side .
DOYLE-1905-2,46.595

Now I think that we are all ready . ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.596

Lestrade's face had begun to grow red and angry . DOYLE-1905-2,46.597

' I do@ @n't know whether you are playing a game with us , Mr Sherlock
Holmes , ' said he . DOYLE-1905-2,46.598

' If you know anything , you can surely say it without all this
tomfoolery . ' DOYLE-1905-2,46.599

' I assure you , my good Lestrade , that I have an excellent reason for
everything that I do . DOYLE-1905-2,46.600

You may possibly remember that you chaffed me a little some hours ago ,
when the sun <P_47> seemed on your side of the hedge ,
DOYLE-1905-2,47.601

so you must not grudge me a little pomp and ceremony now .
DOYLE-1905-2,47.602

Might I ask you , Watson , to open that window , and then to put a match
to the edge of the straw ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,47.603

I did so , DOYLE-1905-2,47.604

and , driven by the draught , a coil of grey smoke swirled down the
corridor , while the dry straw crackled and flamed .
DOYLE-1905-2,47.605

' Now we must see if we can find this witness for you , Lestrade .
DOYLE-1905-2,47.606

Might I ask you all to join in the cry of " Fire " ?
DOYLE-1905-2,47.607

Now , then : one , two , three - ' DOYLE-1905-2,47.608

' Fire ! ' we all yelled . DOYLE-1905-2,47.609

' Thank you . DOYLE-1905-2,47.610

I will trouble you once again . ' DOYLE-1905-2,47.611

' Fire ! ' DOYLE-1905-2,47.612

' Just once more , gentlemen , and all together . ' DOYLE-1905-2,47.613

' Fire ! ' DOYLE-1905-2,47.614

The shout must have rung over Norwood . DOYLE-1905-2,47.615

It had hardly died away when an amazing thing happened .
DOYLE-1905-2,47.616

A door suddenly flew open out of what appeared to be solid wall at the
end of the corridor , DOYLE-1905-2,47.617

and a little wizened man darted out of it , like a rabbit out of its
burrow . DOYLE-1905-2,47.618

' Capital ! ' said Holmes calmly . DOYLE-1905-2,47.619

' Watson , a bucket of water over the straw . DOYLE-1905-2,47.620

That will do ! DOYLE-1905-2,47.621

Lestrade , allow me to present you with your principal missing witness ,
Mr Jonas Oldacre . ' DOYLE-1905-2,47.622

The detective stared at the newcomer with blank amazement .
DOYLE-1905-2,47.623

The latter was blinking in the bright light of the corridor , and
peering at us and at the smouldering fire . DOYLE-1905-2,47.624

It was an odious face - crafty , vicious , malignant , with shifty ,
light-grey eyes and white eyelashes . DOYLE-1905-2,47.625

' What@ @'s this , then ? ' said Lestrade at last .
DOYLE-1905-2,47.626

' What have you been doing all this time , eh ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,47.627

Oldacre gave an uneasy laugh , shrinking back from the furious red face
of the angry detective . DOYLE-1905-2,47.628

I have done no harm . DOYLE-1905-2,47.629

' No harm ? DOYLE-1905-2,47.630

You have done your best to get an innocent man hanged .
DOYLE-1905-2,47.631

If it was@ @n't for this gentleman here , I am not sure that you would
not have succeeded . ' DOYLE-1905-2,47.632

The wretched creature began to whimper . DOYLE-1905-2,47.633

' I am sure , sir , it was only my practical joke . '
DOYLE-1905-2,47.634

<P_48>

' Oh ! a joke , was it ? DOYLE-1905-2,48.636

You wo@ @n't find the laugh on your side , I promise you .
DOYLE-1905-2,48.637

Take him down DOYLE-1905-2,48.638

and keep him in the sitting-room until I come . DOYLE-1905-2,48.639

Mr Holmes , ' he continued , when they had gone , ' I could not speak
before the constables , DOYLE-1905-2,48.640

but I do@ @n't mind saying , in the presence of Dr Watson , that this is
the brightest thing that you have done yet , though it is a mystery to
me how you did it . DOYLE-1905-2,48.641

You have saved an innocent man's life , DOYLE-1905-2,48.642

and you have prevented a very grave scandal , which would have ruined my
reputation in the Force . ' DOYLE-1905-2,48.643

Holmes smiled DOYLE-1905-2,48.644

and clapped Lestrade upon the shoulder . DOYLE-1905-2,48.645

' Instead of being ruined , my good sir , you will find that your
reputation has been enormously enhanced . DOYLE-1905-2,48.646

Just make a few alterations in that report which you were writing ,
DOYLE-1905-2,48.647

and they will understand how hard it is to throw dust in the eyes of
Inspector Lestrade . ' DOYLE-1905-2,48.648

' And you do@ @n't want your name to appear ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,48.649

' Not at all . DOYLE-1905-2,48.650

The work is its own reward . DOYLE-1905-2,48.651

Perhaps I shall get the credit also at some distant day when I permit my
zealous historian to lay out his foolscap once more - eh , Watson ?
DOYLE-1905-2,48.652

Well , now , let us see where this rat has been lurking . '
DOYLE-1905-2,48.653

A lath-and-plaster partition had been run across the passage six feet
from the end , with a door cunningly concealed in it .
DOYLE-1905-2,48.654

It was lit within by slits under the eaves . DOYLE-1905-2,48.655

A few articles of furniture and a supply of food and water were within ,
together with a number of books and papers . DOYLE-1905-2,48.656

' There@ @'s the advantage of being a builder , ' said Holmes as we came
out . DOYLE-1905-2,48.657

' He was able to fix up his own little hiding-place without any
confederate - save , of course , that precious housekeeper of his , whom
I should lose no time in adding to your bag , Lestrade . '
DOYLE-1905-2,48.658

' I will take your advice . DOYLE-1905-2,48.659

But how did you know of this place , Mr Holmes ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,48.660

' I made up my mind that the fellow was in hiding in the house .
DOYLE-1905-2,48.661

When I paced one corridor and found it six feet shorter than the
corresponding one below , it was pretty clear where he was .
DOYLE-1905-2,48.662

I thought he had not the nerve to lie <P_49> quiet before an alarm of
fire . DOYLE-1905-2,49.663

We could , of course , have gone in and taken him , DOYLE-1905-2,49.664

but it amused me to make him reveal himself ; DOYLE-1905-2,49.665

besides , I owed you a little mystification , Lestrade , for your chaff
in the morning . ' DOYLE-1905-2,49.666

' Well , sir , you certainly got equal with me on that .
DOYLE-1905-2,49.667

But how in the world did you know that he was in the house at all ? '
DOYLE-1905-2,49.668

' The thumb-mark , Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,49.669

You said it was final ; DOYLE-1905-2,49.670

and so it was , in a very different sense . DOYLE-1905-2,49.671

I knew it had not been there the day before . DOYLE-1905-2,49.672

I pay a good deal of attention to matters of detail , as you may have
observed , DOYLE-1905-2,49.673

and I had examined the hall , DOYLE-1905-2,49.674

and was sure that the wall was clear . DOYLE-1905-2,49.675

Therefore , it had been put on during the night . ' DOYLE-1905-2,49.676

' But how ? ' DOYLE-1905-2,49.677

' Very simply . DOYLE-1905-2,49.678

When those packets were sealed up , Jonas Oldacre got McFarlane to
secure one of the seals by putting his thumb upon the soft wax .
DOYLE-1905-2,49.679

It would be done so quickly and so naturally that I dare say the young
man himself has no recollection of it . DOYLE-1905-2,49.680

Very likely it just so happened , DOYLE-1905-2,49.681

and Oldacre had himself no notion of the use he would put it to .
DOYLE-1905-2,49.682

Brooding over the case in that den of his , it suddenly struck him what
absolutely damning evidence he could make against McFarlane by using
that thumb-mark . DOYLE-1905-2,49.683

It was the simplest thing in the world for him to take a wax impression
from the seal , to moisten it in as much blood as he could get from a
pin-prick , and to put the mark upon the wall during the night , either
with his own hand or with that of his housekeeper . DOYLE-1905-2,49.684

If you examine among these documents which he took with him into his
retreat , I will lay you a wager that you find the seal with the
thumb-mark upon it . ' DOYLE-1905-2,49.685

' Wonderful ! ' said Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,49.686

' Wonderful ! DOYLE-1905-2,49.687

It@ @'s all as clear as crystal , as you put it . DOYLE-1905-2,49.688

But what is the object of this deep deception , Mr Holmes ? '
DOYLE-1905-2,49.689

It was amusing to me to see how the detective's overbearing manner had
changed suddenly to that of a child asking questions of its teacher .
DOYLE-1905-2,49.690

' Well , I do@ @n't think that is very hard to explain .
DOYLE-1905-2,49.691

A very deep , malicious , vindictive person is the gentleman who is
<P_50> now awaiting us downstairs . DOYLE-1905-2,50.692

You know that he was once refused by McFarlane's mother ?
DOYLE-1905-2,50.693

You do@ @n't ! DOYLE-1905-2,50.694

I told you that you should go to Blackheath first and Norwood afterwards
. DOYLE-1905-2,50.695

Well , this injury , as he would consider it , has rankled in his wicked
, scheming brain , DOYLE-1905-2,50.696

and all his life he has longed for vengeance , but never seen his chance
. DOYLE-1905-2,50.697

During the last year or two things have gone against him - secret
speculation , I think - DOYLE-1905-2,50.698

and he finds himself in a bad way . DOYLE-1905-2,50.699

He determines to swindle his creditors , DOYLE-1905-2,50.700

and for this purpose he pays large cheques to a certain Mr Cornelius ,
who is , I imagine , himself under another name . DOYLE-1905-2,50.701

I have not traced these cheques yet , DOYLE-1905-2,50.702

but I have no doubt that they were banked under that name at some
provincial town where Oldacre from time to time led a double existence .
DOYLE-1905-2,50.703

He intended to change his name altogether , draw this money , and vanish
, starting life again elsewhere . ' DOYLE-1905-2,50.704

' Well , that@ @'s likely enough . ' DOYLE-1905-2,50.705

' It would strike him that in disappearing he might throw all pursuit
off his track , and at the same time have an ample and crushing revenge
upon his old sweetheart , if he could give the impression that he had
been murdered by her only child . DOYLE-1905-2,50.706

It was a masterpiece of villainy , DOYLE-1905-2,50.707

and he carried it out like a master . DOYLE-1905-2,50.708

The idea of the will , which would give an obvious motive for the crime
, the secret visit unknown to his own parents , the retention of the
stick , the blood , and the animal remains and buttons in the wood-pile
, all were admirable . DOYLE-1905-2,50.709

It was a net from which it seemed to me a few hours ago that there was
no possible escape . DOYLE-1905-2,50.710

But he had not that supreme gift of the artist , the knowledge of when
to stop . DOYLE-1905-2,50.711

He wished to improve that which was already perfect - to draw the rope
tighter yet round the neck of his unfortunate victim -
DOYLE-1905-2,50.712

and so he ruined all . DOYLE-1905-2,50.713

Let us descend , Lestrade . DOYLE-1905-2,50.714

There are just one or two questions that I would ask him . '
DOYLE-1905-2,50.715

The malignant creature was seated in his own parlour with a policeman
upon each side of him . DOYLE-1905-2,50.716

' It was a joke , my good sir ; a practical joke , nothing more , ' he
whined incessantly . DOYLE-1905-2,50.717

' I assure you , sir , that I simply <P_51> concealed myself in order to
see the effect of my disappearance , DOYLE-1905-2,51.718

and I am sure that you would not be so unjust as to imagine that I would
have allowed any harm to befall poor young Mr McFarlane . '
DOYLE-1905-2,51.719

' That@ @'s for the jury to decide , ' said Lestrade .
DOYLE-1905-2,51.720

' Anyhow , we shall have you on a charge of conspiracy , if not for
attempted murder . ' DOYLE-1905-2,51.721

' And you@ @'ll probably find that your creditors will impound the
banking account of Mr Cornelius , ' said Holmes . DOYLE-1905-2,51.722

The little man started DOYLE-1905-2,51.723

and turned his malignant eyes upon my friend . DOYLE-1905-2,51.724

' I have to thank you for a good deal , ' said he . DOYLE-1905-2,51.725

' Perhaps I@ @'ll pay my debt some day . ' DOYLE-1905-2,51.726

Holmes smiled indulgently . DOYLE-1905-2,51.727

' I fancy that for some few years you will find your time very fully
occupied , ' said he . DOYLE-1905-2,51.728

' By the way , what was it you put into the wood-pile besides your old
trousers ? DOYLE-1905-2,51.729

A dead dog , or rabbits , or what ? DOYLE-1905-2,51.730

You wo@ @n't tell ? DOYLE-1905-2,51.731

Dear me , how very unkind of you ! DOYLE-1905-2,51.732

Well , well , I dare say that a couple of rabbits would account both for
the blood and for the charred ashes . DOYLE-1905-2,51.733

If ever you write an account , Watson , you can make rabbits serve your
turn . ' DOYLE-1905-2,51.734

