<BEGIN_ellis-1851-2>

<P_9>

<heading>

Thoughts upon education as a means of preventing or diminishing
destitution . ELLIS-1851-2,9.4

<$$heading>

In this world of mingled pleasure and pain , hope and fear , good and
bad , love and hatred , peace and strife , truth and falsehood ,
knowledge and ignorance , it is gratifying to feel a conviction that the
better elements of the mixture are daily gaining a preponderance .
ELLIS-1851-2,9.6

Everywhere around us we see things better done , well-being better
provided for than , as far as we can learn from historical records ,
they were in former times . ELLIS-1851-2,9.7

And when travellers and navigators return from foreign and distant lands
, and narrate to us what they have seen and heard , we learn nothing to
shake this cheerful conviction of ours , or to mortify us with the
reflection that we are falling behind other nations of the earth in our
progressive civilization . ELLIS-1851-2,9.8

Turning from the comparison of our present state of semi-civilization
with the previous barbarism out of which we are but emerging , and
resting our thoughts upon the conflicting elements of barbarism and
civilization in the midst of which we find ourselves afloat , sadder and
soberer reflections are awakened within us . ELLIS-1851-2,9.9

Those of us whose lot is cast among the more barbarous <P_10> elements ,
can@ @not but feel our privation and suffering to be somewhat embittered
by the sight and contact of contemporary abundance and enjoyment .
ELLIS-1851-2,10.10

Others of us , again , who are floating amid the more civilized elements
, unless utterly unworthy , can@ @not but feel a pang in contemplating
the victims of a yet unextinguished barbarism . ELLIS-1851-2,10.11

As our sense of existing misery checks any tendency to boastful
exuberance of joy that might possess us while we contemplate our evident
progress , comparing the present with the past , so our consciousness of
this growing preponderance of good must protect us against despair or
despondency while we fix our attention upon the still wide-spread misery
around us . ELLIS-1851-2,10.12

What has caused the diminution of misery which we seem to admit ?
ELLIS-1851-2,10.13

What is likely to favour the continuance of such diminution in the
future ? ELLIS-1851-2,10.14

The answers that will be generally given to these two questions are - "
Increase of knowledge , and improvement in habits . "
ELLIS-1851-2,10.15

And if it be asked , how increase of knowledge and improved habits can
best be promoted by those who are inclined to engage in the work , the
answer will no less generally be , " by Education . "
ELLIS-1851-2,10.16

If there be one sign of our times more hopeful than another , it is the
unanimity with which Education is relied upon as the principal means for
stifling the barbarism yet unextinguished , and for extending the
civilization yet too circumscribed among us . ELLIS-1851-2,10.17

What a contrast is presented by two systems for the prevention of evil ,
in the first of which the main effort is to avert it by removing its
causes ; in the other , to cope with it only when these causes have been
embodied in effects . ELLIS-1851-2,10.18

Education deals with causes - Punishment <P_11> with effects .
ELLIS-1851-2,11.19

And till within quite modern times , as far as the masses of mankind are
concerned , the action of the former , in imparting knowledge and
implanting habits , has been comparatively neglected ; while the
efficacy of the latter , in deterring from acts committed through
ignorance and ill-regulated propensities has been blindly relied upon .
ELLIS-1851-2,11.20

For example , men in want steal . ELLIS-1851-2,11.21

All agree that theft must , if possible , be prevented .
ELLIS-1851-2,11.22

The Educator would prevent theft by providing such teaching and training
as will enable all to keep themselves from want , and out of temptation
. ELLIS-1851-2,11.23

The Punisher would prevent theft by exhibiting to hungry men how other
hungry men have brought down legal penalties upon themselves by stealing
in order to allay the pangs of hunger . ELLIS-1851-2,11.24

Very different notions , it is true , prevail among the persons out of
whose mouths the word " Education " finds utterance .
ELLIS-1851-2,11.25

But also some similar notions are combined with the different ones .
ELLIS-1851-2,11.26

Hence , systems and schemes of every conceivable form and variety , some
approaching so nearly as if about to unite ; others diverging so widely
as if never destined to co-operate ; the promoters of which all lay
claim to one common purpose - the improvement of mankind .
ELLIS-1851-2,11.27

Let us now endeavour to separate , draw forth , and bring into bold
relief that in which most thoughtful men can@ @not fail to agree - be
the other ingredients of their several Educational schemes ever so
important or indispensable in their opinions . ELLIS-1851-2,11.28

It being once conceded that Education , in some one of the many forms in
which it is conceived , ought to be accessible to every individual ; no
excuse can justify our tolerating a state of things where this Education
<P_12> is practically inaccessible to large masses of the people .
ELLIS-1851-2,12.29

To grant that Education is indispensable for all , is to grant that the
withholding it from some is an act of revolting atrocity .
ELLIS-1851-2,12.30

If the question were not the educating , but the feeding , of the people
; and while it was admitted on all hands , that the people ought to be
fed , some contended that the people must not eat fish , and others ,
that they must not meat , what would be thought of the sense or humanity
of those who should be prepared to leave the people without bread till
it could be agreed whether this bread should be combined with fish or
flesh , or some dish made by an impossible compromise of the two ?
ELLIS-1851-2,12.31

Are there any ingredients that can be considered as the farinaceous
parts of Education ? ELLIS-1851-2,12.32

Doubtless there are ; ELLIS-1851-2,12.33

and be ours the task to enumerate them . ELLIS-1851-2,12.34

Once clearly seen and understood , he who could think of withholding
them from the people would be a monster , - let us hope a fabulous
monster . ELLIS-1851-2,12.35

To drop metaphor - the most cursory glance at what it is agreed ought to
be taught everywhere will suffice to satisfy us that there is some
unanimity in the midst of antagonism . ELLIS-1851-2,12.36

For example , in all Educational schemes it is agreed that Reading ,
Writing , Arithmetic , Geography , and Elementary Mensuration and
Astronomy , should be taught ; ELLIS-1851-2,12.37

and , despite the contradictory views as to the means to be used for the
accomplishment of what is desired , it is no less unanimously admitted
that attention ought to be directed to the formation of habits of
Industry , Economy , Sobriety , Trustworthiness , Punctuality , and
Orderly Conduct . ELLIS-1851-2,12.38

Basing the inquiry , in which I invite you to accompany me , upon this
unanimity undeniably <P_13> existing to a certain extent , and desirable
to a greater , I shall endeavour to draw forth a little more in detail
what , as I conceive , ought to be universally agreed upon as essentials
in Education , turning aside from those other portions of Education ,
however important they may be , upon which differences of opinion exist
, of such strength and , perhaps , so deep seated as to be ineradicable
in our time . ELLIS-1851-2,13.39

In order not to be led astray into a purposeless inquiry , we will begin
by asking ourselves what consequences can be rationally expected from
Education . ELLIS-1851-2,13.40

Education can neither alter the structure of the universe , nor our own
organization . ELLIS-1851-2,13.41

The utmost that it can do is to make us acquainted with <font> that
<$$font> structure , with our own organization in relation to it , and
how we should conduct ourselves so as to secure that amount of
well-being which , as far as our knowledge tells us , is attainable ;
training us , at the same time , to the habits leading readily to that
conduct which knowledge has recommended for our adoption .
ELLIS-1851-2,13.42

But if Education can accomplish this wherever it is brought to bear ,
and if it can be brought to bear generally , there will be little reason
to regret that it can accomplish no more . ELLIS-1851-2,13.43

It is evident at once that Education , viewed as a means of conferring
the knowledge and forming the habits that lead to well-being , will call
forth methods far different from those which are adopted in an ordinary
grammar-school . ELLIS-1851-2,13.44

When parents begin seriously to ask themselves , in the matter of
Education , the same questions that they ask themselves , each in his
own special department of industry , they will soon see what portions of
prevailing methods are susceptible <P_14> of improvement , what must be
discarded , and what new ones introduced . ELLIS-1851-2,14.45

If a parent be an engineer , does he not accurately survey his ground ,
consider the relative merits of different expedients , calculate the
strength , durability , and cost of material , estimate the means at his
disposal , organize and distribute the labour under his command , and
then only proceed to excavate his dock , build his bridge , or construct
his railroad ? ELLIS-1851-2,14.46

If he be a merchant , does he not so arrange his proceedings that
whether he buy or sell , import or export , make or receive consignments
, a balance of profit may be the reward of his industry ?
ELLIS-1851-2,14.47

If he be the captain of a ship , does he not inform himself precisely
and minutely concerning the seas to be traversed , the qualities of his
ship , the nature of his cargo , the proficiency of his officers and
crew ? ELLIS-1851-2,14.48

does he not inspect with scrutinizing eye his charts , compasses ,
chronometers , and other nautical instruments ; ELLIS-1851-2,14.49

and , confiding in these and his own watchfulness and judgment , does he
not look forward without fear to performing his voyage in safety ?
ELLIS-1851-2,14.50

Or if he contemplate emigration , does he not make every preliminary
inquiry for the purpose of ascertaining the climate , the soil , and
other peculiarities of the country which he is about to adopt , so that
his preparations beforehand , and his exertions on landing , may as
early as possible secure for himself and his family that well-being of
which he is in search ? ELLIS-1851-2,14.51

If we view parents , not as engineers , not as merchants , not as
captains , not as emigrants , but simply as parents , we can@ @not be
wrong if we assume that their principal solicitude must be to provide as
far as <P_15> possible for the future well-being of their children .
ELLIS-1851-2,15.52

The means by which they think to attain the accomplishment of their
wishes may be ill-chosen and ill-adapted for the purpose ;
ELLIS-1851-2,15.53

and even their conceptions of what constitutes well-being may be very
imperfect , ELLIS-1851-2,15.54

but their earnestness and good faith can@ @not be doubted .
ELLIS-1851-2,15.55

Thus {COM:sic} much is certain , that all good parents desire well-being
for their children , and look to Education as one of the chief means
within their reach to bring it about . ELLIS-1851-2,15.56

By Education they expect to influence their children's conduct : some
kinds of conduct leading to well-being , other kinds leading away from
well-being . ELLIS-1851-2,15.57

But here a double difficulty presents itself . ELLIS-1851-2,15.58

How are their children to know what conduct is good and what conduct is
bad ? ELLIS-1851-2,15.59

and how are they to become well disposed , that is , inclined to good
and averse to bad conduct ? ELLIS-1851-2,15.60

Teaching is the means that must be relied on for giving the knowledge ,
and training for forming the disposition . ELLIS-1851-2,15.61

These two great Educational functions can@ @not be separated .
ELLIS-1851-2,15.62

They proceed in company , well or ill performed , for good or for evil .
ELLIS-1851-2,15.63

But to help us to discriminate between what may be good or bad in them ,
we may examine them separately ; ELLIS-1851-2,15.64

and , as first in order , we will begin with knowledge or the teaching
function , since we must know what ought to be courted and what ought to
be shunned before we can with any comfort engage in the consideration of
the habits and disposition to be formed , and of the methods of training
necessary to accomplish the purpose aimed at . ELLIS-1851-2,15.65

What , then , is it desirable that all human beings should <font> know
<$$font> in order to be able each to perform his share of the work
required for the general well-being ? ELLIS-1851-2,15.66

<P_16>

May we not safely say that everybody ought to have a general
acquaintance with the qualities and uses of the objects that inevitably
must , or probably will , be brought within the cognizance of the senses
- with what the several elementary bodies , separately , and in
different forms of combination , may be made the causes of - with the
arts and industrial operations by which this knowledge is , and may be
applied , in order to produce well-being - with the structure and
functions of our own organization , considered both in its parts and in
its integrity ? ELLIS-1851-2,16.68

It need not be attempted or pretended to impart the whole of this
knowledge in all its ramifications . ELLIS-1851-2,16.69

Much of it must be reserved for special study and application by
particular professions and trades . ELLIS-1851-2,16.70

But a general apprehension of the structure of the universe , and of man
in his relation to it , with a minute and accurate knowledge , and a
practised and ready skill in the application of indispensable portions
ought to be as much a provision made to await every human being , whose
coming is expected , as the necessary food , clothing , and shelter .
ELLIS-1851-2,16.71

The order in which this knowledge is to be communicated - or more
properly , in which it ought to be brought in contact with the young ,
for them to absorb and assimilate , must be determined , rather by their
capacity for learning the different parts , than by the eventual
relative importance of the parts - taking care , of course , that
nothing really important is ultimately omitted . ELLIS-1851-2,16.72

The kind of instruction which the young are best fitted to receive in
the first place , is that which is obtainable through the judicious and
pleasurable exercise of their senses . ELLIS-1851-2,16.73

This requires no painful restraint <P_17> upon the restless activity of
childhood , and no call upon attention beyond their limited power of
endurance . ELLIS-1851-2,17.74

The food which they eat , the air which they breathe , the clothes which
they wear , the furniture that surrounds them , the houses they live in
, the inmates that associate with them , the strangers that visit , and
then , the world without , according to the glimpses which they catch of
it - what an inexhaustible stock of exercises for the sight , the touch
, the hearing , the smell , and the taste ; in the shape , colour ,
texture , weight , dimensions , motions , distance , odour , and taste
of all these objects , and in their numbers and proportions , and the
contrivances for measuring and noting them ! ELLIS-1851-2,17.75

Preliminary teaching , such as the teaching thus briefly indicated ,
will not merely prepare , ELLIS-1851-2,17.76

it will excite the desire , to acquire the arts of reading and writing .
ELLIS-1851-2,17.77

The narratives of some things that are not within their own experience ,
will awaken a curiosity to learn more , and to possess the key of the
books in which the means of gratification are locked up .
ELLIS-1851-2,17.78

The pleasure of being able to record what they have learned , and to
communicate to those out of the reach of hearing , and the exquisite
enjoyment connected with the power of sketching and delineating forms
will speedily overcome all disinclination , so to apply , as to acquire
facility both in writing and drawing . ELLIS-1851-2,17.79

Reading and writing , language spoken and written , occupy , in this
method of dealing with them , the important position to which they are
entitled among the means for obtaining knowledge , ELLIS-1851-2,17.80

and will not be mistaken for the knowledge itself . ELLIS-1851-2,17.81

A sad bereavement would it be felt were we deprived of our power of
naming and describing things , <P_18> and of communicating our feelings
in regard to them ; and a sad perversion were we to mistake a
familiarity with the names of things for familiarity with things and
their qualities and uses . ELLIS-1851-2,18.82

From the more elementary stage , the continued investigation of the
order of the universe as a whole and in its parts , whether narrated by
travellers , observed by themselves , or recorded from times past , will
lead on to higher branches of science and more complex intellectual
operations . ELLIS-1851-2,18.83

Geography , mensuration , astronomy , and mechanics and chemistry , and
their applications , will appear with all those charms in which their
beauties and uses invest them to eyes and understandings not vitiated by
long dwelling upon unmeaning and purposeless forms , instead of
realities full of vitality and purpose . ELLIS-1851-2,18.84

That portion of knowledge which is to be obtained by examining the
structure and functions of the human body separately and in connection
with the external world - how the surrounding temperature , moisture ,
and air , act upon them - how we ought to deal with such materials as
offer themselves to us for food , clothing , fuel , and shelter , in
order to develop our strength , sustain our health , and infuse vigour
and energy into us , will readily be admitted into every course of
instruction which is intended to comprise whatever is at the same time
communicable and indispensable for our well-being . ELLIS-1851-2,18.85

There is another portion of knowledge that must not be omitted .
ELLIS-1851-2,18.86

It can readily be shown that every man of us all greatly depends for his
own well-being or happiness upon the conduct of his fellow-men , as they
do , in their turn , upon his . ELLIS-1851-2,18.87

The investigation of <P_19> the consequences of this undeniable and
important fact , leads to the discrimination between what conduct is
good and what bad - ELLIS-1851-2,19.88

leads to a thorough appreciation of what are called the social duties .
ELLIS-1851-2,19.89

If , for example , it be seen that men are dependent for their
well-being upon an abundant supply of food , clothing , shelter , and
fuel , and that these can only be obtained by a general prevalence of
industry , skill , knowledge , and economy , and that those who are
deficient in these qualities must suffer from want , or procure relief
from others who are pre-eminently gifted with these qualities , does it
not follow that to work , to apply , to learn , and to save , are social
duties ? ELLIS-1851-2,19.90

And if it be seen that division of labour , interchange , partnerships ,
buying and selling , and credit and confidence materially assist man in
making his labour productive , does it not follow that honesty ,
fidelity , punctuality , and order , are social duties ?
ELLIS-1851-2,19.91

It need scarcely be mentioned , that , as drunkenness is sure to
incapacitate for the proper performance of these duties , so its
opposite , sobriety , must be classed among social duties .
ELLIS-1851-2,19.92

That a population knowing these duties and performing them will surely
be in possession of abundant supplies of the necessaries and comforts of
life , seems to be one of those truths so obvious that to enunciate it
is enough . ELLIS-1851-2,19.93

But it may be asked , - " Will they who know always do what they ought ?
" ELLIS-1851-2,19.94

Our experience of man's history and nature forces us to admit , that ,
as ignorance causes good conduct to be improbable , so knowledge by
itself does not necessarily prevent ill conduct . ELLIS-1851-2,19.95

The consideration of what must be brought to co-operate with knowledge
to make sure of good conduct , brings us to the second educational
function - the training or forming the disposition . ELLIS-1851-2,19.96

<P_20>

To succeed in training to good habits , the work must be commenced at an
early period of life . ELLIS-1851-2,20.98

The young , for whom training is requisite , are incompetent to the work
, either to understand or to do what is needful for the purpose .
ELLIS-1851-2,20.99

As what they ought to be taught , so what they ought to be trained to ,
must be decided and regulated for them by others who already have the
capacity which the young do not possess . ELLIS-1851-2,20.100

It is given to few to form good , and correct bad habits , late in life
. ELLIS-1851-2,20.101

This is equally true of moral and intellectual , as of physical habits .
ELLIS-1851-2,20.102

The requirements of social life are so varied as to make it by no means
necessary that every individual should have precisely the same leanings
. ELLIS-1851-2,20.103

On the contrary , there is scope for habits and qualifications numerous
and various enough to suit all unavoidable diversities of character ,
did we but know and attend how to distribute and appropriate each so as
to admit of its development in harmony with general well-being .
ELLIS-1851-2,20.104

These varieties , however , require to be linked to qualities that
pervade all , without exception . ELLIS-1851-2,20.105

The qualities which all men ought to possess , and to which ,
accordingly , all ought to be trained , are the disposition to labour ,
to learn , to inquire , to save , to fulfil engagements , and to obey
the law . ELLIS-1851-2,20.106

These and other congenial qualities united , as it may happen , with
courage , strength , and vivacity , or with timidity , weakness , and
sedateness , will form ingredients of character adapted to meet all
social exigencies , and suit every possible circumstance , not only
without disturbance , but greatly to the advantage of the general
well-being . ELLIS-1851-2,20.107

Having now clearly before us a summary of what must be admitted by all
to be the ingredients desirable <P_21> in a good education , can we
cherish a reasonable confidence of their being attainable ?
ELLIS-1851-2,21.108

Each among us must bring his own experience to bear upon this question .
ELLIS-1851-2,21.109

I have no hesitation in giving my own answer in the affirmative , and in
warning others who feel less confidence , to beware of limiting their
expectations of what Education may do in the future by their experience
of what it has done in the past . ELLIS-1851-2,21.110

The same observation and thoughtfulness that inspire us with the most
hopeful anticipations of what improved education is destined to
accomplish , explain why the hitherto defective education has fallen
short , and if persisted in unimproved will continue to fall short , of
what the good and intelligent must not cease to struggle for .
ELLIS-1851-2,21.111

At the same time , all those who express their confidence that an
Education efficient to produce a high order of well-being is attainable
, ought to be cautious not to feed themselves with delusions under the
semblance of confidence , nor by the glaring exhibition on their part of
a vain confidence , to indispose others to enjoy the comfort of even so
much confidence as is reasonable . ELLIS-1851-2,21.112

To imagine to ourselves what kind of education we would have , is not to
prove it to be attainable . ELLIS-1851-2,21.113

To say , or even to know , that it is attainable , is not to attain it .
ELLIS-1851-2,21.114

The very term " attainable , " seems to point to the consideration of
the means of attainment ; ELLIS-1851-2,21.115

and what those means are , must be known and understood by everybody who
desires to form reasonable expectations for himself , or to inspire
others with reasonable confidence . ELLIS-1851-2,21.116

Besides , although good education may be attainable , there may be great
difficulties in the way of its attainment . ELLIS-1851-2,21.117

To ignore these difficulties , <P_22> to be blind to them , and not to
be prepared against them , is to make them insuperable - to make sure
that they will eventually overwhelm us - ELLIS-1851-2,22.118

it is to prepare disgrace and ridicule for our own ignorance and
presumption , and , as far as in us lies , to drive others to despair ,
and to retard the general progress of society . ELLIS-1851-2,22.119

What other means , then , beyond those already adverted to , are
requisite in order to make a really good education attainable ?
ELLIS-1851-2,22.120

To try to evade answering this question is an ignominy to which it is to
be hoped few will henceforward be inclined to expose themselves .
ELLIS-1851-2,22.121

Better far to be mortified by failing in the attempt to answer it , than
to be disgraced by succeeding in the attempt to give it the go-by .
ELLIS-1851-2,22.122

It can@ @not be overlooked by anybody , that , among other accessories
of good education , there must be an abundance of food , clothing , fuel
, and shelter , as well as the specific co-operation of educators ,
purposely maintained and qualified , to contribute appropriate teaching
and training . ELLIS-1851-2,22.123

Whence are these accessories to come ? ELLIS-1851-2,22.124

The young , for whose education they are needed , can@ @not provide them
for themselves . ELLIS-1851-2,22.125

Up to the age of thirteen , or even beyond , no call ought to be made
upon any human being to contribute towards the supply of these
requisites for his education . ELLIS-1851-2,22.126

No labour up to that age ought to be enjoined , except with a view to
industrial training , - the produce of such labour being taken rather as
an incidental benefit than looked for as its object .
ELLIS-1851-2,22.127

Labour from the young beyond these limits can be obtained only by
sacrificing or retarding some development - physical , intellectual , or
moral - conducive to well-being . ELLIS-1851-2,22.128

That the accessories <P_23> of good education for the young , then ,
must be provided by their elders , is another of those great facts , or
truths , inattention to which can@ @not but be productive of misery .
ELLIS-1851-2,23.129

How the duty of supplying the educational and other wants of the young
ought to be distributed among the adults may be a subject , in the
opinion of some , yet susceptible of further elucidation ;
ELLIS-1851-2,23.130

but nobody will deny that the duty must be performed .
ELLIS-1851-2,23.131

This duty of the adult to the infant population may be termed the
parental duty . ELLIS-1851-2,23.132

It is a duty , according to the institutions that have generally
prevailed , the undertaking of which has been left altogether optional .
ELLIS-1851-2,23.133

Many of the social duties have been made compulsory .
ELLIS-1851-2,23.134

But nobody has the parental duties imposed upon him ;
ELLIS-1851-2,23.135

nor has society , hitherto , been very rigid in insisting upon the
adequate performance of these duties , when voluntarily assumed .
ELLIS-1851-2,23.136

It may well be doubted how far any power , except that of enlightened
opinion , is competent to enforce a due performance of the parental
duties . ELLIS-1851-2,23.137

But the more reasonable our doubts on this head , the more indispensable
does it appear that the teaching what are the requirements of the young
and how entire is their dependence upon parental care , and the training
to the performance of the parental duties , should not be omitted from
our enumeration of the Educational functions . ELLIS-1851-2,23.138

Whatever may be our arrangements or contrivances , national or municipal
, to aid in the Educational effort , without which the further raising
of a very large portion of the people out of their present state of
barbarism would seem hopeless , we must beware of blinding ourselves ,
or misleading others , by countenancing <P_24> the belief that any
effort can be truly successful except in alliance with parental care .
ELLIS-1851-2,24.139

It may , in fact , be most safely affirmed , that national or municipal
participation in the work of Education can be no more than auxiliary .
ELLIS-1851-2,24.140

For even if it were ultimately decided that all our educational
establishments should be national , municipal , or parochial , it is not
pretended that the young who are to frequent these establishments could
profit by them as they ought , unless provided with adequate food ,
clothing , shelter , and fuel , from another source , - not national -
not municipal - not parochial - but parental . ELLIS-1851-2,24.141

A high state of civilization - a state which we have yet to look forward
to - must be the effect of a large concurrence of causes , not of a
single cause . ELLIS-1851-2,24.142

Among these numerous causes , however , there is not one to be compared
with that of correct opinion and sense of duty among parents .
ELLIS-1851-2,24.143

This cause being known to flourish in any community , it might almost be
predicated that all other causes of well-being would be clustered around
it . ELLIS-1851-2,24.144

Equally confident may we be , that wherever Barbarism is largely
interspersed with Civilization , whatever other causes of evil may be in
operation , among them will be found misconception or disregard of the
parental duties . ELLIS-1851-2,24.145

Applying these observations to the present state of society , we are
compelled to admit , inasmuch as the barbarous elements are still
woefully {TEXT:wofully} rife among us , that there must be present an
equally woful misconception or disregard of the parental duties .
ELLIS-1851-2,24.146

And since it is imposed upon the pioneers of progress in every age to
base their operations upon actual nature , that is , upon the state of
society as they find it - not as they <P_25> might imagine it ; so in
this our time , Educational effort must be based upon the admitted
deficiency in knowledge and performance of parental duty , and directed
, not to compensate for such deficiency , that being impossible , but to
eradicate it in the future , and meanwhile to mitigate the painful
consequences resulting from it . ELLIS-1851-2,25.147

Seeing the extent of pauperism with which the world has , up to this
time , ever been afflicted , some impatient philanthropists are rather
given to despise Education as a means of prevention , on account of the
time that must elapse before it can bear fruit . ELLIS-1851-2,25.148

No doubt such an objection would be plausible , if a resort to Education
necessarily precluded the employment of other auxiliary preventive
remedies at the same time ; or if other less tardy means could be
suggested in the place of Education . ELLIS-1851-2,25.149

The most tardy sanitary appliances are better than no sanitary
appliances at all . ELLIS-1851-2,25.150

And it is childish to object to any appliances as too slow , when
unprepared to substitute others more expeditious . ELLIS-1851-2,25.151

Besides , we are as incompetent at this moment to decide what rapidity
of progressive amelioration Education may be capable of attaining , as
we were , twenty years ago , of forming a conception of the rate
attainable in railway travelling . ELLIS-1851-2,25.152

Education is still in its infancy . ELLIS-1851-2,25.153

Already it has done much for classes ; ELLIS-1851-2,25.154

and who can tell what wonders it may not , in its maturity , accomplish
for the masses ? ELLIS-1851-2,25.155

Moreover , something more than the degree of effort needful to maintain
a state of civilization is demanded to raise us out of our present lower
state . ELLIS-1851-2,25.156

A people worthy to be called civilized , implies a people among whom are
generally understood and practised the <P_26> parental duties , without
the due performance of which , a state of civilization is impossible .
ELLIS-1851-2,26.157

A state of civilization may accordingly be said to be self-maintaining .
ELLIS-1851-2,26.158

But a semi-civilized people implies a people among whom the parental
duties are only imperfectly understood and partially practised .
ELLIS-1851-2,26.159

And hence arises the necessity of extra moral leverage to overcome this
impediment to a complete extrication out of a state of barbarism .
ELLIS-1851-2,26.160

The favoured members of society - a minority where the people are little
advanced - a majority where well forward in civilization , must
contribute out of the comparative superabundance of their share of the
actual civilization , whether in wealth , in knowledge , or in
benevolence , towards supplying the deficiencies of those who are behind
them . ELLIS-1851-2,26.161

More especially must they do their utmost to supply the deficiency in
respect of parental forethought , where such deficiency threatens to
stamp numbers of the rising generation with the curse of vices alike
revolting in their victims and damaging to society .
ELLIS-1851-2,26.162

With their best efforts , they can do no more than partially supply the
deficiency in parental forethought , for which it is impossible to find
a substitute . ELLIS-1851-2,26.163

And hence , the necessity of providing , in every scheme of education ,
for a thorough exposition of the parental duties , and for such training
as will lead to the scrupulous performance of them .
ELLIS-1851-2,26.164

The notion of attempting to expound the parental {TEXT:Parental} duties
to children strikes some people as ludicrous . ELLIS-1851-2,26.165

Little are they aware of what children can appreciate in the way of
instruction judiciously presented to them . ELLIS-1851-2,26.166

I may be allowed to cite a little of my own experience .
ELLIS-1851-2,26.167

It has happened to me repeatedly to put such questions <P_27> as these
to children , ELLIS-1851-2,27.168

and I have seldom failed to elicit answers proving to everybody present
, that I had succeeded in engaging their sympathies , and in reaching
their understandings : ELLIS-1851-2,27.169

- Who feed , clothe , and lodge you ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.170

If your parents neglected to supply you with food , clothes , and
lodging , how could you get them ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.171

Are all children as well off as you are for parents ?
ELLIS-1851-2,27.172

What kind of lives do such children lead , ELLIS-1851-2,27.173

and what is likely to become of them ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.174

What do you come to this school for ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.175

How do you gain admittance here ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.176

How can your teachers obtain the means of subsistence while they are
engaged teaching you ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.177

What kind of people must your parents be , to be able and willing to do
all these things ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.178

How did they become possessed of these good qualities ?
ELLIS-1851-2,27.179

What do you think they were doing when as young as you , in order to be
so good as they now are ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.180

In what respect do you think yourselves better already , and likely to
be still better hereafter , in consequence of your parents' care of you
? ELLIS-1851-2,27.181

If you become parents one of these days , what kind of parents should
you wish to be ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.182

What qualities must good parents possess ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.183

Ought they to think of what their children will want , before their
children are born ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.184

What ought they to provide for them beforehand ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.185

Why must really good parents be industrious , intelligent , economical ,
sober , trustworthy , and conscientious in making and performing
engagements ? ELLIS-1851-2,27.186

<P_28>

When ought people to begin to acquire the knowledge to fit them to
become good parents ? ELLIS-1851-2,28.188

When ought people to begin to form the habits to fit them to become good
parents ? ELLIS-1851-2,28.189

Can you do anything , young as you now are , to prepare yourselves to
perform with credit , the parental and other important duties ?
ELLIS-1851-2,28.190

and what ? ELLIS-1851-2,28.191

When these duties are well performed by parents , what is likely to be
the conduct of their children towards them ? ELLIS-1851-2,28.192

What feelings and conduct ought children to cherish towards their
parents under all circumstances ? ELLIS-1851-2,28.193

Why ought children when they grow up , to become better parents towards
their children than their parents were towards them ?
ELLIS-1851-2,28.194

What hope can there be of future well-being for children , when the
parental duties are misunderstood or neglected ? ELLIS-1851-2,28.195

It must be remembered that I am considering Education in the light of a
preventive of destitution . ELLIS-1851-2,28.196

I scarcely expect to be accused by many who have attended to what I have
urged , of attempting to introduce anything either superfluous or
impracticable . ELLIS-1851-2,28.197

I set out with stating that my wish was to address myself exclusively to
such of the elements as must be admitted by all to be indispensable
constituents of good education . ELLIS-1851-2,28.198

I would now ask whether it is not well deserving of all enlightened
adults to consider in what way they can best direct their energies and
influence , to secure the introduction into all schools of these
essential constituents of good education . ELLIS-1851-2,28.199

A person of any reflection not conversant with the actual <P_29> state
of our educational establishments , if there be such a person , might
well exclaim , - What ! do you mean to say that such obvious truths as
you have been uttering , are ever disregarded by those who conduct the
education of childhood and youth ? ELLIS-1851-2,29.200

Unfortunately they are . ELLIS-1851-2,29.201

And what is worse , parents , although anxiously intent upon promoting
the welfare of their children , have become blinded to the absurdity of
what their children are subjected to , under the notion of fitting them
to participate in the blessings and duties of life .
ELLIS-1851-2,29.202

This lagging of good practice behind the advanced knowledge of the age
is not inexplicable . ELLIS-1851-2,29.203

The force of habit , the adhesiveness of our nature , disinclines us to
the adoption of new methods , even where their superiority is
demonstrated . ELLIS-1851-2,29.204

And besides , the stultifying effect of causes formerly in active
operation , prevents a large portion of the practical men of the day
from comprehending the force of the demonstrations that are submitted to
them . ELLIS-1851-2,29.205

There is , however , nothing to dishearten us in the very great
tardiness with which in practice Education has followed its theory .
ELLIS-1851-2,29.206

Some tardiness is inevitable under any circumstances ;
ELLIS-1851-2,29.207

and the very rapidity of our progress in knowledge of late years
increases the difficulty of finding educators trained to teach so as to
supply the advanced requirements of our own times . ELLIS-1851-2,29.208

Again , amid all our improvements , it is but as yesterday that the
conviction is beginning to fasten itself upon us , that the only way to
make sure of the conduct requisite for the well-being of society is by
dealing with the causes of conduct . ELLIS-1851-2,29.209

At best , to visit with punishment the effects of bad conduct can but
exercise an uncertain and partial influence . ELLIS-1851-2,29.210

Differently <P_30> expressed , to deal with causes is to educate ,
ELLIS-1851-2,30.211

to visit effects is to punish . ELLIS-1851-2,30.212

Then , if it be but as yesterday that we have emerged from barbarism
sufficiently to appreciate the value of good Education , if hitherto
Education has been rather considered in reference to individuals , as a
means of sustaining them in , or raising them to , rank and station ,
than in reference to mankind as a means of elevating the race , to feel
surprise or despair at our having comparatively ill-assorted tools with
which to conduct the work of civilization , must be unreasonable .
ELLIS-1851-2,30.213

No - the appreciation of the necessities of the position ought only to
stimulate us to that exertion which will make all difficulties fly
before us , and give us a claim to the blessings of our children , and
children's children . ELLIS-1851-2,30.214

There is one kind of effort towards bringing about a reformation in
existing Educational establishments , competent to secure such teaching
and training as have been indicated , in which all may participate ,
ELLIS-1851-2,30.215

- and that is , to insist upon having it . ELLIS-1851-2,30.216

Let the demand be created and advertised , and , in Education as in
anything else , supply will follow . ELLIS-1851-2,30.217

With the progress of civilization , good systems of procedure , and an
intelligent bar and police have superseded the cruel and impotent use of
torture for detecting guilt and sheltering innocence in our courts of
law ; ELLIS-1851-2,30.218

and instruction in navigation , and science and skill in ship-building ,
have superseded lucky days and horse-shoes as means of transporting men
and merchandize across the seas in safety . ELLIS-1851-2,30.219

In like manner , let us strive to introduce into our schools the
teaching and training which are directly adapted to fit those to whom
they are applied to steer their course through life in comfort <P_31>
and safety . ELLIS-1851-2,31.220

I repeat <font> directly <$$font> , not indirectly adapted .
ELLIS-1851-2,31.221

We hear , and may continue to hear , that Education , as at present
conducted , tends to accomplish indirectly all that is insisted upon .
ELLIS-1851-2,31.222

But nobody ever pretended that indifferent Education is not better than
no Education at all . ELLIS-1851-2,31.223

What I do contend for is , that Education should be as perfect as
possible , and adapted in its general scope , and in all its parts , to
diffuse the knowledge and conduct which are the causes of well-being ,
and to avert the ignorance and conduct which are the causes of misery .
ELLIS-1851-2,31.224

We should not form a very favourable opinion of marksmen who , wishing
to hit a target , contented themselves with firing in the direction of
it , instead of firing at it . ELLIS-1851-2,31.225

We might be incited to laugh at their folly . ELLIS-1851-2,31.226

When , however , it is not a target to acquire skill upon , but an
actual enemy to be hit and killed , and such an enemy , too , as the
causes of misery , this practice of shooting wide of the mark is far too
deplorable to admit of our laughing at its absurdity ,
ELLIS-1851-2,31.227

- we may heave the sigh or drop the tear ; ELLIS-1851-2,31.228

but , above all , we ought to rouse ourselves to the determination that
such shooting wide of the mark shall no longer be tolerated .
ELLIS-1851-2,31.229

<P_131>

VI . Reasons for insisting that instruction in economical science shall
no longer be excluded from our schools . ELLIS-1851-2,131.231

Of late years I have devoted some time and attention in aiding to
diffuse a knowledge of Economical Science . ELLIS-1851-2,131.232

I have been giving lessons in this science in many schools ,
ELLIS-1851-2,131.233

and have been endeavouring to persuade others to obtain the introduction
of similar teaching into schools over which they exercise control or
influence . ELLIS-1851-2,131.234

I have also presided over several Adult classes ; ELLIS-1851-2,131.235

and , deeply impressed with the importance of what I am engaged in doing
, I have spared no pains to induce the friends and promoters of
Education to bend some portion of their efforts in the same direction .
ELLIS-1851-2,131.236

It is gratifying to me to be able to state that I have met with much
success . ELLIS-1851-2,131.237

I must also admit that disappointments and rebuffs have not been unknown
to me . ELLIS-1851-2,131.238

Exposition , persuasion , refutation , oral and written , as might be
expected , are what I have been obliged to make use of , according as
there presented themselves to me , from time to time , ignorance to be
enlightened , indifference to be overcome , error to be combated .
ELLIS-1851-2,131.239

The result of my experience , thus far , is a growing conviction that if
once the public can be <P_132> made to see what Economical Science
really is - how simple , how beautiful , how interesting , I might
almost say , how grand , when unfolded step by step , without pedantry
and pretence - what blessings would be secured , what suffering warded
off , what heart-burnings and asperities softened down by a general
familiarity with its leading principles - all other difficulties would
vanish , ELLIS-1851-2,132.240

and instruction in Ecnonomical Science would speedily be as common in
all our schools and colleges as its exclusion is at present .
ELLIS-1851-2,132.241

With these views , my purpose on this occasion is to address myself to
those who have never given any systematic attention to Economical
Science . ELLIS-1851-2,132.242

Dwelling in the same country , surrounded by the same objects , whether
happiness or misery be the predominant feature , floating down the same
social current , whether improving or deteriorating as it hastens onward
, I propose that we should enter into free communication ; I taking upon
myself to persuade them how much better we should be if we were all
acquainted and acting in harmony with the leading principles of
Economical Science , they simply suspending their judgment upon the
claims of Economical Science to their attention till they have heard
what it would do , and what it is capable of doing .
ELLIS-1851-2,132.243

Nobody will deny that the amount of well-being in store for us in this
world depends greatly upon our coduct . ELLIS-1851-2,132.244

Our conduct , again , is not independent of our knowledge .
ELLIS-1851-2,132.245

Long before mechanical , chemical , electrical , and physiological
science had assumed the forms in which they are now familiar to us , men
subsisted among the same elements - only in disregard , because in
ignorance of much of their power to influence <P_133> well-being .
ELLIS-1851-2,133.246

Who would venture to assert that the greater regard , founded on the
more accurate knowledge of those elements as embodied in modern science
, has not greatly added to our means of enjoyment , and provided us with
more numerous securities against suffering ? ELLIS-1851-2,133.247

In like manner , we all live , surrounded by the elements of Economical
Science , unconscious , too many of us , of their power to influence
well-being . ELLIS-1851-2,133.248

If it can be explained what these elements are - if even a glimpse can
be communicated of the immensity of their power , either to impede or to
promote well-being , according as we conduct ourselves - nobody would
venture to assert that an altered conduct , founded upon a more accurate
knowledge of the leading principles of Economical Science would not
greatly increase well-being . ELLIS-1851-2,133.249

It being once understood what Economical Science embraces and explains ,
to linger to introduce the teaching of it , in company with other
sciences , in our schools , would seem to be no longer possible .
ELLIS-1851-2,133.250

To close our own ears to those who are willing to instruct us , would be
to make ourselves moral suicides . ELLIS-1851-2,133.251

Were we to withhold such instruction from our children , we should be
something worse - moral infanticides . ELLIS-1851-2,133.252

There is one opinion and feeling common to those who ignore and to those
who study Economical Science ; ELLIS-1851-2,133.253

they both admit and deplore the prevalence or too frequent recurrence of
certain social evils , such as low wages , agricultural and commercial
distress , bankruptcy , pauperism , and destitution .
ELLIS-1851-2,133.254

They who ignore Economical Science and shut it out of their schools ,
are not inclined to look on for others , or to bear for themselves , in
silence , the calamities above enumerated . ELLIS-1851-2,133.255

<P_134>

They cry out against them quite as loudly as the most sturdy economist .
ELLIS-1851-2,134.257

They differ from the economists in this respect , that they assign
causes for evils at haphazard , and when opportunity offers proceed to
act upon their assumptions , to the detriment of many of the objects
whom they commiserate , and to their own eventual mortification ;
whereas the economists investigate the causes of evils , and having
systematized the results of their investigations into a body of
Economical Science , recommend them to be tested , verified , studied ,
and applied for the benefit of mankind . ELLIS-1851-2,134.258

It is a curious feature in the progress of mankind , that science , or
the establishing by careful observation and experiment of the connection
of cause and effect , has ever been obstructed in its progress , and
excluded as long as possible from practice , by empirics , who assume
the connection without troubling themselves either to study or to
expermient . ELLIS-1851-2,134.259

Let us begin by contrasting the conduct of the economist and the empiric
in the matter of low wages . ELLIS-1851-2,134.260

There can be no social evil more fruitful of painful consequences than a
prevalence of low wages ; meaning by low wages , wages insufficient to
enable the labourer to maintain himself in sickness and old age , as
well as in health and youth . ELLIS-1851-2,134.261

It is cruel of masters , says the empiric , to give such low wages ;
ELLIS-1851-2,134.262

they ought not to be so hard-hearted , so grinding , so rapacious ;
ELLIS-1851-2,134.263

and if they can@ @not be legally prevented from sweating their victims ,
they should be controlled by public opinion . ELLIS-1851-2,134.264

The economist brings to bear upon this subject the whole of his
scientific experience . ELLIS-1851-2,134.265

He knows that if a capitalist is gaining extraordinary profit by his
purchase of labour at a low rate , other capitalists would strive to
<P_135> draw his labourers from him by tempting them with the offer of
higher wages . ELLIS-1851-2,135.266

He knows , also , that it is open to labourers to better their condition
by shifting from one employer to another . ELLIS-1851-2,135.267

He knows more than this ; ELLIS-1851-2,135.268

he knows that the capitalist who is giving low wages to some workmen ,
also gives large wages to some , and has actually refused to give any
wages at all to others . ELLIS-1851-2,135.269

He is well aware that the master employs his capital for the purpose of
earning profit , and that he would rather pay one man 1000 <font> l.
<$$font> , if his services would yield him 1,200 <font> l. <$$font> ,
than he would distribute the same sum among 100 men if their joint
labour would yield no more than 1,100 <font> l. <$$font> ;
ELLIS-1851-2,135.270

but on no account would he pay the same sum to purchase the labour of
1000 men , if the produce of their labour would not replace the 1000
<font> l. <$$font> advanced to them . ELLIS-1851-2,135.271

The men who receive high wages are the comparatively competent ,
ELLIS-1851-2,135.272

those who receive low wages are the comparatively incompetent ,
ELLIS-1851-2,135.273

and those who can obtain none are the impotent . ELLIS-1851-2,135.274

Incompetent adults are objects of pity , ELLIS-1851-2,135.275

and impotent adults are still more so . ELLIS-1851-2,135.276

The latter constitute the pauper class . ELLIS-1851-2,135.277

They are the old , the infirm , and the helpless , who have no funds for
their maintenance provided out of their own or other people's savings .
ELLIS-1851-2,135.278

The softest of social empirics issuing out of a lordly mansion would
scarcely venture to denounce a capitalist for refusing to give wages to
the impotent . ELLIS-1851-2,135.279

Is he justified in denouncing him for refusing to give anything beyond a
miserable pittance to the comparatively incompetent , to the drunken ,
the indolent , the untrustworthy , the ignorant , and the wasteful ?
ELLIS-1851-2,135.280

Our impassioned empiric directs some of the overflowings of his
indignation against those who put such questions , ELLIS-1851-2,135.281

<P_136> and fancies that to screen the master from unmerited imputations
is to sanction low wages , and to abet the continuance of misery among
the labourers . ELLIS-1851-2,136.282

The economist is fairly entitled to urge that the denunciation of those
who really have no power over wages is the way rather to favour the
continuance than the amendment of any insufficiency in them ; that he is
prepared to explain , not how existing adult labourers can have higher
wages secured to them , but how that happy change may be in store for
the labourers who are to come after them ; and that , in the mean time ,
the burthen and duty of mitigating present suffering must be borne by
society at large , - as well by court-lords , living without work , as
by lords of labour , or capitalists , living in their work .
ELLIS-1851-2,136.283

The economist , then , with his more comprehensive intelligence and his
more considerate benevolence , feels that it is his duty to care for a
future as well as for the present race of labourers .
ELLIS-1851-2,136.284

It appears to him , that ranting and raving against capitalists will no
more provide any guarantee for future adequate wages than a remedy for
present inadequate wages . ELLIS-1851-2,136.285

He knows that to cause a future range of adequate wages to succeed a
present range of inadequate wages , there must be increase of capital ,
and that increase of capital can only originate in increase of knowledge
, of industry , and of economy . ELLIS-1851-2,136.286

If you ask him how this is to be obtained , he will refer you to better
teaching and training , - and the source whence these are to flow ,
clearer perceptions of the parental duties . ELLIS-1851-2,136.287

Now , if these statements of what the economists would teach are correct
interpretations of experience <P_137> and science , it must be obvious
that all confused or delusive appearances which mislead , or films that
obstruct the eyes of observers , must be dangerous .
ELLIS-1851-2,137.288

They who can@ @not gainsay these expositions may ignore them ;
ELLIS-1851-2,137.289

and baffled in their attempt to fasten the odium of low wages upon
masters , they may attribute them to want of money .
ELLIS-1851-2,137.290

It being once admitted that low wages originate in want of money , an
increase of the quantity of money would seem the thing of necessity to
be prescribed as the means of raising wages . ELLIS-1851-2,137.291

There are only three ways conceivable by which the quantity of money can
be increased : - debasing the coin , a forced issue of paper-money , and
an increased produce of the precious metals . ELLIS-1851-2,137.292

But the economist observes , on each of these means , that not one of
them would add to the capital of the country , - to the store of food ,
clothing , furniture , &c. , out of which wages are to be paid ; that a
large increase of money would depreciate its value - in other words ,
raise prices ; and that accordingly , although money-wages would rise in
proportion , the increased money-wages would obtain for those who
received them no increase of real wages - no larger quantity of the
necessaries and comforts of life . ELLIS-1851-2,137.293

The practical lesson to the student of Economical Science from these
expositions of the influence of the quantity of money upon the rate of
wages is , that to obtain comparatively high wages workmen have but one
course to pursue , that is , to increase their usefulness - to make
their labour productive , and the purchase of it an object of research .
ELLIS-1851-2,137.294

By efforts in this direction every workman may hope to gain wages more
than enough to satisfy his immediate wants . ELLIS-1851-2,137.295

Following up these efforts by a well-regulated <P_138> economy , he will
make a provision for the future ; ELLIS-1851-2,138.296

and while contributing to the growth of the general capital , will
become a capitalist himself . ELLIS-1851-2,138.297

Neither , while thus conscious of the true means of acquiring a title to
high wages , will he be negligent of the duties which he owes to society
and to his children , to assist in laying the foundation of a high rate
of wages for those who are to come after him . ELLIS-1851-2,138.298

And , to do this , the same intelligence and good conduct which have
served to increase his own wages will convince him of the necessity of
leaving to his children the only inheritance that he can safely confide
in as their mainstay - similar intelligence and good conduct to guide
them to good wages , and to the good application of such wages when
placed within their grasp . ELLIS-1851-2,138.299

Another cause to which lowness of wages has been attributed - one that
has often been pleaded by employers , in extenuation of the charge of
harshness or niggardliness towards those whose labour they purchase , is
want of means and consequent inability to afford more .
ELLIS-1851-2,138.300

This plea is frequently followed up by an off-hand explanation of the
causes of this inability . ELLIS-1851-2,138.301

A certain class of farmers will afford us an example of such employers .
ELLIS-1851-2,138.302

They pay low wages , ELLIS-1851-2,138.303

and regret that they can@ @not afford to pay higher , the prices of
their produce being so low , and their farming expenses so high .
ELLIS-1851-2,138.304

According to these farmers , <font> protection <$$font> against foreign
competition would secure to them higher prices , ELLIS-1851-2,138.305

and liberality in landlords would make easy rent , ELLIS-1851-2,138.306

and there would then be no excuse for low wages ! ELLIS-1851-2,138.307

These assertions teem with contradictions to the economist .
ELLIS-1851-2,138.308

He can@ @not take for granted that farmers , even when favoured with
high prices and low rents , <P_139> will pay high wages , if labourers ,
anxious to obtain any wages , however low , are pressing them for
employment beyond what their capital can provide . ELLIS-1851-2,139.309

The economist never can lose sight of the fact that present wages ,
considered in the aggregate , depend upon the proportion that the
capital bears to the number of labourers , while future wages depend
greatly upon the productiveness of present capital , and upon the
economy with which this productiveness is followed up .
ELLIS-1851-2,139.310

He then puts a very simple , yet stringent question to himself .
ELLIS-1851-2,139.311

How will the capital of a country be most productively employed - by
allowing the possessors of it to give to it the industrial direction
from which they expect to derive most profit ? or by forbidding them ?
By giving them permission to fish with their capitals , where they
expect shoals are to be caught ? or by insisting upon the casting of
their nets , where fish are shy , and making fish dear to compensate
them ? ELLIS-1851-2,139.312

The economist finds it no more possible to hesitate in giving his
preference to freedom of industrial enterprise as a means of making
capital productive , than it would be to hesitate in preferring skilful
to unskilful farming . ELLIS-1851-2,139.313

He accepts this preference with the condition attached to it , that the
unskilled and incompetent capitalist must give place to the capitalist
of skill and competency . ELLIS-1851-2,139.314

That price which yields profit to the skilled capitalist will not so
much as meet the expenses of the unskilled capitalist , who must
relinquish what he is unfit for , or be ruined in persisting - in either
case consigning the labourers to those capitalists who are competent to
buy labour , direct it profitably , and accumulate more capital .
ELLIS-1851-2,139.315

Amid the constantly varying distributions and re-distributions of
capital to <P_140> enable its administrators to earn profit , the
economist observes many directed to facilitate and develop
{TEXT:develope} interchange with the inhabitants of other lands .
ELLIS-1851-2,140.316

This also he accepts with the condition attached to it - that whatever
is imported , is imported only because it costs less to produce it
through the intervention of commerce than it would without such
intervention . ELLIS-1851-2,140.317

In other words , a portion of capital is more beneficially employed
producing commodities , to be exported as a means of purchasing the
commodities really wanted , than by attempting to produce the
commodities wanted without the intervention of commercial interchange .
ELLIS-1851-2,140.318

The administrators of capital , if unfettered by restrictions ,
naturally apply it in this way , ELLIS-1851-2,140.319

and the labourers who seek wages , must follow the direction of the
capital . ELLIS-1851-2,140.320

The question , accordingly , that is at issue between the two parties
who interest themselves in the welfare of the labourers - the economists
who would leave capitalists at liberty to administer their capitals as
they please , and the protectionists , or more properly the
restrictionists , who would not , is , - Whether to employ capital as
profitably as possible , be among the means by which wages sufficient to
meet all the demands of humanity , shall be universally accessible to
those who have their labour to dispose of . ELLIS-1851-2,140.321

It is to be hoped that neither party will any longer shut their eyes to
the influence of other means towards attaining this end so devoutly to
be wished , viz. , the knowledge and conduct of the labourers
themselves - an influence so preponderating , that in comparison with it
all other influences may be said to be insignificant .
ELLIS-1851-2,140.322

