<BEGIN_fallowfield-1791-2>

<P_7>

<heading>

The Gardening Calendar . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.4

<font> The Formation , and Management of a Garden . <$$font>
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.5

<$$heading>

Let a preference invariably be given to the situation , which admits the
greatest share of mid-day sun ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.7

and observe that it be sheltered from the north-east and north-west
winds and as near the dung hill as conveniently may be .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.8

If practicable , let water be conveyed into it : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.9

between four and five feet is the most convenient depth for the basons ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.10

but if that can@ @not be done , pump or well water should be exposed to
the open air in cisterns , or troughs , three or four days before made
use of . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.11

The soil must be trenched two feet deep , or upwards ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.12

when of a strong clayey quality , sand or sifted ashes must be mixed
therewith ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.13

when of a light or sandy nature , a portion of strong soil , or clay is
the best mixture ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.14

and one industrious year's fallow , with proper turnings , will bring it
to your wishes . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,7.15

In autumn , when vegetation ceases , all Gardens ought to be turned over
, or <P_8> trenched , as seemeth most requisite for meliorating the soil
, as well as destroying weeds : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.16

- there will be small hopes of a crop the succeeding year , if the soil
is not previously put into condition , by carefully digging and manuring
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.17

Garden-walls ought to be nine or ten feet high ; their breadth at the
bottom two feet , and at the top , twenty inches .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.18

The walks around {TEXT:around,} should be six feet wide , filled with
gravel or sand ; and the borders next the walls <paren> though it may
trespass on the beauty of proportion in a small Garden <$$paren> eight
or ten feet ; as the roots of the fruit-trees can@ @not spread
themselves with freedom , where the borders are narrow .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.19

No peas , beans , or deep-rooted plants , ought {COM:see_errata} to be
placed on the fruit-tree borders . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.20

Let not the same crops be on the same ground , two years together ,
unless you dung it well ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.21

and never suffer weeds to seed if you can help it .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.22

Stumps of cabbages , pea's haulme {TEXT:halume} , and bean stalks , must
be taken up as soon as done bearing . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.23

In planting fruit-trees against walls , observe to give them proper
aspects , as some require mid-day sun more than others .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.24

For all our fruit trees are principally natives of a warmer climate ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,8.25

therefore , let us be content , not to aspire after such delicate <P_9>
fruits as the south of England can justly boast of .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.26

Apple and pear trees , when planted against walls , or espaliers , ought
to have as much of a south-east aspect as can be given them ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.27

and if the soil is not two feet deep , a slate stone should be laid at
the bottom of the soil , in order to prevent their roots running into
the clay . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.28

Their distance should be twenty feet ; but , if planted in orchards ,
thirty . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.29

Plumb and cherry trees , when planted against walls , will bear fruit on
a south-east , or south-west aspect ; but , the former the better .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.30

Their distance should be fifteen feet . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.31

Apricots and Peaches require a south aspect , and warm situation ; their
distance the same as plumbs and cherries . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.32

The morello cherry , may have a north-east aspect .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.33

The width of beds in kitchen Gardens , ought to be four feet ; the
vacancy , or alley between them , one foot . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.34

Let no weeds be suffered to grow on the dung hill ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.35

for if they should scatter their seed upon the dung , they will be
brought into the Garden , or other cultivated ground , shoot up , damage
every crop of useful plants , and occasion a perpetual labour to
extirpate them ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,9.36

neither should dung be ever carried <P_10> into the Garden , before it
has been turned over , and well rotted . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,10.37

The most important points of general culture in a kitchen Garden ,
consist in good digging , manuring the soil , and allowing proper
distances between the plants , according to their several kinds and
growths ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,10.38

for the ground ought never to be crouded with more plants , than it is
able to nourish properly , nor to let any part remain unoccupied for
want of a due succession of crops ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,10.39

neither should we be desirous {COM:see_errata} of sowing very early ,
except the soil be light and dry ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,10.40

for when seeds lay long in the ground before they appear , they are not
only liable to perish , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,10.41

but the ground unites together again FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,10.42

and frustrates their growth . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,10.43

<P_11>

<heading>

January , the First Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.46

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.47

<$$heading>

No work is required to be done in the Kitchen Garden this month , save
the wheeling of manure in a frost , to where wanted .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.49

Mice , at this season , will fall into the houses ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.50

therefore traps must be set , in order that their breed may be
diminished ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.51

for nothing makes greater havock in a Garden than mice ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.52

and if not destroyed now , will be more difficult to be done , after
peas and beans appear above ground . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.53

<font> The Fruit Garden {COM:missing_period} <$$font>
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.54

The work required at this season is , taking the superfluous branches
out of apple and pear trees ; and rubbing the moss off the same , if not
previously done in the month of November or December .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.55

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,11.56

In a hard and dry frost , without snow , some delicate flowers will
require to be covered with mats , pea's haulme , or fern , <P_12> but
taken off again in mild weather ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.57

others must have a little litter laid about their roots , the principal
part of the winter season . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.58

Auricula plants in pots , that were not replanted in August , will
require to be refreshed with new compost , and protected from heavy
rains or snow . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.59

<heading>

February , the Second Month in the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.61

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.62

<$$heading>

When the weather is seasonable , peas , beans , garlic , shallot ,
onion-seed , brocoli , and radish seed may be sown .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.64

Onion-seed ought to be sown as soon as the ground is dry , on a rich and
light soil , and carefully covered ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.65

for should it be omitted this month , or early in March , the crops will
not be satisfactory . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.66

Transplant , early , Yorkshire and Scotch cabbage plants , as soon as
fit for the purpose . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.67

Towards the latter end of the month , if the weather is favorable ,
spinnage , beets , parsly , cress , mustard , and lettuce seeds , may be
sown . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.68

Cauliflower seed , if required , may be sown on a slight hot-bed ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,12.69

but , the latter end of <P_13> March , or beginning of April , it may be
sown on a south border of rich and dry soil , in the open ground .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.70

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.71

The re-nailing of apricot , peach , plumb , and cherry trees , should
this month be finished ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.72

for , if delayed longer , the blossom buds might be hurt .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.73

Slips of currant and gooseberry trees , may be planted any time this
month . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.74

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.75

The beginning of this month , anemone and ranunculus roots must be put
into the ground : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.76

the soil ought to be rich and light . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.77

The latter end of this month , polianthus and auricula-seed may be sown
, in pots , or on a border , with an easterly aspect , and sparingly
watered when dry . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.78

<heading>

March , the Third Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.80

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.81

<$$heading>

If unfavorable weather prevented the planting , or sowing those seeds
required the last month , they must not be omitted the beginning of this
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,13.83

Red , and green savoy cabbage seed , may now be sown ; also , a little
early Yorkshire <P_14> cabbage seed , in order to succeed those planted
out this , or the last month . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.84

If the soil is light and dry , early potatoes may be planted this month
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.85

Dress the asparagus beds with a short three_pronged fork ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.86

observe to loosen every part to a little depth ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.87

but beware of going too deep , for fear of wounding the crowns of the
roots . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.88

Artichoke beds must be dressed also ; leaving only two or three of the
cleanest and best situated plants , upon each root , to bear ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.89

slip the rest clean off , and if required , the best of them may be
planted again . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.90

Parsnips , carrots , and all sallading herbs , may be sown this month .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.91

The tops or crowns of horse-raddish , may be planted or increased , by
separation . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.92

A second crop of peas may be sown , and afterwards a third ; allowing a
fortnight or three weeks between each sowing . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.93

London leek may be sown , when onion seed is put into the ground , or
any time this month . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.94

Chives may be planted , by separating their roots ; observing to
preserve , eight or ten of the small bulbs together .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.95

If you have any peas above ground , some earth should be drawn to their
stems to protect them from frost . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,14.96

<P_15>

Cucumber seed , may now be sown on a hotbed ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.98

but , I can@ @not see the necessity of desiring cooling vegetables
before nature chooses to give us them ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.99

neither sallads , nor cucumbers ought to be made use of till the weather
is hot ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.100

but , as the luxurious part of mankind make free with the bottle and
glass , which inflames their blood , cooling vegetables are requisite
for them . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.101

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.102

Fruit trees , may be planted safely 'till about the last week of this
month , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.103

but October is the best season . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.104

Grafting , may be performed the latter end of this month , if the season
is mild . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.105

The grafts must be cut off three weeks before the time of grafting , the
cut ends laid into the earth half their length , and the top ends
covered with straw to prevent their drying . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.106

Apple kernels instead of crabs , are recommended to be sown in order to
graft on ; not only producing larger trees , but readier in bearing
fruit . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.107

Should the weather not be seasonable , it may be deferred till the first
or second week in April . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.108

A little horse dung must be mixed with the clay , for wrapping round the
joint when grafted , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.109

and it will stand the sun and wet better . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,15.110

It is needless to give a description of the different methods of
grafting , as <P_16> every gardener {TEXT:gardiner} is able to do the
work to perfection . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.111

Cherries , of different sorts , are propagated by inoculating , or
grafting the several kinds into stocks of the wild black cherry .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.112

All sorts of plumbs {COM:see_errata} are grafted , or budded upon plumb
stocks , by sowing the stones of any of the common sorts of the same
fruit ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.113

but , our south country gardiners recommend the muscle {COM:see_errata}
and common white pear plumb , the best for grafting on .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.114

When apricot and peach trees are in bloom , if the nights are frosty ,
they should be covered with mats ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.115

but it frequently happens , that more care is required , than is
frequently given them , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.116

therefore , in a severe spring , little fruit may {TEXT:my} be expected
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.117

Rasp , and straw-berry beds , must now be dug about , and kept clear
from suckers and weeds when ever they appear ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.118

they should be manured once in two years , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.119

and they ought never to stand above four years without a removal ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.120

for should that be omitted , their fruit will be small .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.121

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.122

Such flower roots as are not in good condition , should be removed and
replaced by others . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,16.123

Let all weeds be carefully distroyed , a little fresh mould laid on the
surface where wanted , <P_17> and the rest dug carefully about with a
small spade . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.124

The auricula plants in pots , must be moderately refreshed with water ,
when wanted ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.125

but be careful not to let it fall on the flower stems {COM:see_errata}
or leaves , as it would wash off all the mealy dust , in which a part of
their beauty consists . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.126

Auricula seed sown in August , or the last month , must be frequently ,
but moderately watered when dry . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.127

Any hardy shrub or plant , omitted removing in autumn {COM:see_errata} ,
must now be done . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.128

The carnation layers , if not removed in September , may now be planted
where required ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.129

but , be careful that they are taken up with their balls of earth , and
watered after set ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.130

yet , should they not have taken good root , they may remain till the
middle of May , if required . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.131

Let all the walks be rolled and kept clean . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.132

When watering is required , let it be done two hours after sun-rise ;
and so continued till the last week in May . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.133

An Useful Liquid Manure . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.134

Take fresh pigeon's , or hen's dung , a bushel , <paren> Winchester
<$$paren> in an old bag , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.135

steep it in a hogshead of water , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.136

move the bag in the water every day for a week , when it will be fit for
use . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,17.137

The flowers or plants must be <P_18> watered therewith ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.138

but , take care , that you only apply it to the roots .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.139

The dung will impregnate a second hogshead of water .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.140

It will be needless , to give a description of the forming and
conducting a hot-bed ; as all those who take a delight to rear exotic
plants , are undoubtedly qualified for the purpose .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.141

<heading>

April , the Fourth Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.143

<font> THE KITCHEN GARDEN . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.144

<$$heading>

Whatever was neglected planting or sowing the last month , must not be
omitted the beginning of this . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.146

Cauliflower seed , may now be sown on a rich border , with a south
aspect . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.147

Cabbage-plants , must not be omitted hoeing in dry weather , as soon as
ready ; also , peas and beans . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.148

Set sticks to peas as soon as they are hoed . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.149

Potatoes , may be planted any time this month , on a well manured and
light soil . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.150

Snails and slugs , will make great havock , if they are not searched for
and killed . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.151

Thyme-seed , sweet marjoram , summer and winter savory , hyssop , and
many other culinary seeds , may be sown , if seasonable , the last week
of this month , or first week of next . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,18.152

<P_19>

This is the best season for raising beds of artichokes and asparagus ,
upon a deep , rich , and light soil . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.154

Italian celery , must now be sown : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.155

when the plants have been about five weeks above ground , they must be
pricked out into a deep and rich soil of light earth , where they must
stand till planted a second time for blanching .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.156

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.157

If the severity of the weather prevented grafting to be performed the
last month , it must not be neglected as soon this month as conveniently
can be done ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.158

and should the clay happen to fall off any new grafted tree , it must be
renewed ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.159

and all shoots which rise from the stock below the graft , must be
constantly rubbed off as they are produced ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.160

for , if permitted to remain , the graft would be robbed of its
nourishment , and prevent its shooting . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.161

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.162

This is the best season for planting box edgings , or any evergreen
shrub . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.163

The last year's seedling polyanthuses , if not removed in September ,
must now be removed to where wanted in showery weather ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.164

they require a strong soil and an eastern aspect , or shady situation ,
where they may enjoy the morning sun till ten o'clock .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,19.165

<P_20>

Observe to supply all plants in pots with water in dry weather ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.167

and when any plant or flower , wants removing , let them be taken up
with their balls of earth , and watered after set .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.168

The beds and pots of flowers , should be kept perfectly clean , and free
from weeds . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.169

If weeds or grass increase on gravel walks , they must be turned over in
droughty weather . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.170

Put down small sticks by the roots of hyacinths , for fastening and
supporting their stems . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.171

<heading>

May , the Fifth Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.173

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.174

<$$heading>

Prickly cucumber-seed , may now be raised on a moderate hot-bed ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.176

and as soon as the frosty nights are over , the plants may be
familiarized to the open air ; then pricked out against a south wall :
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.177

the runners must be nailed to the wall , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.178

and they will produce their fruit as satisfactorily , as under a forcing
frame . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.179

Kidney-beans may be sown the second or third week of this month , on a
light and rich soil . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,20.180

<P_21>

Cauliflower plants , remaining in their winter beds , or raised on
hot-beds , must be planted out as soon as ready , and watered after set
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.182

If thyme , marjoram , or any other pot herbs were omitted sowing last
month , they must now be put into the ground .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.183

Early Dutch turnip-seed , must be sown this month in showery weather ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.184

if attempted to be put into the ground much sooner , it will be liable
to turn to seed . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.185

Hoeing , weeding , and watering , are principally required this month
and the next ; hoeing in dry weather , but weeding after rain .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.186

Hoeing , being so beneficial {COM:see_errata} to the crops of peas ,
beans , cabbages , potatoes , cauliflowers , turnips , brocoli , &c.
that it is requisite to be repeated , particularly in heavy land , as
the earth begins to coalesce again to its own form , the particles unite
together , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.187

and the artificial pores , in a great measure , close up :
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.188

therefore , hoeing loosens the soil , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.189

destroys the weeds , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.190

opens the pores again , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.191

and keeps the plants moist and growing without stop or delay .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.192

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.193

Observe , if too much fruit are set on apricot and peach trees , which
may be the case in favorable seasons , they must be thinned .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.194

The yellow , and red magnum_bonum plumb-trees , will require the same
care . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,21.195

<P_22>

When small insects begin to annoy either wall trees , or berry trees ,
some means ought to be used to destroy them ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.197

but , as they infold themselves by curling up the leaf , no method hath
been found out better than nipping those shrivelled leaves off , and
watering the trees with the small hand-engine , which is made of tin ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.198

- it would not cost above half a guinea {TEXT:half-a-guinea} ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.199

but then , this practice must be daily continued for a week or a
fortnight , particularly in dry weather . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.200

<heading>

A Method , Calculated to Destroy Insects , on Trees .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.202

<$$heading>

Take lime , a bushel , <paren> Winchester <$$paren> sulphur
{COM:see_errata} , one pound , tobacco dust , one pound and an half ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.204

steep in twenty gallons of water a fortnight , stirring it daily ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.205

then draw clear off for use . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.206

An equal quantity {TEXT:quanty} of water may be mixed with it when used
: FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.207

water the trees infected , with a pan or engine .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.208

Lees of soap , and chamber lees , set by till they become rancid , will
answer the same purpose by often watering the trees therewith , before
the insects begin to breed , which generally happens in the month of May
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,22.209

Blights , proceed from so many different causes that nothing certain has
{COM:see_errata} yet been found <P_23> out to prevent their dismal
effects on fruit-trees ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,23.210

but , the principal misfortunes in the north of England , are occasioned
by severe frosty nights ; which , we often experience in the month of
May , when the trees are in bloom ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,23.211

therefore , delicate fruit-trees , should be covered with mats or close
net work in those severe nights ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,23.212

for how can we expect an exotic fruit-tree , plant , or flower , that is
a native of a warmer climate , to prosper without great care .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,23.213

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,23.214

Slips of double wall flowers , lavender {TEXT:lavendar} , rue , sage ,
southern-wood , hyssop , and rosemary , may be planted the latter end of
this month , or any time the next ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,23.215

but rosemary , will succeed better by pegging a branch in the earth from
the mother-root ; which , when removed in September , must be taken off
with its ball of earth , and planted on a very light soil against a wall
, with an southern aspect . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,23.216

All exotic plants or shrubs , in tubs or pots , ought to be taken out
once in three or four years , with their balls of earth about them ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,23.217

the matted parts of the roots , on the outside , must be shorn off with
a sharp knife ; then replaced again with fresh soil in their tubs or
pots , or removed into larger ones if required , about the middle of
this month . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,23.218

<P_24>

The seeds of exotic plants , must be sown first or second week of this
month , in pots , exposed to the open air under a wall , with a southern
aspect . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.220

All hardy annual , biennial , and perennial flower-seeds , must be sown
before the middle of this month . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.221

As soon as polyanthuses begin to go out of blow
{COM:sic_here_and_passim} , all their flowers must be cut off , save
those intended for seed ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.222

and all other flowers must be nipped off when their blow is over ,
except such as are wanted for seed . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.223

As soon as auriculas are past flowering , they must be removed out of
the shade , and placed in some part of the Garden , where they can enjoy
the morning sun till about ten o'clock ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.224

after this , no moss or weeds must be suffered to grow on their mould ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.225

and thus are to be left for the summer , or till excessive wet weather
require their removal {COM:missing_period} FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.226

When the seed pods of auriculas are ripe , they must be taken off , and
laid on a shelf or room-floor to dry ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.227

but , if the seed is not wanted , the pods must be nipped off when done
flowering . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.228

If grass-walks are wanted to be made ; the first or second week of this
month is the most proper season , either for laying with turf , or
sowing with hay-seeds collected from poorish land :
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.229

they require to be mown every three weeks . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,24.230

<P_25>

Snails and slugs must be searched for and destroyed , every morning and
evening , in showery weather . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.232

<heading>

June , the Sixth Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.234

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.235

<$$heading>

Prick out from the seed-beds , as soon as ready , <paren> if showery
weather the better <$$paren> cauliflower plants , brocoli , savoy , and
Yorkshire cabbage plants , beets and lettuce ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.237

but if dry weather , forget not to water as soon as planted , and till
they take root . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.238

Turnips , for winter use , may be sown any time from the tenth to the
latter end of the month , in showery weather , on a light and rich soil
; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.239

sow them thin , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.240

and pull out till they be six or eight inches off one another ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.241

some sow them in drills , which are thinned with less trouble .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.242

<heading>

To Prevent Flies Damaging the Seeding Leaves of Turnips .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.244

<$$heading>

Put one ounce of sulphur , with one pound of turnip-seed ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.246

mix them together in a close glazed earthen pot , for three days ,
stirring it well the whole time . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,25.247

<P_26>

All weeds must now be carefully destroyed , either by the hand , hoe ,
or spade ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.249

for if they are permitted to ripen their seeds , the wind will carry
them all round the Garden ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.250

therefore , their increase must be prevented this month , as well as the
next . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.251

After weeding , give a moderate watering ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.252

and observe , that it be now done in the evening , or as soon as the sun
is gone off the plants . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.253

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.254

The clay may , the latter end of this month , be broke off the trees
grafted in the spring , and their bandages loosened .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.255

All fruit trees against walls , or espaliers , must now be put into
condition , by nailing and cutting out those superfluous branches that
require it ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.256

but nothing must be cut off the tops of those that are nailed or
fastened down till Michaelmas , when they must be renailed , and cut to
their proper length . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.257

Thin the wall fruit where it is produced , and yet remains too close
upon the trees . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,26.258

It is requisite to observe at this season , that
{COM:subordinate_pseudo-imperative} where there is too great a vacancy
in any kind of wall trees , or espaliers , suppose there be only a young
shoot produced in or near that place , let it be shortened the latter
end of the month , so that it have only three or four eyes ; by so doing
, it will send forth <P_27> two or three shoots the same season ,
sufficient to fill up the vacancy . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.259

Budding , or inoculating on stone fruit may be performed the latter end
of this month , or the beginning of next . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.260

Fruit trees planted late in the spring , will require to be watered in
dry weather . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.261

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.262

All bulbous roots , that have been three or four years in the ground
without a removal , and have done flowering , may now be taken up ,
their off-sets immediately planted again , and the larger bulbs cleaned
, and laid by upon a dry floor to harden , till put into the ground
again in September or October . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.263

Hyacinths and tulips , must be annually taken up :
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.264

the hyacinths must be laid in a ridge of mould on their sides , and
covered about two inches thick with earth for three weeks ; then taken
up again , laid by and dried , till planted in the last week of October
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.265

Tulips , when taken up , must be laid on a floor to dry till the last
week in October , when they must be planted again ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.266

for should they be put into the ground sooner , the severity of the
spring would hurt {COM:see_errata} their blow ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.267

and if much later , the grandeur of their blow would be diminished .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,27.268

<P_28>

If tulips are intended to be raised from seed , let a few of the best
roots stand for that purpose : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,28.270

as soon as no more nourishment is afforded the head from the stalk , it
must be cut off , and laid a few days to better ripen before the seeds
are taken out , in a warm , but airy place ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,28.271

the seeds when taken out , must then be spread thin to dry till the
middle of September , when they must be sown in a box , or border of
light earth , and treated with great care , by proper removals , every
year for five or six years before they will all flower .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,28.272

When different colors are wanted by art , steep the seed in ink , for a
black ; in verdegrease , for a green ; in azure , for a violet , &c.
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,28.273

N.B. The great care and length of time , in raising some particular
fine flowers , occasions their price to be fixed at an extravagant sum .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,28.274

Clip box edgings the first or second week of this month , in showery
weather : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,28.275

let them be no higher than three inches , nor broader than two .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,28.276

Slips of auriculas may be taken from the old roots , if their seeds are
not wanted to be saved , and watered after set .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,28.277

Lay down carnations from the latter end of this month , to the latter
end of next ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,28.278

and as soon as they shew their bud for flowering , <P_29> sticks must be
set in order to fasten their stalks to . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.279

Double pinks , will grow from slips ; but , more certain by laying as
carnations . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.280

Cuttings of geraniums and myrtles may now be planted .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.281

Green-house plants ought to be set into the open air for the summer
season ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.282

but if the summer proves cold , air must be admitted them occasionally ,
without setting out . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.283

Ranunculus and anemone roots , as soon as their leaves begin to decay ,
must be taken out of the ground , and laid in a dry room till the season
for planting again , which must not be till the first week in February ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.284

if deferred much longer , they will not flower that season ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.285

and if put into the ground sooner , the severity of the spring would
hurt their blow . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.286

Several perennial fibrous rooted plants may be propagated by cuttings of
the flower stalks - FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.287

let some of the stoutest items be cut off close to the plants ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.288

cut them into such lengths as to allow three or four joints to each ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.289

plant them about four or six inches asunder , in a shady border ,
putting two joints of the cuttings into the ground ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.290

and water them as soon as planted - FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.291

if the cuttings were covered close with hand glasses , it would greatly
promote their growth . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,29.292

<P_30>

Still continue to destroy snails or slugs , in the morning or after a
warm shower . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.294

<heading>

July , the Seventh Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.296

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.297

<$$heading>

If the savoy cabbage and other plants , were not ready for transplanting
the last month , they must be pricked out this
{COM:sc._month_here_and_passim} . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.299

Turnip-rooted raddish may now be sown ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.300

after they are come up , they must be weeded to about four or five
inches distance . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.301

When either physical or pot herbs are in full flower , they must be cut
and dried in a shade for use . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.302

Welsh onion seed may be sown about the latter end of the month .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.303

Yellow dutch turnip seed may be sown for the service of winter .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.304

Omit not weeding , watering , and hoeing , when required .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.305

Clear the ground where spring plants stood and are taken up ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.306

dig it carefully over that it may be planted again with such others , as
may be fit for autumnal or winter's use . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,30.307

The last week of this month Deptford onion seed may be sown to stand the
winter , <P_31> on a rich soil and sheltered situation ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.308

the plants will rise and get strength before Martinmas , probably
sufficient to withstand the severity of winter .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.309

<font> The Fruit Garden {COM:missing_period} <$$font>
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.310

Where any fruit trees are not of the sorts you desire , they should now
have buds of such kinds as are most agreeable put into their tender
shoots ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.311

by this method the trees will bear in three years .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.312

Destroy snails and slugs after rain ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.313

and place glass phials filled with honeyed or sugared water for the
destruction of wasps ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.314

but the most effectual method of catching wasps is by touching them with
twigs besmeared with bird-lime ; or by spreading bird-lime on a piece of
board on which a little sugar is scattered . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.315

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.316

The bulbous roots , that were not fit for taking up the last month ,
must be done this , and treated as then required .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.317

Forget not to make layers of carnations , if they were not fit for the
purpose the former month . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.318

Transplant to where agreeable , such biennial or perennial fibrous
rooted flowers , as soon as fit for the purpose , that were sown in the
spring , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.319

but let it be done in the evening after sun-set , or in showery weather
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,31.320

<P_32>

<heading>

August , the Eighth Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.323

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.324

<$$heading>

The first week in this month , sow the seeds of early Yorkshire and
Scotch cabbage for a spring crop ; also , prickly spinnage .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.326

Onion seed may yet be sown ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.327

and should it stand the severity of winter , it will be forwarder than
that sown in the spring . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.328

Cauliflower seed may also be sown , to raise plants for an early crop
next summer ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.329

but when fit for transplanting they must be placed under a frame , to be
occasionally covered with glasses or mats in severe weather .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.330

The plantations of asparagus must be well cleared , and kept perfectly
free from weeds ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.331

and all small suckers which come out on the sides of artichokes planted
in the spring , must now be cut off , and well cleared from weeds .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.332

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.333

Continue to defend the choice wall fruits from birds , insects , and
wasps ; which would now totally destroy them if great care be not taken
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,32.334

<P_33>

Should any branches of wall fruit trees have been displaced by high
winds , they must be carefully fastened to the wall in their due
position . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.336

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.337

Continue to examine those flowers that are intended for seed ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.338

as soon as their pods are ripe , they must be cut off , and laid on a
shelf or room floor to dry . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.339

Let no more flowers blow than the root can well supply ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.340

and let none remain unplucked after their beauty is gone .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.341

The first week in this month , auriculas and polianthuses must be
slipped and removed , the auricula pots renewed with fresh compost , and
watered after set . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.342

The seedling auriculas must now be removed into a border or box of their
own compost , where they may enjoy the morning sun till ten o'clock :
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.343

they must be planted about four inches asunder , and watered moderately
every three or four days during the summer season .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.344

The next year many of them will begin to flower ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.345

all the plants then must be examined , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.346

and such as produce the largest flowers and have good colors , should be
planted in pots for stage flowers ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.347

but all the plain flowers , that is , those which have but one color ,
should be planted in borders among other low flowering plants ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,33.348

<P_34>

and those which are planted in pots , should in the following year's
bloom be again examined , and placed in pots or borders accordingly as
they desire . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.350

Auricula seed may now be sown , in pots , boxes , or on a rich border
with an easterly aspect ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.351

but I think the spring season more preferable .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.352

Compost for Auriculas . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.353

Take two barrows of rotted cow dung , and one barrow of clear river sand
, FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.354

mix well by turning often over till thoroughly incorporated .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.355

<font> Another rich light Compost <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.356

Take three barrows of rich pasture earth , two barrows of rotted cow
dung , and one barrow of sand ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.357

mix FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.358

and turn over occasionally for six months , when it will be fit for use
; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.359

more sand may be mixed with it if requisite . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.360

An Useful Compost for Orchards or Meadows . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.361

Procure as much lime new drawn from the kiln , as is sufficient for the
quantity of cart loads you intend to make up ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,34.362

prepare <P_35> three carts of good soil , for one of lime , ready for
the purpose ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.363

place layer upon layer till the whole is thrown up ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.364

in this state it must remain till the heat of the lime has effectually
mellowed the soil , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.365

then carefully incorporate by turning over , in which state it ought to
remain till the heat of the lime is gone ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.366

afterwards mix as much dung with the same as conveniently can be spared
{COM:missing_period} FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.367

Twenty carts of lime , sixty carts of good soil , and forty carts of
horse or cow's dung , will make an excellent compost .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.368

<heading>

September , the Ninth Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.370

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.371

<$$heading>

About the latter end of this month , prick out cabbage plants at proper
distances , on a piece of mellow ground , where they may remain for the
winter . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.373

Cauliflower-brocoli {TEXT:Cauliflower-brocoli} , broccoli {TEXT:brocoli}
and savoy cabbage plants , must be hoed , and the earth broke between
the plants , to the depth of four or five inches , as soon as fit for
the purpose . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.374

The cauliflower-brocoli , seldom stands the severity of our winters .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,35.375

<P_36>

Let the winter onions , leeks , spinnage , beets , and yellow turnips be
weeded , before the weeds get the start of the plants .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.377

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.378

The same care must be taken of the wall fruit , as required the last
month . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.379

This is the best season for planting of strawberries ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.380

they ought to be set in rows eighteen inches apart each way ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.381

take the advantage of moist weather , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.382

and let the ground be in good condition . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.383

The latter end of this month , all wall trees may be properly nailed and
pruned . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.384

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.385

Let it be particularly observed , that about the middle of this month ,
is the great season of transplanting for the flower garden , in the
biennial and perennial kinds ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.386

for should any flower roots now be omitted removing , there will be but
a moderate prospect of a fine blow the next year .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.387

Auricula plants in pots , especially those replaced last month , must be
frequently , but sparingly watered when dry ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.388

but if the weather should be very wet , they must be removed into
shelter , as wet weather is destructive to them .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,36.389

<P_37>

Layers of carnations and pinks may now be transplanted ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.391

but if they have not got good root , must be deferred till spring .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.392

Clipping of hedges should be totally finished this month :
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.393

and always observe that they be a little broader at the bottom than top
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.394

Seedling polianthuses , if strong enough for a removal , ought to be
pricked out this month . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.395

In planting of shrubs or flowers , in plats or borders , it is requisite
to observe that the tallest ought to stand against the back part or wall
, and so in proportion to the front , and at such a distance as will be
agreeable to their size . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.396

The gravel walks and grass plats must be put into condition to remain
the winter , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.397

for decency is agreeable to the eye at all seasons .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.398

<heading>

October , the Tenth Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.400

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.401

<$$heading>

If any thing was omitted doing the last month , it ought to be totally
finished before the middle of this . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,37.403

<P_38>

Artichokes and asparagus beds must be earthed up and kept from the frost
: FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.405

asparagus will stand twelve years , artichokes , six years .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.406

Celery should now be earthed up as it advances in height , in order that
the plants may be well branched before severe frosts attack them .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.407

In this month , the kitchen garden should either be trenched or turned
over , as seemeth most requisite , that it may have the advantage of
fallow from the sun and air in the winter season ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.408

and if any part of the ground should be too heavy , sand or sifted ashes
must be mixed with it , and enriched with manure , either at this season
, or in the spring , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.409

but this season is preferable . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.410

The beginning of this month is a proper season to plant either Rhapantic
or Turky rhubarb : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.411

when the roots are taken up , cut the crowns or tops of them about three
or four inches long , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.412

then plant them on beds of a dry soil , three feet asunder , taking care
to dig around and enrich when required , as they ought to stand six or
seven years before taken up : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.413

they may be raised by seed . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.414

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.415

If the wall trees were omitted nailing and pruning the last month , they
must now be done . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,38.416

<P_39>

Currants and gooseberry trees must now be properly pruned , dug around ,
and manured if requisite , and their cuttings planted .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.418

They will not bear fruit well above ten years -
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.419

the black currant will bear longer . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.420

The alleys between the strawberry beds must be dug and enriched , if not
done the last month . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.421

They ought to be removed every four years . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.422

Raspberries must be pruned , and new plantations made if wanted .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.423

They will not bear fruit well above four or five years without a removal
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.424

Let it be carefully observed , that if any fruit trees want replacing or
removing , this is the best season in the year .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.425

If after a distant removal their roots should be dry , they ought to be
steeped in soft water an hour before planting .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.426

In planting them observe to cut off those roots that are bruised , or
interfere one with another ; also , all superfluous fibres , which the
middle roots will soon supply . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.427

Let the face of the cut be always placed downward against the ground ,
that the young roots may shoot upwards . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.428

The tops must be pruned so as not to be left too full of wood , always
remembering , that the uppermost eye or bud be outward .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,39.429

<P_40>

When fruit trees are intended to be planted in orchards , the ground
ought to be plowed some years , till properly put into condition ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.431

but should the soil be good , the new planted trees ought to be dug
about for three or four years , and enriched , which will greatly
forward their growth . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.432

Let it be observed , never to lay dung next the roots of trees ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.433

but mix it well with the soil . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.434

The greatest misfortune in most of our orchards , is planting the fruit
trees too near each other ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.435

those that have not a sufficiency of land for the purpose , are sure to
be guilty of this fault : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.436

but let me beg leave to inform them , that the great plantations of
those trees in Herefordshire are generally between thirty and forty feet
distant one way , and sixty or seventy feet the other , which is their
common practice of planting ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.437

and they alledge , that trees planted at that distance escape blights ,
and bear fruit more plentifully than when set nearer .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.438

They frequently plow their ground FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.439

and sow it with corn , while the trees are young , till they have
brought their soil into excellent condition . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.440

A stake may be fixed to the side of each tree if required , to tie it to
, that the wind may not shake it and loosen the roots .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,40.441

<P_41>

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.443

If the biennial and perennial flower roots were not all removed the last
month , they must not be omitted the beginning of this .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.444

Hyacinths , tulips , and other bulbous roots that were taken up the
latter end of this month must be put into the ground ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.445

but observe that the beds of tulips must be dug over three , or
{COM:see_errata} four days before they are planted .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.446

They ought to be set eight or nine inches each way , and four inches
deep . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.447

Auricula plants in pots must be cleared of their dead leaves and weeds ,
and removed into shelter , if not done the last month .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.448

Prune roses , honeysuckles , and other flowering shrubs that require it
, FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.449

and remove suckers from lilacs . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.450

Those people who choose to have flowers to blow early in the spring ,
and have convenient windows where a fire is constantly kept , may , by
filling their flower pots with a rich and light soil , and planting in
them such flowers as are agreeable , have them to blow a month sooner
than in the open ground ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.451

others have flower glasses , on the top of which large bulbous flowers
are made to blow , by filling the glass with water to the bottom of the
bulb - FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.452

the water must be weekly changed on account of becoming foul :
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,41.453

but this experiment is attended with <P_42> losing the flower ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.454

for it will not blow again in its natural soil .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.455

<heading>

November , the Eleventh Month of the Year . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.457

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.458

<$$heading>

Look over the seeds saved in summer , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.460

and perfectly clean them , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.461

then they will be ready for sowing when wanted ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.462

also , look over all the garden tools , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.463

repair , and put them in good order . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.464

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.465

All superfluous branches , may be taken out of the plantations in
orchards , and the moss rubbed off the trees with a piece of hair cloth
; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.466

the same work may be performed the next month , or in January .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.467

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.468

Whatever bulbous roots were omitted putting into the ground the last
month , must be done this as early as possible ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.469

for should the frost set in , by such prevention , the succeeding blow
will be diminished . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,42.470

<P_43>

If the weather be severe , delicate flowers and plants may be covered or
opened , as the season changing from heat to cold may direct .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.472

<heading>

December , the Twelfth and Last Month of the Year .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.474

<font> The Kitchen Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.475

<$$heading>

About the latter end of this month , if the weather is favorable , early
peas may be sown on a warm border ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.477

and should your labour be lost , the ground will be ready for the same
or other purposes in the spring . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.478

In frosty weather manure may be wheeled to where required .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.479

<font> The Fruit Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.480

All late planted trees in a severe frost , must be covered with litter ,
and all the wall fruit trees must be examined and renailed afresh ,
which work is most agreeably done in a clean dry frost .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.481

<font> The Flower Garden . <$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.482

It is requisite to be observed , that many delicate shrubs and flowers ,
will require to have a little litter laid about their roots , the
principal part of the winter season , more particularly those that were
lately planted ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,43.483

others <P_44> will only want covering in a hard frost without snow ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,44.484

but should be uncovered again in open weather ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,44.485

but it often happens , that wet winters do more damage than frosty ones
, as the latter may be guarded against , but the former can@ @not .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,44.486

{COM:lists_omitted}

<P_74>

If either fruit , or forest trees , could be procured from a poorer soil
, and colder situation , than where they are to be removed to , their
growth would be quicker . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,74.489

But as all Nurserymen generally {TEXT:genarally} procure as good land as
their situation will admit ; it frequently happens , when trees are
removed into an {TEXT:a} indifferent soil , their growth will be
moderate , and liable to decay . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,74.490

It then behooves {TEXT:behoves} all Planters , to manage their ground
well for fruit-trees , and to purchase such sort of forest trees as will
best suit the soil on which they are to be planted {COM:missing_period}
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,74.491

<P_75>

The months of October , and November , are the best seasons for planting
them , except fir trees , which should be planted in April ,
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,75.493

for all evergreen trees , shrubs , or plants ought to be removed in the
spring season . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,75.494

{COM:list_omitted}

<P_76>

<heading>

Instructions , for the Ordering of Bees . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,76.498

<$$heading>

Those that delight in a Garden , would undoubtedly have a pleasure in
the management of Bees , could but their care {COM:see_errata} be
attended with any proportionate {TEXT:porportionate} share of emolument
; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,76.500

but the curious improvements herein made have not been properly
communicated to the public ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,76.501

therefore , many despair of success for want of better knowledge .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,76.502

In the following pages I have described Mr. Thorley's new constructed
beehive and method of management , for the encouragement of which , the
Society of Arts , London , offered a premium of two_hundred pounds , in
order to introduce Mr. Thorley's or some other method of a similar kind
: whereby much larger quantities of honey and wax might be procured ,
and , at the same time , the lives of these laborious and useful insects
preserved . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,76.503

Let it be observed then , that the Beehive is a school to which numbers
of people ought to be sent ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,76.504

prudence , industry , benevolence , public spiritedness , oeconomy ,
neatness , and temperance , are all visible among the Bees .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,76.505

These little animals are actuated by a social <P_77> spirit , which
forms them into a body politic , intimately united , and perfectly happy
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.506

They all labour for the general advantage : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.507

they are all submissive to the laws and regulations of the community ;
having no particular interest , no distinction but those which nature or
the necessities of their young have introduced amongst them .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.508

We never see them dissatisfied with their condition , or inclinable to
abandon the hive in disgust , to find themselves slaves or necessitous :
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.509

on the contrary , they think themselves in perfect freedom , and perfect
affluence ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.510

and such indeed is their condition . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.511

They are free , because they only depend on the laws ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.512

they are happy , because the concurrence of their several labours
inevitably produces abundance , which contributes to the riches of each
individual . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.513

Let us compare human societies with this , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.514

and they will appear altogether monstrous . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.515

Necessity , reason , and philosophy , have established them for the
commendable purposes of mutual aid and benefits :
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.516

but a spirit of selfishness destroys all ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.517

and one half of mankind , to load themselves with superfluities , leave
the other destitute of common necessaries . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.518

Let us then , not only copy after their oeconomy and industry , but
strive to propagate so beneficial an insect . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,77.519

Let us do our endeavours to support them in distress , as seasons <P_78>
are not all equally favourable , and without a doubt they will reward
our trouble . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.520

A house ought to be made for these valuable creatures so large , as will
be sufficient to contain the number of hives intended to be kept over
winter ; with as much of a south-east aspect as possibly may be had .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.521

The construction thereof is needless to mention .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.522

The Bee-house being ready , the proper time of removal into it is in
October . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.523

It is requisite that the top of the Bee-hive should be covered with a
little thin coat of lime and hair to prevent vermin entering therein ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.524

the little door at the bottom should have five or six holes made in it
for the benefit of their going in and out , as well as for air .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.525

In succeeding years , every September , feel the weight of all your
stocks , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.526

and if any be light so as not to have food to support them during the
winter , they must be fed with honey or sugar put into a long shallow
trough , or box made on purpose to slide in at the door ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.527

yet should you find the expence great in maintaining so many poor hives
, it will be better to destroy some , than lose the whole ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.528

but in order to remedy the cause of taking away their lives , let none
swarm after the last week in June ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.529

and then those that have swarmed before that time , will be enabled to
lay in such a stock of provisions , as will be sufficient to serve them
through the winter . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,78.530

<P_79>

The reason of their swarming is for want of room in the hive ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,79.532

therefore let it be chiefly observed , not to suffer them to swarm after
the last week of June , <paren> or not at all , if the summer is
uncommonly cold <$$paren> which may be prevented by setting a large imp
under the hive , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,79.533

when filled with honey , it must be taken away , and another placed in
its room , and renewed if required ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,79.534

for should they swarm so late in the summer it will be impossible for
the young swarms to procure as much honey as will support them during
the winter ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,79.535

and I leave my readers to judge , whether it is not better to have a few
that will survive that season without any expence than to have a number
to feed , or destroy . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,79.536

It is customary when they swarm to alight on a small twig or shrub , not
far distant , as a sort of rendezvous , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,79.537

therefore they must be hived pretty soon to prevent their flight ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,79.538

and in order that they may stay in their new habitation , let the inside
of the hive be rubbed with a little honey and water mixed or in the room
of it sugar and water , and stuck a_cross with rods in order to fasten
their combs to , which all bee-masters are qualified to do .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,79.539

They must stand in the place where hived till about ten o'clock the same
evening , and then be removed to their habitation .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,79.540

<P_80>

<heading>

<font> A Description of Mr. <$$font> Thorley's <font> Bee-hive .
<$$font> FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,80.543

<$$heading>

The bottom part thereof is an octangular bee-box made of deal boards ,
about an inch in thickness ; the cover of which is about seventeen
inches in diameter , but the internal part only about fifteen and an
half , and its height ten inches . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,80.545

In the middle of the cover of this octangular box is a hole , which may
be opened or shut at pleasure by means of a slider .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,80.546

In one of the pannels is a pane of glass , covered with a wooden door .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,80.547

The entrance at the bottom of the box is about three inches and an half
broad , and half an inch high . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,80.548

Two slips of deal , about half an inch square , cross each other in the
centre of the box , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,80.549

and are fastened to the pannels by means of small screws ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,80.550

to these slips the Bees fasten their combs . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,80.551

In this octangular box the bees are hived , after swarming in the usual
manner ; and there suffered to continue till they have built their combs
and filled them with honey , which may be known by opening the door ,
and viewing their works through the glass pane , or by the weight of the
hive . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,80.552

When the box-master finds his laborious insects have filled their
habitation , he is to place a common bee-hive of straw on the octangular
box , and draw out the slider , by which a <P_81> communication will be
opened between the box and straw-hive ; the consequence of which will be
, that those laborious insects will fill this hive also with the product
of their labours . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,81.553

When the bee master finds the straw hive is well filled , he may put in
the slider , and take it away , placing another immediately in its room
, and then drawing out the slider . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,81.554

These indefatigable creatures will then fill the new hive in the same
manner . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,81.555

By proceeding in this method , Mr. Thorley assured the Society , that
he had taken three successive hives filled with honey and wax , from one
single hive during the same summer ; and after he had laid his insects
under so large a contribution , the food still remaining in the
octangular box , was abundantly sufficient for their support during the
winter . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,81.556

He added , that if this method was pursued in every part of the kingdom
, instead of that cruel method of putting the creatures to death , he
was persuaded from long experience , that wax would be collected in such
plenty that candles might be made with it , and sold as cheap as those
of tallow are at present {COM:missing_period} FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,81.557

Mr. Thorley has also added another part to his bee-hive , which can@
@not fail of affording the highest entertainment to a curious and
inquisitive mind . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,81.558

It consists of a glass receiver eighteen inches in height , eight inches
<P_82> in diameter at the bottom , and in the greatest thirteen .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.559

This receiver has a hole at the top , about an inch in diameter ;
through which a square piece of deal is extended to nearly the bottom of
the vessel , having two cross bars to which the bees fasten their combs
. FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.560

When the bees have filled their straw hive , which must have a hole in
the centre covered with a piece of tin , Mr. Thorley places the glass
receiver upon the top of the straw hive , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.561

and draws out the piece of tin : FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.562

the bees now finding their habitation enlarged , pursue their labours
with such alacrity , that they fill their glass hive likewise with their
stores . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.563

And as their receptacle is wholy transparent , the curious observer may
entertain himself with viewing the whole progress of their works .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.564

One of the hives now deposited at the Society's rooms , in the Strand ,
is filled with the produce of the labours of those insects ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.565

and the glass hive is supposed to contain near thirty pounds of honey .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.566

Perhaps some of my readers may conclude that Mr. Thorley's bee-hive
will be too expensive for many who choose to keep bees .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.567

Let then , in imitation of his , a straw hive be made open at the top ,
but with two wreathes fixed around the top part , in order to better
support the upper hive when placed upon it ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,82.568

fix , as is customary , two or three sticks a_cross <P_83> the hive for
the bees to fasten their combs to ; FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,83.569

then fill the open part at the top with a deal board , in which cut a
hole to be opened , or shut at pleasure by means of a slider ;
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,83.570

in this hive the new swarm must be put , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,83.571

and in a short time will be filled with honey , should they swarm in the
month of June . FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,83.572

As soon as filled , which may be known by the weight of the hive , let
another straw hive be placed upon it , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,83.573

draw out the slider , by which a communication will be opened between
the two hives , FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,83.574

and further proceed according as Mr. Thorley has described .
FALLOWFIELD-1791-2,83.575

