<BEGIN_faraday-1859-1>

<P_1>

<heading>

Lectures on the physical forces . FARADAY-1859-1,1.4

Lecture I FARADAY-1859-1,1.5

The force of gravitation FARADAY-1859-1,1.6

<$$heading>

It grieves me much to think that I may have been a cause of disturbance
in your Christmas arrangements , FARADAY-1859-1,1.8

for nothing is more satisfactory to my mind than to perform what I
undertake ; FARADAY-1859-1,1.9

but such things are not always left in our own power ,
FARADAY-1859-1,1.10

and we must submit to circumstances as they are appointed .
FARADAY-1859-1,1.11

I will to-day do my best , FARADAY-1859-1,1.12

and will ask you to bear with me if I am unable to give more than a few
words , FARADAY-1859-1,1.13

and as a substitute I will endeavour to make the <font> illustrations
<$$font> of the sense I try to express , as full as possible ;
FARADAY-1859-1,1.14

<P_2>

and if we find by the end of this lecture , that we may be justified in
continuing them , thinking that next week our power shall be greater , -
why then , with submission to you , we will take such course as you may
think fit , - either to go on or discontinue them : FARADAY-1859-1,2.16

and although I now feel much weakened by the pressure of illness <paren>
a mere cold <$$paren> upon me , both in facility of expression and
clearness of thought , I shall here claim , as I always have done on
these occasions , the right of addressing myself to the younger members
of the audience , FARADAY-1859-1,2.17

- and for this purpose , therefore , unfitted as it may seem for an
elderly infirm man to do so , I will return to second childhood and
become , as it were , young again amongst the young .
FARADAY-1859-1,2.18

Let us now consider , for a little while , how wonderfully we stand upon
this world . FARADAY-1859-1,2.19

Here it is we are born , bred , and live , FARADAY-1859-1,2.20

and yet we view these things with an almost entire absence of wonder to
ourselves respecting the way in which all this happens .
FARADAY-1859-1,2.21

So small , indeed , is our wonder , that we are never taken by surprise
; FARADAY-1859-1,2.22

and I do think , that , to a young person of ten , fifteen , or twenty
years of age , perhaps the first sight of a cataract or a mountain would
<P_3> occasion him more surprise than he had ever felt concerning the
means of his own existence ; how he came here ; how he lives ; by what
means he stands upright ; and through what means he moves about from
place to place . FARADAY-1859-1,3.23

Hence , we come into this world , FARADAY-1859-1,3.24

we live , FARADAY-1859-1,3.25

and depart from it , without our thoughts being called specifically to
consider how all this takes place ; FARADAY-1859-1,3.26

and were it not for the exertions of some few inquiring minds , who have
looked <font> into <$$font> these things and ascertained the very
beautiful laws and conditions by which we <font> do <$$font> live and
stand upon the earth , we should hardly be aware that there was anything
wonderful in it . FARADAY-1859-1,3.27

These inquiries , which have occupied philosophers from the earliest
days , when they first began to find out the laws by which we grow , and
exist , and enjoy ourselves , up to the present time , have shown us
that all this was effected in consequence of the existence of certain
<font> forces <$$font> , or <font> abilities <$$font> to do things , or
<font> powers <$$font> , that are so common that nothing can be more so
: FARADAY-1859-1,3.28

for nothing is commoner than the wonderful powers by which we are
enabled to stand upright - FARADAY-1859-1,3.29

they are essential to our existence every moment . FARADAY-1859-1,3.30

<P_4>

It is my purpose to-day to make you acquainted with some of these powers
; not the vital ones , but some of the more elementary , and , what we
call , <font> physical <$$font> powers ; FARADAY-1859-1,4.32

and , in the outset , what can I do to bring to your minds a notion of
neither more nor less than that which I mean by the word <font> power
<$$font> or <font> force ? <$$font> FARADAY-1859-1,4.33

Suppose I take this sheet of paper , and place it upright on one edge ,
resting against a support before me <paren> as the roughest possible
illustration of something to be disturbed <$$paren> ,
FARADAY-1859-1,4.34

and suppose I then pull this piece of string which is attached to it .
FARADAY-1859-1,4.35

I pull the paper over . FARADAY-1859-1,4.36

I have therefore brought into use a <font> power <$$font> of doing so -
the <font> power <$$font> of my hand carried on through this string in a
way which is very remarkable when we come to analyse it ;
FARADAY-1859-1,4.37

and it is by means of these powers conjointly <paren> for there are
several powers here employed <$$paren> that I pull the paper over .
FARADAY-1859-1,4.38

Again , if I give it a push upon the other side , I bring into play a
<font> power <$$font> , but a very different exertion of power from the
former ; FARADAY-1859-1,4.39

or , if I take now this bit of shell-lac <bracket> a stick of shell-lac
about 12 inches long and 1_1$$2 in diameter <$$bracket> and rub it with
flannel , and hold it an inch or so in front of the upper part of this
upright sheet , the <P_5> paper is immediately moved towards the
shell-lac , FARADAY-1859-1,5.40

and by now drawing the latter away , the paper falls over without having
been touched by anything . FARADAY-1859-1,5.41

You see - in the first illustration I produced an effect than which
nothing could be commoner - FARADAY-1859-1,5.42

I pull it over now , not by means of that string or the pull of my band
, but by some action in this shell-lac . FARADAY-1859-1,5.43

The shell-lac , therefore , has a <font> power <$$font> wherewith it
acts upon the sheet of paper ; FARADAY-1859-1,5.44

and as an illustration of the exercise of another kind of power , I
might use gunpowder with which to throw it over . FARADAY-1859-1,5.45

Now , I want you to endeavour to comprehend that when I am speaking of a
<font> power <$$font> or <font> force <$$font> , I am speaking of that
which I used just now to pull over this piece of paper .
FARADAY-1859-1,5.46

I will not embarrass you at present with the <font> name <$$font> of
that power , FARADAY-1859-1,5.47

but it is clear there was a <font> something <$$font> in the shell-lac
which acted by attraction , and pulled the paper over ;
FARADAY-1859-1,5.48

this , then , is one of those things which we call <font> power <$$font>
, or <font> force ; <$$font> FARADAY-1859-1,5.49

and you will now be able to recognise it as such in whatever form I show
it to you . FARADAY-1859-1,5.50

We are not to suppose that there are so very many different powers ;
FARADAY-1859-1,5.51

on the contrary , it is wonderful to think how few are the powers by
which all the phenomena <P_6> of nature are governed .
FARADAY-1859-1,6.52

There is an illustration of another kind of power in that lamp ;
FARADAY-1859-1,6.53

<font> there <$$font> is a power of heat - a power of doing something ,
but not the same power as that which pulled the paper over :
FARADAY-1859-1,6.54

and so , by degrees , we find that there are certain other powers
<paren> not many <$$paren> in the various bodies around us ;
FARADAY-1859-1,6.55

and thus , beginning with the simplest experiments of pushing and
pulling , I shall gradually proceed to distinguish these powers one from
the other , and compare the way in which they combine together .
FARADAY-1859-1,6.56

This world upon which we stand <paren> and we have not much need to
travel out of the world for illustrations of our subject ; but the mind
of man is not confined like the matter of his body , and thus he may and
does travel outwards , for wherever his sight can pierce , there his
observations can penetrate <$$paren> is pretty nearly a round globe ,
having its surface disposed in a manner of which this terrestrial globe
by my side is a rough model ; FARADAY-1859-1,6.57

so much is land FARADAY-1859-1,6.58

and so much is water , FARADAY-1859-1,6.59

and by looking at it here we see in a sort of map or picture how the
world is formed upon its surface . FARADAY-1859-1,6.60

Then , when we come to examine further , I refer you to this sectional
diagram of the geological strata of the <P_7> earth , in which there is
a more elaborate view of what is beneath the surface of our globe .
FARADAY-1859-1,7.61

And , when we come to dig into or examine it <paren> as man does for his
own instruction and advantage , in a variety of ways <$$paren> , we see
that it is made up of different kinds of matter , subject to a very few
powers ; and all disposed in this strange and wonderful way , which
gives to man a history - and such a history - as to what there is in
those veins , in those rocks , the ores , the water springs , the
atmosphere around , and all varieties of material substances , held
together by means of <font> forces <$$font> in one great mass , 8000
miles in diameter , that the mind is overwhelmed in contemplation of the
wonderful history related by these strata <paren> some of which are fine
and thin like sheets of paper <$$paren> , - all formed in succession by
the forces of which I have spoken . FARADAY-1859-1,7.62

I now shall try to help your attention to what I may say by directing ,
to-day , our thoughts to one kind of power . FARADAY-1859-1,7.63

You see what I mean by the term <font> matter <$$font> - any of these
things that I can lay hold of with the hand , or in a bag
FARADAY-1859-1,7.64

<paren> for I may take hold of the air by enclosing it in a bag
<$$paren> - FARADAY-1859-1,7.65

they are all portions of matter with <P_8> which we have to deal at
present , generally or particularly , as I may require to illustrate my
subject . FARADAY-1859-1,8.66

Here is the sort of matter which we call <font> water <$$font> -
FARADAY-1859-1,8.67

it is <font> there <$$font> ice <bracket> pointing to a block of ice
upon the table <$$bracket> , <font> there <$$font> water - <bracket>
pointing to the water boiling in a flask <$$bracket> - <font> here
<$$font> vapour - FARADAY-1859-1,8.68

you see it issuing out from the top <bracket> of the flask <$$bracket> .
FARADAY-1859-1,8.69

Do not suppose that that ice and that water are two entirely different
things , or that the steam rising in bubbles and ascending in vapour
<font> there <$$font> is absolutely different from the fluid water -
FARADAY-1859-1,8.70

it may be different in some particulars , having reference to the <font>
amounts <$$font> of power which it contains ; FARADAY-1859-1,8.71

but it is the same , nevertheless , as the great ocean of water around
our globe , FARADAY-1859-1,8.72

and I employ it here for the sake of illustration , because if we look
into it we shall find that it supplies us with examples of all the
powers to which I shall have to refer . FARADAY-1859-1,8.73

For instance , here is water - FARADAY-1859-1,8.74

it is heavy ; FARADAY-1859-1,8.75

but let us examine it with regard to the <font> amount <$$font> of its
heaviness , or its gravity . FARADAY-1859-1,8.76

I have before me a little glass vessel and scales <bracket> nearly
equipoised scales , one of which contained a half-pint glass vessel
<$$bracket> , FARADAY-1859-1,8.77

and the glass vessel is at present the lighter of the two ;
FARADAY-1859-1,8.78

but if I now take some <P_9> water and pour it in , you see that that
side of the scales immediately goes down ; FARADAY-1859-1,9.79

that shows you <paren> using common language , which I will not suppose
for the present you have hitherto applied very strictly <$$paren> that
it is <font> heavy <$$font> , FARADAY-1859-1,9.80

and if I put this additional weight into the opposite scale , I should
not wonder if this vessel would hold water enough to weigh <font> it
<$$font> down . FARADAY-1859-1,9.81

<bracket> The Lecturer poured more water into the jar , which again went
down . <$$bracket> FARADAY-1859-1,9.82

Why do I hold the bottle <font> above <$$font> the vessel to pour the
water into it ? FARADAY-1859-1,9.83

You will say , because experience has taught me that it is necessary .
FARADAY-1859-1,9.84

I do it for a better reason - because it is a law of nature that the
water should fall towards the earth , FARADAY-1859-1,9.85

and therefore the very means which I use to cause the water to enter the
vessel are those which will carry the whole body of water down .
FARADAY-1859-1,9.86

That power is what we call <font> gravity <$$font> , FARADAY-1859-1,9.87

and you see <font> there <$$font> <bracket> pointing to the scales
<$$bracket> a good deal of water gravitating towards the earth .
FARADAY-1859-1,9.88

Now <font> here <$$font> <bracket> exhibiting a small piece of platinum
<$$bracket> is another thing which gravitates towards the earth as much
as the whole of that water . FARADAY-1859-1,9.89

See what a little there is of it - FARADAY-1859-1,9.90

<font> that <$$font> little thing is heavier than so much water
<bracket> placing the metal in opposite scales to the <P_10> water
<$$bracket> . FARADAY-1859-1,10.91

What a wonderful thing it is to see that it requires so much water as
<font> that <$$font> <bracket> a half-pint vessel full <$$bracket> to
fall towards the earth , compared with the little mass of substance I
have <font> here ! <$$font> FARADAY-1859-1,10.92

And again , if I take this metal <bracket> a bar of aluminium about
eight times the bulk of the platinum <$$bracket> we find the water will
balance that as well as it did the platinum ; so that we get even in the
<font> very <$$font> outset , an example of what we want to understand
by the words <font> forces <$$font> or <font> powers . <$$font>
FARADAY-1859-1,10.93

I have spoken of water , and first of all of its property of falling
downwards : - FARADAY-1859-1,10.94

you know very well how the oceans surround the globe - how they fall
round the surface , giving roundness to it , clothing it like a garment
, FARADAY-1859-1,10.95

but , besides that , there are other properties of water .
FARADAY-1859-1,10.96

<font> Here <$$font> , for instance , is some quicklime ,
FARADAY-1859-1,10.97

and if I add some water to it , you will find another power or property
in the water . FARADAY-1859-1,10.98

It is now very hot , FARADAY-1859-1,10.99

it is steaming up , FARADAY-1859-1,10.100

and I could perhaps light phosphorus or a lucifer-match with it .
FARADAY-1859-1,10.101

Now , that could not happen without a <font> force <$$font> in the water
to produce the result ; FARADAY-1859-1,10.102

but that force is entirely distinct from its power of falling to the
earth . FARADAY-1859-1,10.103

Again , here is another substance <bracket> some anhydrous sulphate of
copper <$$bracket> which will illustrate <P_11> another kind of power .
FARADAY-1859-1,11.104

<bracket> The Lecturer here poured some water over the white sulphate of
copper , which immediately became blue , evolving considerable heat at
the same time . <$$bracket> FARADAY-1859-1,11.105

Here is the same water with a substance which heats nearly as much as
the lime does , FARADAY-1859-1,11.106

but see how differently . FARADAY-1859-1,11.107

So great indeed is this heat in the case of lime , that it is sufficient
sometimes <paren> as you see here <$$paren> to set wood on fire ;
FARADAY-1859-1,11.108

and this explains what we have sometimes heard , of barges laden with
quicklime taking fire in the middle of the river , in consequence of
this power of heat brought into play by a leakage of the water into the
barge . FARADAY-1859-1,11.109

You see how strangely different subjects for our consideration arise ,
when we come to think over these various matters - the power of heat
evolved by acting upon lime with water , and the power which water has
of turning this salt of copper from white to blue .
FARADAY-1859-1,11.110

I want you now to understand the nature of the most simple exertion of
this power of matter called <font> weight <$$font> or <font> gravity .
<$$font> FARADAY-1859-1,11.111

Bodies are heavy ; FARADAY-1859-1,11.112

- you saw that in the case of water when I placed it in the balance .
FARADAY-1859-1,11.113

Here I have what we call a <font> weight <$$font> <bracket> an iron half
cwt. <$$bracket> - a thing called <P_12> a weight , because in it the
exercise of that power of pressing downwards is especially used for the
purposes of weighing ; FARADAY-1859-1,12.114

and I have also one of these little inflated india-rubber bladders ,
which are very beautiful although very common FARADAY-1859-1,12.115

<paren> most beautiful things are common <$$paren> ,
FARADAY-1859-1,12.116

and I am going to put the weight upon it , to give you a sort of
illustration of the downward pressure of the iron , and of the power
which the air possesses of resisting that pressure ;
FARADAY-1859-1,12.117

- it may burst , FARADAY-1859-1,12.118

but we must try to avoid that . FARADAY-1859-1,12.119

<bracket> During the last few observations the Lecturer had succeeded in
placing the half cwt. in a state of quiescence upon the inflated
india-rubber ball , which consequently assumed a shape very much
resembling a flat cheese with round edges . <$$bracket>
FARADAY-1859-1,12.120

There you see a bubble of air bearing half a hundred_weight ,
FARADAY-1859-1,12.121

and you must conceive for yourselves what a wonderful <font> power
<$$font> there must be to pull this weight downwards , to sink it thus
in the ball of air . FARADAY-1859-1,12.122

Let me now give you another illustration of this power .
FARADAY-1859-1,12.123

You know what a pendulum is . FARADAY-1859-1,12.124

I have one here <paren> <font> fig. <$$font> 1 <$$paren> ,
FARADAY-1859-1,12.125

and if I set it swinging , it will continue to swing to and fro .
FARADAY-1859-1,12.126

Now , I wonder whether you can tell me why that body <P_13> oscillates
to and fro - that pendulum bob as it is sometimes called .
FARADAY-1859-1,13.127

Observe , FARADAY-1859-1,13.128

if I hold the straight stick horizontally , as high as the position of
the balls at the two ends of its journey , you see that the ball is in a
higher position at the two extremities than it is when in the middle .
FARADAY-1859-1,13.129

Starting from one end of the stick , the ball falls towards the centre ,
FARADAY-1859-1,13.130

and then rising again to the opposite end , it constantly tries to fall
to the lowest point , swinging and vibrating most beautifully , and with
wonderful properties in other respects - the time of its vibration and
so on - but concerning which we will not now trouble ourselves .
FARADAY-1859-1,13.131

{COM:picture_omitted} If a gold leaf , or piece of thread , or any other
substance , were hung where this ball is , <P_14> it would swing to and
fro in the same manner , and in the same time too .
FARADAY-1859-1,14.132

Do not be startled at this statement ; FARADAY-1859-1,14.133

I repeat , in the same manner and in the same time ,
FARADAY-1859-1,14.134

and you will see by_and_by how this is . FARADAY-1859-1,14.135

Now , that power which caused the water to descend in the balance -
which made the iron weight press upon and flatten the bubble of air -
which caused the swinging to and fro of the pendulum , that power is
entirely due to the attraction which there is between the falling body
and the earth . FARADAY-1859-1,14.136

Let us be slow and careful to comprehend this . FARADAY-1859-1,14.137

It is not that the earth has any <font> particular <$$font> attraction
towards bodies which fall to it , but , that <font> all <$$font> these
bodies possess an attraction , every one towards the other .
FARADAY-1859-1,14.138

It is not that the earth has any special power which these balls
themselves have not , FARADAY-1859-1,14.139

for just as much power as the earth has to attract these two balls
<bracket> dropping two ivory balls <$$bracket> , just so much power have
they in proportion to their bulks to draw themselves one to the other ;
FARADAY-1859-1,14.140

and the only reason why they fall so quickly to the earth is owing to
its greater size . FARADAY-1859-1,14.141

Now , if I were to place these two balls near together , I should not be
able , by the most delicate arrangement of apparatus , to make you , or
<P_15> myself , sensible that these balls did attract one another ;
FARADAY-1859-1,15.142

and yet we know that such is the case , because if , instead of taking a
small ivory ball , we take a mountain , and put a ball like this near it
, we find that , owing to the vast size of the mountain , as compared
with the billiard ball , the latter is drawn slightly towards it ;
showing clearly that an attraction <font> does <$$font> exist , just as
it did between the shell-lac which I rubbed and the piece of paper which
was over_turned by it . FARADAY-1859-1,15.143

Now , it is not very easy to make these things quite clear at the outset
, FARADAY-1859-1,15.144

and I must take care not to leave anything unexplained as I proceed ,
FARADAY-1859-1,15.145

and , therefore , I must make you clearly understand that all bodies are
attracted to the earth , or , to use a more learned term , <font>
gravitate . <$$font> FARADAY-1859-1,15.146

You will not mind my using this word , FARADAY-1859-1,15.147

for when I say that this penny-piece <font> gravitates <$$font> , I mean
nothing more nor less than that it falls towards the earth ,
FARADAY-1859-1,15.148

and if not intercepted , it would go on falling , falling , until it
arrived at what we call the <font> centre of gravity <$$font> of the
earth , which I will explain to you by_and_by . FARADAY-1859-1,15.149

I want you to understand that this property of gravitation is never lost
, that every substance <P_16> possesses it , that there is never any
change in the quantity of it ; FARADAY-1859-1,16.150

and , first of all , I will take as illustration a piece of marble .
FARADAY-1859-1,16.151

Now this marble has weight - as you will see if I put it in these scales
; FARADAY-1859-1,16.152

it weighs the balance down , FARADAY-1859-1,16.153

and if I take it off , the balance goes back again FARADAY-1859-1,16.154

and resumes its equilibrium . FARADAY-1859-1,16.155

I can decompose this marble and change it , in the same manner as I can
change ice into water and water into steam . FARADAY-1859-1,16.156

I can convert a part of it into <font> its own <$$font> steam easily ,
and show you that this steam from the marble has the property of
remaining in the same place at common temperatures , which water-steam
{COM:font_change_around_"water"} has not . FARADAY-1859-1,16.157

If I add a little liquid to the marble and decompose it , I get that
which you see - <bracket> the Lecturer here put several lumps of marble
into a glass jar , and poured water and then acid over them ; the
carbonic acid immediately commenced to escape with considerable
effervescence <$$bracket> - the appearance of boiling , which is only
the separation of one part of the marble from another .
FARADAY-1859-1,16.158

Now this <bracket> marble <$$bracket> steam , and that <bracket> water
<$$bracket> steam , and all other steams <font> gravitate <$$font> just
like any other substance does ; FARADAY-1859-1,16.159

they all are attracted the one towards the other , FARADAY-1859-1,16.160

and all fall towards the earth , FARADAY-1859-1,16.161

and what <P_17> I want you to see is that <font> this <$$font> steam
gravitates . FARADAY-1859-1,17.162

I have here <paren> <font> fig. <$$font> 2 <$$paren> a large vessel
placed upon {COM:picture_omitted} a balance , FARADAY-1859-1,17.163

and the moment I pour this steam into it you see that the steam
gravitates . FARADAY-1859-1,17.164

Just watch the index , FARADAY-1859-1,17.165

and see whether it tilts over or not . FARADAY-1859-1,17.166

<bracket> The Lecturer here poured the carbonic acid out of the glass in
which it was being generated into the vessel suspended on the balance ,
when the gravitation of the carbonic acid was at once apparent .
<$$bracket> FARADAY-1859-1,17.167

Look how it is going down . FARADAY-1859-1,17.168

How pretty that is . FARADAY-1859-1,17.169

I poured nothing in but the invisible steam , or vapour , or gas which
came from the marble , FARADAY-1859-1,17.170

but you see that part of the marble , although it has taken the shape of
air , still gravitates as it did before . FARADAY-1859-1,17.171

<P_18>

Now will it weigh down that bit of paper ? FARADAY-1859-1,18.173

<bracket> Placing a piece of paper in the opposite scale . <$$bracket>
FARADAY-1859-1,18.174

Yes , more than that ; FARADAY-1859-1,18.175

it nearly weighs down this bit of paper . FARADAY-1859-1,18.176

<bracket> Placing another piece of paper in . <$$bracket>
FARADAY-1859-1,18.177

And thus you see that <font> other <$$font> forms of matter besides
solids and liquids tend to fall to the earth ; FARADAY-1859-1,18.178

and , therefore , you will accept from me the fact that <font> all
<$$font> things gravitate , whatever may be their form or condition .
FARADAY-1859-1,18.179

Now <font> here <$$font> is another chemical test which is very readily
applied . FARADAY-1859-1,18.180

<bracket> Some of the carbonic acid was poured from one vessel into
another , and its presence in the latter shown by introducing into it a
lighted taper , which was immediately extinguished . <$$bracket>
FARADAY-1859-1,18.181

You see from this result also that it gravitates .
FARADAY-1859-1,18.182

All these experiments show you that , tried by the balance , tried by
pouring like water from one vessel to another , this steam , or vapour ,
or gas , is , like all other things , attracted to the earth .
FARADAY-1859-1,18.183

There is another point I want in the next place to draw your attention
to . FARADAY-1859-1,18.184

I have here a quantity of shot ; FARADAY-1859-1,18.185

each of these falls separately , FARADAY-1859-1,18.186

and each has its own gravitating power , as you perceive when I let them
fall loosely on a sheet of paper . FARADAY-1859-1,18.187

If I put them into a bottle I collect <P_19> them together as one mass ,
FARADAY-1859-1,19.188

and philosophers have discovered that there is a certain point in the
middle of the whole collection of shots that may be considered as the
<font> one point <$$font> in which all their gravitating power is
centred , FARADAY-1859-1,19.189

and that point they call the <font> centre of gravity ; <$$font>
FARADAY-1859-1,19.190

it is not at all a bad name , and rather a short one - the centre of
gravity . FARADAY-1859-1,19.191

Now suppose I take a sheet of pasteboard or any other thing easily dealt
with , and run a bradawl through it at one corner A <paren> <font> fig.
<$$font> 3 <$$paren> and Mr. Anderson hold that up in his hand before
us , and I then take a piece {COM:picture_omitted} of thread and an
ivory ball , and hang <P_20> that upon the awl , FARADAY-1859-1,20.192

then the centre of gravity of both the pasteboard and the ball and
string are as near as they can get to the centre of the earth ; that is
to say , the whole of the attracting power of the earth is , as it were
, centred in a single point of the cardboard ; FARADAY-1859-1,20.193

and this point is exactly below the point of suspension .
FARADAY-1859-1,20.194

All I have to do , therefore , is to draw a line , A B , corresponding
with the string , FARADAY-1859-1,20.195

and we shall find that the centre of gravity is somewhere in that line .
FARADAY-1859-1,20.196

But where ? FARADAY-1859-1,20.197

To find that out all we have to do is to take another place for the awl
<paren> <font> fig. <$$font> 4 <$$paren> , hang the plumb-line , and
make the same experiment , FARADAY-1859-1,20.198

and there <bracket> at the point c <$$bracket> is the centre of gravity
- there where the two lines which I have traced cross each other ;
FARADAY-1859-1,20.199

and if I take that pasteboard , and make a hole with the bradawl through
it at that point , you will see that it will be supported in any
position in which it may be placed . FARADAY-1859-1,20.200

Now , knowing that , what do I do when I try to stand upon one leg ?
FARADAY-1859-1,20.201

Do you not see that I push myself over to the left side , and quietly
take up the right leg , and thus bring some central point in my body
over this left leg . FARADAY-1859-1,20.202

What is that point which I throw over ? FARADAY-1859-1,20.203

You <P_21> will know at once that it is the <font> centre of gravity
<$$font> - that point in me where the whole gravitating force of my body
is centred , and which I thus bring in a line over my foot .
FARADAY-1859-1,21.204

Here is a toy I happened to see the other day , which will , I think ,
serve to illustrate our subject very well . FARADAY-1859-1,21.205

That toy <font> ought <$$font> to lie something in this manner <paren>
<font> fig. <$$font> 5 <$$paren> . FARADAY-1859-1,21.206

And would do so if it were uniform in substance ; FARADAY-1859-1,21.207

but you see it does not , FARADAY-1859-1,21.208

it will get up again . FARADAY-1859-1,21.209

And now philosophy comes to our aid ; FARADAY-1859-1,21.210

and I am perfectly {COM:picture_omitted} sure , without looking inside
the figure , that there is some arrangement by which the centre of
gravity is at the lowest point when the image is standing upright ;
FARADAY-1859-1,21.211

and we may be certain when I am tilting it over <paren> see <font> fig.
<$$font> 6 <$$paren> that I am lifting up the centre of gravity <paren>
<font> a <$$font> <$$paren> , and <P_22> raising it from the earth .
FARADAY-1859-1,22.212

All this is effected by putting a piece of lead inside the lower part of
the image , and making the base of large curvature ,
FARADAY-1859-1,22.213

and there you have the whole secret . FARADAY-1859-1,22.214

But what will happen if I try to make the figure stand upon a sharp
point ? FARADAY-1859-1,22.215

You observe I must get that point <font> exactly <$$font> under the
centre {COM:picture_omitted} of gravity or it will fall over thus
<bracket> endeavouring unsuccessfully to balance it <$$bracket> ;
FARADAY-1859-1,22.216

and this you see is a difficult matter , FARADAY-1859-1,22.217

I can@ @not make it stand steadily ; FARADAY-1859-1,22.218

but if I embarrass this poor old lady <P_23> with a world of trouble ,
and hang this wire with bullets at each end about her neck , it is very
evident that , owing to there being those balls of lead hanging down on
either side , in addition to the lead inside , I have lowered the centre
of gravity , FARADAY-1859-1,23.219

and now she will stand upon this point <font> <paren> fig. <$$font> 7
<$$paren> ; FARADAY-1859-1,23.220

and what is more , she proves the truth of our philosophy by standing
sideways . FARADAY-1859-1,23.221

I remember an experiment which puzzled me very much when a boy .
FARADAY-1859-1,23.222

I read it in a conjuring book , FARADAY-1859-1,23.223

and this was how the problem was put to us : " How , " as the book said
, {COM:picture_omitted} " how to hang a pail of water , by means of a
stick , upon the side of a table " <paren> <font> fig. <$$font> 8
<$$paren> . FARADAY-1859-1,23.224

Now I have here a <P_24> table , a piece of stick , and a pail ,
FARADAY-1859-1,24.225

and the proposition is , how can that pail be hung to the edge of this
table ? FARADAY-1859-1,24.226

It is to be done , FARADAY-1859-1,24.227

and can you at all anticipate what arrangement I shall make to enable me
to succeed ? FARADAY-1859-1,24.228

Why this . FARADAY-1859-1,24.229

I take a stick , FARADAY-1859-1,24.230

and put it in the pail between the bottom and the horizontal piece of
wood , FARADAY-1859-1,24.231

and thus give it a stiff handle , FARADAY-1859-1,24.232

and there it is , FARADAY-1859-1,24.233

and what is more , the more water I put into the pail the better it will
hang . FARADAY-1859-1,24.234

It is very true that before I quite succeeded I had the misfortune to
push the bottoms of several pails out ; FARADAY-1859-1,24.235

but here it is hanging firmly <paren> <font> fig. <$$font> 9 <$$paren>
, FARADAY-1859-1,24.236

and you {COM:picture_omitted} now see how you can hang up the pail in
the way which the conjuring books require . FARADAY-1859-1,24.237

<P_25>

Again , if you are really so inclined <paren> and I do hope all of you
are <$$paren> , you will find a great deal of philosophy in this
<bracket> holding up a cork and a pointed thin stick about a foot long
<$$bracket> . FARADAY-1859-1,25.239

Do not {COM:picture_omitted} refer to your toy-books , and say you have
seen that before . FARADAY-1859-1,25.240

Answer me rather , if I ask you , have you <font> understood <$$font> it
before ? FARADAY-1859-1,25.241

It is an experiment which appeared very wonderful to me when I was a boy
; FARADAY-1859-1,25.242

I used to take a piece of cork FARADAY-1859-1,25.243

<paren> and I remember , I thought at first that it was very important
that it should be cut out in the shape of a man , FARADAY-1859-1,25.244

but by degrees I got rid of that idea <$$paren> , FARADAY-1859-1,25.245

and the problem was to balance it <P_26> on the point of a stick .
FARADAY-1859-1,26.246

Now you will see I have only to place two sharp-pointed sticks one on
each side , and give it wings , thus , FARADAY-1859-1,26.247

and you will find this beautiful condition fulfilled .
FARADAY-1859-1,26.248

We come now to another point , FARADAY-1859-1,26.249

- All bodies , whether heavy or light , fall to the earth by this force
which we call gravity . FARADAY-1859-1,26.250

By observation , moreover , we see that bodies do not occupy the same
time in falling ; FARADAY-1859-1,26.251

I think you will be able to see that this piece of paper and that ivory
ball fall with different velocities to the table <bracket> dropping them
<$$bracket> ; FARADAY-1859-1,26.252

and if , again , I take a feather and an ivory ball , and let them fall
, you see they reach the table or earth at different times ; that is to
say , the ball falls faster than the feather . FARADAY-1859-1,26.253

Now , that should not be so , FARADAY-1859-1,26.254

for all bodies do fall equally fast to the earth .
FARADAY-1859-1,26.255

There are one or two beautiful points included in that statement .
FARADAY-1859-1,26.256

First of all , it is manifest that an ounce , or a pound , or a ton , or
a_thousand tons , all fall equally fast , no one faster than another :
FARADAY-1859-1,26.257

here are two balls of lead , a very light one and a very heavy one ,
FARADAY-1859-1,26.258

and you perceive they both fall to the earth in the same time .
FARADAY-1859-1,26.259

Now if I were to put into a little bag a number of these balls
sufficient to make up a bulk equal to the <P_27> large one , they would
also fall in the same time ; FARADAY-1859-1,27.260

for if an avalanche fall from the mountains , the rocks , snow and ice ,
together falling towards the earth , fall with the same velocity ,
whatever be their size . FARADAY-1859-1,27.261

I can@ @not take a better illustration of this than that of gold leaf ,
because it brings before us the reason of this apparent difference in
the time of the fall . FARADAY-1859-1,27.262

Here is a piece of gold leaf . FARADAY-1859-1,27.263

Now if I take a lump of gold and this gold leaf , and let them fall
through the air together , you see that the lump of gold - the sovereign
, or coin - will fall much faster than the gold leaf .
FARADAY-1859-1,27.264

But why ? FARADAY-1859-1,27.265

They are both gold , whether sovereign or gold leaf .
FARADAY-1859-1,27.266

Why should they not fall to the earth with the same quickness ?
FARADAY-1859-1,27.267

<font> They would do so <$$font> , but that the air around our globe
interferes very much where we have the piece of gold so extended and
enlarged as to offer much obstruction on falling through it .
FARADAY-1859-1,27.268

I will , however , show you that gold leaf <font> does <$$font> fall as
fast when the resistance of the air is excluded - FARADAY-1859-1,27.269

for if I take a piece of gold leaf and hang it in the centre of a bottle
, so that the gold , and the bottle , and the air within shall all have
an equal chance of falling , then the gold leaf will <P_28> fall as fast
as anything else . FARADAY-1859-1,28.270

And if I suspend the bottle containing the gold leaf to a string , and
set it oscillating like a pendulum , I may make it vibrate as hard as I
please , FARADAY-1859-1,28.271

and the gold leaf will not be disturbed , FARADAY-1859-1,28.272

but will swing as steadily as a piece of iron would do ;
FARADAY-1859-1,28.273

and I might even swing it round my head with any degree of force ,
FARADAY-1859-1,28.274

and it would remain undisturbed . FARADAY-1859-1,28.275

Or I can try another kind of experiment : FARADAY-1859-1,28.276

- if I raise the gold leaf in this way <bracket> pulling the bottle up
to the ceiling of the theatre by means of a cord and pulley , and then
suddenly letting it fall to within a few inches of the lecture table
<$$bracket> , and allow it then to fall from the ceiling downwards
<paren> I will put something beneath to catch it , supposing I should be
<font> maladroit <$$font> <$$paren> , you will perceive that the gold
leaf is not in the least disturbed . FARADAY-1859-1,28.277

The resistance of the air having been avoided , the glass bottle and
gold leaf all fall exactly in the same time . FARADAY-1859-1,28.278

Here is another illustration : FARADAY-1859-1,28.279

- I have hung a piece of gold leaf in the upper part of this long glass
vessel , FARADAY-1859-1,28.280

and I have the means , by a little arrangement at the top , of letting
the gold leaf loose . FARADAY-1859-1,28.281

Before we let it loose we will <P_29> remove the air by means of an air
pump , FARADAY-1859-1,29.282

and while that is being done , let me show you another experiment of the
same kind . FARADAY-1859-1,29.283

Take a penny-piece , or a half-crown , and a round piece of paper a
trifle smaller in diameter than the coin , and try them side by side to
see whether they fall at the same time <bracket> dropping them
<$$bracket> . You see they do not - the penny-piece goes down first .
FARADAY-1859-1,29.284

But , now place this paper flat on the top of the coin , so that it
shall not meet with any resistance from , the air , and upon <font> then
<$$font> dropping them you see they <font> do <$$font> both fall in the
same time <bracket> exhibiting the effect <$$bracket> .
FARADAY-1859-1,29.285

I dare say if I were to put this piece of gold leaf , instead of the
paper , on the coin , it would do as well . FARADAY-1859-1,29.286

It is very difficult to lay the gold leaf so flat that the air shall not
get under it and lift it up in falling , FARADAY-1859-1,29.287

and I am rather doubtful as to the success of this , because the gold
leaf is puckery ; FARADAY-1859-1,29.288

but will risk the experiment . FARADAY-1859-1,29.289

There they go together <bracket> letting them fall <$$bracket>
FARADAY-1859-1,29.290

and you see at once that they both reach the table at the same moment .
FARADAY-1859-1,29.291

We have now pumped the air out of the vessel , FARADAY-1859-1,29.292

and you will perceive that the gold leaf will fall as quickly in this
vacuum as the coin <P_30> does in the air . FARADAY-1859-1,30.293

I am now going to let it loose , FARADAY-1859-1,30.294

and you must watch to see how rapidly it falls . FARADAY-1859-1,30.295

There ! FARADAY-1859-1,30.296

<bracket> letting the gold loose <$$bracket> there it is , falling as
gold should fall . FARADAY-1859-1,30.297

I am sorry to see our time for parting is drawing so near .
FARADAY-1859-1,30.298

As we proceed , I intend to write upon the board behind me certain words
so as to recall to your minds what we have already examined ;
FARADAY-1859-1,30.299

and I put the word Forces as a heading , FARADAY-1859-1,30.300

and I will then add beneath the names of the special forces according to
the order in which we consider them ; FARADAY-1859-1,30.301

and although I fear that I have not sufficiently pointed out to you the
more important circumstances connected with this force of Gravitation ,
especially the law which governs its attraction <paren> for which , I
think , I must take up a little time at our next meeting <$$paren> ,
still I will put that word on the board , and hope you will now remember
that we have in some degree considered the <font> force of gravitation
<$$font> - that force which causes all bodies to attract each other when
they are at sensible distances apart , and tends to draw them together .
FARADAY-1859-1,30.302

<P_31>

<heading>

Lecture II . FARADAY-1859-1,31.305

Gravitation . FARADAY-1859-1,31.306

- Cohesion . FARADAY-1859-1,31.307

<$$heading>

Do me the favour to pay me as much attention as you did at our last
meeting , and I shall not repent of that which I have proposed to
undertake . FARADAY-1859-1,31.309

It will be impossible for us to consider the Laws of Nature , and what
they effect , unless we now and then give our sole attention , so as to
obtain a clear idea upon the subject . FARADAY-1859-1,31.310

Give me now that attention , and then I trust we shall not part without
your knowing something about those Laws , and the manner in which they
act . FARADAY-1859-1,31.311

You recollect , upon the last occasion , I explained that all bodies
attracted each other , and that this power we called <font> gravitation
. <$$font> FARADAY-1859-1,31.312

I told you that when we brought these two bodies <bracket> two equal-@
@sized ivory balls suspended by threads <$$bracket> near together , they
attracted each other , and that we might suppose that the <P_32> whole
power of this attraction was exerted between their respective centres of
gravity ; FARADAY-1859-1,32.313

and , furthermore , you learned from me that if , instead of a small
ball I took a larger one , like <font> that <$$font> <bracket> changing
one of the balls for a much larger one <$$bracket> , there was much more
of this attraction exerted ; or , if I made this ball larger and larger
, until , if it were possible , it became as large as the Earth itself -
or , I might take the Earth itself , as the large ball - that <font>
then <$$font> the attraction would become so powerful as to cause them
to rush together in this manner <bracket> dropping the ivory ball
<$$bracket> . FARADAY-1859-1,32.314

You sit <font> there <$$font> upright , FARADAY-1859-1,32.315

and I stand upright <font> here <$$font> , because we keep our centres
of gravity properly balanced with respect to the earth ;
FARADAY-1859-1,32.316

and I need not tell you that on the other side of this world the people
are standing and moving about with their feet towards our feet , in a
reversed position as compared with us , and all by means of this power
of gravitation to the centre of the earth . FARADAY-1859-1,32.317

I must not , however , leave the subject of gravitation , without
telling you something about its laws and regularity ; and first , as
regards its power with respect to the distance that bodies are apart .
FARADAY-1859-1,32.318

If I take one of these <P_33> balls and place it within an inch of the
other , they attract each other with a certain power .
FARADAY-1859-1,33.319

If I hold it at a greater distance off , they attract with less power ,
FARADAY-1859-1,33.320

and if I hold it at a greater distance still , their attraction is still
less . FARADAY-1859-1,33.321

Now this fact is of the greatest consequence ; FARADAY-1859-1,33.322

for , knowing this law , philosophers have discovered most wonderful
things . FARADAY-1859-1,33.323

You know that there is a planet , Uranus , revolving round the sun with
us , but eighteen_hundred millions of miles off ; FARADAY-1859-1,33.324

and because there is another planet as far off as three_thousand
millions of miles , this law of attraction , or gravitation , still
holds good , FARADAY-1859-1,33.325

and philosophers actually discovered this latter planet , Neptune , by
reason of the effects of its attraction at this overwhelming distance .
FARADAY-1859-1,33.326

Now I want you clearly to understand what this law is .
FARADAY-1859-1,33.327

They say <paren> and they are right <$$paren> that two bodies attract
each other <font> inversely as the square of the distance <$$font> ,
FARADAY-1859-1,33.328

- a sad jumble of words until you understand them ;
FARADAY-1859-1,33.329

but I think we shall soon comprehend what this law is , and what is the
meaning of the " inverse square of the distance . "
FARADAY-1859-1,33.330

I have here <paren> <font> fig. <$$font> 11 <$$paren> a lamp A ,
shining most intensely upon this disc , B , C , D ;
FARADAY-1859-1,33.331

and this light <P_34> acts as a sun by which I can get a shadow from
this little screen B F <paren> merely a square piece of card <$$paren> ,
which , as you know , when I place it close to the large screen , just
shadows as much of it as is exactly equal to its own size ;
FARADAY-1859-1,34.332

but now let me take this card E , which is equal to the
{COM:picture_omitted} other one in size , and place it midway between
the lamp and the screen ; FARADAY-1859-1,34.333

now look at the size of the shadow B D , FARADAY-1859-1,34.334

it is four times the original size . FARADAY-1859-1,34.335

Here , then , comes the " inverse square of the distance . "
FARADAY-1859-1,34.336

This distance , A E , is <font> one <$$font> , FARADAY-1859-1,34.337

and that distance , A B , is <font> two <$$font> , FARADAY-1859-1,34.338

but that size E being <font> one <$$font> , this size B D of {COM:sic}
shadow is <font> four <$$font> instead of <P_35> <font> two <$$font> ,
which is the <font> square <$$font> of the distance ;
FARADAY-1859-1,35.339

and , if I put the screen at one third of the distance from the lamp ,
the shadow on the large screen would be <font> nine <$$font> times the
size . FARADAY-1859-1,35.340

Again , if I hold this screen <font> here <$$font> , at B F , a certain
amount of light falls on it ; FARADAY-1859-1,35.341

and if I hold it nearer the lamp at E , <font> more <$$font> light
shines upon it . FARADAY-1859-1,35.342

And you see at once how much - exactly the quantity which I have shut
off from the part of this screen , B D , now in shadow ;
FARADAY-1859-1,35.343

moreover , you see that if I put a single screen here , at G , by the
side of the shadow , it can only receive <font> one fourth <$$font> of
the proportion of light which is obstructed . FARADAY-1859-1,35.344

That , then , is what is meant by the <font> inverse <$$font> of the
square of the distance . FARADAY-1859-1,35.345

This screen E is the brightest because it is the nearest ,
FARADAY-1859-1,35.346

and there is the whole secret of this curious expression <font>
inversely as the square of the distance . <$$font>
FARADAY-1859-1,35.347

Now , if you can@ @not perfectly recollect this when you go home , get a
candle and throw a shadow of something - your profile , if you like - on
the wall , and then recede or advance , and you will find that your
shadow is exactly in proportion to the <font> square <$$font> of the
distance you are off the wall ; FARADAY-1859-1,35.348

and then if you consider how much light shines on you at one distance ,
and how much <P_36> at another , you get the inverse accordingly .
FARADAY-1859-1,36.349

So it is as regards the attraction of these two balls ,
FARADAY-1859-1,36.350

they attract according to the square of the distance , inversely .
FARADAY-1859-1,36.351

I want you to try and remember these words , FARADAY-1859-1,36.352

and then you will be able to go into all the calculations of astronomers
as to the planets and other bodies , and tell why they move so fast ,
and why they go <font> round <$$font> the sun without falling into it ,
and be prepared to enter upon many other interesting inquiries of the
like nature . FARADAY-1859-1,36.353

Let us now leave this subject which I have written upon the board under
the word Force - Gravitation - and go a step further .
FARADAY-1859-1,36.354

All bodies attract each other at sensible distances .
FARADAY-1859-1,36.355

I showed you the electric attraction on the last occasion <paren> though
I did not call it so <$$paren> ; FARADAY-1859-1,36.356

that attracts at a distance ; FARADAY-1859-1,36.357

and in order to make our progress a little more gradual , suppose I take
a few iron particles <bracket> dropping some small fragments of iron on
the table <$$bracket> . FARADAY-1859-1,36.358

There , I have already told you that in all cases where bodies fall , it
is the <font> particles <$$font> that are attracted .
FARADAY-1859-1,36.359

You may consider these then as separate particles magnified , so as to
be evident to your sight ; FARADAY-1859-1,36.360

they are loose from each other - FARADAY-1859-1,36.361

they all gravitate - FARADAY-1859-1,36.362

<P_37>

they all fall to the earth - FARADAY-1859-1,37.364

for the force of gravitation <font> never <$$font> fails .
FARADAY-1859-1,37.365

Now , I have here a centre of power which I will not name at present ,
FARADAY-1859-1,37.366

and when these particles are placed upon it , see what an attraction
they have for each other . FARADAY-1859-1,37.367

Here I have an arch of iron filings <paren> <font> fig. <$$font> 12
<$$paren> {COM:picture_omitted} regularly built up like an iron bridge ,
because I have put them within a sphere of action which will cause them
to attract each other . FARADAY-1859-1,37.368

See ! - I could let a mouse run through it , FARADAY-1859-1,37.369

and yet if I try to do the same thing with them <font> here <$$font>
<bracket> on the table <$$bracket> they do not attract each other at all
. FARADAY-1859-1,37.370

It is <font> that <$$font> <bracket> the magnet <$$bracket> which makes
them hold together . FARADAY-1859-1,37.371

Now , just as these iron particles hold <P_38> together in the form of
an elliptical bridge , so do the different particles of iron which
constitute this nail hold together and make it one .
FARADAY-1859-1,38.372

And here is a bar of iron ; FARADAY-1859-1,38.373

why , it is only because the different parts of <font> this <$$font>
iron are so wrought as to keep close together by the attraction <font>
between <$$font> the particles that it is held together in one mass .
FARADAY-1859-1,38.374

It is kept together , in fact , merely by the attraction of one particle
to another , FARADAY-1859-1,38.375

and that is the point I want now to illustrate . FARADAY-1859-1,38.376

If I take a piece of flint and strike it with a hammer and break it thus
<bracket> breaking off a piece of the flint <$$bracket> , I have done
nothing more than separate the particles which compose these two pieces
so far apart , that their attraction is too weak to cause them to hold
together , FARADAY-1859-1,38.377

and it is only for that reason that there are now two pieces in the
place of one . FARADAY-1859-1,38.378

I will show you an experiment to prove that this attraction does still
exist in those particles , FARADAY-1859-1,38.379

for here is a piece of glass <paren> FARADAY-1859-1,38.380

for what was true of the flint and the bar of iron is true of the piece
of glass , FARADAY-1859-1,38.381

and is true of every other solid , FARADAY-1859-1,38.382

they are all held together in the lump by the attraction between their
parts <$$paren> , FARADAY-1859-1,38.383

and I can show you the attraction between its separate particles ,
FARADAY-1859-1,38.384

for if I take these portions of glass <P_39> which I have reduced to
very fine powder , you see that I can actually build them up into a
solid wall by pressure between two flat surfaces .
FARADAY-1859-1,39.385

The power which I thus have of building up this wall is due to the
attraction of the particles , forming as it were the cement which holds
them together ; FARADAY-1859-1,39.386

and so in this case , where I have taken no very great pains to bring
the particles together , you see perhaps a couple of ounces of finely
pounded glass standing as an upright wall - FARADAY-1859-1,39.387

is not this attraction most wonderful ? FARADAY-1859-1,39.388

<font> That <$$font> bar of iron one inch square has such power of
attraction in its particles - giving to it such strength - that it will
hold up twenty tons weight before the little set of particles in the
small space equal to one division across which it can be pulled apart ,
will separate . FARADAY-1859-1,39.389

In this manner suspension bridges and chains are held together by the
attraction of their particles , FARADAY-1859-1,39.390

and I am going to make an experiment which will show how strong is this
attraction of the particles . FARADAY-1859-1,39.391

<bracket> The Lecturer here placed his foot on a loop of wire fastened
to a support above , FARADAY-1859-1,39.392

and swung with his whole weight resting upon it for some moments .
<$$bracket> FARADAY-1859-1,39.393

You see while hanging here all my weight is supported by these little
particles <P_40> of the wire , just as in pantomimes they sometimes
suspend gentlemen and damsels . FARADAY-1859-1,40.394

How can we make this attraction of the particles a little more simple ?
FARADAY-1859-1,40.395

There are many things which if brought together properly will show this
attraction . FARADAY-1859-1,40.396

Here is a boy's experiment FARADAY-1859-1,40.397

<paren> and I like a boy's experiment <$$paren> . FARADAY-1859-1,40.398

- Get a tobacco-pipe , FARADAY-1859-1,40.399

fill it with lead , FARADAY-1859-1,40.400

melt it , FARADAY-1859-1,40.401

and then pour it out upon a stone , FARADAY-1859-1,40.402

and thus get a clean piece of lead FARADAY-1859-1,40.403

<paren> this is a better plan than scraping it - FARADAY-1859-1,40.404

scraping alters the condition of the surface of the lead <$$paren> .
FARADAY-1859-1,40.405

I have here some pieces of lead which I melted this morning for the sake
of making them clean . FARADAY-1859-1,40.406

Now these pieces of lead hang together by the attraction of their
particles , FARADAY-1859-1,40.407

and if I press these two separate pieces close together , so as to bring
their particles within the sphere of attraction , you will see how soon
they become one . FARADAY-1859-1,40.408

I have merely to give them a good squeeze , and draw the upper piece
slightly round at the same time , FARADAY-1859-1,40.409

and here they are as one , FARADAY-1859-1,40.410

and the bending and twisting I can give them will not separate them
again ; FARADAY-1859-1,40.411

I have joined the lead together , not with solder , but simply by means
of the attraction of the particles . FARADAY-1859-1,40.412

This however is not the best way of bringing <P_41> those particles
together - FARADAY-1859-1,41.413

we have many better plans than that , FARADAY-1859-1,41.414

- and I will show you one that will do very well for juvenile
experiments . FARADAY-1859-1,41.415

There is some alum crystallised very beautifully by nature
FARADAY-1859-1,41.416

<paren> for all things are far more beautiful in their natural than
their artificial form <$$paren> , FARADAY-1859-1,41.417

and here I have some of the same alum broken into fine powder .
FARADAY-1859-1,41.418

In it I have destroyed that force of which I have placed the name on
this board - Cohesion , or the attraction exerted between the particles
of bodies to hold them together . FARADAY-1859-1,41.419

Now I am going to show you that if we take this powdered alum and some
hot water , and mix them together , I shall dissolve the alum -
FARADAY-1859-1,41.420

all the particles will be separated by the water far more completely
than they are here in the powder ; FARADAY-1859-1,41.421

but then being in the water , they will have the opportunity as it cools
<paren> for that is the condition which favours their coalescence
<$$paren> of uniting together again and forming one mass .
FARADAY-1859-1,41.422

Now , having brought the alum into solution , I will pour it into this
glass basin , FARADAY-1859-1,41.423

and you will , to-morrow , find that those particles of alum which I
have put into the water , and so separated that they are no longer solid
, will , as the water cools , come together and cohere ,
FARADAY-1859-1,41.424

and by to-morrow <P_42> morning we shall have a great deal of the alum
crystallised out , that is to say , come back to the solid form .
FARADAY-1859-1,42.425

<bracket> The Lecturer here poured a little of the hot solution of alum
into the glass dish , FARADAY-1859-1,42.426

and when the latter had thus been made warm , the remainder of the
solution was added . <$$bracket> FARADAY-1859-1,42.427

I am now doing that which I advise you to do if you use a glass vessel ,
namely , warming it slowly and gradually , FARADAY-1859-1,42.428

and in repeating this experiment do as I do , FARADAY-1859-1,42.429

pour the liquid out gently , leaving all the dirt behind in the basin :
FARADAY-1859-1,42.430

and remember that the more carefully and quietly you make this
experiment at home , the better the crystals . FARADAY-1859-1,42.431

To-morrow you will see the particles of alum drawn together ,
FARADAY-1859-1,42.432

and if I put two pieces of coke in some part of the solution <paren> the
coke ought first to be washed very clean , and dried <$$paren> , you
will find to-morrow that we shall have a beautiful crystallisation over
the coke , making it exactly resemble a natural mineral .
FARADAY-1859-1,42.433

Now how curiously our ideas expand by watching these conditions of the
attraction of cohesion ! FARADAY-1859-1,42.434

- how many new phenomena it gives us beyond those of the attraction of
gravitation ! FARADAY-1859-1,42.435

See how it gives us great strength . FARADAY-1859-1,42.436

The things <P_43> we deal with in building up the structures on the
earth are of strength - FARADAY-1859-1,43.437

we use iron , stone , and other things of great strength ;
FARADAY-1859-1,43.438

and only think that all those structures you have about you - think of
the <font> Great Eastern <$$font> if you please , which is of such size
and power as to be almost more than man can manage - are the result of
this power of cohesion and attraction . FARADAY-1859-1,43.439

I have here a body in which I believe you will see a change taking place
in its condition of cohesion at the moment it is made .
FARADAY-1859-1,43.440

It is at first yellow , FARADAY-1859-1,43.441

it then becomes a fine crimson red . FARADAY-1859-1,43.442

Just watch when I pour these two liquids together - both colourless as
water . FARADAY-1859-1,43.443

<bracket> The Lecturer here mixed together solutions of perchloride of
mercury and iodide of potassium , when a yellow precipitate of biniodide
of mercury fell down , which almost immediately became crimson red .
<$$bracket> FARADAY-1859-1,43.444

Now , there is a substance which is very beautiful ,
FARADAY-1859-1,43.445

but see how it is changing colour . FARADAY-1859-1,43.446

It was reddish-yellow at first , FARADAY-1859-1,43.447

but it has now become red . FARADAY-1859-1,43.448

I have previously prepared a little of this red substance , which you
see formed in the liquid , FARADAY-1859-1,43.449

and have put some of it upon paper . FARADAY-1859-1,43.450

<bracket> Exhibiting several sheets of paper coated with scarlet
biniodide of mercury . <$$bracket> FARADAY-1859-1,43.451

<P_44>

There it is - the same substance spread upon paper ,
FARADAY-1859-1,44.453

and there too is the same substance ; FARADAY-1859-1,44.454

and here is some more of it <bracket> exhibiting a piece of paper as
large as the other sheets , but having only very little red colour in it
, the greater part being yellow <$$bracket> , FARADAY-1859-1,44.455

a <font> little <$$font> more of it , you will say .
FARADAY-1859-1,44.456

Do not be mistaken ; FARADAY-1859-1,44.457

there is as much upon the surface of one of these pieces of paper as
upon the other . FARADAY-1859-1,44.458

What you see yellow is the same thing as the red body ,
FARADAY-1859-1,44.459

only the attraction of cohesion is in a certain degree changed ;
FARADAY-1859-1,44.460

for I will take this red body , and apply heat to it
FARADAY-1859-1,44.461

<paren> you may perhaps see a little smoke arise , FARADAY-1859-1,44.462

but that is of no consequence <$$paren> , FARADAY-1859-1,44.463

and if you look at it it will first of all darken -
FARADAY-1859-1,44.464

but see , how it is becoming yellow . FARADAY-1859-1,44.465

I have now made it all yellow , FARADAY-1859-1,44.466

and what is more , it will remain so ; FARADAY-1859-1,44.467

but if I take any hard substance , and rub the yellow part with it , it
will immediately go back again to the red condition .
FARADAY-1859-1,44.468

<bracket> Exhibiting the experiment . <$$bracket> FARADAY-1859-1,44.469

There it is . FARADAY-1859-1,44.470

You see the red is not <font> put back <$$font> , but <font> brought
back <$$font> by the change in the substance . FARADAY-1859-1,44.471

Now <bracket> warming it over the spirit lamp <$$bracket> here it is
becoming yellow again , FARADAY-1859-1,44.472

and that is all because its attraction of cohesion is changed .
FARADAY-1859-1,44.473

And what will you say to me <P_45> when I tell you that this piece of
common charcoal is just the same thing , only differently coalesced , as
the diamonds which you wear ? FARADAY-1859-1,45.474

<paren> I have put a specimen outside of a piece of straw which was
charred in a particular way - FARADAY-1859-1,45.475

it is just like black lead . <$$paren> FARADAY-1859-1,45.476

Now , this charred straw , this charcoal , and these diamonds , are all
of them the same substance , changed but in their properties as respects
the force of cohesion . FARADAY-1859-1,45.477

