<BEGIN_fayrer-1900-1>

<P_1>

<heading>

Autobiography . FAYRER-1900-1,1.4

Chapter I . FAYRER-1900-1,1.5

Early life FAYRER-1900-1,1.6

<$$heading>

I am the second son of a family of eight , - six sons and two daughters
, FAYRER-1900-1,1.8

- and was born on December 6 , 1824 , at Plymouth , where my father and
mother were on a visit after one of his voyages to India .
FAYRER-1900-1,1.9

My father was one of three sons of Captain J. Fayrer :
FAYRER-1900-1,1.10

the eldest was the Rev. Joseph Fayrer , rector of St Teath , Cornwall ;
FAYRER-1900-1,1.11

the third , Edward , a midshipman in the navy , was drowned when
H._M._S. Defence foundered , with all hands , in a gale of wind in the
Baltic in 1811 . FAYRER-1900-1,1.12

My mother was the only daughter of a Lancashire gentleman named
Wilkinson : FAYRER-1900-1,1.13

she was descended on the female side from John Copeland , who took David
, King of Scots , prisoner at the battle of Neville's Cross .
FAYRER-1900-1,1.14

<P_2>

My father , who retired as a commander , entered the navy at an early
age : FAYRER-1900-1,2.16

he served first as a midshipman on board H._M._S. Caroline , Captain
Page , and subsequently , among other ships , in the Impérieuse under
Lord Cochrane , where among his messmates were Marryat , Houston Stewart
, Walpole , and others who rose to distinction . FAYRER-1900-1,2.17

In 1807 he was severely wounded , when in command of the boats of the
Impérieuse , in an attack off the coast of Corsica upon a heavily armed
ship which was taken with great loss on both sides . FAYRER-1900-1,2.18

Lord Napier of Merchiston was with him on this occasion ,
FAYRER-1900-1,2.19

and was also wounded . FAYRER-1900-1,2.20

The ship , which proved to be a Maltese privateer under French colours ,
fired upon the boats : FAYRER-1900-1,2.21

they immediately attacked FAYRER-1900-1,2.22

and took her by boarding , losing many men . FAYRER-1900-1,2.23

My father killed the captain of the privateer , FAYRER-1900-1,2.24

and had , with other wounds , his right arm shattered by a bullet .
FAYRER-1900-1,2.25

For his services on this occasion he was promoted to the rank of
lieutenant in 1808 . FAYRER-1900-1,2.26

When lying unconscious from fever in Malta Hospital , some one hung a
gold cross and chain round his neck with an inscription :
FAYRER-1900-1,2.27

he never knew the donor . FAYRER-1900-1,2.28

He recovered after a long illness , with his right arm badly crippled ,
FAYRER-1900-1,2.29

and remained for some time on half pay . FAYRER-1900-1,2.30

He served afterwards , FAYRER-1900-1,2.31

and was first lieutenant of the Orpheus , Captain Hugh Pigott , during
the American war . FAYRER-1900-1,2.32

Subsequently he obtained permission to command an Indiaman ,
FAYRER-1900-1,2.33

and for many years sailed in ships of that class , the Lady Flora being
the last . FAYRER-1900-1,2.34

My earliest recollections are of Milnthorpe , Kendal , and Ambleside .
FAYRER-1900-1,2.35

I remember Wordsworth , who lived at Rydal Mount , and Hartley Coleridge
, the poet ; also my father's friend , Professor Wilson of Edinburgh
<paren> Christopher North <$$paren> , who used to visit us .
FAYRER-1900-1,2.36

We removed to Scotland when my father was appointed to command one of H.
M. steam-packets , flying the pennant and sailing between Portpatrick
and Donaghadee , Ireland . FAYRER-1900-1,2.37

It was my ramblings here on the sea-shore and amongst the rocks , and
occasional shooting and fishing expeditions with my father , that first
developed my taste for natural history and for sport .
FAYRER-1900-1,2.38

<P_3>

My father was a keen sportsman , FAYRER-1900-1,3.40

and was always a welcome guest at the houses of his many friends in
Galloway . FAYRER-1900-1,3.41

On one occasion he took me to Shane's Castle , in County Antrim , on a
visit to his friend Lord O'Neil , where I saw him catch the great lake
trout in Lough Neagh . FAYRER-1900-1,3.42

It was during one of his visits there that , when some one - I think it
was he - was fishing with a fly for large trout , in casting his line
backwards , the hook fastened on to the ear of a hare sitting on her
form . FAYRER-1900-1,3.43

She was fairly hooked and caught . FAYRER-1900-1,3.44

I have seen , a sketch of this , FAYRER-1900-1,3.45

and believe it was at Shane's Castle . FAYRER-1900-1,3.46

My father used to shoot with a Joe Manton 16-bore gun , which was not
new even then . FAYRER-1900-1,3.47

It is in my possession , and now , converted into a breechloader ,
FAYRER-1900-1,3.48

I shoot with it in preference to any other gun . FAYRER-1900-1,3.49

Portpatrick , the nearest point to Donaghadee in Ireland , is an exposed
and stormy place . FAYRER-1900-1,3.50

The harbour was protected by an extensive pier and breakwaters of
granite , FAYRER-1900-1,3.51

and it was a grand sight to see the heavy seas break over them .
FAYRER-1900-1,3.52

At the end of the pier was a strongly built lighthouse , a visit to the
interior of which was one of the treats of my young days .
FAYRER-1900-1,3.53

On the other side was a sheltered harbour reserved for the two royal
steamers . FAYRER-1900-1,3.54

Trending away on either side of the port was a bold rocky coast , varied
here and there with shingly and sandy beaches . FAYRER-1900-1,3.55

In some places the cliffs rose abruptly out of the sea :
FAYRER-1900-1,3.56

it was a very picturesque and at the same time a wild and dangerous
coast . FAYRER-1900-1,3.57

The harbour works were very costly , FAYRER-1900-1,3.58

and involved a continuous outlay , owing to the damage done by the
storms , when great blocks of granite were displaced by the pressure of
the sea-water . FAYRER-1900-1,3.59

In later years , after the Government steamers were removed , these
works were abandoned FAYRER-1900-1,3.60

and fell to pieces . FAYRER-1900-1,3.61

On one occasion , when wandering along the rocks with one of my brothers
, he slipped on the seaweed FAYRER-1900-1,3.62

and fell in where the water was very deep , FAYRER-1900-1,3.63

and I had great difficulty in saving him , seizing him by the collar and
dragging him out on to a ledge of rock . FAYRER-1900-1,3.64

One of my favourite resorts was the Government carpenter's <P_4> shop :
FAYRER-1900-1,4.65

the head carpenter was a great friend of mine , FAYRER-1900-1,4.66

and used to supply me with wood from which I made boats .
FAYRER-1900-1,4.67

I began to draw pretty well , my favourite subjects being animals and
boats . FAYRER-1900-1,4.68

I also read elementary works on natural philosophy , FAYRER-1900-1,4.69

and used to ponder much over chemical and other experiments .
FAYRER-1900-1,4.70

I was peculiarly fond of reading as a boy , FAYRER-1900-1,4.71

and devoured every work of fiction I could get . FAYRER-1900-1,4.72

In one of my country walks with my brother I met with a serious accident
. FAYRER-1900-1,4.73

In jumping a burn I slipped FAYRER-1900-1,4.74

and fell with violence on my left arm , hurting it severely .
FAYRER-1900-1,4.75

We set off home , FAYRER-1900-1,4.76

but I felt very anxious about alarming my mother , FAYRER-1900-1,4.77

and determined to stop at the doctor's house <font> en_route . <$$font>
FAYRER-1900-1,4.78

He examined my arm , which was by this time very painful and much
swollen , FAYRER-1900-1,4.79

found the elbow was badly dislocated , FAYRER-1900-1,4.80

and proceeded at once to reduce the dislocation , giving me exquisite
pain . FAYRER-1900-1,4.81

I suffered long and severely from that injury : FAYRER-1900-1,4.82

the joint became contracted FAYRER-1900-1,4.83

and stiffened , FAYRER-1900-1,4.84

and the forcible extension of the arm , which was necessary for some
time , caused me great pain . FAYRER-1900-1,4.85

In time I recovered , FAYRER-1900-1,4.86

but the elbow sustained some permanent damage . FAYRER-1900-1,4.87

I got considerable <font> kudos <$$font> for my presence of mind and
determination in going to the doctor on the way home ,
FAYRER-1900-1,4.88

and met with much sympathy . FAYRER-1900-1,4.89

At a pretty place named Dunskye , the property of the Hunter Blairs , I
made my first essay in skating on the lake . FAYRER-1900-1,4.90

I used to enjoy my visits to this place with its woods , glens , and
sandy bays by the sea-shore . FAYRER-1900-1,4.91

When I was between eleven and twelve years of age , my elder brother and
I went to the Rev. R. Wallace , Dalrymple , in Ayrshire , who took
pupils . FAYRER-1900-1,4.92

Up to this time we had been educated at home under a tutor ,
FAYRER-1900-1,4.93

and I could read an easy Latin book . FAYRER-1900-1,4.94

My school-fellows were Loudon and Frank Macleod of Raasay , Francis
Hunter of Dunholme , John Crawford , George Dundas , and Lord Nigel
Kennedy , who came just before I left . FAYRER-1900-1,4.95

There we were thoroughly well trained in classics and mathematics ,
other subjects being taught by the village schoolmaster .
FAYRER-1900-1,4.96

We had all the ordinary amusements <P_5> of boys , and plenty of
trout-fishing , especially on the property of the Cunninghams of Skeldon
, our great friends . FAYRER-1900-1,5.97

It was in the river Doon I first learnt to swim , in one of the deep
pools we resorted to as bathing-places . FAYRER-1900-1,5.98

When we left Dalrymple , my brother went to England to a public school ,
FAYRER-1900-1,5.99

and I returned home to study under a tutor . FAYRER-1900-1,5.100

I had made considerable progress in my classical studies at all events ,
FAYRER-1900-1,5.101

and had become well versed in the folk-lore of the country and the
superstitions of the people , in which I to some extent shared ,
FAYRER-1900-1,5.102

and had further developed those tastes for natural history and sport
which have clung to me through life . FAYRER-1900-1,5.103

Shortly after this , my father , having determined to go to sea again ,
resigned his appointment . FAYRER-1900-1,5.104

He was already regarded as an authority on steam navigation ,
FAYRER-1900-1,5.105

and the command of the Great Liverpool , which was to sail from
Liverpool to New York , the largest ocean-going steamer , was offered to
him . FAYRER-1900-1,5.106

Up to this time , I believe , the Great Western and the Sirius were the
only two steamers that had crossed the Atlantic , thus , however ,
discrediting Dr Lardner's prophecy that a ship would never cross the
Atlantic by steam . FAYRER-1900-1,5.107

My father may certainly be regarded as one of the pioneers of ocean
steam navigation . FAYRER-1900-1,5.108

When we removed to Liverpool I was fourteen , FAYRER-1900-1,5.109

and my brother Robert and I were sent to a day-school .
FAYRER-1900-1,5.110

I took a special delight in natural science , FAYRER-1900-1,5.111

and began to devise experiments on my own account . FAYRER-1900-1,5.112

For instance , I manufactured an electrophorus and a Leyden jar with
which I gave a shock to one of our old servants , which frightened her
considerably and me too , FAYRER-1900-1,5.113

for I thought she was dead ! FAYRER-1900-1,5.114

I used also to attend lectures in the evening , FAYRER-1900-1,5.115

and especially recall a series by Haydon on painting , which interested
me greatly . FAYRER-1900-1,5.116

A terrific gale which burst over Liverpool one night destroyed several
houses FAYRER-1900-1,5.117

and killed many people . FAYRER-1900-1,5.118

It is still remembered as one of the severest gales with which the place
has ever been visited . FAYRER-1900-1,5.119

We frequently had interesting visitors . FAYRER-1900-1,5.120

On one occasion <P_6> the great American statesman Daniel Webster ,
after dining with us , when he was looking at my drawings , said , on
seeing one of an Arab horse , " Sir , you draw horses so well you ought
to have horses to draw you . " FAYRER-1900-1,6.121

I can also remember amongst other visitors and friends Captain Marryat ,
my father's old messmate in the Impérieuse . FAYRER-1900-1,6.122

Once I sat between him and Miss Ellen Tree after dinner ,
FAYRER-1900-1,6.123

and was much amused at their conversation and his stories .
FAYRER-1900-1,6.124

About this time the war in the East broke out , when an old friend and
messmate of my father's , Lord John Churchill , who had been appointed
to command H._M._S. Druid , offered to take me with him as a midshipman
- an offer my father declined with thanks . FAYRER-1900-1,6.125

I did not regret it then , as I had not thought of the navy as a
profession , FAYRER-1900-1,6.126

but did later when my nautical proclivities had developed .
FAYRER-1900-1,6.127

Amongst other incidents , I remember about this time being taken to a
steeplechase , which was won by the celebrated horse Lottery , a
six-foot stone-wall being the last jump . FAYRER-1900-1,6.128

In 1840 I began the study of engineering with a friend of my father's ,
FAYRER-1900-1,6.129

and went to an engine factory daily ; FAYRER-1900-1,6.130

but I did not like it , because it was too mechanical ,
FAYRER-1900-1,6.131

and soon became restless and anxious to do something else .
FAYRER-1900-1,6.132

Meanwhile my father had been appointed to the command of the President ,
the largest steamship afloat at the time , FAYRER-1900-1,6.133

and when she made her trial trip to Cork I went with him .
FAYRER-1900-1,6.134

In returning we anchored in Kingston harbour , where I went on board the
Inconstant , frigate . FAYRER-1900-1,6.135

The voyage , my frequent meetings with naval men , and my visit to the
frigate set me thinking again of what I had for some time been hankering
after - namely , to go to sea . FAYRER-1900-1,6.136

Meanwhile my father took the President to New York , FAYRER-1900-1,6.137

and had a great reception there . FAYRER-1900-1,6.138

He had fought against the Americans when he was lieutenant of the
Orpheus : FAYRER-1900-1,6.139

he now met some of his old adversaries , FAYRER-1900-1,6.140

and they became great friends . FAYRER-1900-1,6.141

He was most enthusiastic about the Americans , as well he might be ,
FAYRER-1900-1,6.142

for they treated him with great kindness . FAYRER-1900-1,6.143

He had been presented also with some beautiful plate and a silver <P_7>
speaking-trumpet . FAYRER-1900-1,7.144

He left the President owing to some difference of opinion with the
directors . FAYRER-1900-1,7.145

She made a second voyage from which she never returned .
FAYRER-1900-1,7.146

Soon after this the West_Indian Mail Steam-packet service was
inaugurated with a fine fleet of steamers named after the great rivers .
FAYRER-1900-1,7.147

My father was offered command of the first of them , the Forth ,
FAYRER-1900-1,7.148

and she came to Liverpool to be fitted with engines .
FAYRER-1900-1,7.149

My desire to go to sea became stronger than ever ; FAYRER-1900-1,7.150

but I was now too old for the navy , being sixteen years of age .
FAYRER-1900-1,7.151

These ships were beautifully fitted out , FAYRER-1900-1,7.152

and the officers wore uniform . FAYRER-1900-1,7.153

It was decided that they should also have midshipmen ,
FAYRER-1900-1,7.154

and at my request my father got me appointed as one to the Thames ,
Captain P. Hast , an old naval friend of his . FAYRER-1900-1,7.155

We shortly left Liverpool FAYRER-1900-1,7.156

and took up our abode at Southampton , as it was from that port that the
West_Indian steamers were to sail . FAYRER-1900-1,7.157

I was just seventeen when I went to London to join the Thames at
Blackwall . FAYRER-1900-1,7.158

I was very sick and miserable at first , FAYRER-1900-1,7.159

and we had a heavy rolling sea in the Bay of Biscay ,
FAYRER-1900-1,7.160

but I soon began to get about and learn my duties , to take the sun , to
work the day's reckoning , and find the ship's place on the chart .
FAYRER-1900-1,7.161

This we did each day , FAYRER-1900-1,7.162

and sent it in to the captain at noon . FAYRER-1900-1,7.163

I learnt to go aloft , to reef , steer , box the compass , make knots ,
splicings , bowlines , &c. , FAYRER-1900-1,7.164

and by the time the first voyage was over was becoming a fairly good
sailor . FAYRER-1900-1,7.165

We went to the West_Indian Islands and several ports in Mexico and South
America . FAYRER-1900-1,7.166

I was much struck with the beauty of the island of Madeira , with its
vine-clad slopes , the picturesque harbour of Funchal , the boatmen with
their little conical caps , and the ladies with their lace veils .
FAYRER-1900-1,7.167

I made some expeditions , amongst others to the convent of N. Senhora .
FAYRER-1900-1,7.168

We then went to Paramaribo in Dutch Guiana , and next to Demerara .
FAYRER-1900-1,7.169

Here I made my first acquaintance with tropical climates and scenery .
FAYRER-1900-1,7.170

An extraordinary incident occurred as we were coasting along the shore
of South America . FAYRER-1900-1,7.171

The <P_8> patent log towing astern was seized by some great fish ;
FAYRER-1900-1,8.172

the creature was spun round and round in the water , FAYRER-1900-1,8.173

and then disappeared . FAYRER-1900-1,8.174

It had evidently seized , and could not immediately relinquish , the
brass log , which , on the line being hauled in , was found to be a good
deal injured . FAYRER-1900-1,8.175

In Demerara I found some old family friends , FAYRER-1900-1,8.176

and visiting them , had an adventure . FAYRER-1900-1,8.177

The steamer lay out in the rapid current in the river ,
FAYRER-1900-1,8.178

and I was returning to her in a jolly-boat pulled by two boys .
FAYRER-1900-1,8.179

We made allowance for the current FAYRER-1900-1,8.180

and fetched the ship all right ; FAYRER-1900-1,8.181

but no one was on the lookout to throw us a rope , FAYRER-1900-1,8.182

and the boy failed to catch hold with the boat-hook .
FAYRER-1900-1,8.183

The rapid stream swept us off towards the sea , the night setting in ,
FAYRER-1900-1,8.184

and we were soon out of sight of the steamer and the lights of the town
. FAYRER-1900-1,8.185

I was making up my mind to pull in towards the shore and make fast there
until daylight , when fortunately we came in sight of a small merchant
vessel at anchor . FAYRER-1900-1,8.186

We steered alongside , FAYRER-1900-1,8.187

they threw us a rope , FAYRER-1900-1,8.188

and the master sent us back to the steamer , not a little disconcerted
by our adventure , which might have ended badly for us .
FAYRER-1900-1,8.189

We went to the island of Trinidad , passing through the Bocas - channels
between islands , by which the harbour of the Port of Spain is
approached - FAYRER-1900-1,8.190

and here , landing one night during a shower of rain , I saw a
magnificent specimen of a double lunar rainbow . FAYRER-1900-1,8.191

We visited La Guayra , on the coast of South America , lying at the foot
of the saddle of Caracas , which was the scene of a great earthquake
during the early part of this century , the traces of which still
remained - for instance , the ruins of the houses and the chasms that
had been left in the town . FAYRER-1900-1,8.192

Landing here one day in a cutter , a heavy surf rolling , as I jumped on
to the landing-place the swell carried away the boat FAYRER-1900-1,8.193

and rolled her over in the surf on the beach , FAYRER-1900-1,8.194

but fortunately no one was drowned . FAYRER-1900-1,8.195

When sailing along the coast between La Guayra and Puerto Cabello , on
one occasion we passed through quantities of dead fish , many of large
size . FAYRER-1900-1,8.196

The only explanation <P_9> suggested was that they had been destroyed by
some sudden submarine volcanic action . FAYRER-1900-1,9.197

We visited also the island of Curacoa , which is remarkable for the size
and importance of its harbour and fortifications . FAYRER-1900-1,9.198

We made more than one visit to Tampico and Vera Cruz in the Gulf of
Mexico , FAYRER-1900-1,9.199

and on one occasion approached Vera Cruz in a heavy gale of wind , a
norther , the force of which was terrific . FAYRER-1900-1,9.200

The surface of the sea was a sheet of foam with a phosphorescent
appearance , FAYRER-1900-1,9.201

and at night it was very wild and impressive . FAYRER-1900-1,9.202

We had some sails blown away , FAYRER-1900-1,9.203

and were in not a little danger , FAYRER-1900-1,9.204

but got in safely . FAYRER-1900-1,9.205

The fortress and walls of San Juan di Ulloa are very strong ;
FAYRER-1900-1,9.206

they are built of porous stone , FAYRER-1900-1,9.207

and several cannon-shot were embedded in them , the remains of some
former siege . FAYRER-1900-1,9.208

The city seemed a neglected , dirty place , full of buzzards that
hovered about or settled in the streets . FAYRER-1900-1,9.209

In one of our trips from Havana to Vera Cruz we had yellow fever <paren>
<font> vomito <$$font> <$$paren> on board FAYRER-1900-1,9.210

and lost one man . FAYRER-1900-1,9.211

This caused considerable consternation ; FAYRER-1900-1,9.212

but the disease did not spread , FAYRER-1900-1,9.213

and we soon forgot all about it . FAYRER-1900-1,9.214

We paid more than one visit to Havana , where friends of my father
received me kindly and took me to the carnival ball at the Tacon Theatre
and to other entertainments ; FAYRER-1900-1,9.215

but the thought of yellow fever somewhat marred the pleasure .
FAYRER-1900-1,9.216

There was a good deal of this in the ships in the harbour at the time :
FAYRER-1900-1,9.217

many had the yellow flag flying or the ensign half-mast high .
FAYRER-1900-1,9.218

We made many trips to the other West_Indian islands ,
FAYRER-1900-1,9.219

but I saw nothing more picturesque than the narrow entrance to the
harbour of Havana , with the castle of the Morro , whence a sentry used
to hail the ships as they passed . FAYRER-1900-1,9.220

We visited Jamaica , FAYRER-1900-1,9.221

and went up to Spanish Town from Port Royal , where the ship lay at
anchor off the palisades : FAYRER-1900-1,9.222

here the sea-breeze , " the Doctor , " was very refreshing in the
tropical heat . FAYRER-1900-1,9.223

Thoughts of yellow fever and the land-crabs , which were said to eat the
bodies of people who were buried there , occurred to me ;
FAYRER-1900-1,9.224

but we all escaped . FAYRER-1900-1,9.225

We went also to St Thomas , where the cool evening air , the bright
starlight , <P_10> and the cheerful society were very charming .
FAYRER-1900-1,10.226

The negroes of St Thomas are polyglots , FAYRER-1900-1,10.227

and it was strange to hear them speak English , French , Dutch , and
Danish . FAYRER-1900-1,10.228

Among other places , we visited the Windward Islands , Barbadoes ,
Grenada , St Vincent , Martinique , Guadaloupe , St Kitt's , the Bahamas
, and Bermudas , FAYRER-1900-1,10.229

and I well remember the lovely scenery and the bright appearance of
these islands . FAYRER-1900-1,10.230

I often went ashore at Barbadoes , FAYRER-1900-1,10.231

and used to go to the hotel of Miss Betsy Austin , the old lady
mentioned in Captain Marryat's novels as giving the Dignity Balls , more
than one of which festivities I have attended . FAYRER-1900-1,10.232

This old lady was very civil to me , having known my father when he was
a lieutenant in a frigate there . FAYRER-1900-1,10.233

At Grenada the ship used to go into a landlocked harbour called the
Carinage , where the water was clear as crystal , and fish , corals ,
and seaweed were visible in its depths . FAYRER-1900-1,10.234

There was a very picturesque little watering-place where the boats used
to fill their casks . FAYRER-1900-1,10.235

Near this on one occasion , tempted by the beautiful water and the warm
air , I stripped FAYRER-1900-1,10.236

and plunged in . FAYRER-1900-1,10.237

When swimming leisurely along not very far from the shore , I suddenly
felt a severe pain in my legs , as if something sharp had penetrated
them : FAYRER-1900-1,10.238

on striking out vigorously , fresh pain followed , FAYRER-1900-1,10.239

and with great difficulty I got into the boat . FAYRER-1900-1,10.240

My legs were bleeding and covered with numerous dark spots .
FAYRER-1900-1,10.241

I had swum among a nest of sea-urchins , which in this part of the world
have spines many inches long . FAYRER-1900-1,10.242

These spines had stuck in my legs and broken off . FAYRER-1900-1,10.243

They took me to an old negro woman's hut not far off ,
FAYRER-1900-1,10.244

and she picked them out with a needle FAYRER-1900-1,10.245

and applied some soothing remedy , FAYRER-1900-1,10.246

but my legs were stiff and sore for some days afterwards .
FAYRER-1900-1,10.247

Subsequently on going over the spot in a boat I saw the sea-urchins in
quantities , FAYRER-1900-1,10.248

and was not astonished at the result of my intrusion into their domain !
FAYRER-1900-1,10.249

There were pleasant walks to visit the sugar-plantations , where I saw
the processes of cane-growing and sugar-making . FAYRER-1900-1,10.250

There was scarcely an island of the group we did not <P_11> visit , many
of them more than once . FAYRER-1900-1,11.251

On one occasion we caught a shark , FAYRER-1900-1,11.252

and once a small coasting vessel lying off one of the harbours was
pointed out to me as the scene of a tragic incident a few days before .
FAYRER-1900-1,11.253

The master , a mulatto , had put his little boy over the side in the
bight of a rope , to teach him to swim . FAYRER-1900-1,11.254

There was a rush , a plunge , a splash , a shriek of terror and pain ,
FAYRER-1900-1,11.255

and the horror-stricken father drew in the upper half of his child , who
had been bitten in two by a shark ! FAYRER-1900-1,11.256

This reminds me of an adventure of my own . FAYRER-1900-1,11.257

We were lying off Hogg Island , New Providence , in the Bahamas ,
FAYRER-1900-1,11.258

and two of us landed on the island in one of the ship's cutters .
FAYRER-1900-1,11.259

On beaching the boat on the sand , the lug-sail was taken down , the
small mizzen left standing , FAYRER-1900-1,11.260

and one man was directed to stay to watch the boat .
FAYRER-1900-1,11.261

We wandered from the shore , FAYRER-1900-1,11.262

and were soon out of sight of her in some sandhills .
FAYRER-1900-1,11.263

After some little time it occurred to me to look from the top of one of
these hills to see if she was all right . FAYRER-1900-1,11.264

What was my dismay to find that she was floating purposelessly about
several hundred yards from the shore , gradually getting out to sea !
FAYRER-1900-1,11.265

I rushed down to the water's edge , FAYRER-1900-1,11.266

pulled off my clothes , all but a pair of cotton drawers , which were
tied below the knee with long tape-strings , FAYRER-1900-1,11.267

went into the water , FAYRER-1900-1,11.268

and struck out for the boat . FAYRER-1900-1,11.269

The man who had been left with her had by this time discovered the
result of his disobedience of orders , FAYRER-1900-1,11.270

and followed me into the water . FAYRER-1900-1,11.271

We were both striking out vigorously for the boat , when something
seemed to seize me by one leg , and the horrid thought flashed across my
mind that a shark had touched me , and would make another attack
immediately . FAYRER-1900-1,11.272

I nearly sank with horror , FAYRER-1900-1,11.273

for I remembered then that the water swarmed with sharks , that they had
been alongside the ship that day , and that a studding-sail which had
been put over the side for people to swim in had been taken in , sharks
coming round it so continuously as to make it dangerous .
FAYRER-1900-1,11.274

However , nothing further happened . FAYRER-1900-1,11.275

I regained my self-possession , FAYRER-1900-1,11.276

reached the boat , FAYRER-1900-1,11.277

and got to her about <P_12> the same time as the man .
FAYRER-1900-1,12.278

We scrambled in FAYRER-1900-1,12.279

and soon got her back to the shore . FAYRER-1900-1,12.280

The feeling of something grasping my leg had been caused by the long
string of my drawers coming untied and wrapping round it as I struck out
. FAYRER-1900-1,12.281

I was now in my eighteenth year , and well grown - not very muscular ,
but active , energetic , and capable of enduring any amount of fatigue
and exertion . FAYRER-1900-1,12.282

I was making considerable progress in my profession ,
FAYRER-1900-1,12.283

could navigate , FAYRER-1900-1,12.284

and could have taken the ship anywhere . FAYRER-1900-1,12.285

I knew the internal economy , the rigging and sails ,
FAYRER-1900-1,12.286

and occasionally during my watch at sea the officer of the watch would
allow me to make or shorten sail , FAYRER-1900-1,12.287

and sometimes I was even left for a short time in charge of the deck .
FAYRER-1900-1,12.288

I was fond of boating , FAYRER-1900-1,12.289

and could sail or steer a cutter as well as any one on board ,
FAYRER-1900-1,12.290

but was not contented , FAYRER-1900-1,12.291

and made up my mind to try and get into the Indian navy , which was open
to a much later age than the British , or if that were not possible ,
into the Indian army . FAYRER-1900-1,12.292

The surgeon of the ship was a great friend of mine .
FAYRER-1900-1,12.293

He often suggested that I should study medicine , FAYRER-1900-1,12.294

and , I fancy , deposited a germ which under favouring influences
developed later into the determination to do so . FAYRER-1900-1,12.295

I made many sketches of headlands and islands as seen from the ship ,
and also of ships - all now lost , as is , I fear , the art that
produced them . FAYRER-1900-1,12.296

Our visit to the West_Indian Islands had terminated at Bermuda as the
last port before we returned to England . FAYRER-1900-1,12.297

On the completion of my third voyage , after having been just a year at
sea , I obtained my father's permission to give it up , seeing no
reasonable prospect of success in that line . FAYRER-1900-1,12.298

I remained with my family at Southampton for some time , studying with a
tutor and making several acquaintances . FAYRER-1900-1,12.299

One was a French <font> emigré , <$$font> M. le Vicomte le Doulcet de
Méry , to whom I was much attached , and with whom I studied French .
FAYRER-1900-1,12.300

He was a most accomplished gentleman and scholar . FAYRER-1900-1,12.301

In 1843 my father , having received an appointment in <P_13> Bermuda ,
was instructed to take out H._M._S. Tenedos , which on arrival was to
be stationed there as a receptacle for prisoners , as Bermuda was then a
convict station . FAYRER-1900-1,13.302

We had a favourable passage out , FAYRER-1900-1,13.303

and I amused myself by working the ship's reckoning .
FAYRER-1900-1,13.304

She was a beautiful frigate , FAYRER-1900-1,13.305

and sailed well . FAYRER-1900-1,13.306

On our arrival she was stationed with two others like herself in the
carinage , an enclosed harbour in Ireland Island , where were the naval
establishment and dockyard . FAYRER-1900-1,13.307

It is a picturesque little island , covered with cedar-trees and smaller
vegetation ; FAYRER-1900-1,13.308

and on it was also the Naval hospital , a beautifully situated and
picturesque spot , and houses of officers and others .
FAYRER-1900-1,13.309

There were several residents , all connected with the naval and military
establishments . FAYRER-1900-1,13.310

Not long after our arrival I completed my nineteenth year ,
FAYRER-1900-1,13.311

and was growing more anxious about my future . FAYRER-1900-1,13.312

I occupied myself with study and drawing , fishing and shooting
occasionally , though there was but little game except when plover or
other birds of passage , visited the island , the denizens being
confined to ground doves and red and blue cardinals .
FAYRER-1900-1,13.313

My future career was determined sooner than seemed probable ,
FAYRER-1900-1,13.314

for not very long after we had been established in the island a severe
epidemic of yellow fever visited us , as it was wont to do at intervals
of some years , FAYRER-1900-1,13.315

and proved very fatal , especially to the troops . FAYRER-1900-1,13.316

I had friends among the naval and military medical officers , chiefly at
the Naval hospital , which was under the charge of Deputy
Inspector-General Dr King . FAYRER-1900-1,13.317

I shall ever remember with gratitude the names of John Page Burke and
Robert Beith , two surgeons at the Naval hospital , who taught me much .
FAYRER-1900-1,13.318

I was strongly impressed during the prevalence of this fever with the
importance of the medical profession , seeing how highly it was valued
and how great an influence its members exercised for good .
FAYRER-1900-1,13.319

The old idea , which had been more than once present in my thoughts ,
recurred , FAYRER-1900-1,13.320

and I determined to enter the Service . FAYRER-1900-1,13.321

The social position of the <P_14> medical officers was good :
FAYRER-1900-1,14.322

their duty was to relieve pain and save life , FAYRER-1900-1,14.323

and nobly they all did it . FAYRER-1900-1,14.324

The youngest of them at that time seemed of more importance than an
admiral or a general , FAYRER-1900-1,14.325

and the science , moreover , was made up of branches of knowledge that
interested me deeply . FAYRER-1900-1,14.326

The epidemic had scarcely ceased ere I saw opportunity of giving effect
to my views ; FAYRER-1900-1,14.327

and at the suggestion of my friends , and by my own express desire , Dr
King was good enough to let me attend the practice of the Naval hospital
and work in the dispensary . FAYRER-1900-1,14.328

Here I made my first acquaintance with the nature and preparation of
drugs , FAYRER-1900-1,14.329

and watched the practice of the medical officers in the wards .
FAYRER-1900-1,14.330

I read hard at osteology , FAYRER-1900-1,14.331

and soon gained a fair knowledge of it . FAYRER-1900-1,14.332

My friends the medical officers took every opportunity of demonstrating
at postmortem examinations all that could in that way be taught of
anatomy , FAYRER-1900-1,14.333

and Burke especially taught me how to apply bandages , splints , &c. ,
and to dress wounds . FAYRER-1900-1,14.334

Here I saw my first important surgical operation , the ligature of the
femoral artery for aneurism . FAYRER-1900-1,14.335

I watched it , not without some qualms - anaesthetics were not then
known - but with intense interest , FAYRER-1900-1,14.336

and never felt any uneasiness after that at the sight of an operation .
FAYRER-1900-1,14.337

In August 1844 it was decided that I should go to London to continue my
studies . FAYRER-1900-1,14.338

My father was guided in this respect by Dr Hall , an old and
distinguished naval surgeon , who recommended strongly that I should
become a pupil at the Charing Cross School of Medicine , and gave me
some introductions . FAYRER-1900-1,14.339

He especially wished me to be under the tutelage of Mr Guthrie , who was
then of great repute in London . FAYRER-1900-1,14.340

My chief recreation was sailing . FAYRER-1900-1,14.341

The Bermuda boats are peculiarly built and rigged .
FAYRER-1900-1,14.342

They are decked , FAYRER-1900-1,14.343

have a cabin and an open space abaft the cabin , and a small space in
front for the men . FAYRER-1900-1,14.344

Their single mast is of great length , stepped near the bow and raking
aft , with a very powerful triangular boom-sail , a short bowsprit , and
a jib . FAYRER-1900-1,14.345

I <P_15> used to spend a good deal of time in a fine one that belonged
to my father , FAYRER-1900-1,15.346

and frequently sailed her amongst the islands , FAYRER-1900-1,15.347

and took my sister to Hamilton for shopping or to visit friends .
FAYRER-1900-1,15.348

It was a long sail from Ireland Island across , and then a considerable
way up the channel between the islands , to Hamilton ;
FAYRER-1900-1,15.349

but I knew the navigation well , FAYRER-1900-1,15.350

and could sail her in any weather . FAYRER-1900-1,15.351

When blowing hard , the jib rolled round the stay , the mainsail reefed
, and the boom well flattened in , these boats will work to windward ,
tacking under the single sail as no other boat in the world , I believe
, will do . FAYRER-1900-1,15.352

They are very wet when pressed , but splendid sea-boats :
FAYRER-1900-1,15.353

their best point of sailing is when close hauled . FAYRER-1900-1,15.354

I had one very sad adventure in this boat . FAYRER-1900-1,15.355

When we started for Hamilton one day the weather was fine but squally ,
FAYRER-1900-1,15.356

and we arrived quickly at our destination . FAYRER-1900-1,15.357

The ladies were some time in town ; FAYRER-1900-1,15.358

the wind had meanwhile freshened , FAYRER-1900-1,15.359

and was blowing hard in gusts . FAYRER-1900-1,15.360

I double-reefed the sail FAYRER-1900-1,15.361

and set the small jib . FAYRER-1900-1,15.362

We got on well till we came to the Sound , where the sea was very heavy
and the wind blowing half a gale or more and right against us .
FAYRER-1900-1,15.363

I soon took in another reef , FAYRER-1900-1,15.364

and was making short tacks across the channel . FAYRER-1900-1,15.365

The jib was pressing her so heavily that I determined to take it off and
work under the reefed mainsail alone . FAYRER-1900-1,15.366

There were two men in the boat , who had on pea-jackets and heavy
sea-boots . FAYRER-1900-1,15.367

I told them what I was going to do , FAYRER-1900-1,15.368

and ordered one man to roll the jib round the stay , a common practice
in a Bermudian boat . FAYRER-1900-1,15.369

When I luffed the boat up and emptied the sail , he stepped out with his
heavy boots and coat on , FAYRER-1900-1,15.370

- he had been told to take them off some time before ,
FAYRER-1900-1,15.371

but had not done so , FAYRER-1900-1,15.372

- unhooked the sheet , FAYRER-1900-1,15.373

and rolled the sail round the stay . FAYRER-1900-1,15.374

All this time the boat was pitching heavily and taking in the water .
FAYRER-1900-1,15.375

As he stepped back his foot slipped FAYRER-1900-1,15.376

and he went overboard . FAYRER-1900-1,15.377

I had put up the helm , FAYRER-1900-1,15.378

and her head had fallen off . FAYRER-1900-1,15.379

Almost before I could realise what had happened he sank with the weight
of his heavy clothes . FAYRER-1900-1,15.380

<P_16>

I threw over all the spare spars I could lay hands on .
FAYRER-1900-1,16.382

The other man was paralysed FAYRER-1900-1,16.383

and could do nothing , the boat meanwhile drifting to leeward .
FAYRER-1900-1,16.384

I pulled off my coat FAYRER-1900-1,16.385

and would have jumped in after him , FAYRER-1900-1,16.386

but the girls came out of the cabin FAYRER-1900-1,16.387

and caught hold of me . FAYRER-1900-1,16.388

I saw him struggling for a moment as a big wave raised him to the line
of vision . FAYRER-1900-1,16.389

I had put the boat about again by this time - FAYRER-1900-1,16.390

she was nearly swamped in doing it - FAYRER-1900-1,16.391

and tacked over the place several times FAYRER-1900-1,16.392

but could see nothing of him : FAYRER-1900-1,16.393

the weight of his clothes had dragged him down . FAYRER-1900-1,16.394

We got home safe but very wet , FAYRER-1900-1,16.395

and I reported the loss of my man . FAYRER-1900-1,16.396

It clearly was no fault of mine , FAYRER-1900-1,16.397

but it made a great impression on me FAYRER-1900-1,16.398

and distressed me much . FAYRER-1900-1,16.399

My brother Robert , midshipman in H._M._S. Endymion , when in command
of a boat going on shore , picked up the body of the man a few days
afterwards . FAYRER-1900-1,16.400

The Endymion left soon after , FAYRER-1900-1,16.401

and I never saw my brother again . FAYRER-1900-1,16.402

On another occasion I was going on board one of the men-of-war , in an
ordinary gig under sail . FAYRER-1900-1,16.403

A sudden squall struck us , FAYRER-1900-1,16.404

the sheet was not let go soon enough , FAYRER-1900-1,16.405

and over we went . FAYRER-1900-1,16.406

She filled and righted , FAYRER-1900-1,16.407

but did not go down : FAYRER-1900-1,16.408

we sat in the swamped boat till another came to our rescue .
FAYRER-1900-1,16.409

It had now been decided that I should go to England in the steamer Tay .
FAYRER-1900-1,16.410

She had been ashore on the Colorados Reefs , Cuba , FAYRER-1900-1,16.411

and , having injured her forefoot badly , was brought into the carinage
, examined , and the extent of the injury ascertained .
FAYRER-1900-1,16.412

A bulkhead was built up , cutting off the engine-room from the fore part
of the ship , FAYRER-1900-1,16.413

and a double sail was passed under her bow . FAYRER-1900-1,16.414

As it was summer , and fine weather might be anticipated , she was
permitted to start on the homeward voyage . FAYRER-1900-1,16.415

It continued fine for some days , FAYRER-1900-1,16.416

then became stormy and wet , FAYRER-1900-1,16.417

and a head wind raised a heavy sea . FAYRER-1900-1,16.418

The captain and officers became anxious , FAYRER-1900-1,16.419

the ship was working heavily , FAYRER-1900-1,16.420

and they found the sail giving way : FAYRER-1900-1,16.421

she was leaking considerably , FAYRER-1900-1,16.422

but the pumps connected with the engine-room so far kept her clear .
FAYRER-1900-1,16.423

One <P_17> night after we had been some time at sea it was blowing hard
, FAYRER-1900-1,17.424

and I walked the deck till late , feeling very anxious .
FAYRER-1900-1,17.425

Having gone below and fallen asleep , I was almost washed out of my
berth by a heavy sea coming through the open port .
FAYRER-1900-1,17.426

I hurried on deck FAYRER-1900-1,17.427

and saw that the smoke from the funnel , instead of flying aft , was
going with the ship . FAYRER-1900-1,17.428

The motion had changed ; FAYRER-1900-1,17.429

she was rolling heavily before the wind instead of pitching in the head
sea . FAYRER-1900-1,17.430

The officer of the watch told me that the ship's course had been changed
to ease her , as the heavy head sea was increasing the leakage .
FAYRER-1900-1,17.431

He was evidently anxious , as was also the captain , who came on deck
frequently . FAYRER-1900-1,17.432

I saw the men on the forecastle suddenly collect round the fore-hatch ,
FAYRER-1900-1,17.433

and looking down , shall never forget what met my view .
FAYRER-1900-1,17.434

The water was pouring in and surging up in volumes ,
FAYRER-1900-1,17.435

and was already on a level with the orlop-deck , FAYRER-1900-1,17.436

but was kept from getting farther aft by the bulkhead put up in Bermuda
. FAYRER-1900-1,17.437

The captain was soon there , FAYRER-1900-1,17.438

the crew were roused , FAYRER-1900-1,17.439

and the passengers gathered together in great alarm .
FAYRER-1900-1,17.440

Extra pumps were rigged and all set to work at them .
FAYRER-1900-1,17.441

The ship soon began to sink much by the head , FAYRER-1900-1,17.442

her stern was raised , FAYRER-1900-1,17.443

and she was steering wildly . FAYRER-1900-1,17.444

The water was washing over and beginning to get farther aft ;
FAYRER-1900-1,17.445

the engine pumps were evidently not acting , FAYRER-1900-1,17.446

and it was ascertained that the pipes leading through the bulkhead had
been choked . FAYRER-1900-1,17.447

In this emergency the second mate - his name , if I recollect rightly ,
was Rivington - dived to the bottom of the seething water , holding to a
rope , FAYRER-1900-1,17.448

and partially freed some of the pipes . FAYRER-1900-1,17.449

Every effort was being made to get the water out , FAYRER-1900-1,17.450

and the passengers as well as the crew were all at work , among them two
French engineers who had been at Panama in connection with the proposed
canal . FAYRER-1900-1,17.451

They were very energetic and urgent about making a raft , though what
they thought we could do with it in that heavy sea I do@ @n't know .
FAYRER-1900-1,17.452

In a roll of the ship one poor fellow was thrown down ,
FAYRER-1900-1,17.453

cut his head open , FAYRER-1900-1,17.454

and bled profusely . FAYRER-1900-1,17.455

I picked him up FAYRER-1900-1,17.456

and bound up the wound . FAYRER-1900-1,17.457

The passengers soon <P_18> went below , FAYRER-1900-1,18.458

and shortly after , when I went down , most of them were assembled in
the saloon at prayers . FAYRER-1900-1,18.459

There were several ladies and some children , FAYRER-1900-1,18.460

and the ladies appeared very calm and tranquil . FAYRER-1900-1,18.461

It was quite believed that the ship was going to sink ,
FAYRER-1900-1,18.462

and it certainly looked very like it . FAYRER-1900-1,18.463

The captain had scarcely been in bed since we left Bermuda ,
FAYRER-1900-1,18.464

and was worn out with fatigue and anxiety . FAYRER-1900-1,18.465

I was too restless and anxious to remain below , FAYRER-1900-1,18.466

and went on deck again . FAYRER-1900-1,18.467

There was a gleam of sunshine , FAYRER-1900-1,18.468

and it was now near noon . FAYRER-1900-1,18.469

The captain got up his sextant FAYRER-1900-1,18.470

and took the sun : FAYRER-1900-1,18.471

there had been no observation for some days , on account of the
thickness of the weather . FAYRER-1900-1,18.472

I took the time for him by the chronometer , FAYRER-1900-1,18.473

and asked him what he thought . FAYRER-1900-1,18.474

He said the only chance for us was to get into the Azores ,
FAYRER-1900-1,18.475

but he feared it was impossible . FAYRER-1900-1,18.476

When he had worked the longitude and ticked off the ship's place on the
chart , he called several of the men passengers into his cabin
FAYRER-1900-1,18.477

and told us our position and the extremity of our danger , which was
obvious . FAYRER-1900-1,18.478

He asked us whether he should try and make for the nearest of the Azores
, Corvo , and run the ship on shore , or whether he should make for the
harbour of Fayal , incurring the risk of sinking in doing so .
FAYRER-1900-1,18.479

I knew well enough that the former plan would be fatal , as it was a
steep and rocky shore , FAYRER-1900-1,18.480

and with Mr Drummond Hay , a passenger , called out , " Try for Fayal .
" FAYRER-1900-1,18.481

Some were clamorous for Corvo as the nearest point of land ,
FAYRER-1900-1,18.482

but it was decided we should make for Fayal . FAYRER-1900-1,18.483

I went on deck FAYRER-1900-1,18.484

and remained there all night . FAYRER-1900-1,18.485

The crew showed symptoms of disorder and a desire to get at drink ,
FAYRER-1900-1,18.486

but the officers kept them in hand . FAYRER-1900-1,18.487

The wind abated a little , FAYRER-1900-1,18.488

but the sea was terrible , the ship rolling heavily and going very
slowly , FAYRER-1900-1,18.489

for the engines were hardly working : FAYRER-1900-1,18.490

it was chiefly by press of canvas we got on . FAYRER-1900-1,18.491

The leak , however , did not seem to increase . FAYRER-1900-1,18.492

We spent a fearful night , FAYRER-1900-1,18.493

for our condition appeared hopeless , FAYRER-1900-1,18.494

I was haunted with the thought of how the end would come , whether by
drowning outright or being crushed in the breaking-up or <P_19> sinking
ship , FAYRER-1900-1,19.495

but kept myself employed as much as possible , FAYRER-1900-1,19.496

and became quite one of the ship's company . FAYRER-1900-1,19.497

When day-light broke the sea had abated FAYRER-1900-1,19.498

and land was in sight . FAYRER-1900-1,19.499

Fresh hope and renewed vigour prevailed , FAYRER-1900-1,19.500

and that morning we ran into the shelter of the Bay of Fayal , where we
found H._M._S. Styx at anchor . FAYRER-1900-1,19.501

She immediately sent assistance FAYRER-1900-1,19.502

and took charge of the ship . FAYRER-1900-1,19.503

The naval lieutenant in charge of the mails made his report , - the
captain being prostrate in his cabin , FAYRER-1900-1,19.504

- and it was determined that we were to land immediately .
FAYRER-1900-1,19.505

I went with some others to a hotel , at the town of Horta ,
FAYRER-1900-1,19.506

and , only too thankful to be on <font> terra firma <$$font> again , lay
down FAYRER-1900-1,19.507

and slept for many hours . FAYRER-1900-1,19.508

Here I saw another capital operation . FAYRER-1900-1,19.509

The medical man practising here came one day FAYRER-1900-1,19.510

and asked the surgeon and me to assist him . FAYRER-1900-1,19.511

We rode some distance into the interior over very rough but picturesque
ground , where I was much struck with the beauty of the vegetation and
the lovely views . FAYRER-1900-1,19.512

Pico , rearing its pyramid-like summit 7000 feet , was a very prominent
object . FAYRER-1900-1,19.513

We found the patient in a small room where there was scarcely space to
perform the operation , which was amputation of the leg .
FAYRER-1900-1,19.514

It was well and successfully done , FAYRER-1900-1,19.515

and we left him in as satisfactory a condition as possible .
FAYRER-1900-1,19.516

In about a week the Tay had been sufficiently patched up to proceed to
England . FAYRER-1900-1,19.517

H._M._S. Styx was to accompany her and see her safely into port ;
FAYRER-1900-1,19.518

but Mr D. Hay , one lady , another man , and myself were the only
passengers who elected to go on in her . FAYRER-1900-1,19.519

The captain had recovered sufficiently to resume the command .
FAYRER-1900-1,19.520

We had a good passage with moderately smooth water until we arrived in
the chops of the Channel , when it again began to blow hard .
FAYRER-1900-1,19.521

We stopped off Plymouth while the Styx ran in to report to the admiral ,
FAYRER-1900-1,19.522

but she was ordered out immediately to accompany us to Southampton .
FAYRER-1900-1,19.523

Our coal was nearly exhausted , FAYRER-1900-1,19.524

and we were sailing very light : FAYRER-1900-1,19.525

the ship was leaking heavily , FAYRER-1900-1,19.526

but the engine pumps were enough to keep us clear as long as the coal
lasted , FAYRER-1900-1,19.527

and if the weather had been fine we <P_20> should have had nothing to
fear . FAYRER-1900-1,20.528

I went to bed , glad in the prospect of being ashore next day :
FAYRER-1900-1,20.529

the weather , however , looked dirty and threatening .
FAYRER-1900-1,20.530

During the night the wind freshened , FAYRER-1900-1,20.531

and in the morning it was so thick we could not see fifty yards ahead .
FAYRER-1900-1,20.532

When we had run by the log so far as to be off the Isle of Wight , we
had lost sight of the Styx , FAYRER-1900-1,20.533

and could see no pilot . FAYRER-1900-1,20.534

We ran on cautiously , FAYRER-1900-1,20.535

and the fog lifting a little , we found we were in sight of St
Catherine's lighthouse , Isle of Wight . FAYRER-1900-1,20.536

We fired guns , FAYRER-1900-1,20.537

but could get no pilot , FAYRER-1900-1,20.538

so in our extremity the captain made a dash for the Needles :
FAYRER-1900-1,20.539

we passed them safely , FAYRER-1900-1,20.540

and got up the Solent . FAYRER-1900-1,20.541

It was a very risky thing to do , FAYRER-1900-1,20.542

but it was our only chance , FAYRER-1900-1,20.543

and fortune favoured us . FAYRER-1900-1,20.544

I heard subsequently that the captain left the ship ,
FAYRER-1900-1,20.545

but did not hear that the second officer , who had behaved so gallantly
when she was in such danger , ever got any reward for his conduct .
FAYRER-1900-1,20.546

On arriving in London the next day I went to look for my aunt ,
FAYRER-1900-1,20.547

but found that she had left and the house was shut up .
FAYRER-1900-1,20.548

I then went to my cousin , the Rev. Robert Fayrer , who had a living in
Camberwell , FAYRER-1900-1,20.549

but he was too far off , FAYRER-1900-1,20.550

so I found some lodgings near Russell Square , FAYRER-1900-1,20.551

and immediately set about making arrangements for joining Charing Cross
School of Medicine . FAYRER-1900-1,20.552

<P_21>

<heading>

Chapter II . FAYRER-1900-1,21.555

Professional life in England and on the Continent .
FAYRER-1900-1,21.556

<$$heading>

Following Dr Hall's advice , I entered at the Charing Cross School of
Medicine FAYRER-1900-1,21.558

and registered my name as a student at the Royal College of Surgeons in
1844 . FAYRER-1900-1,21.559

About the same time a fellow-student joined me in lodgings ,
FAYRER-1900-1,21.560

and we began to study Anatomy , Physiology , Chemistry , &c.
FAYRER-1900-1,21.561

I was especially interested in Mr Wharton Jones' lectures on Physiology
. FAYRER-1900-1,21.562

At these lectures T. H. Huxley sat by my side , FAYRER-1900-1,21.563

and he it was who first directed my attention to their great interest
and importance . FAYRER-1900-1,21.564

At the end of the session I got several prizes , and a scholarship of 15
+L {TEXT:+L15} a-year for two years . FAYRER-1900-1,21.565

W. G. Hunter , subsequently Surgeon-General of the Bombay Army ,
Lambden , and T. H. Huxley , were my <P_22> chief friends among the
students . FAYRER-1900-1,22.566

During the summer session I attended lectures on Botany , Chemistry ,
and Natural History . FAYRER-1900-1,22.567

We generally worked every night , FAYRER-1900-1,22.568

but occasionally went to the theatre . FAYRER-1900-1,22.569

The chief actors at that time were Charles Keane and Mrs Keane ,
Macready , Wallack , Buxton , Keeley , Bedford , Wright , Farran ,
Charles Mathews and Mrs Mathews , and Mrs Stirling .
FAYRER-1900-1,22.570

I knew some of them personally , FAYRER-1900-1,22.571

and saw them all in their best parts ; FAYRER-1900-1,22.572

in fact , this was my only relaxation . FAYRER-1900-1,22.573

Upon the whole , I led a studious and hard-working life , being very
anxious to get on . FAYRER-1900-1,22.574

I was in my twenty-first year , FAYRER-1900-1,22.575

was of a nervous temperament , FAYRER-1900-1,22.576

felt and thought deeply about my work , FAYRER-1900-1,22.577

and had great perseverance , not readily relinquishing an idea after it
had once taken possession of me ; FAYRER-1900-1,22.578

rather versatile , and apt to be diverted from the subject before me by
something which arose out of it . FAYRER-1900-1,22.579

The life was very different to that to which I had hitherto been
accustomed , FAYRER-1900-1,22.580

and on looking back it seems to me that it was as great a struggle as
usually falls to the lot of a young student . FAYRER-1900-1,22.581

At the end of my second year's study I visited my aunt in Westmorland
FAYRER-1900-1,22.582

and made some new acquaintances , amongst others Miss Rodick , now Mrs
Lewis of Hollington . FAYRER-1900-1,22.583

I was appointed house surgeon of the Westminster Ophthalmic Hospital
under the Guthries , father and son , and Mr Hancock .
FAYRER-1900-1,22.584

I soon acquired their confidence , FAYRER-1900-1,22.585

and Mr Guthrie was very kind , often asking me to his house and taking
me with him to surgical operations . FAYRER-1900-1,22.586

Besides eye cases , we frequently had in the hospital selected cases of
other kinds , FAYRER-1900-1,22.587

and these were under my care . FAYRER-1900-1,22.588

I was also attending lectures on zoology at King's College by Rymer
Jones , on botany at the Apothecaries' Gardens in Chelsea by Professor
Lindley , and lectures and clinical instruction in the wards at Hanwell
by Dr Conolly , the great alienist physician , who was the first to
introduce milder measures in the treatment of insanity .
FAYRER-1900-1,22.589

I visited the other hospitals to see the great surgeons operate ,
FAYRER-1900-1,22.590

and made acquaintance with Fergusson at King's College , who was <P_23>
then rising into fame . FAYRER-1900-1,23.591

Surgery , Medicine , Midwifery , Medical Jurisprudence , and the more
advanced branches of medicine , now formed part of my study .
FAYRER-1900-1,23.592

The time came for the examination of the College of Surgeons , July 1847
. FAYRER-1900-1,23.593

Through some mistake of name , I was twice called out of the
waiting-room , led up into the examination hall , and then sent back
again . FAYRER-1900-1,23.594

My turn came at last . FAYRER-1900-1,23.595

Guthrie sat at the first table with Keate , who examined me .
FAYRER-1900-1,23.596

We had a little difference of opinion about the base of the skull ,
Guthrie listening with interest . FAYRER-1900-1,23.597

It appeared the examiner meant the inside , while I was decribing the
outside . FAYRER-1900-1,23.598

He recognizsed this FAYRER-1900-1,23.599

and was satisfied . FAYRER-1900-1,23.600

Guthrie immediately said , " I thought he knew it . "
FAYRER-1900-1,23.601

I got well over this table , FAYRER-1900-1,23.602

had no difficulty with Andrews , Green , Liston , and the other
examiners , FAYRER-1900-1,23.603

and soon heard my name called out among the passed .
FAYRER-1900-1,23.604

I went immediately to inform my father and mother , who were in London ,
having recently returned from Bermuda , chiefly on account of his health
. FAYRER-1900-1,23.605

Not long after this they went to live in Jersey . FAYRER-1900-1,23.606

