<BEGIN_fayrer-1900-2>

<P_23>

I was now anxious to get an appointment , FAYRER-1900-2,23.3

and my kind friend Mr Guthrie wrote to the Naval Director-General , Sir
William Burnett , FAYRER-1900-2,23.4

and not long afterwards I received a summons to Somerset House , where
Sir William examined me in Latin <paren> Celsus <$$paren> , the
Pharmacopeia , and a variety of medical and surgical matters , and said
I might soon expect an appointment . FAYRER-1900-2,23.5

The summons came shortly afterwards in the form of a letter dated 4th
August 1847 , enclosing my commission to H._M._S. Victory , for service
at Haslar Hospital , and directing me to report myself there at once .
FAYRER-1900-2,23.6

About this time Mr Guthrie informed me that he wished me to travel with
the Earl of Mount-Edgcumbe , who thought of wintering in Egypt .
FAYRER-1900-2,23.7

On my reminding him that I was under orders to join the Victory , he
advised me to go and take up my appointment and wait .
FAYRER-1900-2,23.8

I accordingly went to Portsmouth , FAYRER-1900-2,23.9

was placed on the books of the Victory , FAYRER-1900-2,23.10

reported myself at Haslar , FAYRER-1900-2,23.11

and was posted to a division for duty . FAYRER-1900-2,23.12

Thus commenced my life as a medical <P_24> officer .
FAYRER-1900-2,24.13

Before proceeding further , I must revert to some incidents connected
with my student life . FAYRER-1900-2,24.14

Guthrie , the authority on military surgery of those days , was a
kind-hearted , noble-looking old gentleman , though abrupt and somewhat
brusque in manner . FAYRER-1900-2,24.15

When I was presented to him as a possible house-surgeon , he said , " Do
you think you are fit for the work ? " FAYRER-1900-2,24.16

I replied , " I do@ @n't know , FAYRER-1900-2,24.17

but should like to try . " FAYRER-1900-2,24.18

" And you shall try , " was the reply . FAYRER-1900-2,24.19

We got on very well together . FAYRER-1900-2,24.20

I carried out his orders to the letter , FAYRER-1900-2,24.21

and in an emergency acted for myself , which seemed to please him .
FAYRER-1900-2,24.22

One day when we were going round the wards , with a large following of
distinguished visitors , foreign surgeons and others , we stopped at an
interesting case , where he found fault with the dresser for something
he had done or left undone . FAYRER-1900-2,24.23

The student made some reply , FAYRER-1900-2,24.24

and Guthrie said , " I dare@ @say you think yourself a devilish clever
fellow , do@ @n't you ? " FAYRER-1900-2,24.25

" No , sir , I do@ @n't , " was the reply . FAYRER-1900-2,24.26

" But you are though , " said Guthrie , FAYRER-1900-2,24.27

and we passed on . FAYRER-1900-2,24.28

On one occasion , I worked very hard at a dissection of the nerves of
the head and face which Guthrie wanted for a lecture .
FAYRER-1900-2,24.29

I was very busy at the time with my studies and hospital work ,
FAYRER-1900-2,24.30

and was obliged to dissect at night as well as during my intervals of
leisure in the daytime . FAYRER-1900-2,24.31

The close application made me ill , FAYRER-1900-2,24.32

and feeling feverish one night on going to bed , I woke with a sore
throat and difficulty of breathing , FAYRER-1900-2,24.33

and was taken into an upper room , the surgeons coming into it
frequently to look at me : FAYRER-1900-2,24.34

the instruments for tracheotomy were laid out and other preparations
made for opening my windpipe . FAYRER-1900-2,24.35

The danger passed , however , without this operation .
FAYRER-1900-2,24.36

During my student life in London many of my father's old friends came to
see me , among them the Bishop of Norwich , whose receptions I used to
attend , Captain Lord Adolphus FitzClarence , Colonel Upton , and others
. FAYRER-1900-2,24.37

T. H. Huxley , who was then my most intimate friend at the hospital ,
was a year my senior as a student though <P_25> of the same age .
FAYRER-1900-2,25.38

He had just completed his medical studies , having passed at the
University of London . FAYRER-1900-2,25.39

In talking over plans for the future he said how much he wished to go
abroad for the purpose of studying natural history FAYRER-1900-2,25.40

and I recommended him to enter the navy , FAYRER-1900-2,25.41

and told him how it was to be effected . FAYRER-1900-2,25.42

A long conference ended in our concocting a letter to Sir W. Burnett ,
which resulted in his appointment to Haslar and subsequently to the
Rattlesnake , Captain Owen Stanley , son of the Bishop of Norwich .
FAYRER-1900-2,25.43

He went with her in the surveying expedition to Borneo , where he
commenced those investigations which led to his future eminence as a
biologist . FAYRER-1900-2,25.44

He had already distinguished himself by some researches , one of his
earliest investigations being into the structure of the hair-bulb .
FAYRER-1900-2,25.45

Before he left , his brother gave a dinner-party . FAYRER-1900-2,25.46

Huxley appeared in his uniform as an assistant surgeon with one
epaulette , FAYRER-1900-2,25.47

and sundry speeches were made in which he and I took part .
FAYRER-1900-2,25.48

In his history of himself he says that I had much to do with the
initiating of his scientific career . FAYRER-1900-2,25.49

I sometimes went down to Greenwich to see Beith , Cullen , and others of
my old Bermuda naval friends , Hassard , R. A. , and Nichol , formerly
of the 20th , then in the Grenadier Guards . FAYRER-1900-2,25.50

During the course of my studies I gained several certificates and medals
in addition to those already mentioned , FAYRER-1900-2,25.51

and was elected a fellow of the Geographical , a corresponding member of
the Zoological , and a member of the Hakluyt Societies , through my
father's influence . FAYRER-1900-2,25.52

When I joined Haslar in 1847 , Sir Edward Parry was the Admiral
Superintendent and Sir John Richardson the head of the medical
department of the hospital . FAYRER-1900-2,25.53

They were both friends of my father's , FAYRER-1900-2,25.54

and it was strange that these two Arctic explorers should have been
associated here . FAYRER-1900-2,25.55

My comrades among the assistant surgeons were Dr <paren> subsequently
Sir <$$paren> Andrew Clark , who became President of the Royal College
of Physicians of London ; Dr Breen , Dr Arthur Adams , and one other
whose name I can@ @not recall . FAYRER-1900-2,25.56

<P_26>

After a few weeks of ordinary routine duty , I one day received a note
from Lord Mount-Edgcumbe asking me to visit him at Ryde ,
FAYRER-1900-2,26.58

and went by steamer from Southsea . FAYRER-1900-2,26.59

Amongst the passengers were two French gentlemen with whom I entered
into conversation . FAYRER-1900-2,26.60

The younger one was very agreeable , FAYRER-1900-2,26.61

and on landing an acquaintance who recognised them told me that they
were Prince Louis Napoleon and Dr Conneau of Ham celebrity .
FAYRER-1900-2,26.62

I little thought that my <font> compagnon_de_voyage <$$font> was one day
to be Emperor of the French ! FAYRER-1900-2,26.63

Lord Mount-Edgcumbe told me that Sir Benjamin Brodie and Mr Guthrie had
recommended him to take me with him as his medical adviser on the
Continent . FAYRER-1900-2,26.64

He had thought of Egypt , FAYRER-1900-2,26.65

but now contemplated visiting the South of Europe . FAYRER-1900-2,26.66

My reply was that I should have been delighted , but had accepted a
commission in the navy , and was now on duty at Haslar .
FAYRER-1900-2,26.67

He said that if I were willing to go he thought he could get over the
difficulty . FAYRER-1900-2,26.68

He considered me very young , FAYRER-1900-2,26.69

but from all he had heard he was satisified . FAYRER-1900-2,26.70

Late one evening , a few days afterwards , I had a message from Lord
John Hay , Secretary to the Admiralty , asking me to go and see him next
morning . FAYRER-1900-2,26.71

Late as it was , I went over to see Sir Edward Parry and Sir John
Richardson , FAYRER-1900-2,26.72

showed them Lord John Hay's letter , FAYRER-1900-2,26.73

and received permission to go to town . FAYRER-1900-2,26.74

Lord John <paren> Lord Auckland was at that time First Lord <$$paren>
told me Lord Mount-Edgcumbe had asked permission for me to accompany him
on his travels for a year . FAYRER-1900-2,26.75

There was no precedent for giving leave in this manner to a young
officer who had so recently joined , FAYRER-1900-2,26.76

but I could resign my commission temporarily and resume it again on my
return . FAYRER-1900-2,26.77

I found Lord and Lady Mount-Edgcumbe and their party waiting at Dover .
FAYRER-1900-2,26.78

The weather was stormy FAYRER-1900-2,26.79

and our crossing was delayed . FAYRER-1900-2,26.80

I had to prescribe for Lord Mount-Edgcumbe that evening ,
FAYRER-1900-2,26.81

and I may say that I had their confidence , FAYRER-1900-2,26.82

and experienced the greatest kindness from them ever afterwards .
FAYRER-1900-2,26.83

<P_27>

It was in the month of October 1847 that we left Dover , crossed to
Boulogne , and the next day set out in carriages to Cologne , passing
through St Omer , Liège {TEXT:Liége} , and other places .
FAYRER-1900-2,27.85

At Cologne we visited all the sights of the town , including the
cathedral , then unfinished , with the relics of the three kings , and
also the bones of St Ursula's virgins . FAYRER-1900-2,27.86

We went by Rhine steamer to Mayence . FAYRER-1900-2,27.87

I was delighted with the scenery of the Rhine , the Drachenfels , the
castles and towns we passed , FAYRER-1900-2,27.88

and was specially interested in the great fortress of Ehrenbreitstein .
FAYRER-1900-2,27.89

We drove on through Mannheim and Heidelberg , where we saw the castle
and the lovely valley of the Neckar , to Basle , where we spent a night
at the Hotel of the Three Kings , the blue Rhine flowing under the
windows . FAYRER-1900-2,27.90

I walked about the town FAYRER-1900-2,27.91

and saw as much as possible , including the cathedral and Holbein's
Dance of Death . FAYRER-1900-2,27.92

From Basle we drove to Zurich , thence to Berne , on to Ragatz , and
over the Splügen by the Via Mala into Italy . FAYRER-1900-2,27.93

I was much impressed by the grandeur of the scenery as we ascended the
Via Mala , and much disappointed after we crossed the pass into Italy to
find the view obscured by dense mist . FAYRER-1900-2,27.94

We stopped at Lecco , and Varenna on the Lake of Como ,
FAYRER-1900-2,27.95

and thence drove to Milan , where we saw the beautiful cathedral of
white marble with its treasures , and also the Last Supper of Leonardo
da Vinci . FAYRER-1900-2,27.96

We went to Genoa for a day or two , FAYRER-1900-2,27.97

and I saw the Doria and other palaces , with the beautiful public
gardens . FAYRER-1900-2,27.98

On our way south we stopped at Chiaveri , where mosquitos swarmed .
FAYRER-1900-2,27.99

We passed the Gulf of Spezzia FAYRER-1900-2,27.100

and saw the place where Shelley was drowned . FAYRER-1900-2,27.101

Thence we drove on to Pisa , where I was much interested in the
cathedral , the Campo Santo , the baptistery , and the leaning tower .
FAYRER-1900-2,27.102

In the university of Pavia I saw the head of Scarpa the great anatomist
, which was preserved in spirit . FAYRER-1900-2,27.103

At Leghorn we embarked for Naples , where I availed myself of the
opportunity to see as much as possible , including the Museo Borbonico ,
Herculaneum , and Pompeii . FAYRER-1900-2,27.104

From the last place I ascended Vesuvius with two companions and <P_28> a
guide . FAYRER-1900-2,28.105

On reaching the top , and when looking into the crater , an eruption of
ashes and scoriae took place . FAYRER-1900-2,28.106

Fortunately we were on the windward side , FAYRER-1900-2,28.107

and all that went into the air fell to leeward . FAYRER-1900-2,28.108

It was a grand sight , FAYRER-1900-2,28.109

but we were in some danger . FAYRER-1900-2,28.110

The guide disappeared at once , FAYRER-1900-2,28.111

and my companions followed him down the other side of the mountain .
FAYRER-1900-2,28.112

I found my way to the Hermitage , FAYRER-1900-2,28.113

and got home to Naples late . FAYRER-1900-2,28.114

We visited other interesting places , such as Posilippo and Baiae ;
FAYRER-1900-2,28.115

but we were not able , on account of the unfavourable weather , to see
Capri and its blue grotto . FAYRER-1900-2,28.116

I was fortunate in my experience of Vesuvius , as it is not every one
who has been on the top , looked into the crater , and seen such an
outburst . FAYRER-1900-2,28.117

We remained three or four days at Naples , FAYRER-1900-2,28.118

and then went by steamer to Palermo . FAYRER-1900-2,28.119

In the way , at night , I saw the volcanic light from the top of
Stromboli . FAYRER-1900-2,28.120

