<BEGIN_ferguson-1756-2>

<P_33>

<heading>

CHAP. II . FERGUSON-1756-2,33.4

<font> The Truth of the <$$font> Solar System <font> demonstrated ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,33.5

and the Appearances resulting from the Earth's motion described .
<$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,33.6

<$$heading>

101. All matter is of itself unactive , and indifferent to motion or
rest . FERGUSON-1756-2,33.8

If it be once at rest it can never put itself in motion ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,33.9

and if once in motion it can never stop of itself .
FERGUSON-1756-2,33.10

A stone lying on any part of the Earth's surface can never remove itself
to any other part ; FERGUSON-1756-2,33.11

and a ball discharged from a cannon would go on for ever in a straight
line if the air did not resist it's motion , and gravity bring it down
to the Earth . FERGUSON-1756-2,33.12

The resistance that a ball meets with in the air is greater than most
people imagine : FERGUSON-1756-2,33.13

for it is evident from experiments made with the air-pump , that the
pressure of the air is equal to 14 pounds weight on every square inch of
all terrestrial bodies ; FERGUSON-1756-2,33.14

and as every square inch of the foremost side of a cannon_ball
encounters a resistance of 14 pounds weight , the motion of the ball
must be gradually lessened by that resistance , 'till gravity sinks it
to the Earth in spight of the impulse . FERGUSON-1756-2,33.15

It is true , we feel no resistance in walking when the air is still and
calm about us ; FERGUSON-1756-2,33.16

and the reason is , because we are equally pressed on all sides by it :
as a diver , let him descend ever so deep , feels no weight of the water
that is above him , because it is counterbalanced by the water on all
sides and below him . FERGUSON-1756-2,33.17

But , if he comes out , and has as much of the same water put on his
back as was over him when diving , he will not be able to support the
weight . FERGUSON-1756-2,33.18

So , if all the air , save what is before us , were taken away , that
which remains would not only hinder us from going against it ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,33.19

but would beat us back by an irresistible force . FERGUSON-1756-2,33.20

Now , the motion of a bullet being so quick as not to give time for the
air to close in behind it , leaves a vacuum there ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,33.21

and consequently the bullet is resisted by a column before it equal in
thickness to itself . FERGUSON-1756-2,33.22

If there were no air , and the bullet were projected from the cannon in
an horizontal direction , and with a force equal to the power of gravity
, or the Earth's attraction on the bullet , it would then , if not
hindered by interposing hills or other obstacles , go round the Earth ,
and at it's return strike against the breech of the cannon .
FERGUSON-1756-2,33.23

102. That there is such a power as gravity in the Earth , drawing all
bodies on or near it's surface towards it's center , is evident from the
descent of bodies in right lines perpendicular to it's surface ; let
<P_34> them be thrown directly upwards , from any part of the Earth
whatsoever . FERGUSON-1756-2,34.24

For what else could determine bodies , thrown upwards from opposite
sides of the Earth , to fall towards it's center , in directions quite
opposite to one another ? FERGUSON-1756-2,34.25

103. All motion is naturally rectilineal , as is shewn by a ball struck
by any power , and thereby driven along a plane surface :
FERGUSON-1756-2,34.26

for the ball continues it's motion in a straight line , unless it has
some bias {TEXT:biass} in itself , or is drawn aside by some other power
. FERGUSON-1756-2,34.27

And , if a ball be put into a sling and whirled about one's head , if
the sling breaks the ball flies off in a straight line touching the
circle it described before ; which plainly shews that curvilineal motion
is not natural to it ; but that one power is required to put the ball in
rectilineal motion , and another to keep in a circle .
FERGUSON-1756-2,34.28

104. The Satellites of Jupiter and Saturn move round their primary
Planets ; which demonstrates that there is such a power as gravity in
those Planets : FERGUSON-1756-2,34.29

and we find by observation that this power is exactly in proportion to
the quantity of matter , or solid contents , of the Planets ; without
any regard to their quantity of surface . FERGUSON-1756-2,34.30

We likewise find that the Planets Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter , and
Saturn , all move round the Sun , and not round the Earth which proves
gravity to be much stronger in the Sun than in the Earth :
FERGUSON-1756-2,34.31

and it is well known that the Sun is not only much bigger than the Earth
, but that he is 580 times bigger than all the Planets taken together .
FERGUSON-1756-2,34.32

We see the apparent bulk of the Sun , FERGUSON-1756-2,34.33

and it shall be shewn in the sixth Chapter that he is at least 81
millions of miles from us : FERGUSON-1756-2,34.34

now , to appear so big as he does at that distance , a little Geometry
will prove that he must be more than 800_thousand times bigger than the
Earth , whose bulk is tolerably well known . FERGUSON-1756-2,34.35

It is plain that the Earth's Orbit is situated between the Orbits of
Venus and Mars ; FERGUSON-1756-2,34.36

and there is no reason why we should not believe , nay it is impossible
to doubt it , that the Earth is in the same manner affected and governed
by the same attractive power which takes hold of these two Planets ,
keeps them from flying off in straight lines from their Orbits , and
reaches indefinitely far beyond them . FERGUSON-1756-2,34.37

To say <font> it does not <$$font> would be as absurd as to say that six
cannon bullets might be fired perpendicularly up to different heights in
the air , and that they should all come down save one , which was
neither the highest nor the lowest and that <font> that <$$font> one
should remain in the open air , and the Earth begin and continue to move
round about it . FERGUSON-1756-2,34.38

The Moon is well known to be almost fifty times less than the Earth ,
and to revolve about it ; because she is more attracted by the Earth
than the Earth can be by her : FERGUSON-1756-2,34.39

but , <P_35> that her attraction reaches to the Earth appears by her
raising the tides . FERGUSON-1756-2,35.40

105. The stronger any circulating body is attracted by a central body ,
the greater must be the projectile force impressed upon the former to
keep it from falling upon the latter . FERGUSON-1756-2,35.41

The relative distances of all the Planets from the Sun , and the times
of their going round him , are ascertained by observation :
FERGUSON-1756-2,35.42

and we find , by the times in which the Planets go round the Sun , and
the Satellites round their primary Planets , that gravity throughout the
whole System decreases as the squares of the distances of the revolving
bodies increase . That is , if one Planet be twice as far from the Sun
, or one Satellite twice as far from it's primary Planet , as another ,
the remotest is attracted only by a fourth part of the force that acts
on the nearest ; if three times as far , only by a ninth part of the
force ; if four times as far , by a sixteenth part of the force ; and so
on . FERGUSON-1756-2,35.43

By this we know how heavy any body would be upon the Sun , and upon
those Planets which have Moons going round them . FERGUSON-1756-2,35.44

A body that weighs only one pound on the Earth would be half as heavy
again on Saturn , twice as heavy on Jupiter , and 24 times as heavy on
the Sun . FERGUSON-1756-2,35.45

Therefore any creature , that might be supposed to live upon the Sun ,
and upon the different Planets , at different times , would carry a body
weighing 24 pounds upon the Earth with the same degree of strength that
he could carry a 24th part of that body upon the Sun , or a 12th part of
it upon Jupiter , or a 16th part of it upon Saturn .
FERGUSON-1756-2,35.46

The gravities of bodies , or their respective weights , on the surfaces
of Mercury , Venus , and Mars , are unknown to us , because we see no
Moons revolving about those Planets by which we might estimate their
densities . FERGUSON-1756-2,35.47

106. There is no such thing in nature as a great body moving round a
small one . FERGUSON-1756-2,35.48

A pebble tied to a millstone by a packthread at some length , and struck
with a hammer in an horizontal direction , crosswise to the packthread ,
will go round and round the millstone , without removing the millstone
from the place where it lies . FERGUSON-1756-2,35.49

But , as Mr. Whiston says , we may just as well expect that a sling ,
containing a millstone in it , may be fastened to a pebble , and
continue it's motion round that pebble without removing it , as that the
Sun and Planets can revolve about the Earth , while the Earth keeps at
rest in the Center of the System . FERGUSON-1756-2,35.50

107. Again ; let us suppose a first_rate ship , at rest on still water
, to have one end of a rope tied to her and the other end to a small
<P_36> boat , FERGUSON-1756-2,36.51

and let a man , either in the ship or boat , pull the rope ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,36.52

it matters not at which end he pulls , FERGUSON-1756-2,36.53

for the rope will be equally stretched at both ends ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,36.54

and the ship and boat will undoubtedly be drawn towards one another ,
with this difference , that the boat will move as much faster than the
ship as the ship is heavier than the boat . FERGUSON-1756-2,36.55

Now while one man pulls the rope , endeavouring to bring the ship and
boat together , let another in the boat endeavour to row her off
sidewise , or at right angles to the rope , with a force equal to that
with which the other endeavours to haul her up to the ship ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,36.56

and he will immediately find that instead of proceeding in a straight
line to the ship , the boat will go round and round her :
FERGUSON-1756-2,36.57

and so , putting it out of the other person's power to bring the ship
and boat together , they will keep at the rope's length from each other
, FERGUSON-1756-2,36.58

and the ship will be agitated by a small motion round the middle or
center of the place where she lay at rest before , section
{TEXT:symbol_for_section} 19 . FERGUSON-1756-2,36.59

Here the strength employed to draw the ship and boat together represents
the mutual attraction of the Sun and Planets , by which the Planets
would fall freely towards the Sun with a quick motion , and would also ,
in falling , attract the Sun towards them ; FERGUSON-1756-2,36.60

and the strength employed to row off the boat represents the projectile
force impressed on the planets at right angles , or nearly so , to the
lines of the Sun's attraction , by which means the Planets move round
the Sun , and are kept from falling to him : FERGUSON-1756-2,36.61

but by their moving round and mutually attracting him , he is agitated
with a small motion round the Center of the System .
FERGUSON-1756-2,36.62

But , if a brisk gale arises , sufficient to move the ship , and the
mariners hoist up her sails to the wind , the man in the boat will be
quite unable to keep it steady in it's place so as to make the ship sail
round him ; FERGUSON-1756-2,36.63

for the ship will go before the wind , dragging the boat very easily
after her , FERGUSON-1756-2,36.64

and would do the same with several small boats fastened to her in like
manner . FERGUSON-1756-2,36.65

Just so , if any power should move the Sun out of his place , he would
draw the Earth with all the other Planets after him
FERGUSON-1756-2,36.66

and if all the Planets were united together in one , the mass could not
remain fixed in any part of Space to keep the Sun circulating in an
Orbit round it : FERGUSON-1756-2,36.67

much less can this little Earth remain fixed , and keep the Sun and
Planets revolving about it . FERGUSON-1756-2,36.68

The present Lord Bishop of <font> Clogher <$$font> hath very elegantly
illustrated this matter , in his Vindication of the Histories of the Old
and New Testament , Part II. pag. 58 ; where he shews that it is
impossible for a great body to move round a small one , whilst they
mutually attract each other ; FERGUSON-1756-2,36.69

for the weaker power must still yield to the stronger .
FERGUSON-1756-2,36.70

<P_37>

108. It is true that the Sun not only seems to change his visible place
so as to go round the Earth every 24 hours , but that moreover he seems
to make a Tour round the Starry Heavens every year .
FERGUSON-1756-2,37.72

And , could we perceive the Stars in the day-time , we should see them
every day gain upon the Sun 3 minutes 56 seconds , crossing the Meridian
so much sooner than on the day before , which is a 365th part of an
apparent Revolution : FERGUSON-1756-2,37.73

and by that means they appear to revolve about the Earth once more in a
year than the Sun does . FERGUSON-1756-2,37.74

By telescopes we can see the Stars in the day-time ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,37.75

and observations prove that they make 366 apparent Revolutions in 365
days . FERGUSON-1756-2,37.76

Hence any given Star which passes over the Meridian at noon , suppose on
the 20th of <font> June , <$$font> will pass over it at midnight on the
20th of <font> December . <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,37.77

But we must own it to be highly improbable that these motions and
changes of place can be owing to any real motion either of the Sun or
Stars : FERGUSON-1756-2,37.78

for , considering the immense distances of the Stars , section
{TEXT:symbol_for_section} 10 , a motion that would carry them round the
Earth every 24 hours would be incomparably quicker than if all the water
in our rivers , seas , and oceans , should run through the hollow of a
swan's quill in a minute . FERGUSON-1756-2,37.79

The Earth's Orbit , though 162 millions of miles in diameter , is no
bigger than a Point when viewed from the fixed Stars ; as is evident
from their apparent places and magnitudes not being sensibly changed by
the Earth's coming 162 millions of miles nearer to some of them at one
time of the year than another . FERGUSON-1756-2,37.80

And yet the Earth , to go round the Sun but once a year , in this so
comparatively small an Orbit , must move at the rate of
58_thousand_and_80 miles every hour . FERGUSON-1756-2,37.81

But it is easy to compute that , if the Sun were to go round the Earth
in 24 hours , he must travel at the rate of 21_millions_213_thousand_720
miles every hour ; which , though more than a cannon_ball could do in 5
years , would yet be no more in proportion to the motion of the Stars
than 1 is to 10_thousand_210 . FERGUSON-1756-2,37.82

We have no ideas for such incomprehensibly swift motions ; which , were
they real , could answer no other ends than what are gained by the Earth
turning round it's Axis every 24 hours from West to East <paren> causing
thereby an apparent diurnal motion of the Sun from East to West
<$$paren> , and it's going also round the Sun once a year , which causes
him to have an apparent annual motion round the Starry Heavens , and the
Stars to gain so much upon the Sun every day as to make 366 apparent
Revolutions in 365 days which we shall try to illustrate by the
following simile . FERGUSON-1756-2,37.83

109. Let us imagine a prodigious large room , of a round form , all
hung with pictures of men , women , birds , beasts , fishes ; the floor
covered with water deep enough to carry a boat with a person <P_38>
sitting still In it ; and that there is a great taper burning in the
midst of the room , the flame being of equal height with the person's
head from the water . FERGUSON-1756-2,38.84

If a diver under the boat , unknown to and unperceived by this person ,
should turn it gently and equably round and round , as on an Axis ,
giving it at the same time a slow progressive motion round the Taper ,
the same way , but so as to turn it 365 times round it's Axis while it
went once round the Taper , to the person in the boat the whole room and
taper would seem to go round the contrary way every time the boat turned
round ; FERGUSON-1756-2,38.85

the flame would appear to change it's place gradually among the pictures
, so as to make a Tour round the room among them in every Revolution of
the boat round the Taper . FERGUSON-1756-2,38.86

And in that time the observer would be turned so much sooner towards any
particular picture than to the taper , in each turning of the boat ,
that the whole room and pictures would seem to go once more round him
than the taper did . FERGUSON-1756-2,38.87

The application is obvious , if we imagine the pictured room to
represent the visible Heavens set all round with Stars ranged in
different Constellations , the taper the Sun , and the boat the Earth .
FERGUSON-1756-2,38.88

110. It is well known to all who have been at sea , that let the ship
sail ever so fast they feel not her progressive motion .
FERGUSON-1756-2,38.89

If she proceeds forward , to persons looking out of the cabin windows
all quiescent objects in view seem to move ; FERGUSON-1756-2,38.90

and if she turns round , the objects appear to turn the contrary way .
FERGUSON-1756-2,38.91

For , all parts of the ship being relatively at rest , with respect to
the people in it the whole appears to stand still FERGUSON-1756-2,38.92

and the sailors having the ship's motion communicated to them can walk
as well to and fro on the deck , and even play at tennis , as if they
were on dry land . FERGUSON-1756-2,38.93

But if the ship strikes against any obstacle they , like all other
matter , endeavouring naturally to keep the motion communicated to them
find it difficult to avoid falling towards that obstacle .
FERGUSON-1756-2,38.94

111. The motion of the Earth is incomparably more smooth and uniform
than that of a ship , or any other machine made and moved by human art ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,38.95

and therefore we feel it so much the less . FERGUSON-1756-2,38.96

And being carried round with the Earth , in the order , West , South ,
East , North , which are points only relative to ourselves on this Earth
, where we fix them and from thence refer them out in right lines to the
Heavens , all the Celestial bodies seem to move the contrary way , or
from East to West . FERGUSON-1756-2,38.97

That the Stars do not move round the Earth is evident by the following
Article . FERGUSON-1756-2,38.98

112. Every body which gravitates to , and revolves about another body ,
must move in an Orbit whose Plane passes through the Center of that
other body ; because gravity acts in right lines towards the <P_39>
Center , section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 102 . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.99

Accordingly we find that the primary Planets are kept in their Orbits by
forces which tend towards the center of the Sun ; that the Satellites of
Jupiter and Saturn go round their Primaries in Orbits whose centers are
coincident with the centers of these Planets ; and that the Plane of the
Moon's Orbit divides the Earth in halves . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.100

Nor can it possibly be otherwise , any more than that a stone thrown
upwards should fall down quite clear of the Earth and at a distance from
it . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.101

This entirely subverts the common notion of the Stars going round the
Earth ; FERGUSON-1756-2,39.102

for none of them , save those in the Equinoctial , describe Circles
round the Earth's center : FERGUSON-1756-2,39.103

all the rest , as they are more and more northerly or southerly , even
to the quiescent Poles , describe lesser and lesser Circles , whose
centers are in the Earth's Axis continued both ways to the very Poles of
the Heavens . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.104

But beyond the Earth's surface it's Axis does not exist ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,39.105

or is really nothing ; FERGUSON-1756-2,39.106

and as <font> nothing <$$font> has no properties , the Stars can never
gravitate thereto . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.107

We might as well , at least , imagine the Center of the Orbit described
by the forementioned boat round the ship , section
{TEXT:symbol_for_section} 107 , to be in the air above the top of her
main-mast , or under her keel at the bottom of the sea .
FERGUSON-1756-2,39.108

113. If we could translate ourselves from Planet to Planet we should
still find that all the Stars would appear of the same magnitudes , and
at the same distances from each other , as they do to us on Earth ;
because the width of the remotest Planet's Orbit bears no sensible
proportion to the distance of the Stars . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.109

But then the whole Heavens would appear to revolve about very different
Axes from what they do to us here ; FERGUSON-1756-2,39.110

and consequently those quiescent Points , which are our Poles in the
Heavens , would seem to revolve about other Points ; which , though
apparently in motion to us on Earth , would be at rest to us if seen
from any other Planet . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.111

Thus the Axis of Venus , which lies almost at right angles to the Axis
of our Earth , would have it's motionless Poles in two opposite points
of the Heavens lying almost in our Equinoctial ; where the motion
appears quickest of all to us , because it is performed in the largest
Circle . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.112

And the very Poles , which are at rest to us , have the quickest motion
of all as seen from Venus . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.113

To Mars and Jupiter , the Heavens appear to turn round one and the same
Axis , whose Poles are about 23_1$$2 degrees from ours ; but with very
different velocities . FERGUSON-1756-2,39.114

Were we in Jupiter we should be amazed at the rapid motion of the
Heavens , the Sun and Stars going round in 9 hours 56 minutes :
FERGUSON-1756-2,39.115

Could we go from thence to Venus we should be as much surprised at the
slowness of the Heavenly motions ; the Sun going but once round in 584
<P_40> hours , and the Stars in 540 hours 12 minutes :
FERGUSON-1756-2,40.116

And could we go from Venus to the Moon we should see the Heavens with a
yet slower diurnal motion ; the Sun going round not in less than 708
hours ; the Stars in 654 hours 46 minutes . All which being so
contradictory to one another can@ @not possibly exist in Nature :
FERGUSON-1756-2,40.117

but these Appearances must arise from the real motions of the said
Planets , in times so different from one another , and upon Axes whose
Poles point toward such different parts of the Heavens .
FERGUSON-1756-2,40.118

That those Planets do really turn in this manner is evident by viewing
them through telescopes , which discover spots adhering to their
surfaces , appearing and disappearing regularly on opposite sides of
their disks , the Moon only excepted , whose spots vary their situations
but very little to our view , because she turns round her Axis exactly
in the time that she goes round the Earth ; FERGUSON-1756-2,40.119

and these Appearances not only demonstrate the Revolving of the Planets
round their Axes , FERGUSON-1756-2,40.120

but also shew the Positions or Inclinations of their Axes to their
respective Orbits . FERGUSON-1756-2,40.121

114. The Squares of the Periods of all the Planets round the Sun are to
one another as the Cubes of their Mean distances from him .
FERGUSON-1756-2,40.122

This proportion holds not only with respect to the primary Planets in
going round the Sun , but also with regard to the Satellites going round
their Primaries in each particular System , without the least exception
; FERGUSON-1756-2,40.123

and demonstrates that the Annual motion belongs to the Earth , not to
the Sun . FERGUSON-1756-2,40.124

For , as the Cube of 240_thousand miles , the Moon's distance from the
Earth , section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 52 , is to the Cube of 81
millions of miles , the Earth's distance from the Sun , section
{TEXT:symbol_for_section} 47 ; that is , as 2 to
38_million_272_thousand_753 , so is the square of the Moon's period ,
which is 27 days 8 hours , to the square of the Period of any Body
moving round the Earth at the Sun's distance in days ; or to 30_thousand
and 5_million_838_thousand_352 ; whose square root , or 173_thousand_510
, is the number of days that would be in a Solar year , if the Sun moved
round the Earth . FERGUSON-1756-2,40.125

This number contains 365 , the days in our year , no less than 475 times
: so that , if the Sun moved round us , our year would be 475 times as
long as it now is . FERGUSON-1756-2,40.126

This Calculation alone , according to Mr. Whiston , is sufficient to
demonstrate the Earth's motion round the Sun ; according to which , the
abovementioned Proportion of the Cubes of the Distances being as the
Squares of the Periods , agrees to the utmost exactness of Astronomical
observations . FERGUSON-1756-2,40.127

<font> N.B. <$$font> To square a number is <P_41> to multiply it by
itself ; FERGUSON-1756-2,41.128

and to cube a number , is first to multiply it by itself , and then the
product by the same number again . FERGUSON-1756-2,41.129

Thus , 9 is the square of the number 3 , and 27 the cube of it .
FERGUSON-1756-2,41.130

To extract the square root of a number is to find a number which being
squared , that is , multiplied by itself , produces that number .
FERGUSON-1756-2,41.131

So , 3 is the square root of 9 ; as 4 is of 16 ; 5 of 25 , <font> &c.
<$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,41.132

115. Dr. Bradley , our present Astronomer Royal , has found by a long
series of the most accurate Observations that there is a small apparent
motion of the fixed Stars , no ways depending on the Earth's diurnal
motion ; but produced by a cause so exactly answering and agreeable to
an annual motion in the Earth , as evinces the same , even to a
Mathematical demonstration . FERGUSON-1756-2,41.133

Those who are qualified to read the Doctor's modest account of this
great Discovery may consult the <font> Philosophical Transactions ,
<$$font> N=o= 406 . FERGUSON-1756-2,41.134

Or they may find it largely treated of by Drs. Smith , Long ,
Desaguliers , Rutherfurth , and M. De La Caille .
FERGUSON-1756-2,41.135

116. Because we are on the Earth we can@ @not perceive it's diurnal
motion ; FERGUSON-1756-2,41.136

yet it is very certain that we are capable of knowing , by one grand
effect of such a motion , whether the Earth has it or not .
FERGUSON-1756-2,41.137

For all Globes which have no diurnal motions round their Axes must , by
the equality of the weight of bodies on their surfaces , be perfect
Spheres , especially in the fluid parts which freely communicate with
one another . FERGUSON-1756-2,41.138

But all Globes which have a diurnal motion or rotation about their Axes
<paren> which being Swiftest at the Equator will cause the Parts to
recede from the Axis of Motion chiefly near the Equator <$$paren> will
be oblate Spheroids ; or higher , that is , farther from the Center in
the equatorial than in the polar Regions . FERGUSON-1756-2,41.139

That our Earth is really of this figure is demonstrable from the unequal
vibrations of a pendulum , and the unequal lengths of a degree , in
different latitudes . FERGUSON-1756-2,41.140

Since then the Earth is higher at the Equator than at the Poles , the
sea , which naturally runs downward , or towards the places which are
least distant from the Center , would run towards the Polar regions ,
and leave the Equatorial parts dry , if the centrifugal force of the
latter did not raise those parts and carry the waters thither , section
{TEXT:symbol_for_section} 43 , <font> n. <$$font> 78 .
FERGUSON-1756-2,41.141

117. As all bodies near the Poles , being nearer the Earth's center and
also having a slower motion round it's Axis than those which are more
remote , must gradually lose of their weight the further they are <P_42>
carried towards the Equatorial parts ; on account not only of their
being removed farther from the Earth's center , but also of their
describing larger circles , and having quicker motions round the Earth's
Axis : it is plain that a pendulum which vibrates seconds near the Poles
will gradually lose of it's motion as it is carried towards the Equator
; and must have it's rod gradually shortened to make it keep time .
FERGUSON-1756-2,42.142

This is confirmed by all the experiments which have been made with
pendulums in different latitudes . FERGUSON-1756-2,42.143

By comparing the different lengths of pendulums , swinging seconds at
the Equator and at <font> London , <$$font> it is found that a pendulum
under the Equator must have it's rod 2_169$$1000 lines shorter than
under the Poles ; a line being 1$$12th part of an inch .
FERGUSON-1756-2,42.144

118. If the Earth were to turn round it's Axis in 84 minutes 43 seconds
, the centrifugal force would be equal to the power of gravity at the
Equator ; FERGUSON-1756-2,42.145

and so all bodies there would entirely lose their weight .
FERGUSON-1756-2,42.146

If the Earth revolved quicker , they would all fly off ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,42.147

and a great part of it would be reduced to atoms .
FERGUSON-1756-2,42.148

119. We are kept to the Earth's surface on all sides by the power of
it's central attraction ; which laying hold of all bodies according to
their densities , or quantities of matter , without regard to their
bulks , constitutes what we call their weight . FERGUSON-1756-2,42.149

And having the Sky over our heads , go where we will , and our feet
towards the center of the Earth , we call it <font> up <$$font> over our
heads , and <font> down <$$font> under our feet : although the same
right line , which is <font> down <$$font> to <font> us , <$$font> if
continued thro and beyond the other side of the Earth , would be <font>
up <$$font> to the inhabitants opposite to us . FERGUSON-1756-2,42.150

For , The inhabitants , <font> n , i , e , m , s , o , q , l , <$$font>
stand with their feet toward the Earth's center <font> C ; <$$font>
FERGUSON-1756-2,42.151

and have the same sort of Sky <font> N , l , E , M , S , O , Q , L ,
<$$font> over their heads . FERGUSON-1756-2,42.152

Therefore the point <font> S <$$font> is as directly upward to the
inhabitant <font> s <$$font> on the South Pole as <font> N <$$font> is
to the inhabitant <font> n <$$font> on the North Pole :
FERGUSON-1756-2,42.153

so is <font> E <$$font> to the inhabitant <font> e , <$$font> supposed
to be on the north end of <font> Peru ; <$$font> and <font> Q <$$font>
to the opposite inhabitant <font> q <$$font> on the middle of the island
<font> Sumatra . <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,42.154

Each of these inhabitants wonders how his opposite , or <font> Antipode
, <$$font> can stand with his head hanging downwards ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,42.155

but , let either come to the other , and he will tell him that he then
stood as upright and firm , on the place where he was , as he now stands
where he is . FERGUSON-1756-2,42.156

To all these the whole Heavens of Sun , Moon and Stars , seem to turn
round the points <font> N <$$font> and <font> S , <$$font> as the Poles
of the fixt Axis <font> NCS ; <$$font> because the Earth does really
turn round the mathematical line <font> nCs <$$font> as round an Axis of
which <font> n <$$font> is the North Pole and <font> s <$$font> the
South Pole . FERGUSON-1756-2,42.157

The inhabitant <font> U <$$font> affirms that he is on the uppermost
side of <P_43> the Earth , FERGUSON-1756-2,43.158

and wonders how another at <font> L <$$font> can stand on the undermost
side with his head hanging downwards . FERGUSON-1756-2,43.159

But <font> U <$$font> in the mean time forgets that in twelve hours time
he will be carried half round with the Earth and then be in the very
situation that <font> L <$$font> now is , although as far from him as
before . FERGUSON-1756-2,43.160

And yet , when he comes there , he will find no difference as to his
manner of standing ; FERGUSON-1756-2,43.161

only he will see the opposite half of the Heavens ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,43.162

and will imagine the Heavens to have gone half round .
FERGUSON-1756-2,43.163

120. When we see a globe hung up in a room we can@ @not help imagining
it to have an upper and an under side , FERGUSON-1756-2,43.164

and immediately form a like idea of the Earth ; from whence we conclude
, that it is as impossible for persons to stand on the under side of the
Earth as for pebbles to lie on the under side of the globe , which
instantly fall away from it down to the ground ; FERGUSON-1756-2,43.165

and well they may , because the attraction of the Earth being too great
for the attraction of the globe pulls them away .
FERGUSON-1756-2,43.166

Just so would be the case with our Earth , if it were placed near a
Globe much bigger than itself , such as Jupiter : FERGUSON-1756-2,43.167

for then it would really have an upper and an under side with respect to
that large Globe ; which , by it's Attraction , would pull away every
thing from the side of the Earth next to it ; FERGUSON-1756-2,43.168

and only those on the top of the opposite or upper side could keep upon
it , FERGUSON-1756-2,43.169

But there is no larger Globe near enough our Earth to overcome it's
central attrition ; FERGUSON-1756-2,43.170

and therefore it has no such thing as an upper and an under side :
FERGUSON-1756-2,43.171

for all bodies on or near it's surface , even to the Moon , gravitate
towards it's center . FERGUSON-1756-2,43.172

121. Seeing the Earth and other Planets of our System gravitate towards
the Sun , and would fall upon his surface if not hindered by their
projectile forces , therefore to have an idea of real <font> up <$$font>
and <font> down <$$font> we must conceive that every way in a straight
line from the Sun's center is <font> up , <$$font> on all sides of him ;
and that every way towards it is <font> down <$$font> : the Sun's center
being the lowest point in our whole system . FERGUSON-1756-2,43.173

122. Let any man imagine that the Earth and every thing but himself is
taken away , and he left alone in the midst of indefinite Space ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,43.174

could he then have any ideas of <font> up <$$font> or <font> down ?
<$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,43.175

Surely none ; FERGUSON-1756-2,43.176

nor could he stir from that part of Space ! FERGUSON-1756-2,43.177

Were his pockets full of gold , he might take the pieces one by one ,
and throw them away on all sides of him , without any danger of losing
them ; FERGUSON-1756-2,43.178

for the attraction of his body would bring them all back by the ways
they went , FERGUSON-1756-2,43.179

and <font> he <$$font> would be <font> down <$$font> to every one of
them . FERGUSON-1756-2,43.180

Then if a Sun , or any other large body , were created , and placed
myriads of miles from <P_44> him , in any part of Space whatsoever , he
would be attracted towards it , FERGUSON-1756-2,44.181

and could not save himself from falling <font> down <$$font> to it .
FERGUSON-1756-2,44.182

123. The Earth's bulk is but a point , as that at <font> C , <$$font>
compared to the Heavens ; FERGUSON-1756-2,44.183

and therefore every inhabitant upon it , let him be where he will , as
at <font> n , e , m , s , <$$font> &c. sees one half of the Heavens .
FERGUSON-1756-2,44.184

The inhabitant <font> n , <$$font> on the North Pole of the Earth ,
constantly sees the Hemisphere <font> ENQ <$$font> ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,44.185

and having the North Pole <font> N <$$font> of the Heavens just over his
head , his Horizon coincides with the Celestial Equator <font> ECQ .
<$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,44.186

Therefore all the Stars in the Northern Hemisphere <font> ENC , <$$font>
between the Equator and North Pole , appear to turn round the line
<font> NC , <$$font> moving parallel to the Horizon .
FERGUSON-1756-2,44.187

The Equatorial Stars keep in the Horizon , FERGUSON-1756-2,44.188

and all those in the Southern Hemisphere <font> ESQ <$$font> are
invisible . FERGUSON-1756-2,44.189

The like Phenomena are seen by an inhabitant <font> s <$$font> on the
South Pole , with respect to the Hemisphere <font> ESQ <$$font> ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,44.190

and to him the opposite Hemisphere is always invisible .
FERGUSON-1756-2,44.191

Hence , under either Pole , only one half of the Stars can be seen :
FERGUSON-1756-2,44.192

for those which are once visible never set , FERGUSON-1756-2,44.193

and those which are once invisible never rise . FERGUSON-1756-2,44.194

But the Ecliptic <font> YCX , <$$font> or Orbit which the Sun appears to
describe once a year by the Earth's annual motion , has the one half
<font> YC <$$font> constantly above the Horizon <font> ECQ <$$font> of
the North Pole <font> n <$$font> ; and the other half <font> CX <$$font>
always below it . FERGUSON-1756-2,44.195

Therefore whilst the Sun describes the northern half <font> YC <$$font>
of the Ecliptic he neither sets to the North Pole FERGUSON-1756-2,44.196

nor rises to the South ; FERGUSON-1756-2,44.197

and whilst he describes the other half <font> CX <$$font> he neither
sets to the South Pole FERGUSON-1756-2,44.198

nor rises to the North . FERGUSON-1756-2,44.199

The same things are true with respect to the Moon ; only with this
difference , that as the Sun describes the Ecliptic but once a year , he
is for half that time visible to each Pole in it's turn , and as long
invisible ; FERGUSON-1756-2,44.200

but as the Moon goes round the Ecliptic in 27 days 8 hours , she is only
visible for 13 days 16 hours , and as long invisible , to each Pole by
turns . FERGUSON-1756-2,44.201

All the Planets likewise rise and set to the Poles , because their
Orbits are cut obliquely in halves by the Horizon of the Poles .
FERGUSON-1756-2,44.202

When the Sun <paren> in his apparent way from <font> X <$$font>
<$$paren> arrives at <font> C <$$font> he is just rising to an observer
at <font> n <$$font> on the North Pole , and setting to another at
<font> s <$$font> on the South Pole , which is on the 20th of <font>
March . <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,44.203

From <font> C <$$font> he rises higher and higher in every apparent
Diurnal revolution 'till he comes to the highest point of the Ecliptic
<font> y , <$$font> on the 21st of <font> June , <$$font> when he is at
his greatest Altitude , which is 23_1$$2 degrees , or the Arch <font> Ey
, <$$font> equal to his greatest Northern declination ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,44.204

and from thence he seems to descend gradually in every apparent
Circumvolution , 'till he sets at <font> C <$$font> on the 23d of <P_45>
<font> September <$$font> ; FERGUSON-1756-2,45.205

and then he goes to exhibit the like Appearances at the South Pole for
the other half of the year . FERGUSON-1756-2,45.206

Hence the Sun's apparent motion round the Earth is not in parallel
Circles , but in Spirals ; such as might be represented by a thread
wound round a Globe from Tropic to Tropic ; the Circumvolutions being at
some distance from one another about the Equator , but gradually nearer
to each other as they approach nearer to the Tropics .
FERGUSON-1756-2,45.207

124. If the observer be any where on the Terrestrial Equator <font> eCq
, <$$font> as suppose at <font> e , <$$font> he is in the Plane of the
Celestial Equator ; or in other words , under the Equinoctial <font> ECQ
, <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,45.208

and the Axis of the Earth <font> nCs <$$font> is coincident with the
Plane of his Horizon , extended out to <font> N <$$font> and <font> S ,
<$$font> the North and South Poles of the Heavens .
FERGUSON-1756-2,45.209

As the Earth turns round the line <font> NCS , <$$font> the whole
Heavens <font> MOLl <$$font> seem to turn round the same line , but the
contrary way . FERGUSON-1756-2,45.210

It is plain that this observer has the Pole constantly in his Horizon ,
which cuts the Diurnal paths of all the Celestial bodies perpendicularly
and in halves . FERGUSON-1756-2,45.211

Therefore the Sun , Planets , and Stars rise every day ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,45.212

and ascend perpendicularly above the Horizon for six hours ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,45.213

and passing over the Meridian descend in the same manner for the six
following hours ; FERGUSON-1756-2,45.214

then set in the Horizon , FERGUSON-1756-2,45.215

and continue twelve hours below it . FERGUSON-1756-2,45.216

Consequently at the Equator the days and nights are equally long
throughout the year . FERGUSON-1756-2,45.217

When the observer is in the situation <font> e , <$$font> he sees the
Hemisphere <font> SEN ; <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,45.218

but in twelve hours after he is carried half round the Earth's Axis to
<font> q , <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,45.219

and then the Hemisphere <font> SQN <$$font> becomes visible to him ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,45.220

and <font> SEN <$$font> disappears , being hid by the Convexity of the
Earth . FERGUSON-1756-2,45.221

Thus we find that to an observer at either of the Poles one half of the
Sky is always visible , and the other half never seen
FERGUSON-1756-2,45.222

but to an observer on the Equator the whole Sky is seen every 24 hours .
FERGUSON-1756-2,45.223

{COM:figure_omitted}

The Figure here referred to , represents a Celestial globe of glass ,
having a Terrestrial globe within it ; after the manner of the glass
sphere invented by my generous friend Dr. Long , <font> Lowndes's
<$$font> Professor of Astronomy in <font> Cambridge . <$$font>
FERGUSON-1756-2,45.225

125. If a Globe be held side_wise to the eye , at some distance and so
that neither of it's Poles can be seen , then the Equator <font> ECQ
<$$font> and all Circles parallel to it , as <font> DL , yzx , abX , MO
, <$$font> &c. will appear to be straight lines , as projected in this
Figure ; which is requisite to be mentioned here , because we shall have
occasion to call them Circles in the following Article .
FERGUSON-1756-2,45.226

<P_46>

126. Let us now suppose that the observer has gone from the Equator
<font> e <$$font> towards the North Pole <font> n , <$$font> and that he
stops at <font> i <$$font> ; FERGUSON-1756-2,46.228

it is plain he then sees the Hemisphere <font> MElNL <$$font> ; his
Horizon <font> MCL <$$font> having shifted as far from the Celestial
poles <font> N <$$font> and <font> S <$$font> as he has travelled from
under the Equinoctial <font> E. <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,46.229

And it is likewise plain that , as the Heavens constantly seem to turn
round the line <font> NCS <$$font> as an Axis , all those Stars which
are as far from the North Pole <font> N <$$font> as the observer is from
under the Equinoctial , namely the Stars north of the dotted parallel
<font> DL , <$$font> never set below the Horizon ; and those which are
south of the dotted parallel <font> MO <$$font> never rise above it .
FERGUSON-1756-2,46.230

Hence , the former of these two parallel Circles , which are equidistant
from both Poles , is called <font> the Circle of perpetual Apparition ,
<$$font> and the latter <font> the Circle of perpetual Occultation :
<$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,46.231

but all the Stars between these two Circles rise and set every day .
FERGUSON-1756-2,46.232

Let us imagine many Circles to be drawn between these two , and parallel
to them ; FERGUSON-1756-2,46.233

those which are on the north side of the Equinoctial will be unequally
cut by the Horizon <font> MCL , <$$font> having larger portions above
the Horizon than below it ; and the more so , as they are nearer to the
Circle of perpetual Apparition ; FERGUSON-1756-2,46.234

but the reverse happens to those on the south side of the Equinoctial ,
whilst one half of the Equinoctial is always above the Horizon and the
other half below it . FERGUSON-1756-2,46.235

Hence , by the apparent turning of the Heavens , the northern Stars
describe greater Arcs or Portions of Circles above the Horizon than
below it ; and the greater as they are farther from the equinoctial
towards the Circle of perpetual Apparition ; whilst the contrary happens
to all Stars south of the Equinoctial : FERGUSON-1756-2,46.236

but those upon it describe equal Arcs both above and below the Horizon ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,46.237

and therefore they are just as long above as below it .
FERGUSON-1756-2,46.238

127. An observer on the Equator has no Circle of perpetual Apparition
or Occultation , because all the Stars , together with the Sun and Moon
, rise and set to him every day . FERGUSON-1756-2,46.239

But , as a bare view of the Figure {COM:figure_omitted} is sufficient to
shew that these two Circles <font> DL <$$font> and <font> MO <$$font>
are just as far from the Poles <font> N <$$font> and <font> S <$$font>
as the observer at <font> I <$$font> <paren> or one opposite to him at
<font> o <$$font> <$$paren> is from the Equator <font> ECQ <$$font> ; it
is plain , that if an observer begins to travel from the Equator towards
either Pole , his Circle of perpetual Apparition rises from that Pole as
from a Point , and his Circle of perpetual Occultation from the other .
FERGUSON-1756-2,46.240

As the observer advances towards the nearer Pole , these two Circles
enlarge their diameters FERGUSON-1756-2,46.241

and approach toward one another until he comes to the Pole ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,46.242

and then they meet and coincide in the Equator . FERGUSON-1756-2,46.243

On different sides of the Equator , to observers at equal distances from
it , the Circle of perpetual Apparition to the one is the Circle of
perpetual Occultation to the other . FERGUSON-1756-2,46.244

<P_47>

128. Because the Stars never vary their distances from the Equinoctial
, at least not so much as to be sensible in an age , they never vary in
the lengths of their diurnal and nocturnal Arts to the same places on
the Earth . FERGUSON-1756-2,47.246

But as the Earth goes round the Sun every year in the Ecliptic , one
half of which is on the north side of the Equinoctial and the other half
on it's south side , the Sun appears to change his place every day , so
as to go once round the Circle <font> YCX <$$font> every year , section
{TEXT:symbol_for_section} 108 , 123 . FERGUSON-1756-2,47.247

Therefore whilst the Sun advances northward , from having described the
Parallel <font> abX , <$$font> touching the Ecliptic in <font> X ,
<$$font> the days continually lengthen FERGUSON-1756-2,47.248

and the nights shorten , until he comes to <font> y , <$$font> and
describes the Parallel <font> yzx , <$$font> when the days are at the
longest and the nights at the shortest : FERGUSON-1756-2,47.249

for then , as the Sun goes no farther northward , the greatest portion
that is possible of the diurnal Arc <font> yz <$$font> is above the
Horizon of the inhabitant and the smallest portion <font> zx <$$font>
below it . FERGUSON-1756-2,47.250

As the Sun declines southward from <font> y <$$font> he describes
smaller diurnal and greater nocturnal Arches , or Portions of Circles ,
every day ; which causes the days to shorten and nights to lengthen ,
until he arrives again at the Parallel <font> abX <$$font> ; which
having only the small portion <font> ab <$$font> above the Horizon
<font> MCL , <$$font> and the greatest portion <font> bX <$$font> below
it , the days are at the shortest and the nights at the longest ;
because the Sun recedes no farther south , but returns northward as
before . FERGUSON-1756-2,47.251

It is easy to see that the Sun must be in the Equinoctial <font> ECQ
<$$font> twice every year , and then the days and nights are equally
long ; that is , 12 hours each . FERGUSON-1756-2,47.252

These hints serve at present to give an idea of some of the Appearances
resulting from the motions of the Earth ; which shall be more
particularly described in the seventh Chapter . FERGUSON-1756-2,47.253

To an observer at either Pole , the Sun and Stars seem to move parallel
to the Horizon , which is coincident with the Equinoctial ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,47.254

and therefore , such an observer is said to have a Parallel position of
the Sphere . FERGUSON-1756-2,47.255

To an observer any where between the Poles and Equator , the Parallels
described by the Sun and Stars are cut obliquely by the Horizon ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,47.256

and therefore he is said to have an Oblique position of the Sphere .
FERGUSON-1756-2,47.257

To an observer any where on the Equator , the Parallels of Motion ,
described by the Sun and Stars , are cut perpendicularly , or at Right
angles , by the Horizon ; FERGUSON-1756-2,47.258

and therefore he is said to have a Right position of the Sphere .
FERGUSON-1756-2,47.259

And these three are all the different ways that the Sphere can appear to
be posited to all the people on Earth . FERGUSON-1756-2,47.260

129. As to the common objections against the Earth's motion , they are
all easily answered and set aside . FERGUSON-1756-2,47.261

That it may move and not be <P_48> seen or felt by us to do so has been
already shewn , section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 110 , 111 .
FERGUSON-1756-2,48.262

But some imagine that if the Earth turns round eastward , a ball fired
perpendicularly up into the air must fall considerably westward of the
place it was projected from . FERGUSON-1756-2,48.263

This objection , which at first seems to be of some weight , will be
found to have none at all when we consider that the gun together with
the ball partakes of the Earth's motion ; FERGUSON-1756-2,48.264

and therefore the ball , being carried forward in the air as quick as
the Earth turns , must fall down again on the same place .
FERGUSON-1756-2,48.265

A stone let fall from the top of a main-mast , if it meets with no
obstacle , falls on the deck of the ship , as near the foot of the mast
when the ship sails , as when she is at rest . FERGUSON-1756-2,48.266

And if an inverted bottle full of liquor be hung up to the ceiling
{TEXT:cieling} of the cabin , and a small hole be made in it's cork to
let the liquor drop through on the floor , the drops will fall just as
far forward on the floor when the ship sails as when she does not .
FERGUSON-1756-2,48.267

And gnats or flies can as freely dance amongst one another in a moving
cabin as in a fixed chamber . FERGUSON-1756-2,48.268

As to those objections taken from Scripture expressions which seem to
contradict the Earth's motion , this general answer may be made to them
all ; <font> viz. <$$font> it is plain from many instances that the
Scriptures were never intended to instruct us in Philosophy and
Astronomy , and therefore nothing in them is to be understood as
strictly or positively asserted in relation thereto ; but only expressed
according to the common apprehensions of mankind .
FERGUSON-1756-2,48.269

We all know that the Moon appears as big as the Sun , and enlightens us
in the night-time for more than one half of every month : for which
reason Moses calls her A Great Light , as well as the Sun , <font> Gen.
<$$font> ch. i. ver. 26 . FERGUSON-1756-2,48.270

Nevertheless it is known to every <font> Tyro <$$font> in Astronomy that
the Sun is near 40 millions of times as big as the Moon ; and that the
Moon is so far from being a luminous body that she shines upon us only
by the reflected or borrowed light of the Sun . FERGUSON-1756-2,48.271

If Moses had known this and told the <font> Israelites <$$font> so they
would have stared at him , and considered him rather as a madman than as
a person commissioned by the Almighty to be their leader .
FERGUSON-1756-2,48.272

<P_49>

<heading>

CHAP. III . FERGUSON-1756-2,49.275

<font> The <$$font> Ptolomean <font> System refuted .
FERGUSON-1756-2,49.276

The Motions and Phases of Mercury and Venus explained . <$$font>
FERGUSON-1756-2,49.277

<$$heading>

130. THE <font> Tychonic System , <$$font> section
{TEXT:symbol_for_section} 99 , being sufficiently refuted by the 106th
Article , we need say nothing more about it . FERGUSON-1756-2,49.279

131. The falsity and absurdity of the <font> Ptolomean System ,
<$$font> section {TEXT:symbol_for_section} 98 , which asserts the Earth
to be at rest in the Center of the Universe , and all the Planets , with
the Sun and Stars , to move round it , is evident .
FERGUSON-1756-2,49.280

For , according to this hypothesis , Mercury and Venus can never be hid
behind the Sun , as their Orbits are included within the Sun's :
FERGUSON-1756-2,49.281

and these two Planets ought always to move direct , and to be as often
in Opposition to the Sun , as in Conjunction with him .
FERGUSON-1756-2,49.282

But , the contrary of all this is true ; FERGUSON-1756-2,49.283

for they are just as often behind the Sun as before him ,
FERGUSON-1756-2,49.284

appear as often to move backwards as forwards , FERGUSON-1756-2,49.285

and are so far from ever being seen in the side of the Heavens opposite
to the Sun , that they were never seen a quarter of a circle in the
Heavens distant from him . FERGUSON-1756-2,49.286

132. These two Planets , when viewed with a good telescope , appear in
all the various shapes of the Moon ; which is a plain proof that they
shine not by any light of their own : FERGUSON-1756-2,49.287

for if they did , they would constantly appear round as the Sun does ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,49.288

and could never be seen like dark spots upon the Sun when they pass
directly between him and us . FERGUSON-1756-2,49.289

Their regular Phases demonstrate them to be spherical bodies ; as may be
shewn in the following manner . FERGUSON-1756-2,49.290

Hang an ivory ball by a thread , FERGUSON-1756-2,49.291

and let one move it round the flame of a candle , at two or three yards
distance from your eye : FERGUSON-1756-2,49.292

when the ball is beyond the candle , so as to be almost hid by the flame
, it's enlightened side will be towards the eye , and appear round like
the Full Moon : FERGUSON-1756-2,49.293

When the ball is between the eye and candle , it's enlightened side will
disappear , like the Moon at the Change : FERGUSON-1756-2,49.294

When it is half way between these two positions , it will appear half
illuminated , like the Moon in her Quarters : FERGUSON-1756-2,49.295

And every where , between these positions , it will appear more or less
horned or gibbous . FERGUSON-1756-2,49.296

If this experiment be made with a circular plate which has a flat
surface , you may make it appear fully enlightened , or not enlightened
at all ; FERGUSON-1756-2,49.297

but can never make it seem either horned or gibbous .
FERGUSON-1756-2,49.298

<P_50>

133. If you remove about six or seven yards from the candle , and place
yourself so , as it's flame may be just about the height of your eye ,
and then desire another person to move the ball slowly round the candle
as before , keeping it as near as he can of equal height with the flame
, the ball will appear to you not to move in a circle , but to vibrate
backward and forward like a pendulum ; moving quickest : when it is
directly between you and the candle , and when behind it ; and gradually
slower as it goes farther to the right or left side of the flame , until
it appears at the greatest distance therefrom ; FERGUSON-1756-2,50.300

and then , though it continues to move with the same velocity , it will
seem to stand still for a moment . FERGUSON-1756-2,50.301

In every Revolution it will shew all the above Phases , section
{TEXT:symbol_for_section} 132 ; FERGUSON-1756-2,50.302

and if two balls , a lesser and a bigger , be moved in this manner round
the candle , the lesser ball being kept nearest the flame , and carried
round almost four times as often as the bigger , you will have a
tolerable good representation of the apparent Motions of Mercury and
Venus ; especially , if the bigger ball describes a circle almost twice
as large in diameter as the circle described by the lesser .
FERGUSON-1756-2,50.303

134. Let <font> ABCDE <$$font> be a part or segment of the visible
Heavens , in which the Sun , Moon , Planets , and Stars appear to move ,
at the same distance from the Earth <font> E. <$$font>
FERGUSON-1756-2,50.304

For there are certain limits , beyond which the eye is no judge of
different distances ; which is plain from the Moon's appearing to be as
far from us as the Sun and Stars are . FERGUSON-1756-2,50.305

Let the circle <font> fghiklmno <$$font> be the Orbit in which Mercury
<font> m <$$font> moves round the Sun <font> S ; <$$font> according to
the order of these letters . FERGUSON-1756-2,50.306

When Mercury is at <font> f , <$$font> he disappears to the Earth at
<font> E , <$$font> because his enlightened side is turned from it ,
unless he be then in one of his Nodes , section
{TEXT:symbol_for_section} 21 , 26 ; in which case , he will appear like
a dark spot upon the Sun . FERGUSON-1756-2,50.307

When he is at <font> g <$$font> in his Orbit , he appears at <font> B
<$$font> in the Heavens , westward of the Sun <font> S , <$$font> which
appears at <font> C : <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,50.308

when at <font> h , <$$font> he appears at <font> A , <$$font> at his
greatest western elongation or distance from the Sun ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,50.309

and then seems to stand still . FERGUSON-1756-2,50.310

But , as he moves from <font> h <$$font> to <font> i , <$$font> he
appears to go from <font> A <$$font> to <font> B <$$font> ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,50.311

and seems to be in the same place when at <font> i <$$font> as when he
was at <font> g : <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,50.312

at <font> k <$$font> he is hid by the Sun from the Earth at <font> E ;
<$$font> being then in his superior Conjunction .
FERGUSON-1756-2,50.313

In going from <font> k <$$font> to <font> l , <$$font> he appears to
move from <font> C <$$font> to <font> D <$$font> ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,50.314

and when he is at <font> n , <$$font> he appears stationary at <font> E
<$$font> ; being seen as far east from the Sun as he was west from him
at <font> A . <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,50.315

In going from <font> n <$$font> to <font> o <$$font> in his Orbit , he
seems to go back again in the Heavens , from <font> E <$$font> to <font>
D <$$font> ; appearing in the same place <paren> with respect to the Sun
<$$paren> at <font> o <$$font> as he did when at <font> l <$$font> ; but
of a larger diameter at <font> o , <$$font> because he is then nearer
the Earth <font> E : <$$font> FERGUSON-1756-2,50.316

and <P_51> when he comes to <font> f , <$$font> he again passes by the
Sun , FERGUSON-1756-2,51.317

and disappears , as before . FERGUSON-1756-2,51.318

Whilst he goes from <font> n <$$font> to <font> h <$$font> in his Orbit
, he seems to go backward in the Heavens , from <font> E <$$font> to
<font> A <$$font> ; FERGUSON-1756-2,51.319

and whilst he moves from <font> h <$$font> to <font> n , <$$font> he
seems to go forward from <font> A <$$font> to <font> E. <$$font>
FERGUSON-1756-2,51.320

As he goes on from <font> f , <$$font> at <font> g <$$font> a little of
his enlightened side is seen from <font> E <$$font> ;
FERGUSON-1756-2,51.321

at <font> h <$$font> he appears half full , because half of his
enlightened side is seen ; at <font> i , <$$font> gibbous , or more than
half full ; and at <font> k <$$font> he would appear quite full , were
he not hid from <font> E <$$font> by the Sun <font> S. <$$font>
FERGUSON-1756-2,51.322

At <font> l , <$$font> he appears gibbous again ; at <font> n <$$font>
half decreased , at <font> o <$$font> horned , and at <font> f <$$font>
new , like the Moon at her Change . FERGUSON-1756-2,51.323

He goes sooner from his eastern station at <font> n <$$font> to his
western station at <font> h , <$$font> than from <font> h <$$font> to
<font> n <$$font> again ; because he goes through less than half his
Orbit in the former case , and more in the latter .
FERGUSON-1756-2,51.324

