<BEGIN_fielding2-1744-2>

<P_1,5>

<heading>

Chap. II . <font> In which are seen the terrible Consequences which
attend Envy and Selfishness . <$$font> FIELDING2-1744-2,1,5.4

<$$heading>

It will perhaps surprize the Reader as much as it did poor <font> David
<$$font> , to find that <font> Daniel <$$font> , notwithstanding the
Appearance of Friendship he had all along kept up with his Brother , was
in reality one of those Wretches , whose only Happiness centers in
themselves ; and that his Conversation with his Companions had never any
other View , but in some shape or other to promote his own Interest .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,5.6

To this was owing his Endeavour to keep <font> David <$$font> from being
imposed on , lest his Generosity should lead him to let others share his
Money as well as himself : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,5.7

From this alone arose his Character of Wisdom ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,5.8

for he could easily find out an ill-disposed Mind in another , by
comparing it with what passed in his own Bosom . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,5.9

While he found it for his Benefit to pretend to the same delicate Way of
Thinking , and sincere Love which <font> David <$$font> had for him , he
<P_1,6> did not want Art enough to affect it ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,6.10

but as soon as he thought it his Interest to break with his Brother , he
threw off the Mask , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,6.11

and took no pains to conceal the Baseness of his Heart .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,6.12

From the time they came from School , during the old Gentleman's Illness
, <font> Daniel <$$font> 's only Study was , how he should throw his
Brother out of his Share of his Father's Patrimony , and engross it
wholly to himself . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,6.13

The anxious Thoughts he appeared continually in , on this account , were
imputed by his good_natured Friend , to a tender Concern for a Parent's
Suffering ; a Consideration which much increased his Love for him .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,6.14

His Mother had a Maid , whom Mr. <font> Daniel <$$font> had a great
fancy for ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,6.15

but she being a virtuous Woman , <paren> and besides , having a
Sweetheart in her Fellow-servant , whom she liked much better <$$paren>
resisted all his Sollicitations , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,6.16

and would have nothing to say to him . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,6.17

But yet he found she could not refuse any little Presents he made her ;
which convinced him she was very mercenary , and made him think of a
Scheme to make her serve his Designs of another kind , since she would
not be subservient to his Pleasures . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,6.18

He knew his Father had <P_1,7> given a sealed Paper to his Brother ,
which he told him was his Will , with strict Orders not to open it till
after his Death ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,7.19

and , as he was not ignorant where <font> David <$$font> had put it , he
formed a Scheme to steal away the real Will , and to put a forged one in
its place . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,7.20

But then he was greatly puzzled what he should do for Witnesses , which
, as he had slily pumped out of an ingenious young Gentleman , his
Acquaintance , who was Clerk to an Attorney , were necessary to the
signing a Will . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,7.21

He therefore thought , if he could bribe this Girl and her Sweet-heart
for this Purpose , he should accomplish all he desired ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,7.22

for , as the same learned Lawyer had told him , two Witnesses were
sufficient , where the Estate was only personal , as that of his
Father's was . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,7.23

This young Woman was one of those sort of People who had been bred up to
get her Living by hard Work ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,7.24

she had been taught never to keep company with any Man , but him she
intended to marry ; nor to get drunk , or steal :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,7.25

for if she gave way to those things , <paren> besides that they were
great Sins <$$paren> she would certainly come to be hanged ; which , as
she had an utter Aversion to , she went on in an honest way , and never
intended to depart from it . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,7.26

<P_1,8>

Our Spark , when first he thought of making use of her , was very much
afraid , lest she should refuse , and betray him .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,8.28

But when he reflected , how impossible it would be for him to refuse any
thing he thought valuable , tho' he was to be guilty of ever so much
Treachery to obtain it , he resolved boldly to venture on the Trial .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,8.29

When he first spoke to her about it , he offered her fifty Pounds ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,8.30

but she was so frighten'd at the Thoughts of being accessary to a
Forgery , that she declared , " she would not do it for the whole World
; for that she had more Value for her precious Soul , than for any thing
he could give her : That as to him , he was a Schollard , and might
think of some way of saving himself ; but as she could neither write nor
read , she must surely be d-'d . " FIELDING2-1744-2,1,8.31

This way of talking so thoroughly convinced <font> Daniel <$$font> of
her Folly , that he made no doubt of soon gaining her to his Purpose .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,8.32

He therefore made use of all the most persuasive Arguments he could
think of : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,8.33

And amongst the rest , he told her , that by this means she might marry
the Man she liked , and live with him in a very comfortable manner .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,8.34

He immediately perceived <P_1,9> this staggered all her Resolutions ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.35

and as soon as he saw she could be moved , did not fear succeeding .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.36

He pulled out of his Pocket a Purse with a_hundred Guineas ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.37

and told them out before her , <paren> for the Sight of Money is much
more prevalent than the Idea of it <$$paren> FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.38

and assured her , that he would be better than he had promised her ; for
if she would comply with his Request , the whole Sum she had seen should
be hers {TEXT:her's} , and that she and her Lover by this means would be
enabled to live in a manner much above all the Maids she used to
converse with . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.39

The Thoughts of being set above her Acquaintance quite overcame her ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.40

and , as she had never been Mistress of above forty Shillings at a time
, a_hundred Guineas appeared such an immense Sum , that she easily
conceived she could live very well , without being obliged to work any
more . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.41

This Prospect so charmed her , that she promised to do whatever he would
have her : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.42

She did not doubt but she could make her Sweet-heart comply ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.43

for he had never refused her any thing since their Acquaintance began .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.44

This made <font> Daniel <$$font> quite happy , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.45

for every thing else was plain before him . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.46

He had no Scruple on the Fellow's account ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,9.47

for once get the <P_1,10> Consent of a Woman , and that of a Man <paren>
who is vulgarly called , in love with her <$$paren> consequently follows
. FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.48

For though a Man's Disposition is not naturally bad , yet it is not
quite certain he will have Resolution enough to resist a Woman's
continual Importunities . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.49

<font> Daniel <$$font> took the first Opportunity <paren> which quickly
offered , every thing being common between him and his Brother <$$paren>
of stealing the Will . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.50

As it was in his Father's Hand , he could easily forge it ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.51

for he wrote very like him ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.52

when he had done this , he had it witnessed in Form ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.53

placed it in the room of the other , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.54

and then went away quite satisfied in the Success of his Scheme .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.55

The real Affliction of <font> David <$$font> , on the old Gentleman's
Death , prevented his immediate thinking of the Will .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.56

And <font> Daniel <$$font> was forced to counterfeit what he did not
feel , not daring to be eager for the opening it , lest when the
Contents were known , the Truth should be suspected .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.57

But as soon as the first Grief was a little abated , and the Family
began to be calmed , <font> David <$$font> desired his Mother and
Brother to walk up stairs ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,10.58

then went <P_1,11> to his Bureau , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.59

and took out the Will , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.60

and read it before them . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.61

The Contents were as follows : <font> Daniel <$$font> was left sole
Executor ; that out of 11000 <font> l. <$$font> which was the Sum left
, he should pay his Mother 60 <font> l. per_Annum <$$font> , and that
<font> David <$$font> should have 500 <font> l. <$$font> for his
Fortune . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.62

They all stood speechless for some time , staring at each other .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.63

At last <font> David <$$font> broke silence , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.64

and embracing <font> Daniel <$$font> , said , I hope my dear Brother
will not impute my Amazement to any Concern I have , that he has so much
the largest Share of my Father's Fortune . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.65

No , I do assure you , the only Cause of my Uneasiness is fearing I have
done anything to disoblige my Father , who always behaved with so much
Good-nature to me , and made us both so equal in his Care and Love ,
that I think he must have had some Reason for this last Action , of
leaving me so small a matter , especially as I am the eldest .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.66

Here <font> Daniel <$$font> interrupted him , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.67

and began to swear and bluster . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.68

He said , that his Father must have been told some wicked Lyes of his
Brother , and he was resolved to find out the vile Incendiary .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.69

But <font> David <$$font> begged him to be pacified ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,11.70

and assured him he thought of it without <P_1,12> Concern ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.71

for he knew him too well , to suspect any Alteration in his Behaviour ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.72

and did not doubt but every thing would be in common amongst them as
usual : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.73

nay , so tenderly and affectionately did he love <font> Daniel <$$font>
, that he reflected with pleasure how extremely happy his Life must be
in continually sharing with his best Friend the Fortune his Father had
left him . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.74

Thus would he have acted , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.75

and his honest Heart never doubted but that his Brother's Mind was like
his own . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.76

<font> Daniel <$$font> answered him with Asseverations of his always
commanding every thing equally with himself . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.77

The good old Woman blessed herself for having two such Sons ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.78

and they all went down stairs in very good Humour .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.79

<font> Daniel <$$font> had two Reasons for allotting his Mother
something ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.80

one was , that nothing but a Jointure could have barr'd her coming in
for Thirds ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,12.81

the other was , that if no notice had been taken of her in the Will , it
might have been a strong Motive for Suspicion : Not that he had any
great Reason for Caution , as nothing less than seeing him do it could
have made <font> David <$$font> <paren> such a Confidence had he in
<P_1,13> him <$$paren> even suspect he could be guilty of such an Action
. FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.82

The Man and Maid were soon married ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.83

and as they had long lived in the Family , <font> David <$$font> gave
them something to set up with . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.84

This was thought very lucky by the Brother , as it might prevent any
Suspicions how they came by Money . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.85

Thus every thing succeeded to <font> Daniel <$$font> 's Mind ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.86

and he had compassed all his Designs without any Fear of a Discovery .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.87

The two Brothers agreed on leaving off their Father's Business , as they
had enough to keep them ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.88

and as their Acquaintance lay chiefly in that Neighbourhood , they took
a little House there . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.89

The old Gentlewoman , whose ill Health would not suffer her to live in
<font> London <$$font> , retired into the Country ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.90

and lived with her Sister . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.91

<font> David <$$font> was very happy in the Proofs he thought he had of
his Brother's Love ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.92

and as it was his Nature to be easily contented , he gave very little
Trouble or Expence to the Family . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,13.93

<font> Daniel <$$font> hugg'd himself in his Ingenuity , and in the
Thoughts how impossible it would have <P_1,14> been for him to have been
so imposed on . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.94

His Pride <paren> of which he had no small Share <$$paren> was greatly
gratified in thinking his Brother was a Dependent {TEXT:Dependant} on
him ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.95

but then he was resolved it should not be long before he felt that
Dependance , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.96

for otherwise the greatest part of his Pleasure must be lost .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.97

One thing quite stung him to the quick , <font> viz. <$$font> That
<font> David <$$font> 's amiable Behaviour , joined to a very good
Understanding , with a great Knowledge which he had attained by Books ,
made all their Acquaintance give him the preference :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.98

and as Envy was very predominant in <font> Daniel <$$font> 's Mind ,
this made him take an utter Aversion to his Brother , which all the
other's Goodness could not get the better of : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.99

for as his Actions were such as he could not but approve , they were
still greater Food for his Hatred ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.100

and the Reflection that others approved them also , was what he could
not bear . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.101

The first thing in which <font> David <$$font> discovered an Alteration
in his Brother , was in the Behaviour of the Servants ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.102

for as they are always very inquisitive , they soon found out by some
means or other , that <font> Daniel <$$font> was in possession of all
the Money , and was not obliged to let his Brother share it with him .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.103

They watched their Master's Motions , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,14.104

<P_1,15> and as soon as they found that slackening in their Respect to
<font> David <$$font> would not be displeasing to the other , it may
easily be believed , they were not long in doubt whether they should
follow their own Interest : so that at last , when <font> David <$$font>
called them , they were always going to do something for their Master ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.105

" truly , while he wanted them , they could not wait on any body else .
" FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.106

<font> Daniel <$$font> took notice of their Behaviour ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.107

and was inwardly pleased at it . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.108

<font> David <$$font> knew not what to make of it ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.109

he would not mention it to his Brother , till it grew to such a height
he could bear it no longer : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.110

and when he spoke of it to <font> Daniel <$$font> , it was only by way
of consulting with him how to turn them away .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.111

But how great was his Surprize , when <font> Daniel <$$font> , instead
of talking in his usual Style , said , that for his part he saw no Fault
in any of <font> his <$$font> Servants ; that they did their Duty very
well , and that he should not part with his own Conveniences for any
body's Whims ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.112

if he accused any of them of a Fault , he would call them up , and try
if they could not justify themselves . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.113

<font> David <$$font> was at first struck dumb with Amazement ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,15.114

he thought he was not awake , that it was impossible it could be his
Brother's Voice <P_1,16> which uttered those Words :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.115

but at last he recollected himself enough to say , What is it come to
this ? FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.116

Am I brought to a Trial with <font> your <$$font> Servants , <paren> as
you are pleased to call them ? <$$paren> FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.117

I thought we had lived on different Terms . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.118

Oh ! recall those Words , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.119

and do@ @n't provoke me to say what perhaps I shall afterwards repent .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.120

<font> Daniel <$$font> knew , that although his Brother was far from
being passionate for Trifles , yet that his whole Frame would be so
shaken from any ill Usage from him , he would not be able to command
himself : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.121

He resolved therefore to take this Opportunity of aggravating his
Passion , till it was raised to an height , which to the unthinking
World would make him appear in the wrong ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.122

he therefore very calmly answered , You may do as you please , Brother ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.123

but what you utter , appears to me to be quite Madness ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.124

I do@ @n't perceive but you are used in <font> my <$$font> House as well
as I am myself , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.125

and can@ @not guess what you complain of . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.126

If you are not contented , you best know how to find a Remedy ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.127

many a Brother in your Case , I believe , would think themselves very
happy , to meet with the Usage you have , without wanting to make
mischief in Families . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.128

This had the desired Effect , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,16.129

and threw <P_1,17> <font> David <$$font> into that inconsistent
Behaviour , which must always be produced in a Mind torn at once by
Tenderness and Rage . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,17.130

That sincere Love and Friendship he had always felt for his Brother ,
made his Resentment the higher , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,17.131

and he alternately fired into Reproaches , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,17.132

and melted into Softness ; till at last , he swore he would go out of
the House , and never more visit the Place , which was in the possession
of so unnatural a Wretch . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,17.133

<font> Daniel <$$font> had now all he wanted ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,17.134

from the Moment the other's Passion grew loud , he had set open the Door
, that the Servants might hear how he used him , and be Witnesses he was
not in fault . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,17.135

He behaved with the utmost Calmness , which was very easy for him to do
, as he felt nothing . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,17.136

He said , his Brother should be always welcome to live in his House ,
provided he could be quiet , and contented with what was reasonable ;
and not be so mad as to think , while he insisted only on the Management
of his own Family , he departed from that romantic Love he so often
talked of . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,17.137

Indeed , it must be confessed , that if <font> David <$$font> would have
been satisfied to have lived in his Brother's House , in a State of
Dependency ; to have walked about in a rusty <P_1,18> Coat , and an old
Tye-Wig , like a decayed Gentleman , thinking it a Favour to have Bread
, while every Visitor at the House , should be extolling the Goodness of
his Brother for keeping him : I say , could he have been contented with
this sort of Behaviour , he might have stayed there as long as he
pleased . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,18.138

But <font> Daniel <$$font> was resolved he should not be on a Level with
him , who had taken so much pains to get a superior Fortune :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,18.139

he therefore behaved in this manner , with design either to get rid of
him , or make him submit to his Terms . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,18.140

This latter it was impossible ever to accomplish :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,18.141

For <font> David <$$font> 's Pride would not have prevented his taking
that Usage from a Stranger , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,18.142

but his Love could by no means suffer him to bear it from his Brother .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,18.143

Therefore , as soon as the Variety of Passions he struggled with , would
give him leave , he told him , That since he was so very different from
what he had always thought him , and capable of what he esteemed the
greatest Villainy , he would sooner starve than have any thing more to
say to him . On which he left him , and went up to his own Chamber with
a fixed Resolution to leave the House that very Day , and never return
to it any more . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,18.144

<P_1,19>

It would be impossible to describe what he felt when he was alone ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.146

all the Scenes of Pleasure he had ever enjoyed in his Brother's Company
, rushed at once into his Memory ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.147

and when he reflected on what had just happened , he could not account
for such a Difference in one Man's Conduct . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.148

He was sometimes ready to blame himself , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.149

and thought he must have been guilty of something in his Passion ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.150

<paren> for he hardly remembered what he had said <$$paren> to provoke
his Brother to such a Behaviour : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.151

he was then going to seek him , to be reconciled to him .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.152

But when he considered the Beginning of the Quarrel , and what <font>
Daniel <$$font> had said to him concerning the Servants , he concluded
he must be tired of his Company , and from some Motive or other had
altered his Affection . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.153

Then several little Slights came into his head , which he had overlooked
at the time of their happening ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.154

and from all these Reflections , he concluded he could have no farther
Hopes from his Brother . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.155

However , he resolved to stay in his Room till the Evening , to see if
there yet remained Tenderness enough in <font> Daniel <$$font> to induce
him to endeavour the removing his present Torment .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,19.156

What he felt during that Interval , is not to be expressed <P_1,20> or
understood , but by the few who are capable of real Tenderness ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.157

every Moment seemed an Age . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.158

Sometimes in the Confusion of his Thoughts , the Joy of being again well
with his Brother , appeared so strong to his Imagination , he could
hardly refrain going to him ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.159

but when he found it grew late , and no Notice was taken of him , not
even so much as a Summons to Dinner , he was then certain any
Condescension on his side would only expose him to be again insulted ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.160

he therefore resolved to stay there no longer .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.161

When he went down stairs , he asked where his Brother was ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.162

and was told , he went out to Dinner with Mr. - , and had not been at
home since . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.163

He was so struck with the Thought that <font> Daniel <$$font> could have
so little Concern for him , as to go into Company and leave him in such
Misery , he had hardly Strength enough left to go any farther ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.164

however , he got out of the House as fast as he was able , without
considering whither he was going , or what he should do ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.165

<paren> for his Mind was so taken up , and tortured with his Brother's
Brutality , that all other Thoughts quite forsook him . <$$paren>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,20.166

He <P_1,21> wandered up and down till he was quite weary and faint , not
knowing whither to direct his Steps . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,21.167

When he first set out , he had but half a Crown in his Pocket , a
Shilling of which he gave away in his Walk to a Beggar , who told him a
Story of having been turned out of doors by an unnatural Brother ; so
that now he had but one Shilling and Sixpence left , with which he went
into a publick House , and got something to recruit his worn-out Spirits
. FIELDING2-1744-2,1,21.168

In his Situation , any thing that would barely support Nature , was
equal to the greatest Dainties ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,21.169

for his Mind was in so much anxiety , it was impossible for him to spend
one Thought on any thing but the Cause of his Grief .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,21.170

So true is that Observation of <font> Shakespear <$$font> 's , " When
the Mind is free , the Body is delicate ; " that those People know very
little of real Misery <paren> however the Sorrow for their own
Sufferings may make them imagine no one ever endured the like <$$paren>
who can be very sollicitous of what becomes of them .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,21.171

But this was far from being our Hero's Case , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,21.172

for when he found himself too weak to travel farther , he was obliged to
go into a publick House ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,21.173

for being far from home , and an utter Stranger , no <P_1,22> private
House would have admitted him . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.174

As soon as he got into a Room , he threw himself into a Chair ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.175

and could scarce speak . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.176

The Landlord asked him , what he would please to drink ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.177

but he not knowing what he said , made answer , he did not chuse any
thing . Upon which he was answered in a surly manner , " if he did not
care for drinking , he could have no great Business there , " and would
be very welcome to walk out again . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.178

This Treatment just rouzed him enough , to make him recollect where he
was , and that he must call for something ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.179

therefore he ordered a Pint of Beer to be brought , which he immediately
drank off , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.180

for he was very dry , tho' his Griefs were so fixed in his Mind , he
could not feel even Hunger or Thirst . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.181

But Nature must be refreshed by proper Nourishment ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.182

and he found himself now not so faint , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.183

and seemed inclined to sleep ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.184

he therefore inquired for a Bed ; which his kind Landlord <paren> on his
producing Money enough to pay for it <$$paren> immediately procured for
him ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.185

and being perfectly overcome with Fatigue and Trouble , he insensibly
sunk to Rest . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,22.186

<P_1,23>

In the Morning when he waked , all the Transactions of the preceding Day
came fresh into his Mind ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.188

he knew not which way to turn himself , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.189

but lay in the greatest Perplexity for some time :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.190

At last , it came into his head he had an Uncle , who when he was a Boy
used to be very kind to him ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.191

he therefore had some hopes he would receive and take care of him .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.192

He got up , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.193

and walked as well as he was able to his Uncle's House .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.194

The good old Man was quite frighten'd at the sight of him ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.195

for the one Day's extreme Misery he had suffered , had altered him , as
much as if he had been ill a Twelvemonth . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.196

His Uncle begged to know what was the matter with him ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.197

but he would give him no other Answer , but that his Brother and he had
had a few Words , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.198

for he would not complain ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.199

and he desired he would be so kind to let him stay with him a little
while , till Matters could be brought about again .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.200

His Uncle told him , he should be very welcome .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.201

And there for some time I will leave him to his own private Sufferings ,
<font> lest it should be thought I am so ignorant of the World , as not
to know the proper Time of forsaking People . <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,23.202

<P_1,24>

<heading>

Chap. III . <font> In which is seen the Possibility of a married
Couple's leading an uneasy Life . <$$font> FIELDING2-1744-2,1,24.205

<$$heading>

Mutual Fondness , and the Desire of marrying with each other , had
prevailed with the two Servants , who were the Cause of poor <font>
David <$$font> 's Misfortunes , and the Engines of <font> Daniel
<$$font> 's Treachery , to consent to an Action which they themselves
feared they should be d-n'd for ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,24.207

but this fond Couple had not long been joined together in the State of
Matrimony , before <font> John <$$font> found out , that <font> Peggy
<$$font> had not all those Perfections he once imagined her possessed of
; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,24.208

and her Merit decreased every day more and more in his Eyes .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,24.209

However , while the Money lasted , <paren> which was not very long , for
they were not at all scrupulous of using it , thinking such great Riches
were in no danger of being brought to an end <$$paren> between
Upbraidings , Quarrels , Reconciliations , kissing and falling out ,
they made a <P_1,25> shift to jumble on together , without coming to an
open Rupture . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.210

But the Money was no sooner gone , than they grew out of all Patience .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.211

When <font> John <$$font> began to feel Poverty coming upon him , and
found all he had got by his Villainy was <font> a Wife <$$font> , whom
he now was heartily weary of , his Conscience flew in his face ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.212

and would not let him rest . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.213

All the Comfort he had left was in abusing <font> Peggy : <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.214

He said she had betrayed him , and he should have been always honest ,
had it not been for her wheedling . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.215

She , on the other hand , justified herself , by alledging , nothing but
her Love for him could have drawn her into it : And if he thought it so
great a Crime , <font> as he was a Man , and knew better than her , he
should not have consented , or suffered her to do it . <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.216

For tho' I dare say this Girl had never read <font> Milton <$$font> ,
yet she could act the Part of throwing the blame on her Husband , as
well as if she had learned it by heart . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.217

In short , from Morning till Night , they did nothing but quarrel ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.218

and there passed many curious Dialogues between them , which I shall not
here repeat : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.219

for , as I hope to be read by the polite World , I would avoid every
thing , of which they can <font> have no Idea . <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,25.220

<P_1,26>

I shall therefore only say in general , that between the Stings of their
Consciences , the Distresses from Poverty , <font> John <$$font> 's
Coldness and Neglect ; nay , his liking other Women better than his Wife
, <font> which no virtuous Woman can possibly bear <$$font> ; and <font>
Peggy <$$font> 's Uneasiness and Jealousy ; this Couple led a Life very
Little to be envied . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,26.222

But this could not last long , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,26.223

for when they found it was impossible for them to subsist any longer
without working , they resolved to go into separate Services :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,26.224

for they were now as eager to part , as they had formerly been to come
together . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,26.225

They were forming this Resolution , when they heard Mr. <font> David
<$$font> was gone from his Brother's House on a violent Quarrel .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,26.226

This Separation had made a general Discourse , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,26.227

and People said , <font> it was no wonder , for it was impossible any
body could live in the House with him ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,26.228

for he was of such a Temper , that he fell out with his Brother , for no
other reason than because he would not turn away all his Servants to
gratify his Humours . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,26.229

For altho' Mr. <$$font> Daniel <font> had all the Money , yet he was so
<$$font> good to keep him ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,26.230

<font> and sure , when People are kept <$$font> upon Charity , <font>
they need not be so proud , but be glad to be contented , <P_1,27>
without setting <$$font> a Gentleman against his Servants .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.231

<font> The old Gentleman his Father <$$font> knew what he was ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.232

<font> or he would have left him more . <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.233

When <font> John <$$font> heard all this , he was struck with Amazement
, FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.234

and the Wickedness he had been guilty of appeared in so horrible a light
, that he was almost mad . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.235

At first he thought he would find Mr. <font> David <$$font> out , and
confess the whole Truth : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.236

They had lived in the same House a great while ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.237

and <font> John <$$font> knew him to be so mild and gentle , that he
flatter'd himself he might possibly obtain his Forgiveness :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.238

but then the fear of Shame worked so violently , that he despaired of
mustering sufficient Spirits to go through the Story .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.239

The Struggle in his Mind was so great , he could not fix on what to
determine ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.240

but the same Person who had drawn him into this piece of Villainy ,
occasioned at last the Discovery : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.241

For his Wife intreated him , with all the Arguments she could think of ,
not to be hanged voluntarily , when there was no necessity for it ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.242

for altho' the Action they had done was not right , yet , thank God ,
they had not been guilty <font> of Murder . <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,27.243

Indeed if that had been the case , there <P_1,28> would have been a
reason for confessing it ; because it could not have been concealed ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.244

for <font> Murder will out ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.245

the very Birds of the Air will tell of that : <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.246

but as they were in no danger of being found out , it would be madness
to run their Necks into a Halter . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.247

<font> John <$$font> , who was ruined by his Compliance with this Woman
while he liked her , since he was weary of , and hated her , took hold
of every Opportunity to contradict her . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.248

Therefore her Eagerness to keep their Crime a Secret , join'd to his own
Remorse , determined him to let Mr. <font> David <$$font> know it .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.249

However , he dissembled with her for the present , lest she {TEXT:he}
should take any steps to obstruct his Designs .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.250

He immediately began to enquire where Mr. <font> David <$$font> was
gone ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.251

and when he was informed he was at his Uncle's , he went thither ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.252

and asked for him : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.253

but a Servant told him Mr. <font> David <$$font> was indeed there , but
so ill he could not be spoke with . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.254

However , if the Business was of great Consequence , he would call his
Master ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.255

but disclosing it to himself would do as well .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,28.256

<font> John <$$font> answered , what he had to say could be communicated
to nobody but to Mr. <P_1,29> <font> David <$$font> himself .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.257

He was so very importunate to see him , that at last , by the Uncle's
Consent , he was admitted into his Chamber . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.258

When the Fellow came near poor <font> David <$$font> , and observed that
wan and meagre Countenance , which the great Agitation of his Mind
<paren> together with a Fever , which he had been in ever since he came
to his Uncle's <$$paren> had caused , he was so shocked for some time ,
that he could not speak . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.259

At last , he fell on his knees , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.260

and imploring Pardon , told him the whole Story of his forging the Will
, not omitting any one Circumstance . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.261

The great Weakness of <font> David <$$font> 's Body , with this fresh
Astonishment and strong Conviction of his Brother's Villainy , quite
overcame him , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.262

and he fainted away ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.263

but as soon as his Spirits were a little revived , he sent for his Uncle
, FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.264

and told him what <font> John <$$font> had just related .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.265

He asked him what was to be done , and in what manner they could proceed
; for that he would on no account bring publick Infamy on his Brother .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.266

His Uncle told him , he could do nothing in his present Condition ; but
desired him to compose himself , and have a regard to his Health , and
that he would take care of the whole Affair , adding a promise to manage
every thing in the quietest manner possible . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,29.267

<P_1,30>

Then the good-natured Man took <font> John <$$font> into another Room ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,30.269

examined him closely ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,30.270

and assured him , if he would act as he would have him , he would make
Interest that he should be forgiven ; but that he must prevail with his
Wife to join her Evidence with his . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,30.271

<font> John <$$font> said , " if he pleased to go with him , he thought
the best method to deal with her , was to frighten her to it . " On
which the old Gentleman sent for an Attorney , and carried one of his
own Servants for a Constable , in order to make her comply with as
little noise as such an Affair could admit of .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,30.272

They then set out for <font> John <$$font> 's House , when <font> David
<$$font> 's Uncle told the Woman , " if she would confess the truth ,
she should be forgiven ; but if she resolved to persist , he had brought
a Constable to take her up , and she would surely be hanged on her
Husband's Evidence . " FIELDING2-1744-2,1,30.273

The Wench was so terrified , she fell a crying ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,30.274

and told all she knew of the matter . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,30.275

The Attorney then took both their Depositions in Form ; after which ,
<font> John <$$font> and his Wife went home with Mr. <font> David
<$$font> 's Uncle , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,30.276

and were to stay there till the Affair was finished .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,30.277

The poor young Man , with this fresh Disturbance of his Mind , was grown
<P_1,31> worse , and thought to be in danger of losing his Life ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.278

but by the great Care of the old Gentleman he soon recovered .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.279

The Uncle's next Design was to go to <font> Daniel <$$font> , and
endeavour by all means to bring him to reasonable Terms , and to prevail
on him to submit himself to his Brother's Discretion .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.280

<font> Daniel <$$font> , at first , blustered FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.281

and swore , it was a Calumny , and that he would prosecute the Fellow
and Wench for Perjury : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.282

And then left the Room , with a <font> Haughtiness that generally
attends that High-mindedness <$$font> , which is capable of being
detected in Guilt . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.283

He tried all methods possible to get <font> John <$$font> and his Wife
out of his Uncle's House , in order to bribe them a second time ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.284

but that Scheme could not succeed . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.285

He then used every Endeavour to procure false Evidence ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.286

but when the time of Trial approached , his Uncle went once more to
{TEXT:to_to} him , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.287

and talked seriously to him , on the Consequences of being convicted in
a Court of Justice of Forgery , especially of that heinous sort :
Assuring him he had the strongest Evidence , joined to the greatest
Probability of the Falseness of his Father's Will .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.288

After he had discoursed with him some time , and <font> Daniel <$$font>
began to find the Impossibility of defending himself , he fell from one
Extreme to another , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,31.289

<P_1,32>

<paren> for a Mind capable of Treachery , is most times very
pusillanimous <$$paren> FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.291

and his Pride now thought fit to condescend to the most abject
Submissions ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.292

he begged he might see his Brother , and ask his Pardon ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.293

and said , he would live with him as a Servant for the future , if he
would but forgive him . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.294

His Uncle told him , he could by no means admit of his seeing <font>
David <$$font> as yet , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.295

for he was still too weak to be disturbed ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.296

but if he would resign all that was left of his Father's Fortune , and
leave himself at his Brother's mercy , he would venture to promise that
he should not be prosecuted . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.297

<font> Daniel <$$font> was very unwilling to part with his Money ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.298

but finding there was no Remedy , he at last consented .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.299

His Uncle would not leave him till he had got every thing out of his
hands , lest he should embezzle any of it , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.300

there was not above eight_thousand Pounds out of the eleven left by his
Father , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.301

for he had rioted away the rest with Women and Sots .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.302

When every thing was secured , the old Gentleman told <font> David
<$$font> what he had done , who highly approved every Step he had taken
, and was full of Gratitude for his Goodness to him .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,32.303

And <P_1,33> now in appearance all <font> David <$$font> 's Troubles
were over , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,33.304

and indeed he had nothing to make him uneasy , but the reflecting on his
Brother's Actions ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,33.305

these were continually before his Eyes , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,33.306

and tormented him in such a manner , it was some time before he could
recover his Strength . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,33.307

However , he resolved to settle on <font> Daniel <$$font> an Annuity for
Life to keep him from Want , and if he should ever by his Extravagance
fall into Distress , to relieve him , tho' he should not know from whom
it came ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,33.308

but he thought it better not to see him again ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,33.309

for he dared not venture that Trial . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,33.310

<font> David <$$font> desired his Uncle would let him live with him ,
that he might take care of him in his old Age ; and make as much Return
as possible for his generous , good-natured Treatment of him , in his
Distress . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,33.311

This Request was easily granted ; his Company being the greatest
Pleasure the old Man could enjoy . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,33.312

<font> David <$$font> now resolved to live an easy Life , without
entering into any more Engagements of either Friendship or Love ; but to
spend his time in reading and calm Amusements , not flattering himself
with any great Pleasures , and <P_1,34> consequently , not being liable
to any great Disappointments . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,34.313

This manner of Life was soon interrupted again by his Uncle's being
taken violently ill of a Fever , which carried him off in ten Days'
{TEXT:Day's} time . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,34.314

This was a fresh Disturbance to the Ease he had proposed ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,34.315

for <font> David <$$font> had so much Tenderness , he could not possibly
part with so good a Friend , without being moved : tho' he soothed his
Concern as much as possible , with the Consideration that he was arrived
to an Age , wherein to breathe was all could be expected , and that
Diseases and Pains must have filled up the rest of his Life .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,34.316

At last , he began to reflect , even with pleasure , that the Man whom
he had so much reason to esteem and value , had escaped the most
miserable part of a human Life : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,34.317

For hitherto , the old Man had enjoyed good Health ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,34.318

and he was one of those sort of Men who had good Principles , designed
well , and did all the good in his power : but at the same time , was
void of those Delicacies , and strong Sensations of the Mind , which
constitute both the Happiness and Misery of those who are possessed of
them . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,34.319

He left no Children ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,34.320

for tho' he was married young , his Wife died within half a Year of the
Small_Pox . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,34.321

<P_1,35>

She brought him a very good Fortune ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,35.323

and by his Frugality and Care , he died worth upwards of ten_thousand
Pounds , which he gave to his Nephew <font> David <$$font> , some few
Legacies to old Servants excepted . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,35.324

When <font> David <$$font> saw himself in the possession of a very easy
comfortable Fortune , instead of being overjoyed , as is usual on such
occasions , he was at first the more unhappy ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,35.325

the Consideration of the Pleasure he should have had to share this
Fortune with his Brother , continually brought to his Remembrance his
cruel Usage , which made him feel all his old Troubles over again .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,35.326

He had no Ambition , nor any Delight in Grandeur .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,35.327

The only Use he had for Money , was to serve his Friends ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,35.328

but when he reflected how difficult it was to meet with a Person who
deserved that Name , and how hard it would be for him ever to believe
any one sincere , having been so much deceived , he thought nothing in
Life could be any great Good to him again . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,35.329

He spent whole Days in thinking on this Subject , wishing he could meet
with a human Creature capable of Friendship ; by which Word he meant so
perfect a Union <P_1,36> of Minds , that each should consider himself
but as a Part of one entire Being ; a little Community , as it were of
two , to the Happiness of which all the Actions of both should tend with
an absolute disregard of any selfish or separate Interest .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,36.330

This was the Fantom , the Idol of his Soul's Admiration . In the
Worship of which he at length grew such an Enthusiast , that he was in
this Point only as mad as <font> Quixotte <$$font> himself could be with
Knight Errantry ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,36.331

and after much amusing himself with the deepest Ruminations on this
Subject , in which a fertile Imagination raised a_thousand pleasing
Images to itself , he at length took the oddest , most unaccountable
Resolution that ever was heard of , <font> viz. <$$font> To travel
through the whole World , rather than not meet with a real Friend .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,36.332

From the time he lived with his Brother , he had led so recluse a Life ,
that he in a manner had shut himself up from the World ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,36.333

but yet when he reflected that the Customs and Manners of Nations ,
relate chiefly to Ceremonies , and have nothing to do with the Hearts of
Men ; he concluded , <P_1,37> he could sooner enter into the Characters
of Men in the great Metropolis where he lived , than if he went into
foreign Countries ; where , not understanding the Languages so readily ,
it would be more difficult to find out the Sentiments of others , which
was all he wanted to know . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,37.334

He resolved therefore to take a Journey through <font> London <$$font> ;
not as some Travellers do , to see the Buildings , the Streets , to know
the Distances from one Place to another , with many more Sights of equal
Use and Improvement ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,37.335

but his design was to seek out one capable of being a real Friend , and
to assist all those who had been thrown into Misfortunes by the ill
Usage of others . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,37.336

He had good Sense enough to know , that Mankind in their Natures are
much the same every where ; and that if he could go through one great
Town , and not meet with a generous Mind , it would be in vain to seek
farther . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,37.337

In this Project , he intended not to spend a Farthing more than was
necessary , designing to keep all his Money to share with his Friend ,
if he should be so fortunate to find any Man worthy to be called by that
Name . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,37.338

<P_1,38>

<heading>

Chap. IV . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,38.341

<$$heading>

<font> The first setting out of Mr. <$$font> David Simple <font> on his
Journey <$$font> ; <font> with some very remarkable and uncommon
Accidents . <$$font> FIELDING2-1744-2,1,38.343

The first Thought which naturally occurs to a Man , who is going in
search of any thing , is , which is the most likely Method of finding it
. FIELDING2-1744-2,1,38.344

Our Hero , therefore , began to consider seriously amongst all the
Classes and Degrees of Men , where he might most probably meet with a
real Friend . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,38.345

But when he examined Mankind , from the highest to the lowest , he was
convinced , that to Experience alone he must owe his Knowledge ; for
that no Circumstance of Time , Place , or Station , made a Man
absolutely either good or bad , but the Disposition of his own Mind ;
and that Good-nature and Generosity were always the same , tho' the
Power to exert those Qualities are more or less , according to the
Variation of outward Circumstances . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,38.346

He resolved <P_1,39> therefore , to go into all publick Assemblies , and
to be intimate in as many private Families as possible , and to observe
their Manner of living with each other ; by which means , he thought he
should judge of their Principles and Inclinations .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,39.347

As there required but small preparation for his Journey , a Staff , and
a little Money in his Pocket , being all that was necessary , he set out
without any farther Consideration . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,39.348

The first place he went into , was the <font> Royal-Exchange . <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,39.349

He had been there before , to see the Building and hear the Jargon at
the time of high Change ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,39.350

but now his Curiosity was quite of a different kind .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,39.351

He could not have gone any where to have seen a more melancholy Prospect
, or with more likelihood of being disappointed of his Design , than
where Men of all Ages and all Nations were assembled , with no other
View than to barter for Interest . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,39.352

The Countenances of most of the People , showed they were filled with
Anxiety : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,39.353

Some indeed appeared pleased ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,39.354

but yet it was with a mixture of Fear . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,39.355

While he was musing , and making Observations to himself , he was
accosted by a well-looking Man , who asked him , if he would buy into a
<P_1,40> particular Fund . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.356

He said no , he did not intend to deal . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.357

Nay , says the other , I advise you as a Friend ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.358

for now is your time , if you have any Money to lay out ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.359

as you seem a Stranger , I am willing to inform you in what manner to
proceed , lest you should be imposed on by any of the Brokers .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.360

He gave him a great many thanks for his kindness ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.361

but could not be prevailed on to buy any Stock , as he understood so
little of the matter . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.362

About half an Hour afterwards , there was a piece of News published ,
which sunk this Stock a great deal below <font> Par .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.363

David <$$font> then told the Gentleman , it was very lucky he had not
bought ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.364

ay , and so it is , replied he ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.365

but when I spoke , I thought it would be otherwise .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.366

I am sure , I have lost a great deal by this <font> cursed News .
<$$font> FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.367

Immediately <font> David <$$font> was pulled by the Sleeve by one , who
had stood by , and overheard what they had been saying ; who whispered
him in the Ear , to take care what he did , otherwise the Man , with
whom he had been talking , would draw him into some Snare . Upon which
he told his new Friend , what had passed with the other , and how he had
advised him to buy Stock . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.368

Did he , said this Gentleman ? FIELDING2-1744-2,1,40.369

I will assure you , I saw that <P_1,41> very Man sell off as much of
<font> that <$$font> Stock as he could , just before you spoke to him ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.370

but he having a great deal , wanted to draw you in , to buy , in order
to avoid losing ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.371

for he was acquainted with the News , before it was made publick .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.372

<font> David <$$font> was amazed at such Treachery ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.373

and began to suspect every thing about him , of some ill Design .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.374

But he could not imagine , what Interest this Man could have in warning
him , of trusting the other , till by conversing with a third Person ,
he found out , that he was his most inveterate Enemy , from Envy ;
because they had both set out in the World together , with the same
Views of sacrificing every thing to the raising of a Fortune ; and that
, either by cunning or accident , the other was got rich before him .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.375

This was the Motive , said he , of his forewarning you of the other's
Designs : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.376

For that Gentleman who spoke to you first , is one of the sharpest Men I
know ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.377

he is one of the Long-heads , and much too wise to let any one impose on
him : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.378

And to let you into a Secret , he is what we call <font> a good Man .
<$$font> FIELDING2-1744-2,1,41.379

<P_1,42>

<font> David <$$font> seemed surprized at that Epithet ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.381

and asked , how it was possible , a Fellow whom he had just catched in
such a piece of Villainy , could be called a good Man ? At which Words
, the other , with a Sneer at his Folly , told him he meant that he was
worth a Plumb . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.382

Perhaps he might not understand that neither ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.383

<paren> for he began to take him for a Fool <$$paren>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.384

but he meant by a Plumb 100,000 <font> l. <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.385

<font> David <$$font> was now quite in a Rage ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.386

and resolved to stay no longer in a Place , where Riches were esteemed
Goodness , and Deceit , Low-Cunning , and giving up all things to the
love of Gain , were thought Wisdom . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.387

As he was going out of the <font> Change <$$font> , he met a Jeweller ,
who knew him by sight , having seen him at his Uncle's , where he used
often to visit . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.388

He asked him several Questions ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.389

and after a short Conversation , desired he would favour him with his
Company at Dinner , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.390

for his House was just by . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,42.391

<font> David <$$font> readily accepted his Offer , being willing to be
acquainted with as <P_1,43> great a variety of People as he possibly
could . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,43.392

The Jeweller's Name was <font> Johnson <$$font> ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,43.393

he had two Daughters , who were of their Company at Dinner .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,43.394

They were both young , and pretty ; especially the younger , who had
something so soft and engaging in her Countenance , that <font> David
<$$font> was quite charmed with her . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,43.395

Mr. <font> Johnson <$$font> , who had been an extravagant Rake in his
Youth , tho' he was now become a Miser , and a rigid Censurer of others'
{TEXT:others} Pleasures , immediately perceived the young Man was
greatly taken with his Daughter ; which he resolved to improve , knowing
that his Uncle had made him his Heir , and that it was worth while to
endeavour to increase his liking for her . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,43.396

He well remembered , that in his days of Gallantry , he had often from a
transient View of Women liked them ; but for want of Opportunities of
frequently conversing with them , his Passion had grown cool again .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,43.397

He therefore thought the wisest way would be , to engage <font> David
<$$font> to stay some time with him , as the surest Method to fix his
Affection . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,43.398

It was no hard matter to persuade the young Man , to what his
Inclination so strongly prompted him to comply with ; though this
Inclination was so newly born , he hardly knew himself <P_1,44> from
what Motive his desire of staying there arose .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,44.399

But this Ignorance did not continue long ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,44.400

for a short time's conversing with his Mistress , convinced him , how
much he liked her : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,44.401

He resolved to watch her very narrowly , to see , if her Mind was equal
to her Person , which was indeed very agreeable :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,44.402

but Love so magnified her Charms in the Eyes of <font> David <$$font> ,
that from the moment he took a Fancy to her , <font> he imagined her
Beauty exceeded that of all other Women in the World . <$$font> For
which Reason he was strongly possessed , she was in all respects what he
wish'd her to be . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,44.403

The Girl was commanded by her Father , if Mr. <font> David <$$font>
made any Addresses to her , to receive them in such a manner , as to fix
him hers . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,44.404

He said , he had conversed with Women enough in his time , to know they
did not want Arts to manage the Men they had formed any Designs on ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,44.405

and therefore desired she would comply with him , in a Case which would
be so greatly to her Advantage . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,44.406

She did not want many Arguments , to persuade her to endeavour the
Promotion of her own Interest , which she had as much at heart as he
could have . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,44.407

Her only Answer was , she should obey him : on which he <P_1,45> left
her , highly pleased at her Dutifulness ; <font> which he imputed to his
own Wisdom in educating her in a strict manner . <$$font>
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.408

<font> David <$$font> passed his time very happily ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.409

for the Master of the Family omitted nothing in his power to oblige him
, FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.410

and he was always received by his Mistress with cheerful {TEXT:chearful}
Smiles and Good Humour . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.411

He lived on in this agreeable manner for three Months , without ever
wishing to go in search of new Adventures , thinking he had now found
the greatest Happiness to be attained in this World , in a Woman he
could both love and esteem . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.412

Her Behaviour was in all respects engaging ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.413

her Duty to her Father , Complaisance and Affection to her Sister , and
Humanity to the Servants , made him conclude , his travelling was at an
end ; for that in her he had met with every thing he wanted .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.414

He was not long before he asked her Father's Consent , which was easily
obtained ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.415

and now he had not a Wish beyond what he imagined satisfied .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.416

Hitherto he had observed nothing in her , but what increased his good
Opinion . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,45.417

He was one day a little startled , <P_1,46> by her telling him , he
should not seem too anxious , whether he had her , or no ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,46.418

for she was certain her Father deigned , if he found he loved her enough
to take her on any Terms , to save some of her Fortune to add to her
Sister's : FIELDING2-1744-2,1,46.419

but when she told him , she had too much Generosity and Love for him ,
to let him be imposed on by his Affection to her ; this Discourse
increased his good Opinion of her ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,46.420

and the Thought that she loved him , gave him the greatest Pleasure .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,46.421

He then told her , he did not care whether her Father would or could
give her any thing ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,46.422

her Affection was all he coveted in this World .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,46.423

He spent his time in Raptures , in the reflection , what a charming Life
he should lead with such a Woman . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,46.424

But this lasted not long , before all his fancied Scenes of Joy fell to
the ground , by an Accident so very uncommon , I must pause a while
before I can relate it . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,46.425

<P_1,47>

<heading>

Chap. V . <$$heading> <font> In which is contained , a most curious
Dialogue , between a young Woman , and her Confidant {TEXT:Confident} .
<$$font> FIELDING2-1744-2,1,47.428

Just as Mr. <font> David <$$font> and his Mistress were on the point of
being married , there came one day a rich Jew to Mr. <font> Johnson
<$$font> 's House , in order to deal with him for some Jewels .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,47.429

As he had been a long time an Acquaintance of his , he invited him to
Dinner . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,47.430

It happened the Jew was as much taken with the elder Daughter , as Mr.
<font> David <$$font> was with the younger ; which occasioned his making
frequent Visits . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,47.431

The Father soon perceived the Reason of it , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,47.432

and was greatly rejoiced at it ; on which account he delayed the other's
Match for a little while , hoping to see them both well disposed of at
the same time . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,47.433

But the Jew did not presently declare himself , on the consideration
that she was a Christian . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,47.434

He considered , whether it might not be possible , to obtain her on any
other Terms than Matrimony . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,47.435

<P_1,48>

He knew her Father was very covetous ; which gave him hopes , that for a
Sum of Money , he himself would sell her . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.437

He resolved therefore to try that Method first ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.438

but if that did not succeed , as he found he liked her so much , that he
was uneasy without the possession of her , he could but marry her
afterwards . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.439

He was charmed with her Person , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.440

<font> and thought Women's Souls were of no great consequence <$$font> ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.441

nor did it signify much what they profess . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.442

He took the first Opportunity of making his proposal to the Father ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.443

and offered him such a Sum of Money as his Heart leaped at the mention
of ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.444

but he endeavoured to conceal the Effect it had on him as much as
possible , FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.445

and only said , he would consider of it till the next Morning , and then
he should have an Answer . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.446

As soon as Mr. <font> Johnson <$$font> was alone , he sat down to think
seriously on what he should determine . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.447

He was sure by the Sum the Jew had offered for his Daughter , that if he
did not comply with his Scheme , he would marry her , rather than go
without her . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.448

But then he was dubious which he should get most by .
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,48.449

He was a good while deliberating , which way his Interest <P_1,49> would
be best promoted . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,49.450

At last he concluded , if he could get rid of his Daughter , without
giving her any Fortune , and make an Alliance with so rich a Man , it
would in the end prove more conducive to his Interest than taking the
Money . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,49.451

When the Jew therefore came at the appointed time to know his
Determination , he began by telling him , " He was very sorry after so
long an Acquaintance , in all which time he had dealt fairly with him ,
" <paren> as indeed he had never attempted to impose on the Jew ,
knowing it to be impossible <$$paren> , " that he should form a Scheme
to dishonour his Family , and have so ill an Opinion of him , to think
he would be an Instrument in it ; but as it might be owing to the great
Passion he had for his Daughter , he was very unwilling to fall out with
him : If his Love was great enough to marry her , he would give her to
him with all his heart . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,49.452

Perhaps he might object to her being a Christian ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,49.453

but he had always used her implicitly to obey him ;
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,49.454

and therefore he need not fear her conforming to whatever he pleased .
" FIELDING2-1744-2,1,49.455

This Stumbling-block once got over , every thing <P_1,50> else was soon
agreed between them ; FIELDING2-1744-2,1,50.456

for the Jew consented to take her on her Father's own Terms :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,50.457

And there remained nothing now to do , but to acquaint Miss <font>
Johnson <$$font> with it . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,50.458

She was at first startled at the thoughts of changing her Religion :
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,50.459

but as she had no more Understanding than was just necessary to set off
her own Charms , by knowing which Dress , and which Posture became her
best ; and had never been taught any thing more than to go to Church of
a <font> Sunday <$$font> , when she was not wanted to stay at home to
overlook the Dinner , without knowing any other Reason for it than
Custom : The rich Presents the Jew made her , and his Promises of
keeping her great , soon overcame all her Scruples ,
FIELDING2-1744-2,1,50.460

and she consented to have him . FIELDING2-1744-2,1,50.461

