<BEGIN_fielding1-1749-1>

<P_1,5>

<heading>

{COM:BOOK_1} Chap. II . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.4

<font> A short description of Squire <$$font> Allworthy , <font> and a
fuller account of Miss <$$font> Bridget Allworthy <font> his sister .
<$$font> FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.5

<$$heading>

In that Part of the western Division of this Kingdom , which is commonly
called <font> Somersetshire <$$font> , there lately lived <paren> and
perhaps lives still <$$paren> a Gentleman whose Name was <font>
Allworthy <$$font> , and who might well be called the Favourite of both
Nature and Fortune ; FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.7

for both of these seem to have contended which should bless and enrich
him most . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.8

In this Contention , Nature may seem to some to have come off victorious
, as she bestowed on him many Gifts ; while Fortune had only one Gift in
her Power ; FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.9

but in pouring forth this , she was so very profuse , that others
perhaps may think this single Endowment to have been more than
equivalent to all the various blessings which he enjoyed from Nature .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.10

From the former of these , he derived an agreeable Person , a sound
Constitution , a solid Understanding , and a benevolent Heart ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.11

by the latter , he was decreed to the Inheritance of one of the largest
Estates in the County . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.12

This Gentleman had , in his Youth , married a very worthy and beautiful
Woman , of whom he had been extremely fond : FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.13

by her he had three Children , all of whom died in their infancy .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.14

He had likewise had the Misfortune of burying this beloved Wife herself
, about five Years before the time in which this History chuses to set
out . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,5.15

This Loss , however great , he bore like a Man of Sense and Constancy ;
tho' it must be <P_1,6> confessed {TEXT:confest} , he would often talk a
little whimsically on this Head : FIELDING1-1749-1,1,6.16

For he sometimes said he looked on himself as still married , and
considered his Wife as only gone a little before him , a Journey which
he should most certainly , sooner or later , take after her ; and that
he had not the least Doubt of meeting her again in a Place where he
should never part with her more . Sentiments for which his Sense was
arraigned by one Part of his Neighbours , his Religion by a second , and
his Sincerity by a third . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,6.17

He now lived , for the most Part , retired in the Country , with one
Sister , for whom he had a very tender Affection .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,6.18

This lady was now somewhat past the Age of 30 , an Aera , at which , in
the Opinion of the Malicious , the Title of Old Maid may , with no
Impropriety , be assumed . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,6.19

She was of that Species of Women , whom you commend rather for good
Qualities than Beauty , and who are generally called by their own Sex ,
very good sort of Women - as good a Sort of Woman , Madam , as you would
wish to know . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,6.20

Indeed , she was so far from regretting Want of Beauty , that she never
mentioned that Perfection <paren> if it can be called one <$$paren>
without Contempt ; and would often thank God she was not as handsome as
Miss such_a_one , whom perhaps Beauty had led into Errors , which she
might have otherwise avoided . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,6.21

Miss <font> Bridget Allworthy <$$font> <paren> for that was the Name of
this Lady <$$paren> very rightly conceived the Charms of Person in a
Woman to be no better than Snares for herself , as well as for others ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,6.22

and yet so discreet was she in her Conduct , that her Prudence was as
much on the Guard , as if she had all the Snares to apprehend which were
ever laid for her whole Sex . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,6.23

Indeed , I <P_1,7> have observed <paren> tho' it may seem unaccountable
to the Reader <$$paren> that this Guard of Prudence , like the Trained
Bands , is always readiest to go on Duty where there is the least Danger
. FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.24

It often basely and cowardly deserts those Paragons for whom the Men are
all wishing , sighing , dying , and spreading , every Net in their Power
; FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.25

and constantly attends at the Heels of that higher Order of Women for
whom the other Sex have a more distant and awful Respect , and whom
<paren> from Despair , I suppose , of Success <$$paren> they never
venture to attack . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.26

Reader , I think proper , before we proceed any farther together , to
acquaint thee , that I intend to digress , through this whole History ,
as often as I see Occasion : Of which I am myself a better Judge than
any pitiful Critic whatever . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.27

And here I must desire all those Critics to mind their own Business ,
and not to intermeddle with Affairs , or Works which no ways concern
them : FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.28

For , till they produce the Authority by which they are constituted
Judges , I shall not plead to their Jurisdiction .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.29

<heading>

{COM:BOOK_1} Chap. III . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.31

<font> An odd Accident which befel Mr. <$$font> Allworthy <font> at his
Return home . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.32

The decent Behaviour of Mrs. <$$font> Deborah Wilkins , <font> with
some proper Animadversions on Bastards . <$$font>
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.33

<$$heading>

I have told my Reader , in the preceding Chapter , that Mr. <font>
Allworthy <$$font> inherited a large Fortune ; that he had a good Heart
, and no Family . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,7.35

Hence , doubtless , it will be concluded by many , that he lived like an
honest Man , owed no one a <P_1,8> Shilling , took nothing but what was
his own , kept a Good house , entertained his Neighbours with a hearty
Welcome at his Table , and was charitable to the Poor , <font> i.e.
<$$font> to those who had rather beg than work , by giving them the
Offals from it ; that he dy'd immensely rich and built an Hospital .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.36

And true it is , that he did many of these Things ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.37

but , had he done nothing more , I should have left him to have recorded
his own Merit on some fair Free-stone over the Door of that Hospital .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.38

Matters of a much more extraordinary Kind are to be the Subject of this
History , FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.39

or I should grossly misspend my Time in writing so voluminous a Work ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.40

and you , my sagacious Friend , might , with equal Profit and Pleasure ,
travel through some Pages , which certain droll Authors have been
facetiously pleased to call <font> The History of England . <$$font>
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.41

Mr. <font> Allworthy <$$font> had been absent a full Quarter of a Year
in <font> London <$$font> , on some very particular Business , tho' I
know not what it was ; but judge of its Importance by its having
detained him so long from home , whence he had not been absent a Month
at a time during the Space of many Years . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.42

He came to his House very late in the Evening , FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.43

and after a short Supper with his Sister , retired much fatigued to his
Chamber . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.44

Here , having spent some Minutes on his Knees , a Custom which he never
broke through on any Account , he was preparing to step into Bed , when
, upon opening the Cloaths , to his great Surprize , he beheld an Infant
, wrapt up in some coarse Linnen , in a sweet and profound Sleep ,
between his Sheets . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.45

He stood some Time lost in Astonishment at this Sight ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,8.46

but , as Good-nature <P_1,9> had always the Ascendant in his Mind , he
soon began to be touched with Sentiments of Compassion for the little
Wretch before him . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,9.47

He then rang his Bell , FIELDING1-1749-1,1,9.48

and ordered an elderly Woman Servant to rise immediately and come to him
, FIELDING1-1749-1,1,9.49

and in the mean Time was so eager in contemplating the Beauty of
Innocence , appearing in those lively Colours with which Infancy and
Sleep always display it , that his Thoughts were too much engaged to
reflect that he was in his Shirt , when the Matron came in .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,9.50

She had indeed given her Master sufficient Time to dress himself ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,9.51

for out of respect to him , and Regard to Decency , she had spent many
Minutes in adjusting her Hair at the Looking-glass , notwithstanding all
the Hurry in which she had been summoned by the Servant , and tho' her
Master , for aught she knew , lay expiring in an Apoplexy , or in some
other Fit . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,9.52

It will not be wondered at , that a Creature who had so strict a Regard
to Decency in her own Person , should be shocked at the least Deviation
from it in another . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,9.53

She therefore no sooner opened the Door , and saw her Master standing by
the Bed-side in his Shirt , with a Candle in his Hand , than she started
back in a most terrible Fright , and might perhaps have swooned away ,
had he not now recollected his being undrest , and put an End to her
Terrors , by desiring her to stay without the Door till he had thrown
some Cloaths over his Back , and was become incapable of shocking the
pure eyes of Mrs. <font> Deborah Wilkins <$$font> , who , tho' in the
52d Year of her Age , vowed she had never beheld a Man without his Coat
. FIELDING1-1749-1,1,9.54

Sneerers and prophane Wits may perhaps laugh at her first Fright ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,9.55

yet my graver <P_1,10> Reader , when he considers the Time of Night ,
the Summons from her Bed , and the Situation in which she found her
Master , will highly justify and applaud her Conduct ; unless the
Prudence , which must be supposed to attend Maidens at that Period of
Life at which Mrs. <font> Deborah <$$font> had arrived , should a
little lessen his Admiration . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.56

When Mrs. <font> Deborah <$$font> returned into the Room , and was
acquainted by her Master with the finding the little Infant , her
consternation was rather greater than his had been ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.57

nor could she refrain from crying out , with great Horror of Accent as
well as Look , ' My good Sir ! what@ @'s to be done ? '
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.58

Mr. <font> Allworthy <$$font> answered , She must take Care of the
Child that Evening , and in the Morning he would give Orders to provide
it a Nurse . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.59

' Yes , Sir , ' says she , ' and I hope your Worship will send out your
Warrant to take up the Hussy its Mother FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.60

<paren> for she must be one of the Neighbourhood <$$paren>
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.61

and I should be glad to see her committed to <font> Bridewel <$$font> ,
and whipt at the Cart's Tail . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.62

Indeed such wicked Sluts can@ @not be too severely punished .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.63

I@ @'ll warrant 't@ @is not her first , by her impudence in laying it to
your Worship . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.64

' In laying it to me ! <font> Deborah <$$font> , ' answered <font>
Allworthy , ' I ca@ @n't think she hath any such Design .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.65

I suppose she hath only taken this method to provide for her Child ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.66

and truly I am glad she hath not done worse . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.67

' I do@ @n't know what is worse , ' cries <font> Deborah <$$font> , '
than for such wicked Strumpets to lay their Sins at honest Mens Doors ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.68

and though your Worship knows your own Innocence , yet the World is
censorious ; FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.69

and it hath been many an honest Man's Hap to pass for the Father of
Children he never begot ; FIELDING1-1749-1,1,10.70

and if your Worship should provide for the Child , it may <P_1,11> make
the people the apter to believe : FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.71

Besides , why should your Worship provide for what the Parish is obliged
to maintain ? FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.72

For my own Part , if it was an honest Man's Child indeed ; but for my
own Part , it goes against me to touch these misbegotten Wretches , whom
I do@ @n't look upon as my fellow Creatures . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.73

Faugh , how it stinks ! FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.74

It doth not smell like a Christian . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.75

If I might be so bold to give my Advice , I would have it put in a
Basket , and sent out and laid at the Church-Warden's Door .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.76

It is a good Night , only a little rainy and windy ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.77

and if it was well wrapt up , and put in a warm Basket , it is two to
one but it lives till it is found in the Morning .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.78

But if it should not , we have discharged our Duty in taking proper Care
of it ; FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.79

and it is , perhaps , better for such Creatures to die in a State of
Innocence , than to grow up and imitate their Mothers ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.80

for nothing better can be expected of them . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.81

There were some Strokes in this Speech which perhaps would have offended
Mr. <font> Allworthy <$$font> , had he strictly attended to it ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.82

but he had now got one of his Fingers into the Infant's Hand , which ,
by its gentle Pressure , seeming to implore his Assistance , had
certainly out-pleaded the eloquence of Mrs. <font> Deborah <$$font> ,
had it been ten times greater than it was . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.83

He now gave Mrs. <font> Deborah <$$font> positive Orders to take the
Child to her own Bed , and to call up a Maid-servant to provide it Pap ,
and other Things , against it waked . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.84

He likewise ordered that proper Clothes should be procured for it early
in the Morning , and that it should be brought to himself as soon as he
was stirring . FIELDING1-1749-1,1,11.85

Such was the Discernment of Mrs. <font> Wilkins <$$font> , and such the
Respect she bore her Master , under <P_1,12> whom she enjoyed a most
excellent Place , that her Scruples gave Way to his peremptory Commands
; and she took the Child under her Arms , without any apparent Disgust
at the Illegality of its Birth ; and declaring it was a sweet little
Infant , walked off with it to her own Chamber .
FIELDING1-1749-1,1,12.86

<font> Allworthy <$$font> here betook himself to those pleasing Slumbers
which a Heart that hungers after Goodness is apt to enjoy when
thoroughly satisfied : FIELDING1-1749-1,1,12.87

As these are possibly sweeter than what are occasioned by any other
hearty Meal , I should take more Pains to display them to the Reader ,
if I knew any Air to recommend him to for the procuring such an Appetite
. FIELDING1-1749-1,1,12.88

<P_2,5>

<heading>

{COM:BOOK_6} Chap. II . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,5.91

<font> The character of Mrs. <$$font> Western . <font>
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,5.92

Her great Learning and Knowledge of the World , and an Instance of the
deep Penetration which she derived from those Advantages . <$$font>
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,5.93

<$$heading>

The Reader hath seen Mr. <font> Western <$$font> , his Sister , and
Daughter , with young <font> Jones <$$font> , and the Parson , going
together to Mr. <font> Western <$$font> 's <P_2,6> House , where the
greater Part of the Company spent the Evening with much Joy and
Festivity . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.95

<font> Sophia <$$font> was indeed the only grave Person :
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.96

For as to <font> Jones <$$font> , though Love had now gotten entire
Possession of his Heart , yet the pleasing Reflection on Mr. <font>
Allworthy <$$font> 's Recovery , and the Presence of his Mistress ,
joined to some tender Looks which she now and then could not refrain
from giving him , so elevated our Heroe , that he joined the Mirth of
the other three , who were perhaps as good-humoured People as any in the
World . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.97

<font> Sophia <$$font> retained the same Gravity of Countenance the next
Morning at Breakfast ; whence she retired likewise earlier than usual ,
leaving her Father and Aunt together . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.98

The Squire took no Notice of this Change in his Daughter's Disposition .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.99

To say the Truth , though he was somewhat of a Politician , and had been
twice a Candidate in the Country Interest at an Election , he was a Man
of no great Observation . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.100

His Sister was a Lady of a different Turn . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.101

She had lived about the Court , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.102

and had seen the World . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.103

Hence she had acquired all that Knowledge which the said World usually
communicates ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.104

and was a perfect Mistress of Manners , Customs , Ceremonies , and
Fashions . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.105

Nor did her Erudition stop here . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.106

She had considerably improved her Mind by Study ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.107

she had not only read all the modern Plays , Operas , Oratorios , Poems
and Romances ; in all which she was a Critic ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.108

but had gone thro' <font> Rapin <$$font> 's History of <font> England
<$$font> , <font> Eachard <$$font> 's <font> Roman History <$$font> ,
and many <font> French Memoires pour servir a l'Histoire <$$font> ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,6.109

to these she had added most of the political Pamphlets and Journals
published within the last twenty Years . <P_2,7> From which she had
attained a very competent Skill in Politics , and could discourse very
learnedly on the Affairs of <font> Europe <$$font> .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.110

She was , moreover , excellently well skilled in the Doctrine of Amour ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.111

and knew better than any Body who and who were together : a Knowledge
which she the more easily attained , as her Pursuit of it was never
diverted by any Affairs of her own ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.112

for either she had no Inclinations , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.113

or they had never been solicited ; which last is indeed very probable :
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.114

For her masculine Person , which was near six Foot high , added to her
Manner and Learning , possibly prevented the other Sex from regarding
her , notwithstanding her Petticoats , in the Light of a Woman .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.115

However , as she had considered the Matter scientifically , she
perfectly well knew , though she had never practised them , all the Arts
which fine Ladies use when they desire to give Encouragement , or to
conceal Liking , with all the long Appendage of Smiles , Ogles , Glances
, <font> &c. <$$font> as they are at present practised in the
Beau-monde . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.116

To sum the whole , no Species of Disguise or Affectation had escaped her
Notice ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.117

but as to the plain simple Workings of honest Nature , as she had never
seen any such , she could know but little of them .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.118

By means of this wonderful Sagacity , Mrs. <font> Western <$$font> had
now , as she thought , made a Discovery of something in the Mind of
<font> Sophia <$$font> . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.119

The first Hint of this she took from the Behaviour of the young Lady in
the Field of Battle ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.120

and the Suspicion which she then conceived , was greatly corroborated by
some Observations which she had made that Evening , and the next Morning
. FIELDING1-1749-1,2,7.121

However , being greatly cautious to avoid being found in a Mistake , she
carried the Secret a <P_2,8> whole Fortnight in her Bosom , giving only
some oblique Hints , by Simpering , Winks , Nods , and now and then
dropping an obscure Word , which indeed sufficiently alarmed <font>
Sophia <$$font> , but did not at all affect her Brother .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.122

Being at length , however , thoroughly satisfied of the Truth of her
Observation , she took an Opportunity , one Morning , when she was alone
with her Brother , to interrupt one of his Whistles in the following
Manner . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.123

' Pray , Brother , have you not observed something very extraordinary in
my Niece lately ? ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.124

' No , not I , ' answered <font> Western <$$font> ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.125

Is anything the matter with the Girl ? ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.126

' I think there is , ' replies she , ' and something of much Consequence
too . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.127

' Why , she doth not complain of any Thing , '
{COM:moved_close_quote_from_after_"Western"} cries <font> Western
<$$font> , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.128

' and she hath had the Small_Pox . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.129

' Brother , ' returned she , ' girls are liable to other Distempers
besides the Small_Pox , and sometimes possibly to much worse . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.130

Here <font> Western <$$font> interrupted her with much Earnestness ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.131

and begged her , if any thing ailed his Daughter , to acquaint him
immediately ; adding , ' she knew he loved her more than his own Soul ,
and that he would send to the World's End for the best Physician to her
. ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.132

' Nay , nay , ' answered she , smiling , ' the Distemper is not so
terrible ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.133

but I believe , Brother , you are convinced I know the World ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.134

and I promise you I was never more deceived in my Life , if my Niece be
not most desperately in Love . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.135

' How ! in Love ! ' cries <font> Western <$$font> , in a Passion ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.136

' in Love , without acquainting me ! FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.137

I@ @'ll disinherit her ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.138

I@ @'ll turn her out of Doors , stark naked , without a Farthing .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,8.139

Is all my Kindness vor 'ur , and vondness o'@ @ur <P_2,9> come to this ,
to fall in Love without asking me Leave ? ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.140

' But you will not , ' answered Mrs. <font> Western <$$font> , ' turn
this Daughter , whom you love better than your own Soul , out of Doors ,
before you know whether you shall approve her Choice .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.141

Suppose she should have fixed on the very Person whom you yourself would
wish , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.142

I hope you would not be angry then ? ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.143

' No , no , ' cries <font> Western <$$font> , ' that would make a
Difference . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.144

If she marries the Man I would ha' her , she may love whom she pleases ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.145

I sha@ @n't trouble my Head about that . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.146

' That is spoken , ' answered the Sister , ' like a sensible Man ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.147

but I believe the very Person she hath chosen would be the very Person
you would chuse for her . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.148

I will disclaim all Knowledge of the World , if it is not so ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.149

and I believe , Brother , you will allow I have some . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.150

' Why , look@ @ee , Sister , ' said <font> Western <$$font> , ' I do
believe you have as much as any Woman ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.151

and to be sure those are Women's Matters . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.152

You know I do@ @n't love to hear you talk about Politics ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.153

they belong to us , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.154

and Petticoats should not meddle : FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.155

but come , Who is the Man ? ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.156

' Marry ! ' said she , ' you may find him out yourself , if you please
. FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.157

You , who are so great a Politician , can be at no great Loss .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.158

The Judgment which can penetrate into the Cabinets of Princes , and
discover the secret Springs which move the great State Wheels in all the
political Machines of <font> Europe <$$font> , must surely , with very
little Difficulty , find out what passes in the rude uninformed Mind of
a Girl . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.159

' Sister , ' cries the Squire , ' I have often warned you not to talk
the Court Gibberish to me . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,9.160

I tell you , I do@ @n't understand the Lingo ; but I can read a Journal
, <P_2,10> or the <font> London Evening Post . <$$font>
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.161

Perhaps , indeed , there may be now and then {TEXT:tan} a Verse which I
ca@ @n't make much of , because half the Letters are left out ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.162

yet I know very well what is meant by that , and that our Affairs do@
@n't go so well as they should do , because of Bribery and Corruption .
' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.163

' I pity your Country Ignorance from my Heart , ' cries the Lady .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.164

' Do you ? ' answered <font> Western <$$font> ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.165

' and I pity your Town Learning ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.166

I had rather be anything than a Courtier , and a Presbyterian , and a
Hanoverian too , as some people , I believe , are . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.167

' If you mean me , ' answered she , ' you know I am a Woman , Brother ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.168

and it signifies nothing what I am . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.169

Besides - {COM:missing_close_quote} FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.170

' I do know you are a Woman , ' cries the Squire ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.171

' and it@ @'s well for thee , that art {TEXT:at} one ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.172

if hadst been a Man , I promise thee I had lent thee a <font> Flick
<$$font> long ago . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.173

' Ay there , ' said she , ' in that <font> Flick <$$font> lies all your
fancied Superiority . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.174

Your Bodies , and not your Brains , are stronger than ours .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.175

Believe me , it is well for you that you are able to beat us ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.176

or , such is the Superiority of our Understanding , we should make all
of you what the brave , and wise , and witty , and polite are already ,
- our Slaves . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.177

' I am glad I know your Mind , ' answered the Squire .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.178

' But we@ @'ll talk more of this Matter another Time .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.179

At present , do tell me what Man is it you mean about my Daughter ? '
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.180

' Hold a Moment , ' said she , ' while I digest that sovereign Contempt
I have for your Sex ; or else I ought to be too angry with you .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.181

There - I have made a Shift to gulp it down . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.182

And now , good politic Sir , what think you of Mr. <font> Blifil
<$$font> ? FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.183

Did she not faint away on seeing him lie breathless on the Ground ?
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,10.184

Did she not , <P_2,11> after he was recovered , turn pale again the
Moment we came up to that Part of the Field where he stood ?
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.185

And pray what else should be the Occasion of all her Melancholy that
Night at Supper , the next Morning , and indeed ever since ? '
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.186

' 'Fore <font> George <$$font> ! ' cries the Squire ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.187

' now you mind me on@ @'t , I remember it all .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.188

It is certainly so , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.189

and I am glad on@ @'t with all my Heart . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.190

I knew <font> Sophy <$$font> was a good Girl , and would not fall in
Love to make me angry . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.191

I was never more rejoiced in my Life ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.192

for nothing can lie so handy together as our two Estates .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.193

I had this Matter in my Head some Time ago : FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.194

for certainly the two Estates are in a Manner joined together in
Matrimony already , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.195

and it would be a_thousand Pities to part them .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.196

It is true , indeed , there be larger Estates in the Kingdom , but not
in this County , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.197

and I had rather bate something , than marry my Daughter among Strangers
and Foreigners . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.198

Besides , most o' zuch great Estates be in the Hands of Lords ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.199

and I heate the very name of <font> themmun <$$font> .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.200

Well but , Sister , what would you advise me to do :
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.201

For I tell you Women know these Matters better than we do ? '
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.202

' Oh , your humble Servant , Sir , ' answered the lady :
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.203

' we are obliged to you for allowing us a Capacity in any Thing .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.204

Since you are pleased , then , most politic Sir , to ask my Advice , I
think you may propose the Match to <font> Allworthy <$$font> yourself .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.205

There is no Indecorum in the Proposal's coming from the Parent of either
Side . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.206

King <font> Alcinous <$$font> , in Mr. <font> Pope <$$font> 's Odyssey
, offers his Daughter to <font> Ulysses <$$font> .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.207

I need not caution so politic a Person not to say that your Daughter is
in Love ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,11.208

that would indeed be against all <P_2,12> rules . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.209

' Well , ' said the Squire , ' I will propose it ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.210

but I shall certainly lend un a <font> Flick <$$font> , if he should
refuse me . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.211

' Fear not , ' cries Mrs. <font> Western <$$font> ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.212

' the Match is too advantageous to be refused . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.213

' I do@ @n't know that , ' answered the Squire :
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.214

' Allworthy is a queer B-ch , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.215

and Money hath no Effect o'@ @un . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.216

' Brother , ' said the Lady , ' your Politics astonish me .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.217

Are you really to be imposed on by Professions ?
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.218

Do you think Mr. <font> Allworthy <$$font> hath more Contempt for Money
than other Men because he professes more ? FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.219

Such Credulity would better become one of us weak Women , than that wise
Sex which Heaven hath formed for Politicians .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.220

Indeed , Brother , you would make a fine Plenipo to negotiate with the
<font> French <$$font> . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.221

They would soon persuade you , that they take Towns out of mere
defensive Principles . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.222

' Sister , ' answered the Squire , with much Scorn , ' let your Friends
at Court answer for the Towns taken ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.223

as you are a Woman , I shall lay no Blame upon you :
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.224

For I suppose they are wiser than to trust Women with Secrets . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.225

He accompanied this with so sarcastical a Laugh , that Mrs. <font>
Western <$$font> could bear no longer . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.226

She had been all this Time fretted in a tender Part
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.227

<paren> for she was indeed very deeply skilled in these matters , and
very violent in them <$$paren> , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.228

and therefore , burst forth in a Rage , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.229

declared her Brother to be both a Clown and a Blockhead , and that she
would stay no longer in his House . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.230

The Squire , tho' perhaps he had never read <font> Machiavel <$$font> ,
was , however , in many Points , a perfect Politician .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.231

He strongly held all those wise Tenets , which are so well inculcated in
that Politico-Peripatetic school of <font> Exchange-Alley <$$font> .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,12.232

<P_2,13>

He knew the just Value and only Use of Money , <font> viz. <$$font> to
lay it up . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.234

He was likewise well skilled in the exact Value of Reversions ,
Expectations , <font> &c. <$$font> FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.235

and had often considered the Amount of his Sister's Fortune , and the
Chance which he or his Posterity had of inheriting it .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.236

This he was infinitely too wise to sacrifice to a trifling Resentment .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.237

When he found , therefore , he had carried Matters too far , he began to
think of reconciling them ; which was no very difficult Task , as the
Lady had great Affection for her Brother , and still greater for her
Niece ; and tho' too susceptible of an Affront offered to her skill In
Politics , on which she much valued herself , was a Woman of a very
extraordinary good and sweet Disposition . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.238

Having first , therefore , laid violent Hands on the Horses , for whose
Escape from the Stable no place but the Window was left open ; he next
applied himself to his Sister ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.239

softened and soothed her , by unsaying all he had said , and by
Assertions directly contrary to those which had incensed her .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.240

Lastly , he summoned the Eloquence of <font> Sophia <$$font> to his
Assistance , who , besides a most graceful and winning Address , had the
Advantage of being heard with great Favour and Partiality by her Aunt .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.241

The Result of the whole was a kind Smile from Mrs. <font> Western
<$$font> , who said , ' Brother , you are absolutely a perfect <font>
Croat <$$font> ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.242

but as those have their use in the Army of the Empress Queen , so you
likewise have some good in you . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.243

I will therefore once more sign a Treaty of Peace with you ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.244

and see that you do not infringe it on your Side ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,13.245

at least , as you are so excellent a Politician , I may expect you will
<P_2,14> keep your leagues , like the <font> French <$$font> , till your
Interest calls upon you to break them . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.246

<heading>

{COM:BOOK_6} Chap. III . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.248

<font> Containing two defiances to the critics . <$$font>
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.249

<$$heading>

The Squire having settled matters with his Sister , as we have seen in
the last Chapter , was so greatly impatient to communicate the Proposal
to <font> Allworthy <$$font> , that Mrs. <font> Western <$$font> had
the utmost Difficulty to prevent him from visiting that Gentleman in his
Sickness , for this Purpose . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.251

Mr. <font> Allworthy <$$font> had been engaged to dine with Mr. <font>
Western <$$font> at the Time when he was taken ill .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.252

He was , therefore , no sooner discharged out of the Custody of Physic ,
but he thought <paren> as was usual with him on all Occasions , both the
highest and the lowest <$$paren> of fulfilling his Engagement .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.253

In the Interval between the Time of the Dialogue in the last Chapter ,
and this Day of public Entertainment , <font> Sophia <$$font> had , from
certain obscure Hints thrown out by her Aunt , collected some
Apprehension that the sagacious Lady suspected her Passion for <font>
Jones <$$font> . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.254

She now resolved to take this Opportunity of wiping out all such
Suspicion , and for that Purpose to put an entire Constraint on her
Behaviour . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.255

First , she endeavoured to conceal a throbbing melancholy Heart with the
utmost Sprightliness in her Countenance , and the highest Gaiety in her
Manner . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.256

Secondly , she addressed her whole Discourse to Mr. <font> Blifil
<$$font> , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.257

and took not the least Notice of poor <font> Jones <$$font> the whole
Day . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,14.258

The Squire was so delighted with this Conduct of his Daughter , that he
scarce eat any <P_2,15> Dinner , and spent almost his whole Time in
watching Opportunities of conveying Signs of his Approbation by Winks
and Nods to his Sister ; who was not at first altogether so pleased with
what she saw as was her Brother . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.259

In short , <font> Sophia <$$font> so greatly overacted her Part , that
her Aunt was at first staggered , and began to suspect some Affectation
in her Niece ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.260

but as she was herself a Woman of great Art , so she soon attributed
this to extreme Art in <font> Sophia <$$font> .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.261

She remembered the many Hints she had given her Niece concerning her
being in Love , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.262

and imagined the young Lady had taken this Way to rally her out of her
Opinion , by an overacted Civility : a Notion that was greatly
corroborated by the excessive Gaiety with which the whole was
accompanied . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.263

We can@ @not here avoid remarking , that this Conjecture would have been
better founded had <font> Sophia <$$font> lived ten years in the Air of
<font> Grosvenor-Square <$$font> , where young Ladies do learn a
wonderful Knack of rallying and playing with that Passion , which is a
mighty serious Thing in Woods and Groves an_hundred Miles distant from
<font> London <$$font> . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.264

To say the Truth , in discovering the Deceit of others , it matters much
that our own Art be wound up , if I may use the Expression , in the same
Key with theirs : FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.265

For very artful Men sometimes miscarry by fancying others wiser , or ,
in other Words , greater Knaves , than they really are .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.266

As this Observation is pretty deep , I will illustrate it by the
following short Story . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.267

Three Countrymen were pursuing a <font> Wiltshire <$$font> Thief through
<font> Brentford <$$font> . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.268

The simplest of them seeing the <font> Wiltshire House <$$font> written
under a Sign , advised his Companions to enter it ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,15.269

for there most probably <P_2,16> they would find their Countryman .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.270

The second , who was wiser , laughed at this Simplicity ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.271

but the third , who was wiser still , answered , ' Let us go in ,
however , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.272

for he may think we should not suspect him of going amongst his own
Countrymen . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.273

They accordingly went in FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.274

and searched the House , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.275

and by that Means missed overtaking the Thief , who was , at that Time ,
but a little way before them ; and who , as they all knew , but had
never once reflected , could not read . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.276

The Reader will pardon a Digression in which so invaluable a Secret is
communicated , since every Gamester will agree how necessary it is to
know exactly the Play of another , in order to countermine him .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.277

This will , moreover , afford a Reason why the wiser Man , as is often
seen , is the Bubble of the weaker , and why many simple and innocent
Characters are so generally misunderstood and misrepresented ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.278

but what is most material , this will account for the Deceit which
<font> Sophia <$$font> put on her politic Aunt .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.279

Dinner being ended , and the Company retired into the garden , Mr.
<font> Western <$$font> , who was thoroughly convinced of the Certainty
of what his Sister had told him , took Mr. <font> Allworthy <$$font>
aside , FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.280

and very bluntly proposed a Match between <font> Sophia <$$font> and
young Mr. <font> Blifil <$$font> . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.281

Mr. <font> Allworthy <$$font> was not one of those Men whose Hearts
flutter at any unexpected and sudden tidings of worldly Profit .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.282

His Mind was , indeed , tempered with that Philosophy which becomes a
Man and a Christian . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.283

He affected no absolute Superiority to all Pleasure and Pain , to all
Joy And grief ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,16.284

but was not at the same time to be discomposed and ruffled by every
accidental <P_2,17> Blast ; by every Smile or Frown of Fortune .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.285

He received , therefore , Mr. <font> Western <$$font> 's Proposal
without any visible Emotion , or without any Alteration of Countenance .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.286

He said the Alliance was such as he sincerely wished ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.287

then launched forth into a very just Encomium on the young Lady's Merit
; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.288

acknowledged the Offer to be advantageous in Point of Fortune ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.289

and after thanking Mr. <font> Western <$$font> for the good Opinion he
had professed of his Nephew , concluded , that if the young People liked
each other , he should be very desirous to complete the Affair .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.290

<font> Western <$$font> was a little disappointed at Mr. <font>
Allworthy <$$font> 's Answer , which was not so warm as he expected .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.291

He treated the Doubt whether the young People might like one another
with great Contempt , saying , ' That Parents were the best Judges of
proper Matches for their Children : that , for his Part , he should
insist on the most resigned Obedience from his Daughter : and if any
young Fellow could refuse such a Bedfellow , he was his humble Servant ,
and hoped there was no Harm done . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.292

<font> Allworthy <$$font> endeavoured to soften this Resentment by many
Eulogiums {TEXT:Elogiums} on <font> Sophia <$$font> , declaring , he had
no doubt but that Mr. <font> Blifil <$$font> would very gladly receive
the Offer ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.293

but all was ineffectual ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.294

he could obtain no other Answer from the Squire but - ' I say no more -
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.295

I humbly hope there@ @'s no Harm done - FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.296

that@ @'s all . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.297

Which Words he repeated at least , a_Hundred times before they parted .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.298

<font> Allworthy <$$font> was too well acquainted with his Neighbour to
be offended at this Behaviour ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,17.299

and tho' he was so averse to the Rigour which some Parents exercise on
their Children in the Article <P_2,18> of Marriage , that he had
resolved never to force his Nephew's Inclinations , he was nevertheless
much pleased with the Prospect of this Union : FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.300

For the whole Country resounded the Praises of <font> Sophia <$$font> ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.301

and he had himself greatly admired the uncommon Endowments of both her
Mind and Person . To which , I believe we may add , the Consideration
of her vast Fortune , which , tho' he was too sober to be intoxicated
with it , he was too sensible to despise . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.302

And here , in Defiance of all the barking Critics in the World , I must
and will introduce a Digression concerning true Wisdom , of which Mr.
<font> Allworthy <$$font> was in Reality as great a Pattern as he was of
Goodness . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.303

True Wisdom then , notwithstanding all which Mr. <font> Hogarth
<$$font> 's poor Poet may have writ against Riches , and in Spite of all
which any rich well-fed Divine may have preached against Pleasure ,
consists not in the Contempt of either of these .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.304

A Man may have as much Wisdom in the Possession of an affluent Fortune ,
as any Beggar in the Streets ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.305

or may enjoy a handsome Wife or a hearty Friend , and still remain as
wise as any sour Popish Recluse , who buries all his social Faculties ,
and starves his Belly while he well lashes his Back .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.306

To say Truth , the wisest Man is the likeliest to possess all worldly
Blessings in an eminent Degree : FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.307

For as that Moderation which Wisdom prescribes is the surest Way to
useful Wealth ; so can it alone qualify us to taste many Pleasures .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.308

The wise Man gratifies every Appetite and every Passion , while the Fool
sacrifices all the rest to pall and satiate one .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,18.309

<P_2,19>

It may be objected , That very wise Men have been notoriously avaricious
. FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.311

I answer , Not in that Instance . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.312

It may likewise be said , That the wisest men have been in their Youth ,
immoderately fond of Pleasure . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.313

I answer , They were not wise then . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.314

Wisdom , in short , whose Lessons have been represented as so hard to
learn by those who never were at her School , teaches us only to extend
a simple Maxim universally known and followed even in the lowest Life ,
a little farther than that Life carries it . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.315

And this is not to buy at too dear a Price . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.316

Now , whoever takes this Maxim abroad with him into the grand Market of
the World , and constantly applies it to Honours , to Riches , to
Pleasures , and to every other Commodity which that Market affords , is
, I will venture to affirm , a wise Man ; FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.317

and must be so acknowledged in the worldly Sense of the Word :
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.318

For he makes the best of Bargains , since in Reality he purchases every
Thing at the Price only of a little Trouble , and carries home all the
good Things I have mentioned , while he keeps his Health , his Innocence
, and his Reputation , the common Prices which are paid for them by
others , entire and to himself . FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.319

From this Moderation , likewise , he learns two other Lessons , which
complete his Character . First , never to be intoxicated when he hath
made the best Bargain , nor dejected when the Market is empty , or when
its Commodities are too dear for his Purchase .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,19.320

But I must remember on what Subject I am writing , and not trespass too
far on the Patience <P_2,20> of a good-natured Critic .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,20.321

Here , therefore , I put an End to the Chapter .
FIELDING1-1749-1,2,20.322

<P_3,5>

<heading>

{COM:BOOK_10} Chap. II . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.325

<font> Containing the Arrival of an <$$font> Irish <font> Gentleman ,
with very extraordinary Adventures which ensued at the Inn . <$$font>
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.326

<$$heading>

Now the little trembling Hare , which the Dread of all her numerous
Enemies , and chiefly of that cunning , cruel , carnivorous Animal Man ,
had confined all the Day to her Lurking-place , sports wantonly o'er the
Lawns : FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.328

Now on some hollow Tree the Owl , shrill Chorister of the Night , hoots
forth Notes which might charm the Ears of some modern Connoisseurs in
Music : FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.329

Now , in the Imagination of the half-drunk Clown , as he staggers
through the Church-yard , or rather Charnel-yard , to his Home , Fear
paints the bloody Hobgoblin ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.330

Now Thieves and Ruffians are awake , and honest Watchmen fast asleep :
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.331

In plain <font> English <$$font> , it was now Midnight ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.332

and the Company at the Inn , as well those who have been already
mentioned in this History , as some others who arrived in the Evening ,
were all in Bed . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.333

<font> Susan <$$font> Chambermaid was now only stirring , she being
obliged to wash the Kitchen before she retired to the Arms of the fond
expecting Ostler . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.334

In this Posture were Affairs at the Inn when a Gentleman arrived there
Post . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.335

He immediately alighted from his Horse , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,5.336

and , coming up to <font> Susan <$$font> , enquired of her , in a very
abrupt and confused Manner , being almost out of Breath with <P_3,6>
Eagerness , whether there was any Lady in the House ?
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,6.337

The Hour of Night , and the Behaviour of the Man , who stared very
wildly all the Time , a little surprized <font> Susan <$$font> , so that
she hesitated before she made any Answer : Upon which the Gentleman ,
with redoubled Eagerness , begged her to give him a true Information ,
saying , He had lost his Wife , and was come in Pursuit of her .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,6.338

' Upon my Shoul {COM:missing_close_quote} , cries he ,
{COM:missing_open_quote} I have been near catching her already in two or
three Places , if I had not found her gone just as I came up with her .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,6.339

If she be in the House , do carry me up in the Dark and shew her to me ;
and if she be gone away before me , do tell me which Way I shall go
after her to meet her , and , upon my Shoul , I will make you the
richest poor Woman in the Nation . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,3,6.340

He then pulled out a Handful of Guineas , a Sight which would have
bribed Persons of much greater Consequence than this poor Wench to much
worse Purposes . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,6.341

<font> Susan <$$font> , from the Account she had received of Mrs.
<font> Waters <$$font> , made not the least Doubt but that she was the
very identical Stray whom the right Owner pursued .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,6.342

As she concluded , therefore , with great Appearance of Reason , that
she never could get Money in an honester Way than by restoring a Wife to
her Husband , she made no Scruple of assuring the Gentleman that the
Lady he wanted was then in the House , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,6.343

and was presently afterward prevailed upon <paren> by very liberal
Promises , and some Earnest paid into her Hands <$$paren> to conduct him
to the Bed-chamber of Mrs. <font> Waters <$$font> .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,6.344

It hath been a Custom long established in the polite World , and that
upon very solid and substantial <P_3,7> Reasons , that a Husband shall
never enter his Wife's Apartment without first knocking at the Door .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.345

The many excellent Uses of this Custom need scarce be hinted to a Reader
who hath any Knowledge of the World : FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.346

For by this Means the Lady hath Time to adjust herself , or to remove
any disagreeable Object out of the Way ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.347

for there are some Situations , in which nice and delicate Women would
not be discovered by their Husbands . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.348

To say the Truth , there are several Ceremonies instituted among the
polished part of Mankind , which , tho' they may , to coarser Judgments
, appear as Matters of mere Form , are found to have much of Substance
in them , by the more discerning ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.349

and lucky would it have been , had the Custom abovementioned been
observed by our Gentleman in the present Instance .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.350

Knock , indeed , he did at the Door , but not with one of those gentle
Raps which is usual on such Occasions . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.351

On the contrary , when he found the Door locked , he flew at it with
such Violence , that the Lock immediately gave Way , the Door burst open
, and he fell headlong into the Room . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.352

He had no sooner recovered his Legs , than forth from the Bed , upon his
Legs likewise , appeared - with Shame and Sorrow are we obliged to
proceed - our Heroe himself , who , with a menacing Voice , demanded of
the Gentleman who he was , and what he meant by daring to burst open his
Chamber in that outrageous Manner . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.353

The Gentleman at first thought he had committed a Mistake ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,7.354

and was going to ask Pardon and retreat , when , on a sudden , as the
Moon <P_3,8> shone very bright , he cast his Eyes on Stays , Gowns ,
Petticoats , Caps , Ribbons , Stockings , Garters , Shoes , Clogs ,
<font> &c. <$$font> all which lay in a disordered Manner on the Floor .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.355

All these , operating on the natural Jealousy of his Temper , so enraged
him , that he lost all Power of Speech ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.356

and , without returning any Answer to <font> Jones <$$font> , he
endeavoured to approach the Bed . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.357

<font> Jones <$$font> immediately interposing , a fierce Contention
arose , which soon proceeded to Blows on both Sides .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.358

And now Mrs. <font> Waters <$$font> <paren> for we must confess she was
in the same Bed <$$paren> being , I suppose , awakened from her Sleep ,
and seeing two Men fighting in her Bedchamber , began to scream in the
most violent Manner , crying out Murder ! Robbery ! and more
frequently Rape ! which last , some , perhaps , may wonder she should
mention , who do not consider that these Words of Exclamation are used
by Ladies in a Fright , as Fa , la , la , ra , da , <font> &c. <$$font>
are in Music , only as the Vehicles of Sound , and without any fixed
Ideas . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.359

Next to the Lady's Chamber was deposited the Body of an <font> Irish
<$$font> Gentleman , who arrived too late at the Inn to have been
mentioned before . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.360

This Gentleman was one of those whom the <font> Irish <$$font> call a
Calabalaro , or Cavalier . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.361

He was a younger Brother of a good Family , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.362

and , having no Fortune at Home , was obliged to look abroad in order to
get one : For which purpose he was proceeding to the <font> Bath
<$$font> , to try his Luck with Cards and the Women .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.363

This young Fellow lay in Bed reading one of Mrs. <font> Behn <$$font>
's Novels ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,8.364

for he had been instructed by a Friend , that he would find no more
effectual Method of recommending himself to the Ladies than the
improving his Understanding , and filling <P_3,9> his Mind with good
Literature . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.365

He no sooner , therefore , heard the violent Uproar in the next Room ,
than he leapt from his Bolster , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.366

and , taking his Sword in one Hand , and the Candle which burnt by him
in the other , he went directly to Mrs. <font> Waters <$$font> 's
Chamber . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.367

If the Sight of another Man in his Shirt at first added some Shock to
the Decency of the Lady , it made her presently Amends by considerably
abating her Fears ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.368

for no sooner had the Calabalaro enter'd the Room , than he cry'd out ,
' Mr. <font> Fitzpatrick <$$font> , what the Devil is the <font> Maning
<$$font> of this ? ' Upon which the other immediately answered , ' O ,
Mr. <font> Maclachlan <$$font> , I am rejoiced you are here ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.369

- This Villain hath debauched my Wife , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.370

and is got into bed with her . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.371

- ' What Wife ? ' cries <font> Maclachlan <$$font> ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.372

' do not I know Mrs. <font> Fitzpatrick <$$font> very well ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.373

and do@ @n't I see that the Lady , whom the Gentleman who stands here in
his Shirt is lying in Bed with , is none of her ? '
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.374

<font> Fitzpatrick <$$font> , now perceiving , as well by the Glimpse he
had of the Lady , as by her Voice , which might have been distinguished
at a greater Distance than he now stood from her , that he had made a
very unfortunate Mistake , began to ask many Pardons of the Lady ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.375

and then , turning to <font> Jones <$$font> , he said , ' I would have
you take Notice I do not ask your Pardon , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.376

for you have <font> bate <$$font> me ; for which I am resolved to have
your Blood in the Morning . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.377

<font> Jones <$$font> treated this Menace with much Contempt ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.378

and Mr. <font> Maclachlan <$$font> answered , ' Indeed , Mr. <font>
Fitzpatrick <$$font> , you may be ashamed of your ownself , to disturb
People at this Time of Night : FIELDING1-1749-1,3,9.379

If all the People in the Inn were not <P_3,10> asleep , you would have
awakened them as you have me . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.380

The Gentleman has served you very rightly . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.381

Upon my Conscience , tho' I have no Wife , if you had treated her so , I
would have cut your Throat . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.382

<font> Jones <$$font> was so confounded with his fears for his Lady's
Reputation , that he knew neither what to say or do ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.383

but the Invention of Women is , as hath been observed , much readier
than that of Men . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.384

She recollected that there was a Communication between her Chamber and
that of Mr. <font> Jones <$$font> ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.385

relying , therefore , on his Honour and her own Assurance , she answered
, ' I know not what you mean , Villains ! FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.386

I am Wife to none of you . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.387

Help ! FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.388

Rape ! FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.389

Murder ! FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.390

Rape ! ' FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.391

- And now , the Landlady coming into the Room , Mrs. <font> Waters
<$$font> fell upon her with the utmost Virulence , saying , ' She
thought herself in a sober Inn , and not in a Bawdy-House ; but that a
Set of Villains had broke into her Room , with an Intent upon her Honour
, if not upon her Life ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.392

and both , she said , were equally dear to her . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.393

The Landlady now began to roar as loudly as the poor Woman in Bed had
done before . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.394

She cry'd , ' She was undone , and that the Reputation of her House ,
which was never blown upon before , was utterly destroyed . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.395

Then , turning to the Men , she cry'd , " What , in the Devil's Name ,
is the Reason of all this Disturbance in the Lady's Room ? '
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.396

<font> Fitzpatrick <$$font> , hanging down his Head , repeated , ' that
he had committed a Mistake , for which he heartily asked Pardon , '
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.397

and then retired with his Countryman . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,10.398

<font> Jones <$$font> , who was too ingenious to have missed the Hint
given him by his Fair One , boldly asserted , ' That he had run to her
Assistance upon hearing <P_3,11> the Door broke open ; with what Design
he could not conceive , unless of robbing the Lady ; which if they
intended , he said , he had had the good Fortune to prevent . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.399

' I never had a Robbery committed in my House since I have kept it , '
cries the Landlady : FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.400

' I wou'd have you to know , Sir , I harbour no Highwaymen here ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.401

I scorn the Word , thof {COM:sic} I say it . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.402

None but honest , good Gentlefolks , are welcome to my House ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.403

and , I thank good Luck , I have always had enow of such Customers ;
indeed as many as I could entertain . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.404

Here hath been my Lord - ' FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.405

and then she repeated over a Catalogue of Names and Titles , many of
which we might , perhaps , be guilty of a Breach of Privilege by
inserting . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.406

<font> Jones <$$font> , after much Patience , at length interrupted her
, by making an Apology to Mrs. <font> Waters <$$font> , for having
appeared before her in his Shirt , assuring her ' That nothing but a
Concern for her Safety could have prevailed on him to do it . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.407

The Reader may inform himself of her Answer , and , indeed , of her
whole Behaviour to the End of the Scene , by considering the Situation
which she affected , being that of a modest Lady , who was awakened out
of her Sleep by three strange Men in her Chamber .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.408

This was the Part which she undertook to perform ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.409

and , indeed , she executed it so well , that none of our Theatrical
Actresses could exceed her , in any of their Performances , either on or
off the Stage . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.410

And hence , I think , we may very fairly draw an Argument , to prove how
extremely natural Virtue is to the Fair Sex : FIELDING1-1749-1,3,11.411

For , tho' there is not , perhaps , one in ten_thousand who is capable
of making a good Actress , and even among these <P_3,12> we rarely see
two who are equally able to personate the same Character ; yet this of
Virtue they can all admirably well put on ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,12.412

and as well those Individuals who have it not , as those who possess it
, can all act it to the utmost Degree of Perfection .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,12.413

When the Men were all departed , Mrs. <font> Waters <$$font> ,
recovering from her Fear , recovered likewise from her Anger ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,12.414

and spoke in much gentler Accents to the Landlady , who did not so
readily quit her Concern for the Reputation of the House , in Favour of
which she began again to number the many great Persons who had slept
under her Roof ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,12.415

but the Lady stopt her short , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,12.416

and having absolutely acquitted her of having had any Share in the past
Disturbance , begged to be left to her Repose , which , she said , she
hoped to enjoy unmolested during the Remainder of the Night . Upon
which the Landlady , after much Civility and many Curt'sies , took her
Leave . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,12.417

<heading>

{COM:BOOK_10} Chap. III . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,12.419

<font> A dialogue between the landlady and <$$font> Susan <font> the
Chambermaid , proper to be read by all Inn-keepers , and their Servants
; with the Arrival , and affable Behaviour of a beautiful young Lady ;
which may teach Persons of Condition how they may acquire the Love of
the whole World . <$$font> FIELDING1-1749-1,3,12.420

<$$heading>

The Landlady remembering that <font> Susan <$$font> had been the only
Person out of Bed when the Door was burst open , resorted presently to
her , to enquire into the first Occasion of the Disturbance , as well as
who the strange Gentleman was , and when and how he arrived .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,12.422

<P_3,13>

<font> Susan <$$font> related the whole Story which the Reader knows
already , varying the Truth only in some Circumstances , as she saw
convenient , and totally concealing the Money which she had received .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.424

But whereas her Mistress had in the Preface to her Enquiry spoken much
in Compassion for the Fright which the Lady had been in concerning any
intended Depredations on her Virtue , <font> Susan <$$font> could not
help endeavouring to quiet the Concern which her Mistress seemed to be
under on that Account , by swearing heartily she saw <font> Jones
<$$font> leap out from her Bed . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.425

The Landlady fell into a violent Rage at these Words .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.426

' A likely Story truly , ' cried she , ' that a Woman should cry out ,
and endeavour to expose herself , if that was the Case !
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.427

I desire to know what better Proof any Lady can give of her Virtue than
her crying out , which , I believe , twenty People can witness for her
she did ? FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.428

I beg , Madam , you would spread no such Scandal of any of my Guests :
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.429

For it will not only reflect on them , but upon the House ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.430

and I am sure no Vagabonds , nor wicked beggarly People come here . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.431

' Well , ' says <font> Susan <$$font> , ' then I must not believe my own
Eyes . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.432

' No , indeed , must you not always , ' answered her Mistress ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.433

' I would not have believed my own Eyes against such good Gentlefolks .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.434

I have not had a better Supper ordered this half Year than they ordered
last Night , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.435

and so easy and good-humoured were they , that they found no Fault with
my <font> Worcestershire <$$font> Perry , which I sold them for <font>
Champagne <$$font> ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.436

and to be sure it is as well_tasted and as wholesome as the best <font>
Champagne <$$font> in the Kingdom , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,13.437

otherwise I would scorn to give it <P_3,14> 'em ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.438

and they drank me {COM:construing_this_as_ethical_dative} two Bottles .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.439

No , no , I will never believe any Harm of such sober good Sort of
People . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.440

<font> Susan <$$font> being thus silenced , her Mistress proceeded to
other Matters . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.441

' And so you tell me , ' continued she , ' that the strange Gentleman
came Post , and there is a Footman without with the Horses ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.442

why then , he is certainly some of your great Gentlefolks too .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.443

Why did not you ask him whether he@ @'d have any Supper ?
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.444

I think he is in the other Gentleman's Room ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.445

go up FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.446

and ask whether he called . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.447

Perhaps he@ @'ll order something when he finds any Body stirring in the
House to dress it . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.448

Now do@ @n't commit any of your usual Blunders , by telling him the
Fire@ @'s out , and the Fowls alive . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.449

And if he should order Mutton , do@ @n't blab out , that we have none .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.450

The Butcher , I know , killed a Sheep just before I went to Bed ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.451

and he never refuses to cut it up warm when I desire it .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.452

Go , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.453

remember there@ @'s all Sorts of Mutton and Fowls ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.454

go , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.455

open the Door with , <font> Gentlemen , d'@ @ye call <$$font> ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.456

and if they say nothing , ask what his Honour will be pleased to have
for Supper ? FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.457

Do@ @n't forget his Honour . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.458

Go ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.459

if you do@ @n't mind all these Matters better , you@ @'ll never come to
any Thing . ' FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.460

<font> Susan <$$font> departed , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.461

and soon returned with an Account , that the two Gentlemen were got both
into the same Bed . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.462

' Two Gentlemen , ' says the Landlady , ' in the same Bed !
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.463

that@ @'s impossible , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.464

they are two errant Scrubs , I warrant them , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.465

and I believe young Squire <font> Allworthy <$$font> guessed right ,
that the Fellow intended to rob her Ladyship : FIELDING1-1749-1,3,14.466

For if he had broke open the Lady's Door with any of the wicked Designs
of <P_3,15> a Gentleman , he would never have sneaked away to another
Room to save the expense of a Supper and a Bed to himself .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.467

They are certainly Thieves , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.468

and their searching after a Wife is nothing but a Pretence . '
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.469

In these Censures , my Landlady did Mr. <font> Fitzpatrick <$$font>
great Injustice ; FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.470

for he was really born a Gentleman , though not worth a Groat ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.471

and tho' , perhaps , he had some few Blemishes in his Heart as well as
in his Head , yet being a sneaking , or a niggardly Fellow , was not one
of them . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.472

In reality , he was so generous a Man , that , whereas he had received a
very handsome Fortune with his Wife , he had now spent every Penny of it
, except some little Pittance which was settled upon her ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.473

and , in order to possess himself of this , he had used her with such
Cruelty , that , together with his Jealousy , which was of the bitterest
Kind , it had forced the poor Woman to run away from him .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.474

This Gentleman then being well tired with his long Journey from <font>
Chester <$$font> in one Day , with which , and some good dry Blows he
had received in the Scuffle , his Bones were so sore , that added to the
soreness of his Mind , it had quite deprived him of any Appetite for
eating . And being now so violently disappointed in the Woman whom , at
the Maid's Instance , he had mistaken for his Wife , it never once
entered into his Head that she might nevertheless be in the House ,
though he had erred in the first Person he had attacked .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.475

He therefore yielded to the Dissuasions of his Friend from searching any
farther after her that Night , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.476

and accepted the kind Offer of Part of his Bed .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,15.477

<P_3,16>

The Footman and Post-Boy were in a different Disposition .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,16.479

They were more ready to order than the Landlady was to provide ;
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,16.480

however , after being pretty well satisfied by them of the real Truth of
the Case , and that Mr. <font> Fitzpatrick <$$font> was no Thief , she
was at length prevailed on to set some cold Meat before them , which
they were devouring with great Greediness , when <font> Partridge
<$$font> came into the Kitchen . FIELDING1-1749-1,3,16.481

He had been first awaked by the Hurry which we have before seen ,
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,16.482

and while he was endeavouring to compose himself again on his Pillow , a
Screech-Owl had given him such a Serenade at his Window , that he leapt
in a most horrible Affright from his Bed , FIELDING1-1749-1,3,16.483

and , huddling on his Cloaths with great Expedition , ran down to the
Protection of the Company , whom he heard talking below in the Kitchen .
FIELDING1-1749-1,3,16.484

