<BEGIN_fielding1-1754-2>

<P_467>

<heading>

The Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon . FIELDING1-1754-2,467.4

By The Late Henry Fielding , Esq. FIELDING1-1754-2,467.5

<$$heading>

Wednesday , June 26 , 1754 . FIELDING1-1754-2,467.7

On this day , the most melancholy sun I had ever beheld arose ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,467.8

and found me awake at my house at Fordhook . FIELDING1-1754-2,467.9

By the light of this sun , I was , in my own opinion , last to behold
and take leave of some of those creatures on whom I doated with a
mother-like fondness , guided by nature and passion , and uncured and
unhardened by all the doctrine of that philosophical school where I had
learnt to bear pains and to despise death . FIELDING1-1754-2,467.10

In this situation , as I could not conquer nature , I submitted entirely
to her , FIELDING1-1754-2,467.11

and she made as great a fool of me as she had ever done of any woman
whatsoever : FIELDING1-1754-2,467.12

under pretence of giving me leave to enjoy , she drew me in to suffer
the company of my little ones , during eight hours ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,467.13

and I doubt not whether , in that time , I did not undergo more than in
all my distemper . FIELDING1-1754-2,467.14

At twelve precisely my coach was at the door , which was no sooner told
me than I kissed my children round , and went into it with some little
resolution . FIELDING1-1754-2,467.15

My wife , who behaved more like a heroine and philosopher , though at
the same time the tenderest mother in the world , and my eldest daughter
, followed me , FIELDING1-1754-2,467.16

some friends went with us , FIELDING1-1754-2,467.17

and others here took their leave ; FIELDING1-1754-2,467.18

and I heard my behaviour applauded , with many murmurs and praises to
which I well knew I had no title ; as all other such philosophers may ,
if they have any modesty , confess on the like occasions .
FIELDING1-1754-2,467.19

<P_468>

In two hours we arrived in Redriffe , FIELDING1-1754-2,468.21

and immediately went on board , FIELDING1-1754-2,468.22

and were to have sailed the next morning ; FIELDING1-1754-2,468.23

but as this was the king's proclamation-day , and consequently a holiday
at the Custom-house , the captain could not clear his vessel till the
Thursday ; FIELDING1-1754-2,468.24

for these holidays are as strictly observed as those in the popish
calendar , FIELDING1-1754-2,468.25

and are almost as numerous . FIELDING1-1754-2,468.26

I might add , that both are opposite to the genius of trade , and
consequently <font> contra bonum publicum . <$$font>
FIELDING1-1754-2,468.27

To go on board the ship it was necessary first to go into a boat ; a
matter of no small difficulty , as I had no use of my limbs , and was to
be carried by men , who , though sufficiently strong for their burden ,
were , like Archimedes , puzzled to find a steady footing .
FIELDING1-1754-2,468.28

Of this , as few of my readers have not gone into wherries on the Thames
, they will easily be able to form to themselves an idea .
FIELDING1-1754-2,468.29

However , by the assistance of my friend Mr. Welch , whom I never think
or speak of but with love and esteem , I conquered this difficulty , as
I did afterwards that of ascending the ship , into which I was hoisted
with more ease by a chair lifted with pullies . FIELDING1-1754-2,468.30

I was soon seated in a great chair in the cabin , to refresh myself
after a fatigue which had been more intolerable , in a quarter of a
mile@ @'s passage from my coach to the ship , than I had before
undergone in a land-journey of twelve miles , which I had travelled with
the utmost expedition . FIELDING1-1754-2,468.31

This latter fatigue was , perhaps , somewhat heightened by an
indignation which I could not prevent arising in my mind .
FIELDING1-1754-2,468.32

I think , upon my entrance into the boat , I presented a spectacle of
the highest horror . FIELDING1-1754-2,468.33

The total loss of limbs was apparent to all who saw me ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,468.34

and my face contained marks of a most diseased state , if not of death
itself . FIELDING1-1754-2,468.35

Indeed , so ghastly was my countenance , that timorous women with child
had abstained from my house , for fear of the ill consequences of
looking at me . FIELDING1-1754-2,468.36

In this condition , I ran the gauntlope , <paren> so , I think , I may
justly call it <$$paren> through rows of sailors and watermen , few of
whom failed of paying their compliments to me , by all manner of insults
and jests on my misery . FIELDING1-1754-2,468.37

No man who knew me will think I conceived any personal redentment at
this behaviour ; FIELDING1-1754-2,468.38

but it was a lively picture of that cruelty and inhumanity in the nature
of men , which I have often contemplated with concern ; and which leads
the mind into a train of very uncomfortable and melancholy thoughts .
FIELDING1-1754-2,468.39

It may be said , that this barbarous custom is peculiar to the English ,
and of them only to the lowest degree ; that it is an excrescence of an
uncontrolled licentiousness mistaken for liberty , and never shews
itself in men who are polished and refined , in such manner as human
nature requires , to produce that perfection of which it is susceptible
, and to purge away that malevolence of disposition , of which , at our
birth , we partake in common with the savage creation .
FIELDING1-1754-2,468.40

This may be said , FIELDING1-1754-2,468.41

and this is all that can be said ; FIELDING1-1754-2,468.42

and it is , I am afraid , but little satisfactory to account for the
inhumanity of those , who , while they boast of being made after God's
own image , seem to bear in their minds a resemblance of the vilest
species ; of brutes ; or rather , indeed , of our idea of devils :
FIELDING1-1754-2,468.43

for I do@ @n't know that any brutes can be taxed with such malevolence .
FIELDING1-1754-2,468.44

A surloin of beef was now placed on the table , for which , though
little better than Carrion , as much was charged by the masters of the
little paltry alehouse who dressed it , as would have been demanded for
all the elegance of the King's Arms , or any other polite tavern , or
eating-house : FIELDING1-1754-2,468.45

for , indeed , the difference between the best house and the world is ,
that at the former you pay largely for luxury , at the latter for
nothing . FIELDING1-1754-2,468.46

Thursday , June 27 . FIELDING1-1754-2,468.47

This morning the captain , who lay on shore at his own house , paid us a
visit in the cabin ; FIELDING1-1754-2,468.48

and behaved like an angry bashaw , declaring , that had he known we were
not to be pleased , he would not have carried us for five_hundred pounds
. FIELDING1-1754-2,468.49

He added many asseverations that he was a gentleman , and despised money
; not forgetting <P_469> several hints of the presents which had been
made him for his cabin , of twenty , thirty , and forty guineas , by
several gentlemen , over and above the sum for which they had contracted
. FIELDING1-1754-2,469.50

This behaviour greatly surprised me , as I knew not how to account for
it , nothing having happened since we parted from the captain the
evening before in perfect good humour ; FIELDING1-1754-2,469.51

and all this broke forth on the first moment of his arrival this morning
. FIELDING1-1754-2,469.52

He did not , however , suffer my amazement to have any long continuance
, before he clearly shewed me that all this was meant only as an apology
to introduce another procrastination <paren> being the fifth <$$paren>
of his weighing anchor ; which was now postponed till Saturday ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,469.53

for such was his will and pleasure . FIELDING1-1754-2,469.54

Besides the disagreeable situation in which we then lay , in the
confines of Wapping and Redriffe , tasting a delicious mixture of the
air of both these sweet places , and enjoying the concord of sweet
sounds of seamen , watermen , fish-women , oyster-women , and of all the
vociferous inhabitants of both shores , composing altogether a greater
variety of harmony than Hogarth's imagination hath brought together in
that print of his , which is enough to make a man deaf to look at ; I
had a more urgent cause to press our departure , which was , that the
dropsy , for which I had undergone three tappings , seemed to threaten
me with a fourth discharge , before I should reach Lisbon , and when I
should have no body on board capable of performing the operation ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,469.55

but I was obliged to hearken to the voice of reason , if I may use the
captain's own words , and to rest myself contented .
FIELDING1-1754-2,469.56

Indeed , there was no alternative within my reach , but what would have
cost me much too dear . FIELDING1-1754-2,469.57

There are many evils in society , from which people of the highest rank
are so entirely exempt , that they have not the least knowledge or idea
of them ; nor , indeed , of the characters which are formed by them .
FIELDING1-1754-2,469.58

Such , for instance , is the conveyance of goods and passengers from one
place to another . FIELDING1-1754-2,469.59

Now there is no such thing as any kind of knowledge contemptible in
itself ; FIELDING1-1754-2,469.60

and as the particular knowledge I here mean is entirely necessary to the
well understanding and well enjoying this journal , and , lastly , as in
this case the most ignorant will be those very readers whose amusement
we chiefly consult , and to whom we wish to be supposed principally to
write , we will here enter somewhat largely into the discussion of this
matter ; the rather , for that no antient or modern author <paren> if we
can trust the catalogue of Doctor Mead's library <$$paren> hath ever
undertaken it ; but that it seems <paren> in the style of Don Quixotte
<$$paren> a task reserved for my pen alone . FIELDING1-1754-2,469.61

When I first conceived this intention , I began to entertain thoughts of
enquiring into the antiquity of travelling ; FIELDING1-1754-2,469.62

and , as many persons have performed in this way <paren> I mean have
travelled <$$paren> at the expence of the public , I flattered myself
that the spirit of improving arts and sciences , and of advancing useful
and substantial learning , which so eminently distinguishes this age ,
and hath given rise to more speculative societies in Europe than I at
present can recollect the names of ; perhaps , indeed , than I or any
other besides their very near neighbours ever heard mentioned , would
assist in promoting so curious a work . A work ! begun with the same
views , calculated for the same purposes , and fitted for the same uses
with the labours which those right honourable societies have so
chearfully undertaken themselves , and encouraged in others ; sometimes
with the highest honours , even with admission into their colleges , and
with inrollment among their members . FIELDING1-1754-2,469.63

From these societies I promised myself all assistance in their power ,
particularly the communication of such valuable manuscripts and records
as they must be supposed to have collected from those obscure ages of
antiquity , when history yields us such imperfect accounts of the
residence , and much more imperfect , of the travels of the human race ;
unless , perhaps , as a curious and learned member of the young society
of antiquarians is said to have hinted his conjectures {COM:sic} , that
their residence and their travels were <P_470> one and the same ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.64

and this discovery <paren> for such it seems to be <$$paren> he is said
to have owed the lighting by accident on a book , which we shall have
occasion to mention presently , the contents of which were then little
known to the society . FIELDING1-1754-2,470.65

The King of Prussia , moreover , who from a degree of benevolence and
taste , which in either case is a rare production in so northern a
climate , is the great encourager of art and science , I was well
allured would promote so useful a design , and order his archives to be
searched in my behalf . FIELDING1-1754-2,470.66

But after well weighing all these advantages , and much meditation on
the order of my work , my whole design was subverted in a moment by
hearing of the discovery just mentioned to have been made by the young
antiquarian , who , from the most antient record in the world <paren>
though I do@ @n't find the society are all agreed in this point
<$$paren> one long preceding the date of the earliest modern collections
, either of books or butterflies , none of which pretend to go beyond
the flood , shews us , that the first man was a traveller , and that he
and his family were scarce settled in Paradise before they disliked
their own home , and became passengers to another place .
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.67

Hence it appears , that the humour of travelling is as old as the human
race , and that it was their curse from the beginning .
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.68

By this discovery my plan became much shortened ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.69

and I found it only necessary to treat of the conveyance of goods and
passengers from place to place ; which not being universally known ,
seemed proper to be explained , before we examined into its original .
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.70

There are , indeed , two different ways of tracing all things , used by
the historian and the antiquary FIELDING1-1754-2,470.71

these are upwards and downwards . FIELDING1-1754-2,470.72

The former shews you how things are , FIELDING1-1754-2,470.73

and leaves to others to discover when they began to be so .
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.74

The latter shews you how things were , FIELDING1-1754-2,470.75

and leaves their present existence to be examined by others .
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.76

Hence the former is more useful ; the latter more curious .
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.77

The former receives the thanks of mankind ; the latter of that valuable
part , the virtuosi . FIELDING1-1754-2,470.78

In explaining , therefore , this mystery of carrying goods and
passengers from one place to another , hitherto so profound a secret to
the very best of our readers , we shall pursue the historical method ,
and endeavour to shew by what means it is at present performed ,
referring the more curious enquiry either to some other pen , or to some
other opportunity . FIELDING1-1754-2,470.79

Now there are two general ways of performing <paren> if God permit
<$$paren> this conveyance ; viz. by land and water , both of which have
much variety ; that by land being performed in different vehicles , such
as coaches , caravans , waggons , &c. and that by water in ships ,
barges , and boats , of various sizes and denominations .
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.80

But as all these methods of conveyance are formed on the same principles
, they agree so well together , that it is fully sufficient to
comprehend them all in the general view , without descending to such
minute particulars , as would distinguish one method from another .
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.81

Common to all of these is one general principle , that as the goods to
be conveyed are usually the larger , so they are to be chiefly
considered in the conveyance ; FIELDING1-1754-2,470.82

the owner being indeed little more than an appendage to his trunk , or
box , or bale , or at best a small part of his own baggage , very little
care is to be taken in stowing or packing them up with convenience to
himself : FIELDING1-1754-2,470.83

for the conveyance is not of passengers and goods , but of goods and
passengers . FIELDING1-1754-2,470.84

Secondly , From this conveyance arises a new kind of relation , or
rather of subjection in the society ; by which the passenger becomes
bound in allegiance to his conveyer . FIELDING1-1754-2,470.85

This allegiance is indeed only temporary and local , but the most
absolute during its continuance , of any known in Great Britain , and ,
to say truth , scarce confident with the liberties of a free people ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,470.86

nor could it be reconciled with them , did it not move downwards , a
Circumstance universally apprehended to be incompatible to all kinds of
slavery . FIELDING1-1754-2,470.87

<P_471>

For Aristotle , in his Politicks , hath proved abundantly to my
satisfaction , that no men are born to be slaves , except barbarians ;
and there only to such as are not themselves barbarians :
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.89

and indeed Mr. Montesquieu hath carried it very little farther , in the
case of the Africans ; the real truth being , that no man is born to be
a slave , unless to him who is able to make him so .
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.90

Thirdly , This subjection is absolute , FIELDING1-1754-2,471.91

and consists of a perfect resignation both of body and soul to the
disposal of another ; after which resignation , during a certain time ,
his subject retains no more power over his own will , than an Asiatic
slave , or an English wife , by the laws of both countries , and by the
customs of one of them . FIELDING1-1754-2,471.92

If I should mention the instance of a stage-coachman , many of my
readers would recognize the truth of what I have here observed ; all
indeed , that ever have been under the dominion of that tyrant , who ,
in this free country , is as absolute as a Turkish Bashaw .
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.93

In two particulars only his power is defective ; FIELDING1-1754-2,471.94

he can@ @not press you into his service , FIELDING1-1754-2,471.95

and if you enter yourself at one place , on condition of being
discharged at a certain time at another , he is obliged to perform his
agreement , if God permit : FIELDING1-1754-2,471.96

but all the intermediate time you are absolutely under his government ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.97

he carries you how he will , when he will , and whither he will ,
provided it be not much out of the road ; FIELDING1-1754-2,471.98

you have nothing to eat , or to drink , but what , and when , and where
he pleases . FIELDING1-1754-2,471.99

Nay , you can@ @not sleep , unless he pleases you should ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.100

for he will order you sometimes out of bed at midnight , and hurry you
away at a moment's warning : FIELDING1-1754-2,471.101

indeed , if you can sleep in his vehicle , he can@ @not prevent it ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.102

nay , indeed , to give him his due , this he is ordinarily disposed to
encourage ; FIELDING1-1754-2,471.103

for the earlier he forces you to rise in the morning , the more time he
will give you in the heat of the day , sometimes even fix hours at an
alehouse , or at their doors , where he always gives you the same
indulgence which he allows himself ; FIELDING1-1754-2,471.104

and for this he is generally very moderate , in his demands .
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.105

I have known a whole bundle of passengers charged no more than half a
crown for being suffered to remain quiet at an alehouse door , for above
a whole hour , and that even in the hottest day in summer .
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.106

But as this kind of tyranny , though it hath escaped our political
writers , hath been , I think , touched by our dramatic , and is more
trite among the generality of readers ; and as this and all other kinds
of such subjection are alike unknown to my friends , I will quit the
passengers by land , and treat of those who travel by water ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.107

for whatever is said on this subject is applicable to both alike ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.108

and we may bring them together as closely as they are brought in the
liturgy , when they are recommended to the prayers of all Christian
congregations ; and <paren> which I have often thought very remarkable
<$$paren> where they are joined with other miserable wretches , such as
, women in labour , people in sickness , infants just born , prisoners
and captives . FIELDING1-1754-2,471.109

Goods and passengers are conveyed by water in divers vehicles , the
principal of which being a ship , it shall suffice to mention that alone
. FIELDING1-1754-2,471.110

Here the tyrant doth not derive his title , as the stage-coachman doth
from the vehicle itself , in which he stows his goods and passengers ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.111

but he is called the captain ; a word of such various use and uncertain
signification , that it seems very difficult to fix any positive idea to
it : FIELDING1-1754-2,471.112

if , indeed , there be any general meaning which may comprehend all its
different uses , that of the head , or chief , of any body of men ,
seems to be most capable of this comprehension ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,471.113

for whether they be a company of soldiers , a crew of sailors , or a
gang of rogues , he who is at the head of them is always stiled the
captain . FIELDING1-1754-2,471.114

The particular tyrant , whose fortune it was to stow us aboard , laid a
farther claim to this appellation than the bare command of a vehicle of
conveyance . FIELDING1-1754-2,471.115

He had been the captain of a privateer , which he chose to call being in
the king's service , FIELDING1-1754-2,471.116

and thence derived a right of hoisting the military ornament of a
cockade over the button of his hat . FIELDING1-1754-2,471.117

<P_472>

He likewise wore a sword of no ordinary length by his side , with which
he swaggered in his cabin , among the wretches his passengers , whom he
had stowed in cupboards on each side . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.119

He was a person of a very singular character . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.120

He had taken it into his head that he was a gentleman , from those very
reasons that proved he was not one ; and to shew himself a fine
gentleman , by a behaviour which seemed to insinuate he had never seen
one . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.121

He was , moreover , a man of gallantry ; FIELDING1-1754-2,472.122

at the age of seventy , he had the sinicalness of Sir Courtly Nice ,
with the roughness of Surly FIELDING1-1754-2,472.123

and while he was deaf himself , had a voice capable of deafening all
others . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.124

Now , as I saw myself in danger by the delays of the captain , who was ,
in reality , waiting for more freight , and as the wind had been long
nested , as it were , in the south-west , where it constantly blew
hurricanes , I began with great reason to apprehend that our voyage
might be long , and that my belly , which began already to be much
extended , would require the water to be let out at a time when no
assistance was at hand ; though , indeed , the captain comforted me with
assurances , that he had a pretty young fellow on board , who acted as
his surgeon , as I found he likewise did as steward , cook , butler ,
sailor . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.125

In short , he had as many offices as Scrub in the play ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,472.126

and went through them all with great dexterity FIELDING1-1754-2,472.127

this of surgeon , was , perhaps , the only one in which his skill was
somewhat deficient , at least that branch of tapping for the dropsy ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,472.128

for he very ingenuously and modestly confessed , he had never seen the
operation performed , nor was possessed of that chirurgical instrument
with which it is performed . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.129

Friday , June 28 . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.130

By way of prevention , therefore , I this day sent for my friend Mr.
Hunter , the great surgeon and anatomist of Covent-garden ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,472.131

and , though my belly was not yet very full and tight , let out ten
quarts of water ; FIELDING1-1754-2,472.132

the young sea-surgeon attended the operation , not as a performer , but
as a student . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.133

I was now eased of the greatest apprehension which I had from the length
of the passage ; FIELDING1-1754-2,472.134

and I told the captain , I was become indifferent as to the time of his
sailing . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.135

He expressed much satisfaction in this declaration , and at hearing from
me , that I found myself , since my tapping , much lighter and better .
FIELDING1-1754-2,472.136

In this , I believe , he was sincere ; FIELDING1-1754-2,472.137

for , he was , as we shall have occasion to observe more than once , a
very good-natured man ; FIELDING1-1754-2,472.138

and as he was a very brave one too , I found that the heroic constancy ,
with which I had borne an operation that is attended with scarce any
degree of pain , had not a little raised me in his esteem .
FIELDING1-1754-2,472.139

That he might adhere , therefore , in the most religious and rigorous
manner to his word , when he had no longer any temptation from interest
to break it , as he had no longer any hopes of more goods or passengers
, he ordered his ship to fall down to Gravesend on Sunday morning , and
there to wait his arrival . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.140

Sunday , June 30 , FIELDING1-1754-2,472.141

Nothing worth notice passed till that morning , when my poor wife ,
after passing a night in the Utmost torments of the tooth-ach , resolved
to have it drawn . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.142

I dispatched , therefore , a servant into Wapping , to bring , in haste
, the best tooth-drawer he could find . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.143

He soon found out a female of great eminence in the art ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,472.144

but when he brought her to the boat , at the water-side , they were
informed that the ship was gone ; FIELDING1-1754-2,472.145

for , indeed , she had set out a few minutes after his quitting her ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,472.146

nor did the pilot , who well knew the errand on which I had sent my
servant , think fit to wait a moment for his return , or to give me any
notice of his setting out , though I had , very patiently , attended the
delays of the captain four days , after many solemn promises of weighing
anchor every one of the three last . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.147

But of all the petty bashaws , or turbulent tyrants I ever beheld , this
soure-faced pilot was the worst_tempered ; FIELDING1-1754-2,472.148

for , during the time that he had the guidance of the ship , which was
till we arrived in the Downs , he complied with no one's desires ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,472.149

nor did he give a civil word , or , indeed , a civil look to any on
board . FIELDING1-1754-2,472.150

<P_473>

The toothdrawer , who , as I said before , was one of great eminence
among her neighbours , refused to follow the ship ; so that my man made
himself the best of his way , and , with some difficulty , came up with
us before we were got under full sail ; FIELDING1-1754-2,473.152

for , after that , as we had both wind and tide with us , he would have
found it impossible to overtake the ship , till she was come to an
anchor at Gravesend . FIELDING1-1754-2,473.153

The morning was fair and bright , FIELDING1-1754-2,473.154

and we had a passage thither , I think , as pleasant as can be conceived
; FIELDING1-1754-2,473.155

for , take it with all its advantages , particularly the number of fine
ships you are always sure of seeing by the way , there is nothing to
equal it in all the rivers of the world . FIELDING1-1754-2,473.156

The yards of Deptford and of Woolwich are noble sights ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,473.157

and give us a just idea of the great perfection to which we are arrived
in building those floating castles , and the figure which we may always
make in Europe among the other maritime powers .
FIELDING1-1754-2,473.158

That of Woolwich , at least , very strongly imprinted this idea on my
mind ; FIELDING1-1754-2,473.159

for , there was now on the stocks there the Royal Anne , supposed to be
the largest ship ever built , and which contains ten carriage guns more
than had ever yet equipped a first rate . FIELDING1-1754-2,473.160

It is true , perhaps , that there is more of ostentation than of real
utility , in ships of this vast and unwieldy burthen , which are rarely
capable of acting against an enemy ; FIELDING1-1754-2,473.161

but if the building such contributes to preserve , among other nations ,
the notion of the British superiority in naval affairs , the expence ,
though very great , is well incurred , FIELDING1-1754-2,473.162

and the ostentation is laudable and truly political .
FIELDING1-1754-2,473.163

Indeed , I should be sorry to allow that Holland , France , or Spain ,
possessed a vessel larger and more beautiful than the largest and most
beautiful of ours ; FIELDING1-1754-2,473.164

for this honour I would always administer to the pride of our sailors ,
who should challenge it from all their neighbours with truth and success
. FIELDING1-1754-2,473.165

And sure I am that not our honest tars alone , but every inhabitant of
this island , may exult in the comparison , when he considers the king
of Great-Britain as a maritime prince , in opposition to any other
prince in Europe ; FIELDING1-1754-2,473.166

but I am not so certain that the same idea of superiority will result
from comparing our land-forces with those of many other crowned heads .
FIELDING1-1754-2,473.167

In numbers , they all far exceed us , FIELDING1-1754-2,473.168

and in the goodness and splendor of their troops , many nations ,
particularly the Germans and French , and perhaps the Dutch , cast us at
a distance FIELDING1-1754-2,473.169

for , however we may flatter ourselves with the Edwards and Henrys of
former ages , the change of the whole art of war since those days , by
which the advantage of personal strength is , in a manner , entirely
lost , hath produced a change in military affairs to the advantage of
our enemies . FIELDING1-1754-2,473.170

As for our successes in later days , if they were not entirely owing to
the superior genius of our general , they were not a little due to the
superior force of his money . FIELDING1-1754-2,473.171

Indeed , if we should arraign marshal Saxe of ostentation , when he
shewed his army , drawn up , to our captive general , the day after the
battle of La Val , we can@ @not say that the ostentation was entirely
vain ; since he certainly shewed him an army , which had not been often
equalled , either in the number or goodness of the troops , and which ,
in those respects , so far exceeded ours , that none can ever cast any
reflexion on the brave young prince who could not reap the lawrels of
conquest in that day ; but his retreat will be always mentioned as an
addition to his glory . FIELDING1-1754-2,473.172

In our marine the case is entirely the reverse ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,473.173

and it must be our own fault if it doth not continue so ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,473.174

for continue so it will , as long as the florishing state of our trade
shall support it , FIELDING1-1754-2,473.175

and this support it can never want , till our legislature shall cease to
give sufficient attention to the protection of our trade , and our
magistrates want sufficient power , ability , and honesty to execute the
laws : a circumstance not to be apprehended , as it can@ @not happen ,
till our senates and our benches shall be filled with the blindest
ignorance , or with the blackest corruption . FIELDING1-1754-2,473.176

<P_474>

Besides the ships in the docks , we saw many on the water :
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.178

the yatchts are sights of great parade , FIELDING1-1754-2,474.179

and the king's body yatcht , is , I believe , unequalled in any country
, for convenience as well as magnificence ; both which are consulted in
building and equipping her with the most exquisite art and workmanship .
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.180

We saw likewise several Indiamen just returned from their voyage .
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.181

These are , I believe , the largest and finest vessels which are any
where employed in commercial affairs . FIELDING1-1754-2,474.182

The colliers , likewise , which are very numerous , and even assemble in
sleets , are ships of great bulk ; FIELDING1-1754-2,474.183

and , if we descend to those used in the American , African , and
European trades , and pass through those which visit our own coasts , to
the small craft : that ly between Chatham and the Tower , the whole
forms a most pleasing object to the eye , as well as highly warming to
the heart of an Englishman , who has any degree of love for his country
, or can recognize any effect of the patriot in his constitution .
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.184

Lastly , the Royal Hospital of Greenwich , which presents so delightful
a front to the water , and doth such honour at once to its builder and
the nation , to the great skill and ingenuity of the one , and to the no
less sensible gratitude of the other , very properly closes the account
of this scene ; which may well appear romantic to those who have not
themselves seen , that , in this one instance , truth and reality are
capable , perhaps , of exceeding the power of fiction .
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.185

When we had passed {TEXT:past} by Greenwich , we saw only two or three
gentlemen's houses , all of very moderate account , till we reached
Gravesend ; FIELDING1-1754-2,474.186

these are all on the Kentish shore , which affords a much drier ,
wholesomer and pleasanter situation than doth that of opposite , Essex .
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.187

This circumstance , I own , is somewhat surprising to me , when I
reflect on the numerous villas that crowd the river , from Chelsea
upwards as far as Shepperton , where the narrower channel affords not
half so noble a prospect , and where the continual succession of the
small craft , like the frequent repetition of all things , which have
nothing in them great , beautiful , or admirable , tire the eye , and
give us distaste and aversion instead of pleasure .
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.188

With some of these situations , such as Barnes , Mortlake , &c. even
the shore of Essex might contend , not upon very unequal terms ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.189

but , on the Kentish borders , there are many spots to be chosen by the
builder , which might justly claim the preference over almost the very
finest of those in Middlesex and Surrey . FIELDING1-1754-2,474.190

How shall we account for this depravity in taste ?
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.191

for , surely , there are none so very mean and contemptible , as to
bring the pleasure of seeing a number of little wherries , gliding along
after one another , in competition with what we enjoy , in viewing a
succession of ships , with all their sails expanded to the winds ,
bounding over the waves before us . FIELDING1-1754-2,474.192

And here I can@ @not pass by another observation on the deplorable want
of taste in our enjoyments , which we shew by almost totally neglecting
the pursuit of what seems to me the highest degree of amusement :
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.193

this is , the sailing ourselves in little vessels of our own , contrived
only for our ease and accommodation , to which such situations of our
villas , as I have recommended , would be so convenient and even
necessary . FIELDING1-1754-2,474.194

This amusement , I confess , if enjoyed in any perfection , would be of
the expensive kind ; FIELDING1-1754-2,474.195

but such expence would not exceed the reach of a moderate fortune ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.196

and would fall very short of the prices which are daily paid for
pleasures of a far inferior rate , FIELDING1-1754-2,474.197

the truth , I believe , is , that sailing in the manner I have just
mentioned , is a pleasure rather unknown , or unthought , than rejected
by those who have experienced it ; unless , perhaps , the apprehension
of danger , or sea_sickness , may be supposed , by the timorous and
delicate , to make too large deductions ; insisting , that all their
enjoyments shall come to them pure and unmixed , and being ever ready to
cry out , <font> Nocet empta dolore voluptas . <$$font>
FIELDING1-1754-2,474.198

<P_475>

This , however , was my present case ; FIELDING1-1754-2,475.200

for the ease and lightness which I felt from my tapping , the gaiety of
the morning , the pleasant sailing with wind and tide , and the many
agreeable objects with which I was constantly entertained during the
whole way , were all suppressed and overcome by the single consideration
of my wife's pain , which continued incessantly to torment her till we
came to an anchor , when I dispatched a messenger in great haste , for
the best reputed operator in Gravesend . FIELDING1-1754-2,475.201

A surgeon of some eminence now appeared , who did not decline
tooth-drawing , though he certainly would have been offended with the
appellation of tooth-drawer , no less than his brethren , the members of
that venerable body , would be with that of barber , since the late
separation between those long united companies , by which , if the
surgeons have gained much , the barbers are supposed to have lost very
little . FIELDING1-1754-2,475.202

This able and careful person <paren> for so I sincerely believe he is
<$$paren> after examining the guilty tooth , declared , that it was such
a rotten shell , and so placed at the very remotest end of the upper jaw
, where it was , in a manner , covered and secured by a large , fine ,
firm tooth , that he despaired of his power of drawing it .
FIELDING1-1754-2,475.203

He said , indeed , more to my wife , FIELDING1-1754-2,475.204

and used more rhetoric to dissuade her from having it drawn , than is
generally employed to persuade young ladies , to prefer a pain of three
moments to one of three months continuance ; especially , if those young
ladies happen to be past forty and fifty years of age , when , by
submitting to support a racking torment , the only good circumstance
attending which is , 't@ @is so short , that scarce one in a_thousand
can cry out , I feel it , they are to do a violence to their charms ,
and lose one of those beautiful holders , with which alone Sir Courtly
Nice declares , a lady can ever lay hold of his heart .
FIELDING1-1754-2,475.205

He said at last so much , FIELDING1-1754-2,475.206

and seemed to reason so justly , that I came over to his side , and
assisted him in prevailing on my wife <paren> for it was no easy matter
<$$paren> to resolve on keeping her tooth a little longer , and to apply
to palliatives only for relief . FIELDING1-1754-2,475.207

These were opium applied to the tooth , and blisters behind the ears .
FIELDING1-1754-2,475.208

Whilst we were at dinner this day , in the cabin , on a sudden the
window on one side was beat into the room , with a crash , as if a
twenty-pounder had been discharged among us . FIELDING1-1754-2,475.209

We were all alarmed at the suddenness of the accident , for which ,
however , we were soon able to account : FIELDING1-1754-2,475.210

for the sash , which was shivered all to pieces , was pursued into the
middle of the cabin by the bowsprit of a little ship , called a
cod-smack , the master of which made us amends for running <paren>
carelesly at best <$$paren> against us , and injuring the ship , in the
sea way ; that is to say , by damning us all to hell , and uttering
several pious wishes that it had done us much more mischief . All which
were answered in their own kind and phrase by our men ; between whom ,
and the other crew , a dialogue of oaths and scurrility was carried on ,
as long as they continued in each other's hearing .
FIELDING1-1754-2,475.211

It is difficult , I think , to assign a satisfactory reason why sailors
in general should , of all others , think themselves entirely discharged
from the common bands of ' humanity , and should seem to glory in the
language and behaviour of savages ? FIELDING1-1754-2,475.212

They see more of the world , FIELDING1-1754-2,475.213

and have , most of them , a more erudite education , than is the portion
of land-men of their degree . FIELDING1-1754-2,475.214

Nor do I believe that in any country they visit <paren> Holland itself
not excepted <$$paren> they can ever find a parallel to what daily
passes on the river Thames . FIELDING1-1754-2,475.215

Is it that they think true courage <paren> for they are the bravest
fellows upon earth <$$paren> inconsistent with all the gentleness of a
humane carriage , and that the contempt of civil order springs up in
minds but little cultivated at the same time , and from the same
principles , with the contempt of danger and death ?
FIELDING1-1754-2,475.216

Is it ? FIELDING1-1754-2,475.217

In short , it is so ; FIELDING1-1754-2,475.218

and how it comes to be so , I leave to form a question in the Robin Hood
society , or to be propounded for solution among the aenigmas in the
Woman's Almanack for the next year . FIELDING1-1754-2,475.219

<P_476>

<font> Monday , July <$$font> I FIELDING1-1754-2,476.221

This day Mr. Welch took his leave of me after dinner , as did a young
lady of her sister , who was proceeding with my wife to Lisbon .
FIELDING1-1754-2,476.222

They both set out together in a post-chaise for London .
FIELDING1-1754-2,476.223

Soon after their departure , our cabin where my wife and I were sitting
together , was visited by two ruffians , whose appearance greatly
corresponded with that of the sheriff's , rather the knight marshal's
bailiffs . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.224

One of these , especially , who seemed to affect a more than ordinary
degree of rudeness and insolence , came in without any kind of ceremony
, with a broad gold lace on his hat , which was cocked with much
military fierceness on his head . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.225

An inkhorn at his buttonhole , and some papers in his hand ,
sufficiently assured me what he was , FIELDING1-1754-2,476.226

and I asked him if he and his companion were not custom-house officers ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,476.227

he answered with sufficient dignity , that they were , as an information
which he seemed to conclude would strike the hearer with awe , and
suppress all further enquiry ; FIELDING1-1754-2,476.228

but , on the contrary , I proceeded to ask of what rank he was in the
Custom-house , FIELDING1-1754-2,476.229

and receiving an answer from his companion , as I remember , that the
gentleman was a riding surveyor ; I replied that he might be a riding
surveyor , but could be no gentleman , for that none who had any title
to that denomination , would break into the presence of a lady , without
any apology , or even moving his hat . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.230

He then took his covering from his head , FIELDING1-1754-2,476.231

and laid it on the table , saying , he asked pardon , and blamed the
mate , who should , he said , have informed him if any persons of
distinction were below . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.232

I told him , he might guess by our appearance <paren> which , perhaps ,
was rather more than could be said with the strictest adherence to truth
<$$paren> that he was before a gentleman and lady , which should teach
him to be very civil in his behaviour , though we should not happen to
be of that number whom the world calls people of fashion and distinction
. FIELDING1-1754-2,476.233

However , I said , that as he seemed sensible of his error , and had
asked pardon , the lady would permit him to put his hat on again , if he
chose it . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.234

This he refused with some degree of surliness , FIELDING1-1754-2,476.235

and failed not to convince me that , if I should condescend to become
more gentle , he would soon grow more rude . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.236

I now renewed a Reflexion , which I have often seen occasion to make ,
that there is nothing so incongruous in nature as any kind of power ,
with lowness of mind and of ability , and that there is nothing more
deplorable than the want of truth in the whimsical notion of Plato ; who
tells us that Saturn , well knowing the state of human affairs , gave us
kings and rulers , not of human , but divine original ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,476.237

for as we make not shepherds of sheep , nor oxherds of oxen , nor
goatherds of goats ; but place some of our own kind over all , as being
better and fitter to govern them : in the same manner , were demons by
the Divine Love , set over us , as a race of beings of a superior order
to men , and who , with great ease to themselves , might regulate our
affairs , and establish peace , modesty , freedom , and justice . And
totally destroying all sedition , might complete the happiness of the
human race . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.238

So far , at least , may even now be said with truth , that in all states
which are under the government of mere man , without any divine
assistance , there is nothing but labour and misery to be found .
FIELDING1-1754-2,476.239

From what I have said therefore , we may at least learn , with our
utmost endeavours , to imitate the Saturnian institution ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,476.240

borrowing all assistance from our immortal part , while we pay to this
the strictest obedience , we should form both our private economy , and
public policy , from its dictates . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.241

By this dispensation of our immortal minds , we are to establish a law ,
and to call it by that name . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.242

But if any government be in the hands of a single person , of the few ,
or of the many ; and such governor or governors shall abandon himself or
themselves to the unbridled pursuit of the wildest pleasures or desires
, unable to restrain any passion , but possessed with an insatiable bad
disease ; if such shall attempt to govern ; and at the same time to
trample on all laws , there can be no means of Preservation left for the
wretched people . FIELDING1-1754-2,476.243

<P_477>

It is true that Plato is here treating of the highest of sovereign power
in a state ; FIELDING1-1754-2,477.245

but it is as true , that his observations are general , and may be
applied to all inferior powers : FIELDING1-1754-2,477.246

and , indeed , every subordinate degree is immediately derived from the
highest ; FIELDING1-1754-2,477.247

and as it is equally protected by the same force , and sanctifyed by the
same authority , is alike dangerous to the well-being of the subject .
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.248

Of all powers , perhaps , there is none so sanctified and protected , as
this which is under our present consideration .
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.249

So numerous , indeed , and strong are the sanctions given to it by many
acts of parliament , that having once established the laws of customs on
merchandize , it seems to have been the sole view of the legislature to
strengthen the hands , and to protect the persons of the officers , who
became established by those laws ; many of whom are so far from bearing
any resemblance to the Saturnian institution , and to be chosen from a
degree of beings superior to the rest of human race , that they
sometimes seem industriously picked out of the lowest and vilest orders
of mankind . FIELDING1-1754-2,477.250

There is , indeed , nothing so useful to man in general , nor so
beneficial to particular societies and individuals , as trade .
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.251

This is that <font> alma_mater , <$$font> at whose plentiful breast all
mankind are nourished . FIELDING1-1754-2,477.252

It is true , like other parents , she is not always equally indulgent to
all her children ; FIELDING1-1754-2,477.253

but though she gives to her favourites a vast proportion of redundancy
and superfluity , there are very few whom she refuses to supply with the
conveniences , and none with the necessaries of life .
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.254

Such a benefactress as this must naturally be beloved by mankind in
general ; FIELDING1-1754-2,477.255

it would be wonderful , therefore , if her interest was not considered
by them , and protected from the fraud and violence of some of her
rebellious offspring , who coveting more than their share , or more than
she thinks proper to allow them , are daily employed in meditating
mischief against her , and in endeavouring to steal from their brethren
those shares which this great <font> alma_mater <$$font> had allowed
them . FIELDING1-1754-2,477.256

At length our governor came on board , FIELDING1-1754-2,477.257

and about six in the evening we weighed anchor ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.258

and fell down to the Nore , whither our passage was extremely pleasant ,
the evening being very delightful , the moon just past the full , and
both wind and tide favourable to us . FIELDING1-1754-2,477.259

<font> Tuesday , July 2 . <$$font> FIELDING1-1754-2,477.260

This morning we again set sail under all the advantages we had enjoyed
the evening before : FIELDING1-1754-2,477.261

this day we left the shore of Essex , FIELDING1-1754-2,477.262

and coasted along Kent , passing by the pleasant island of Thanet ,
which is an island , and that of Sheppy , which is not an island ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.263

and about three o'clock , the wind being now full in our teeth , we came
to an anchor in the Downs , within two miles of Deal .
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.264

My wife , having suffered intolerable pain from her tooth , again
renewed her resolution of having it drawn , FIELDING1-1754-2,477.265

and another surgeon was sent for from Deal , but with no better success
than the former . FIELDING1-1754-2,477.266

He likewise declined the operation , for the same reason which had been
assigned by the former : FIELDING1-1754-2,477.267

however , such was her resolution , backed with pain , that he was
obliged to make the attempt , which concluded more in honour of his
judgment , than of his operation ; FIELDING1-1754-2,477.268

for after having put my poor wife to inexpressible torment , he was
obliged to leave her tooth <font> in statu quo ; <$$font>
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.269

and she had now the comfortable prospect of a long fit of pain , which
might have lasted her whole voyage , without any possibility of relief .
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.270

In these pleasing sensations , of which I had my just share , nature ,
overcome with fatigue , about eight in the evening resigned her to rest
; a circumstance which would have given me some happiness , could I have
known how to employ those spirits which were raised by it :
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.271

but unfortunately for me , I was left in a disposition of enjoying an
agreeable hour , without the assistance of a companion , which has
always appeared to me necessary to such enjoyment ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.272

my daughter and her companion were both retired sea-sick to bed ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,477.273

the other passengers were a rude school-boy of fourteen years old , and
an illiterate <P_478> Portuguese friar , who understood no language but
his own , in which I had not the least smattering .
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.274

The captain was the only person left , in whose conversation I might
indulge myself ; FIELDING1-1754-2,478.275

but unluckily , besides a total ignorance of every thing in the world
but a ship , he had the misfortune of being so deaf , that to make him
hear , I will not say understand , my words , I must run the risque of
conveying them to the ears of my wife , who , though in another room
<paren> called , I think , the state-room ; being indeed a most stately
apartment capable of containing one human body in length , if not very
tall , and three bodies in breadth <$$paren> lay asleep within a yard of
me . FIELDING1-1754-2,478.276

In this situation necessity and choice were one and the same thing ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.277

the captain and I sat down together to a small bowl of punch , over
which we both soon fell fast asleep , and so concluded the evening .
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.278

<font> Wednesday , July <$$font> 3 . FIELDING1-1754-2,478.279

This morning I awaked at four o'clock , FIELDING1-1754-2,478.280

for my distemper seldom suffered me to sleep later .
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.281

I presently got up , FIELDING1-1754-2,478.282

and had the pleasure of enjoying the sight of a tempestuous sea for four
hours before the captain was stirring ; FIELDING1-1754-2,478.283

for he loved to indulge himself in morning slumbers , which were
attended with a wind musick , much more agreeable to the performers than
to the hearers , especially such as have , as I had , the privilege of
sitting in the orchestra . FIELDING1-1754-2,478.284

At eight o'clock the captain rose , FIELDING1-1754-2,478.285

and sent his boat on shore ; FIELDING1-1754-2,478.286

I ordered my man likewise to go in it , as my distemper was not of that
kind which entirely deprives us of appetite . FIELDING1-1754-2,478.287

Now , though the captain had well victualled his ship with all manner of
salt provisions for the voyage , and had added great quantities of fresh
stores , particularly of vegetables at Gravesend , such as beans and
peas , which had been on board only two days , and had , possibly , not
been gathered above two more , I apprehended I could provide better for
myself at Deal , than the ship's ordinary seemed to promise .
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.288

I accordingly sent for fresh provisions of all kinds from the shore , in
order to put off the evil day of starving as long as possible .
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.289

My man returned with most of the articles I sent for ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.290

and I now thought myself in a condition of living a week on my own
provisions . FIELDING1-1754-2,478.291

I therefore ordered my own dinner , which I wanted nothing but a cook to
dress , and a proper fire to dress it at ; FIELDING1-1754-2,478.292

but those were not to be had , nor indeed any addition to my roast
mutton , except the pleasure of the captain's company , with that of the
other passengers ; FIELDING1-1754-2,478.293

for my wife continued the whole day in a state of dozing ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.294

and my other females , whose sickness did not abate by the rolling of
the ship at anchor , seemed more inclined to empty their stomachs than
to fill them . FIELDING1-1754-2,478.295

Thus I passed the whole day <paren> except about an hour at dinner
<$$paren> by myself , FIELDING1-1754-2,478.296

and the evening concluded with the captain as the preceding one had done
; FIELDING1-1754-2,478.297

one comfortable piece of news he communicated to me , which was , that
he had no doubt of a prosperous wind in the morning ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.298

but as he did not divulge the reasons of this confidence , and as I saw
none myself besides the wind being directly opposite , my faith in this
prophecy was not strong enough to build any great hopes upon .
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.299

<font> Thursday , July <$$font> 4 . FIELDING1-1754-2,478.300

This morning , however , the captain seemed resolved to fulfil his own
predictions , whether the wind would or no ; FIELDING1-1754-2,478.301

he accordingly weighed anchor , FIELDING1-1754-2,478.302

and taking the advantage of the tide , when the wind was not very
boisterous , he hoisted his sails , FIELDING1-1754-2,478.303

and , as if his power had been no less absolute over Eolus than it was
over Neptune , he forced the wind to blow him on in its own despight .
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.304

But as all men who have ever been at sea , well know how weak such
attempts are , and want no authorities of Scripture to prove , that the
most absolute power of a captain of a ship is very contemptible in the
wind's eye , so did it befal our noble commander , who having struggled
with the wind three or four hours , was obliged to give over , and lost
, in a few minutes , all that he had been so long a gaining ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.305

in short , we returned to our former station , FIELDING1-1754-2,478.306

and once more cast anchor in the neighbourhood of Deal .
FIELDING1-1754-2,478.307

<P_479>

Here , though we lay near the shore , that we might promise ourselves
all the emolument which could be derived from it , we found ourselves
deceived ; and that we might with as much conveniency be out of the
sight of land ; FIELDING1-1754-2,479.309

for , except when the captain launched forth his own boat , which he did
always with great reluctance , we were incapable of procuring any thing
from Deal , but at a price too exorbitant , and beyond the reach even of
modern luxury ; the fair of a boat from Deal , which lay at two miles
distance , being at least three half crowns , and if we had been in any
distress for it , as many half guineas ; FIELDING1-1754-2,479.310

for these good people consider the sea as a large common , appendant to
their manor , in which , when they find any of their fellow creatures
impounded , they conclude , that they have a full right of making them
pay at their own discretion for their deliverance :
FIELDING1-1754-2,479.311

to say the truth , whether it be that men , who live on the sea-shore ,
are of an amphibious kind , and do not entirely partake of human nature
, or whatever else may be the reason , they are so far from taking any
share in the distresses of mankind , or of being moved with any
compassion for them , that they look upon them as blessings showered
down from above ; and which the more they improve to their own use , the
greater is their gratitude and piety . FIELDING1-1754-2,479.312

Thus at Gravesend , a sculler requires a shilling for going less way
than he would row in London for three pence ; FIELDING1-1754-2,479.313

and , at Deal , a boat often brings more profit in a day , than it can
produce in London in a week , or , perhaps , in a month ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,479.314

in both places , the owner of the boat founds his demand on the
necessity and distress of one , who stands more or less in absolute want
of his assistance ; FIELDING1-1754-2,479.315

and with the urgency of these , always rises in the exorbitancy of his
demand , without ever considering , that , from these very circumstances
, the power or ease of gratifying such demand is in like proportion
lessened . FIELDING1-1754-2,479.316

Now , as I am unwilling that some conclusions , which may be , I am
aware , too justly drawn from these observations , should be imputed to
human nature in general , I have endeavoured to account for them in a
way more consistent with the goodness and dignity of that nature :
FIELDING1-1754-2,479.317

however it be , it seems a little to reflect on the governors of such
monsters , that they do not take some means to restrain these
impositions , and prevent them from triumphing any longer in the
miseries of those , who are , in many circumstances at least , their
fellow creatures , and considering the distresses of a wretched seaman ,
from his being wrecked to his being barely wind bound , as a blessing
sent among them from above , and calling it by that blasphemous name .
FIELDING1-1754-2,479.318

<font> Friday , July <$$font> 5 . FIELDING1-1754-2,479.319

This day I sent a servant on board a man of war , that was stationed
here , with my compliments to the captain , to represent to him the
distress of the ladies , and to desire the favour of his long-boat to
conduct us to Dover , at about seven miles distance ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,479.320

and , at the same time , presumed to make use of a great lady's name ,
the wife of the first lord commissioner of the admiralty ; who would , I
told him , be pleased with any kindness shewn by him towards us in our
miserable condition . FIELDING1-1754-2,479.321

And this I am convinced was true , from the humanity of the lady ,
though she was entirely unknown to me . FIELDING1-1754-2,479.322

The captain returned a verbal answer to a long letter ; acquainting me ,
that what I desired could not be complied with , it being a favour not
in his power to grant . FIELDING1-1754-2,479.323

This might be , and I suppose was true ; FIELDING1-1754-2,479.324

but it is as true , that if he was able to write , and had pen , ink ,
and paper aboard , he might have sent a written answer , and that it was
the part of a gentleman so to have done ; FIELDING1-1754-2,479.325

but this is a character seldom maintained on the watery element ,
especially by those who exercise any power on it .
FIELDING1-1754-2,479.326

Every commander of a vessel here seems to think himself entirely free
from all those rules of decency and civility , which direct and restrain
the conduct of the members of a society on shore ;
FIELDING1-1754-2,479.327

and each , claiming absolute dominion in his little wooden world , rules
by his own laws and his own discretion . FIELDING1-1754-2,479.328

I do not , indeed , know so pregnant an instance of the dangerous
consequences of absolute power , and it's aptness to intoxicate the mind
, as that of <P_480> those petty tyrants , who become such in a moment ,
from very well-disposed and social members of that communion , in which
they affect no superiority , but live in an orderly state of legal
subjection with their fellow-citizens . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.329

<font> Saturday , July <$$font> 6 . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.330

This morning our commander , declaring he was sure the wind would change
, took the advantage of an ebbing tide , FIELDING1-1754-2,480.331

and weighed his anchor . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.332

His assurance , however , had the same completion , and his endeavours
the same success , with his former trial FIELDING1-1754-2,480.333

and he was soon obliged to return once more to his old quarters .
FIELDING1-1754-2,480.334

Just before we let go our anchor , a small sloop , rather than submit to
yield us an inch of way , ran foul of our ship ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,480.335

and carried off her bowsprit . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.336

This obstinate frolic would have cost those aboard the sloop very dear ,
if our steersman had not been too generous to exert his superiority ,
the certain consequence of which would have been the immediate sinking
of the other . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.337

This contention of the inferior , with a might capable of crushing it in
an instant , may seem to argue no small share of folly or madness , as
well as of impudence ; FIELDING1-1754-2,480.338

but I am convinced there is very little danger in it :
FIELDING1-1754-2,480.339

contempt is a port to which the pride of man submits to fly with
reluctance , FIELDING1-1754-2,480.340

but those who are within it are always in a place of the most assured
security ; FIELDING1-1754-2,480.341

for whosoever throws away his sword , prefers , indeed , a less
honourable , but much safer means of avoiding danger , than he who
defends himself with it . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.342

And here we shall offer another distinction , of the truth of which much
reading and experience have well convinced us , that as in the most
absolute governments , there is a regular progression of slavery
downwards , from the top to the bottom , the mischief of which is seldom
felt with any great force and bitterness , but by the next immediate
degree ; so in the most dissolute and anarchical states , there is as
regular an ascent of what is called rank or condition , which is always
laying hold of the head of him , who is advanced but one step higher on
the ladder , who might , if he did not too much despise such efforts ,
kick his pursuer head-long to the bottom . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.343

We will conclude this digression with one general and short observation
, which will , perhaps , set the whole matter in a clearer light than
the longest and most laboured harangue . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.344

Whereas envy of all things most exposes us to danger from others ; so ,
contempt of all things best secures us from them .
FIELDING1-1754-2,480.345

And thus , while the dungcart and the sloop are always meditating
mischief against the coach and the ship , and throwing themselves
designedly in their way , the latter consider only their own security ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,480.346

and are not ashamed to break the road , and let the other pass by them .
FIELDING1-1754-2,480.347

<font> Monday , July <$$font> 8 . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.348

Having passed {TEXT:past} our Sunday without any thing remarkable ,
unless the catching a great number of whitings in the afternoon may be
{TEXT:b} thought so ; we now set sail on Monday at six o'clock , with a
little variation of wind ; FIELDING1-1754-2,480.349

but this was so very little , and the breeze itself so small , that the
tide was our best , and indeed almost our only friend .
FIELDING1-1754-2,480.350

This conducted us along the short remainder of the Kentish shore .
FIELDING1-1754-2,480.351

Here we passed {TEXT:past} that cliff of Dover , which makes so
tremendous a figure in Shakespear , and which , whoever reads without
being giddy , must , according to Mr. Addison's observation , have
either a very good head , or a very bad one ; but , which , whoever
contracts any such ideas from the sight of , must have , at least , a
poetic , if not a Shakespearian genius . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.352

In truth , mountains , rivers , heroes , and gods owe great part of
their existence to the poets ; FIELDING1-1754-2,480.353

and Greece and Italy do so plentifully abound in the former , because
they furnished so glorious a number of the latter ; who , while they
bestowed immortality on every little hillock and blind stream , left the
noblest rivers and mountains in the world to share the same obscurity
with the eastern and western poets , in which they are celebrated .
FIELDING1-1754-2,480.354

This evening we beat the sea off Sussex , in sight of Dungeness , with
much more pleasure than progress ; FIELDING1-1754-2,480.355

for the weather was almost a perfect calm , FIELDING1-1754-2,480.356

and the moon , which was almost at the full , scarce suffered a single
cloud to veil her from our sight . FIELDING1-1754-2,480.357

<P_481>

<font> Tuesday , Wednesday , July <$$font> 9 , 10 .
FIELDING1-1754-2,481.359

These two days we had much the same fine weather ,
FIELDING1-1754-2,481.360

and made much the same way ; FIELDING1-1754-2,481.361

but , in the evening of the latter day , a pretty fresh gale sprung up ,
at N.N.W . which brought us by the morning in sight of the Isle of
Wight . FIELDING1-1754-2,481.362

<font> Thursday , July <$$font> 11 . FIELDING1-1754-2,481.363

This gale continued till towards noon ; when the east end of the island
bore but little a-head of us . FIELDING1-1754-2,481.364

The captain swaggered , FIELDING1-1754-2,481.365

and declared he would keep the sea ; FIELDING1-1754-2,481.366

but the wind got the better of him , so that about three he gave up the
victory , and , making a sudden tack , stood in for the shore , passed
by Spithead and Portsmouth , and came to an anchor at a place called
Ryde on the island . FIELDING1-1754-2,481.367

A most tragical incident fell out this day at sea .
FIELDING1-1754-2,481.368

While the ship was under sail , but making , as will appear , no great
way , a kitten , one of four of the feline inhabitants of the cabin ,
fell from the window into the water : FIELDING1-1754-2,481.369

an alarm was immediately given to the captain , who was then upon deck ,
and received it with the utmost concern and many bitter oaths .
FIELDING1-1754-2,481.370

He immediately gave orders to the steersman in favour of the poor thing
, as he called it ; FIELDING1-1754-2,481.371

the sails were instantly slackened , and all hands , as the phrase is ,
employed to recover the poor animal . FIELDING1-1754-2,481.372

I was , I own , extremely surprised at all this ; less , indeed , at the
captain's extreme tenderness , than at his conceiving any possibility of
success ; FIELDING1-1754-2,481.373

for , if puss had had nine_thousand , instead of nine lives , I
concluded they had been all lost . {COM:the_kitten_recovers}
FIELDING1-1754-2,481.374

