<BEGIN_fleming-1886-1>

<P_68>

<heading>

Digestibility of food . FLEMING-1886-1,68.4

<$$heading>

The digestibility of food is an important consideration in feeding , as
with some kinds more is absorbed into the system than others .
FLEMING-1886-1,68.6

With scarcely any of them is digestion complete throughout , a portion
always being thrown out of the body undigested , no matter what amount
of preparation it may have undergone . FLEMING-1886-1,68.7

<P_69>

With regard to this point , it may be remarked that age has an influence
on the digestibility of plants and herbage . FLEMING-1886-1,69.9

Thus , hay cut as soon as ripe is digested more easily than at a later
stage of growth , FLEMING-1886-1,69.10

and it is the same with clover . FLEMING-1886-1,69.11

When young , plants contain more albuminoids , and less woody fibre or
cellulose , than when old . FLEMING-1886-1,69.12

Roots , however , such as carrots , turnips , potatoes , and mangolds ,
have their nutritive value increased by age , since the production of
the carbo-hydrates - as sugar and starch - increases with growth .
FLEMING-1886-1,69.13

Food containing a large amount of nutriment in small bulk is usually
digested better than hay or straw . FLEMING-1886-1,69.14

This is particularly the case with the albuminoids and fats contained in
them ; FLEMING-1886-1,69.15

85 per_cent. of beans and 80 per_cent. of linseed are digested as
easily as 64 per_cent. of hay , and 45 per_cent. of straw .
FLEMING-1886-1,69.16

The more nitrogenous the hay and straw , the better it is digested .
FLEMING-1886-1,69.17

Only 20 per_cent. of wheat straw is digested , against 76 of lucerne
hay . FLEMING-1886-1,69.18

What is called " cellulose " is usually fairly well digested .
FLEMING-1886-1,69.19

Hay and straw of leguminous plants , as peas and beans , are not so
easily digested as that of the cereals , because more woody matter ,
which is indigestible , is contained in the former than the latter .
FLEMING-1886-1,69.20

With wheat-straw chaff , it has been stated that about 22 per_cent. of
the total organic matter in it is digested . FLEMING-1886-1,69.21

It would appear that only a certain amount of each substance can be
digested from a given quantity of food , FLEMING-1886-1,69.22

and rest or work will not cause an animal to digest more , though it may
happen that two animals of the same breed will digest different
quantities of the same food . FLEMING-1886-1,69.23

The digestibility of one food may be increased by the addition of a
second or third different kind , FLEMING-1886-1,69.24

and a decrease in digestibility may be effected in the same way .
FLEMING-1886-1,69.25

Small quantities of oil added to a diet of hay and straw will slightly
increase their digestibility ; FLEMING-1886-1,69.26

but the addition of sugar or starch , if it exceeds 10 per_cent. of the
diet <paren> both being dry <$$paren> , diminishes the <P_70>
digestibility , the albuminoids and cellulose not being digested to the
proper amounts . FLEMING-1886-1,70.27

An excess of starch is more to be feared than an undue proportion of
sugar in the digestion of hay . FLEMING-1886-1,70.28

More or less preparation of food will increase facility of digestion ,
so long as it does not alter the character of its constituents or impair
the digestive process . FLEMING-1886-1,70.29

Crushing grain which is covered by an insoluble husk , or is so dense
that the gastric juice acts slowly on it , is to ensure its easier
digestion in the stomach , should it escape crushing by the teeth in the
act of mastication . FLEMING-1886-1,70.30

Therefore it is that oats and barley are more nutritious crushed than
whole ; as if a portion misses the crushing action of the molars , it is
almost certain to be voided unaltered from the animal .
FLEMING-1886-1,70.31

So it is , also , that the seeds of maize and beans are better for
feeding when broken into pieces than when given whole .
FLEMING-1886-1,70.32

Even hay and straw may be rendered more digestible when cut up or "
chopped " than when allowed whole , as it is then more easily mixed with
the saliva and the gastric juice , and the animal is spared much of the
fatigue of mastication . FLEMING-1886-1,70.33

Some legumes even require to be boiled to render them digestible ;
FLEMING-1886-1,70.34

and potatoes are better boiled or steamed than given raw , as in the
latter state they are likely to give rise to intestinal irritation .
FLEMING-1886-1,70.35

The condition of the horse has also a good deal to do with the digestion
of food . FLEMING-1886-1,70.36

A healthy , vigorous animal can digest much more food , and quicker ,
than a weakly one ; FLEMING-1886-1,70.37

and a sick horse may have its digestive powers seriously enfeebled ,
while hardship or fatigue may have a similar effect .
FLEMING-1886-1,70.38

<heading>

Condition of food with regard to quality . FLEMING-1886-1,70.40

<$$heading>

The condition of the food may likewise alter its facility of digestion
and nutritive properties , this depending upon its mode of growth , care
in collecting and preserving , cleanliness , and freedom from animal and
vegetable parasites . FLEMING-1886-1,70.42

If the land <P_71> on which the food is grown be poor in quality , the
produce will be in a similar condition ; FLEMING-1886-1,71.43

it will be poor in its chemical constituents , particularly those on
which its nutritive value depends . FLEMING-1886-1,71.44

Oats , manured with cows' dung , will produce sixteen bushels for every
bushel of seed sown , while on unmanured land there will be only five
bushels produced for every bushel of seed . FLEMING-1886-1,71.45

The formation of the soil affects to a considerable degree the produce
and quality of the food . FLEMING-1886-1,71.46

Oats reared on clay land are superior to any other .
FLEMING-1886-1,71.47

Rye flourishes better on a light , sandy soil . FLEMING-1886-1,71.48

A stiff clay produces a coarse barley ; a light chalk a light grain ;
and a loamy land a full , plump grain ; FLEMING-1886-1,71.49

these are only a few examples of many which might be quoted .
FLEMING-1886-1,71.50

The time of cutting influences the nutritive value of a food ;
FLEMING-1886-1,71.51

hay cut late has lost much of its properties ; FLEMING-1886-1,71.52

if cut too early it is prevented from reaching the full extent of its
nutritive matters . FLEMING-1886-1,71.53

Wheat cut about a fortnight before it is ripe contains the most starch
and gluten ; FLEMING-1886-1,71.54

the bushel weighs heavier , FLEMING-1886-1,71.55

and the straw contains its greatest nourishment ; FLEMING-1886-1,71.56

cut late , the ear contains more cellulose , consequently an increased
production of bran , and a diminished proportion of flour .
FLEMING-1886-1,71.57

The season affects the quality of the forage ; FLEMING-1886-1,71.58

for instance , in very wet years , and especially when lands have been
flooded , parasitic diseases of plants are most common .
FLEMING-1886-1,71.59

The age of grain and forage , up to a certain time , enhances their
value and quality . FLEMING-1886-1,71.60

Old hay is preferable to , and more valuable than , new ;
FLEMING-1886-1,71.61

and the same applies to oats , beans , wheat , etc.
FLEMING-1886-1,71.62

Food badly saved and stored undergoes deterioration , which may range
from slight diminution in nutritive principles , or sourness , to mouldy
, decomposing , and offensively smelling material .
FLEMING-1886-1,71.63

<heading>

Cleanliness of food . FLEMING-1886-1,71.65

<$$heading>

Cleanliness of food is important , as that which is dirty may cause
indigestion , colic , serious disease , or even death .
FLEMING-1886-1,71.67

Sand , earth , or gravel , when taken in with the food , is generally
<P_72> retained in the large intestines , accumulating until there is
sometimes a very great quantity . FLEMING-1886-1,72.68

Horses fed on dusty food , such as the sweepings from grain-mills , or
with that which contains husks of oats , often have large calculi , or
what are called " dust balls , " form in the intestines , which very
frequently cause rupture , obstruction , or strangulation of these .
FLEMING-1886-1,72.69

Even a small pebble , small nail , or scrap of metal , gaining access to
the intestines with the food , may form the nucleus for one of these
accumulations , stones , or " concretions . " FLEMING-1886-1,72.70

Hay or grain may be unclean from bad preservation or gathering , or even
when growing . FLEMING-1886-1,72.71

The most frequent cause of uncleanliness in this respect is the presence
of moulds of various kinds , which not only diminish the value of the
food in nutrition , but may even prove injurious or poisonous to the
horses consuming it . FLEMING-1886-1,72.72

The most common sources of damage to growing plants or grain are the
parasitic fungi , commonly known as " Bunt , " " Rust , " " Mildew , " "
Smut , " and " Ergot . " FLEMING-1886-1,72.73

" Bunt " grows on grasses , straws , and grains ; FLEMING-1886-1,72.74

but it chiefly attacks the head of wheat , which it destroys , replacing
the flour by a dark powder with a fish-like smell .
FLEMING-1886-1,72.75

When it affects the stalks and leaves , these become pale , dry , and
shriveled up . FLEMING-1886-1,72.76

" Rust " appears as a reddish-yellow powder on the grasses , and on the
stalk , leaves , and flowering heads of plants , FLEMING-1886-1,72.77

and it more or less destroys them . FLEMING-1886-1,72.78

" Mildew " shows itself as brown or black spots that are really
parasitic spores , which penetrate the plant , and change the part into
a black powder . FLEMING-1886-1,72.79

" Smut " grows in large black clusters , somewhat like soot , but solid
, on grasses and grain-plants , causing them to look sickly , bleached ,
and eventually killing them . FLEMING-1886-1,72.80

" Ergot " grows on grasses and grain-plants , in the form of a cock's
spur or horn-shaped body , dark purple in colour , and unpleasant in
odour . FLEMING-1886-1,72.81

<P_73>

Mouldiness is usually produced by faulty preservation or storing ,
FLEMING-1886-1,73.83

and is due to the presence of various kinds of microscopical fungi ,
which , damp or wet having removed many of the nutritive elements of the
hay or grain , completely destroy forage if allowed to grow on it
unchecked . FLEMING-1886-1,73.84

It appears as a fine dust , or black , bluish , or brown patches ,
according to the kind of mould . FLEMING-1886-1,73.85

Mouldy hay , if dry , breaks readily , FLEMING-1886-1,73.86

and when shaken gives off what appears to be dust , but which is really
the spores of the fungus , and which are very irritating to the eyes ,
nostrils , and throat . FLEMING-1886-1,73.87

Forage damaged by these moulds is not only less nutritious than clean
forage , FLEMING-1886-1,73.88

but it is more or less indigestible and injurious , causing loss of
condition , colic , constipation , diarrhoea , inflammation of the
intestines , diabetes , skin disease , paralysis , and sometimes
abortion in breeding animals . FLEMING-1886-1,73.89

Mouldy oats have been known to kill horses fed on them for only a short
time . FLEMING-1886-1,73.90

Insects , very minute in size , also damage forage , but not at all to
the same extent as the parasitic fungi . FLEMING-1886-1,73.91

<heading>

Changing food . FLEMING-1886-1,73.93

<$$heading>

Care is often necessary in changing from one kind of food to another
kind . FLEMING-1886-1,73.95

A change from dry to green food , if sudden , is very likely to cause
diarrhoea ; FLEMING-1886-1,73.96

and even imperfectly dried , or new hay , will often do this ,
especially with hard-worked horses , or those required to go at a fast
pace . FLEMING-1886-1,73.97

A sudden change from oats to barley , from a poor to a rich diet , or
from an easily digested to a dry , indigestible food , is to be guarded
against . FLEMING-1886-1,73.98

Changing from oats to wheat is especially to be carefully done ,
FLEMING-1886-1,73.99

or serious damage will ensue ; FLEMING-1886-1,73.100

indeed , wheat from horses is all times a dangerous diet .
FLEMING-1886-1,73.101

<heading>

Different kinds of food . FLEMING-1886-1,73.103

<$$heading>

The grass family furnishes by far the largest number of articles
consumed by animals as food , FLEMING-1886-1,73.105

for however diverse in <P_74> external aspect hay , oats , wheat , maize
, barley , rice , rye , and millet may appear , yet they all belong to
the genus <font> graminacae , <$$font> though there are plants generally
regarded as grasses - as the clovers and sainfoin - which in reality do
not belong to them . FLEMING-1886-1,74.106

The grasses , notwithstanding their wide geographical distribution , are
remarkably uniform in structure , the greatest diversity being in their
height ; though it may be noted that the British grasses are only annual
, while those of warm climates are often perennial .
FLEMING-1886-1,74.107

<font> Hay . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,74.108

- Grass and dried grass , or hay , represent a typical food for the
horse , upon which he can subsist , become fat , and even perform a
certain amount of slow work without any other kind of subsistence .
FLEMING-1886-1,74.109

Grasses are divided into natural and artificial . FLEMING-1886-1,74.110

The former are true grasses , FLEMING-1886-1,74.111

and the artificial include the clovers , sainfoin , lucerne , etc. -
plants which are really not grasses . FLEMING-1886-1,74.112

The natural grasses comprise upland , meadow , and water-meadow grass ;
though this is rather an arbitrary {TEXT:arbitary} division , as many
grasses which grow on uplands are also to be found in meadows .
FLEMING-1886-1,74.113

The soil upon which the grasses grow considerably influences their value
for feeding purposes ; FLEMING-1886-1,74.114

on rich soils the pastures are more permanent , FLEMING-1886-1,74.115

but the produce is better for rearing and feeding animals ;
FLEMING-1886-1,74.116

but on poor , light soil the grass is difficult to maintain , and
indifferently nutritious . FLEMING-1886-1,74.117

Grass in its natural state is not usually given to horses in the United
Kingdom , as it is more convenient and useful to give it in a dried
condition - <font> i.e. , <$$font> converted into hay ;
FLEMING-1886-1,74.118

for though in warmer climates horses can perform a fair amount of work
on it , yet here it has not the same amount of sustenance ,
FLEMING-1886-1,74.119

and if it is young is liable to act as a laxative or purgative .
FLEMING-1886-1,74.120

Water-meadow hay is not good for horses , FLEMING-1886-1,74.121

and contains aquatic plants . FLEMING-1886-1,74.122

Of the meadow and upland hay , the latter is considered the best .
FLEMING-1886-1,74.123

It is short , fine , FLEMING-1886-1,74.124

has a pleasant odour <P_75> and taste , hard and crisp stem ,
FLEMING-1886-1,75.125

and is generally mixed with some of the artificial grasses , as clover .
FLEMING-1886-1,75.126

Its colour varies according to the way in which it has been prepared ,
though it rather inclines to green . FLEMING-1886-1,75.127

In good upland hay the flowering heads of the grasses should be
plentiful . FLEMING-1886-1,75.128

Meadow hay is long , the stems rather hard , though in indifferent
samples they may be soft . FLEMING-1886-1,75.129

Compared with upland , it is coarser , darker in colour , and the aroma
stronger , FLEMING-1886-1,75.130

but this generally depends upon its preparation ; FLEMING-1886-1,75.131

the taste , owing to the coarseness of some of the grasses , is not so
sweet . FLEMING-1886-1,75.132

It generally contains a number of other plants besides the grasses .
FLEMING-1886-1,75.133

It may be mentioned that the water-meadow hay is hard , long , coarse ,
and tasteless , without aroma , and full of water-plants .
FLEMING-1886-1,75.134

It is a very poor feeding material . FLEMING-1886-1,75.135

The value of hay depends much upon the mode of growth and the time at
which it is cut , as well as the way in which it is preserved .
FLEMING-1886-1,75.136

That made from grasses growing in sheltered places - as under trees and
hedges - is insipid , and little worth as food ; FLEMING-1886-1,75.137

and all hay cut too late - after it has seeded - is less nutritious then
when cut at the proper time . FLEMING-1886-1,75.138

The best hay is one year old , of a rather greenish tint , firm and long
, clean , sweet to the taste , and of a pleasant characteristic odour .
FLEMING-1886-1,75.139

An infusion from it <paren> hay tea <$$paren> should be of a good dark
colour ; FLEMING-1886-1,75.140

in the truss , flowers are found in it which still retain more or less
of their tint . FLEMING-1886-1,75.141

A large variety of good grasses are contained in it , and an abundance
of flowering-heads . FLEMING-1886-1,75.142

Hay of medium quality , if old , is tasteless , brittle , and dusty ;
FLEMING-1886-1,75.143

or if affected in quality from other causes , is short and fine ,
deficient in variety of grasses ; or short , coarse , and dark in colour
, odourless , taste perhaps pungent , and weeds sometimes present .
FLEMING-1886-1,75.144

Hay of bad quality is mouldy , brittle , bad-smelling , perhaps <P_76>
dark-brown in colour , and innutritious . FLEMING-1886-1,76.145

If composed of water-meadow grasses , these are seen in abundance ,
giving a great coarseness to the hay , which is deficient in colour and
aroma . FLEMING-1886-1,76.146

Hay of medium and of bad quality are often found together ,
FLEMING-1886-1,76.147

but they should be considered as distinct , as there is a hay of medium
quality which , though unsuited for hard-worked or valuable animals , is
yet useful for a certain class of horse , as it does not contain
anything injurious , but simply , either through a bad season , bad
sowing , or being a second crop , is destitute of the nutriment
contained in the best quality , having none of those hurtful properties
, however , found in bad hay . FLEMING-1886-1,76.148

Again , hay originally of the best quality will , if kept too long ,
lose much of its nourishment , and become second-class forage .
FLEMING-1886-1,76.149

Hay when less than one year old is termed new , FLEMING-1886-1,76.150

and though horses like new hay , experience has shown that it is not
good for feeding purposes , being likely to cause purging and abdominal
pain ; FLEMING-1886-1,76.151

indeed , it is considered as innutritious . FLEMING-1886-1,76.152

If it must be used , it should be given only in small quantities , and
mixed , if possible , with old hay . FLEMING-1886-1,76.153

It is preferable to give over-ripe , or even slightly weathered , hay ,
rather than that which is green and juicy . FLEMING-1886-1,76.154

Old hay is so called after its first year , FLEMING-1886-1,76.155

and it generally retains its full nutritive properties for one year more
; FLEMING-1886-1,76.156

but , as a general rule , hay deteriorates FLEMING-1886-1,76.157

and becomes dry after being stacked longer than eighteen months .
FLEMING-1886-1,76.158

Exceptionally , however , when grown upon good soil , mown , and
gathered under favourable conditions , it is often after that age more
nutritious than the succeeding year's crop . FLEMING-1886-1,76.159

New hay is distinguished from old by its green colour , more powerful
aroma , the fibres containing sap , particularly at the joints , and by
its being softer than old hay , which enables it to undergo more
twisting without breaking . FLEMING-1886-1,76.160

A truss of old hay , for the same weight as a truss of new - 56 lbs. -
is less in <P_77> bulk , owing to the amount of consolidation which has
taken place in the rick . FLEMING-1886-1,77.161

The second or third cutting of hay is termed the " aftermath . "
FLEMING-1886-1,77.162

It is greener than the first crop , softer , FLEMING-1886-1,77.163

contains weeds and roots , no flowering heads , FLEMING-1886-1,77.164

and the aroma is less marked than in good hay , even if well got ;
FLEMING-1886-1,77.165

but badly harvested it is entirely destitute of perfume ;
FLEMING-1886-1,77.166

owing to the lateness of the crops and the amount of moisture it
contains , it is very difficult to harvest properly ;
FLEMING-1886-1,77.167

as a rule it is only fit for cattle . FLEMING-1886-1,77.168

When the grass is cut , it should remain in the field as short a time as
possible ; as if left in the sun too long it loses its colour and
flavour , and becomes dried up ; FLEMING-1886-1,77.169

the difference of an hour on a hot day is said to occasion a loss of
fifteen to twenty per_cent. in the hay . FLEMING-1886-1,77.170

If exposed to rain , much of its valuable nutriment is washed out of it
. FLEMING-1886-1,77.171

The peculiar aroma of hay is due to a volatile compound , some say to
the sweet-scented vernal grass ; FLEMING-1886-1,77.172

in badly saved hay this aroma is destroyed . FLEMING-1886-1,77.173

In England the greatest care is exercised to preserve the colour and
aroma , FLEMING-1886-1,77.174

and this is secured by repeated turning and rapid drying ;
FLEMING-1886-1,77.175

in Scotland , where little natural hay is made <paren> that principally
produced being from clover and rye grass <$$paren> , less turning is
done , FLEMING-1886-1,77.176

the crop is allowed to remain a number of days on the ground ,
FLEMING-1886-1,77.177

and when gathered it does not ferment . FLEMING-1886-1,77.178

Consequently , Scotch hay bears an indifferent name .
FLEMING-1886-1,77.179

For the same reasons , Irish hay is poor in quality ; even more so than
the Scotch , being left a longer time in the fields .
FLEMING-1886-1,77.180

When hay is stacked in large quantity , it undergoes a certain amount of
" heating , " or fermentation , which improves its flavour and nutritive
qualities ; FLEMING-1886-1,77.181

but if this heating is carried beyond a certain point , it causes damage
. FLEMING-1886-1,77.182

Hay ricked in a damp or wet state does not heat , FLEMING-1886-1,77.183

but becomes mouldy and rotten . FLEMING-1886-1,77.184

A rick should remain untouched for one year . FLEMING-1886-1,77.185

Hay may be badly harvested , dusty , mow-burnt , mouldy , or musty .
FLEMING-1886-1,77.186

In badly harvested hay the damage may be slight , <P_78> caused by a
shower of rain ; FLEMING-1886-1,78.187

or the hay may be bleached , sapless , and deficient in aroma , the
result of being exposed to bad weather . FLEMING-1886-1,78.188

When slightly damaged , such hay may be given as food ;
FLEMING-1886-1,78.189

but when affected to any extent , it is only fit for bedding .
FLEMING-1886-1,78.190

Hay is made dusty from exposure to bad weather , or to the sun ,
FLEMING-1886-1,78.191

or it may be due to decay . FLEMING-1886-1,78.192

" Mow-burnt " hay is the result of undue fermentation in the stack , its
colour being changed from brown to a very dark brown , almost black ,
the hay itself being dry and brittle , with a very pungent taste and
powerful odour . FLEMING-1886-1,78.193

When only slightly mow-burnt , horses do not dislike it , as it is sweet
, owing to its containing a large amount of sugar , while the aroma is
pleasant ; FLEMING-1886-1,78.194

but when badly burned , the sugar has become converted into acetic acid
, FLEMING-1886-1,78.195

has to a large extent lost its nutritious properties ,
FLEMING-1886-1,78.196

and causes derangement of the digestion . FLEMING-1886-1,78.197

Horses soon become tired of mow-burnt hay , which acts as a diuretic ,
and if continued for any time produces excessive thirst , loss of
condition , listlessness and weakness , FLEMING-1886-1,78.198

and the animal is in a condition to contract serious disease .
FLEMING-1886-1,78.199

" Musty " hay is that which has been exposed to wet and damp , either in
the rick or before being stacked ; FLEMING-1886-1,78.200

mould is more or less abundant on it , FLEMING-1886-1,78.201

the odour is unpleasant , FLEMING-1886-1,78.202

and it has a bitter taste . FLEMING-1886-1,78.203

It should never be given as food if possible , as it is liable to
produce disease ; FLEMING-1886-1,78.204

if it must be given , it should be in small quantities , after being
dressed with a solution of common salt , FLEMING-1886-1,78.205

or it should be exposed to steam at a high temperature .
FLEMING-1886-1,78.206

The artificial grasses which are made into hay are chiefly red and white
clover ; Swedish , Italian , and yellow clover ; vetches , lucerne , and
sainfoin . FLEMING-1886-1,78.207

When these artificial grasses are converted into hay , the proportion of
albuminoids per_cent. is nearly equal to that of oats , and much
greater than in the natural grasses , though they contain less fats ,
carbo-hydrates , and phosphates ; FLEMING-1886-1,78.208

the flesh-producing elements in clover are given as 13.52 for clover and
8.44 for meadow hay . FLEMING-1886-1,78.209

The artificial grasses are too rich to be given alone in large quantity
, as <P_79> " broken_wind " and indigestion , as well as liver disease ,
have been attributed to them . FLEMING-1886-1,79.210

They should therefore be given in small quantity , or mixed with hay .
FLEMING-1886-1,79.211

Owing to the amount of moisture in clover , there is great difficulty in
converting it into hay ; FLEMING-1886-1,79.212

consequently , it is liable to become mouldy and rank , and therefore
liable to produce disease of the bowels , etc. FLEMING-1886-1,79.213

The trefoils are said to contain a very active principle very irritating
to the kidneys . FLEMING-1886-1,79.214

The amount of artificial forage which may be given to horses with safety
will vary according to circumstances ; FLEMING-1886-1,79.215

in the green state , it should be used sparingly , especially with
horses which are brought on to it for the first time , as it is liable
to undergo fermentation in the intestines , and cause extreme distension
. FLEMING-1886-1,79.216

In the form of hay , owing to its highly stimulating qualities , a
sparing use of it should be observed ; FLEMING-1886-1,79.217

one-third of this forage to two-thirds hay would be a judicious mixture
for ordinary use for horses not performing hard work .
FLEMING-1886-1,79.218

Lucerne is a valuable food , when green , for sick horses ;
FLEMING-1886-1,79.219

it should , however , be half dried in the sun before use , if possible
. FLEMING-1886-1,79.220

When made into good hay , it is very good feeding , mixed with the
ordinary ration . FLEMING-1886-1,79.221

<font> Oats . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,79.222

- Oats are generally considered the best grain food for horses .
FLEMING-1886-1,79.223

Good oats are heavy , FLEMING-1886-1,79.224

have a thin skin , FLEMING-1886-1,79.225

and are clean , hard , sweet , and free from musty smell .
FLEMING-1886-1,79.226

Ordinary oats usually contain about 30 per_cent. of innutritious husk ;
FLEMING-1886-1,79.227

and light oats , weighing less than 40 lbs. to the bushel , contain a
larger amount of husk than heavier oats . FLEMING-1886-1,79.228

White oats are generally thinner in the skin than black .
FLEMING-1886-1,79.229

Very good oats will weigh from 42 lbs. {TEXT:lbs} to 48 lbs. per
bushel ; FLEMING-1886-1,79.230

but under 40 lbs. they are not of much value for hard work , unless
given in larger quantity . FLEMING-1886-1,79.231

Kiln-dried oats are objectionable , inasmuch as the flour in them is
more or less damaged , either in the process of drying or before they
have been put on the kiln . FLEMING-1886-1,79.232

Foreign oats , however , are generally slightly kiln-dried , even when
in good condition , before being put on board ship , with a view to
<P_80> prevent their heating during the voyages . FLEMING-1886-1,80.233

Oats , also , which have been badly harvested , or become dirty from any
cause , are sometimes washed to improve their appearance , and then
dried on the kiln . FLEMING-1886-1,80.234

New oats are also sometimes slightly kiln-dried to make them hard ,
resembling old oats , and thus increase their value .
FLEMING-1886-1,80.235

When so dried , oats have a peculiar smell and taste , and a wrinkled
appearance about the ends of the husks , owing to the shrinking of the
kernel ; FLEMING-1886-1,80.236

the colour is also deeper , and sometimes reddish in tint .
FLEMING-1886-1,80.237

What are called " foxy " oats are oats which have heated in bulk when
not perfectly dry , and undergone fermentation to some extent .
FLEMING-1886-1,80.238

They have a pink or very red colour , an unpleasant smell , and a bitter
taste . FLEMING-1886-1,80.239

When given to horses they act injuriously upon the kidneys , causing
diabetes and loss of condition . FLEMING-1886-1,80.240

Damp oats are generally recognized by their softness , mustiness , or
mouldiness , or sprouting , depending upon the amount of damp , the
period of exposure , and whether the oats are in bulk .
FLEMING-1886-1,80.241

If merely soft , no great harm is done , FLEMING-1886-1,80.242

but if they have a musty smell , or show mould , they are unfit for food
. FLEMING-1886-1,80.243

Sprouted oats should not be given for food . FLEMING-1886-1,80.244

Oats may be mixed with stones , dirt , or any foreign matter , as well
as the small seeds of weeds . FLEMING-1886-1,80.245

These should be got rid of by winnowing . FLEMING-1886-1,80.246

New are chiefly distinguished from old oats by the smell , which in the
former is rather earth-like ; FLEMING-1886-1,80.247

the husk of the new oat is also bright , while its taste is sweet and
milky , FLEMING-1886-1,80.248

it is likewise softer than the old oat . FLEMING-1886-1,80.249

<font> Maize . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,80.250

- This has now become a very common diet for horses , especially for
those doing moderate and slow work . FLEMING-1886-1,80.251

Compared with oats , it contains more heat-forming , and rather less
flesh-forming , elements . FLEMING-1886-1,80.252

The difference between the price of the two is generally in favour of
maize , FLEMING-1886-1,80.253

and influences its use on economical grounds . FLEMING-1886-1,80.254

It should be at least a year old and clean . FLEMING-1886-1,80.255

New maize is distinguished from old by its softness .
FLEMING-1886-1,80.256

In this country it is usually given combined with <P_81> oats , as when
horses are fed upon it alone , it is considered too heating .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.257

<font> Barley . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,81.258

- Barley is generally too expensive in this country for horses .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.259

If used at all , great care must be observed , as it is liable to cause
derangement of digestion , and irritation of the bowels and skin .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.260

<font> Rye . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,81.261

- Rye is better and safer than barley , but inferior to oats .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.262

<font> Beans . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,81.263

- Beans constitute an excellent ingredient in the feed of horses doing
very hard work , as they contain more nutritive and stimulant matter .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.264

English beans for feeding should be one year old , weigh from 60 lbs.
to 64 lbs. per bushel , and be hard , full , sweet , and free from
perforations caused by insects which devour the kernel .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.265

The skin should be thick , and easily removed . FLEMING-1886-1,81.266

Egyptian beans are largely used because of their lower price ;
FLEMING-1886-1,81.267

if they are clean , dry , and sound , they are not very inferior to
English beans . FLEMING-1886-1,81.268

<font> Peas . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,81.269

- These have somewhat the same composition as beans ,
FLEMING-1886-1,81.270

and are , therefore , almost equally nutritious ; FLEMING-1886-1,81.271

being weight-for-weight cheaper , they are often substituted for these .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.272

They should also be at least a year old , sound , clean , and free from
perforations . FLEMING-1886-1,81.273

<font> Bran . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,81.274

- This can scarcely be looked upon as an article of substantial diet ,
as owing to the improved wheat-dressing machines , very little
nutritious matter is allowed to adhere to it . FLEMING-1886-1,81.275

It is , however , often given as a laxative to sick horses , or those
which are resting ; FLEMING-1886-1,81.276

and it is palatable and refreshing . FLEMING-1886-1,81.277

It should be dry , free from mould , sweet-tasting , and clean .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.278

<font> Linseed . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,81.279

- This is not usually given to healthy horses , but for patients .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.280

It is employed in the form of mucilage , tea , or gruel .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.281

Linseed-cake water is sometimes used to moisten manger-food , when this
is of a constipating nature , and with advantage .
FLEMING-1886-1,81.282

It has been recommended that in large <P_82> establishments the
cooking-house should have a trough for the preparation of this fluid .
FLEMING-1886-1,82.283

<font> Carrots . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,82.284

- These are the best of all roots for horses , and especially for
hunters and others performing hard work , as well as for unthrifty
horses . FLEMING-1886-1,82.285

Indeed , were it not for the high price , they might be recommended for
all horses . FLEMING-1886-1,82.286

<font> Turnips and Mangolds . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,82.287

- These , when of good quality , are useful adjuncts to the food of
horses standing idle , or doing little work in winter .
FLEMING-1886-1,82.288

They are best given raw and pulped . FLEMING-1886-1,82.289

<font> Potatoes . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,82.290

- When these are largely cultivated they are often given to horses as an
article of diet , especially when more or less damaged by disease .
FLEMING-1886-1,82.291

Though they possess only a small amount of flesh-forming material , yet
they are supposed to be about one-third as nutritious as oats ,
FLEMING-1886-1,82.292

and when steamed or boiled , mixed with chopped hay and straw , and a
small proportion of oats , they are found capable of maintaining horses
, doing slow work , in good condition . FLEMING-1886-1,82.293

<font> Green forage . <$$font> FLEMING-1886-1,82.294

- During the season green forage is frequently given to horses as part
of their diet , even when performing moderate work ;
FLEMING-1886-1,82.295

but grass , when very succulent , and especially that which has been
grown on water meadows and sewage irrigation land , is best for idle or
sick horses , as , though refreshing , it contains very little nutriment
. FLEMING-1886-1,82.296

Clover , tares , and vetches are much liked by horses ,
FLEMING-1886-1,82.297

and may be given mixed with their hay ; FLEMING-1886-1,82.298

when sown in spring and cut late in the summer , they are very useful ,
as then the pastures become bare ; FLEMING-1886-1,82.299

and for farm horses , winter tares come in useful for spring feeding on
arable farms . FLEMING-1886-1,82.300

Under all circumstances , green food , when wet with rain or dew ,
should not be given to horses until some of the moisture has been got
rid of by drying . FLEMING-1886-1,82.301

When green forage is given in the early spring as part of the feed
ration , it should at first be allowed sparingly , and after the other
food has been consumed , as horses devour it greedily ;
FLEMING-1886-1,82.302

after a time it may be increased in quantity without <P_83> danger .
FLEMING-1886-1,83.303

It is usually found most economical and safe to have the green forage
chopped , and mixed with the hay , chaff , and corn , especially for
town horses . FLEMING-1886-1,83.304

<heading>

Preparation of food . FLEMING-1886-1,83.306

<$$heading>

Stabled horses , and especially those doing hard work , generally
require to have their food more or less prepared , FLEMING-1886-1,83.308

and this preparation is a matter of some importance with regard to
economy and efficient feeding . FLEMING-1886-1,83.309

No matter how perfectly mastication and digestion may succeed in
extracting nourishment from unbroken and unprepared grain , the
abridgment of labour and duration in these processes must be a saving to
the animal ; FLEMING-1886-1,83.310

but when mastication or digestion is impaired - as in old horses when
their teeth become defective , in horses over-fatigued by severe labour
or privation , or in those which are ill or recovering from sickness -
such preparation must be doubly beneficial . FLEMING-1886-1,83.311

Grain should be crushed at least sufficiently to break the husk ;
FLEMING-1886-1,83.312

and beans , peas , and maize should not be broken into flour , but
cracked or split . FLEMING-1886-1,83.313

Cutting hay , and also straw , when it is part of the rations , into
chop , is now pretty generally adopted , especially in large studs of
horses , as it prevents waste ; FLEMING-1886-1,83.314

and if the chop is mixed with the grain , it ensures complete
mastication of both . FLEMING-1886-1,83.315

It is recognised that for horses doing long and slow work , with but a
limited time for rest , this preparation of the food is eminently
beneficial . FLEMING-1886-1,83.316

The easier and more thorough mastication is a guarantee that the food is
well mixed with saliva in the mouth , FLEMING-1886-1,83.317

and this renders digestion in the stomach more rapid and perfect .
FLEMING-1886-1,83.318

With a mixture of chop and different kinds of grain , it is very
necessary that the whole should be thoroughly mixed .
FLEMING-1886-1,83.319

If a number of horses are to be fed with it , in order that each may
receive its due quantity of each ingredient , to facilitate <P_84> this
mixing a large iron tub or box <paren> or if of wood it should be lined
throughout with sheet iron <$$paren> at least one-third greater than the
bulk of the food to be mixed at one time ought to be employed ;
FLEMING-1886-1,84.320

the different parts of the food are laid in this box in alternate layers
; FLEMING-1886-1,84.321

when all are placed , they are then stirred up by means of a light spade
. FLEMING-1886-1,84.322

Hay of good quality requires no further preparation than chopping ;
FLEMING-1886-1,84.323

but for inferior hay , and especially if it be mouldy , the process of
steaming for fifteen or twenty minutes has been recommended ;
FLEMING-1886-1,84.324

this steaming , though it does not improve the nutritive qualities of
the hay , renders it more palatable and digestible ,
FLEMING-1886-1,84.325

and destroys whatever noxious qualities it may possess .
FLEMING-1886-1,84.326

Roots , as carrots , turnips , or parsnips , should be carefully
cleansed from earth and grit by washing ; FLEMING-1886-1,84.327

and to prevent choking , and render them more easily eaten , they should
be cut or sliced into small pieces . FLEMING-1886-1,84.328

If boiled or steamed , this should not be overdone , as horses relish
them more when they are a little hard . FLEMING-1886-1,84.329

With regard to the propriety of boiling food , opinions differ somewhat
; FLEMING-1886-1,84.330

but for healthy horses , performing more than an average amount of
severe , and especially fast , work there can be no doubt that unboiled
grain , when of good quality , is better than that which is boiled .
FLEMING-1886-1,84.331

For heavy , or draught horses , Reynolds remarks that when hard or
uncooked corn forms the ordinary ration , a night feed two or three
times a week of steamed grain , mixed with bran , is an exceedingly good
and agreeable change . FLEMING-1886-1,84.332

At periods of the year when the demands upon team labour are moderate ,
the practice of steaming the corn is better for the animals , and also
more economical . FLEMING-1886-1,84.333

With a view to reducing the stimulating qualities of the diet , for
horses doing only half work or less , the practice is especially good .
FLEMING-1886-1,84.334

A bushel of grain thus prepared will go as far in rendering the chop
palatable as three times the quantity given raw . FLEMING-1886-1,84.335

For young <P_85> horses during the periods of teething , as well as for
old horses having defective teeth or weakened digestive powers , boiled
corn is much to be preferred . FLEMING-1886-1,85.336

Damaged grain of all kinds , if used , should invariably be subjected to
the cooking process ; FLEMING-1886-1,85.337

but it should be remembered that all steamed or boiled foods must be
consumed before fermentation commences in them . FLEMING-1886-1,85.338

Boiling or steaming ought to be applied only to whole grain ,
FLEMING-1886-1,85.339

and should not reduce it to pulp , as horses dislike " slops . "
FLEMING-1886-1,85.340

A little salt added to such food renders it more palatable ,
FLEMING-1886-1,85.341

and probably tends to keep it sweet for a longer period .
FLEMING-1886-1,85.342

<heading>

Mixture of food . FLEMING-1886-1,85.344

<$$heading>

For working horses , it is necessary that the food consist of a mixture
of different kinds ; FLEMING-1886-1,85.346

for though health may be maintained on hay or grass alone , yet whenever
exertion exceeds that of mere exercise , more nutriment is required to
compensate for the waste , FLEMING-1886-1,85.347

and if hay or grass only is allowed , such a quantity of these must be
consumed as will cause great inconvenience to the animal by the
distention they create , while a long time is needed for their
mastication and digestion . FLEMING-1886-1,85.348

Therefore grain must be given to supplement the hay , and this in
proportion to the amount of work exacted ; FLEMING-1886-1,85.349

but even a mixture of grain , when this has to be given , is very
advantageous , from an economical and dietetic point of view .
FLEMING-1886-1,85.350

Thus it is found that oats , and beans or peas , and maize and oats ,
are more beneficial than either of these grains given singly ,
FLEMING-1886-1,85.351

and a variation in their relative proportion , at intervals , is also
strongly recommended . FLEMING-1886-1,85.352

So it is that in the diet scale of large studs we often find two or
three kinds of grain in the ration , in addition to the hay and straw ,
roots and grass . FLEMING-1886-1,85.353

With regard to mixture of food , the object should be to furnish what is
deficient in one kind of grain by another grain which contains it in
large proportions . FLEMING-1886-1,85.354

<P_86>

<heading>

Quantity of food FLEMING-1886-1,86.357

<$$heading>

As before mentioned , the quantity of food allowed for a horse , over
and above what is required to maintain health , should be in proportion
to the amount of work exacted . FLEMING-1886-1,86.359

A selection of diet having been determined upon , by a careful estimate
of the relative feeding value and comparative costs of each article
entering into its composition , a consideration of the quantity
necessary to keep the horse in such condition as will enable him to
perform his work satisfactorily and without material injury to his
strength , is most important . FLEMING-1886-1,86.360

It will be obvious that the quantity of food required will depend upon
circumstances - such as the duration and severity of the work , the
conditions under which it has to be performed , as well as the size ,
age , condition , constitution , and appetite of the animal ;
FLEMING-1886-1,86.361

for it must not be forgotten that horses , like men , differ in their
appetites , some being able to perform a certain amount of work on a
smaller quantity of food than others . FLEMING-1886-1,86.362

To maintain a just balance between food and work , which the condition
of the horse will pretty accurately demonstrate , the owner must be
ready to increase , and as promptly diminish , the grain allowance , as
demands upon it are created or disappear . FLEMING-1886-1,86.363

If the quality of the food is not sufficiently rich to furnish material
for the repair of waste tissue , the deficiency must be met by the
consumption of an increased quantity . FLEMING-1886-1,86.364

But as has been pointed out , an excessive supply of comparatively
innutritious food to compensate for deficiency in quality , is not only
embarrassing to the stomach , FLEMING-1886-1,86.365

but hampers the horse with bulky dead weight . FLEMING-1886-1,86.366

Severely worked horses eat more than those which are not so strained ,
FLEMING-1886-1,86.367

and should therefore be supplied with more concentrated food , easier of
digestion , and rich in flesh-forming properties .
FLEMING-1886-1,86.368

For the largest-sized draught horse which performs steady hard work for
a number of hours every day , 18 lbs. of hay , and <P_87> a small
proportion of straw , cut into chaff , with 18 lbs. of oats , and a
pound or two of beans or peas , is reckoned a fair allowance .
FLEMING-1886-1,87.369

Reynolds states that the weight of dry food absolutely consumed by an
average-sized , well-conditioned cart horse , moderately worked ,
regularly fed , well housed , and supplied with diet of good quality ,
is from 29 lbs. to 34 lbs. daily , of which the hay and straw should
constitute about two-fifths . FLEMING-1886-1,87.370

However nutritious the food may be , less than 29 lbs. will not suffice
to maintain the organs in healthy action . FLEMING-1886-1,87.371

In a stud of cart horses which he managed , the following was the daily
allowance : - Indian corn , 10 lbs. ; Egyptian beans or Canadian peas ,
5 lbs. ; oats , 2 lbs. ; oatmeal and linseed , 1.3 lb. ; bran , 2.1
lbs. ; hay , 10.6 lbs. ; roots and grass , 3 lbs.
FLEMING-1886-1,87.372

Maize , beans , or peas , with bran and cut hay , formed the basis of
the usual food allowance . FLEMING-1886-1,87.373

The oats and linseed were used only for sick or delicate-@ @feeding
horses . FLEMING-1886-1,87.374

The oatmeal was made into gruel , of which each horse was allowed a
drink on coming to his stable when the day's work was completed .
FLEMING-1886-1,87.375

The roots and grass were given during the months it was considered
advisable to use them . FLEMING-1886-1,87.376

In autumn and winter the corn was bruised and given raw , except a night
feed of steamed food three or more times a week . FLEMING-1886-1,87.377

In spring and summer the grain was steamed , FLEMING-1886-1,87.378

but an occasional meal of dry food was allowed as a change .
FLEMING-1886-1,87.379

A further change both in the proportion and quantity of the grain given
was also frequently made , as conditions of weather or work appeared to
indicate , FLEMING-1886-1,87.380

but the autumn allowance was always the most stimulative .
FLEMING-1886-1,87.381

The bulk of the hay was given in the form of chop with the corn , two or
three pounds only being given in the rack the last thing at night .
FLEMING-1886-1,87.382

In quality the best obtainable clover hay was used .
FLEMING-1886-1,87.383

A small quantity of straw was sometimes chopped with the hay .
FLEMING-1886-1,87.384

The horses were of average size , moderately worked at equable and
regular labour every day FLEMING-1886-1,87.385

<paren> 25 per_cent. were also worked for about three hours each Sunday
morning <$$paren> , FLEMING-1886-1,87.386

and their condition was good . FLEMING-1886-1,87.387

<P_88>

Another large company employing a number of horses performing very hard
work , drawing heavily laden drags , allows forage per_diem as follows :
- Hay 16 lbs. ; oats , 10 lbs. ; beans , 5 lbs. ; maize , 4 lbs. ;
bran , 2 lbs. ; total , 37 lbs. FLEMING-1886-1,88.389

The hay is all chopped , and the grain crushed separately ; then the
whole mixed together . FLEMING-1886-1,88.390

Every Saturday night each horse is given a mash of linseed , mixed with
a small proportion of bran , boiled altogether and given warm .
FLEMING-1886-1,88.391

When the work is less , less grain is given . FLEMING-1886-1,88.392

For smaller horses undergoing regular , but hard , work within a brief
space - such as omnibus or tramcar horses - a less allowance of food is
of course given . FLEMING-1886-1,88.393

The following is the diet allowance per day of the principal Tramway
Companies in the United Kingdom . FLEMING-1886-1,88.394

It may be observed , however , that this allowance varies according to
the price of forage in the market , and also sometimes according to the
season . FLEMING-1886-1,88.395

{COM:table_omitted}

<P_89>

The scale of rations for troop horses is usually 10 lbs. of oats ; 12
lbs. of hay ; 8 lbs. of straw - the latter allowed for litter ;
FLEMING-1886-1,89.398

but when the duty is severe , or when the horses are in camp , from 2
lbs. to 4 lbs. additional oats are allowed ; FLEMING-1886-1,89.399

in camp no straw is given for bedding . FLEMING-1886-1,89.400

In all cases the hay is given unchopped . FLEMING-1886-1,89.401

For hunters , much will depend , of course , upon the size of the animal
and the amount of work demanded from him . FLEMING-1886-1,89.402

Large horses , say 16 hands high , doing two days a week in the field ,
16 lbs. of good oats and 10 lbs. of hay is not too great an allowance
; FLEMING-1886-1,89.403

2 lbs. of split beans might be substituted for 2 lbs. of oats with
advantage ; FLEMING-1886-1,89.404

for smaller_sized hunters the allowance may be less ,
FLEMING-1886-1,89.405

but it can rarely be reduced below 12 lbs. per_diem , with 12 lbs. of
hay . FLEMING-1886-1,89.406

For all hunters a small proportion of the hay , say 4 lbs. , should be
chopped and mixed with the grain ; FLEMING-1886-1,89.407

2 lbs. or 3 lbs. of carrots may be advantageously given at intervals .
FLEMING-1886-1,89.408

For carriage horses doing light work 10 lbs. of corn and 12 lbs. of
hay are quite sufficient ; FLEMING-1886-1,89.409

in some cases 8 lbs. of corn and 14 lbs. of hay would suffice .
FLEMING-1886-1,89.410

Ponies and undersized horses do not require so much grain , of course ;
FLEMING-1886-1,89.411

indeed , for ponies , unless the work is very hard , a very small
allowance of oats , say 4 lbs. per_diem , is all that is required ; hay
and roots being often quite enough to keep them in good condition .
FLEMING-1886-1,89.412

It is a good plan to vary the diet now and again - such as giving a bran
or linseed mash once or twice a week . FLEMING-1886-1,89.413

An important question arises when treating of the quantity of the food a
horse should receive , FLEMING-1886-1,89.414

and that is with regard to bulk . FLEMING-1886-1,89.415

Attempts are made from time to time to feed horses on concentrated food
, with the view of securing facility of transport ;
FLEMING-1886-1,89.416

but it is forgotten that a certain degree of bulk is necessary in all
food , in order that the digestive organs may perform their function
properly . FLEMING-1886-1,89.417

During working time food of less bulk may be given , such as oats , as
it interferes less <P_90> with the breathing organs , and is more
rapidly consumed ; FLEMING-1886-1,90.418

but a certain amount of bulk the horse must have at some time or other ,
FLEMING-1886-1,90.419

and the best time for giving this is at night . FLEMING-1886-1,90.420

<heading>

Frequency of feeding . FLEMING-1886-1,90.422

<$$heading>

Next in importance to the quantity of food is the frequency with which
it should be given . FLEMING-1886-1,90.424

It should always be remembered that the peculiar anatomical structure of
the digestive organs in the horse , as well as the nature of the
digestive process in that animal , necessitate food being given at
regular and frequent periods . FLEMING-1886-1,90.425

Nothing conduces to health and efficiency more than the observance of
the rule by which food is allowed at periods suited to the requirements
of the digestive functions . FLEMING-1886-1,90.426

Perhaps no animal suffers more from long fasts than the horse ;
FLEMING-1886-1,90.427

and disease or disorder of the digestive organs is a common occurrence
in stables where long fasts are succeeded by heavy feeding , as
digestion is impaired by the food being devoured greedily , and in
larger quantity than the stomach can properly accommodate .
FLEMING-1886-1,90.428

Horses should be fed at least three times a day ; better if it could be
four times . FLEMING-1886-1,90.429

The hour at which the morning feed should be given will depend more or
less upon the time for turning out for work ; FLEMING-1886-1,90.430

there ought to be ample leisure for consuming the meal before that
occurs . FLEMING-1886-1,90.431

At any rate , the first feed should not be later than six or seven in
the morning ; the next towards mid-day ; and if only fed three times a
day , the third in the evening . FLEMING-1886-1,90.432

If possible , no longer interval than four hours should elapse between
the meals ; FLEMING-1886-1,90.433

and while those given during the day should be moderate in quantity ,
that allowed at night ought to be the largest , as the horse then has
ample time for mastication and rest . FLEMING-1886-1,90.434

During the day a little food , however small the quantity , is better
than none ; FLEMING-1886-1,90.435

and for heavy horses , and even for light ones when it can be carried ,
a nose-bag containing a feed is a <P_91> most advantageous addendum to
the equipment . FLEMING-1886-1,91.436

If the hay is given long or uncut , the bulk of it should be reserved
for night consumption . FLEMING-1886-1,91.437

An important point in feeding is to apportion the feeds in such a way
that each will be consumed at the time it is given ; as if any is left
in the manger it becomes stale or sour , and the horse does not care for
it afterwards . FLEMING-1886-1,91.438

This is most frequently the case with chaff which has been wetted in the
manger - a good practice , as it is easier masticated ,
FLEMING-1886-1,91.439

but it has the disadvantage of spoiling any food which may be left ,
FLEMING-1886-1,91.440

and also necessitates the frequent washing out of the manger .
FLEMING-1886-1,91.441

<heading>

Water . FLEMING-1886-1,91.443

<$$heading>

Water is as essential to horses as food , FLEMING-1886-1,91.445

and unless for special reasons , they should never be stinted in it .
FLEMING-1886-1,91.446

Horses prefer soft to hard water , and clean to dirty water ;
FLEMING-1886-1,91.447

whether hard or soft , it should always be clean , if possible .
FLEMING-1886-1,91.448

The quantity consumed will depend upon circumstances .
FLEMING-1886-1,91.449

Some horses drink more than others ; FLEMING-1886-1,91.450

in hot weather more is required than cold ; FLEMING-1886-1,91.451

after severe exertion , a greater quantity is taken than when the horse
is allowed to remain quiet ; FLEMING-1886-1,91.452

when feverish , horses drink more than in health ; FLEMING-1886-1,91.453

when deprived of water for a long time , more is swallowed than would
have been taken had the horse been allowed to help himself voluntarily .
FLEMING-1886-1,91.454

Horses , as a rule , drink less water when they can have easy access to
it , or when it is always before them , than when they only receive it
at certain , perhaps long , intervals . FLEMING-1886-1,91.455

It is , therefore , the best plan to allow them to have water frequently
, even when performing fast work . FLEMING-1886-1,91.456

If properly watered , a horse will not drink any more than is necessary
for him ; so that , as to quantity , he is the best judge .
FLEMING-1886-1,91.457

There are circumstances when , perhaps , it may be necessary to restrict
an unlimited supply of cold water , as when he is exhausted from fatigue
, after prolonged abstinence , or when very cold , or even <P_92>
excessively hot . FLEMING-1886-1,92.458

In such cases , a small quantity only should be allowed until the body
is in a fit state to receive more ; FLEMING-1886-1,92.459

or the water may be given tepid , FLEMING-1886-1,92.460

or , which is better , some oatmeal may be mixed with it , or a bucket
of oatmeal gruel given instead ; FLEMING-1886-1,92.461

indeed , in all such circumstances , the latter is the safest procedure
. FLEMING-1886-1,92.462

It is a wise plan always to give water before feeding , not after ;
FLEMING-1886-1,92.463

as if given after eating it is likely to cause colic , by carrying with
it some of the undigested food from the stomach into the intestines .
FLEMING-1886-1,92.464

Fresh water should always be given . FLEMING-1886-1,92.465

Water troughs ought to be kept scrupulously clean , and the water in
them often changed . FLEMING-1886-1,92.466

Icy cold water is not very safe , FLEMING-1886-1,92.467

and if it must be given , it should be allowed only in small quantity at
a time , or warm water added to it . FLEMING-1886-1,92.468

<heading>

Grooming . FLEMING-1886-1,92.470

<$$heading>

Next in importance to food and water in stable-kept horses is grooming .
FLEMING-1886-1,92.472

There can be no doubt that the artificial state in which horses are kept
renders cleanliness of the skin a necessity , FLEMING-1886-1,92.473

and it is universally recognized that the beauty , health , and vigour
of the horse are largely dependent upon the condition of his integument
. FLEMING-1886-1,92.474

The function of the skin is very important , FLEMING-1886-1,92.475

and just in proportion as that function is maintained in activity , so
will the health be improved . FLEMING-1886-1,92.476

To clean the skin thoroughly , a brush is , perhaps , the best appliance
; though in Eastern countries , where the horses have very thin ,
sensitive skins , and fine coats , as well as with some horses in our
own country , a brush may cause considerable irritation .
FLEMING-1886-1,92.477

Grooming is not required to the same degree , perhaps , with all horses
; FLEMING-1886-1,92.478

the slow-paced cart or farm horses , or horses which are much exposed to
the weather , or whose work is not fast , do not require , and , in fact
, should not receive , so much grooming as carriage horses , hunters ,
or racehorses . FLEMING-1886-1,92.479

Indeed , the former are none the worse for having a little grease in
their skin , to <P_93> protect them from the cold and the wet ;
FLEMING-1886-1,93.480

but dirt of every description should be removed from the surface , and
all loose dandruff {TEXT:dandriff} brushed from amongst the hair .
FLEMING-1886-1,93.481

With regard to the grooming of farm horses , Reynolds recommends that
they should not be curry-combed , but brushed and well wisped over
before being turned out to work , and again on completion of their day's
labour . FLEMING-1886-1,93.482

After being stabled wet , from rain or perspiration , the skin must be
thoroughly dried , and at supper-time a brisk dry wisping instituted to
determine increased surface-circulation , and promote a feeling of
warmth and comfort for the night . FLEMING-1886-1,93.483

For hardening the backs and shoulders of colts recently put to work ,
and of horses having irritable skins , a free application of salt and
water to the saddle and collar-seats is beneficial .
FLEMING-1886-1,93.484

Many persons advocate clipping the hair from the legs of heavy horses ,
a practice highly pernicious , and one to be condemned in the strongest
terms . FLEMING-1886-1,93.485

Hair is the natural protector of the cuticle , FLEMING-1886-1,93.486

and is especially required to warm and shield the delicate skin of the
heels ; FLEMING-1886-1,93.487

its removal from these situations is certain to induce a predisposition
to " <font> grease <$$font> , " and other equally serious consequences .
FLEMING-1886-1,93.488

If the legs are muddy on return from labour , they should be dried as
far as practicable , and the adherent clay subsequently removed with a
hard brush . FLEMING-1886-1,93.489

The application of the thinnest possible film of pure neatsfoot oil to
the surface of the hair of the legs will prevent the adhesion of clay ,
FLEMING-1886-1,93.490

but it should only be used when absolutely necessary .
FLEMING-1886-1,93.491

Opinions vary upon the desirability of washing the legs of cart horses .
FLEMING-1886-1,93.492

As a rule , the practice is unnecessary and injudicious ;
FLEMING-1886-1,93.493

but when the legs have become thoroughly saturated during labour , there
can be no further harm occasioned by washing off any mud which may also
have accumulated amongst the hair . FLEMING-1886-1,93.494

It must , however , be regarded , as essential to proper management ,
that under no pretext is a horse to be left for the night until all his
legs have been thoroughly <P_94> dried . FLEMING-1886-1,94.495

Nor is this precept very difficult of execution ; FLEMING-1886-1,94.496

a handful or two of light wood sawdust rubbed for a few minutes well
into the hair will absorb all moisture from the most hirsute legs ,
affording not only a sense of comfort to the animal , but preventing
those undesirable consequences engendered by continued application of
cold and wet to the extremities . FLEMING-1886-1,94.497

The iron curry-comb should never , as a rule , be applied to the skin of
horses . FLEMING-1886-1,94.498

For long rough coats , nothing is better than a good dandy-brush to
remove dandriff , dust , and dirt ; FLEMING-1886-1,94.499

for finer-@ @coated horses , a good bristle-brush suffices ,
FLEMING-1886-1,94.500

and the use of this may be advantageously supplemented by the wisp and
rubber ; FLEMING-1886-1,94.501

indeed , for some extremely thin-skinned , fine-@ @coated horses , the
two latter are generally found sufficient , provided the groom applies
them energetically and efficiently . FLEMING-1886-1,94.502

In India , the syce or groom rarely resorts to anything else than the
palms of his hands and the sides of his arms up to the elbows , in order
to make the coat shine . FLEMING-1886-1,94.503

Whatever may be used , it is necessary that the hair be worked in its
natural direction , FLEMING-1886-1,94.504

and the surface of the skin must be well acted upon .
FLEMING-1886-1,94.505

The times at which grooming should be performed must vary with
convenience ; FLEMING-1886-1,94.506

the horse ought to be groomed , if possible , early in the morning , and
either immediately after the stable has been cleaned out , or after that
has been done and the horse exercised . FLEMING-1886-1,94.507

Grooming is undoubtedly best performed immediately after exercise , as
then the skin is in a much better condition for being cleaned ;
FLEMING-1886-1,94.508

and the cleaning should extend from the face to the heels , and include
thorough brushing of the forelock , mane , and tail , with sponging of
the nostrils , lips , eyes , and beneath the tail , as well as washing
the hoofs . FLEMING-1886-1,94.509

If the horse is heated , or is wet from perspiration or rain , he should
on no account be allowed to remain undried for any length of time ;
FLEMING-1886-1,94.510

but if he can@ @not be attended to immediately in a proper manner , he
may either receive a temporary wisping of the body and legs , or
clothing and bandaging these , <P_95> or leaving on the saddle or
harness until an opportunity arrives for grooming him ;
FLEMING-1886-1,95.511

or , better , still , he may be exercised for a short time , so as to
prevent what is called a chill . FLEMING-1886-1,95.512

When he can be attended to , the legs should be first well dried , and
then bandaged , a blanket being thrown over the body meanwhile ;
FLEMING-1886-1,95.513

when all the legs have been so treated , the body may then be groomed ,
FLEMING-1886-1,95.514

and when this has been finished , if necessary , the bandages may be
removed from the legs , and these thoroughly brushed out .
FLEMING-1886-1,95.515

It is very dangerous to allow the skin to dry by simple evaporation ,
and especially in a cold or draughty stable ; as pleurisy , bronchitis ,
and inflammation of the lungs or intestines are very often the result .
FLEMING-1886-1,95.516

To groom a horse properly requires a considerable amount of time , and
much skill and exertion ; FLEMING-1886-1,95.517

it is therefore necessary , unless grooms are very trustworthy , that
owners of horses should know when their horses are groomed , and should
also see that it is done thoroughly . FLEMING-1886-1,95.518

A well-groomed horse gives evidence of the fact in the clean , shining ,
and healthy appearance of the coat , FLEMING-1886-1,95.519

and if the hand be rubbed against the hairs it is not soiled by them .
FLEMING-1886-1,95.520

If , on the contrary , the horse is not well groomed , the coat will be
dull , staring , and unsightly , FLEMING-1886-1,95.521

and patches of dirt may be seen upon it , while if the hand is pushed up
through it , it will be covered with a white greasy film , and if the
animal has perspired , scurf and dirt will be observed where the saddle
or harness have been ; while an examination of the points of the hips
and shoulders , the sides and points of the hocks , the roots of the
hairs of the mane , tail , and forelock , will yield further evidence .
FLEMING-1886-1,95.522

