<BEGIN_forster1-1827-2>

<P_3>

<heading>

Prognostics of the weather , &c. FORSTER1-1827-2,3.4

<$$heading>

<font> Aches and Pains <$$font> in the body of various kinds frequently
forbode rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,3.6

Persons for example subject to rheumatism feel more pain in the affected
limb or part of the body before a change of weather , particularly when
fair is to be exchanged for wet . FORSTER1-1827-2,3.7

Old carious teeth are also troublesome , FORSTER1-1827-2,3.8

and pains in the face , ears , and gums are sometimes experienced .
FORSTER1-1827-2,3.9

Limbs once broken also ache at the place of their union ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,3.10

and various other aches and pains too various and trifling to be
specified have been from time immemorial found to be signs of changes of
the weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,3.11

<font> Animals <$$font> , by some peculiar sensibility to electrical or
other atmospheric influence , often indicate changes of the weather by
their peculiar motions and habits , all which will be found under their
respective heads . FORSTER1-1827-2,3.12

See <font> Ass , Dogs , Swallows , &c. <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,3.13

Virgil well observes on this interesting subject , FORSTER1-1827-2,3.14

{COM:latin_omitted}

<P_4>

<font> Ants . <$$font> - FORSTER1-1827-2,4.17

An universal bustle and activity observed in anthills may be generally
regarded as a sign of rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,4.18

The ants frequently appear all in motion together , FORSTER1-1827-2,4.19

and carry their eggs about from place to place . FORSTER1-1827-2,4.20

This is observed by Aratus , Virgil , Pliny , and others .
FORSTER1-1827-2,4.21

There are several species of ants , FORSTER1-1827-2,4.22

but we believe this prognostic to be common to nearly all of them ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,4.23

nor do we know precisely to what species Virgil alluded when he said ,
alluding to signs of rain , FORSTER1-1827-2,4.24

{COM:latin_omitted}

<font> Aselli <$$font> or Asini , two small stars in the constellation
of the Crab , between which is a beautiful cluster of minute stars ,
which to the naked eyes appear like a nebula , and is called Praesepe ,
the manger . FORSTER1-1827-2,4.26

The poets of old pretended , that when these two stars and the said
nebula became dull it foretold rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,4.27

It seems owing to some stars being duller in light than others that they
became the soonest obscured by the condensing of the sky into cloud
before rain ; as , for instance , the two small stars of the Aselli in
the constellation of the Crab , of whose peculiar prognostic so much is
said by Aratus . FORSTER1-1827-2,4.28

The Pleiades are remarkably brilliant for their size .
FORSTER1-1827-2,4.29

One should expect that the light of the different Stars would produce
differences in the coloured halos seen sometimes to surround them .
FORSTER1-1827-2,4.30

The original composition of the light of the different stars is very
different , FORSTER1-1827-2,4.31

and consequently no general tables of refraction can be constructed to
apply to all stars . FORSTER1-1827-2,4.32

Aldebaran , Arcturus , Betulgeus , and Alpliard , for instance , are red
stars ; Capella , yellow ; and Sirius , Procyon , and Atair , white :
while Lyra and Spica Virginis are blueish . FORSTER1-1827-2,4.33

The planets differ much <font> inter se . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,4.34

<P_5>

<font> Asses . <$$font> - FORSTER1-1827-2,5.36

When asses bray more than ordinary , particularly if they shake their
ears as if uneasy , it is said to predict rain , and particularly
showers . FORSTER1-1827-2,5.37

I have noticed , that in showery weather a donkey confined in a yard
near the house , has brayed before every shower , and generally some
minutes before the rain has fallen , as if some electrical influence ,
produced by the concentrating power of the approaching raincloud ,
caused a tickling in the windpipe of the animal , just before the shower
came up . FORSTER1-1827-2,5.38

Whatever this electric state of the air preceding a shower may be , it
seems to be the same that causes in other animals some peculiar
sensations , which makes the peacock squall , the pintado call "
comeback , " and which creates a variety of prognosticative motions in
the different species of the animal kingdom . FORSTER1-1827-2,5.39

At the same time old wounds , decayed teeth , and bones that have been
broken begin to ache . FORSTER1-1827-2,5.40

See these articles . FORSTER1-1827-2,5.41

An expressive adage says , When that the ass begins to bray , Be sure we
shall have rain that day . FORSTER1-1827-2,5.42

We have repeatedly been able to give our haymakers useful admonitions
founded solely on the braying of the ass . FORSTER1-1827-2,5.43

Thus the proverb says truly , 'T@ @is time to cock your hay and corn
When the old donkey blows his horn . FORSTER1-1827-2,5.44

<font> Bats <$$font> flitting about late in the evening in spring and
autumn , at which seasons they are most commonly seen , foretell a fine
day on the morrow , as do dorbeetles , and some other insects .
FORSTER1-1827-2,5.45

On the contrary , when bats return soon to their hiding places , and
send forth loud cries , bad weather may be expected .
FORSTER1-1827-2,5.46

In April 1809 , at Wokey Hole , near Wells , we saw many hundreds of
torpid bats clinging to the roofs of that great cave .
FORSTER1-1827-2,5.47

<P_6>

<font> Barometer . <$$font> - FORSTER1-1827-2,6.49

There is no instrument now more generally used for ascertaining the
coming weather than the barometer . FORSTER1-1827-2,6.50

It may however be remarked , that it is more from its rising or falling
, than from its height or lowness that we are to infer fair or foul
weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,6.51

Generally speaking , the rising of the mercury presages clear fair
weather , and its falling , foul weather ; as rain , snow , high winds ,
and storms . FORSTER1-1827-2,6.52

In very hot weather , the falling of the mercury indicates thunder .
FORSTER1-1827-2,6.53

In winter the rising indicates frost , FORSTER1-1827-2,6.54

and in frosty weather , if the mercury fall three or four divisions ,
there will follow a thaw ; FORSTER1-1827-2,6.55

but in a continued frost , if the mercury rise , it will snow .
FORSTER1-1827-2,6.56

When foul weather happens soon after the falling of the mercury , expect
but little of it ; FORSTER1-1827-2,6.57

and , on the contrary , expect but little fair weather when it proves
fair shortly after the mercury has risen . FORSTER1-1827-2,6.58

In foul weather , when the mercury rises much and high , and so
continues for two or three days before the foul weather is quite over ,
then expect a continuance of fair weather to follow .
FORSTER1-1827-2,6.59

In fair weather , when the mercury falls much and low , and thus
continues for two or three days before the rain comes , then expect a
great deal of wet , and probably high winds . FORSTER1-1827-2,6.60

The unsettled motion of the mercury denotes uncertain and changeable
weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,6.61

The words engraved on the register plate of the barometer , it may be
observed , can@ @not be strictly relied upon to correspond exactly with
the state of the weather ; though it will in general agree with them as
to the mercury rising and falling . FORSTER1-1827-2,6.62

When the thermometer and barometer rise together in summer , with rain
in large drops , a wholesome state of the atmosphere is at hand .
FORSTER1-1827-2,6.63

<P_7>

A great and sudden rising of the barometer , that is to say , a great
accession of atmospherical pressure , will , in some persons , occasion
a slight temporary difficulty of hearing and tingling in the ears ,
similar to that which is experienced in descending from high mountains ,
or from the air in balloons . FORSTER1-1827-2,7.65

<font> Balloons <$$font> have been made use of to ascertain the
direction of upper currents of air ; FORSTER1-1827-2,7.66

and as their currents by degrees get lower and support the current
blowing near the earth's surface , we may often by means of small air
balloons foretell what will be the direction of the breeze at the next
change of wind . FORSTER1-1827-2,7.67

See <font> Current , Kite , <$$font> &c. FORSTER1-1827-2,7.68

<font> Berries <$$font> in the hedges often forbode a hard winter ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,7.69

and severe weather frequently occurs in seasons when they are
particularly plentiful on the Maybush and Blackthorn .
FORSTER1-1827-2,7.70

This rule is not however without its exceptions . FORSTER1-1827-2,7.71

But , at all events , peculiarities of the seasons have a wonderful
influence on the quantity of berries , particularly those of Holly
{TEXT:Holy} . FORSTER1-1827-2,7.72

In winter 1823 - 4 they were very numerous , though the season was mild
. FORSTER1-1827-2,7.73

In 1824 - 5 scarcely one was to be seen ; FORSTER1-1827-2,7.74

the season was also mild . FORSTER1-1827-2,7.75

The peculiarities of the seasons , and their influence on plants ,
constitute a very curious subject of research ; FORSTER1-1827-2,7.76

it comprehends the whole doctrine of special blights , whereby only
certain tribes of plants are affected . FORSTER1-1827-2,7.77

For example , the summer of 1810 killed the plane-trees almost every
where in this island . FORSTER1-1827-2,7.78

The spring of 1824 destroyed the mezereon shrubs . FORSTER1-1827-2,7.79

Epidemics and epizooties come under the same class ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,7.80

and are referable to specific conditions of the atmosphere .
FORSTER1-1827-2,7.81

<font> Beetles <$$font> flying about late in an evening often foretell a
fine day on the morrow . FORSTER1-1827-2,7.82

<font> Blue Sky . <$$font> - FORSTER1-1827-2,7.83

When there is a piece of blue sky seen in a rainy day big enough , as
the proverb says , <P_8> " to make a Dutchman a pair of breeches , " we
shall probably have a fine afternoon . FORSTER1-1827-2,8.84

<font> Bones <$$font> which have once been broken , and are reunited ,
are apt to ache before rain at the place of their re-union .
FORSTER1-1827-2,8.85

See <font> Aches and Pains . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,8.86

<font> Butterflies , <$$font> when they appear early , are sometimes
forerunners of fine weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,8.87

The first sort which appears in spring is the sulphur butterfly <font>
Papilio sulphurea proecox , <$$font> whose wings are of a pale greenish
yellow . FORSTER1-1827-2,8.88

These come in March if the weather be fine and warm .
FORSTER1-1827-2,8.89

The next sort are the tortoiseshell butterflies , early in April .
FORSTER1-1827-2,8.90

And in May come the common white or cabbage butterflies .
FORSTER1-1827-2,8.91

Moths and Sphinxes are also signs of fine weather , when they are common
in an evening . FORSTER1-1827-2,8.92

<font> Calm . <$$font> - FORSTER1-1827-2,8.93

A dead calm often precedes a violent gale ; FORSTER1-1827-2,8.94

and sometimes the calmest and clearest mornings , in certain seasons ,
are followed by a blowing showery day . FORSTER1-1827-2,8.95

Calms are forerunners of the hurricanes of the West_Indies and other
tropical climes . FORSTER1-1827-2,8.96

<font> Candles , <$$font> as well as lamps , often afford good
prognostics of weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,8.97

When the flames of candles flare and snap , or burn with an unsteady or
dim light , rain , and frequently wind also , are found to follow .
FORSTER1-1827-2,8.98

The excrescences from the wicks called funguses also denote rain and
wind . FORSTER1-1827-2,8.99

The curious forms assumed by the excrescent wicks of candles has led to
many superstitions . FORSTER1-1827-2,8.100

We quote the following from a calendarian account of Childermas .
FORSTER1-1827-2,8.101

" In the year 1819 , on the Eve of the Holy Innocents , the wick of a
candle , left for a long time unsnuffed , had by degrees assumed a
complete cruciform shape , which being viewed by the common people a
standing up amidst the gloomy <P_9> flame of the candle , was fearfully
set down by the people as a memento of the sufferings of Jesus Christ on
the cross , who , as they fancied , mysteriously declared thus again ,
by appearing in a flame , <font> I am the light that lighteth every man
that cometh into the world . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,9.102

The fearful appearance of this phenomenon was rendered more impressive
to the minds of the credulous , in consequence of its happening on the
vigil of Childermas , which has been ever regarded a day of unlucky
omens . " FORSTER1-1827-2,9.103

- <font> Perpetual Calender . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,9.104

See <font> Lamps <$$font> . FORSTER1-1827-2,9.105

<font> Candlemas Day . <$$font> - FORSTER1-1827-2,9.106

If this day be clear and frosty it is said that winter will be still of
some continuance , and that the weather will be colder after the
festival than before , according with the old proverb ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,9.107

{COM:latin_omitted}

We have noticed this to be a critical time of the year with respect to
the weather , and that when mild and wet , winter is actually gone , and
we may calculate on no more frost . FORSTER1-1827-2,9.109

Another metrical proverb , frequently quoted in Poor Robin's , Moore's ,
and other Almanacks , reminds us , If Candlemas day be fair and bright ,
Winter will have another flight ; FORSTER1-1827-2,9.110

But if Candlemas day be clouds and rain , Winter is gone
FORSTER1-1827-2,9.111

and will not come again . FORSTER1-1827-2,9.112

<font> Cats <$$font> are said , when they wash their faces , or when
they seem sleepy and dull , to foretell rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,9.113

The same is said of them when they appear irritable and restless , and
play with their tails . FORSTER1-1827-2,9.114

<font> Cattle , <$$font> when they gambol about in their pastures more
than ordinary , foreshew rain , and in general a change of weather .
FORSTER1-1827-2,9.115

<P_10>

<font> Chickens , <$$font> when they pick up small stones and pebbles ,
and are more noisy than usual , afford , according to Aratus , a sign of
rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,10.117

Other authors prognosticate the coming of rain from the habit fowls have
of rubbing in the dust , and clapping their wings ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,10.118

but this applies to several sorts of fowls , as well as to the
gallinaceous {TEXT:gullinaceous} kind . FORSTER1-1827-2,10.119

<font> Cherryclacks <$$font> offer admonitions of the existence and
nature of the gales and breezes by night . FORSTER1-1827-2,10.120

In the cherry season of July , the noise of these scare-birds is often
troublesome , as the following lines from the <font> Anthologia Bor. et
Aus. <$$font> so naturally remind us : FORSTER1-1827-2,10.121

{COM:verse_omitted}

There is no doubt that a whistler , to scream by the wind , might be so
constructed as to point out the fluctuating strength of the blowing gale
. FORSTER1-1827-2,10.123

<P_11>

<font> Chilliness , <$$font> and a sensation of cold greater than the
indication of temperature by the thermometer leads us to expect , often
forebodes rain , as it shews that there is already an increased moisture
in the air , which experience has shewn to be referable to its
decomposition and the first formation of cloud . FORSTER1-1827-2,11.125

<font> Cirrostratus <$$font> or Wanecloud whenever it prevails usually
forebodes rain , snow , or hail ; FORSTER1-1827-2,11.126

but there are , nevertheless , some nice distinctions to be made , and
which a discriminating meteorologist may soon learn to make .
FORSTER1-1827-2,11.127

For example ; when a plain sheet of the wanecloud is spread over a large
surface at eventide , or when the sky gradually thickens with this cloud
, a fall of steady rain is usually the consequence .
FORSTER1-1827-2,11.128

Before storms we see sometimes a curious sort of wanecloud , consisting
of bars curiously carved like the cyma of architectural ornaments .
FORSTER1-1827-2,11.129

But the forms of this cloud are very various , FORSTER1-1827-2,11.130

and the peculiar indications of each of them have not yet been duly
noticed . FORSTER1-1827-2,11.131

This cloud has been defined <font> a shallow extended cloud , subconcave
or undulated , or a congeries of small clouds of this sort . <$$font>
FORSTER1-1827-2,11.132

The figure of the cirrostratus , like that of the cirrus , is very
various : FORSTER1-1827-2,11.133

sometimes it consists in dense longitudinal streaks ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,11.134

at others it looks like shoals of fish ; FORSTER1-1827-2,11.135

sometimes the whole sky is so mottled with it as to give the idea of the
back of the mackerel ; FORSTER1-1827-2,11.136

this has been called the mackerel-back sky : FORSTER1-1827-2,11.137

frequently it appears like the grains of polished wood ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,11.138

or is composed of fine fibres , disposed after the manner of the fibres
of muscles , which often intersect each <P_12> other .
FORSTER1-1827-2,12.139

I have seen the cirrostratus assume the reticular form , like the cirrus
, from which it can then only be distinguished by its greater degree of
density . FORSTER1-1827-2,12.140

This cloud is sometimes spread out into a plane horizontal sheet , more
or less dense ; FORSTER1-1827-2,12.141

this is the form in which the halo generally appears .
FORSTER1-1827-2,12.142

All clouds are capable of becoming lighter or darker , according to
their relative position with respect to the sun : FORSTER1-1827-2,12.143

the cirrostratus , however , is remarkable for exhibiting a great
variety of beautiful colours , according to its variation in density ,
to other peculiarities in its structure , or to its relative position .
FORSTER1-1827-2,12.144

These appearances are best seen in the morning and evening , when the
sun is near to the horizon . FORSTER1-1827-2,12.145

They have been well described by the ancient poets , who have likewise
described them as precursors of rain and tempestuous weather .
FORSTER1-1827-2,12.146

Virgil , speaking of the prognostics of rain , alludes to several
appearances which must be ascribed to the intervention of this cloud :
FORSTER1-1827-2,12.147

{COM:latin_omitted}

<P_13>

{COM:latin_omitted}

<font> Cirrocumulus <$$font> or Sondercloud is a congeries of small
roundish little clouds in close horizontal apposition .
FORSTER1-1827-2,13.151

The cirrocumulus is not always uniform in its appearance ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,13.152

it varies in the size and rotundity of its constituent nubiculae , and
in their closer or more distant arrangement . FORSTER1-1827-2,13.153

It is frequent in summer , FORSTER1-1827-2,13.154

and often forms very beautiful skies : FORSTER1-1827-2,13.155

at all times of the year it may be seen , in the intervals of showers ,
and before an increase of temperature , of which its prevalence is a
pretty certain prognostic . FORSTER1-1827-2,13.156

Before thunderstorms a very dense sphere of this cloud may be noticed ,
whose nubiculae are close , compact , and very round , and indicate a
high electrical change . FORSTER1-1827-2,13.157

The poet Bloomfield beautifully describes the appearance of these clouds
floating in large beds at different altitudes by moonlight :
{COM:verse_omitted} FORSTER1-1827-2,13.158

<font> Cirrus <$$font> or Curlcloud . FORSTER1-1827-2,13.159

- When , after much fine weather , this cloud first appears like a white
line pencilled along on the azure sky , we may generally reckon on a
change ; FORSTER1-1827-2,13.160

and if the cloud increases , and others are added to it laterally , or
if <P_14> it change to the wanecloud , rain will probably follow before
long . FORSTER1-1827-2,14.161

The tufts of cirrus , called mares' tails , are known to be a sign of
wind , which has frequently been found to blow from the quarter to which
these curl-clouds have previously pointed . FORSTER1-1827-2,14.162

In wet weather , when the air is damp , the cirrus , which is seen in
the intervals of the rain , is ill defined , and often of a plumose
figure ; FORSTER1-1827-2,14.163

and has less of the fibrous structure : FORSTER1-1827-2,14.164

this may be attributed to its being surrounded with moister air , which
being a conductor , though an imperfect one , there is not the same
necessity for the cirrus to be drawn out into fine transmitting points ;
as the fluid would fly off more generally from all parts of it .
FORSTER1-1827-2,14.165

Cirri of this kind are generally of short duration ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,14.166

there is often a haziness in the atmosphere when they appear ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,14.167

and they are soon followed by rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,14.168

They seldom appear in fair weather ; FORSTER1-1827-2,14.169

and if cirri , which have been previously fibrous , put on the plumose
and indefinite character , a change to wet weather may be expected .
FORSTER1-1827-2,14.170

<font> Clouds <$$font> of any sort , when they increase much , portend
rain , particularly at eventide ; FORSTER1-1827-2,14.171

when they are very red they often foreshew wind ; when they form a
dappled grey sky , with north wind , fair weather ; when they rapidly
form and evaporate , variable weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,14.172

Clouds fretted and spotted covering the sky after fine weather , or wavy
like the undulation of the sea , forbode rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,14.173

- See <font> Stratus , Cirrus , <$$font> &c. FORSTER1-1827-2,14.174

<font> Colours <$$font> of various kinds , in the sky and clouds ,
tokens severally of different phenomena . FORSTER1-1827-2,14.175

Much red always forebodes wind and rain , particularly in <P_15> the
morning ; FORSTER1-1827-2,15.176

in the evening it sometimes indicates a fine day , particularly if the
morning be grey . FORSTER1-1827-2,15.177

A proverb says , An evening red and a morning grey Will set the
traveller on his way ; FORSTER1-1827-2,15.178

But an evening grey and a morning red Will pour down rain on the
pilgrim's head . FORSTER1-1827-2,15.179

It comes from the Italian , {COM:italian_omitted} FORSTER1-1827-2,15.180

A greenish colour of the sky near to the horizon , often shews that we
may expect more wet weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,15.181

The most beautiful and varied tints are seen in autumn ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,15.182

and in that season the purple of the falling haze is often a sign of a
continuation of fine weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,15.183

When the clouds become more coloured than ordinary , and particularly
when red prevails , it sometimes indicates an east wind .
FORSTER1-1827-2,15.184

<font> Cold and Heat . <$$font> - FORSTER1-1827-2,15.185

The coldest weather , on an average , happens in the middle of January ,
and the hottest in the middle of July . FORSTER1-1827-2,15.186

In July 13th and 14th , 1808 , the thermometer stood at 94@ @=o= and 96@
@=o= of Fahrenheit {TEXT:Farenheit} , in the shade .
FORSTER1-1827-2,15.187

" Excessive cold weather occurred on the 14th of January , 1820 .
FORSTER1-1827-2,15.188

The quicksilver in my thermometer fell to 5@ @=o= at eleven o'clock at
night . FORSTER1-1827-2,15.189

Another thermometer was also observed , hanging in a window in the house
, to be likewise much below Zero . FORSTER1-1827-2,15.190

At the same time , and during the night , I ascertained by a Six's
thermometer , that the cold had been 10@ @=o= , that is ten degrees
below of Fahrenheit's scale , or forty degrees below the freezing point
. FORSTER1-1827-2,15.191

This extraordinary degree of cold <P_16> appeared to be partial , and to
occur in a particular line of places , as if a stream of excessive cold
air were drawn along over partial tracts of country . "
FORSTER1-1827-2,16.192

- <font> Atmospheric Phenomena . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,16.193

The nearer approach of small birds to the windows of our habitations
usually forebode cold weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,16.194

<font> Cocks , <$$font> when they crow at unwonted hours , often
foretell a change of weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,16.195

We have often noticed this before rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,16.196

But this is by no means so certain a sign as many others , because at
particular seasons , and in particular kinds of weather , cocks
habitually crow all day . FORSTER1-1827-2,16.197

During the calm , still , dry , dark , and warm weather sometimes
occurring in the winter months , and which may be called the halcyon
days of our climate , cocks keep a constant crowing all night and day .
FORSTER1-1827-2,16.198

There appear to be three principal cock crowings in ordinary weather ,
namely , about midnight or soon after , about three in the morning , and
at daybreak ; FORSTER1-1827-2,16.199

the latter is never omitted . FORSTER1-1827-2,16.200

We have noticed , however , that when cocks crow all day , in summer
particularly a change to rain has frequently followed .
FORSTER1-1827-2,16.201

Shakespeare , in <font> Hamlet , <$$font> has a well known and beautiful
passage relative to the crowing of cocks all night at Christmas .
FORSTER1-1827-2,16.202

The fact is , that during the dark months of midwinter these fowls
actually do crow on some occasions the whole of the night .
FORSTER1-1827-2,16.203

Cocks are said to clap their wings in an unusual manner before rain ,
and hens to rub in the dust and seem very uneasy .
FORSTER1-1827-2,16.204

<P_17>

<font> Coronas <$$font> round the sun or moon portend rain .
FORSTER1-1827-2,17.206

Coloured crowns of light , and compounded halos , are more sure signs of
a fall . FORSTER1-1827-2,17.207

See <font> Halo . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,17.208

<font> Cream and Milk <$$font> when they turn sour in the night often
indicate thereby that thunderstorms are about , and will probably
shortly take place . FORSTER1-1827-2,17.209

The effect is referable to the electricity of the air at the time .
FORSTER1-1827-2,17.210

<font> Cranes <$$font> are said of old to foretel rain ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,17.211

and on this subject there is a passage in Virgil about which the learned
have always disputed much as to its exact import :
FORSTER1-1827-2,17.212

{COM:latin_omitted}

The passage in Aratus <paren> Dios. 300 <$$paren> from which the
Virgilian prognostic is taken , certainly favours the notion that the
cranes retreat to the valleys , and return from their aerial flight when
they foresee rain coming . FORSTER1-1827-2,17.214

See the Prognostics of Theophrastus , and also Aristotle's <font> Hist.
Anim. <$$font> ix. 10 . and Prof. Heyne's Virgil , <font> Not. ad
{TEXT:ad.} Georg. <$$font> i. 375 . FORSTER1-1827-2,17.215

Buhl , the editor of Aratus , also adopts this explanation .
FORSTER1-1827-2,17.216

The high flight of cranes in silence indicates fine weather .
FORSTER1-1827-2,17.217

<font> Crocuses , <$$font> particularly the yellow crocus , generally
blow in our gardens about the feast of St. Valentine ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,17.218

and are hence called <font> Hymen's torch , <$$font> and <font> flame of
Hymen . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,17.219

They blow through March , FORSTER1-1827-2,17.220

and decay in April . FORSTER1-1827-2,17.221

The striped crocus comes later , as do the white , the blue and white ,
and the blue ; this last seldom blowing till the beginning of March .
FORSTER1-1827-2,17.222

<P_18>

<font> Crows <$$font> utter a peculiar cry before rain , different from
their usual voice , as is noticed by Aratus and Virgil .
FORSTER1-1827-2,18.224

<font> Corvus aquat . <$$font> is quite a common proverb ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,18.225

but this may also allude to the <font> Raven , <$$font> which see .
FORSTER1-1827-2,18.226

<font> Currents of Air <$$font> change their course frequently in the
higher regions of the air first , FORSTER1-1827-2,18.227

and are afterwards continued to the earth's surface ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,18.228

hence we can often foresee a change of the wind by observing the way in
which the clouds above move . FORSTER1-1827-2,18.229

Both the strength of a coming gale , and the point of the compass from
which it will blow , may usually be foreseen some time beforehand by
noticing the velocity and direction of the clouds floating along in the
upper current , or by means of balloons {TEXT:baloons} .
FORSTER1-1827-2,18.230

<font> Cumulus <$$font> or Stackencloud is that large and irregular
hemispherical kind of cloud which , in fair weather , usually forms in
the day and subsides in the evening . FORSTER1-1827-2,18.231

These clouds , when they are very irregular in their shapes , when they
are full of protuberances and fleeces , or when their fleeces curl
inwards as they pass along in the wind , indicate rainy or showery
weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,18.232

Their increase , instead of vanishing , at eventide also portends the
same thing , as does their change into twainclouds .
FORSTER1-1827-2,18.233

<font> Cumulostratus <$$font> or Twaincloud compared with cumulus ,
which it resembles , is more dense , FORSTER1-1827-2,18.234

and overhangs its base in uneven or rugged folds ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,18.235

a pre-existing cirrus , cirrocumulus , or cirrostratus , or one perhaps
immediately formed for the occasion , alights on its summit ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,18.236

and inosculates . FORSTER1-1827-2,18.237

Many of these cirrostrati are sometimes seen attached to the
cumulostratus , and sometimes to intersect it . FORSTER1-1827-2,18.238

Cumulostrati frequently remain in this state for a long time ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,18.239

and constitute very picturesque skies . FORSTER1-1827-2,18.240

<P_19>

At other times the processes are more rapid . FORSTER1-1827-2,19.242

The cirri , or cirrostrati are soon lost in the cumulostratus , which
increases in density , and soon becomes the nimbus described in its
proper place . FORSTER1-1827-2,19.243

See <font> Nimbus . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,19.244

The cumulostratus is one of the stages in the process by which rain is
ultimately effected , of which it may therefore be regarded as a
prognostic . FORSTER1-1827-2,19.245

In Switzerland , Wales , Spain , and other mountainous countries , it
may be confounded at a distance , in its early stages , with distant
mountains . FORSTER1-1827-2,19.246

<font> Dandelion <$$font> the <font> Taraxacum Dens Leonis <$$font> is a
common plant , which flowers early , and remains in blow more or less
all the year . FORSTER1-1827-2,19.247

The general flowering , however , of this plant takes place about the
8th of April , FORSTER1-1827-2,19.248

and for a month it bespangles the fields , mixing agreeably with the
daisy . FORSTER1-1827-2,19.249

<font> Daffodillies , <$$font> of which there are several sorts , blow
in March and April ; FORSTER1-1827-2,19.250

the early daffodil comes about the 10th of March ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,19.251

the great double variety is called <font> Lent Lily . <$$font>
FORSTER1-1827-2,19.252

There are several kinds which blow later in the month .
FORSTER1-1827-2,19.253

<font> Dead Nettles <$$font> blow early and all the year ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,19.254

the red , or purple kind , are scarce all winter .
FORSTER1-1827-2,19.255

They afford a sign of a mild season when they come in winter in
abundance . FORSTER1-1827-2,19.256

<font> Dolphins , <$$font> as well as <font> Porpuses , <$$font> when
they come about a ship , and sport and gambol on the surface of the
water , betoken a storm ; FORSTER1-1827-2,19.257

hence they are regarded as unlucky omens for sailors .
FORSTER1-1827-2,19.258

According to ancient fable they formerly offered themselves in times of
storm to convey shipwrecked mariners to the shore ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,19.259

but this is , of course , a story of a mere human invention .
FORSTER1-1827-2,19.260

The fable of Arion is well known . FORSTER1-1827-2,19.261

<P_20>

<font> Donkey , <$$font> brays before rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.263

See <font> Ass . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,20.264

<font> Dogs , <$$font> before rain , grow sleepy and dull ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,20.265

and lay drowsily before the fire , FORSTER1-1827-2,20.266

and are not easily aroused . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.267

They also often eat grass , which indicates that their stomachs , like
ours , are apt to be disturbed before change of weather .
FORSTER1-1827-2,20.268

It is also said to be a sign of change of weather when dogs howl and
bark much in the night ; FORSTER1-1827-2,20.269

they certainly do this much at the full moon , which has given rise to
the saying relative to the <font> Dogs that bay at the moon . <$$font>
FORSTER1-1827-2,20.270

Dogs also dig in the earth with their feet before rain ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,20.271

and often make deep holes in the ground . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.272

<font> Dreams <$$font> of a hurrying and frightful nature , also incubus
, and other symptoms of oppressed and imperfect sleep , are frequent
indications that the weather is changed or about to change .
FORSTER1-1827-2,20.273

Many persons experience these nocturnal symptoms on a change of wind ,
particularly when it becomes east . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.274

In all these cases the effect seems to be produced immediately on the
nervous system , and through it on the stomach , so that the stomach
shall again re-act on the sensorium . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.275

The symptoms are enhanced by a full stomach and other sources of
indigestion . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.276

See <font> Wind , <$$font> also <font> East Wind . <$$font>
FORSTER1-1827-2,20.277

<font> Drains <$$font> and cesspools {TEXT:sespools} smell stronger than
usual before rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.278

<font> Drowsiness <$$font> and heavy sleep , both in men and animals ,
often forebodes a heavy fall of rain or snow . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.279

<font> Ducks . <$$font> - FORSTER1-1827-2,20.280

The loud and clamorous quackling of ducks , geese , and other waterfowl
, is a sign of rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.281

It is also a sign of rain when they wash themselves , and flutter about
in the water more than usual . FORSTER1-1827-2,20.282

Virgil has well described all these habits of aquatic birds .
FORSTER1-1827-2,20.283

See <font> Geese . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,20.284

<P_21>

The above prognostics apply to various other species of water birds .
FORSTER1-1827-2,21.286

See our article <font> Virgilian Prognostics . <$$font>
FORSTER1-1827-2,21.287

<font> Ears , <$$font> when there is a tingling noise , or what is
called a staging in them , afford thereby a sign of a change of weather
, not simply of rain , as has been said , but of barometrical pressure
in general . FORSTER1-1827-2,21.288

The sudden increase of pressure , like the descent from high mountains ,
or from balloons , causes in many persons a temporary deafness and
roaring in the ears . FORSTER1-1827-2,21.289

A sudden fall of the barometer affects also the ears , but in a
different manner , like mounting a high hill . FORSTER1-1827-2,21.290

<font> East Wind <$$font> is frequently made known to nervous people in
the night by imperfect sleep , headache , and hurrying dreams .
FORSTER1-1827-2,21.291

It is remarkable that good astronomical observations can@ @not be made
when the wind is east . FORSTER1-1827-2,21.292

And frequently when the celestial objects seem to wave and move about in
the field of the telescope , an east wind is found to follow ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,21.293

for it has already began above in the higher regions of the air .
FORSTER1-1827-2,21.294

<font> Eclipse Weather <$$font> is a popular term in the south of
England for the weather following an eclipse of the sun or moon ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,21.295

and it is vulgarly esteemed tempestuous , and not to be depended upon by
the husbandman . FORSTER1-1827-2,21.296

<font> Epidemics <$$font> are disorders of health brought on by
atmospherical influence ; FORSTER1-1827-2,21.297

and modern discoveries have shown how much most prevailing diseases
partake of an epidemical nature . FORSTER1-1827-2,21.298

Scarlet fever , typhus , the plague , and indeed most diseases of this
sort , are now considered epidemical . FORSTER1-1827-2,21.299

It would seem that there were a most immediate connexion between the
peculiar state of the air and the kind of disorders which might be
thereby <P_22> excited . FORSTER1-1827-2,22.300

For it may be observed , that even of those disorders which are not
generally admitted to be contagious , one particular kind will prevail
for a long time . FORSTER1-1827-2,22.301

Thus , in winter , the different symptoms of that state of body which we
call a cold , appear , in some measure , to prevail and vary together ;
so that it is common to hear people talking of the fashionable complaint
. FORSTER1-1827-2,22.302

Coughs , for a while , are the prevailing symptoms ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,22.303

then sore throats are the most common . FORSTER1-1827-2,22.304

It is in spring that certain kinds of cutaneous eruptions usually appear
; and in autumn , that those irregularities in the functions of the
digestive viscera , called cholera morbus , &c. happen , and which have
been erroneously attributed to eating much fruit .
FORSTER1-1827-2,22.305

On the other hand , it can@ @not be considered that atmospheric
peculiarities alone produce epidemic and other complaints , which must
be regarded as having a compound origin , and as resulting from the
operation of peculiar states of atmosphere on persons of particular
states of constitution ; FORSTER1-1827-2,22.306

otherwise all persons would be affected , which is contrary to
experience . FORSTER1-1827-2,22.307

There are , probably , innumerable varieties of temperament of general
habits of life , and , of pre-existing diseases , which , in different
subjects , vary the effects of the air . FORSTER1-1827-2,22.308

And many persons , perhaps , enjoy a state of health , and perfect
action , which may be capable of resisting its evil influence altogether
. FORSTER1-1827-2,22.309

It would , perhaps , be productive of useful results , if physicians of
extensive practice would make accurate meteorological registers during
the prevalence of any epidemic or contagious disorders : such as the
influenza , which , a few years ago , took a range of some miles round
London , but was also prevalent in other parts of the country .
FORSTER1-1827-2,22.310

<P_23>

<font> Epizootie <$$font> is a name for epidemic disorders occurring
among animals , of which we have many and various instances on record .
FORSTER1-1827-2,23.312

The state of the electrometer and other atmospherical instruments should
be carefully examined during the prevalence of such pestilences .
FORSTER1-1827-2,23.313

<font> Erodius <$$font> is the name of some seabird , the species not
being precisely ascertained , of which Aratus writes a great deal , as
being a bird of ominous import . FORSTER1-1827-2,23.314

{COM:greek_omitted}

Various other prognostics are by the same author deduced from this bird
. FORSTER1-1827-2,23.316

But indeed the writings of the ancients abound with allusions to the
indicative use of seafowls . FORSTER1-1827-2,23.317

See " Arati Diosemeri , " edited by T. Forster , London , 8vo. 1815 ,
p. 26 . FORSTER1-1827-2,23.318

The above quotation evidently alludes to a prognostic of wind .
FORSTER1-1827-2,23.319

In another place Aratus describes the flight of the bird to the sea ,
and his shrill cry before rain , FORSTER1-1827-2,23.320

{COM:greek_omitted}

This prognostic is confirmed by Aristotle and by Theophrastus .
FORSTER1-1827-2,23.322

<font> Fair Weather . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,23.323

- The absence of those circumstances which forebode or accompany foul
weather , may generally be considered as indicating a return of fair .
FORSTER1-1827-2,23.324

Virgil mentions the clear and bright appearance of the moon and stars ,
after they have long been hazy and confused , and other signs , to
indicate approaching serenity . FORSTER1-1827-2,23.325

{COM:latin_omitted}

<P_24>

{COM:latin_omitted} <font> Falling_Stars , <$$font> a small kind of
meteors , forbode a change , particularly wind , of which Aratus and
Virgil remind us . FORSTER1-1827-2,24.328

Aratus observes in his Diosemea : {COM:greek_omitted} And Virgil :
{COM:latin_omitted} FORSTER1-1827-2,24.329

<font> Feathers , <$$font> pieces of flue , or dry leaves , playing
about on the surface of ponds and other waters , as if agitated by light
and varying eddies of wind , often forbode rain , of which both
Theophrastus and Aratus remind us . FORSTER1-1827-2,24.330

To other signs , Virgil adds , {COM:latin_omitted}
FORSTER1-1827-2,24.331

<font> Fieldfares , <$$font> when they arrive early and in great
abundance in autumn , foreshew a hard winter , which <P_25> has probably
set in , in the regions from which they have come .
FORSTER1-1827-2,25.332

They usually come in November . FORSTER1-1827-2,25.333

<font> Fishes , <$$font> when they bite more readily , and gambol near
the surface of the streams or ponds , foreshew rain .
FORSTER1-1827-2,25.334

<font> Fire . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,25.335

- The brightness and heat of the fire in winter , often indicates frost
and clear weather , as does the lodgment of the moisture on the windows
; FORSTER1-1827-2,25.336

for it demonstrates a cold atmosphere abroad . FORSTER1-1827-2,25.337

When the fire burns dull , damp weather and non-electric rain often
follow : FORSTER1-1827-2,25.338

it is said that the air on these occasions has less of oxygen .
FORSTER1-1827-2,25.339

The real cause however is unknown . FORSTER1-1827-2,25.340

<font> Flowers <$$font> are many of them excellent indicators of the
approaching weather by their opening and shutting , and other motions .
FORSTER1-1827-2,25.341

See <font> Pimpernel , <$$font> &c. FORSTER1-1827-2,25.342

<font> Fleeces , and Mares' Tails , <$$font> as they are called , seen
in the sky , are signs of rain and wind . FORSTER1-1827-2,25.343

By fleeces are meant those clouds which look like fleeces of wool ,
which the Greeks described as being {COM:greek_omitted} .
FORSTER1-1827-2,25.344

Virgil also , speaking of fine weather , alludes to the absence of these
clouds : {COM:latin_omitted} FORSTER1-1827-2,25.345

Mares' Tails are the comoid Curlclouds called Cirri :
FORSTER1-1827-2,25.346

their prevalence forbodes wind . FORSTER1-1827-2,25.347

They look sometimes like distended locks of hair .
FORSTER1-1827-2,25.348

<font> Flies , <$$font> and various sorts of volatile insects , become
more troublesome , FORSTER1-1827-2,25.349

and sting FORSTER1-1827-2,25.350

and bite more than usual before , as well as in the intervals of rainy
weather , particularly in autumn , when they are very numerous , and
often become a great nuisance . FORSTER1-1827-2,25.351

This observation applies to several sorts of flies .
FORSTER1-1827-2,25.352

The horseflies likewise of all sorts are more troublesome before the
fall of rain , and particularly when the weather is warm .
FORSTER1-1827-2,25.353

<P_26>

<font> Flora's Clock , <$$font> is a term used to denote the periodical
opening of flowers , whereby the hours of the day are indicated .
FORSTER1-1827-2,26.355

Thus the Yellow Star of Jerusalem , <font> Tragopogon pratensis ,
<$$font> as well as the Purple Star of Jerusalem , <font> T.
porrifolius , <$$font> close their flowers exactly at noon .
FORSTER1-1827-2,26.356

The Syngenecious plants in general have periods independent of the
variations of the weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,26.357

The Four o'clock Flower in Jamaica is well known ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,26.358

and so are many others . FORSTER1-1827-2,26.359

The Evening Primrose , <font> Oenatherp biennis , <$$font> opens at
sunset FORSTER1-1827-2,26.360

and closes at daybreak ; FORSTER1-1827-2,26.361

it opens with a snapping noise . FORSTER1-1827-2,26.362

The flower of the Garden Lettuce , which is in a vertical plane , opens
at seven o'clock , FORSTER1-1827-2,26.363

and shuts at ten . FORSTER1-1827-2,26.364

A species of serpentine Aloes , without prickles , whose large and
beautiful flowers exhale a strong odour of the Vanilla , during the time
of its expansion , which is very short , is cultivated in the imperial
garden at Paris . FORSTER1-1827-2,26.365

It does not blow till towards the months of July , and about five
o'clock in the evening , at which time it gradually opens its petals ,
expands them , droops , and dies . FORSTER1-1827-2,26.366

By ten o'clock the same night it is totally withered , to the great
astonishment of the spectators , who flock in crowds to see it .
FORSTER1-1827-2,26.367

The Cerea , a native of Jamaica and Vera Cruz , expands a beautiful
coral flower , FORSTER1-1827-2,26.368

and emits a flagrant odour , for a few hours in the night ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,26.369

and then closes to open no more . FORSTER1-1827-2,26.370

The flower is near a foot in diameter ; the inside of the calyx of a
splendid yellow ; FORSTER1-1827-2,26.371

and the numerous {TEXT:numeral} petals are of a pure white .
FORSTER1-1827-2,26.372

It begins to open about seven or eight o'clock in the evening ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,26.373

and closes before sunrise in the morning . FORSTER1-1827-2,26.374

The flower of the Dandelion possesses very peculiar means of sheltering
itself from the heat of the <P_27> sun , as it closes entirely whenever
the heat becomes excessive . FORSTER1-1827-2,27.375

It has been observed to open , in summer , at half an hour after five in
the morning , and to collect its petals towards the centre about nine
o'clock . FORSTER1-1827-2,27.376

Linnaeus has enumerated forty-six flowers which possess this kind of
sensibility : FORSTER1-1827-2,27.377

he divides them into three classes . 1. Meteoric Flowers , which less
accurately observe the hour of folding , but are expanded sooner or
later , according to the cloudiness , moisture , or pressure of the
atmosphere . 2. Tropical Flowers , that open in the morning and close
before evening every day ; but the hour of their expanding becomes
earlier or later as the length of the day increases or decreases . 3.
Equinoctial Flowers , which open at a certain and exact hour of the day
, and for the most part close at another determinate hour .
FORSTER1-1827-2,27.378

<font> Forests . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,27.379

- The hollow sound of forests , while the wind is roaring among the
woods , is a sign of rain and of storms . FORSTER1-1827-2,27.380

<font> Frogs , <$$font> by their clamorous croaking , indicate rainy
weather ; as does likewise their coming abroad in great numbers of an
evening ; FORSTER1-1827-2,27.381

but this last sign applies more obviously to toads .
FORSTER1-1827-2,27.382

Virgil observes , as a sign of rain , {COM:latin_omitted}
FORSTER1-1827-2,27.383

Abundance of yellow frogs are accounted a good sign in a hayfield ,
probably as indicating fine weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,27.384

<font> Fungi . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,27.385

- In the damp weather of autumn the fungus tribe become very numerous ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,27.386

and often are the first phenomena which remind us of the decline of
summer and the approach of a cooler season , when <P_28>
{COM:latin_omitted} FORSTER1-1827-2,28.387

There is something remarkable about the growth of fungi .
FORSTER1-1827-2,28.388

Some fungi appear here and there springing up in places where they are
least expected , and where they have perhaps never grown before .
FORSTER1-1827-2,28.389

How do the seeds come in such places ? FORSTER1-1827-2,28.390

A learned cryptogamist once said , he thought their semina floated in
the air , and were carried up into the clouds , and wafted along with
them , and deposited by fogs on the earth's surface .
FORSTER1-1827-2,28.391

Is there any particular aspect or side of trees more obnoxious to the
growth of parasitical fungi than others ? FORSTER1-1827-2,28.392

<font> Gales of Wind <$$font> are foretold by the sudden fall of the
mercury in the barometer , or the appearance of waneclouds and of
curlclouds , and by many of the signs of rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,28.393

Varying gales and changing breezes often indicate a change of weather
from fair to wet . FORSTER1-1827-2,28.394

The most tremendous gales and storms have been foretold by the settling
of the stormy petrels under the wake of a ship . FORSTER1-1827-2,28.395

<font> Gallinaceous Poultry <$$font> in general appear uneasy ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,28.396

and rub in the dust , before rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,28.397

<font> Geese <$$font> washing , or taking wing with a clamorous noise ,
and flying to the water , portend rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,28.398

Geese are excellent guards to a house against fire or thieves .
FORSTER1-1827-2,28.399

Hence Ovid , speaking of the former white colour of the crow , observes
in allusion to the geese who saved the Roman capital :
{COM:latin_omitted} FORSTER1-1827-2,28.400

When Wild Geese are observed to migrate to the southward or westward in
greater numbers than usual in autumn or winter , they are said to
indicate hard weather ; FORSTER1-1827-2,28.401

and in general the early appearance <P_29> of flocks of these and other
wild fowls in the south , foreshew a severe winter .
FORSTER1-1827-2,29.402

<font> Gnats <$$font> afford several indications .
FORSTER1-1827-2,29.403

When they fly in a vortex in the beams of the setting sun , they forbode
fair weather : FORSTER1-1827-2,29.404

when they frisk about more widely in the open air at eventide , they
foreshew heat ; FORSTER1-1827-2,29.405

and when they assemble under trees , and bite more than usual , they
indicate rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,29.406

<font> Gossamer , <$$font> as it is called , being the fine web of a
certain species of spiders , floating in the air in abundance , and
lodging on the trees , or the rigging of ships , and on other objects ,
affords a sign of fine settled weather in autumn , as does the much
covering of the ground and herbage by the woof of the spiders in general
. FORSTER1-1827-2,29.407

See <font> Spider . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,29.408

In crossing the Channel from Calais to Dover , I have observed that the
captains of the vessels have sometimes forboded fine settled weather
from the settling on the masts and rigging , of a certain sort of web ,
which we take to be the woof of some spider , though we have observed it
to alight on the ships when some way out at sea .
FORSTER1-1827-2,29.409

<font> Hail , Snow , and Sleet <$$font> have but few appropriate signs .
FORSTER1-1827-2,29.410

In general the clouds which are destined to pour the cool hailshowers of
a March or April day have more defined edges and a different sort of
appearance from those clouds which eventually lead to rain .
FORSTER1-1827-2,29.411

There is also a peculiar dark brownish_purple colour in some of the
large twainclouds which precede the vernal showers of snow and hail .
FORSTER1-1827-2,29.412

<font> Halo . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,29.413

- When this phenomenon is observed round the sun or moon , it indicates
the presence of the wanecloud , FORSTER1-1827-2,29.414

and shews that hail , snow , or rain , according to the season , will
soon follow . FORSTER1-1827-2,29.415

Coloured or double Halos are still more certain indications <P_30> of
rain , and often of wind also . FORSTER1-1827-2,30.416

When mock suns or mock moons , bands of light , and other unusual
phenomena attend Halos , a peculiar condition of the atmosphere is
indicated . FORSTER1-1827-2,30.417

The proper <font> Halo <$$font> or luminous ring , is distinguished from
the <font> Corona <$$font> or luminous disk , which is sometimes a
forerunner of rain also , but is a thing of more frequent occurrence .
FORSTER1-1827-2,30.418

When Halos are very red , wind almost always follows .
FORSTER1-1827-2,30.419

<font> Headaches <$$font> often foretell a change of weather in persons
subject to such complaints . FORSTER1-1827-2,30.420

There is also some obscure change of weather near to the periods of new
and full moon which causes a certain ephemeral headache that begins
usually in the morning , gets worse about two o'clock , and subsides in
the evening , attended with an irritated stomach ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,30.421

it much resembles the ordinary bilious headache from repletion ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,30.422

but differs from that which follows immediately on a certain sort of
indigestion . FORSTER1-1827-2,30.423

Indeed most periodical disorders seem to be connected with some
atmospheric changes . FORSTER1-1827-2,30.424

And it is very remarkable , that they should so often have their worst
paroxysms and the crisis of their terms about the time of the
conjunction and the opposition of the moon . FORSTER1-1827-2,30.425

<font> Hogs , <$$font> when they shake the stalks of corn and spoil them
, often indicate rain : FORSTER1-1827-2,30.426

also when they rub in the dust , the same or some similar phenomenon may
be expected . FORSTER1-1827-2,30.427

When they run squeaking about , and throw up their heads with a peculiar
jerk , windy weather is about to commence : hence the Wiltshire proverb
, that " Pigs can see the wind . " FORSTER1-1827-2,30.428

<font> Horses , <$$font> as well as some other domestic animals ,
foretell the coming of rain by starting more than ordinary , and
appearing in other respects restless and uneasy on the road .
FORSTER1-1827-2,30.429

It has been questioned <P_31> whether those animals do not manifest also
some periodical irritability , like that which influences mankind .
FORSTER1-1827-2,31.430

Possibly the eyes of certain horses , like that of certain persons , may
be attended with <font> muscae volitantes <$$font> or other
imperfections of sight which render their perceptions of objects less
perfect before rain ; FORSTER1-1827-2,31.431

they may also become more generally irritable . FORSTER1-1827-2,31.432

The fact however is true , FORSTER1-1827-2,31.433

and has frequently come under our observation . FORSTER1-1827-2,31.434

<font> Hydrometers <$$font> indicate that the air is moist or dry ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,31.435

and hence become prognosticks of rain , which often follows a general
dampness of the air . FORSTER1-1827-2,31.436

<font> Incubus <$$font> or Nightmare , though it commonly comes of a
loaded stomach , will nevertheless often occur on the occasion of a
change of weather in the night , which seem to produce the effect by
disturbing the digestive organs . FORSTER1-1827-2,31.437

The same observation holds good with regard to those frightful and
impressive dreams which some persons have in particular kinds of weather
, and about the period of change . FORSTER1-1827-2,31.438

An east wind beginning to blow in the night will often cause them ;
FORSTER1-1827-2,31.439

and sometimes the same effect is produced by that state of the
atmosphere which immediately precedes a large fall of snow ; though the
latter phenomenon more often produces dullness and languor of the whole
animal system of the body . FORSTER1-1827-2,31.440

<font> Jackdaws <$$font> are said to be more than usually clamorous
before rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,31.441

These birds frequent the flocks of rooks , FORSTER1-1827-2,31.442

and with them go out to feed , as if they were aware of the superior
sagacity of the rook in finding out the most productive pasture , and
had learnt to avail themselves of it . FORSTER1-1827-2,31.443

Starlings sometimes do the same . FORSTER1-1827-2,31.444

Sometimes before a change of weather the daws make a great noise in the
chimneys wherein they build , FORSTER1-1827-2,31.445

and the sound coming down the flue is distinctly heard in the chamber .
FORSTER1-1827-2,31.446

<P_32>

<font> Ignis Fatuus , <$$font> Will with a Wisp , or Jack-a-Lantern , is
a kind of meteor which takes place near the ground , neither the cause
nor indicative value of which are quite agreed on .
FORSTER1-1827-2,32.448

Sir Isaac Newton calls it a vapour shining without heat ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,32.449

and says that there is the same difference between this vapour and flame
, as between rotten wood shining without heat , and burning coals of
fire . FORSTER1-1827-2,32.450

The Ignis Fatuus is said to have been observed to stand still as well as
to move , FORSTER1-1827-2,32.451

and sometimes seemed fixed on the surface of the water .
FORSTER1-1827-2,32.452

In Italy two kinds of these lights are said to have been discovered ;
one in the mountains , the other in the plains : FORSTER1-1827-2,32.453

they are called by the common people Cularsi , because they look upon
them as birds , the belly and other parts of which are resplendent like
the Pyraustae or Fire Flies . FORSTER1-1827-2,32.454

Mr. Bradley supposed the Will with a Wisp to be no more than a group of
small enlightened insects . FORSTER1-1827-2,32.455

Mr. Francis Willoughby and Mr. Ray were of opinion , that the Ignis
Fatuus is nothing but the shining of some night_flying insect .
FORSTER1-1827-2,32.456

Dr. Derham , on the other hand , thought this phenomenon was composed
of fired vapours . FORSTER1-1827-2,32.457

Various have been the conjectures of different philosophers about the
causes of these igneous meteors : FORSTER1-1827-2,32.458

their precise cause has , however , never been ascertained .
FORSTER1-1827-2,32.459

M. De Luc ascribes them to certain phosphoric exhalations , which
ascend from the earth , and take fire or become phosphorescent in the
air . FORSTER1-1827-2,32.460

Some have regarded the Ignis Fatuus to be an electrical phenomenon ,
while most philosophers nowadays regard it as the combustion of some
gases . FORSTER1-1827-2,32.461

<P_33>

The following simile , founded on the popular superstition of the Ignis
Fatuus conducting its followers into dangerous situations , is taken
from " The Times Anatomised in several Characters , " by T. F. 12mo.
Lond. 1647 , Character 24th , " A Novice Preacher ; " of whom the
author says , " No wonder that instead of shining lights they prove
<font> foolish fires to lead their flock into a maze of errours ,
<$$font> in which they wander , not having the clue of learning or
judgement to guide them out . " Signat. E. I. - <font> Brand's Pop.
Antiq. <$$font> vol. ii. p. 682 . FORSTER1-1827-2,33.463

Milton , in his Paradise Lost , b. ix. l. 634 , observes : -
{COM:verse_omitted} FORSTER1-1827-2,33.464

Some persons have confounded the Ignis Fatuus with the St. Elmo's fires
, called Castor and Pollux , and described in the Peren. Calendar ,
Jan. 26 , p. 32 , to which , excepting their difference of local
situation , they seem to bear some analogy . FORSTER1-1827-2,33.465

If one of these fires is seen alone the sailors call it Helen ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,33.466

but the two they call Castor and Pollux , FORSTER1-1827-2,33.467

and invoke them as gods . FORSTER1-1827-2,33.468

" These lights do sometimes about the evening rest on men's heads ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,33.469

and are a great and good omen . " FORSTER1-1827-2,33.470

These appearances are called by the French and Spaniards inhabiting the
coasts of the Mediterranean St Helme's or St. Elme's Fires ; by the
Italians the Fires of St. Peter and St. Nicholas ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,33.471

and they are frequently taken notice of by the writers of voyages .
FORSTER1-1827-2,33.472

<P_34>

Thus in " Greene's Conceipt , " &c. 4to. Lond. 1598 , p. 27 : -
{COM:verse_omitted} FORSTER1-1827-2,34.474

<font> Jonquils , <$$font> of which there are several sorts , blow in
the open ground in March and April . FORSTER1-1827-2,34.475

The Great Jonquil and the Odorous Jonquil blow about the middle of March
. The lesser or proper Jonquil somewhat later . FORSTER1-1827-2,34.476

When they blow well and early they forbode a fine season .
FORSTER1-1827-2,34.477

<font> Kine , <$$font> when they assemble at one corner of a field with
their tails to windward , often indicate rain or wind .
FORSTER1-1827-2,34.478

During the dead calm before a storm comes up , we may often see them
extending their nostrils , and with the head upwards snuffing in the air
; FORSTER1-1827-2,34.479

this prognostic has been noticed of old by Virgil , and after him by
Lord Bacon and others . FORSTER1-1827-2,34.480

{COM:latin_omitted}

Cattle are also said to foreshew rain when they lick their fore-feet ,
or lie on the right side , or scratch themselves more than they are wont
to do against posts or other objects . FORSTER1-1827-2,34.482

Some say oxen licking themselves against the hair is a sign of wet .
FORSTER1-1827-2,34.483

<font> Kingfishers . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,34.484

- These brilliant birds appear above ponds , rivers , and pieces of
water at uncertain times ; FORSTER1-1827-2,34.485

the prognostics which Brown in his " Vulgar <P_35> Errours " pretends to
have drawn from these Birds seem quite foundationless .
FORSTER1-1827-2,35.486

<font> Kites <$$font> made of paper , such as are usually flown by boys
, may be converted into useful prognosticks of the wind .
FORSTER1-1827-2,35.487

When several of them are let up together , the higher ones being
successively tied to the backsticks of those below them , they will
ascend to a vast height . FORSTER1-1827-2,35.488

We have known the upper kite in these cases ascend to above 1000 feet
high . FORSTER1-1827-2,35.489

When the upper one gets a direction different from the lower one , the
wind will frequently be found to get into the quarter indicated by the
upper kite . FORSTER1-1827-2,35.490

This law respecting winds is more strikingly manifested by means of
small air balloons , whose varying directions , as they ascend , portend
the successive changes of the wind , which often take place first in the
higher regions of the air . FORSTER1-1827-2,35.491

See <font> Balloon , Cloud , Current , <$$font> and <font> Wind .
<$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,35.492

When by the motion of kites we perceive that the wind vibrates or shifts
its direction we may be sure the weather will be squally .
FORSTER1-1827-2,35.493

There is also a kind of bobbing motion sometimes imparted to kites by
the wind in variable weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,35.494

The kite seems to nod backwards and forward , thereby pulling forward
the arm of the person who holds it by successive jerks .
FORSTER1-1827-2,35.495

During many fine afternoons this present summer , when the wind has
blown strong , we have repeated all the above experiments , particularly
on the following days : - Sunday , July 11 ; Monday , July 12 ; Sunday ,
August 29 ; and Thursday , Nov. 4 . FORSTER1-1827-2,35.496

<font> Kites . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,35.497

- The birds so called <font> Falcones Milvi <$$font> soaring very high
in the air , denote fair weather , according to many authors .
FORSTER1-1827-2,35.498

The {TEXT:Th} same is observed of Ravens . - <font> Corvi Coraces .
<$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,35.499

<P_36>

<font> Lamps , <$$font> from the manner in which they burn forbode
weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,36.501

Before rain they burn less bright , FORSTER1-1827-2,36.502

the flame snaps and crackles , FORSTER1-1827-2,36.503

and a sort of fungous excrescence grows from the wicks , which Virgil
was mindful to put among his prognostics of rain and wind .
FORSTER1-1827-2,36.504

See <font> Virgilian Prognostics . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,36.505

From this indicatorial property of the burning lights arose many
superstitions relating to them ; as the blue colour of the flame being a
sign of ghosts , and death , and so on , of which the following
explanation is already offered in the <font> Perennial Calendar .
<$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,36.506

Numerous were the omens attached by credulous persons , in former days ,
to the manner in which candles burnt , and particularly to the colour of
their flames . FORSTER1-1827-2,36.507

When they burned blue , it was accounted ill luck , or else that some
ghostly apparition was announced . FORSTER1-1827-2,36.508

Now , when the brain and nervous system are in a certain state
peculiarly favourable to spectral illusions , the imagination may easily
colour the flame of a candle , without its really changing its tint :
just as , in fevers , people see spots of colour on the wall , or
imagine insects on the bed-clothes . FORSTER1-1827-2,36.509

For the same morbid condition of the animal system , which may cause
persons to see the spectral prognostic , would , in this case , cause
them to behold the subsequent phantom , FORSTER1-1827-2,36.510

and thus the omen and its awful consequence would be viewed together to
the support of superstition . FORSTER1-1827-2,36.511

Besides this , the particular mode of burning observed in the wicks of
lamps and candles , is really found to be caused by atmospherical
peculiarities , FORSTER1-1827-2,36.512

and is a sure sign of rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,36.513

From the same work we quote as follows : FORSTER1-1827-2,36.514

- Nov. 18 . FORSTER1-1827-2,36.515

This is , perhaps , the most foggy time of the whole year ; a dense
stratus frequently continuing through the whole night and day .
FORSTER1-1827-2,36.516

Indeed , <P_37> fogs are the usual concomitants of November in London
and its neighbourhood , where one effect of a foggy night is often that
of diminishing the combustion of oil in lamps and other lights , which
shews that misty and damp air can@ @not furnish oxygen so readily as
that which is clear . FORSTER1-1827-2,37.517

We remember , frequently after foggy nights , seeing the lamps in the
street burning to a late hour next morning . FORSTER1-1827-2,37.518

Experiments on the power of the air at different times to furnish oxygen
, might be made with Lamps , Candles , and other lights .
FORSTER1-1827-2,37.519

We find that fungous excrescences about the wicks of Lamps and Candles
have been regarded as signs of rain , time immemorial .
FORSTER1-1827-2,37.520

Aristophanes has an allusion to it : - {COM:greek_omitted}
FORSTER1-1827-2,37.521

Aratus speaks to the same effect : - {COM:greek_omitted} which Virgil
with his wonted elegance thus parodizes : - {COM:latin_omitted}
FORSTER1-1827-2,37.522

<font> Larks , <$$font> when they fly high , and remain singing a long
while in the air , forbode fine weather . FORSTER1-1827-2,37.523

<font> Leaches <$$font> confined in a glass of water , by their <P_38>
motions foretell rain and wind , before which they seem much agitated ,
particularly before thunder and lightning . FORSTER1-1827-2,38.524

<font> Lily . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,38.525

- The Lent Lily , or Daffodil , <font> Narcissus Pseudonarcissus ,
<$$font> indicates the commencement of March , the Lily of the Valley
the middle of May , the Orange Lily the beginning of June , and the
White Lily the middle of July . FORSTER1-1827-2,38.526

By a familiar acquaintance with flowers we may know not only the coming
weather , but the time of day and the time of year .
FORSTER1-1827-2,38.527

Linnaeus is said to have possessed such a knowledge of the periods and
indication of flowers , that he wanted neither a watch , a calendar ,
nor a weatherglass . FORSTER1-1827-2,38.528

See <font> Lily , <$$font> in Part ii . FORSTER1-1827-2,38.529

<font> Lychnis . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,38.530

- This plant , usually called Scarlet Lychnis , blows regularly about
the 24th of June , FORSTER1-1827-2,38.531

and is hence called <font> Candelabrum Sancti Johannis . <$$font>
FORSTER1-1827-2,38.532

The appearance of its beautiful red flowers are sure indications that
the summer solstice is at hand : FORSTER1-1827-2,38.533

it blows through July , FORSTER1-1827-2,38.534

and fades in August . FORSTER1-1827-2,38.535

By an easy corruption it has got the vulgar name of Scarlet Lightning .
FORSTER1-1827-2,38.536

<font> Lumen Lambens <$$font> is an electric light , seen about plants
of a summer evening , of which the particular indications as to the
coming weather have not been yet accurately discovered .
FORSTER1-1827-2,38.537

<font> Magpies , <$$font> in windy weather , fly often in small flocks
of three or four together , uttering a harsh cry .
FORSTER1-1827-2,38.538

Horace's allusion , <font> {COM:latin_omitted} <$$font> seems to have
reference to some observed prognosticative sign , converted by augurs
into a superstitious fable , whereby these birds are represented as
unlucky . FORSTER1-1827-2,38.539

The absurd foreboding of ill luck from magpies is well known to the
vulgar and credulous . FORSTER1-1827-2,38.540

<P_39>

<font> March Dust <$$font> and <font> May Sun , <$$font> both of which
imply a fine dry spring , are said to be particularly good omens for the
husbandman . FORSTER1-1827-2,39.542

An adage says , " A peck of March dust is worth a king's ransom . "
FORSTER1-1827-2,39.543

We have confirmed , by many years' experience , the truth of the proverb
which commends a dry spring , as leading to the most productive summer .
FORSTER1-1827-2,39.544

<font> Marygold . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,39.545

- When this plant has its flower well expanded in the morning , the day
will be fine . FORSTER1-1827-2,39.546

The small Field Marigold , <font> Calendra arvensis , <$$font> affords a
more certain sign of rain when its flowers are closed in the morning .
FORSTER1-1827-2,39.547

Marigolds flower all the year , FORSTER1-1827-2,39.548

but are in greatest abundance in July and August .
FORSTER1-1827-2,39.549

<font> Mare's Tails , <$$font> or cormoid curlclouds in the sky ,
forbode wind , and sometimes rain . FORSTER1-1827-2,39.550

<font> Martins <$$font> fly low before and during rainy weather .
FORSTER1-1827-2,39.551

See <font> Swallow . <$$font> FORSTER1-1827-2,39.552

The Martins , or Martlets , as they are called in heraldry , arrive a
few days later than Swallows , that is , about the 20th of April ,
FORSTER1-1827-2,39.553

and depart in October ; previous to which they swarm in thousands , and
settle on the roofs of buildings . FORSTER1-1827-2,39.554

