<BEGIN_froude-1830-1>

<P_2,1>

<heading>

The Remains of the Rev. Richard Hurrell Froude , M.A.
FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.4

Sermon I . FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.5

Disproportion of our Exertions to our Professions . FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.6

Jeremiah XXXV. 14 . FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.7

<$$heading>

" The words of Jonadab , the son of Rechab , that he commanded his sons
not to drink wine , are performed : FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.9

for unto this day they drink none , FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.10

but obey their father's commandment : FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.11

Notwithstanding I have spoken unto you , rising early and speaking ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.12

but ye hearkened not unto Me . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.13

In the days of the prophet Jeremiah , one period of the trial , which
the Lord vouchsafed to His disobedient and gainsaying people , was
drawing near to a close . FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.14

A period of more than 800 years had now elapsed since the Lord had
brought them up out of Egypt to establish them in the land of promise .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,1.15

During that long interval , they had been watched over by their Almighty
Father and King with the <P_2,2> tenderest and most anxious care .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.16

Their nation had been preserved from foreign enemies , by a succession
of deliverers whom the Lord raised up , FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.17

Their faith had been kept alive by a long succession of interpositions ,
which , to us who survey them from a distance , bear the evident impress
of divine superintendance . FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.18

The truth had been constantly held up to them by the long line of
prophets and teachers , who acted as the interpreters of God's
miraculous dispensations . FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.19

They had never been suffered to lose sight either of causes of the evils
they brought upon themselves , or of means to remedy them .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.20

All had now been tried which either threats or promises , forbearance or
fatherly chastisement , could effect , FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.21

and all had been insufficient . FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.22

" I have spoken unto you , saith the Lord , rising early and speaking ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.23

but ye hearkened not unto Me . FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.24

I have sent unto you also all My servants the prophets , rising early
and sending them , saying , Return ye now every man from his evil way
and amend your doings , and go not after other gods to serve them , and
ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers
. FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.25

But ye have not inclined your ear nor hearkened unto Me .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.26

Therefore , thus saith the Lord God of Hosts , the God of Israel ;
Behold I will bring upon Judah and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem all
the evil that I have pronounced against them : because I have spoken to
them but they have not heard , I have called unto them but they have not
answered . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,2.27

<P_2,3>

The measure of their iniquity was now full . FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.29

Yet even after all this , the Lord did not think fit to pronounce this
final sentence of condemnation unaccompanied by a concluding
expostulation . FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.30

Before the prophet Jeremiah was commissioned to utter their irrevocable
doom , the Lord said unto him , " Go to the house of the Rechabites ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.31

and speak unto them , FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.32

and bring them into the house of the Lord , FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.33

and give them wine to drink . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.34

Then Jeremiah took Jaazaniah and his brethren and his sons and the whole
house of the Rechabites , FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.35

and set before them pots full of wine , FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.36

and said unto them , Drink ye . FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.37

But they said unto him , We will drink no wine ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.38

for Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us , saying , Ye
shall drink no wine , neither ye nor your sons for ever .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.39

This was one of those almost dramatic representations in which the
prophetic books abound ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.40

and the real meaning is subsequently explained . FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.41

" Then came the word of the Lord to Jeremiah , saying , Go
FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.42

and tell the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem , Will ye not
receive instruction nor hearken unto My words . FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.43

The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab , which he commanded his sons ,
not to drink wine , are performed , FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.44

for unto this day they drink none , FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.45

but obey their father's commandment . FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.46

Notwithstanding I have spoken unto you rising early and speaking ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.47

but ye have not hearkened unto Me . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,3.48

This instance of obedience to a human parent , <P_2,4> one who had been
in the grave more than 200 years , and to whose memory they were
attached by nothing more than an hereditary feeling , is contrasted with
the obstinate neglect of the Israelites to obey the living God - their
heavenly Father , whose eye was always over them . FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.49

The Rechabites could deny their appetites without repining ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.50

and refused to enjoy the comforts of a domestic life ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.51

but dwelt in tents , living in a land where they were strangers .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.52

And this they did , not with a view to obtain any benefit to themselves
- not from any motive either of hope or fear - but merely because their
ancestor Jonadab , the son of Rechab , had charged them so .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.53

The privations and restraints which God imposed upon the Israelites were
far less grievous than these . FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.54

He required scarce any_thing at their hands but what a just sense of
their own happiness would have dictated . FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.55

And from obedience to this easy yoke , they had every_thing to hope ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.56

from rebellion against it , they had every_thing to fear .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.57

Yet in spite of all this , they would not incline their ear , nor
hearken . FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.58

This is the contrast which God sets before them . FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.59

By the example of the Rechabites , He shows them that they could obey if
they would , FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.60

and because they would not He determines to punish them .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.61

It is probable that few have read this chapter without feeling
astonished at the obstinacy and infatuation of the Israelites .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,4.62

But if we stop short with mere astonishment , we shall have lost the
<P_2,5> most instructive portion of the lesson it conveys .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,5.63

These things are not recorded to show us how very foolish and deaf to
their best interests men have been in distant ages , but to make us
distrustful of our own security ; to remind us that since we also are
men , we must be on our guard against the same infatuation .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,5.64

Nor let any person allow himself , on light grounds , to suppose that he
in his own person is entirely free from it . FROUDE-1830-1,2,5.65

The point in this narrative which is most surprising , is the
perseverance of one set of men in pursuit of an object , the value of
which we can@ @not understand , and the complete indifference of another
set , to an object quite as easily within their reach , and the value of
which we perceive to be inestimable . FROUDE-1830-1,2,5.66

Now if any_one will be at the pains to look around him , or to examine
his own heart , he will find that he himself , and almost every_one ,
are in themselves an example of this surprising inconsistency .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,5.67

He will detect himself and his neighbours in dedicating as much time and
pains to the pursuit of things , which even themselves own to be
comparatively insignificant , as would , if directed to higher objects ,
secure to them an inheritance in heaven . FROUDE-1830-1,2,5.68

There is indeed scarcely any_thing in the whole face of human affairs ,
which when one comes to consider it , is so amazing as the disproportion
of the exertions we make , to the acknowledged value of the ends to
which they are directed . FROUDE-1830-1,2,5.69

<P_2,6>

We can@ @not turn our eyes in any direction without seeing instances of
men who lead lives of labour and discomfort in the pursuit of such
things as wealth , power , or praise , and really think nothing of the
difficulties they face , and pain which in many instances they undergo .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,6.71

How many people are there , who , at an early age , leave their friends
and their country , to go into the most unpleasant and unhealthy
situations - some into the most intensely hot countries , and some into
the coldest , with the certainty of not returning till many of the best
years of their life are past , and with the great chance of either dying
themselves before the time of their return arrives , or at any rate of
finding many of their dearest friends dead before they have another
opportunity of seeing them . FROUDE-1830-1,2,6.72

These persons are actuated with the wish , which , as far as it goes ,
is a good one , of relieving their parents from the burden of
maintaining them , of making their way in the world , some by the
profession of soldier or sailor , some by taking a share in trade , some
by acquiring knowledge . FROUDE-1830-1,2,6.73

And all of these would despise , as a pitiful low-spirited person ,
any_one who should shrink from an opportunity of getting forward ,
either through regard to his health or to his comfort .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,6.74

Nor need we look to these alone for instances of perseverance and
self-denial {TEXT:self_denial} ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,6.75

we see the same thing , though perhaps in a less striking and obvious
degree , in our own immediate neighbourhood . FROUDE-1830-1,2,6.76

The <P_2,7> lives of the farmer , the tradesman , the mechanic , are
each of them lives of continued labour ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,7.77

they require patience , industry , self-command . FROUDE-1830-1,2,7.78

Each of them spends by far the greater part of his time in occupations
from which he would be very glad to be released , in order to acquire
the means of making his family comfortable , and himself respectable .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,7.79

Nor are those who seem at first sight exempted by station and by fortune
from the actual necessity of laborious occupation , in many cases
disposed to take advantage of this exemption . FROUDE-1830-1,2,7.80

Each has his favourite pursuit ; some to increase their wealth , some to
make themselves powerful ; the better sort to obtain the esteem of their
neighbours by activity and kindness . FROUDE-1830-1,2,7.81

All these feel no scruple or hesitation in sacrificing their time ,
their money , their quiet , to the various objects which they propose to
themselves to attain ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,7.82

and think these sacrifices so natural , so much matters of course , that
it never occurs to them to take credit to themselves for vigour and
strength of mind ; or if any of them do so , they become an object of
ridicule to all that know that they do so . FROUDE-1830-1,2,7.83

Such as I have described is the common state of things which meets our
observation wherever we turn our eyes . FROUDE-1830-1,2,7.84

Now I do not mention these things as being in themselves blameable or
wrong . FROUDE-1830-1,2,7.85

Did men but exert themselves in all respects with the same zeal and
energy which they do in these - were the pains <P_2,8> they take to
please God and to earn a heavenly inheritance , as much greater than the
pains they take for these earthly objects , as the acknowledged value of
a heavenly reward exceeds that of an earthly - all this would be just
and commendable . FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.86

Industry in the pursuit of unimportant ends is not blameable , except
when coupled with remissness about such as are important .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.87

But when coupled with such remissness , it then assumes a very different
character , FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.88

and becomes a direct insult to religion . FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.89

The obedience of the Rechabites added to the criminality of the Jews ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.90

and in the accusation which is brought against them , is urged as reason
why God would no longer delay His vengeance . FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.91

How much worse then and more inexcusable must be our conduct , if we
ourselves can be appealed to against ourselves : FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.92

of how much severer punishment shall we be thought worthy , if we
ourselves show our <font> power <$$font> to obey , by our conduct in
temporal things , and our <font> unwillingness <$$font> , by our neglect
of the things eternal ! FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.93

The question which we have to answer to our consciences is this :
FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.94

does the belief that such and such actions on my part will please God ,
make me as resolutely bent upon doing them , as the belief that the same
line of conduct tends to bring about some worldly advantage ?
FROUDE-1830-1,2,8.95

What we have to compare together is , not the degrees in which we are
influenced by bad motives and good motives , not whether we deliberately
prefer <P_2,9> other services to God's , but whether the trifles which
surround us , admitting them to be ever so innocent , do not , in point
of fact , urge us to act more vigorously , than the great prospect which
faith holds out to us . FROUDE-1830-1,2,9.96

And this question is not such an indefinite one as it may at first
appear - FROUDE-1830-1,2,9.97

it is no matter of feeling , but one of practice ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,9.98

and <paren> though we can@ @not judge of it at all in the case of our
neighbour <$$paren> each of us may ascertain pretty accurately how
matters stand with himself . FROUDE-1830-1,2,9.99

The parts of our duty , which will furnish us with the most intelligible
answer , are those to which we can@ @not possibly be urged by any other
motive than the knowledge that God requires them of us . Those secret
duties which we owe to our Maker , but which are attended with no
visible consequences to ourselves , and can@ @not in any way , that we
understand , affect the interests of our neighbours - for instance , the
duty of private prayer . FROUDE-1830-1,2,9.100

It is plain that we are obliged to the practice of regular private
devotion , by the same , if not still higher authority than that which
obliges us to the attendance of public worship . FROUDE-1830-1,2,9.101

The chief difference between the motives which lead us to each is this ,
that while in the discharge of this latter duty , we are assisted by the
consciousness that we are falling in with what other people think right
, and perhaps by a feeling that we also in our turn derive advantage
from seeing so many of our fellow creatures joining in the same
confession of our common <P_2,10> Faith : in the former case the motive
is wholly unmixed , FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.102

we pray to God in private only , from the knowledge that He has promised
to hear us , and that our asking is the condition on which alone He will
grant us what we have need of . FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.103

If then we really have faith in God's promises we shall be as sedulous
in private as in public worship ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.104

and unless we are so , we may feel sure that it is some other motive
than reliance in God which induces us to obey Him in the instances we do
. FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.105

Now do we endeavour as constantly and as earnestly to serve God in this
point as in the other parts of our duty ? FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.106

In the first place , do we even say our prayers with regularity ,
morning and evening , never allowing any but the most urgent excuse to
interfere with us ? FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.107

This is the first step ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.108

do we take this ? FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.109

The question is no idle or unimportant one ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.110

the answer to it concerns us , as nearly as the young man's answer to
Jesus concerned him . FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.111

Our eternal welfare is at stake on it . FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.112

Next , supposing us ever so regular , are we as sincerely diligent in
the endeavour to keep our thoughts about us while at prayer ? - to fix
our attention on the meaning of the words we repeat , and to connect
every petition with the realities of our daily conduct ?
FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.113

This is no easy matter ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.114

it is one in which we have room for the greatest zeal and diligence .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,10.115

Every one who sincerely endeavours to perform this duty rightly , will
<P_2,11> find out , in the course of his experience , many ways by which
to gain power over his thoughts in this most important exercise .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.116

It was with a view to this exercise that the holy men , of whom we read
in the first ages of Christianity , had recourse to fastings and
penances which we can hardly bear to think of . FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.117

They found that their thoughts rested with more earnestness on their
treasure in heaven , the less they had to think about with pleasure on
the earth ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.118

and rather than mock God by praying to Him in word , when indeed their
hearts were fixed on other things , they made Him their only consolation
, by voluntarily foregoing every other . FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.119

Rather than that their right eye should offend Him , they plucked it out
FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.120

and cast it from them , thinking it better that one member should perish
, than that their whole body should be cast into hell .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.121

Such are the efforts and sacrifices which have been made , in order to
perform rightly a duty , which is no less incumbent upon us than upon
the first Christians . FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.122

We , like them , must pray to our Father which seeth in secret ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.123

and He will not be contented with a less perfect sacrifice from us than
He required of them . FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.124

Now I do not ask , do we make such efforts and sacrifices as they did ;
but , do we make any efforts at all ? FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.125

Can we mention to ourselves any one {COM:sic} thing that we are in the
habit of doing , in order to assist our attention in private prayer ?
FROUDE-1830-1,2,11.126

Is there any one {COM:sic} sacrifice of earthly pleasure , which we
<P_2,12> can tell our consciences we make with no other object , than
that we may take more pleasure in the thought of God ?
FROUDE-1830-1,2,12.127

When we have answered this question , let us next turn our thoughts to
the pains and sacrifices which we make every day , without even ever
thinking of them , for the sake of getting on in our businesses .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,12.128

And then let us own with shame , how very little indeed the wish to
serve God enters into the motives which make us useful and respectable -
how little our diligence in business arises from fervency of spirit , or
is likely to render us acceptable with God . FROUDE-1830-1,2,12.129

We shall have to acknowledge , that did we make one half or one quarter
the sacrifices in obedience to our Heavenly Father , which we make
without the slightest scruple or hesitation , in the pursuit of ends
which we acknowledge to be comparatively of no value at all , we should
be very much better people than we are . FROUDE-1830-1,2,12.130

To such persons as us then , the warning in the text speaks as loudly
and as fearfully as to the disobedient Israelites .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,12.131

" Because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the
commandment of their father which he commanded them ; but this people
hath not hearkened unto Me : therefore thus saith the Lord God of Hosts
, the God of Israel , I will bring upon Judah , and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem , all the evil that I have spoken against them . "
FROUDE-1830-1,2,12.132

<P_2,13>

Let us then , without withdrawing ourselves from worldly concerns ,
endeavour with all our minds to convert them into religious duties , and
exert ourselves on all occasions with a zeal proportionate to the
importance of the object we have in view . FROUDE-1830-1,2,13.134

And may Almighty God , who alone can order the unruly wills and
affections of sinful men , grant unto His people that they may love the
thing which He commands , and desire that which He does promise , that
so among the sundry and manifold changes of the world , our hearts may
surely there be fixed , where true joys are to be found , through Jesus
Christ our Lord . FROUDE-1830-1,2,13.135

<P_2,14>

<heading>

Sermon II . FROUDE-1830-1,2,14.138

Religious Uses of Industry . FROUDE-1830-1,2,14.139

Ecclesiastes i. 13 . FROUDE-1830-1,2,14.140

" This sore travail hath God given to the sons of men , to be exercised
therewith . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,14.141

<$$heading>

In the passage from which the text is taken , King Solomon is taking a
review of the pursuits and occupations of mankind : " all the works that
are done under the sun . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,14.143

He pronounces them all to be vanity and vexation of spirit ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,14.144

but reminds us at the same time that " this sore travail is given to the
sons of men to be <font> exercised therewith . <$$font> "
FROUDE-1830-1,2,14.145

He perceived by his wisdom , that in God's dealings with us , our
comfort is not so much studied as our good ; and that the unsatisfactory
things , in the immediate pursuit of which we are obliged to spend so
much of our time , are intended rather as the occasions than the objects
of our exertion : that they are not held up to us , in order to our
being gratified by attaining them , but that we may be exercised in
pursuing them . FROUDE-1830-1,2,14.146

Such was the conclusion at which the wisest of <P_2,15> men arrived ,
after he had " given his heart to search out by wisdom all things that
are done under heaven " - after he had seen that " all things are full
of labour ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.147

man can@ @not utter it ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.148

the eye is not satisfied with seeing , nor the ear filled with hearing .
" FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.149

We have then before us an instructive lesson , which is well worth our
attending to . FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.150

God , we all know , has so arranged the course of things as to force men
, whether they will or no , to contend with difficulties and endure
vexation : FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.151

and we are told that He has done this in order to exercise us , to
discipline our minds in habits of industry and patience .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.152

This lesson is instructive , as it must in all reason enforce on us the
obligation we are under to cultivate such habits ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.153

and the due consideration of it is of great importance , as we are apt
to look with far too much lenience on the vices to which they are
opposed , <font> viz. <$$font> idleness and impatience .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.154

The lenience with which we regard the vices of idleness and impatience ,
arises , in a great degree , from the circumstance that their opposites
, industry and patience , are not necessarily virtues .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.155

The state of things in which we are placed is such , that our temporal
success and prosperity depend in a very great degree on the pains we
take to secure them : FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.156

every_body sees this . FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.157

Bad selfish people are often quite as much aware of it as those of an
opposite character , FROUDE-1830-1,2,15.158

and are induced , by seeing it , to lead lives of as much activity , and
one may almost say self-denial , as the best people do in pursuit of the
<P_2,16> best objects . FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.159

Thus it comes to pass that since these habits are so useful and
desirable , in a worldly point of view , as to render them their own
reward , we look on their opposites as their own punishment and as in
most cases deserving rather pity than censure . FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.160

They are thought to be among the things in which a man may judge for
himself and stand by the consequences ; and that if in such respects he
stands in his own light , he is nobody's enemy but his own .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.161

But the conclusion which the wise king came to was very different .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.162

He looked on industry in our calling , not as a means towards securing
success and prosperity ; not as tending to make men more rich , more
learned , more powerful ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.163

this indeed he saw well enough that it would do , FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.164

but this he knew by experience to be vanity . FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.165

" Vanity of vanities , saith the preacher , all is vanity .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.166

What profit hath a man of all his labour that he taketh under the sun ?
" FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.167

On the contrary , he saw , in the active pursuit of such things as these
, the fulfilment of one end of our being , the exercising of ourselves
in that sore labour , which God has appointed as the task of fallen man
. FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.168

Industry and patience , though they tend to secure us trifling worldly
advantages , and on this account are often cultivated by otherwise bad
men , tend also to make us firm , sober , and self-denying ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.169

therefore can@ @not be neglected consistently with our eternal interest
. FROUDE-1830-1,2,16.170

<P_2,17>

In order then to set these virtues in their true light , I will now
endeavour to point out how very deeply and thoroughly our condition is
affected by them , not so much externally as internally , - not so much
as to what they will acquire for us , as to what they will make of us .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.172

And I shall begin with the commonest and most obvious things .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.173

First then , the course of nature is so regulated , that there is
scarcely any one {COM:one} part {TEXT:missing_"part"} either of our
bodies or minds which could have become what it is without some degree
of industry and patience , and which might not have been indefinitely
improved and elevated , by higher degrees of them than we have used .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.174

We are , in a certain sense , our <font> own creation <$$font> , even in
the manifest features of our persons and characters .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.175

For consider how it is that from children we have become men :
FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.176

what is the process that has effected so great a change in us , and
fitted us for taking our part in a sphere of life , totally different
from that in which nature first placed us ? FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.177

The process has been a slow and tedious one , occupying a very
considerable portion of that short space which is allotted to us in the
world ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.178

and in that time we have had a great deal to do .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.179

Our present attainments , be they what they may , both of body and mind
, may most perceptibly be traced by us to their first sources .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.180

In the picture of our past lives , the causes of our present
peculiarities are painfully discernible . FROUDE-1830-1,2,17.181

We may recollect the point at which feelings first began to take hold of
us , which have <P_2,18> since , either for good or bad , spread their
influence over our character : FROUDE-1830-1,2,18.182

and if we try to do so faithfully we shall readily acknowledge how much
we owe to past instances of industry , - how deeply we have to regret
our negligence and self-indulgence . FROUDE-1830-1,2,18.183

Our strength and activity we may trace to exercise ; our knowledge , to
industry and experience ; our desires , to past indulgence ; and our
moderation , to past self-denial . FROUDE-1830-1,2,18.184

All the minutest rules for the direction of our conduct towards others ,
without which we should every moment be exposing ourselves to ridicule ,
or even incurring dislike and censure , are a possession which we have
gradually accumulated , and which is valuable in proportion to the use
we have made of our opportunities . FROUDE-1830-1,2,18.185

In fact , all that we are now , which we were not when children , has
been the toilsome acquisition of slow experience - of the " sore travail
which God has given the sons of men to be exercised therewith . "
FROUDE-1830-1,2,18.186

And even our own memories will suffice to show us that we have become
our present selves , not by a mere vegetative change of mind and body ,
but by contending with difficulties , enduring privations , suffering
for imprudence , and feeling the advantages of right conduct .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,18.187

This we might learn merely from observation of our own selves , if there
were no other persons in the world . FROUDE-1830-1,2,18.188

But the lesson is brought home to us in a more striking way , if we
compare the progress which we have made with that of other men .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,18.189

Few <P_2,19> persons can compare their own character with that of others
, who have to appearances been similarly circumstanced with themselves ,
and not perceive each for himself that there are very many respects in
which his attainments fall short of his neighbours' .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.190

One will find himself less persevering , another less temperate ,
another less considerate for other people ; or less willing to face pain
for the sake of honesty , than he sees other people to be , who
nevertheless have had no greater advantages than himself .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.191

And in many cases this divergence of character is so remarkable , that
one can scarcely believe the beings in whom it is observable to belong
to the same species . FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.192

Now what is the cause of all this ? FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.193

Are we to suppose that tempers of mind grow up in us , as it were of
their own accord ; and that we have nothing to do but to sit still and
wait for the event ; in short , that nature settles for us what sort of
people we shall become ? FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.194

The difference between man and man can@ @not be so accounted for ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.195

and we must be careful against indulging a delusion in which it would be
so pleasing to acquiesce . FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.196

Nature has not placed so wide a barrier between one person and another ,
but that all are to be judged by a common rule . FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.197

The law which is to try Noah , Daniel , and Job , is that by which we
too must stand or fall . FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.198

The Holy Apostles were men of like passions with ourselves .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.199

Even our Lord Jesus Christ was tempted in all things like unto us .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,19.200

<P_2,20>

We have to acknowledge , and that with shame and confusion , that the
great gulph which seems fixed between us and the Saints , who were tried
like us , has been fixed by our own carelessness and self-indulgence .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.202

Such are the vast consequences which attend on industry and patience :
FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.203

without these we shall make nothing of ourselves , and bury our talent
in a napkin ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.204

with them , if we persist on resolutely , we may still improve ourselves
indefinitely ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.205

and if it were not for the time we have already squandered , we might at
this moment have been even like the Saints . FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.206

It is indeed undoubtedly true that many persons are so constituted that
such habits come much easier to them than to others :
FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.207

some have a less difficult task in overcoming one passion , some another
: FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.208

and God undoubtedly will make allowances for each of us , in proportion
to the difficulties which we experience . FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.209

But there is one important habit , that of self-command , which we all
must have equal difficulty in attaining . FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.210

We can only be said to have command over ourselves in proportion as we
are able to resist pleasure from a sense of duty .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.211

It is then only in proportion as we have temptation to overcome , that
we have any means of showing this habit ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,20.212

and it is as absurd to suppose self-command easier to persons who have
no passions to contend with , as to suppose {TEXT:missing_"to_suppose"}
the acquisition of bodily strength , easier to persons who have no hard
work to <P_2,21> do , or sharp exercise to tire them .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.213

Upon the whole then we are much more on a footing than we may at first
suppose ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.214

and those on whom nature has imposed the hardest tasks , have so much
more opportunity of disciplining themselves . FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.215

We are placed in the world with the power of becoming almost what we
please ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.216

and according to the use we make of the opportunities put in our way ,
we may attain almost to any degree of virtue or of wickedness .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.217

Every temptation we meet with , is one of those opportunities ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.218

for , whether it be great or little , still we know well enough that it
is in our power , at the time , either to resist or to yield .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.219

And very little observation will teach us , that every victory gained
over our inclinations will make the next struggle easier ; whereas ,
every time that we allow ourselves to be overcome , we entail on
ourselves a severer contest on the next occasion .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.220

Thus it comes to pass , that while those who take every occasion to
stand up resolutely and manfully against temptation , are constantly
gaining strength themselves , and diminishing the obstacles which they
have to contend with : those who allow themselves to indulge the impulse
of the moment , find their own powers fail , and those of the enemy
increase against them , till at last they give the matter up altogether
, and fall into a state of recklessness . FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.221

Such as I have described , is the path which God has left open to us ,
for fitting ourselves to act our part in life ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,21.222

such is the sore travail which He has <P_2,22> given to the sons of men
; FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.223

- a great part of it they must endure whether they will or no .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.224

They must pass from childhood to manhood ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.225

they must be dependent on others before they can maintain themselves ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.226

they must be governed by others , before they know how to keep
themselves out of mischief ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.227

they must learn to refrain from many things that they would like , and
to do many things that they dislike exceedingly .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.228

All this they absolutely must undergo , even in order to get their
living and keep out of the hands of justice . FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.229

Far more than this must they submit to , if they would ever pass through
life with tolerable respectability , - if they would be loved and
trusted by their fellow creatures . FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.230

Now what is the reason of all this ? FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.231

The wise king tells us it is that we may be " exercised therewith . "
FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.232

And when we take into consideration what we all know , that the present
state of things is to fit us for another state , into which we are to
pass after death , we shall see plainly enough what is the use of this
exercise . FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.233

We shall see , not merely that it is a task which we must submit to ,
but also why it has been imposed on us ; and learn to look on it , not
as an instance of God's arbitrary power , but of His considerate
benevolence . FROUDE-1830-1,2,22.234

Consider then , that as it is absolutely necessary we should become
people of a certain sort before we are qualified to fill certain
situations here on earth , so even common sense would teach us that ,
<P_2,23> in order to our being fitted for acting our part in the other
world , some acquirements or other , some sort of character , must be
necessary . FROUDE-1830-1,2,23.235

If a man is to go into a foreign country , to transact any important
business , how many things has he to attend to , and prepare for !
FROUDE-1830-1,2,23.236

He must acquaint himself with the sort of circumstances in which he
shall be placed , the sort of people he shall have to deal with , their
manners , their language , the sort of questions he shall have to answer
, the sort of difficulties he shall have to contend with .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,23.237

He may have either to endure great fatigue , or to exert great nerve and
firmness , or to submit to hunger and cold , such as require long
training to bear up against ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,23.238

and , unless he does all this , he must make up his mind to certain
failure , or in many cases to death . FROUDE-1830-1,2,23.239

Now common sense would tell us to expect something of this sort in the
country to which we all have to go . A country far more distant , and
more unlike our own , than any traveller has reached in this world .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,23.240

And though we might not be able , by common sense alone , to make out
what sort of training would best fit us for living in this country ,
still even <font> it <$$font> would teach us that self-command , courage
, justice , benevolence , must be of the greatest service to us , under
any change of circumstances , and however events turned out .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,23.241

We have , however , a surer and safer guide to determine this important
point for us . FROUDE-1830-1,2,23.242

God has <P_2,24> Himself told us what sort of country it is to which we
are going , and what sort of persons we must be in order to live happily
in it . FROUDE-1830-1,2,24.243

We are to dwell in the presence of a great King , whose eyes are purer
than to behold iniquity , and yet to whom all hearts are open , all
desires known , and from whom no secrets are hid .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,24.244

How then shall we be able to endure His looks , or dare to appear before
Him , unless we have done all in our power to make ourselves such as He
approves ? FROUDE-1830-1,2,24.245

With this prospect before us , we ought to feel in the highest degree
grateful for the time He has given us for preparation ; and more
especially so when we consider that the kind of discipline which He has
provided for us during the interval before our summons , is exactly such
as to prepare us best . FROUDE-1830-1,2,24.246

He has furnished us with opportunities for exercising all those tempers
of mind which He will then expect of us . FROUDE-1830-1,2,24.247

All the sore travail that He has appointed for the sons of men , He has
appointed that we may be " exercised therewith , " - exercised in the
ways of self-denial , purity , charity , and , above all , faith .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,24.248

For , it will be observed , that our present situation is , in a
particular manner , suited to cultivation of this temper - a temper ,
the very essence of which consists in a steady performance of duty , in
spite of every discouragement , which endures as seeing Him that is
invisible . FROUDE-1830-1,2,24.249

Thus , then , I have endeavoured to point out that the course of things
is so arranged as to make patience <P_2,25> and industry the only means
by which we can be brought to any good , first of all in this life , and
then in the life to come : that they are the appointed means , not only
of securing to us subsistence and comfort , but also of fitting us to
act our part in life with respectability , of making us just , firm ,
honest , temperate : and that they have been appointed , in order that
the pains we are obliged to take in order to acquire these tempers , may
farther make us self-denying , obedient , faithful , that we may , by
degrees , be built up in godliness , and fitted to take our station in
an@ @other and higher sphere of existence . FROUDE-1830-1,2,25.250

And I have dwelt on all this in order to show the paramount importance
of that patience and industry , which are , as it were , the key to all
these advantages , the necessary instruments for working out our
salvation . FROUDE-1830-1,2,25.251

The practical inference , then , from all this is , that we are to
cultivate these virtues for their own sake , more than for any tangible
effects which we may expect to derive from them .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,25.252

They are of equal importance to the rich and the poor : to those who
have to work for their maintenance and those who are born to affluence .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,25.253

To go even farther , one may state , that even such persons as have been
blessed by nature with moderate passions and desires , such as are
disposed of their own accord to kindness , sobriety , seriousness of
mind , even these persons have need to " exercise " themselves , - to
pass such lives as require industry <P_2,26> and patience , - almost as
much as others of less favoured temper , in whom the effects of
self-indulgence would be more obvious and offensive .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,26.254

Many indeed there are , who , without much pains or restraint , may go
on very comfortably and respectably , by means of those habits which
they have already acquired , and in consequence of the discipline which
they have already undergone . FROUDE-1830-1,2,26.255

Perhaps even most people , before they have advanced very far in life ,
have sufficient command over themselves to keep out of danger from the
ordinary temptations we meet with , and to act almost instinctively
according to a certain standard of temperance , honesty , and
benevolence . FROUDE-1830-1,2,26.256

Now persons in this condition should remember , that , though they stand
in less immediate need of exertion , yet that on its own account
exertion is requisite for all ; and not less indispensably so to them
than to others , - unless indeed they suppose themselves to have
attained the highest perfection of which their nature is susceptible .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,26.257

Though God does not force them to labour in order to escape present evil
, He commands them to do so for the sake of future good ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,26.258

and , as He shows , here on earth , that we must discipline ourselves up
to a certain point even for the sake of our worldly comfort , so He
enables us to perceive that , if we would improve beyond this point , if
we would fit ourselves to dwell with Him , and with the Holy Angels ,
discipline is the appointed and only means <P_2,27> by which we are to
press forward towards the prize of our high calling .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,27.259

Again , the previous considerations lead us to observe , that what is
true of moral is no less so of religious improvement .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,27.260

It has been unhappily supposed , by some , that religion is a matter of
feeling , to be attained to , and judged of , in quite a different way
from other tempers and habits . FROUDE-1830-1,2,27.261

We see , and own readily enough , that it is impossible to become manly
at once , prudent and temperate at once ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,27.262

we observe , that to become men instead of children , we have need of
time and trouble ; and that , after we are men , we have still much more
to do before we are sensible and trustworthy men ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,27.263

yet we feel a kind of indefinite hope that , without such a process , we
may become religious men . FROUDE-1830-1,2,27.264

Now we have but to consider what are the acts that religion requires of
us , FROUDE-1830-1,2,27.265

and we shall see that this must be a complete delusion . That the
temper , which alone deserves the name of religion , is just as much a
habit , just as much the consequence of discipline , as any other temper
that can be named . FROUDE-1830-1,2,27.266

For , whatever are the duties common sense and prudence oblige us to
discharge , to obtain the respect of our fellow men , and the
approbation of our own conscience , these same duties does religion
enforce upon us , but with this difference ; - that whereas in the
former case our industry is stimulated , and our patience supported , by
the knowledge of the object for which we are working , and <P_2,28> the
consciousness that we are making progress towards it , in the latter we
are to do all to the glory of God , FROUDE-1830-1,2,28.267

- we are to impose the same restraints upon our inclination , but for
the sake of a Being whom we do not see , a reward which we can@ @not
comprehend . FROUDE-1830-1,2,28.268

Thus , then , throughout the whole course of human conduct , to obtain
for us what we want , and to make us what we ought to be , industry and
patience are essentially necessary ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,28.269

and we have this cheering thought to console us in our difficulties ,
that though God obliges us to " work out our salvation with fear and
trembling , " yet He Himself has promised to " work in us , both to will
and to do of His good pleasure . " {COM:sermon_3_omitted}
FROUDE-1830-1,2,28.270

<P_2,42>

<heading>

Sermon IV . FROUDE-1830-1,2,42.273

Knowledge Useless Except to the Serious_Minded . FROUDE-1830-1,2,42.274

Luke xvi. 31 . FROUDE-1830-1,2,42.275

" If they hear not Moses and the prophets , neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,42.276

<$$heading>

Few of our tendencies have been a more frequent subject of declamation
than that which disposes us to underrate the advantages which we possess
, and to look with a vague admiration on what lies beyond our reach .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,42.278

Its effects , however , are of greater magnitude and more serious import
than may at first sight appear to be the case . FROUDE-1830-1,2,42.279

They concern not only our present comforts but our prospects of future
happiness . FROUDE-1830-1,2,42.280

For of all the blessings which we enjoy and undervalue , none are so
little appreciated as our religious privileges . FROUDE-1830-1,2,42.281

In spite of all the great things that God has done for us , - His long
miraculous intercourse <P_2,43> with the world - His precious gift of
the inspired volume - the bright examples which He has held up to us in
the lives of Saints , who , as it were , show us the way to heaven -
above all , the means of grace and the hopes of glory , which conclude
the beneficent dispensation that He has revealed to us , - all those
things seem but little in our eyes ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,43.282

still , as of old , " the Lord in this place , FROUDE-1830-1,2,43.283

and we know it not . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,43.284

In the abstract , indeed , when we withdraw our thoughts from the real
and practical effect of these blessings , and , as it were , survey our
religious condition from a distance , our understandings can@ @not but
assent to all the glowing language in which Scripture describes our
privileges . FROUDE-1830-1,2,43.285

We can@ @not but acknowledge how important are those things which many
prophets and righteous men desired to see , though they did not see them
; how goodly are those tents of Jacob and tabernacles of Israel which
Balaam beheld afar off , and in which it is our privilege to abide .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,43.286

But when we take a more practical view of the subject , and instead of
looking at the abstract character of these blessings , turn our
attention to the real change which they produce in our hearts and
conduct ; when we think of them not as they <font> ought <$$font> to
appear to us , but as they <font> do <$$font> , we are obliged to
observe that , in spite of all we know respecting God and His ways , we
are nearly in all respects the same persons as we should have been
without this <P_2,44> knowledge , and that we should probably go on much
in the same manner as we do , were our religious creed no condition in
the regulation of our conduct . FROUDE-1830-1,2,44.287

This unsatisfactory answer too often sets us on looking about for
excuses , and endeavouring to shift the blame from ourselves to our
circumstances . FROUDE-1830-1,2,44.288

It directs our thoughts rather towards what seems defective in God's
dispensations , than to the great blessings which in the abstract appear
so clear to us , FROUDE-1830-1,2,44.289

and disposes us to indulge the deceiving thought , which our Lord
reproves in the text , " that if one came unto us from the dead we
should repent , " or in other words , that if God would manifest to us
His power and superintendance in more striking ways than those in which
He has thought fit to manifest them , we should then find it easier to
enlist in His service . FROUDE-1830-1,2,44.290

It is needless to prove {TEXT:missing_"prove"} that this idea must be
very hurtful to those who entertain it ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,44.291

and as it is more or less apt to intrude on most of us , it may be of
advantage to show how completely it is destitute of foundation ; how
hopeless it is to imagine that any_thing more <font> can <$$font> be
done for those who will not take advantage of what has been done for
them . FROUDE-1830-1,2,44.292

To state the excuse then in the fairest form in which it can be made ,
we may say , that notwithstanding all the means which God has taken to
convince our understandings what is our duty and interest , yet that
nothing has been done for us <P_2,45> which tends to counteract the
influence of the temptations which immediately surround us .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.293

God's presence is not impressed upon us in any way that awes the
imagination , nor His superintendence in any way that stimulates
obedience . FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.294

Every_thing that we see and feel , the whole course of the natural and
moral world is so regulated as to lull us into security , and divert our
attention from those truths which reason indeed does tell we should keep
constantly in view . FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.295

Now all this must be admitted to be true , FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.296

and as an <font> account <$$font> of our irreligion might be brought
forward with justice , FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.297

but as an <font> excuse <$$font> for it is nothing to the purpose ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.298

- it is merely assigning , as a cause of our disobedience , that we can@
@not overcome those difficulties which alone make obedience valuable ;
that we are not God's servants , because we will not perform the duties
which constitute His service . FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.299

This , then , might of itself be a sufficient answer to those who allow
their minds to dwell on the excuse ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.300

but it may be as well to go farther , and to point out that the state of
things which such persons seem to picture to themselves would in all
probability fail of the end which they have in view , and leave us just
where we were as to our moral and religious improvement .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.301

For suppose our external circumstances to be the most favourable that
imagination can suggest , FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.302

suppose our relation to the Supreme Being to be forced upon us in a
manner ever so striking and irresistible , FROUDE-1830-1,2,45.303

yet all this <P_2,46> would go but a little way towards engendering in
us , even <font> the knowledge <$$font> which is implied in true
religion . FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.304

The idea which we must acquire of God and His ways is essentially moral
, FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.305

and it is more than questionable whether the nature of things admits of
its being communicated by any other than the tedious process of a holy
and self-denying life ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.306

for before we can be said to have a just conception of the Divine Nature
, we must have formed in ourselves those affections of which He is the
Object , such as love , reverence , trust ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.307

and it is only in proportion as we have formed them , that we can annex
any idea to the promise that He will be their full and final
satisfaction . FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.308

We have Divine authority for asserting , that " if a man say he love God
and love not his brother , he is a liar ; " FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.309

so , too , we must learn what reverence is in our relation to earthly
parents , before we can reverence our Father which is in heaven .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.310

And thus must we seek the Lord " if haply we may feel after Him and find
Him , although He is not far from every one {COM:sic} of us . "
FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.311

It would be easy to pursue the subject to an indefinite extent ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.312

but it may suffice to state that the idea of the Supreme Being is one
which must be collected by long experience , which must be engraven on
our character , and associated with all our feelings , before we can be
said to know Him to good purpose , and to have fulfilled the end of our
existence . FROUDE-1830-1,2,46.313

And how small a way we should be carried towards this by any impression
which external circumstances <P_2,47> could excite in us may be very
easily perceived ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,47.314

for the most that such circumstances could effect would be , to fix our
thoughts in the right direction as long as the impression lasted ; as
long as we continued in that state of mind which , foreign to our
habitual temper , had been forced on us by some extraordinary display of
God's presence . FROUDE-1830-1,2,47.315

But any discovery of Himself which God could make to us , however
sublime and astonishing , must , in the nature of things , at last
become familiar to us ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,47.316

and any impression , however vivid , must by the same necessary process
wear out : so that if we were to rely on these for our religious
improvement , we should need an uninterrupted succession of new
discoveries and fresh impressions ; or if this were not granted , we
must become worse and worse , instead of better and better , every day
from our conversion . FROUDE-1830-1,2,47.317

Nor are we left to arguments from mere probabilities , in order to bring
this conclusion home to us . FROUDE-1830-1,2,47.318

We have in a degree , at least , experienced the inefficiency of the
most overpowering and sublime events , in fixing our attention on the
Great Being who dispensed them . FROUDE-1830-1,2,47.319

We have an opportunity of knowing in person what our Lord declared to
our forefathers ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,47.320

" If they hear not Moses and the prophets , neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,47.321

For let us consider the bearing of the event which we at this season
commemorate . FROUDE-1830-1,2,47.322

It is , as we <P_2,48> must perceive , the literal fulfilment of the
rich man's prayer for his brethren . FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.323

One <font> has <$$font> come unto us from the dead .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.324

Nor does it make any great difference that we have not heard this
preaching in person , but rely on others for the report of it .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.325

We are just as certain that our Lord is risen as if we had ourselves
witnessed His resurrection ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.326

and the evidence which is thus afforded us respecting our future destiny
is not so very different from that which was granted to His immediate
followers . FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.327

To the imagination , indeed , it is less awfully overpowering ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.328

yet even to the imagination it is not without its force .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.329

The Ceremonies and Services of this season are just as much tangible
effects of the Resurrection as those which the Apostle Thomas sought to
confirm his faith ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.330

and the same process which has made us familiar to the one in the course
of time must have destroyed the impressiveness of the other .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.331

Thus it is then that the Services which we are performing furnish a
practical comment on our Lord's declaration in the text , and , on the
abstract argument which may be derived from the nature of impressions .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.332

Christ <font> has <$$font> risen , FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.333

and the present face of the world obtrudes the fact upon our notice ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.334

yet the melancholy prediction is fulfilled , which winds up the last
words of Inspiration . FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.335

" He that is unjust , let him be unjust still ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.336

and he that is filthy , let him be filthy still ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,48.337

and he that is righteous , let him <P_2,49> be righteous still ;
FROUDE-1830-1,2,49.338

and he that is holy , let him be holy still . " FROUDE-1830-1,2,49.339

Thus then we may infer , both from a consideration of our own nature ,
and from the fact of the Resurrection , that God has done all for us
which any_thing but our own will can do ; and that if we neglect our
present advantages , we have nothing to blame but ourselves .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,49.340

Yet it may serve to give us a clearer view of the subject ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,49.341

and will at the same time be attended with practical advantage , if we
apply to the Resurrection in particular , the considerations which
extend equally to all God does for us ; and reflect on the means through
which alone , it can become an instrument of practical good to us .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,49.342

It will thus be seen that the advantage which may be derived from the
knowledge of the fact , has a necessary dependence {TEXT:dependance} on
the habitual religious condition of the persons to whom it is
communicated ; and that the process by which we are to take advantage of
it , is a discipline just of the same sort as that which we undergo in
forming virtuous habits ; so that to create a strong impression on the
mind , far from being the object of the Dispensation , scarcely enters
into its design : and if in any instance it accidentally effects this ,
yet that by so doing it no more fulfils its final purpose , than the
excitement of good impulses completes a virtuous character .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,49.343

The real benefits then which have been conferred on us by the
Resurrection of our Lord , the <P_2,50> substantial advantages which it
has effected for us in our state of religious probation , seem to be the
two following . FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.344

It has given us evidence of a very peculiar kind , that we shall survive
death : FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.345

- And has taught us that the Being , whose history is recorded in the
Gospels , is now in heaven to receive our prayers .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.346

Now these consequences , important as they are , effect no obvious or
immediate good for us ; FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.347

they must be dwelt on long before they can be felt at all ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.348

and seem rather intended as comforts to the religious than warnings to
unholy minds . FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.349

1. And first , as to the evidence afforded of our immmortality . Let
us consider in what manner it is that this branch of evidence affects at
all . FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.350

It clearly is not wanted to make up any deficiency in the proof :
FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.351

for without it we have abundant ground of certainty in the plain
declaration of Jesus Christ . FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.352

He tells us , in the most unequivocal manner , and on several distinct
occasions , that a life is in store for us , " where they can@ @not die
any more , for they are equal to the Angels , " - " where neither moth
nor rust doth corrupt , " - where everlasting happiness or everlasting
fire are laid up for all of us . FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.353

And even had we wanted His ominiscient authority , yet the general tenor
{TEXT:tenour} of Scripture would be sufficient to dispel all the doubts
that hang over natural religion . FROUDE-1830-1,2,50.354

Our Lord's own Resurrection <P_2,51> then can add nothing to the proof
that we have independent of it . FROUDE-1830-1,2,51.355

Again : it can@ @not be said to be of importance to us , as superseding
other grounds of conviction , and thus presenting the argument to us in
a less embarrassed form . FROUDE-1830-1,2,51.356

This indeed was true with respect to the first converts to Christianity
, who had to be instructed from the very <font> foundation <$$font> ,
and required to learn the most important truths in the simplest manner .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,51.357

But we have no need of this kind . FROUDE-1830-1,2,51.358

The simplest ground on which we believe any_thing is our Lord's word ,
FROUDE-1830-1,2,51.359

and they who will not listen to it will believe nothing .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,51.360

Thus then it appears that the Resurrection of our Lord , considered as
an evidence of a future life , can neither strengthen nor simplify that
which we have independently ; and consequently that it can have no
tendency either to force conviction on those who will not believe , or
to supersede the necessity of investigation for those who are too idle
to seek truth by labour . FROUDE-1830-1,2,51.361

The effect which it is calculated to produce upon the mind is rather to
keep up a sustained practical assurance , than once for all to convince
the understanding . FROUDE-1830-1,2,51.362

The circumstance is one to which the thoughts very frequently recur , as
they do to past events in our own life , and on which we may dwell with
the same consolatory satisfaction , as on the instances in which we have
experienced God's faithfulness in our own persons .
FROUDE-1830-1,2,51.363

