<BEGIN_george-1763-1>

<P_180>

{ED:254_Saturday,_1_January_1763}

33 m. pt 10 . GEORGE-1763-1,180.4

Thinking it very probable that Ld Hardwicke will come here with his new
marry'd son and daughter ; I would wish to have my D. Friends opinion
whether I ought or ought not to speak to him ; GEORGE-1763-1,180.5

I myself rather incline to the taking some <paren> tho ' little
<$$paren> notice of him , in hopes of drawing him from the D. of
Newcastle : he being the only man of the party that is either wise or
well_thought_of by the world . GEORGE-1763-1,180.6

I have heard from my sister that my mother is much better this morning
than yesterday . GEORGE-1763-1,180.7

{ED:255_Tuesday,_4_January_1763}

33 m. pt 5 . GEORGE-1763-1,180.9

Nothing can be more proper than my D. Friend's observations on the
paper drawn up by Ld Egremont ; GEORGE-1763-1,180.10

and it has already had its effect the D de Nivernois having yielded
every point except the one of the Mississipy , and on that consented
that two or three expedients shall be sent to France and one of them
accepted ; GEORGE-1763-1,180.11

I also think the remarks on the paper stating the Newfoundland trade
both just and wise . GEORGE-1763-1,180.12

<P_181>

It gives me much pleasure that G. Townshend is so perfectly right .
GEORGE-1763-1,181.14

I wish he were already here . GEORGE-1763-1,181.15

Desmaretz's opinion is strongly against the Cunette at Dunkirk ;
GEORGE-1763-1,181.16

how we shall get over it I know not GEORGE-1763-1,181.17

but am of opinion from the experience of this war that we have nothing
to fear from thence . GEORGE-1763-1,181.18

{ED:256_Thursday,_6_January_1763}

40 m. pt 9 . GEORGE-1763-1,181.20

I have carefully examined the list of those that have regiments
GEORGE-1763-1,181.21

and see it the interest of no old {COM:sic} , unless out of some
particular private reason unknown , to change for one of the regiments
in Ireland GEORGE-1763-1,181.22

my scheme is therefore the giving the 10th Regiment of Foot to Major
Genl. Sandford that the 26th Regt. of Foot vulgarly called the
Caledonians {TEXT:Calledonians} may have again a Scotch Commander , and
that Col: Scott ; GEORGE-1763-1,181.23

Lord Albemarle has pushed much for an old regiment for his brother ;
GEORGE-1763-1,181.24

if he got the 16th of Foot , that would be a feather for his commanding
the assault at the Moro Castle , which was the true cause of taking the
Havannah GEORGE-1763-1,181.25

and Brudenell would according to Lord Ligonier take that regiment as it
is very high among those that remain at the Peace .
GEORGE-1763-1,181.26

If this is agreeable to my D. Friend I will order it to_day and Ld.
Pultny and Ligonier as Aid_de_Camps ; GEORGE-1763-1,181.27

and I would propose sending the orders for breaking the young corps that
are to be broke in Ireland that the quarters may be ready for part of
those that are to go on that establishment ; GEORGE-1763-1,181.28

there is not an hour to be lost with regard to recalling the ships and
troops from the E._Indies ; GEORGE-1763-1,181.29

by a letter come this morning from the Admiralty of Lord Egremont that
order sent now will not bring the ships back till June 1764 , the troops
perhaps the same , GEORGE-1763-1,181.30

if we go on deferring , God only knows to what extent our debt will
still encrease . GEORGE-1763-1,181.31

<P_182>

{ED:257_Thursday,_6_January_1763}

15 m. pt 3 . GEORGE-1763-1,182.34

I have just read Knyphausen's letter of Tuesday to the K of Prussia ;
GEORGE-1763-1,182.35

he encourages him in the idea of my D. Friend's attempting to draw
Russia on him , and that we are to have the assistance of France in this
affair , as the only means of preventing the King of Prussia <font> from
the measures his treatment may with justice drive him to . <$$font>
GEORGE-1763-1,182.36

Ld Egremont has been here GEORGE-1763-1,182.37

he is with reason much offended at the answer from the Admiralty to his
letter ; GEORGE-1763-1,182.38

they seem not to take any step for disarming the Fleet , and to lay in
for blaming the Secretary of State if any enquiry should be made into
their delay ; GEORGE-1763-1,182.39

I have order'd him to write an answer that may leave the blame at the
right door ; GEORGE-1763-1,182.40

I will speak pretty plainly to Mr. Greenville when he comes to-morrow ,
GEORGE-1763-1,182.41

he has broke with Ld Egremont GEORGE-1763-1,182.42

and is I find in open war with every man , because he will not forgive
the change of his office . GEORGE-1763-1,182.43

{ED:258_circa_Monday,_10_January_1763}

Twelve o'clk . GEORGE-1763-1,182.45

As I shall have the pleasure of seeing my D. Friend before three , I
will defer nominating the Colonels of the vacant regiments till
Wednesday ; GEORGE-1763-1,182.46

I think my D. Friend's solution of the proposition when the troops and
ships should be recall'd from the E._Indies perfectly just .
GEORGE-1763-1,182.47

I shall not fail to observe to <P_183> Lord Halifax that Lord Egremont
is the person Nivernois should first speak to in all affairs as being in
his department ; but particularly in the subject now started , which I
own I think right ; GEORGE-1763-1,183.48

Lord Egremont open'd to me on Saturday <paren> when he asked leave to go
for a few days into Sussex <$$paren> my D. Friend's idea of
comprehending Hanover in the Neutrality , which he had named to
Nivernois , who made no objection to it , and said he was of opinion his
Court would do it with pleasure , GEORGE-1763-1,183.49

what pass'd he has wrote to the D. of B. that there may be no jealousy
in that quarter of things being said to Nivernois that he is not
entrusted with ; GEORGE-1763-1,183.50

I can@ @not conceive from whence it comes that Prince Ferdinand has not
given Monsr. de Riaucourt a passport he having wrote here for
instructions above a month ago , and having received an answer the post
after to grant it ; GEORGE-1763-1,183.51

this shall be again order'd ; GEORGE-1763-1,183.52

though as he was to leave the army on Christmas Eve I should imagine
Granby the proper person now to give the passport ; GEORGE-1763-1,183.53

what the French mean by saying none of the troops have yet left the
Combined Army ; GEORGE-1763-1,183.54

the Hanoverians were in their own territories on the 6th and 7th of this
month , GEORGE-1763-1,183.55

as to the Brunswickers and Hessians , I doubt their having moved though
pressed from Hanover as well as from hence . GEORGE-1763-1,183.56

{ED:259_Thursday,_13_January_1763}

<P_184>

Lord Mansfield's indecent language is not anything surprizing to me , as
it comes from him ; GEORGE-1763-1,184.59

his disinclination to Government , and his own opinion of his
superiority of abilitys over the rest of the world , are reasons enough
without searching farther for causes that have made him so highly
improper on this occasion . GEORGE-1763-1,184.60

Fox told Lord Halifax that were there no difference of opinions on this
occasion he thought it would be look'd on as very improper by most
people that a Council should be summon'd for the Preliminary Articles
and no one for the Definitive Treaty GEORGE-1763-1,184.61

as this was the case I thought it was not worth while to make many
complaints on this occasion GEORGE-1763-1,184.62

and therefore wish to know when my D. Friend would have the Council .
GEORGE-1763-1,184.63

Lord Egremont will come back on Sunday ; GEORGE-1763-1,184.64

if I could learn the day before I see Lord Halifax tomorrow that will be
time enough . GEORGE-1763-1,184.65

I will send my dearest Friend tomorrow an exact list what regiments will
be broken . GEORGE-1763-1,184.66

Greenville thinks the news founded of the Marlborough and Temple being
lost . GEORGE-1763-1,184.67

{ED:260_?_middle_of_January_1763}

I enclose the reduction of the troops which I wish could be soon settl'd
that I may instantly begin to discharge GEORGE-1763-1,184.69

else the reduction will be too quick GEORGE-1763-1,184.70

for regiments will be daily coming home , GEORGE-1763-1,184.71

and I fear robberys will be much more frequent than if the corps were to
be broke as they {TEXT:the} come home , GEORGE-1763-1,184.72

for <P_185> then many would be gone to labour before the Belleisle and
other garrisons can be brought home to be discharg'd .
GEORGE-1763-1,185.73

I also send a short exposee of the Ct. of Bentheim@ @'s shameful
conduct . GEORGE-1763-1,185.74

{ED:261_circa_Saturday,_15_January_1763}

34 m. pt. 11 GEORGE-1763-1,185.76

As to Blair's brother I have got him a company in a young regiment in
Ireland within these two days ; GEORGE-1763-1,185.77

if my D. Friend thinks it absolutely necessary to give him an old
company he may be the 10th Captn. to one of the regiments transfer'd
from hence to the Irish establishment . GEORGE-1763-1,185.78

As to Murray , Athol's brother , he apply'd one day last week for rank
GEORGE-1763-1,185.79

and has got a brevet of Major as he was only a Captn. ;
GEORGE-1763-1,185.80

but understands that on a proper opportunity offering a company of the
Guards may fall to his lot which I find is his great ambition .
GEORGE-1763-1,185.81

I have already heard of Lord Albemarle's wish of rank to Lt. Col: Grant
, and in the most extraordinary manner , an officer much his senior
<paren> by at least 30 <$$paren> who has served with equal merit ,
having presented me on Friday through Lord Ligonier a memorial stating
Lord Albemarle's having declar'd Grant a Colonel by Brevet ; which
oblig'd the other brave man to come home rather than serve under his
junior : GEORGE-1763-1,185.82

Grant is undoubtedly a gallant officer ; GEORGE-1763-1,185.83

but I think it would make a great noise to give him a step having no
less than 84 Lieut. Colonels above him some of whom are Members of
Parliament ; others that have equal merit , and some that <paren> as for
instance young Amherst <$$paren> have commanded corps this war and who
would with reason cry out at this injustice . GEORGE-1763-1,185.84

I enclose the list of the army . GEORGE-1763-1,185.85

I have drawn my pen through the Invalids because not right stated
GEORGE-1763-1,185.86

but will send them on a separate paper . GEORGE-1763-1,185.87

<P_186>

{ED:_262_Sunday,_16_January_1763}

15 m. pt. 3 . GEORGE-1763-1,186.90

The reading the D. of Bedford@ @'s causes no surprize in me but real
sorrow that he is so much dissatisfy'd , particularly as there is
undoubtedly some truth in what he asserts , though his warmth of temper
turns hillocks into mountains ; GEORGE-1763-1,186.91

I am as uneasy as he can be at the great loss of time that has put off
the Definitive Treaty , GEORGE-1763-1,186.92

but I can with truth aver that my D. Friend has wished for dispatch as
well as myself ; GEORGE-1763-1,186.93

a kind letter from my D. Friend will I hope put the good Duke in good
humour once again that he may put the finishing stroke to this salutary
and I may say necessary measure . GEORGE-1763-1,186.94

{ED:_263_Tuesday,_18_January_1763}

<P_187>

I hope Vienna and Berlin will now at length put an end to the calamitys
of Germany ; GEORGE-1763-1,187.97

the being acquainted by France of this affair is a plain proof they mean
to live on a friendly footing with us ; GEORGE-1763-1,187.98

Ld Egmonts intelligence from Harwich is a small example of the many
harsh things Mr. Fox will attempt to drive my D. Friend into ;
GEORGE-1763-1,187.99

but his sense and good heart will make him see what steps are necessary
to ruin the Newcastle faction , and those that would be only ruining
individuals who are not attach'd to that party ; GEORGE-1763-1,187.100

this ought to serve as a lesson that no man should be dismiss'd unless
others besides the Foxes declare them to be of that denomination .
GEORGE-1763-1,187.101

5 m. pt 11 . GEORGE-1763-1,187.102

{ED:_264_Friday,_21_January_1763}

As there is no vacancy on the Irish Staff there is no occasion for my
saying anything to Ld Halifax this day with regards to my D. Friend's
int of giving way to Ld Kildare so far as the Irish Staff ,
GEORGE-1763-1,187.104

if my D. Friend looks on it as a thing absolutely necessary for
Government I will do it , tho' not without his declaring he yields all
thought of a regiment ; GEORGE-1763-1,187.105

for if I have not some plea of that kind to do what I have with some
warmth refus'd , I fear Ld Halifax and all those who are acquainted with
this affair will attribute it to a great fluctuation of temper to give
on Friday what I refus'd on Wednesday ; GEORGE-1763-1,187.106

if my D. <P_188> Friend sees I ca@ @n't avoid that aspersion on this
occasion I know him too well to think him capable of pressing me ;
GEORGE-1763-1,188.107

if that is the case , when I see him at night I do@ @n't doubt but he
will strike out the best method for me to do this very disagreeable
{TEXT:disagreable} thing ; GEORGE-1763-1,188.108

if I were to advise my D. Friend I would desire him to see whether he
has not some prior recommendations for a prebend to Mr. Fox's :
GEORGE-1763-1,188.109

I myself think there are two , Ld Warwick <paren> who was much hurt at
the Archbishop's nephew being preferred to his recommendation <$$paren>
and Ld Plymouth ; GEORGE-1763-1,188.110

the reason why I wish my D. Friend would see if he has no one , that I
do@ @n't think Mr. Fox very likely to recommend a man that will do
honour to that sacred profession . GEORGE-1763-1,188.111

15 m pt 11 GEORGE-1763-1,188.112

{ED:_265_Tuesday,_1_February_1763}

Nothing can be more proper than my D. Friend's letter to Ld. Egremont
; GEORGE-1763-1,188.114

if he has any remains of gratitude for the many favours he has receiv'd
he will behave as he owes it to the D. Friend GEORGE-1763-1,188.115

if not the sooner I have the seals out of his hands the better ;
GEORGE-1763-1,188.116

when I see my D. Friend this evening I hope to hear what the answer has
been , GEORGE-1763-1,188.117

and then I will settle the proper time for holding the Council ;
GEORGE-1763-1,188.118

as to Faucitt , he can@ @not have the first Dep. Government that being
engag'd to Col. Evelyn ; GEORGE-1763-1,188.119

but he may have the next ; GEORGE-1763-1,188.120

as to Ld. Ligonier , Major Seland shall be taken care of ;
GEORGE-1763-1,188.121

I have seen the good General GEORGE-1763-1,188.122

and have order'd the estimates which my D. Friend can have in a day or
two . GEORGE-1763-1,188.123

20 m. pt. 4 . GEORGE-1763-1,188.124

<P_189>

{ED:_266_Saturday,_5_February_1763}

11 m. pt 5 . GEORGE-1763-1,189.127

I quite agree with my D. Friend in rejoicing at the Declaration
Nivernois has made with regard to Wesel ; GEORGE-1763-1,189.128

this I hope will put an end to the German War ; GEORGE-1763-1,189.129

I had not heard anything with regard to Louisiane GEORGE-1763-1,189.130

and will not do as if I am acquainted with it till it comes officially .
GEORGE-1763-1,189.131

{ED:_267_Thursday,_10_February_1763}

Ld Granby's language to me was full of duty and attachment , saying he
had obligations to the D of N that would ever make him out of gratitude
have a personal regard to him ; but that his inclination as well as duty
would make him ever attach'd to my person , and consequently support my
measures and Ministry as at present compos'd or however I should form it
. GEORGE-1763-1,189.133

Mr. Townshend's conduct surprises me not the least
GEORGE-1763-1,189.134

he ever was and ever will be so fickle that no man can depend on him
GEORGE-1763-1,189.135

I think it a happy riddance ; GEORGE-1763-1,189.136

the Queen admires the bird just arrived very much .
GEORGE-1763-1,189.137

26 m. pt. 5 . GEORGE-1763-1,189.138

<P_190>

{ED:_268_Saturday,_12_February_1763}

I ca@ @n't refrain expressing my joy to my D. Friend at a note just
communicated by Lord Egremont from the D. de Nivernois by which it
appears that everything is settled between the D. of Bedford and the
French and Spanish Minsters ; the Definitive Treaty to be signed as last
Thursday ; GEORGE-1763-1,190.141

this great work could never have been concluded , had not my D.
Friend's upright intentions and ability brought back things , which
either the ignorance or ill designs of others had nearly made abortive .
GEORGE-1763-1,190.142

3 m pt 10 . GEORGE-1763-1,190.143

Since writing the above the inclos'd is come from my D. Friend .
GEORGE-1763-1,190.144

{ED:_269_circa_Tuesday,_22_February_1763}

9 m. pt. 5 . GEORGE-1763-1,190.146

There is no manner of doubt that the manner propos'd , of throwing off
the unpopularity of rejecting Sir J. Phillips's very silly motion is
very wise and seems free from objection ; GEORGE-1763-1,190.147

I am glad the Solicitor_General sees so strongly the conduct of the N.
Britton , GEORGE-1763-1,190.148

I hope he will act upon it ; GEORGE-1763-1,190.149

Lord Sandys's <P_191> ill humour is very seasonable as it saves me a
pension ; GEORGE-1763-1,191.150

Col: Grants commission I look on as a thing almost impossible as he must
pass over above forty heads ; GEORGE-1763-1,191.151

this was thought an unadvisable step when Lord Albemarle went to the
Havannah , GEORGE-1763-1,191.152

and therefore the great promotion was made to give the rank to Carlton .
GEORGE-1763-1,191.153

{ED:_270_Thursday,_24_February_1763}

Mr. Ellis came here from the meeting at Sir Fr. Dashwood's ,
GEORGE-1763-1,191.155

and reported that they had gone through the several estimates , and that
Sir R. Newdigate was the only man that continu'd openly objecting to
the schemes : GEORGE-1763-1,191.156

Townshend drop'd a wish they had been different at home
GEORGE-1763-1,191.157

Sir J. Phillips , and Sir C. Mordaunt in the handsomest manner yielded
to what is propos'd ; GEORGE-1763-1,191.158

Ld Halifax was still more solicitous this morning than yesterday for Ld.
Drogheda's regiment remaining , GEORGE-1763-1,191.159

I continu'd saying I saw no method of doing it for that the agreement to
the Estimates depended on leaving Ireland in the same situation as last
Peace , that if cavalry {TEXT:c} regiments are wanted there the two
youngest regiments of Dragoons may be form'd for that service ;
GEORGE-1763-1,191.160

Ld. Egremont wants to talk with Mr. de Nivernois of some method of
preventing our Newfoundland Fishery and the French from doing illegal
actions to each other , GEORGE-1763-1,191.161

as I did not know my D. Friend's sentiments on that head , I chose to
defer giving him any orders ; tho as he thinks Nivernois inclined to do
what is fair on that head if <P_192> my D. Friend's opinion on that
subject is the same as mine , I can see no objection to their talking it
over and trying to prevent the mischiefs that may otherwise arise .
GEORGE-1763-1,192.162

17 m pt 5 GEORGE-1763-1,192.163

{ED:_271_Saturday,_26_February_1763}

15 m. pt. . GEORGE-1763-1,192.165

A messenger is just arriv'd from Mitchell with the news of the Peace at
Hubertsbourg being sign'd on the {TEXT:missing_"the"} 15th
GEORGE-1763-1,192.166

there is as yet no communication of the particulars of this affair , but
that the K. of Prussia keeps all his dominions , and that he has made
one article by which he is at liberty to insert all his allys and
friends in this treaty , GEORGE-1763-1,192.167

the Empress has the same ; GEORGE-1763-1,192.168

the K. of Prussia is to desire our leave to insert us as well as his
other allys , GEORGE-1763-1,192.169

this I am sure is caus'd by his vanity of appearing the peace maker of
the Continent , and perhaps to say afterwards some uncivil thing to us ;
GEORGE-1763-1,192.170

can we avoid being inserted GEORGE-1763-1,192.171

I ask this question for Halifax will probably name it ;
GEORGE-1763-1,192.172

I wish an answer . GEORGE-1763-1,192.173

{ED:_272_end_of_February_1763}

<P_193>

I am sorry My D. Friend was detain'd this morning :
GEORGE-1763-1,193.176

I have no objection to the Herd. Prince's drinking the Bath waters
provided we are to have no conversation about the marriage ,
GEORGE-1763-1,193.177

if he means to enter on that subject I think he should send some body
here before he comes ; that there may be nothing to discuss when he
arrives . GEORGE-1763-1,193.178

40 m. pt 4 . GEORGE-1763-1,193.179

{ED:_272_Wednesday,_2_March_1763}

30 m. pt. 10 . GEORGE-1763-1,193.181

The Duke's ill humour is owing to the orders sent him to press strongly
the Plaisantine , and to throw out his fear that it might delay the
exchange of ratifications , GEORGE-1763-1,193.182

this was the advice I receiv'd from my D. Friend back'd by Ld.
Mansfield ; GEORGE-1763-1,193.183

D'Eon was set out , GEORGE-1763-1,193.184

therefore a messenger was sent after him with this instruction ,
GEORGE-1763-1,193.185

Neville recommended the waiting for Portugal which was also declar'd ;
GEORGE-1763-1,193.186

this latter part was at the D. of B.@ @'s own desire insinuated by
Neville to me the night he arriv'd ; GEORGE-1763-1,193.187

the D. of B. on receiving D'Eon instantly sends to the Duke of Praslin
that he is ready to exchange the ratification <P_194> the day the
Spaniards are : GEORGE-1763-1,194.188

on receiving the Plaisantine instruction , he in ill humour sends to
Praslin that now he is forbid to do it , GEORGE-1763-1,194.189

and now begs to have leave to exchange the 10th as agreed to in the
Definitive Treaty and not wait for Portugal and the Plaisantine , and
that Solar desires him not to take any part in the Plaisantine ;
GEORGE-1763-1,194.190

the D. ends with some very uncivil things to Ld. Egremont
GEORGE-1763-1,194.191

and asks his recall ; GEORGE-1763-1,194.192

thus these wrong_headed men I have the misfortune to be served by will
ever from heat undo {TEXT:undoe} what they are employed in ;
GEORGE-1763-1,194.193

the question I have now to ask my D. Friend is whether he shall have
leave to exchange on the 10th and what answer must be given to his
desire of coming home ; GEORGE-1763-1,194.194

I wish an answer by twelve that I may be prepared when Lord Egremont
comes . GEORGE-1763-1,194.195

{ED:274_Thursday_3_March_1763}

12 m. pt. 10 . GEORGE-1763-1,194.197

Lord Baths situation is deplorable GEORGE-1763-1,194.198

I feel most sincerely for him ; GEORGE-1763-1,194.199

I perfectly agree with the advice for the letter to the D. of B.
GEORGE-1763-1,194.200

Fox's advice about the army is right , GEORGE-1763-1,194.201

what pass'd between me and Ld. Ligonier does not overturn it ,
GEORGE-1763-1,194.202

he express'd some concern at his losing his Aid_de_Camp's which I said
had been done by way of oeconomy , GEORGE-1763-1,194.203

he ask'd whether I had order'd his patent to be recalled which I told
him I had not ; GEORGE-1763-1,194.204

after that he said he fear'd the army would be on the same footing as in
Sir Robt. Walpole's time , which made it very bad at the beginning of
the last war ; to which I told him I should now think of the best method
for preventing that ; GEORGE-1763-1,194.205

now I can any day my D. Friend pleases tell him he is to do nothing ;
GEORGE-1763-1,194.206

he offer'd <P_195> to review the regiments for nothing to which I said
that did not come as yet to be thought of GEORGE-1763-1,195.207

but the manner of reviewing the regiments would be among other
arrangements soon to be consider'd . GEORGE-1763-1,195.208

Mr. Ch. Townshend's conduct is what I should not have thought any
other man capable of , but himself very much so , GEORGE-1763-1,195.209

for I look on him as the worst man that lives , GEORGE-1763-1,195.210

it was that made me tell my D. Friend the other day I could never bear
the thought {TEXT:thoughts} of seeing him hold the seals
GEORGE-1763-1,195.211

this confirms me in it , GEORGE-1763-1,195.212

I would as soon employ a common thief as him . GEORGE-1763-1,195.213

Has my D. Friend considered Behr's paper . GEORGE-1763-1,195.214

{ED:275_Thursday_3_March_1763}

Ld. Egremont has been here , GEORGE-1763-1,195.216

he has seen Ld. Mansfield , Ld. Egmont , Mr. Greenville and Ld.
Halifax who are all of opinion that unless Mr. de Mello agrees to the
exchanging ratifications without Portugal , that it will be contrary to
other treaties to do it , and in some degree a breach of faith to our
only ally ; GEORGE-1763-1,195.217

I wish my D Friend would see Egremont who was in South Audley Street
this morning . GEORGE-1763-1,195.218

I enclose another paper from Baron Behr . GEORGE-1763-1,195.219

50 m. pt. 4 . GEORGE-1763-1,195.220

{ED:276_early_March_1763}

<P_196>

Ten {TEXT:ten} o' clock GEORGE-1763-1,196.223

Tho unable to find expressions strong enough to paint to my D. Friend
what I feel at the very generous and unparallel'd part he has acted this
day , I should think myself very insensible did I not once more to_night
acquaint him how much I am oblig'd to him for his conduct :
GEORGE-1763-1,196.224

I hope that same Providence that has ever directed my steps , and has
employ'd my D. Friend to guide me through perilous and dangerous
situations to the haven of honour and integrity , will now at this
critical minute point out some arrangement more perfect than the one
propos'd this day ; GEORGE-1763-1,196.225

my D. Friend must not be surprised that the seeing him resolved to quit
the scene of business is the most {TEXT:is_the_most_is_the_most} cruel
blow that could have happen'd to me . GEORGE-1763-1,196.226

{ED:277_early_March_1763}

35 m. pt. 7 . GEORGE-1763-1,196.228

My D. Friend's nobleness of nature can@ @not be more enrag'd at the
overbearing letter he has received than I am ; GEORGE-1763-1,196.229

but I fear all these warm heads will act as this ungrateful man does ,
GEORGE-1763-1,196.230

but why shall I fix it on them only when I daily see men of a more
phlegmatic disposition act in the same manner ; GEORGE-1763-1,196.231

that my D. Friend is heartily sick of his situation I can easily credit
; GEORGE-1763-1,196.232

and I scarcely should think it right as a {TEXT:missing_"a"} friend to
press him to continue if I did not feel a stronger tye , my affection to
my country ; GEORGE-1763-1,196.233

but when I consider that the man <P_197> he would on such an occasion
recommend as his successor is of all men the one I should be most
griev'd at seeing in his place , I must beg him to continue till summer
or instantly look out for some other man than Mr. Fox for that mighty
office ; GEORGE-1763-1,197.234

why can@ @not Mr. Greenville be made a peer and have either Oswald , or
Elliott or even Lord Barrington for his Chancellor of the Exchequer ,
GEORGE-1763-1,197.235

what right has Mr. Fox to complain , GEORGE-1763-1,197.236

did he not himself tell me that any office of business is improper for
the Minister of the House of Commons ; GEORGE-1763-1,197.237

I name this expedient to show that if my D. Friend can@ @not persuade
himself to continue <paren> which I confess will grieve me most
excessively <$$paren> that I must expect to see him have an honest man
as his successor in a board where that is the most necessary of all
qualifications ; GEORGE-1763-1,197.238

if he should absolutely resolve to quit I hope he will accept the
Chamberlain's Staff and become once again a Court officer ;
GEORGE-1763-1,197.239

for I can never agree to his being without office .
GEORGE-1763-1,197.240

{ED:278_circa_Saturday,_5_March_1763}

10 m. pt. 2 . GEORGE-1763-1,197.242

I quite agree with my Dear Friend that it would be highly improper if
these gentlemen in office who have differ'd with the present Minister in
the House of Commons so openly were not to feel some resentment .
GEORGE-1763-1,197.243

I am ever hurt when my D. Friend and myself are in the least of
different opinions GEORGE-1763-1,197.244

t@ @is what I ever strive to prevent ; GEORGE-1763-1,197.245

but in the case of Mr. Fox I fear we shall never think alike ,
GEORGE-1763-1,197.246

I have one principle firmly rooted in my mind from the many <P_198>
seasonable letters I have receiv'd from my D. Friend never to trust a
man void of principles , GEORGE-1763-1,198.247

if any man ever deserved that character 't@ @is Mr. Fox ;
GEORGE-1763-1,198.248

the seeing him at the head of the House of Commons was very unpleasant
to me : GEORGE-1763-1,198.249

but I consented to it , as that was the only means of getting my D.
Friend to proceed this winter in the Treasury ; GEORGE-1763-1,198.250

if he resolves to quit that situation the only consideration that could
make me bear Mr. Fox is vanish'd ; GEORGE-1763-1,198.251

and then his own bad character comes strongly into my thoughts when I
hear him nam'd ; GEORGE-1763-1,198.252

t@ @is not prejudice but aversion to his whole mode of government that
causes my writing so openly my thoughts to my only friend ;
GEORGE-1763-1,198.253

has this whole winter been any thing else but a scene of corruption
GEORGE-1763-1,198.254

and I am persuaded were he the acting Minister this would appear in more
ways , than he is now able to accomplish ; GEORGE-1763-1,198.255

for my D. Friend's heart is too upright and his principles too well
grounded to approve of this ; GEORGE-1763-1,198.256

they are the true sources of his dislike to his present employment ,
which has given him too many proofs of the baseness of the present age .
GEORGE-1763-1,198.257

{ED:279_?_Monday,_7_March_1763}

My D. Friend chusing to be silent on Ld Talbots speech , except his
high_flown compliments on the D of Newcastle , is a clear proof to me
how extremely improper his language must have been ;
GEORGE-1763-1,198.259

his conduct the whole winter has been unaccountable , either silent in
the house or attacking friends and commending foes ;
GEORGE-1763-1,198.260

this is not to be borne {TEXT:boren} , GEORGE-1763-1,198.261

the unhappy system that has been follow'd but too often since I have
mounted the throne of preferring men who have opinions of their own ,
has aided to weaken Government , GEORGE-1763-1,198.262

I have long heard my D Friend wish it had been otherwise :
GEORGE-1763-1,198.263

a Talbot , a Dashwood , a Strange , are forever running counter ;
GEORGE-1763-1,198.264

thus honest men are seldom to be kept right GEORGE-1763-1,198.265

and others for want of honesty are ever underhand wishing to do mischief
. GEORGE-1763-1,198.266

10 o' clk. <P_199> {ED:280_Friday,_11_March_1763} GEORGE-1763-1,199.267

40 m. pt. 5 . GEORGE-1763-1,199.268

When I write to my D. Friend I chuse to lay my thoughts naked before
him , and leave nothing behind the curtain ; GEORGE-1763-1,199.269

he knows my personal dislike to Mr. Fox as a man GEORGE-1763-1,199.270

therefore if I say anything that is favourable to the plan I heartily
wish could be done without , it is from conviction not predilection .
GEORGE-1763-1,199.271

I never saw anything less calculated to cement , and make a firm
administration than {TEXT:that} the scheme form'd by Mr. Fox ;
GEORGE-1763-1,199.272

the making Ld. Gower and Ld. Shelburne Secretaries of State would in
my opinion be taking two men little fitter than Denbigh Ravensworth and
Pomfret or Ld. Talbot : GEORGE-1763-1,199.273

as to Ld. Waldegrave I think him in some things better than the two
others , GEORGE-1763-1,199.274

but he would fairly be but a chip in the porridge {TEXT:porrige} .
GEORGE-1763-1,199.275

I fear predilection for the three he recommends has guided his judgment
as far from the truth as his aversion to Mr. Greenville does when he
calls him ill_natur'd , weak , and dishonest , GEORGE-1763-1,199.276

as to his pointing out Oswald for Chanc. of the Exchr. I believe he is
not wrong as to his abilitys GEORGE-1763-1,199.277

but I must confess that I agree with my D. Friend that perhaps his
being born on the other side of the Tweed might cause some more abuse
GEORGE-1763-1,199.278

but I would willingly go through fifty times as much if I could persuade
my D. Friend to remain at the head of the Treasury ;
GEORGE-1763-1,199.279

for I am still more uneasy after seeing Fox's paper ;
GEORGE-1763-1,199.280

his whole attack on the Chancellor and Greenville is their {TEXT:there}
not using their department for H. of Commons jobs {TEXT:jobbs} ;
GEORGE-1763-1,199.281

if Mr. Fox is Minister I plainly see the very Judges must be fill'd by
wretches that are unfit to decide the properties of freemen , because
they can be the means of acquiring a vote in Parliament ; the sea and
land service to be filled by <P_200> improper persons for the same
purpose instead of the men who have by their conduct done honour to
their Country , GEORGE-1763-1,200.282

by this means both the military branches will be on the same low footing
as when Sir Robt. Walpole quitted Government GEORGE-1763-1,200.283

and believe me my D. Friend when once things are got into the state I
fear they will , nothing can save the country ; GEORGE-1763-1,200.284

do@ @n't think that I am merely saying to show my aversion to Mr. Fox
GEORGE-1763-1,200.285

but t@ @is to express the anguish of mind I am in at thinking that
perhaps necessity may force me to accept of the man I would rather see
perish than at the head of Ministry ; GEORGE-1763-1,200.286

once more I beg my D. Friend to consider if no method can be hit upon
to prevent what my mind so much revolts against , GEORGE-1763-1,200.287

if none can , I agree to the trying Fox , GEORGE-1763-1,200.288

but I own {TEXT:owne} from the moment he comes in I shall not feel
myself interested in the public affairs and shall feel rejoic'd whenever
I can see a glimmering hope of getting quit of him .
GEORGE-1763-1,200.289

