<BEGIN_gibbon-1776-1>

<P_1,356>

<heading>

Chap. XIII . GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.4

<$$heading>

<font> The reign of Diocletian and his three associates , Maximian ,
Galerius , and Constantius . GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.6

- General re-establishment of order and tranquillity .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.7

- The Persian war , victory , and triumph . GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.8

- The new form of administration . GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.9

- Abdication and retirement of Diocletian and Maximian . <$$font>
GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.10

As the reign of Diocletian was more illustrious than that of any of his
predecessors , so was his birth more abject and obscure .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.11

The strong claims of merit and of violence had frequently superseded the
ideal prerogatives of nobility ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.12

but a distinct line of separation was still preserved between the free
and the servile part of mankind . GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.13

The parents of Diocletian had been slaves in the house of Anulinus , a
Roman senator ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.14

nor was he himself distinguished by any other name , than that which he
derived from a small town in Dalmatia , from whence his mother deduced
her origin . GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.15

It is , however , probable , that his father obtained the freedom of the
family , and that he soon acquired an office of scribe , which was
commonly exercised by persons of his condition . GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.16

Favourable oracles , or rather the consciousness of superior merit ,
prompted his aspiring son to pursue the profession of arms and the hopes
of fortune ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.17

and it would be extremely curious to observe the gradation of arts and
accidents which enabled him in the end to fulfil those oracles , and to
display that merit to the world . GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.18

Diocletian was successively promoted to the government of Maesia , the
honours of the consulship , and the important command of the guards of
the palace . GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.19

He distinguished his abilities in the Persian war ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,356.20

and , after the death of Numerian , the slave , by the confession and
judgment of his rivals <P_1,357> was declared the most worthy of the
imperial throne . GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.21

The malice of religious zeal , whilst it arraigns the savage fierceness
of his colleague Maximian , has affected to cast suspicions on the
personal courage of the emperor Diocletian . GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.22

It would not be easy to persuade us of the cowardice of a soldier of
fortune , who acquired and preserved the esteem of the legions , as well
as the favour of so many warlike princes . GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.23

Yet even calumny is sagacious enough to discover and to attack the most
vulnerable part . GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.24

The valour of Diocletian was never found inadequate to his duty or to
the occasion ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.25

but he appears not to have possessed the daring and generous spirit of a
hero , who courts danger and fame , disdains artifice , and boldly
challenges the allegiance of his equals . GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.26

His abilities were useful rather than splendid ; a vigorous mind ,
improved by the experience and study of mankind ; dexterity and
application in business ; a judicious mixture of liberality and oeconomy
, of mildness and rigour ; profound dissimulation under the disguise of
military frankness ; steadiness to pursue his ends ; flexibility to vary
his means ; and above all the great art of submitting his own passions ,
as well as those of others , to the interest of his ambition , and of
colouring his ambition with the most specious pretences of justice and
public utility . GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.27

Like Augustus , Diocletian may be considered as the founder of a new
empire . GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.28

Like the adopted son of Caesar , he was distinguished as a statesman
rather than as a warrior ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.29

nor did either of those princes employ force , whenever their purpose
could be effected by policy . GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.30

The victory of Diocletian was distinguished by its singular mildness .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.31

A people accustomed to applaud the clemency of the conqueror , if the
usual punishments of death , exile , and confiscation were inflicted
with any degree of temper and equity , beheld , with the most pleasing
astonishment , a civil war , whose rage was confined to the field of
battle . GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.32

Diocletian received into his confidence Aristobulus , the principal
minister of the house of Carus , GIBBON-1776-1,1,357.33

respected the <P_1,358> lives , the fortunes , and the dignity of his
adversaries , GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.34

and even continued in their respective stations the greater number of
the servants of Carinus . GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.35

It is not improbable that motives of prudence might assist the humanity
of the artful Dalmatian ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.36

of these servants , many had purchased his favour by secret treachery ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.37

in others , he esteemed their grateful fidelity to an unfortunate master
. GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.38

The discerning judgment of Aurelian , of Probus , and of Carus , had
filled the several departments of the state and army with officers of
approved merit , whose removal would have injured the public service ,
without promoting the interest of the successor .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.39

Such a conduct , however , displayed to the Roman world the fairest
prospect of the new reign , GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.40

and the emperor affected to confirm this favourable preposession , by
declaring , that among all the virtues of his predecessors , he was the
most ambitious of imitating the humane philosophy of Marcus Antoninus .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.41

The first considerable action of his reign , seemed to evince his
sincerity as well as his moderation . GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.42

After the example of Marcus , he gave himself a colleague in the person
of Maximian , on whom he bestowed at first the title of Caesar , and
afterwards that of Augustus . GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.43

But the motives of his conduct , as well as the object of his choice ,
were of a very different nature from those of his admired predecessor .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.44

By investing a luxurious youth with the honours of the purple , Marcus
had discharged a debt of private gratitude , at the expence , indeed ,
of the happiness of the state . GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.45

By associating a friend and a fellow-soldier to the labours of
government , Diocletian , in a time of public danger , provided for the
defence both of the East and of the West . GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.46

Maximian was born a peasant , and , like Aurelian , in the territory of
Sirmium . GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.47

Ignorant of letters , careless of laws , the rusticity of his appearance
and manners still betrayed in the most elevated fortune the meanness of
his extraction . GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.48

War was the only art which he professed . GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.49

In a long course of service , he had distinguished himself on every
frontier of the empire ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,358.50

and though his military talents were <P_1,359> formed to obey rather
than to command , though , perhaps , he never attained the skill of a
consummate general , he was capable , by his valour , constancy , and
experience , of executing the most arduous undertakings .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.51

Nor were the vices of Maximian less useful to his benefactor .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.52

Insensible to pity , and fearless of consequences , he was the ready
instrument of every act of cruelty which the policy of that artful
prince might at once suggest and disclaim . GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.53

As soon as a bloody sacrifice had been offered to prudence or to revenge
, Diocletian , by his seasonable intercession , saved the remaining few
whom he had never designed to punish , GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.54

gently censured the severity of his stern colleague ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.55

and enjoyed the comparison of a golden and an iron age , which was
universally applied to their opposite maxims of government .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.56

Notwithstanding the difference of their characters , the two emperors
maintained , on the throne , that friendship which they had contracted
in a private station . GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.57

The haughty turbulent spirit of Maximian , so fatal afterwards to
himself and to the public peace , was accustomed to respect the genius
of Diocletian , GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.58

and confessed the ascendant of reason over brutal violence .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.59

From a motive either of pride or superstition , the two emperors assumed
the titles , the one of Jovius , the other of Herculius .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.60

Whilst the motion of the world <paren> such was the language of their
venal orators <$$paren> was maintained by the all-seeing wisdom of
Jupiter , the invincible arm of Hercules purged the earth of monsters
and tyrants . GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.61

But even the omnipotence of Jovius and Herculius was insufficient to
sustain the weight of the public administration .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.62

The prudence of Diocletian discovered , that the empire , assailed on
every side by the barbarians , required on every side the presence of a
great army , and of an emperor . GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.63

With this view he resolved once more to divide his unwieldy power , and
with the inferior title of <font> Caesars , <$$font> to confer on two
generals of approved merit an equal share of the sovereign authority .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,359.64

Galerius , surnamed Armentarius , from his original profession of a
herdsman , and , Constantius , who from his pale complexion had
<P_1,360> acquired the denomination of Chlorus , were the two persons
invested with the second honours of the imperial purple .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.65

In describing the country , extraction , and manners of Herculius , we
have already delineated those of Galerius , who was often , and not
improperly , styled the younger Maximian , though , in many instances
both of virtue and ability , he appears superior to the elder .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.66

The birth of Constantius was less obscure than that of his colleagues .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.67

Eutropius , his father , was one of the most considerable nobles of
Dardania , GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.68

and his mother was the niece of the emperor Claudius .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.69

Although the youth of Constantius had been spent in arms , he possessed
a mild and amiable disposition , GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.70

and the popular voice had long since acknowledged him worthy of the rank
which he at last attained . GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.71

To strengthen the bonds of political , by those of domestic union , each
of the emperors assumed the character of a father to one of the Caesars
, Diocletian to Galerius , and Maximian to Constantius ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.72

and each obliging them to repudiate their former wives , bestowed his
daughter in marriage on his adopted son . GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.73

These four princes distributed among themselves the wide extent of the
Roman empire . GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.74

The defence of Gaul , Spain , and Britain , was entrusted to Constantius
: GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.75

Galerius was stationed on the banks of the Danube , as the safeguard of
the Illyrian provinces . GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.76

Italy and Africa were considered as the department of Maximian ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.77

and for his peculiar portion , Diocletian reserved Thrace , Egypt , and
the rich countries of Asia . GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.78

Every one was sovereign within his own jurisdiction ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.79

but their united authority extended over the whole monarchy ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.80

and each of them was prepared to assist his colleagues with his counsels
or presence . GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.81

The Caesars , in their exalted rank , revered the majesty of the
emperors , GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.82

and the three younger princes invariably acknowledged , by their
gratitude and obedience , the common parent of their fortunes .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.83

The suspicious jealousy of power found not any place among them ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,360.84

and the singular happiness of their union , has been compared to a
chorus of music , whose harmony <P_1,361> was regulated and maintained
by the skilful hand of the first artist . GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.85

This important measure was not carried into execution , till about six
years after the association of Maximian , GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.86

and that interval of time had not been destitute of memorable incidents
. GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.87

But we have preferred , for the sake of perspicuity , first to describe
the more perfect form of Diocletian's government , and afterwards to
relate the actions of his reign , following rather the natural order of
the events , than the dates of a very doubtful chronology .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.88

The first exploit of Maximian , though it is mentioned in a few words by
our imperfect writers , deserves , from its singularity , to be recorded
in a history of human manners . GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.89

He suppressed the peasants of Gaul , who , under the appellation of
Bagaudae , had risen in a general insurrection ; very similar to those ,
which in the fourteenth century successively afflicted both France and
England . GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.90

It should seem , that very many of those institutions , referred by an
easy solution to the feudal system , are derived from the Celtic
barbarians . GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.91

When Caesar subdued the Gauls , that great nation was already divided
into three orders of men ; the clergy , the nobility , and the common
people . GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.92

The first governed by superstition , the second by arms ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.93

but the third and last was not of any weight or account in their public
councils . GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.94

It was very natural for the Plebeians , oppressed by debt or
apprehensive of injuries , to implore the protection of some powerful
chief , who acquired over their persons and property , the same absolute
rights as among the Greeks and Romans , a master exercised over his
slaves . GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.95

The greatest part of the nation was gradually reduced into a state of
servitude ; compelled to perpetual labour on the estates of the Gallic
nobles , and consigned {TEXT:consined} to the soil , either by the real
weight of fetters , or by the no less cruel and forcible restraints of
the laws . GIBBON-1776-1,1,361.96

During the long series of troubles which agitated Gaul , from the reign
of Gallienus to that of Diocletian , the condition of these servile
peasants was <P_1,362> peculiarly miserable ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.97

and they experienced at once the complicated tyranny of their masters ,
of the barbarians , of the soldiers , and of the officers of the revenue
. GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.98

Their patience was at last provoked into despair .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.99

On every side they rose in multitudes , armed with rustic weapons , and
with irresistible fury . GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.100

The ploughman became a foot soldier , GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.101

the shepherd mounted on horseback , GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.102

the deserted villages and open towns were abandoned to the flames ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.103

and the ravages of the peasants equalled those of the fiercest
barbarians . GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.104

They asserted the natural rights of men , GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.105

but they asserted those rights with the most savage cruelty .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.106

The Gallic nobles justly dreading their revenge , either took refuge in
the fortified cities , GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.107

or fled from the wild scene of anarchy . GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.108

The peasants reigned without control {TEXT:controul} ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.109

and two of their most daring leaders had the folly and rashness to
assume the imperial ornaments . GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.110

Their power soon expired at the approach of the legions .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.111

The strength of union and discipline obtained an easy victory over a
licentious and divided multitude . GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.112

A severe retaliation was inflicted on the peasants who were found in
arms ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.113

the affrighted remnant returned to their respective habitations ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.114

and their unsuccessful effort for freedom served only to confirm their
slavery . GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.115

So strong and uniform is the current of popular passions , that we may
venture , from very scanty materials , to relate the particulars of this
war ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.116

but we are not disposed to believe that the principal leaders Aelianus
and Amandus were Christians , or to insinuate , that the rebellion , as
it happened in the time of Luther , was occasioned by the abuse of those
benevolent principles of Christianity , which inculcate the natural
freedom of mankind . GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.117

Maximian had no sooner recovered Gaul from the hands of the peasants ,
than he lost Britain by the usurpation of Carausius .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,362.118

Ever since the successful rashness of the Franks under the reign of
Probus , their daring countrymen had constructed squadrons of light
brigantines , in which they incessantly ravaged the provinces <P_1,363>
adjacent to the ocean . GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.119

To repel their desultory incursions , it was found necessary to create a
naval power ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.120

and the judicious measure was pursued with prudence and vigour .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.121

Gessoriacum or Boulogne , in the narrow streights of the British channel
, was chosen by the emperor for the station of the Roman fleet ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.122

and the command of it was intrusted to Carausius , a Menapian of the
meanest origin , but who had long signalized his skill as a pilot , and
his valour as a soldier . GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.123

The integrity of the new admiral corresponded not with his abilities .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.124

When the German pirates {TEXT:pyrates} sailed from their own harbours ,
he connived at their passage , GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.125

but he diligently intercepted their return , GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.126

and appropriated to his own use an ample share of the spoil which they
had acquired . GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.127

The wealth of Carausius was , on this occasion , very justly considered
as an evidence of his guilt ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.128

and Maximian had already given orders for his death .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.129

But the crafty Menapian foresaw and prevented the severity of the
emperor . GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.130

By his liberality he had attached to his fortunes the fleet which he
commanded , and secured the barbarians in his interest .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.131

From the port of Boulogne he sailed over to Britain ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.132

persuaded the legion , and the auxiliaries which guarded that island ,
to embrace his party , GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.133

and boldly assuming , with the imperial purple , the title of Augustus ,
defied the justice and the arms of his injured sovereign .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.134

When Britain was thus dismembered from the empire , its importance was
sensibly felt , and its loss sincerely lamented .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.135

The Romans celebrated , and perhaps magnified , the extent of that noble
island , provided on every side with convenient harbours ; the
temperature of the climate , and the fertility of the soil , alike
adapted for the production of corn or of vines ; the valuable minerals
with which it abounded ; its rich pastures covered with innumerable
flocks , and its woods free from wild beasts or venomous serpents .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,363.136

Above all , they regretted the large amount of the revenue of Britain ,
whilst they confessed , that such a province well deserved to <P_1,364>
become the seat of an independent monarchy . GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.137

During the space of seven years , it was possessed by Carausius ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.138

and fortune continued propitious to a rebellion , supported with courage
and ability . GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.139

The British emperor defended the frontiers of his dominions against the
Caledonians of the North , GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.140

invited , from the continent , a great number of skilful artists ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.141

and displayed , on a variety of coins that are still extant , his taste
and opulence . GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.142

Born on the confines of the Franks , he courted the friendship of that
formidable people , by the flattering imitation of their dress and
manners . GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.143

The bravest of their youth he enlisted among his land or sea forces ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.144

and in return for their useful alliance , he communicated to the
barbarians the dangerous knowledge of military and naval arts .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.145

Carausius still preserved the possession of Boulogne and the adjacent
country . GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.146

His fleets rode triumphant in the channel , GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.147

commanded the mouths of the Seine and of the Rhine ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.148

ravaged the coasts of the ocean , GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.149

and diffused beyond the columns of Hercules the terror of his name .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.150

Under his command , Britain , destined in a future age , to obtain the
empire of the sea , already assumed its natural and respectable station
of a maritime power . GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.151

By seizing the fleet of Boulogne , Carausius had deprived his master of
the means of pursuit and revenge . GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.152

And when , after a vast expence of time and labour , a new armament was
launched into the water , the imperial troops , unaccustomed to that
element , were easily baffled and defeated by the veteran sailors of the
usurper . GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.153

This disappointed effort was soon productive of a treaty of peace .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.154

Diocletian and his colleague , who justly dreaded the enterprising
spirit of Carausius , resigned to him the sovereignty of Britain ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.155

and reluctantly admitted their perfidious servant to a participation of
the imperial honours . GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.156

But the adoption of the two Caesars restored new vigour to the Roman
arms ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.157

and while the Rhine was guarded by the presence of Maximian , his brave
associate Constantius , assumed the conduct of the British war .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,364.158

His <P_1,365> first enterprise was against the important place of
Boulogne . GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.159

A stupendous mole , raised across the entrance of the harbour ,
intercepted all hopes of relief . GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.160

The town surrendered after an obstinate defence ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.161

and a considerable part of the naval strength of Carausius fell into the
hands of the besiegers . GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.162

During the three years , which Constantius employed in preparing a fleet
adequate to the conquest of Britain , he secured the coast of Gaul ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.163

invaded the country of the Franks , GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.164

and deprived the usurper of the assistance of those powerful allies .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.165

Before the preparations were finished , Constantius received the
intelligence of the tyrant's death , GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.166

and it was considered as a sure presage of the approaching victory .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.167

The servants of Carausius imitated the example of treason , which he had
given . GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.168

He was murdered by his first minister Allectus , GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.169

and the assassin succeeded to his power and to his danger .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.170

But he possessed not equal abilities either to exercise the one , or to
repel the other . GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.171

He beheld , with anxious terror , the opposite shores of the continent ,
already filled with arms , with troops , and with vessels ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.172

for Constantius had very prudently divided his forces , that he might
likewise divide the attention and resistance of the enemy .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.173

The attack was at length made by the principal squadron , which , under
the command of the praefect Asclepiodotus , an officer of distinguished
merit , had been assembled in the mouth of the Seine .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.174

So imperfect in those times was the art of navigation , that orators
have celebrated the daring courage of the Romans , who ventured to set
sail with a side wind , and on a stormy day . GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.175

The weather proved favourable to their enterprise .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.176

Under the cover of a thick fog , they escaped the fleet of Allectus ,
which had been stationed off the Isle of Wight to receive them ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.177

landed in safety on some part of the western coast ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.178

and convinced the Britons , that a superiority of naval strength will
not always protect their country from a foreign invasion .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,365.179

Asclepiodotus had no sooner disembarked the imperial troops , than he
<P_1,366> set fire to his ships ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.180

and as the expedition proved fortunate , his heroic conduct was
universally admired . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.181

The usurper had posted himself near London , to expect the formidable
attack of Constantius , who commanded in person the fleet of Boulogne ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.182

but the descent of a new enemy required his immediate presence in the
west . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.183

He performed that long march in so precipitate a manner , that he
encountered the whole force of the praefect with a small body of
harassed and disheartened troops . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.184

The engagement was soon terminated by the total defeat and death of
Allectus ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.185

a single battle , as it has often happened , decided the fate of this
great island ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.186

and when Constantius landed on the shores of Kent , he found them
covered with obedient subjects . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.187

Their acclamations were loud and unanimous ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.188

and the virtues {TEXT:virtues,} of the conqueror may induce us to
believe , that they sincerely rejoiced in a revolution , which , after a
separation of ten years , restored Britain to the body of the Roman
empire . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.189

Britain had none but domestic enemies to dread ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.190

and as long as the governors preserved their fidelity , and the troops
their discipline , the incursions of the Scots or Irish could never
materially affect the safety of the province . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.191

The peace of the continent , and the defence of the great rivers which
bounded the empire , were objects of far greater difficulty and
importance . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.192

The policy of Diocletian , which inspired the councils of his associates
, provided for the public tranquillity , by encouraging a spirit of
dissension among the barbarians , and by strengthening the
fortifications of the Roman limit . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.193

In the East he fixed a line of camps from Egypt to the Persian dominions
, GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.194

and , for every camp , he instituted an adequate number of stationary
troops , commanded by their respective officers , and supplied with
every kind of arms , from the new arsenals which he had formed at
Antioch , Emesa , and Damascus . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.195

Nor was the precaution of the emperor less watchful against the
well-known valour of the barbarians of Europe . GIBBON-1776-1,1,366.196

From the mouth <P_1,367> of the Rhine to that of the Danube , the
ancient camps , towns , and citadels , were diligently re-established ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.197

and in the most exposed places , new ones were skilfully constructed ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.198

the strictest vigilance was introduced among the garrisons of the
frontier , GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.199

and every expedient was practised that could render the long chain of
fortifications firm and impenetrable . GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.200

A barrier so respectable was seldom violated , GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.201

and the barbarians often turned against each other their disappointed
rage . GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.202

The Goths , the Vandals , the Gepidae , the Burgundians , the Alemanni ,
wasted each other's strength by destructive hostilities ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.203

and whosoever vanquished , they vanquished the enemies of Rome .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.204

The subjects of Diocletian enjoyed the bloody spectacle ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.205

and congratulated each other , that the mischiefs of civil war were now
experienced only by the barbarians . GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.206

Notwithstanding the policy of Diocletian , it was impossible to maintain
an equal and undisturbed tranquillity during a reign of twenty years ,
and along a frontier of many hundred miles . GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.207

Sometimes the barbarians suspended their domestic animosities ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.208

and the vigilance of the garrisons sometimes gave a passage to their
strength or dexterity . GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.209

Whenever the provinces were invaded , Diocletian conducted himself with
that calm dignity which he always affected or possessed ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.210

reserved his presence for such occasions as were worthy of his
interposition , GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.211

never exposed his person or reputation to any unnecessary danger ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.212

ensured his success by every means that prudence could suggest ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.213

and displayed , with ostentation , the consequences of his victory .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.214

In wars of a more difficult nature , and more doubtful event , he
employed the rough valour of Maximian , GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.215

and that faithful soldier was content to ascribe his own victories to
the wise counsels and auspicious influence of his benefactor .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.216

But after the adoption of the two Caesars , the emperors themselves ,
retiring to a less laborious scene of action , devolved on their adopted
sons the defence of the Danube and of the Rhine .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,367.217

The vigilant Galerius was never reduced to the necessity of vanquishing
an army <P_1,368> of barbarians on the Roman territory .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.218

The brave and active Constantius delivered Gaul from a very furious
inroad of the Alemanni ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.219

and his victories of Langres and Vindonissa appear to have been actions
of considerable danger and merit . GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.220

As he traversed the open country with a feeble guard , he was
encompassed on a sudden by the superior multitude of the enemy .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.221

He retreated with difficulty towards Langres ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.222

but , in the general consternation , the citizens refused to open their
gates , GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.223

and the wounded prince was drawn up the wall by the means of a rope .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.224

But on the news of his distress , the Roman troops hastened from all
sides to his relief , GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.225

and before the evening he had satisfied his honour and revenge by the
slaughter of six_thousand Alemanni . GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.226

From the monuments of those times , the memory of several other
victories over the barbarians of Sarmatia and Germany might possibly be
collected ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.227

but the tedious search would not be rewarded either with amusement or
with instruction . GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.228

The conduct which the emperor Probus had adopted in the disposal of the
vanquished , was imitated by Diocletian and his associates .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.229

The captive barbarians , exchanging death for slavery , were distributed
among the provincials , and assigned to those districts <paren> in Gaul
, the territories of Amiens , Beauvais , Cambray , Treves , Langres ,
and Troyes , are particularly specified <$$paren> which had been
depopulated by the calamities of war . GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.230

They were usefully employed as shepherds and husbandmen ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.231

but were denied the exercise of arms , except when it was found
expedient to enrol them in the military service .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.232

Nor did the emperors refuse the property of lands , with a less servile
tenure , to such of the barbarians as solicited the protection of Rome .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.233

They granted a settlement to several colonies of the Carpi , the
Bastarnae , and the Sarmatians ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.234

and , by a dangerous indulgence , permitted them in some measure to
retain their national manners and independence .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,368.235

Among the provincials , it was a subject of flattering exultation , that
the barbarian , <P_1,369> so lately an object of terror , now cultivated
their lands , drove their cattle to the neighbouring fair , and
contributed by his labour to the public plenty .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.236

They congratulated their masters on the powerful accession of subjects
and soldiers ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.237

but they forgot to observe , that multitudes of secret enemies ,
insolent from favour , or desperate from oppression , were introduced
into the heart of the empire . GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.238

While the Caesars exercised their valour on the bank of the Rhine and
Danube , the presence of the emperors was required on the southern
confines of the Roman world . GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.239

From the Nile to Mount Atlas , Africa was in arms .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.240

A confederacy of five Moorish nations issued from their deserts to
invade the peaceful provinces . GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.241

Julian had assumed the purple at Carthage . Achilleus at Alexandria ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.242

and even the Blemmyes , renewed or rather continued their incursions
into the Upper Egypt . GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.243

Scarcely any circumstances have been preserved of the exploits of
Maximian in the western parts of Africa ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.244

but it appears by the event , that the progress of his arms was rapid
and decisive , that he vanquished the fiercest barbarians of Mauritania
, and that he removed them from the mountains , whose inaccessible
strength had inspired their inhabitants with a lawless confidence , and
habituated them to a life of rapine and violence .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.245

Diocletian , on his side , opened the campaign in Egypt by the siege of
Alexandria , GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.246

cut off the aqueducts which conveyed the waters of the Nile into every
quarter of that immense city , GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.247

and rendering his camp impregnable to the sallies of the besieged
multitude , he pushed his reiterated attacks with caution and vigour .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.248

After a siege of eight months , Alexandria , wasted by the sword and by
fire , implored the clemency of the conqueror ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.249

but it experienced the full extent of his severity .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.250

Many thousands of the citizens perished in a promiscuous slaughter ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.251

and there were few obnoxious persons in Egypt who escaped a sentence
either of death or at least of exile . GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.252

The fate of Busiris and of Coptos was still more melancholy than that of
Alexandria ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,369.253

those proud cities , the <P_1,370> former distinguished by its antiquity
, the latter enriched by the passage of the Indian trade , were utterly
destroyed by the arms and by the severe order of Diocletian .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.254

The character of the Egyptian nation , insensible to kindness , but
extremely susceptible of fear , could alone justify this excessive
rigour . GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.255

The seditions of Alexandria had often affected the tranquillity and
subsistence of Rome itself . GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.256

Since the usurpation of Firmus , the province of Upper Egypt ,
incessantly relapsing into rebellion , had embraced the alliance of the
savages of Ethiopia . GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.257

The numbers of the Blemmyes , scattered between the island of Meroe and
the Red Sea , was very inconsiderable , GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.258

their disposition was unwarlike , their weapons rude and inoffensive .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.259

Yet in the public disorders these barbarians , whom antiquity , shocked
with the deformity of their figure , had almost excluded from the human
species , presumed to rank themselves among the enemies of Rome .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.260

Such had been the unworthy allies of the Egyptians ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.261

and while the attention of the state was engaged in more serious wars ,
their vexatious inroads might again harass the repose of the province .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.262

With a view of opposing to the Blemmyes a suitable adversary ,
Diocletian persuaded the Nobatae , or people of Nubia , to remove from
their ancient habitations in the deserts of Lybia ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.263

and resigned to them an extensive but unprofitable territory above Syene
and the cataracts of the Nile , with the stipulation , that they should
ever respect and guard the frontier of the empire .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.264

The treaty long subsisted ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.265

and till the establishment of Christianity introduced stricter notions
of religious worship , it was annually ratified by a solemn sacrifice in
the isle of Elephantine , in which the Romans , as well as the
barbarians , adored the same visible or invisible powers of the universe
. GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.266

At the same time that Diocletian chastised the past crimes of the
Egyptians , he provided for their future safety and happiness by many
wise regulations which were confirmed and enforced under the succeeding
reigns . GIBBON-1776-1,1,370.267

One very remarkable edict , which he published , <P_1,371> instead of
being condemned as the effect of jealous tyranny , deserves to be
applauded as an act of prudence and humanity . GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.268

He caused a diligent inquiry to be made " for all the ancient books
which treated of the admirable art of making gold and silver ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.269

and without pity committed them to the flames ; apprehensive , as we are
assured , lest the opulence of the Egyptians should inspire them with
confidence to rebel against the empire . " GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.270

But if Diocletian had been convinced of the reality of that valuable art
, far from extinguishing the memory , he would have converted the
operation of it to the benefit of the public revenue .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.271

It is much more likely that his good sense discovered to him the folly
of such magnificent pretensions , and that he was desirous of preserving
the reason and fortunes of his subjects from the mischievous pursuit .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.272

It may be remarked , that these ancient books , so liberally ascribed to
Pythagoras , to Solomon , or to Hermes , were the pious frauds of more
recent adepts . GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.273

The Greeks were inattentive either to the use or to the abuse of
chemistry {TEXT:chymistry} . GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.274

In that immense register , where Pliny has deposited the discoveries ,
the arts , and the errors of mankind , there is not the least mention of
the transmutation of metals ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.275

and the persecution of Diocletian is the first authentic event in the
history of alchymy . GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.276

The conquest of Egypt by the Arabs diffused that vain science over the
globe . GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.277

Congenial to the avarice of the human heart , it was studied in China as
in Europe , with equal eagerness , and with equal success .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.278

The darkness of the middle ages ensured a favourable reception to every
tale of wonder , GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.279

and the revival of learning gave new vigour to hope ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.280

and suggested more specious arts of deception . GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.281

Philosophy , with the aid of experience , has at length banished the
study of alchymy ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.282

and the present age , however desirous of riches , is content to seek
them by the humbler means of commerce and industry .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.283

The reduction of Egypt was immediately followed by the Persian war .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,371.284

It was reserved for the reign of Diocletian to vanquish that <P_1,372>
powerful nation , and to force a confession from the successors of
Artaxerxes , of the superior majesty of the Roman empire .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.285

We have observed , under the reign of Valerian , that Armenia was
subdued by the perfidy and the arms of the Persians , and that after the
assassination of Chosroes , his son Tiridates , the infant heir of the
monarchy , was saved by the fidelity of his friends , and educated under
the protection of the emperors . GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.286

Tiridates derived from his exile such advantages as he could never have
obtained on the throne of Armenia ; the early knowledge of adversity ,
of mankind , and of the Roman discipline . GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.287

He signalized his youth by deeds of valour , GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.288

and displayed a matchless dexterity , as well as strength , in every
martial exercise , and even in the less honourable contests of the
Olympian_games . GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.289

Those qualities were more nobly exerted in the defence of his benefactor
Licinius . GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.290

That officer , in the sedition which occasioned the death of Probus ,
was exposed to the most imminent danger , GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.291

and the enraged soldiers were forcing their way into his tent , when
they were checked by the single arm of the Armenian prince .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.292

The gratitude of Tiridates contributed soon afterwards to his
restoration . GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.293

Licinius was in every station the friend and companion of Galerius ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.294

and the merit of Galerius , long before he was raised to the dignity of
Caesar , had been known and esteemed by Diocletian .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.295

In the third year of that emperor's reign , Tiridates was invested with
the kingdom of Armenia . GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.296

The justice of the measure was not less evident than its expediency .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.297

It was time to rescue from the usurpation of the Persian monarch an
important territory , which , since the reign of Nero , had been always
granted under the protection of the empire to a younger branch of the
house of Arfaces . GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.298

When Tiridates appeared on the frontiers of Armenia , he was received
with an unfeigned transport of joy and loyalty .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.299

During twenty-six years , the country had experienced the real and
imaginary hardships of a foreign yoke . GIBBON-1776-1,1,372.300

The Persian monarchs had <P_1,373> adorned their new conquest with
magnificent buildings ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.301

but those monuments were raised at the expence of the people , and
abhorred as badges of slavery . GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.302

The apprehension of a revolt had inspired the most rigorous precautions
: GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.303

oppression had been aggravated by insult , GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.304

and the consciousness of the public hatred had been productive of every
measure that could render it still more implacable .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.305

We have already remarked the intolerant spirit of the Magian religion .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.306

The statues of the deified kings of Armenia , and the sacred images of
the sun and moon , were broke in pieces by the zeal of the conqueror ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.307

and the perpetual fire of Ormuzd was kindled and preserved upon an altar
erected on the summit of mount Bagavan . GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.308

It was natural , that a people exasperated by so many injuries , should
arm with zeal in the cause of their independence , their religion , and
their hereditary sovereign . GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.309

The torrent bore down every obstacle , GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.310

and the Persian garrison retreated before its fury .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.311

The nobles of Armenia flew to the standard of Tiridates , all alleging
their past merit , offering their future service , and soliciting from
the new king those honours and rewards from which they had been excluded
with disdain under the foreign government . GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.312

The command of the army was bestowed on Artavasdes , whose father had
saved the infancy of Tiridates , and whose family had been massacred for
that generous action . GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.313

The brother of Artavasdes obtained the government of a province .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.314

One of the first military dignities was conferred on the Satrap Otas , a
man of singular temperance and fortitude , who presented to the king his
sister and a considerable treasure , both of which , in a sequestered
fortress , Otas had preserved from violation . GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.315

Among the Armenian nobles appeared an ally , whose fortunes are too
remarkable to pass unnoticed . GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.316

His name was Mamgo , GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.317

his origin was Scythian , GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.318

and the horde which acknowledged his authority , had encamped a very few
years before on the skirts of the Chinese empire , which at that time
extended as far as the neighbourhood of Sogdiana .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,373.319

Having incurred the displeasure of his master , <P_1,374> Mamgo , with
his followers , retired to the banks of the Oxus ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.320

and implored the protection of Sapor . GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.321

The emperor of China claimed the fugitive , GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.322

and alleged the rights of sovereignty . GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.323

The Persian monarch pleaded the laws of hospitality ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.324

and with some difficulty avoided a war , by the promise that he would
banish Mamgo to the uttermost parts of the West ; a punishment , as he
described it , not less dreadful than death itself .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.325

Armenia was chosen for the place of exile , GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.326

and a large district was assigned to the Scythian horde , on which they
might feed their flocks and herds , and remove their encampment from one
place to another , according to the different seasons of the year .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.327

They were employed to repel the invasion of Tiridates ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.328

but their leader , after weighing the obligations and injuries which he
had received from the Persian monarch , resolved to abandon his party .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.329

The Armenian prince , who was well acquainted with the merit as well as
power of Mamgo , treated him with distinguished respect ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.330

and by admitting him into his confidence , acquired a brave and faithful
servant , who contributed very effectually to his restoration .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.331

For a while , fortune appeared to favour the enterprising valour of
Tiridates . GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.332

He not only expelled the enemies of his family and country from the
whole extent of Armenia , GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.333

but in the prosecution of his revenge he carried his arms , or at least
his incursions , into the heart of Assyria . GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.334

The historian , who has preserved the name of Tiridates from oblivion ,
celebrates , with a degree of national enthusiasm , his personal prowess
; GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.335

and , in the true spirit of eastern romance , describes the giants and
the elephants that fell beneath his invincible arm .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.336

It is from other information that we discover the distracted state of
the Persian monarchy , to which the king of Armenia was indebted for
some part of his advantages . GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.337

The throne was disputed by the ambition of contending brothers ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,374.338

and Hormuz , after exerting without success the strength of his own
party , had recourse to the dangerous assistance of the barbarians who
inhabited the banks of the Caspian <P_1,375> Sea .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.339

The civil war was , however , soon terminated , either by a victory or
by a reconciliation ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.340

and Narses , who was universally acknowledged a king of Persia ,
directed his whole force against the foreign enemy .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.341

The contest then became too unequal ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.342

nor was the valour of the hero able to withstand the power of the
monarch . GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.343

Tiridates , a second time expelled from the throne of Armenia , once
more took refuge in the court of the emperors . GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.344

Narses soon re-established his authority in the revolted province ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.345

and loudly complaining of the protection afforded by the Romans to
rebels and fugitives , aspired to the conquest of the East .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.346

Neither prudence nor honour could permit the emperors to desert the
cause of the Armenian king , GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.347

and it was resolved to exert the force of the empire in the Persian war
. GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.348

Diocletian , with the calm dignity which he uniformly affected , fixed
his own station in the city of Antioch , from whence he prepared and
directed the military operations . GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.349

The conduct of the legions was intrusted to the intrepid valour of
Galerius , who , for that important purpose , was removed from the banks
of the Danube to those of the Euphrates . GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.350

The armies soon encountered each other in the plains of Mesopotamia ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.351

and two battles were fought with various and doubtful success :
GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.352

but the third engagement was of a more decisive nature ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.353

and the Roman army received a total overthrow , which is attributed to
the rashness of Galerius , who , with an inconsiderable body of troops ,
attacked the innumerable host of the Persians . GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.354

But the consideration of the country that was the scene of action , may
suggest another reason for his defeat . GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.355

The same ground on which Galerius was vanquished , had been rendered
memorable by the death of Crassus , and the slaughter of ten legions .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.356

It was a plain of more than sixty miles , which extended from the hills
of Carrae to the Euphrates ; a smooth and barren surface of sandy desert
, without a hillock , without a tree , and without a spring of fresh
water . GIBBON-1776-1,1,375.357

The steady infantry of the Romans , fainting with heat and thirst ,
could <P_1,376> neither hope for victory if they preserved their ranks ,
nor break their ranks without exposing themselves to the most imminent
danger . GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.358

In this situation they were gradually encompassed by the superior
numbers , harassed by the rapid evolutions , and destroyed by the arrows
of the barbarian cavalry . GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.359

The king of Armenia had signalized his valour in the battle ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.360

and acquired personal glory by the public misfortune .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.361

He was pursued as far as the Euphrates ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.362

his horse was wounded , GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.363

and it appeared impossible for him to escape the victorious enemy .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.364

In this extremity Tiridates embraced the only refuge which he saw before
him : GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.365

he dismounted GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.366

and plunged into the stream . GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.367

His armour was heavy , the river very deep , and in those parts at least
half a mile in breadth ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.368

yet such was his strength and dexterity , that he reached in safety the
opposite bank . GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.369

With regard to the Roman general , we are ignorant of the circumstances
of his escape ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.370

but when he returned to Antioch , Diocletian received him , not with the
tenderness of a friend and colleague , but with the indignation of an
offended sovereign . GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.371

The haughtiest of men , clothed in his purple , but humbled by the sense
of his fault and misfortune , was obliged to follow the emperor's
chariot above a mile on foot , and to exhibit , before the whole court ,
the spectacle of his disgrace . GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.372

As soon as Diocletian had indulged his private resentment , and asserted
the majesty of supreme power , he yielded to the submissive entreaties
of the Caesar , GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.373

and permitted him to retrieve his own honour as well as that of the
Roman arms . GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.374

In the room of the unwarlike troops of Asia , which had most probably
served in the first expedition , a second army was drawn from the
veterans and new levies of the Illyrian frontier ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.375

and a considerable body of Gothic auxiliaries were taken into the
imperial pay . GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.376

At the head of a chosen army of twenty-five_thousand men , Galerius
again passed the Euphrates ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,376.377

but , instead of exposing his legions in the open plains of Mesopotamia
, he advanced through the mountains of Armenia , where he found the
inhabitants devoted to his cause , and the country <P_1,377> as
favourable to the operations of infantry , as it was inconvenient for
the motions of cavalry . GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.378

Adversity had confirmed the Roman discipline , whilst the barbarians ,
elated by success , were become so negligent and remiss , that in the
moment when they least expected it , they were surprised by the active
conduct of Galerius , who , attended only by two horsemen , had with his
own eyes secretly examined the state and position of their camp .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.379

A surprise , especially in the night-time , was for the most part fatal
to a Persian army . GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.380

" Their horses were tied , and generally shackled , to prevent their
running away ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.381

and if an alarm happened , a Persian had his housing to fix , his horse
to bridle , and his corslet to put on , before he could mount . "
GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.382

On the occasion , the impetuous attack of Galerius spread disorder and
dismay over the camp of the barbarians . GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.383

A slight resistance was followed by a dreadful carnage ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.384

and in the general confusion , the wounded monarch <paren> for Narses
commanded his armies in person <$$paren> fled towards the deserts of
Media . GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.385

His sumptuous tents , and those of his Satraps , afforded an immense
booty to the conqueror ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.386

and an incident is mentioned , which proves the rustic but martial
ignorance of the legions in the elegant superfluities of life .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.387

A bag of shining leather filled with pearls , fell into the hands of a
private soldier ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.388

he carefully preserved the bag , GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.389

but he threw away its contents , judging , that whatever was of no use
could not possibly be of any value . GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.390

The principal loss of Narses was of a much more affecting nature .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.391

Several of his wives , his sisters , and children , who had attended the
army , were made captives in the defeat . GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.392

But though the character of Galerius had in general very little affinity
with that of Alexander , he imitated , after his victory , the amiable
behaviour of the Macedonian towards the family of Darius .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,377.393

The wives and children of Narses were protected from violence and rapine
, conveyed to a place of safety , and treated with every mark of respect
and <P_1,378> tenderness , that was due from a generous enemy , to their
age , their sex , and their royal dignity . GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.394

While the East anxiously expected the decision of this great contest ,
the emperor Diocletian , having assembled in Syria a strong army of
observation , displayed from a distance the resources of the Roman power
, GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.395

and reserved himself for any future emergency of the war .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.396

On the intelligence of the victory , he condescended to advance towards
the frontier ; with a view of moderating , by his presence and counsels
, the pride of Galerius . GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.397

The interview of the Roman princes at Nisibis , was accompanied with
every expression of respect on one side , and of esteem on the other .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.398

It was in that city that they soon afterwards gave audience to the
ambassador of the great king . GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.399

The power , or at least the spirit , of Narses , had been broken by his
last defeat ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.400

and he considered an immediate peace , as the only means that could stop
the progress of the Roman arms . GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.401

He dispatched Apharban , a servant who possessed his favour and
confidence , with a commission to negociate a treaty , or rather to
receive whatever conditions the conqueror should impose .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.402

Apharban opened the conference by expressing his master's gratitude for
the generous treatment of his family , and by soliciting the liberty of
those illustrious captives . GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.403

He celebrated the valour of Galerius without degrading the reputation of
Narses , GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.404

and thought it no dishonour to confess the superiority of the victorious
Caesar , over a monarch who had surpassed in glory all the princes of
his race . GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.405

Notwithstanding the justice of the Persian cause , he was empowered to
submit the present differences to the decision of the emperors
themselves ; convinced as he was , that , in the midst of prosperity ,
they would not be unmindful of the vicissitudes of fortune .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,378.406

Apharban concluded his discourse in the style of eastern allegory , by
observing that the Roman and Persian monarchies were the two eyes of the
<P_1,379> world , which would remain imperfect and mutilated if either
of them should be put out . GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.407

" It well becomes the Persians , " replied Galerius , with a transport
of fury , which seemed to convulse his whole frame , " it well becomes
the Persians to expatiate on the vicissitudes of fortune , and calmly to
read us lectures on the virtues of moderation . GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.408

Let them remember their own <font> moderation <$$font> towards the
unhappy Valerian . GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.409

They vanquished him by fraud , GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.410

they treated him with indignity . GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.411

They detained him till the last moment of his life in shameful captivity
, GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.412

and after his death they exposed his body to perpetual ignominy . "
GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.413

Softening , however , his tone , Galerius insinuated to the ambassador ,
that it had never been the practice of the Romans to trample on a
prostrate enemy ; and that , on this occasion , they should consult
their own dignity , rather than the Persian merit .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.414

He dismissed Apharban with a hope , that Narses would soon be informed
on what conditions he might obtain , from the clemency of the emperors ,
a lasting peace , and the restoration of his wives and children .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.415

In this conference we may discover the fierce passions of Galerius , as
well as his deference to the superior wisdom and authority of Diocletian
. GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.416

The ambition of the former grasped at the conquest of the East ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.417

and had proposed to reduce Persia into the state of a province .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.418

The prudence of the latter , who adhered to the moderate policy of
Augustus and the Antonines , embraced the favourable opportunity of
terminating a successful war by an honourable and advantageous peace .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.419

In pursuance of their promise , the emperors soon afterwards appointed
Sicorius Probus , one of their secretaries , to acquaint the Persian
court with their final resolution . GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.420

As the minister of peace , he was received with every mark of politeness
and friendship ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.421

but , under the pretence of allowing him the necessary repose after so
long a journey , the audience of Probus was deferred from day to day ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,379.422

and he attended the slow motions of the king , till at length he was
admitted to his presence , near the river Asprudus , <P_1,380> in Media
. GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.423

The secret motive of Narses in this delay , had been to collect such a
military force , as might enable him , though sincerely desirous of
peace , to negociate with the greater weight and dignity .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.424

Three persons only assisted at this important conference , the minister
Apharban , the praefect of the guards , and an officer who had commanded
on the Armenian frontier . GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.425

The first condition proposed by the ambassador , is not at present of a
very intelligible nature ; that the city of Nisibis might be established
for the place of mutual exchange , or , as we should formerly have
termed it , for the staple of trade between the two empires .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.426

There is no difficulty in conceiving the intention of the Roman princes
, to improve their revenue by some restraints upon commerce ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.427

but as Nisibis was situated within their own dominions , and as they
were masters both of the imports and exports , it should seem , that
such restraints were the objects of an internal law rather than of a
foreign treaty . GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.428

To render them more effectual , some stipulations were probably required
on the side of the king of Persia , which appeared so very repugnant
either to his interest or to his dignity , that Narses could not be
persuaded to subscribe them . GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.429

As this was the only article to which he refused his consent , it was no
longer insisted on ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.430

and the emperors either suffered the trade to flow in its natural
channels , GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.431

or contented themselves with such restrictions , as it depended on their
own authority to establish . GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.432

As soon as this difficulty was removed , a solemn peace was concluded
and ratified between the two nations . GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.433

The conditions of a treaty so glorious to the empire , and so necessary
to Persia , may deserve a more peculiar attention , as the history of
Rome presents very few transactions of a similar nature ; most of her
wars , having either been terminated by absolute conquest , or waged
against barbarians ignorant of the use of letters .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.434

I. The Aboras , or as it is called by Xenophon , the Araxes , was fixed
as the boundary between the two monarchies . GIBBON-1776-1,1,380.435

That river which rises near the Tigris , was increased a few miles below
Nisibis , by the little stream <P_1,381> of the Mygdonius ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.436

passed under the walls of Singara , GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.437

and fell into the Euphrates at Circesium , a frontier town , which , by
the care of Diocletian , was very strongly fortified .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.438

Mesopotamia , the object of so many wars , was ceded to the empire ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.439

and the Persians , by this treaty renounced all pretensions to that
great province . GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.440

II. They relinquished to the Romans five provinces beyond the Tigris .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.441

Their situation formed a very useful barrier , GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.442

and their natural strength was soon improved by art and military skill .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.443

Four of these , to the north of the river , were districts of obscure
fame and inconsiderable extent ; Intiline , Zabdicene , Arzanene , and
Moxoene : GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.444

but on the east of the Tigris , the empire acquired the large and
mountainous territory of Carduene , the ancient seat of the Carduchians
, who preserved for many ages their manly freedom in the heart of the
despotic monarchies of Asia . GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.445

The ten_thousand Greeks traversed their country , after a painful march
, or rather engagement , of seven days ; GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.446

and it is confessed by their leader , in his incomparable relation of
the retreat , that they suffered more from the arrows of the Carduchians
, than from the power of the great king . GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.447

Their posterity , the Curds , with very little alteration either of name
or manners , acknowledge the nominal sovereignty of the Turkish sultan .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.448

III. It is almost needless to observe , that Tiridates , the faithful
ally of Rome , was restored to the throne of his fathers , and that the
rights {TEXT:right} of the imperial supremacy were fully asserted and
secured . GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.449

The limits of Armenia were extended as far as the fortress of Sintha in
Media , GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.450

and this increase of dominion was not so much an act of liberality as of
justice . GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.451

Of the provinces already mentioned beyond the Tigris , the four first
had been dismembered by the Parthians , from the crown of Armenia ;
GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.452

and when the Romans acquired the possession of them , they stipulated ,
at the expence of the usurpers , an ample compensation , which invested
their ally with the extensive and fertile country of Atropatene .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,381.453

Its principal city , in the same situation perhaps as the modern Tauris
<P_1,382> was frequently honoured with the residence of Tiridates ,
GIBBON-1776-1,1,382.454

and as it sometimes bore the name of Ecbatana , he imitated , in the
buildings and fortifications , the splendid capital of the Medes .
GIBBON-1776-1,1,382.455

