<BEGIN_gibbon-1789-2>

<P_1,21>

I was born at Putney , in the county of Surrey {TEXT:Surry} , the 27th
of April , O. S. in the year
one_thousand_seven_hundred_and_thirty-seven ; the first child of the
marriage of Edward Gibbon , esq. and of Judith Porten .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.3

My lot might have been that of a slave , a savage , or a peasant ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.4

nor can I reflect without pleasure on the bounty of Nature , which cast
my birth in a free and civilized country , in an age of science and
philosophy , in a family of honourable rank , and decently endowed with
the gifts of fortune . GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.5

From my birth I have enjoyed the right of primogeniture ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.6

but I was succeeded by five brothers and one sister , all of whom were
snatched away in their infancy . GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.7

My five brothers , whose names may be found in the parish register of
Putney , I shall not pretend to lament : GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.8

but from my childhood to the present hour I have deeply and sincerely
regretted my sister , whose life was somewhat prolonged , and whom I
remember to have been an amiable infant . GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.9

The relation of a brother and a sister , especially if they do not marry
, appears to me of a very singular nature . GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.10

It is a familiar and tender friendship with a female , much about our
own age ; an affection perhaps softened by the secret influence of sex ,
but pure from any mixture of sensual desire , the sole species of
Platonic love that can be indulged with truth , and without danger .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.11

At the general election of 1741 , Mr. Gibbon and Mr. Delm√© stood an
expensive and successful contest at Southampton , against Mr. Dummer
and Mr. Henly , afterwards Lord Chancellor and Earl of Northington .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,21.12

<P_1,22>

The Whig candidates had a majority of the resident voters ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.14

but the corporation was firm in the Tory interest :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.15

a sudden creation of one_hundred_and_seventy new freemen turned the
scale ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.16

and a supply was readily obtained of respectable volunteers , who
flocked from all parts of England to support the cause of their
political friends . GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.17

The new parliament opened with the victory of an opposition , which was
fortified by strong clamour and strange coalitions .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.18

From the event of the first divisions , Sir Robert Walpole perceived
that he could no longer lead a majority in the House of Commons ,
GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.19

and prudently resigned <paren> after a dominion of one-and-twenty years
<$$paren> the guidance of the state <paren> 1742 <$$paren> .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.20

But the fall of an unpopular minister was not succeeded , according to
general expectation , by a millennium of happiness and virtue :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.21

some courtiers lost their places , GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.22

some patriots lost their characters , GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.23

Lord Orford's offences vanished with his power ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.24

and after a short vibration , the Pelham government was fixed on the old
basis of the Whig aristocracy . GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.25

In the year 1745 , the throne and the constitution were attacked by a
rebellion , which does not reflect much honour on the national spirit ;
since the English friends of the Pretender wanted courage to join his
standard , and his enemies <paren> the bulk of the people <$$paren>
allowed him to advance into the heart of the kingdom .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.26

Without daring , perhaps without desiring , to aid the rebels , my
father invariably adhered to the Tory opposition .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.27

In the most critical season he accepted , for the service of the party ,
the office of alderman in the city of London : GIBBON-1789-2,1,22.28

but the duties were so repugnant to his inclination and habits ,
<P_1,23> that he resigned his gown at the end of a few months .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.29

The second parliament in which he sat was prematurely dissolved <paren>
1747 <$$paren> : GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.30

and as he was unable or unwilling to maintain a second contest for
Southampton , the life of the senator expired in that dissolution .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.31

The death of a new_born child before that of its parents may seem an
unnatural , GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.32

but it is strictly a probable , event : since of any given number the
greater part are extinguished before their ninth year , before they
possess the faculties of the mind or body . GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.33

Without accusing the profuse waste or imperfect workmanship of Nature ,
I shall only observe , that this unfavourable chance was multiplied
against my infant existence . GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.34

So feeble was my constitution , so precarious my life , that , in the
baptism of each of my brothers , my father's prudence successively
repeated my Christian name of Edward , that , in case of the departure
of the eldest son , this patronymick appellation might be still
perpetuated in the family . GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.35

<font> - Uno avulso non deficit alter . <$$font> GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.36

To preserve and to rear so frail a being , the most tender assiduity was
scarcely sufficient , GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.37

and my mother's attention was somewhat diverted by her frequent
pregnancies , by an exclusive passion for her husband , and by the
dissipation of the world , in which his taste and authority obliged her
to mingle . GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.38

But the maternal office was supplied by my aunt , Mrs. Catherine Porten
; at whose name I feel a tear of gratitude trickling down my cheek .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.39

A life of celibacy transferred her vacant affection to her sister's
first child ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.40

my weakness excited her pity ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,23.41

her attachment <P_1,24> was fortified by labour and success :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.42

and if there be any , as I trust there are some , who rejoice that I
live , to that dear and excellent woman they must hold themselves
indebted . GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.43

Many anxious and solitary days did she consume in the patient trial of
every mode of relief and amusement . GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.44

Many wakeful nights did she sit by my bed-side in trembling expectation
that each hour would be my last . GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.45

Of the various and frequent disorders of my childhood my own
recollection is dark ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.46

Nor do I wish to expatiate on so disgusting a topic .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.47

Suffice it to say , that while every practitioner , from Sloane and Ward
to the Chevalier Taylor , was successively summoned to torture or
relieve me , the care of my mind was too frequently neglected for that
of my health : GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.48

compassion always suggested an excuse for the indulgence of the master ,
or the idleness of the pupil ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.49

and the chain of my education was broken , as often as I was recalled
from the school of learning to the bed of sickness .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.50

As soon as the use of speech had prepared my infant reason for the
admission of knowledge , I was taught the arts of reading , writing ,
and arithmetic . GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.51

So remote is the date , so vague is the memory of their origin in myself
, that , were not the error corrected by analogy , I should be tempted
to conceive them as innate . GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.52

In my childhood I was praised for the readiness , with which I could
multiply and divide , by memory alone , two sums of several figures :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.53

such praise encouraged my growing talent ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.54

and had I persevered in this line of application , I might have acquired
some fame in mathematical studies . GIBBON-1789-2,1,24.55

After this previous institution at home , or at a day school <P_1,25> at
Putney , I was delivered at the age of seven into the hands of Mr. John
Kirkby , who exercised about eighteen months the office of my domestic
tutor . GIBBON-1789-2,1,25.56

His own words , which I shall here transcribe , inspire in his favor a
sentiment of pity and esteem . GIBBON-1789-2,1,25.57

" During my abode in my native county of Cumberland , in quality of an
indigent curate , I used now-and-then in a Summer , when the
pleasantness of the season invited , to take a solitary walk to the
sea-shore , which lies about two miles from the town where I lived .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,25.58

Here I would amuse myself , one while in viewing at large the agreeable
prospect which surrounded me , and another while <paren> confining my
sight to nearer objects <$$paren> in admiring the vast variety of
beautiful shells , thrown upon the beach ; some of the choicest of which
I always picked up , to divert my little ones upon my return .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,25.59

One time among the rest , taking such a journey in my head , I sat down
upon the declivity of the beach with my face to the sea , which was now
come up within a few yards of my feet ; when immediately the sad
thoughts of the wretched condition of my family , and the
unsuccessfulness of all endeavours to amend it , came crowding into my
mind , which drove me into a deep melancholy , and ever and anon forced
tears from my eyes . " GIBBON-1789-2,1,25.60

Distress at last forced him to leave the country .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,25.61

His learning and virtue introduced him to my father ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,25.62

and at Putney he might have found at least a temporary shelter , had not
an act of indiscretion driven him into the world .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,25.63

One day reading prayers in the parish church , he most unluckily forgot
the name of <P_1,26> King George : GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.64

his patron , a loyal subject , dismissed him with some reluctance , and
a decent reward ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.65

and <font> how <$$font> the poor man ended his days I have never been
able to learn . GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.66

Mr. John Kirkby is the author of two small volumes ; the Life of
Automathes <paren> London , 1745 <$$paren> , and an English and Latin
grammar <paren> London , 1746 <$$paren> ; which , as a testimony of
gratitude , he dedicated <paren> November 5th , 1745 <$$paren> to my
father . GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.67

The books are before me : GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.68

from them the pupil may judge the preceptor ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.69

and , upon the whole , his judgment will not be unfavourable .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.70

The grammar is executed with accuracy and skill , GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.71

and I know not whether any better existed at the time in our language :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.72

but the life of Automathes aspires to the honours of a philosophical
fiction . GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.73

It is the story of a youth , the son of a shipwrecked exile , who lives
alone on a desert island from infancy to the age of manhood .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.74

A hind is his nurse ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.75

he inherits a cottage , with many useful and curious instruments ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.76

some ideas remain of the education of his two first years ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.77

some arts are borrowed from the beavers of a neighbouring lake ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.78

some truths are revealed in supernatural visions .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.79

With these helps , and his own industry , Automathes becomes a
self-taught though speechless philosopher , who had investigated with
success his own mind , the natural world , the abstract sciences , and
the great principles of morality and religion . GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.80

The author is not entitled to the merit of invention , since he has
blended the English story of Robinson Crusoe with the Arabian romance of
Hai Ebn Yokhdan , which he might have read in the Latin version of
Pocock . GIBBON-1789-2,1,26.81

In the Automathes I can@ @not praise either the <P_1,27> depth of
thought or elegance of style ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.82

but the book is not devoid of entertainment or instruction ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.83

and among several interesting passages , I would select the discovery of
fire , which produces by accidental mischief the discovery of conscience
. GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.84

A man who had thought so much on the subjects of language and education
was surely no ordinary preceptor : GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.85

my childish years , and his hasty departure , prevented me from enjoying
the full benefit of his lessons ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.86

but they enlarged my knowledge of arithmetic , GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.87

and left me a clear impression of the English and Latin rudiments .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.88

In my ninth year <paren> January , 1746 <$$paren> , in a lucid interval
of comparative health , my father adopted the convenient and customary
mode of English education ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.89

and I was sent to Kingston upon Thames , to a school of about seventy
boys , which was kept by Dr. Wooddeson and his assistants .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.90

Every time I have since passed over Putney Common , I have always
noticed the spot where my mother , as we drove along in the coach ,
admonished me that I was now going into the world , and must learn to
think and act for myself . GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.91

The expression may appear ludicrous ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.92

yet there is not , in the course of life , a more remarkable change than
the removal of a child from the luxury and freedom of a wealthy house ,
to the frugal diet and strict subordination of a school ; from the
tenderness of parents , and the obsequiousness of servants , to the rude
familiarity of his equals , the insolent tyranny of his seniors , and
the rod , perhaps , of a cruel and capricious pedagogue .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,27.93

Such hardships may steel the mind and body against the injuries of
<P_1,28> fortune ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.94

but my timid reserve was astonished by the crowd and tumult of the
school ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.95

the want of strength and activity disqualified me for the sports of the
play-field ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.96

nor have I forgotten how often in the year forty-six I was reviled and
buffeted for the sins of my Tory ancestors . GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.97

By the common methods of discipline , at the expense of many tears and
some blood , I purchased the knowledge of the Latin syntax :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.98

and not long since I was possessed of the dirty volumes of Phaedrus and
Cornelius Nepos , which I painfully construed and darkly understood .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.99

The choice of these authors is not injudicious . GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.100

The <font> lives <$$font> of Cornelius Nepos , the friend of Atticus and
Cicero , are composed in the style of the purest age :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.101

his simplicity is elegant , his brevity copious : GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.102

he exhibits a series of men and manners ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.103

and with such illustrations , as every pedant is not indeed qualified to
give , this classic biographer may initiate a young student in the
history of Greece and Rome . GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.104

The use of fables or apologues has been approved in every age from
ancient India to modern Europe . GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.105

They convey in familiar images the truths of morality and prudence ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.106

and the most childish understanding <paren> I advert to the scruples of
Rousseau <$$paren> will not suppose either that beasts <font> do
<$$font> speak , or that men <font> may <$$font> lie .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.107

A fable represents the genuine characters of animals ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.108

and a skilful master might extract from Pliny and Buffon some pleasing
lessons of natural history , a science well adapted to the taste and
capacity of children . GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.109

The Latinity of Phaedrus is not exempt from an alloy of the silver age ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.110

but his manner is concise , terse , and sententious :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,28.111

the Thracian slave discreetly breathes <P_1,29> the spirit of a freeman
; GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.112

and when the text is found , the style is perspicuous .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.113

But his fables , after a long oblivion , were first published by Peter
Pithou , from a corrupt manuscript . GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.114

The labours of fifty editors confess the defects of the copy , as well
as the value of the original ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.115

and the school-boy may have been whipped for misapprehending a passage ,
which Bentley could not restore , and which Burman could not explain .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.116

My studies were too frequently interrupted by sickness ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.117

and after a real or nominal residence at Kingston School of near two
years , I was finally recalled <paren> December , 1747 <$$paren> by my
mother's death , which was occasioned in her thirty-eighth year , by the
consequences of her last labour . GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.118

I was too young to feel the importance of my loss ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.119

and the image of her person and conversation is faintly imprinted in my
memory . GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.120

The affectionate heart of my aunt , Catherine Porten , bewailed a sister
and a friend ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.121

but my poor father was inconsolable , GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.122

and the transport of grief seemed to threaten his life or his reason .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.123

I can never forget the scene of our first interview , some weeks after
the fatal event ; the awful silence , the room hung with black , the
mid-day tapers , his sighs and tears ; his praises of my mother , a
saint in heaven ; his solemn adjuration that I would cherish her memory
and imitate her virtues ; and the fervor with which he kissed and
blessed me as the sole surviving pledge of their loves .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.124

The storm of passion insensibly subsided into calmer melancholy .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.125

At a convivial meeting of his friends , Mr. Gibbon might affect or
enjoy a gleam of cheerfulness ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,29.126

but his plan <P_1,30> of happiness was for ever destroyed :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.127

and after the loss of his companion he was left alone in a world , of
which the business and pleasures were to him irksome or insipid .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.128

After some unsuccessful trials he renounced the tumult of London and the
hospitality of Putney , GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.129

and buried himself in the rural or rather rustic solitude of Buriton ;
from which , during several years , he seldom emerged .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.130

As far back as I can remember , the house , near Putney-bridge and
church-yard , of my maternal grandfather appears in the light of my
proper and native home . GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.131

It was there that I was allowed to spend the greatest part of my time ,
in sickness or in health , during my school vacations and my parents
residence in London , and finally after my mother's death .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.132

Three months after that event , in the spring of 1748 , the commercial
ruin of her father , Mr. James Porten , was accomplished and declared .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.133

He suddenly absconded : GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.134

but as his effects were not sold , nor the house evacuated , till the
Christmas following , I enjoyed during the whole year the society of my
aunt , without much consciousness of her impending fate .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.135

I feel a melancholy pleasure in repeating my obligations to that
excellent woman , Mrs. Catherine Porten , the true mother of my mind as
well as of my health . GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.136

Her natural good sense was improved by the perusal of the best books in
the English language , GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.137

and if her reason was sometimes clouded by prejudice , her sentiments
were never disguised by hypocrisy or affectation .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.138

Her indulgent tenderness , the frankness of her temper , and my innate
rising curiosity , soon removed all distance between us :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,30.139

<P_1,31>

like friends of an equal age , we freely conversed on every topic ,
familiar or abstruse ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.141

and it was her delight and reward to observe the first shoots of my
young ideas . GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.142

Pain and languor were often soothed by the voice of instruction and
amusement ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.143

and to her kind lessons I ascribe my early and invincible love of
reading , which I would not exchange for the treasures of India .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.144

I should perhaps be astonished , were it possible to ascertain the date
, at which a favourite tale was engraved , by frequent repetition , in
my memory : the Cavern of the Winds ; the Palace of Felicity ; and the
fatal moment , at the end of three months or centuries , when Prince
Adolphus is overtaken by Time , who had worn out so many pair of wings
in the pursuit . GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.145

Before I left Kingston school I was well acquainted with Pope's Homer
and the Arabian Nights Entertainments , two books which will always
please by the moving picture of human manners and specious miracles :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.146

nor was I then capable of discerning that Pope's translation is a
portrait endowed with every merit , excepting that of likeness to the
original . GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.147

The verses of Pope accustomed my ear to the sound of poetic harmony :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.148

in the death of Hector , and the shipwreck of Ulysses , I tasted the new
emotions of terror and pity ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.149

and seriously disputed with my aunt on the vices and virtues of the
heroes of the Trojan war . GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.150

From Pope's Homer to Dryden's Virgil was an easy transition ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.151

but I know not how , from some fault in the author , the translator , or
the reader , the pious Aeneas did not so forcibly seize on my
imagination ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,31.152

and I derived more pleasure from Ovid's Metamorphoses , especially
<P_1,32> in the fall of Phaeton , and the speeches of Ajax and Ulysses .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.153

My grand-father's flight unlocked the door of a tolerable library ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.154

and I turned over many English pages of poetry and romance , of history
and travels . GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.155

Where a title attracted my eye , without fear or awe I snatched the
volume from the shelf ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.156

and Mrs. Porten , who indulged herself in moral and religious
speculations , was more prone to encourage than to check a curiosity
above the strength of a boy . GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.157

This year <paren> 1748 <$$paren> , the twelfth of my age , I shall note
as the most propitious to the growth of my intellectual stature .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.158

The relics of my grandfather's fortune afforded a bare annuity for his
own maintenance ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.159

and his daughter , my worthy aunt , who had already passed her fortieth
year , was left destitute . GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.160

Her noble spirit scorned a life of obligation and dependence ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.161

and after revolving several schemes , she preferred the humble industry
of keeping a boarding-house for Westminster-school , where she
laboriously earned a competence for her old age .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.162

This singular opportunity of blending the advantages of private and
public education decided my father . GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.163

After the Christmas holidays in January , 1749 , I accompanied Mrs.
Porten to her new house in College-street ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.164

and was immediately entered in the school , of which Dr. John Nicoll
was at that time head-master . GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.165

At first I was alone : GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.166

but my aunt's resolution was praised ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.167

her character was esteemed ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.168

her friends were numerous and active : GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.169

in the course of some years she became the mother of forty or fifty boys
, for the most part of family and fortune ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,32.170

and as her primitive habitation <P_1,33> was too narrow , she built and
occupied a spacious mansion in Dean's Yard . GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.171

I shall always be ready to join in the common opinion , that our public
schools , which have produced so many eminent characters , are the best
adapted to the genius and constitution of the English people .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.172

A boy of spirit may acquire a previous and practical experience of the
world ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.173

and his playfellows may be the future friends of his heart or his
interest . GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.174

In a free intercourse with his equals , the habits of truth , fortitude
, and prudence will insensibly be matured . GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.175

Birth and riches are measured by the standard of personal merit ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.176

and the mimic scene of a rebellion has displayed , in their true colours
, the ministers and patriots of the rising generation .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.177

Our seminaries of learning do not exactly correspond with the precept of
a Spartan king , " that the child should be instructed in the arts ,
which will be useful to the man ; " since a finished scholar may emerge
from the head of Westminster or Eton , in total ignorance of the
business and conversation of English gentlemen in the latter end of the
eighteenth century . GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.178

But these schools may assume the merit of teaching all that they pretend
to teach , the Latin and Greek languages : GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.179

they deposit in the hands of a disciple the keys of two valuable chests
; GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.180

nor can he complain , if they are afterwards lost or neglected by his
own fault . GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.181

The necessity of leading in equal ranks so many unequal powers of
capacity and application , will prolong to eight or ten years the
juvenile studies , which might be despatched in half that time by the
skilful master of a single pupil . GIBBON-1789-2,1,33.182

Yet even the repetition of exercise and discipline contributes to
<P_1,34> fix in a vacant mind the verbal science of grammar and prosody
: GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.183

and the private or voluntary student , who possesses the sense and
spirit of the classics , may offend , by a false quantity , the
scrupulous ear of a well-@ @flogged critic . GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.184

For myself , I must be content with a very small share of the civil and
literary fruits of a public school . GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.185

In the space of two years <paren> 1749 , 1750 <$$paren> , interrupted by
danger and debility , I painfully climbed into the third form ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.186

and my riper age was left to acquire the beauties of the Latin , and the
rudiments of the Greek tongue . GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.187

Instead of audaciously mingling in the sports , the quarrels , and the
connections of our little world , I was still cherished at home under
the maternal wing of my aunt ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.188

and my removal from Westminster long preceded the approach of manhood .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.189

The violence and variety of my complaint , which had excused my frequent
absence from Westminster School , at length engaged Mrs. Porten , with
the advice of physicians , to conduct me to Bath :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.190

at the end of the Michaelmas-vacation <paren> 1750 <$$paren> she quitted
me with reluctance , GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.191

and I remained several months under the care of a trusty maid-servant .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.192

A strange nervous affection , which alternately contracted my legs , and
produced , without any visible symptoms , the most excruciating pain ,
was ineffectually opposed by the various methods of bathing and pumping
. GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.193

From Bath I was transported to Winchester , to the house of a physician
; GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.194

and after the failure of his medical skill , we had again recourse to
the virtues of the Bath-waters . GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.195

During the intervals of these fits , I moved with my father to Buriton
and Putney ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,34.196

and <P_1,35> a short unsuccessful trial was attempted to renew my
attendance at Westminster-school . GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.197

But my infirmities could not be reconciled with the hours and discipline
of a public seminary ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.198

and instead of a domestic tutor , who might have watched the favourable
moments , and gently advanced the progress of my learning , my father
was too easily content with such occasional teachers as the different
places of my residence could supply . GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.199

I was never forced , and seldom was I persuaded , to admit these lessons
: GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.200

yet I read with a clergyman at Bath some odes of Horace , and several
episodes of Virgil , which gave me an imperfect and transient enjoyment
of the Latin poets . GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.201

It might now be apprehended that I should continue for life an
illiterate cripple : GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.202

but , as I approached my sixteenth year , Nature displayed in my favour
her mysterious energies : GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.203

my constitution was fortified and fixed ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.204

and my disorders , instead of growing with my growth and strengthening
with my strength , most wonderfully vanished . GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.205

I have never possessed or abused the insolence of health :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.206

but since that time few persons have been more exempt from real or
imaginary ills ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.207

and , till I am admonished by the gout , the reader will no more be
troubled with the history of my bodily complaints .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.208

My unexpected recovery again encouraged the hope of my education ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.209

and I was placed at Esher , in Surrey , in the house of the Reverend Mr.
Philip Francis , in a pleasant spot , which promised to unite the
various benefits of air , exercise , and study <paren> January , 1752
<$$paren> . GIBBON-1789-2,1,35.210

The translator of Horace might have taught me to relish the Latin poets
, had not my friends discovered in a few weeks , <P_1,36> that he
preferred the pleasures of London , to the instruction of his pupils .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.211

My father's perplexity at this time , rather than his prudence , was
urged to embrace a singular and desperate measure .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.212

Without preparation or delay he carried me to Oxford ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.213

and I was matriculated in the university as a gentleman commoner of
Magdalen college , before I had accomplished the fifteenth year of my
age <paren> April 3 , 1752 <$$paren> . GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.214

The curiosity , which had been implanted in my infant mind , was still
alive and active ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.215

but my reason was not sufficiently informed to understand the value , or
to lament the loss , of three precious years from my entrance at
Westminster to my admission at Oxford . GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.216

Instead of repining at my long and frequent confinement to the chamber
or the couch , I secretly rejoiced in those infirmities , which
delivered me from the exercises of the school , and the society of my
equals . GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.217

As often as I was tolerably exempt from danger and pain , reading , free
desultory reading , was the employment and comfort of my solitary hours
. GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.218

At Westminster , my aunt sought only to amuse and indulge me ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.219

in my stations at Bath and Winchester , at Buriton and Putney , a false
compassion respected my sufferings ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.220

and I was allowed , without control or advice , to gratify the
wanderings of an unripe taste . GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.221

My indiscriminate appetite subsided by degrees in the <font> historic
<$$font> line : GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.222

and since philosophy has exploded all innate ideas and natural
propensities , I must ascribe this choice to the assiduous perusal of
the Universal History , as the octavo volumes successively appeared .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,36.223

This unequal work , and a treatise of Hearne , the <font> Ductor
historicus , <$$font> referred and introduced <P_1,37> me to the Greek
and Roman historians , to as many at least as were accessible to an
English reader . GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.224

All that I could find were greedily devoured , from Littlebury's lame
Herodotus , and Spelman's valuable Xenophon , to the pompous folios of
Gordon's Tacitus , and a ragged Procopius of the beginning of the last
century . GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.225

The cheap acquisition of so much knowledge confirmed my dislike to the
study of languages ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.226

and I argued with Mrs. Porten , that , were I master of Greek and Latin
, I must interpret to myself in English the thoughts of the original ,
and that such extemporary versions must be inferior to the elaborate
translations of professed scholars ; a <font> silly <$$font> sophism ,
which could not easily be confuted by a person ignorant of any other
language than her own . GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.227

From the ancient I leaped to the modern world : GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.228

many crude lumps of Speed , Rapin , Mezeray , Davila , Machiavel ,
Father Paul , Bower , &c. I devoured like so many novels ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.229

and I swallowed with the same voracious appetite the descriptions of
India and China , of Mexico and Peru . GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.230

My first introduction to the historic scenes , which have since engaged
so many years of my life , must be ascribed to an accident .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.231

In the summer of 1751 , I accompanied my father on a visit to Mr.
Hoare's , in Wiltshire ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.232

but I was less delighted with the beauties of Stourhead , than with
discovering in the library a common book , the Continuation of Echard's
Roman History , which is indeed executed with more skill and taste than
the previous work . GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.233

To me the reigns of the successors of Constantine were absolutely new ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,37.234

and I was immersed in the passage of the Goths <P_1,38> over the Danube
, when the summons of the dinner-bell reluctantly dragged me from my
intellectual feast . GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.235

This transient glance served rather to irritate than to appease my
curiosity ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.236

and as soon as I returned to Bath I procured the second and third
volumes of Howel's History of the World , which exhibit the Byzantine
period on a larger scale . GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.237

Mahomet and his Saracens soon fixed my attention ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.238

and some instinct of criticism directed me to the genuine sources .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.239

Simon Ockley , an original in every sense , first opened my eyes ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.240

and I was led from one book to another , till I had ranged round the
circle of Oriental history . GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.241

Before I was sixteen , I had exhausted all that could be learned in
English of the Arabs and Persians , the Tartars and Turks ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.242

and the same ardour urged me to guess at the French of D'Herbelot , and
to construe the barbarous Latin of Pocock's Abulfaragius .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.243

Such vague and multifarious reading could not teach me to think , to
write , or to act ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.244

and the only principle that darted a ray of light into the indigested
chaos , was an early and rational application to the order of time and
place . GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.245

The maps of Cellarius and Wells imprinted in my mind the picture of
ancient geography : GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.246

from Stranchius I imbibed the elements of chronology :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.247

the Tables of Helvicus and Anderson , the Annals of Usher and Prideaux ,
distinguished the connection of events , GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.248

and engraved the multitude of names and dates in a clear and indelible
series . GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.249

But in the discussion of the first ages I overleaped the bounds of
modesty and use . GIBBON-1789-2,1,38.250

In my childish balance I presumed to weigh the systems of Scaliger and
Petavius , of Marsham and Newton , which I could seldom study <P_1,39>
in the originals ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.251

and my sleep has been disturbed by the difficulty of reconciling the
Septuagint with the Hebrew computation . GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.252

I arrived at Oxford with a stock of erudition , that might have puzzled
a doctor , and a degree of ignorance , of which a school-boy would have
been ashamed . GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.253

At the conclusion of this first period of my life , I am tempted to
enter a protest against the trite and lavish praise of the happiness of
our boyish years , which is echoed with so much affectation in the world
. GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.254

That happiness I have never known , GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.255

that time I have never regretted ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.256

and were my poor aunt still alive , she would bear testimony to the
early and constant uniformity of my sentiments . GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.257

It will indeed be replied , that I am not a competent judge ; that
pleasure is incompatible with pain ; that joy is excluded from sickness
; and that the felicity of a school-boy consists in the perpetual motion
of thoughtless and playful agility , in which I was never qualified to
excel . GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.258

My name , it is most true , could never be enrolled among the sprightly
race , the idle progeny of Eton or Westminster , <font> Who foremost may
delight to cleave , With pliant arm , the glassy wave , Or urge the
flying ball . <$$font> GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.259

The poet may gaily describe the short hours of recreation ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.260

but he forgets the daily tedious labours of the school , which is
approached each morning with anxious and reluctant steps .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,39.261

A traveller , who visits Oxford or Cambridge , is surprised and edified
by the apparent order and tranquillity <P_1,40> that prevail in the
seats of the English muses . GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.262

In the most celebrated universities of Holland , Germany , and Italy ,
the students , who swarm from different countries , are loosely
dispersed in private lodgings at the houses of the burghers :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.263

they dress according to their fancy and fortune ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.264

and in the intemperate quarrels of youth and wine , their <font> swords
, <$$font> though less frequently than of old , are sometimes stained
with each other's blood . GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.265

The use of arms is banished from our English universities ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.266

the uniform habit of the academics , the square cap , and black gown ,
is adapted to the civil and even clerical profession ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.267

and from the doctor in divinity to the under-graduate , the degrees of
learning and age are externally distinguished . GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.268

Instead of being scattered in a town , the students of Oxford and
Cambridge are united in colleges ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.269

their maintenance is provided at their own expense , or that of the
founders ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.270

and the stated hours of the hall and chapel represent the discipline of
a regular , and , as it were , a religious community .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.271

The eyes of the traveller are attracted by the size or beauty of the
public edifices ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.272

and the principal colleges appear to be so many palaces , which a
liberal nation has erected and endowed for the habitation of science .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.273

My own introduction to the university of Oxford forms a new aera in my
life ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.274

and at the distance of forty years I still remember my first emotions of
surprise and satisfaction . GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.275

In my fifteenth year I felt myself suddenly raised from a boy to a man :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.276

the persons , whom I respected as my superiors in age and academical
rank , entertained me with every mark of attention and civility ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,40.277

and <P_1,41> my vanity was flattered by the velvet cap and silk gown ,
which distinguish a gentleman commoner from a plebeian student .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.278

A decent allowance , more money than a school-boy had ever seen , was at
my own disposal ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.279

and I might command , among the tradesmen of Oxford , an indefinite and
dangerous latitude of credit . GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.280

A key was delivered into my hands , which gave me the free use of a
numerous and learned library : GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.281

my apartment consisted of three elegant and well-furnished rooms in the
new building , a stately pile , of Magdalen College ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.282

and the adjacent walks , had they been frequented by Plato's disciples ,
might have been compared to the Attic shade on the banks of the Ilissus
. GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.283

Such was the fair prospect of my entrance <paren> April 3 , 1752
<$$paren> into the university of Oxford . GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.284

A venerable prelate , whose taste and erudition must reflect honour on
the society in which they were formed , has drawn a very interesting
picture of his academical life . GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.285

- " I was educated <paren> says Bishop Lowth <$$paren> in the University
of Oxford . GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.286

I enjoyed all the advantages , both public and private , which that
famous seat of learning so largely affords . GIBBON-1789-2,1,41.287

I spent many years in that illustrious society , in a well-regulated
course of useful discipline and studies , and in the agreeable and
improving commerce of gentlemen and of scholars ; in a society where
emulation without envy , ambition without jealousy , contention without
animosity , incited industry , and awakened genius ; where a liberal
pursuit of knowledge , and a genuine freedom of thought , were raised ,
encouraged , and pushed <P_1,42> forward by example , by commendation ,
and by authority . GIBBON-1789-2,1,42.288

I breathed the same atmosphere that the Hookers , the Chillingworths ,
and the Lockes had breathed before ; whose benevolence and humanity were
as extensive as their vast genius and comprehensive knowledge ; who
always treated their adversaries with civility and respect ; who made
candour , moderation , and liberal judgment as much the rule and law as
the subject of their discourse . GIBBON-1789-2,1,42.289

And do you reproach me with my education in this place , and with my
relation to this most respectable body , which I shall always esteem my
greatest advantage and my highest honor ? " GIBBON-1789-2,1,42.290

I transcribe with pleasure this eloquent passage , without examining
what benefits or what rewards were derived by Hooker , or Chillingworth
, or Locke , from their academical institution ; without inquiring ,
whether in this angry controversy the spirit of Lowth himself is
purified from the intolerant zeal , which Warburton had ascribed to the
genius of the place . GIBBON-1789-2,1,42.291

It may indeed be observed , that the atmosphere of Oxford did not agree
with Mr. Locke's constitution ; and that the philosopher justly
despised the academical bigots , who expelled his person and condemned
his principles . GIBBON-1789-2,1,42.292

The expression of gratitude is a virtue and a pleasure :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,42.293

a liberal mind will delight to cherish and celebrate the memory of its
parents ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,42.294

and the teachers of science are the parents of the mind .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,42.295

I applaud the filial piety , which it is impossible for me to imitate ;
since I must not confess an imaginary debt , to assume the merit of a
just or generous retribution . GIBBON-1789-2,1,42.296

To the university of Oxford <P_1,43> I acknowledge no obligation ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.297

and she will as cheerfully renounce me for a son , as I am willing to
disclaim her for a mother . GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.298

I spent fourteen months at Magdalen College ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.299

they proved the fourteen months the most idle and unprofitable of my
whole life : GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.300

the reader will pronounce between the school and the scholar ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.301

but I can@ @not affect to believe that Nature had disqualified me for
all literary pursuits . GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.302

The specious and ready excuse of my tender age , imperfect preparation ,
and hasty departure , may doubtless be alleged ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.303

nor do I wish to defraud such excuses of their proper weight .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.304

Yet in my sixteenth year I was not devoid of capacity or application ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.305

even my childish reading had displayed an early though blind propensity
for books ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.306

and the shallow flood might have been taught to flow in a deep channel
and a clear stream . GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.307

In the discipline of a well-constituted academy , under the guidance of
skilful and vigilant professors , I should gradually have risen from
translations to originals , from the Latin to the Greek classics , from
dead languages to living science : GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.308

my hours would have been occupied by useful and agreeable studies ,
GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.309

the wanderings of fancy would have been restrained ,
GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.310

and I should have escaped the temptations of idleness , which finally
precipitated my departure from Oxford . GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.311

Perhaps in a separate annotation I may coolly examine the fabulous and
real antiquities of our sister universities , a question which has
kindled such fierce and foolish disputes among their fanatic sons .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,43.312

In the meanwhile it will be acknowledged that these venerable bodies are
sufficiently old to partake of all <P_1,44> the prejudices and
infirmities of age . GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.313

The schools of Oxford and Cambridge were founded in a dark age of false
and barbarous science ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.314

and they are still tainted with the vices of their origin .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.315

Their primitive discipline was adapted to the education of priests and
monks ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.316

and the government still remains in the hands of the clergy , an order
of men whose manners are remote from the present world , and whose eyes
are dazzled by the light of philosophy . GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.317

The legal incorporation of these societies by the charters of popes and
kings had given them a monopoly of the public instruction ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.318

and the spirit of monopolists is narrow , lazy , and oppressive ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.319

their work is more costly and less productive than that of independent
artists ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.320

and the new improvements so eagerly grasped by the competition of
freedom , are admitted with slow and sullen reluctance in those proud
corporations , above the fear of a rival , and below the confession of
an error . GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.321

We may scarcely hope that any reformation will be a voluntary act ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.322

and so deeply are they rooted in law and prejudice , that even the
omnipotence of parliament would shrink from an inquiry into the state
and abuses of the two universities . GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.323

The use of academical degrees , as old as the thirteenth century , is
visibly borrowed from the mechanic corporations ; in which an apprentice
, after serving his time , obtains a testimonial of his skill , and a
licence to practise his trade and mystery . GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.324

It is not my design to depreciate those honours , which could never
gratify or disappoint my ambition ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,44.325

and I should applaud the institution , if the degrees of bachelor or
<P_1,45> licentiate were bestowed as the reward of manly and successful
study : if the name and rank of doctor or master were strictly reserved
for the professors of science , who have approved their title to the
public esteem . GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.326

In the universities of Europe , excepting our own , the languages and
sciences are distributed among a numerous list of effective professors :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.327

the students , according to their taste , their calling , and their
diligence , apply themselves to the proper masters ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.328

and in the annual repetition of public and private lectures , these
masters are assiduously employed . GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.329

Our curiosity may inquire what number of professors has been instituted
at Oxford ? <paren> for I shall now confine myself to my own university
; <$$paren> by whom are they appointed , and what may be the probable
chances of merit or incapacity ? GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.330

how many are stationed to the three faculties , GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.331

and how many are left for the liberal arts ? GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.332

what is the form , and what the substance , of their lessons ?
GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.333

But all these questions are silenced by one short and singular answer ,
" That in the university of Oxford , the greater part of the public
professors have for these many years given up altogether even the
pretence of teaching . " GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.334

Incredible as the fact may appear , I must rest my belief on the
positive and impartial evidence of a master of moral and political
wisdom , who had himself resided at Oxford . GIBBON-1789-2,1,45.335

Dr. Adam Smith assigns as the cause of their indolence , that , instead
of being paid by voluntary contributions , which would urge them to
increase the number , and to deserve the gratitude of their pupils , the
Oxford professors are <P_1,46> secure in the enjoyment of a fixed
stipend , without the necessity of labour , or the apprehension of
control . GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.336

It has indeed been observed , nor is the observation absurd , that
excepting in experimental sciences , which demand a costly apparatus and
a dexterous hand , the many valuable treatises , that have been
published on every subject of learning , may now supersede the ancient
mode of oral instruction . GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.337

Were this principle true in its utmost latitude , I should only infer
that the offices and salaries , which are become useless , ought without
delay to be abolished . GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.338

But there still remains a material difference between a book and a
professor ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.339

the hour of the lecture enforces attendance ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.340

attention is fixed by the presence , the voice , and the occasional
questions of the teacher ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.341

the most idle will carry something away ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.342

and the more diligent will compare the instructions , which they have
heard in the school , with the volumes , which they peruse in their
chamber . GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.343

The advice of a skilful professor will adapt a course of reading to
every mind and every situation ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.344

his authority will discover , admonish , and at last chastise the
negligence of his disciples ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.345

and his vigilant inquiries will ascertain the steps of their literary
progress . GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.346

Whatever science he professes he may illustrate in a series of
discourses , composed in the leisure of his closet , pronounced on
public occasions , and finally delivered to the press .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.347

I observe with pleasure , that in the university of Oxford Dr. Lowth ,
with equal eloquence and erudition , has executed this task in his
incomparable <font> Praelections <$$font> on the Poetry of the Hebrews .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,46.348

<P_1,47>

The college of St. Mary Magdalen was founded in the fifteenth century
by Wainfleet , bishop of Winchester ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.350

and now consists of a president , forty fellows , and a number of
inferior students . GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.351

It is esteemed one of the largest and most wealthy of our academical
corporations , which may be compared to the Benedictine abbeys of
catholic countries ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.352

and I have loosely heard that the estates belonging to Magdalen College
, which are leased by those indulgent landlords at small quit-rents and
occasional fines , might be raised , in the hands of private avarice ,
to an annual revenue of nearly thirty_thousand pounds .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.353

Our colleges are supposed to be schools of science , as well as of
education ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.354

nor is it unreasonable to expect that a body of literary men , devoted
to a life of celibacy , exempt from the care of their own subsistence ,
and amply provided with books , should devote their leisure to the
prosecution of study , and that some effects of their studies should be
manifested to the world . GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.355

The shelves of their library groan under the weight of the Benedictine
folios , of the editions of the fathers , and the collections of the
middle ages , which have issued from the single abbey of St. Germain de
Prez at Paris . GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.356

A composition of genius must be the offspring of one mind ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.357

but such works of industry , as may be divided among many hands , and
must be continued during many years , are the peculiar province of a
laborious community . GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.358

If I inquire into the manufactures of the monks of Magdalen , if I
extend the inquiry to the other colleges of Oxford and Cambridge , a
silent blush , or a scornful frown , will be the only reply .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,47.359

<P_1,48>

The fellows or monks of my time were decent easy men , who supinely
enjoyed the gifts of the founder ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.361

their days were filled by a series of uniform employments ; the chapel
and the hall , the coffee-house and the common room , till they retired
, weary and well satisfied , to a long slumber . GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.362

From the toil of reading , or thinking , or writing , they had absolved
their conscience ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.363

and the first shoots of learning and ingenuity withered on the ground ,
without yielding any fruits to the owners or the public .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.364

As a gentleman commoner , I was admitted to the society of the fellows ,
GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.365

and fondly expected that some questions of literature would be the
amusing and instructive topics of their discourse .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.366

Their conversation stagnated in a round of college business , Tory
politics , personal anecdotes , and private scandal :
GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.367

their dull and deep potations excused the brisk intemperance of youth ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.368

and their constitutional toasts were not expressive of the most lively
loyalty for the house of Hanover . GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.369

A General election was now approaching : GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.370

the great Oxfordshire contest already blazed with all the malevolence of
party-zeal . GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.371

Magdalen College was devoutly attached to the old interest !
GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.372

and the names of Wenman and Dashwood were more frequently pronounced ,
than those of Cicero and Chrysostom . GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.373

The example of the senior fellows could not inspire the undergraduates
{TEXT:under-graduates} with a liberal spirit or studious emulation ;
GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.374

and I can@ @not describe , as I never knew , the discipline of college .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.375

Some duties may possibly have been imposed on the poor scholars , whose
ambition aspired to the peaceful honours of a fellowship <font> <paren>
ascribiquietis ordinibus - Deorum <$$paren> ; <$$font>
GIBBON-1789-2,1,48.376

<P_1,49>

but no independent members were admitted below the rank of a gentleman
commoner , GIBBON-1789-2,1,49.378

and our velvet cap was the cap of liberty . GIBBON-1789-2,1,49.379

A tradition prevailed that some of our predecessors had spoken Latin
declamations in the hall ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,49.380

but of this ancient custom no vestige remained : GIBBON-1789-2,1,49.381

the obvious methods of public exercises and examinations were totally
unknown ; GIBBON-1789-2,1,49.382

and I have never heard that either the president or the society
interfered in the private economy of the tutors and their pupils .
GIBBON-1789-2,1,49.383

