<BEGIN_gibson-1729-2>

<P_35>

<heading>

A Supplement to the History of Queen <font> Anne <$$font> , &c.
GIBSON-1729-2,35.4

<$$heading>

Queen <font> Anne <$$font> being the next Protestant Heir to her Sister
<font> Mary <$$font> , came peaceably to the Crown upon the Death of
King <font> William <$$font> ; notwithstanding the Affairs abroad were
in a troubled Condition , and the Nation at home full of unseasonable
Divisions . GIBSON-1729-2,35.6

<P_36>

Those who adhered to the Revolution Principles could object nothing
against her , not only as she was married to a Protestant Prince , but
as she join'd in the Revolution , and to outward appearance always
adhered to the same Principles . GIBSON-1729-2,36.8

Neither was she opposed by those who were in the Pretender's Cause .
GIBSON-1729-2,36.9

For besides that Things were not come to that maturity , so as to enable
the Pretender's Friends to make any Attempt against her Succession to
the Crown ; they were also buoy'd up with new Hopes upon this
extraordinary Event of King <font> William <$$font> 's Death , who
always acted from an invincible Principle in opposition to all their
Schemes : Whereas Queen <font> Anne <$$font> , tho
{COM:sic_here_and_passim} they knew she was ambitious of coming to the
Crown , yet they foresaw from the State of Affairs abroad , and the
Temper of the Nation at home , that their Cause would be in some
likelihood of gathering strength during her Reign : And the rather ,
because the Queen had so much Partiality towards her Father , that she
was no real Enemy to those who adhered to his Interest ;
GIBSON-1729-2,36.10

and being herself past all Hopes of having more Children to inherit the
Crown after her , they always imagined this would render her indifferent
as to the Succession in the House of <font> Hanover . <$$font>
GIBSON-1729-2,36.11

Upon these Views the Schemes of this Party were greatly forwarded , to
which the Circumstances of Affairs at that time very <P_37> much
contributed . GIBSON-1729-2,37.12

For tho' {COM:sic} the Nation had been so alarm'd with the Dangers that
threatened their Religion and Liberties before the Revolution , that
most People had conceived a great Aversion to Popery and Arbitrary Power
, whereby things were carry'd on with great Unanimity in behalf of the
Common Interest for some time ; yet it was not long , when this Surfeit
began to wear off , and the old Feuds were again revived .
GIBSON-1729-2,37.13

Many who had shewn themselves sufficiently zealous in the
Revolution-Cause , began to grow cold and indifferent ; some thro' their
Inconstancy , and some from Views of Ambition and Self-Interest .
GIBSON-1729-2,37.14

And K. <font> William <$$font> being a Stranger , could never gain the
Love and Affection of the common People , while so many Engines were set
on foot to biass their Judgments against their true Interest .
GIBSON-1729-2,37.15

Therefore such was the general Disposition of the Nation upon the
Queen's Accession to the Throne , that nothing could so effectually have
stifled their Differences , as the Expectations , which some , who were
disgusted at King <font> William <$$font> 's Government , had in the
Queen ; and the Dangers that threatened this Kingdom , and all <font>
Europe <$$font> , from the excessive Power of <font> France <$$font> ,
which rendered most Protestants unanimous in going to war , whatever
other Differences were among them . Whereupon the Duke of <font>
Marlborough <$$font> was appointed Commander in Chief <P_38> of the Army
by the Queen , and a Declaration of War against <font> France <$$font>
was issued forth the 4=th= of <font> May <$$font> , about two Months
after her Accession to the Crown . GIBSON-1729-2,38.16

Her Reign began with Success both by Sea and Land , GIBSON-1729-2,38.17

nor was there any Encouragement wanting to enable the Duke of <font>
Marlborough <$$font> to proceed with Vigour against the common Enemy :
GIBSON-1729-2,38.18

for at this time the Duke was mostly inclined to favour the High-Church
Party , who carry'd the greatest sway ; as did also the Lord <font>
Godolphin <$$font> ; So that no opposition was made either to the
Alliances abroad , or to the raising the Supplies at home ; because the
High-Church Party look'd upon those two Lords , and some others who were
in chief Confidence with the Queen , as their own ; GIBSON-1729-2,38.19

And the Low-Church Party contributed chearfully to the Common Cause ,
which they had favoured all along , as being every way agreeable to
their Sentiments . GIBSON-1729-2,38.20

About the latter end of the Year <font> Charles <$$font> Archduke of
<font> Austria <$$font> being proclaim'd King of <font> Spain <$$font> ,
by virtue of the late Alliances , came over to <font> England <$$font> ,
GIBSON-1729-2,38.21

and from thence was conducted to <font> Portugal <$$font> the Spring
following , on board the Confederate Fleet , in order to take possession
of <font> Spain <$$font> , by the assistance of the Confederate Forces ,
who arrived with him in <font> Portugal . <$$font> GIBSON-1729-2,38.22

For the King of <font> Portugal <$$font> , who had been awed into a
<P_39> Treaty with the <font> French <$$font> , contrary to his Interest
, relinquished his Engagements as soon as the <font> English <$$font>
and <font> Dutch <$$font> Fleets appeared to defend his Coasts from the
Insults of <font> France . <$$font> GIBSON-1729-2,39.23

And the Duke of <font> Savoy <$$font> , who had been trap'd in the same
Snare , also left the <font> French <$$font> , GIBSON-1729-2,39.24

and join'd the Allies , notwithstanding his two Daughters were married ,
the one to the Duke of <font> Burgundy <$$font> , the Dauphin's eldest
Son , and the other to the present King of <font> Spain <$$font> , his
second Son . GIBSON-1729-2,39.25

In this time the Allies took <font> Venlo <$$font> from the <font>
French <$$font> , as also <font> Ruremond , Stevensvaert <$$font> , and
the Citadel of <font> Liege <$$font> ; GIBSON-1729-2,39.26

and at Sea destroy'd the <font> French <$$font> and <font> Spanish
<$$font> Ships at <font> Vigo <$$font> , from whence they brought a
considerable deal of rich Booty , besides several important Advantages
which Prince <font> Eugene <$$font> gain'd in <font> Italy <$$font> ;
all which portended well to the Confederate Interest .
GIBSON-1729-2,39.27

But in the midst of these Successes abroad , the Divisions at home began
soon to come to a great height . GIBSON-1729-2,39.28

For this same Year the Bill against Occasional Conformity was brought
into the House of Commons , and carry'd by a Majority in that House ;
which caused several Conferences between them and the Lords , who looked
upon it both as unseasonable and uncharitable ; GIBSON-1729-2,39.29

and of this mind were also some of the Bishops , so that it was rejected
. GIBSON-1729-2,39.30

But so earnest were the Commons to have this Bill pass , that they
<P_40> brought it again upon the Stage the next Session , with a design
to work out some Great Men who favour'd the Dissenters , and to bring
the Management of Affairs wholly into the hands of their own Party .
GIBSON-1729-2,40.31

The Duke of <font> Marlborough <$$font> , the Lord <font> Godolphin
<$$font> , and some others of their Friends voted at first for that Bill
; GIBSON-1729-2,40.32

but finding that such Divisions might have an unhappy Tendency , and
that the Schemes of this Party were inconsistent with the public
Interest and the Measures then on foot , were at last not only forced to
leave them , but to use all possible means to have them discountenanced
, and in the Elections to have such Members chosen to sit in Parliament
, as would give no Interruption to the War , by refusing or retarding
the necessary Supplies , or doing any other Thing that might encourage
the Enemy : Such as would maintain the Laws , that had been made to
promote Unanimity among Protestants , who would reject those Schemes
that tended to Persecution , and to favour Arbitrary Measures of any
kind , and who in their Principles , were firm to the Revolution , and
every thing that might preserve Liberty and Property .
GIBSON-1729-2,40.33

When this was accomplished , all Things went on smoothly .
GIBSON-1729-2,40.34

Every Year was crowned with fresh Victories . GIBSON-1729-2,40.35

And in the Year 1706 , the Union of the two Kingdoms , which before had
been several times <P_41> attempted in vain , was agreed to by the
Commissioners of both sides , GIBSON-1729-2,41.36

and passed without much Opposition in both Houses , the next ensuing
Session ; which strengthen'd the Nation and the whole Confederacy
against the Common Enemy , and added so much Power to those who were at
the head of Affairs here , that they met with no Interruption in their
Proceedings for some time . GIBSON-1729-2,41.37

The <font> French <$$font> Armies , which were driven out of <font>
Germany <$$font> , after the famous Battle of <font> Hockstet <$$font> ,
could never return any more to disturb the Empire ; GIBSON-1729-2,41.38

and besides many signal pitch'd Battles , which the Confederates won in
<font> Flanders <$$font> , they became also possessed of the Enemy's
{TEXT:Enemies} strongest Towns ; which extraordinary Events humbled the
<font> French <$$font> Monarch to that degree , that in <font> May
<$$font> 1709 , when the War had continued about seven Years , he sued
for Peace : and his Ministers , who were the Marquis {TEXT:Marquiss} de
<font> Torcy <$$font> , and the President de <font> Rouville <$$font> ,
met the Duke <font> of Marlborough <$$font> and the Lord Viscount <font>
Townshend <$$font> , with the <font> Dutch <$$font> Plenipotentiaries ,
at the <font> Hague <$$font> , where Prince <font> Eugene <$$font> came
also on the Emperor's account . GIBSON-1729-2,41.39

Here the <font> French <$$font> Ministers offered in their Master's
{TEXT:Masters} Name , by way of Preliminary , " That he would consent to
the Demolition of <font> Dunkirk . <$$font> - That he would abandon the
Person , called <font> Prince of Wales <$$font> , and send him forth of
his Dominions . - That he would acknowledge <P_42> the Queen's Title ,
and the Succession as established on the House of <font> Hanover .
<$$font> - That he would renounce all Pretensions to the <font> Spanish
<$$font> Monarchy . - That he would quit his Pretensions to the Towns
and Fortresses of <font> Ypres <$$font> , <font> Furnes <$$font> ,
<font> Menin <$$font> , <font> Tournay <$$font> , <font> Lisle <$$font>
, <font> Conde <$$font> , <font> Maubege <$$font> , and other Places ,
necessary for a Barrier to the United Provinces . And to the Empire ,
that he would restore all Things as had been settled by the Treaty of
<font> Reswick <$$font> ; and further , that he would destroy the
Fortifications of the City of <font> Strasburg . " <$$font>
GIBSON-1729-2,42.40

But the Duke of <font> Marlborough <$$font> , the Prince of <font> Savoy
<$$font> , and the other Ministers of the confederated Powers , did not
look upon these Offers as sufficient from a Prince , who had so often
broke through the most solemn Engagements , nor such as would make
sufficient Recompence to each Party , for the vast Charge they had been
at , in carrying on the War against him ; nor that any Terms obtain'd on
that footing , would be a sufficient Security to prevent a War for the
future , especially if the <font> Spanish <$$font> Monarchy should
continue in his Grand-son's hands , of which they had already found the
dangerous Effects , as he had been thereby enabled to stand out against
the most powerful Confederacy that ever was form'd in <font> Europe
<$$font> ; GIBSON-1729-2,42.41

and therefore they proposed other Terms <P_43> to the <font> French
<$$font> Plenipotentiaries , such as they judged would establish a just
Balance of Power , and would give Satisfaction to all the Parties
engaged in the War against that Monarch . GIBSON-1729-2,43.42

The principal Confederates were not only agreed as to their own several
Demands and Pretensions , so that there was no Misunderstanding among
them , GIBSON-1729-2,43.43

but they had also taken care of Interests of all the rest , reserving
still a Power of making such further Demands , as might be necessary to
render the Peace firm and lasting . GIBSON-1729-2,43.44

The present Emperor , who was then Arch-Duke of <font> Austria <$$font>
, and had been proclaimed King of <font> Spain <$$font> , was to have
had that Monarchy for his Share , and the <font> French <$$font> King to
join with the Allies in all such Measures , as should be judg'd
necessary to make his Grand-son abandon the same , in case of his
Refusal . GIBSON-1729-2,43.45

And as Provision was to have been made , that no Branch of the House of
<font> Bourbon <$$font> should inherit the <font> Spanish <$$font>
Monarchy , so the Emperor was also to have renounced all Title to that
Kingdom ; GIBSON-1729-2,43.46

and all possible Precaution was likewise to have been taken , in case of
the Emperor's Death without Issue , that <font> Spain <$$font> and the
Empire should not be united . GIBSON-1729-2,43.47

A good and sufficient Barrier was to have been provided for the
States-General , according to the Tenure of the Grand Alliance ,
GIBSON-1729-2,43.48

and Care would have been taken for the effectual Demolition of <font>
Dunkirk <$$font> , and whatever <P_44> might tend to advance the Trade
of <font> Great Britain . <$$font> GIBSON-1729-2,44.49

For in case the Queen had made Peace with <font> France <$$font> at that
time , while her Armies were attended with such continued Success , and
while all the Confederates were so unanimous , as she must have been the
chief Arbiter in setling every one's Pretensions , so as <font> France
<$$font> on the one hand would not have been in a Condition to have
stood out against her Demands , in Matters of Trade ; neither could her
Allies have opposed any Advantages this Nation should have gained that
way , as the Successes against the common Enemy were chiefly owing to
the Share <font> Great Britain <$$font> had taken in the War , and that
without consenting to her Demands , their own could not have been
answered . GIBSON-1729-2,44.50

Thus the Plenipotentiaries of the Allies judged nothing less could
enable them to treat rightly with <font> France <$$font> ;
GIBSON-1729-2,44.51

and tho their Demands were indeed pretty high , both as to the Towns
that were to have been given up in <font> Germany <$$font> , and the
<font> Netherlands <$$font> , and likewise as to <font> Philip <$$font>
's abandoning <font> Spain <$$font> ; yet the <font> French <$$font>
Ministers consented to them , GIBSON-1729-2,44.52

and the Marquis de <font> Torcy <$$font> posted to <font> Versailles
<$$font> , with an Intention as he pretended to get them confirm'd by
his Master , alledging that their Instructions did not reach to every
particular Article . GIBSON-1729-2,44.53

But the <font> French <$$font> Forces in <font> Spain <$$font> , having
about this time made themselves Masters of <font> Alicant <$$font> , and
having <P_45> also obtain'd a small Victory over a Body of <font>
Portuguese <$$font> , King <font> Lewis <$$font> thereupon thought fit
to delay , till after the Campaign , having a very great Army in the
<font> Netherlands <$$font> , from which he had no small Expectations .
GIBSON-1729-2,45.54

But he was greatly disappointed , GIBSON-1729-2,45.55

for the Confederates took <font> Tournay <$$font> , GIBSON-1729-2,45.56

beat the <font> French <$$font> in a signal Battle near <font> Mons
<$$font> , GIBSON-1729-2,45.57

and afterwards made themselves Masters of that strong City and Fortress
. GIBSON-1729-2,45.58

And before the Summer was ended , the Affairs of <font> Spain <$$font>
took also a Turn , that was very favourable to the Allies ; Count <font>
Staremberg <$$font> , who commanded the confederate Forces there ,
having obtain'd several Advantages over King <font> Philip <$$font> ,
whereby that whole Kingdom , which had been in a manner lost after the
Battle of <font> Almanza <$$font> , was now in a fair way of being again
recovered by the Confederates : which , with the Loss of <font> Mons
<$$font> and <font> Tournay <$$font> , proved so great a Mortification
to the <font> French <$$font> King , that in the beginning of the next
Year , <font> viz. <$$font> 1710 , he was again very sollicitous to
renew the Conferences ; which accordingly began this Year in <font>
March <$$font> , at <font> Gertruydenburg <$$font> , and continued till
<font> July <$$font> , when they broke up without coming to any
Conclusion : The <font> French <$$font> having gone back from their
former Proposals , and having made new Offers , which were no ways
satisfactory to the Allies . The Causes of which , and the
extraordinary Events that followed , will now be related at some Length
. GIBSON-1729-2,45.59

<P_46>

When Things were thus brought very near to a Crisis abroad , it was
observable that an unruly Ferment was working in the Minds of Multitudes
of People at home , who were disaffected to the publick Interest , from
various Motives , as is usual in all such Circumstances , when the best
Measures are on foot . GIBSON-1729-2,46.61

The Duke of <font> Marlborough <$$font> , who by reason of his great
Successes , had obtain'd the chief Sway in all Affairs , was not without
Abundance of Enemies who envy'd his good Fortune , tho there was indeed
no Man in the Kingdom so fit as himself for the Command of the Army .
GIBSON-1729-2,46.62

He was wise in all his Undertakings , having never engaged in any Affair
of Moment without Advice , which was a Blemish in King <font> William's
<$$font> Character , who otherwise was a very great General , but would
often follow his own Schemes , contrary to the Opinion of his best
Counsellors . GIBSON-1729-2,46.63

But when the Command of the Army was first confer'd upon the Duke , tho
his Experience in Military Affairs was then but small , yet his
Excellency lay in this , that he never did any thing , but in concert
with those who had most Experience , and carefully weighed whatever was
proposed to him ; GIBSON-1729-2,46.64

and having join'd Diligence and Industry along with his other great
Talents , he soon excelled all other Men , both in Conduct and Success .
GIBSON-1729-2,46.65

<P_47>

But the higher the Duke advanced in Fame , the more he was envy'd ,
GIBSON-1729-2,47.67

and there were many Circumstances , that concur'd to increase the Number
of his Enemies . Especially his vast Riches , and an Opinion many had
conceived of him , that he was covetous , because he enjoyed so many
Places , both of Honour and Profit ; being not only Commander in Chief
of the Army , by which he had the Disposal of all Military Employments ,
but also being Master-General_of_the_Ordnance , and Colonel of the first
Regiment of Foot-Guards . GIBSON-1729-2,47.68

The Dutchess was Groom of the Stole to the Queen , and Privy-Purse ,
whereby she had constantly the Queen's Ear and Pocket ; which gave no
small Offence to some of the Nobility , who perhaps considered their own
Merits , no otherwise than as being of more ancient or greater
Extraction than the Duke and Dutchess , and might therefore be
displeased that they could not have the Preference in the Queen's Favour
. GIBSON-1729-2,47.69

The Duke's Family was also very much strengthened in Alliances with
other great and powerful Families ; GIBSON-1729-2,47.70

for his only Son being dead , he had matched his eldest Daughter to the
Lord Treasurer <font> Godolphin <$$font> 's eldest Son .
GIBSON-1729-2,47.71

Another he had married to the Earl of <font> Sunderland <$$font> , who
was at that time principal Secretary of State ; a third to the Earl of
<font> Bridgewater <$$font> ; and the youngest to <P_48> the present
Duke of <font> Montagu <$$font> , who was then Marquis {TEXT:Marquiss}
of <font> Monthermer <$$font> , his Father being at that time alive :
which created a no small Jealousy among some sort of People , who did
all they could to prepossess Men's {TEXT:Mens} Minds with Fears , lest
the Command of the Army , the Treasury , and all Affairs of State ,
being as it were in the hands of one Family , and the Duke of <font>
Marlborough <$$font> being in such great Authority with the Allies
abroad , might be the Means to endanger the Constitution .
GIBSON-1729-2,48.72

The greatest and ablest Men of the Kingdom , were also of the Duke's
Party , GIBSON-1729-2,48.73

and gave their Concurrence to all the Measures then on foot , both in
relation to foreign and domestick Affairs . GIBSON-1729-2,48.74

The Earl <font> Godolphin <$$font> was an able States-man of long
Experience , especially in the Treasury ; having been a Commissioner
many Years , before he was made Lord Treasurer : GIBSON-1729-2,48.75

and tho he was an honest Man , as appeared afterwards , when a Scrutiny
was made into his Conduct , yet being so nearly allied to the Duke , by
the strongest Tyes of private Interest , it proved the Means to heighten
Peoples Jealousies very much ; so that he was by many looked upon as a
dangerous Person , to be in so high a Trust . GIBSON-1729-2,48.76

And therefore this Ministry were never without some Opposition , even
when they were in their greatest Vogue , GIBSON-1729-2,48.77

and abundance of pains was taken both in <P_49> publick and private , to
embarrass their Measures . GIBSON-1729-2,49.78

The late Earl <font> Cowper <$$font> , who was then Lord Chancellor ,
owed his Rise chiefly to the Lord Treasurer , and the other great Men of
that Party . GIBSON-1729-2,49.79

He had a ready Wit and accurate Judgment , GIBSON-1729-2,49.80

and was the greatest Orator of his Time . GIBSON-1729-2,49.81

He presided in many Affairs of greatest Moment , particularly at the
making of the Union , wherein he acquitted himself so handsomely , as he
did on many other publick Occasions , that it might be justly said of
him , what <font> Ben Johnson <$$font> said of the Lord <font> Verulam :
<$$font> " That he commanded where he spoke , that he had his Judges
angry and pleased at his Devotion : That no Man had their Affections
more in his power , and that the Fear of every Man that heard him , was
lest he should make an end . " GIBSON-1729-2,49.82

The Lord <font> Somers <$$font> , the late Chancellor , was also in
great Repute , as an able and grave Counsellor , GIBSON-1729-2,49.83

but was grown somewhat infirm , and therefore unfit for the Toils of
Business ; tho' {COM:sic} his Advice was much followed , being an able
Lawyer and a Man of great Experience in Affairs . GIBSON-1729-2,49.84

The late Lord <font> Halifax <$$font> , another very great Man , was in
his full Vigour . GIBSON-1729-2,49.85

He had a very extensive Genius , which rendred his Advice useful in all
Affairs , GIBSON-1729-2,49.86

besides that he was a Master in all kinds of polite Learning , and a
Favourer of Men <P_50> of Merit , which procured him many Friends .
GIBSON-1729-2,50.87

The two Secretaries , <font> viz. <$$font> the Earl of <font>
Sunderland <$$font> , the Duke's Son-in-Law , and Mr. <font> Boyle
<$$font> who was afterwards created Lord <font> Carleton <$$font> , were
both of them Men of great Application and Vigilance ; who being also in
their Prime , were therefore the more fit for the vast Burden of Affairs
, that lay upon them . GIBSON-1729-2,50.88

But the Earl of <font> Wharton <$$font> , excelled all others in
Readiness of Wit , and Quickness of Penetration . GIBSON-1729-2,50.89

He was also very active and indefatigable , by which he came to know the
Strength and Weakness of those who opposed the publick Measures , and
seldom failed to get Intelligence of their most secret Combinations and
Intrigues . GIBSON-1729-2,50.90

He did not affect formal Speeches , GIBSON-1729-2,50.91

but having a prompt and ready Eloquence join'd with an uncommon Share of
Courage , so he never fail'd to encounter those who were of greatest
Note , among the opposite Party ; GIBSON-1729-2,50.92

for he could soon discern how far Self prevail'd in any of them ,
GIBSON-1729-2,50.93

and always laid open their most interested and selfish Views , by the
plainest Construction that could be made of their own Words and Actions
; and all this with such a peculiar Sharpness of Wit , and with so much
Pleasantry , that as his Observations were no less entertaining , than
truly convincing to those who heard him speak , so they often put his
Adversaries to Confusion and Silence . GIBSON-1729-2,50.94

<P_51>

Besides these , there were many of the Nobility and Gentlemen of best
Account , who sided with the Ministry , in all their publick Measures .
GIBSON-1729-2,51.96

They had also a Majority among the Bishops , who espoused their
Sentiments . As also most of those who were distinguished by their Wit
or Learning , who naturally approved their Conduct , because it was the
most rational and the most adapted to the Honour and Safety of the
Nation . GIBSON-1729-2,51.97

Likewise the Merchants and most Persons concerned in Trade , were
generally on this side , because they looked on their Interest to be
altogether precarious , unless such a Ballance should be established ,
as might put it out of the power of <font> France <$$font> , or any
other Nation , to hurt our Commerce ; GIBSON-1729-2,51.98

and as they had this in view , so they all along contributed cheerfully
to support the War , and all other Exigencies of the State .
GIBSON-1729-2,51.99

These great Men being thus strengthened with so powerful a Body , there
seem'd to be no human Probability that any Thing should be able to give
them the least Interruption in their Proceedings , much less to move
them out of the Queen's Favour , for whom in particular they had done
such great Things ; having rendered her Name no less famous over the
World , than that of her great Predecessor Queen <font> Elizabeth .
<$$font> GIBSON-1729-2,51.100

Besides that the Party who opposed them , consisted chiefly of such
Persons , who albeit <P_52> they gave themselves out to be the only true
Friends of the established Church , yet their Principles were generally
dislik'd by those who had the best Notions of what was truly for the
good of the Nation , and the Protestant Interest , in regard their
Schemes were too narrow and limited with respect to other Protestants ,
and inconsistent with their own Profession , as they generally fell in
with Papists and Jacobites , who were known Enemies to the Constitution
in Church and State . GIBSON-1729-2,52.101

Neither had they Men who were thought to be of sufficient Reputation to
take up the Burden of their Cause , in case they had been able to carry
their Point against the Duke of <font> Marlborough <$$font> and his
Friends . GIBSON-1729-2,52.102

For the Duke of <font> Ormond <$$font> was the only Person they could
set up as his Competitor , a Man no ways qualify'd for it , his Head
being turned more to Show and Ostentation , than to the real Employments
of a General ; which however rendered him more popular than the other ,
who studiously avoided all such Things . GIBSON-1729-2,52.103

In civil Affairs , <font> Robert Harley <$$font> was the fittest Person
to be employed , tho' {COM:sic} a Man of an obnoxious Character .
GIBSON-1729-2,52.104

He had been thrice Speaker of the House of Commons ,
GIBSON-1729-2,52.105

was well acquainted with the Business of that House , and the Characters
of the leading Members . GIBSON-1729-2,52.106

He had likewise been one of the principal Secretaries of State ,
GIBSON-1729-2,52.107

but continued only a short while in that Office , being discarded <P_53>
upon account of one <font> Gregg <$$font> , a Clerk of the Office , who
was executed for keeping a secret Correspondence with <font> France .
<$$font> GIBSON-1729-2,53.108

The Particulars of this Story are sufficiently known to many Persons yet
alive , GIBSON-1729-2,53.109

and therefore need not be told here ; only thus much , that the Ministry
having pressed this <font> Gregg <$$font> very earnestly , with a
Promise of Pardon , in case he had accus'd <font> Harley <$$font> ,
which <font> Gregg <$$font> never would do , this so much disgusted
<font> Harley <$$font> , that he was ever after plotting the Downfall of
the Duke of <font> Marlborough <$$font> and his Party , and therefore
fell in with all the Clamours that were rais'd against them .
GIBSON-1729-2,53.110

But he lay under several Disadvantages , which very much lessened his
Credit , among all sorts of People . GIBSON-1729-2,53.111

For even this Affair of <font> Gregg <$$font> was imputed to his
Negligence , by those who believed him to be otherwise innocent .
GIBSON-1729-2,53.112

He was not much beloved by either Side ; GIBSON-1729-2,53.113

the High-Church Party were afraid to trust him because his Father Sir
<font> Edward Harley <$$font> , and most of his Relations had been
Dissenters , and because he came into play first of all by their
Interest . GIBSON-1729-2,53.114

The Papists and Nonjurors us'd to shew no liking to him , for the same
Reason , being always afraid he would prove false to them , as indeed he
never discovered any great Forwardness in their Cause .
GIBSON-1729-2,53.115

The Dissenters on the other hand were no less jealous of him , because
in real Deeds he seemed , to fall in <P_54> mostly with their Enemies ,
at the same time he always professed Friendship for them , and gave them
good Words . GIBSON-1729-2,54.116

Others looked on him as one who lay always on the Catch , to fall in
with either Party , where he could best serve his own Turn .
GIBSON-1729-2,54.117

He had also very much impair'd his paternal Estate in the pursuit of his
Projects , so that he was looked upon by most People to be a dangerous
Person , GIBSON-1729-2,54.118

and there was no great Likelihood , as things went , that he should ever
come more upon the Stage . GIBSON-1729-2,54.119

There were besides him some few other Persons of Note , who had been in
no mean Imployments ; particularly Mr. <font> St. John <$$font>
Secretary of War , a very active Man ; also Sir <font> Simon Harcourt
<$$font> an able Lawyer , who had been Sollicitor-General ;
GIBSON-1729-2,54.120

but both were discarded by reason of their Intimacy and Friendship with
<font> Harley . <$$font> GIBSON-1729-2,54.121

But at this time of the day , while the other Party was so powerful ,
and consisted of the greatest and most experienced Men of the Nation ,
these were looked upon as inconsiderable , and the rather that they
could not support any Interest without <font> Harley <$$font> , who was
at this time obnoxious to all Sides . GIBSON-1729-2,54.122

But tho' {COM:sic} all this promised nothing but the greatest Security
to the Duke of <font> Marlborough <$$font> , and to those who were in
Employment with him , such as in all human appearance no Envy or
Opposition could well overturn ; yet too much Power in the hands <P_55>
of Subjects , whatever good Use may be made of it , often proves
injurious to the Possessors of it , even when there is the least outward
Appearance of Danger . GIBSON-1729-2,55.123

The Papists both at home and abroad , and those who were in the
Pretender's Interest , had gathered very much Strength during the last
two Years , but especially when the Negotiations with <font> France
<$$font> broke up , that the People were disappointed in their
Expectations of Peace ; GIBSON-1729-2,55.124

for then they began to complain loudly of the Continuance of the War ,
which indeed had put a stop to all manner of Trade , whereby the Poor
who were wont to be employed in the Manufactures , came to be in a
destitute Condition . GIBSON-1729-2,55.125

New Taxes were rais'd that heightened the Price of many necessary
Commodities , which fell chiefly on the poorer Sort ; which , with the
Scarcity of Corn , and the Rise of the Price of Bread at that time ,
increased their Miseries very much . GIBSON-1729-2,55.126

And the Land-Tax being continued from Year to Year , at the Rate of four
Shillings on the Pound , caused no small Discontent among the Country
Gentlemen , that however much they were wont sometimes to applaud the
Duke's great Successes , they began now to change their Note , and fell
in with those who only envy'd his Fame and great Acquisitions .
GIBSON-1729-2,55.127

This gave new Vigour to the Pretender's Friends , who began to be very
active , and joined with Papists to <P_56> debauch the Principles of the
ignorant sort , GIBSON-1729-2,56.128

and many of the Clergy were no less industrious in sowering Peoples
Minds with a continual Outcry of the Danger of the Church , from the
Favour the Government shewed to the Dissenters ; insomuch that the
Parliament was forced to make some Resolves to put a stop to this
unreasonable Clamour , declaring those Enemies to their Country who
should affirm the Church of <font> England <$$font> to be in Danger
under her Majesty's Administration . GIBSON-1729-2,56.129

However this was not sufficient to stop Peoples mouths , while they
laboured under so many Discontents and Jealousies .
GIBSON-1729-2,56.130

The Clergy were encouraged by several ambitious Men of their own Order ,
who themselves were willing to run no hazard , and by other disgusted
Persons of whom they might perhaps expect Favours , in Case of a Change
; GIBSON-1729-2,56.131

and no doubt some were excited by their own weak Fears and Jealousies ,
to utter Things both from the Pulpit and in Conversation , that were
seditious and uncharitable , and tended to set the Nation on flame :
GIBSON-1729-2,56.132

But the great Men generally overlook'd this Misbehaviour in the Clergy ,
GIBSON-1729-2,56.133

and perhaps thought it prudent so to do , not only because of their
Function , but also because they hoped these Clamours would be at an end
, so soon as a Peace should be concluded ; which they expected could not
<P_57> be far off , considering the low Ebb things were brought to in
<font> France <$$font> ; GIBSON-1729-2,57.134

and it would perhaps have been more advisable for them to have continued
in the same Resolution , and either to have still overlook'd their
Miscarriages , or only to have suffered the Laws to take place in the
common and usual Way against such Persons , than what they did about
this time in the Case of Dr. <font> Sacheverel <$$font> , whose Story
must still be so fresh in Memory , that I need not enter upon it as a
Thing forgotten or unknown , and which opened a way for the most
extraordinary Changes , and such a Succession of Events , as perhaps
never happened from the like Occasion , as shall here be shewn in as
brief a manner as possible . GIBSON-1729-2,57.135

This <font> Sacheverel <$$font> was the Son of a Clergyman ,
GIBSON-1729-2,57.136

and had his Education at <font> Oxford <$$font> , by the Care of some
Benefactors , among whom I have been told Dr. <font> Burnet <$$font> ,
Bishop of <font> Sarum <$$font> , was one . GIBSON-1729-2,57.137

He was noted there as a Person of a very turbulent and litigious Spirit
, and but in very little Esteem among them , while he resided with them
. GIBSON-1729-2,57.138

He was vain and aspiring beyond measure , and so hasty for his Doctor's
Degree , that he bought it before his Time , at a considerable Price .
GIBSON-1729-2,57.139

He had such a high Conceit of his own Talents , that he would always be
seeking the most publick Opportunities of exerting them .
GIBSON-1729-2,57.140

Towards the <P_58> latter End of the Summer , in 1709 , just about the
time when the Conferences broke up at the <font> Hague <$$font> , that
the Nation was full of Complaints , he went into <font> Derbyshire
<$$font> , where one of the Name of <font> Sacheverel <$$font> , being
High Sheriff that Year , he was by him invited to preach at the Assizes
; which Sermon was afterwards printed with a Dedication to the said
Sheriff , wherein were several Things reflecting on the Government ;
GIBSON-1729-2,58.141

and being by some Means or other on the 5th of <font> November <$$font>
following put up to preach before the Lord Mayor of <font> London
<$$font> and Court of Aldermen , he there delivered that Sermon , which
made so great a Noise , and brought him upon his Trial .
GIBSON-1729-2,58.142

His Text was on these Words of St. <font> Paul <$$font> , 4 <font>
Corinth. <$$font> Chap. II. ver. 26 . <font> In Perils among false
Brethren : <$$font> Where , instead of commemorating the Deliverances
that happened on that Day , first by the Discovery of the Powder Plot ,
and afterwards by King <font> William <$$font> 's Landing , whereby the
Protestant Religion was twice under God preserved to this and other
Nations , as well as our Civil Liberties ; he , <paren> to the great
Surprize of most of those who heard him <$$paren> by several plain
Inferences , while he was pressing Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance
, fell foul on the Revolution and all who espoused such Principles , as
being Enemies to their Country . GIBSON-1729-2,58.143

The Duke of <P_59> <font> Marlborough <$$font> and the rest of the
Ministry , those also in both Houses of Parliament who adhered to them ,
were the false Brethren he aimed at , because of the Toleration Act
which they supported , and which he compared to the <font> Trojan-Horse
<$$font> full of Arms and Blood , that would one time or other pull down
the Established Church . GIBSON-1729-2,59.144

He made several sly insinuations against some of the Bishops and other
Clergymen , who were not Men of his own Sentiments , <paren> even not
sparing his Benefactors <$$paren> who from Motives of Charity and the
Rules of good Policy , concurred with the State in shewing Favour to the
Dissenters . GIBSON-1729-2,59.145

Nor did he confine himself to the Living only , GIBSON-1729-2,59.146

but also raked into the Ashes of the Dead , by falling on those who in
former Times had been of the same Principles ; particularly Archbishop
<font> Grindal <$$font> , whom he called a perfidious Prelate and a
false Son of the Church , because he had favoured the Puritans in his
Time . Notwithstanding that Reverend Father was a Man of an Exemplary
Life ; was one of the Compilers of the Book of Common-Prayer , and an
Exile in Queen <font> Mary <$$font> 's Reign for his steady adherence to
the Protestant Cause . GIBSON-1729-2,59.147

In short , his whole Sermon was nothing but a Heap of seditious and
uncharitable Invectives , full of high-sounding Words and pompous
Comparisons , the better to inflame the Minds of the Multitude ,
GIBSON-1729-2,59.148

and to this <P_60> end he also misapply'd both Scripture and History ,
and all with an Air of the greatest Assurance . GIBSON-1729-2,60.149

It may well be remembered what Noise this Sermon made , being delivered
before the chief Persons of the City of <font> London <$$font> , where
most of the Supplies were usually raised , GIBSON-1729-2,60.150

and People spoke as they were affected , some applauding the Preacher's
Zeal and Courage , GIBSON-1729-2,60.151

others were astonished at his Assurance , GIBSON-1729-2,60.152

and looked upon him as a turbulent Fellow and a mischievous Incendiary ,
to vent such false Invectives in so solemn a Place , especially at a
time which called for the greatest Unanimity . GIBSON-1729-2,60.153

But when this Sermon was printed , it made still a far greater Noise ,
GIBSON-1729-2,60.154

and was soon spread into all Parts of the Kingdom ; so that the Ministry
taking great Offence thereat , and their Patience being quite tired out
with many other Complaints of the same kind , that came from all
Quarters , resolved to bring this bold Offender to trial , that they
might deter others from the like Practices . GIBSON-1729-2,60.155

For little or nothing was heard from the Pulpit in many Places ,
especially from the younger Sort of Clergymen , but the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance , with such Inferences as might
give People a Dislike to the Ministry , the Revolution-Principles and
all the Laws and Constitutions founded upon them ; tho indeed Dr.
<font> Sacheverel <$$font> <P_61> had of all others rendered himself the
most obnoxious to Censure , both because of the place where his Sermon
was preached , and likewise because the printing of that Sermon had
brought it into every body's hands , and made it a Bone of Contention
among all sorts of People throughout the Kingdom . GIBSON-1729-2,61.156

About this time the Parliament met at <font> Westminster <$$font> ,
where Complaint being made of the Sermon , it was produced . and
several Paragraphs in it were read , with the Dedication of the Sermon
preach'd at <font> Derby <$$font> , in order to his Impeachment before
the Lords . GIBSON-1729-2,61.157

But some opposed this Method of proceeding , thinking it would be doing
the Doctor too much honour , and that the Time was not very reasonable
to make too great a noise about him , which this would do , and by that
means might increase his Party , considering how much the Generality of
the Clergy were disgusted ; GIBSON-1729-2,61.158

and therefore judged it more advisable to have him try'd before some
inferior Court . GIBSON-1729-2,61.159

This was the wisest Advice , as appear'd afterwards .
GIBSON-1729-2,61.160

But the Majority falling in with the Great Men , who were for his
Impeachment ; and those who favour'd the Doctor's Cause being in hopes
of some happy Turn by this solemn and august Way of Proceeding , as it
would alarm the Nation , did therefore all they could underhand to press
it forwards . Whereupon the House resolved , <P_62> " That both the
Books were malicious , scandalous , and seditious Libels , reflecting on
the Queen and her Government , the Revolution and Protestant Succession
, and upon both Houses of Parliament , tending to alienate the Minds of
her Majesty's good Subjects , and to create Jealousies and Divisions
among them . " GIBSON-1729-2,62.161

The Doctor being also taken into custody , the Commons moved to draw up
Articles of Impeachment against him , in order to his Trial .
GIBSON-1729-2,62.162

Accordingly they charged the Doctor with High Crimes and Misdemeanours ,
which they sum'd up in four Articles , founded upon the above-mentioned
Resolve , GIBSON-1729-2,62.163

and appointed Managers to carry on the Trial ; <font> viz. <$$font> Mr.
<font> Boyle <$$font> , who was since created Lord <font> Carleton
<$$font> , then one of the Principal Secretaries of State ; Sir <font>
Robert Walpole <$$font> ; Sir <font> Peter King <$$font> , the present
Lord Chancellor ; Sir <font> Thomas Parker <$$font> , the late
Chancellor ; Mr. <font> Cowper <$$font> , Brother to the late Lord of
that Name , afterwards Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer ; Sir <font>
Joseph Jokyll <$$font> , the present Master of the Rolls ; the late Lord
<font> Lechmere <$$font> , Attorney-General ; Mr. <font> Pulteney
<$$font> ; Mr. <font> Smith <$$font> , one of the Tellers of the
Exchequer ; Mr. <font> Hambden <$$font> , and some others , all Persons
of Note , and several of them Men of great Probity and Sufficiency .
GIBSON-1729-2,62.164

The Doctor was allowed to have for his Counsel , Sir <font> Simon
Harcourt <$$font> , who was a <P_63> Rival to some of the great Men ,
and had no small Influence on those who opposed the Court ; Sir <font>
Constantine Phipps <$$font> ; and Mr. <font> Dee <$$font> , a Civilian
; besides several others who were Assistants , all of them Men devoted
to the Doctor's Cause , except Mr. <font> Dodd <$$font> , who was
afterwards made Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer .
GIBSON-1729-2,63.165

The Managers , in making good the Articles of Impeachment , discussed
many things of Importance to the Nation , wherein People had been misled
by the Doctor and other such Engines . GIBSON-1729-2,63.166

The Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance , which had been so
often made use of as a Handle to gratify Mens private Views , and to
cast an Odium on the Revolution , thereby to influence Peoples Minds
against the Succession in the House of <font> Hanover <$$font> , was
exposed as seditious , when preached up to serve those pernicious Ends ;
GIBSON-1729-2,63.167

and such Persons were proved Enemies to the Nation , who made this their
constant Topick , at a time when none of the Subjects had in the least
opposed the Queen and Government , but had contributed cheerfully in all
Exigencies against the common Enemy : And that these Preachers were
themselves the only Persons guilty of the Crimes against which they
inveighed so loudly in their Sermons . GIBSON-1729-2,63.168

The Resistance made at the Revolution in 1688 , was justified , where
there was a total Subversion <P_64> of the Religion , Laws and Liberties
of the People ; GIBSON-1729-2,64.169

and as it was begun and carry'd on with the Concurrence and Voice of the
whole Nation , so it was warranted from Reason and the constant Practice
of this Kingdom ; the Subjects having in all times of Danger stood up in
defence of their Liberties . GIBSON-1729-2,64.170

The just Rights of the Royal Prerogative and the Rights of the Subjects
were both set forth and maintain'd , according to the Fundamental
Constitution of <font> England . <$$font> GIBSON-1729-2,64.171

The Honour of the Government was also vindicated , and the Toleration
granted to Protestant Dissenters , warranted , as being altogether
consistent with the Safety of the Established Church , and not only
agreeable to Christian Charity , but to that Clemency and Tenderness
which all good Governments ought to shew , to every part of the
Community . GIBSON-1729-2,64.172

These being the chief Matters where in the Doctor had given Offence ,
the Managers therefore insisted much upon them in their Pleadings , so
as to make out the Charge against him in each Article ; besides his
Blunders , his false Application of Scripture and other Particulars ,
which some of them thought fit also to animadvert upon , perhaps that
his Friends might not think too highly of him : GIBSON-1729-2,64.173

for the common People , and those who were fond of Novelties , began to
idolize him very much . GIBSON-1729-2,64.174

The Bishops <P_65> being likewise required to give their Opinion in this
Trial , to satisfy those who might think the Doctor hardly dealt with ,
in case the Bishops had been altogether silent . GIBSON-1729-2,65.175

Therefore several of that Reverend Bench spoke their Minds freely ,
particularly Dr. <font> Burnet <$$font> Bishop of <font> Sarum <$$font>
, an honest publick_spirited Man , who was very zealous and active for
the Protestant Interest and the Succession in the House of <font>
Hanover <$$font> , and had been formerly no less active and zealous for
the Revolution , which rendered him very obnoxious to all the
disaffected Party . GIBSON-1729-2,65.176

This Reverend Prelate recited most of the Transactions of that and the
preceding Times , wherein , he set forth the ill use had been made of
the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance to carry on the
Design of some bad Men , and in particular to flatter weak or bad
Princes in their Encroachments on their Subjects Liberties , and made
just Observations on the Calamities which such things had brought upon
the Nation . GIBSON-1729-2,65.177

The present Bishop of <font> Durham <$$font> spoke also on the same Side
, GIBSON-1729-2,65.178

and Dr. <font> Trimnel <$$font> , who was then Bishop of <font> Norwich
<$$font> , tho a Man of a mild peacable Disposition , yet could not
forbear taking notice of the evil Tendency of that Sermon ,
GIBSON-1729-2,65.179

and therefore gave his Judgment against it . GIBSON-1729-2,65.180

But Dr. <font> Wake <$$font> , the present Archbishop of <font>
Canterbury <$$font> , <P_66> who was then Bishop of <font> Lincoln
<$$font> , canvassed every part of the Sermon very narrowly ,
GIBSON-1729-2,66.181

and confirm'd all the Managers had said to make out the Charge on each
Article , by giving a further Insight into the Tendency of his whole
Discourse ; which he did with great Judgment and Perspicuity , and that
by the most fair and candid Construction that could be put upon it ;
having also taken notice , as some of the Managers had done before ,
that the Doctor had misapply'd History and Scripture to promote those
Designs which had been charged upon him , in the Articles of Impeachment
. GIBSON-1729-2,66.182

Now it was the Design of the Ministry and the other leading Men in both
Houses , to expose the unreasonableness of the complaints that had been
made against the Government , GIBSON-1729-2,66.183

and they were in hopes such a publick Trial might be the Means to make
the whole Nation sensible how much they had been imposed on by those ,
who from a false Pretence of Religion and Zeal for the Established
Church , were only carrying on such designs as might in the end destroy
the Constitution , or at least might have this unhappy Effect , to
retard the Measures that were then on foot against the common Enemy .
GIBSON-1729-2,66.184

But how far they succeeded in this , was soon manifest from the Changes
that happened . GIBSON-1729-2,66.185

For this extraordinary way of proceeding against the Doctor , instead of
<P_67> convincing Men of their Folly , it rendered them the more
outrageous . GIBSON-1729-2,67.186

And as the unusual Solemnity of the Trial made a very great noise , not
only throughout this Nation , but over all <font> Europe <$$font> , so
those who were Enemies to the common Cause and the Welfare of <font>
England <$$font> improved every Circumstances to incense the People more
than ever against the Government ; GIBSON-1729-2,67.187

and that which encouraged them above all things , was a Rumour that the
Queen secretly favoured the Doctor's Cause , which in the issue proved
true , as will anon appear . GIBSON-1729-2,67.188

During the time of this long Trial , which lasted most part of the
Spring , there happened great Disorders in diverse Parts of the Kingdom
, stirred up by disaffected persons ; GIBSON-1729-2,67.189

and at <font> London <$$font> the Doctor was every day attended to
<font> Westminster <$$font> , and back to the <font> Temple <$$font> ,
where he lodged , with very great Crowds of Rabble , who insulted all
Persons whom they met unless they would join with them in their Huzza's
and Acclamations of Applause to the Doctor and <font> High-Church for
ever <$$font> , which was their common Cry . GIBSON-1729-2,67.190

This was at first in some measure overlook'd by the Government , who
probably imagin'd that sort of People would soon be tir'd out with their
daily Attendance , or at least as most of them were Servants and
Apprentices , that their Masters would not permit them long to leave
their <P_68> Business : GIBSON-1729-2,68.191

but it happened quite otherwise ; GIBSON-1729-2,68.192

for the Disaffection became like a contagious Distemper , which seizes
without distinction . GIBSON-1729-2,68.193

The Servants were encouraged by their Masters , GIBSON-1729-2,68.194

and Money was given to spirit up the Mob , who went in great Bodies and
pulled down several of the Dissenters Meeting Houses , and committed
many other Outrages , until a stop was put to their Career , by sending
Soldiers among them . GIBSON-1729-2,68.195

But when these Tumults were suppressed about <font> London <$$font> ,
the Mob in the Country fell upon the Meeting Houses in several other
Towns and Cities ; GIBSON-1729-2,68.196

and not only insulted the Dissenters , but those who favoured them ,
being encouraged and connived at by Mayors , Justices , and other
Officers of the Peace . GIBSON-1729-2,68.197

By this means his Cause gathered strength , GIBSON-1729-2,68.198

and Reports were spread throughout the whole Kingdom , that he had been
prosecuted for no other reason , but his Adherence to the Church and
Monarchy , which were industriously put together , that those who had
called him to account for his Doctrines , might be looked upon as
Persons of Anti-monarchical Principles , and Enemies to the Established
Church ; which gave the generality of People , <paren> who were now
grown in a manner infatuated <$$paren> very ill Impressions of the
Ministry , by which means the great Things they had done for the Honour
and Safety of the Nation and the Good of all <P_69> Christendom , were
in a great measure trampled under foot . GIBSON-1729-2,69.199

But besides the restless Endeavours of openly disaffected Persons , who
had a deep Share in all these Disorders ; the Methods taken by the
Doctor's Friends in his Trial , contributed also very much to give
strength to that Cause , by bringing him into great Credit as an honest
and publick-spirited Man , who had stood up manfully in a time of
imminent Danger . GIBSON-1729-2,69.200

His Counsel being sensible that the Insinuations of his Sermon were so
open and barefac'd that they might justly render him obnoxious to
Censure and Punishment , did therefore all that was in their power ,
both in the Answers to the Articles of Impeachment , and in their
Pleadings , to clear his Intentions from the Imputation of Disloyalty to
the Queen , and Disrespect to the Government . GIBSON-1729-2,69.201

The like Care was taken of his Speech , which made so great noise ; in
composing of which , besides his Counsel , some Clergymen were thought
to be concerned , <font> viz. <$$font> Dr. <font> Atterburry <$$font>
, Dr. <font> Moss <$$font> and Dr. <font> Smallridge <$$font> ;
because they were frequently with him in <font> Westminster-Hall
<$$font> , and at his Apartments in the Temple . GIBSON-1729-2,69.202

<font> Atterbury <$$font> was a proud obstinate Man , and a hot Stickler
against Men of moderate Principles , which caused him to be much cry'd
up by some sort of People , tho he was no Friend to the present happy
Establishment , as has <P_70> since been made manifest .
GIBSON-1729-2,70.203

He had the Reputation of being a fine Preacher , GIBSON-1729-2,70.204

but his Delivery was so affected , that many of the younger Clergymen
studying to imitate him , rendered themselves very ridiculous by it .
GIBSON-1729-2,70.205

<font> Moss <$$font> was also esteem'd for his preaching .
GIBSON-1729-2,70.206

But Dr. <font> Smallridge <$$font> had most Learning ;
GIBSON-1729-2,70.207

he was modest withal , GIBSON-1729-2,70.208

but having been much at <font> Oxford <$$font> , he there imbib'd some
narrow Principles , tho otherwise he was reckoned a deserving Man .
GIBSON-1729-2,70.209

Besides Dr. <font> Smallridge <$$font> , there were also some other
Persons of good Reputation , both among the Nobility , the Bishops and
Clergy , who at the same time they did not altogether approve of the
Virulency and Bitterness of the Doctor's Sermon , yet fell into the same
Sentiments ; among whom was Sir <font> William Dawes <$$font> then
Bishop of <font> Chester <$$font> , Dr. <font> Sharp <$$font>
Archbishop of <font> York <$$font> , and Dr. <font> Compton <$$font>
Bishop of <font> London . <$$font> GIBSON-1729-2,70.210

The two last were the more regarded , that they stood up so strenuously
against the Arbitrary Measures of King <font> James <$$font> 's Reign ,
GIBSON-1729-2,70.211

but being both grown very old and infirm , were now much abused by
<font> Atterbury <$$font> and some other Clergymen , who kept a constant
Watch over them , and took the advantage of their great Age , and their
Inability to go abroad , to impose many Falshoods upon them .
GIBSON-1729-2,70.212

Nevertheless those who affected a more than ordinary Zeal for the
Established Church , thought the better of their Cause , <P_71> that two
Prelates of so great Reputation patronized it : GIBSON-1729-2,71.213

And when the Doctor's Speech came to be published , tho as to the matter
of it , there was neither that Submission shewn to the Government , nor
that charitable Temper which became a Christian Minister , yet as they
had been careful to avoid such Bitterness of Expression as was in the
Sermon , and likewise to colour over some things that had given Offence
, so it had a very bad Tendency . GIBSON-1729-2,71.214

This Speech contain'd many Insults , cloath'd under the soft Appearance
of Duty and Humility , GIBSON-1729-2,71.215

and was full of the most solemn Protestations of his Innocency ; so that
it could not fail to gain upon the ignorant sort , and those who were
prejudiced against the publick Measures . GIBSON-1729-2,71.216

A way was also opened into the Queen's Favour by many flattering
Protestations for her Honour and Safety ; GIBSON-1729-2,71.217

and the better to impose on the Queen and the High-Church Party ,
References were made to the Writings of several Bishops , and other
Eminent Divines , concerning Passive-Obedience and Non-Resistance , and
to the Homilies concerning Rebellion ; which were publish'd with his
Speech , that it might be thought he had preached no other Doctrines
than those of the Church of <font> England <$$font> ;
GIBSON-1729-2,71.218

and to put the best Colour upon his insinuations against the Toleration
, those Persons were only complain'd <P_72> of , who would conform
merely {TEXT:meerly} for the sake of Employments {TEXT:Imployments} in
the Government , and upon no other account . GIBSON-1729-2,72.219

Some licentious Passages extant in divers books and Libels were also
publish'd , as those things against which the Doctor had inveigh'd with
so much warmth in his Sermon ; which being mentioned in this Speech with
a Concern such as seem'd becoming a Minister of the Gospel , his Zeal
and Conduct was therefore much approved . GIBSON-1729-2,72.220

But as most People saw plainly that the Drift of this Sermon was against
the Toleration , which was become very odious after all this Noise about
it ; so it was made use of as a further Aggravation against the Ministry
, that they had suffered such impious Books to be printed , without
inflicting some exemplary Punishment on the Authors and Publishers of
them . GIBSON-1729-2,72.221

And therefore those in Power were in all places represented as Persons
who countenanced Schism , and all manner of Irreligion ; whereby the
Speech had a worse effect upon the Publick than the Sermon ,
notwithstanding the Managers made it appear that the Authors of some of
these Books had been prosecuted , that others had been dead a long time
, and that some of these Books had been printed abroad , and were sent
over privately into the Kingdom ; and that others were so very
insignificant , that {TEXT:h_at} they had lain several Years in
Obscurity , <P_73> until the Doctor and his Friends had revived them ,
to evade the Charge brought against him . GIBSON-1729-2,73.222

Upon the whole , the Doctor was voted guilty by a great Majority ;
GIBSON-1729-2,73.223

his two Sermons were ordered to be burnt by the hands of the common
Hangman , himself forbid to preach for three Years .
GIBSON-1729-2,73.224

The Lords also , to shew their just Indignation against the Books
produced by the Doctor , ordered them likewise to be burnt in the same
manner . GIBSON-1729-2,73.225

And when the Queen came to the House in <font> April <$$font> following
, she declared her Resentment particularly against those who had taken
false Impressions , from the Artifices made use of to impose on the
Publick a Belief that the Church was in danger , because some licentious
Libels had crept forth , which she said was an Evil complain'd of in all
Ages , and could not be altogether prevented by the greatest Care and
Vigilancy . GIBSON-1729-2,73.226

In the same Speech she took notice , that as she had at all times been
forward to suppress Vice and Irreligion , so she was ready to give
Assent to any good Laws that should be thought of , utterly to
discountenance all such Licentiousness . GIBSON-1729-2,73.227

Hitherto the Queen spoke the Sentiments of her Ministers , tho by this
time her Mind was very much alienated from them . GIBSON-1729-2,73.228

And it was even observed after the Death of the Prince of <font> Denmark
<$$font> her Husband , which happened near two Years before <P_74> this
Trial , that she grew more cold and indifferent towards them , than when
he was alive . GIBSON-1729-2,74.229

That Prince being somewhat infirm and unactive , neither affected the
Grandeur of a Crown , nor the Toils of Business , tho he had right
Sentiments concerning the publick Affairs . GIBSON-1729-2,74.230

He was always for a strict Harmony with the Allies abroad ,
GIBSON-1729-2,74.231

and being himself of a different Profession from the Established Church
, was by that means also a Friend to the Toleration .
GIBSON-1729-2,74.232

But the Queen , as to her private Opinion , was of another mind :
GIBSON-1729-2,74.233

only out of respect to the Prince , and because the Toleration was
granted before her Time , she also comply'd with the Continuance of it .
GIBSON-1729-2,74.234

