<BEGIN_gisborne-1802-2>

<P_53>

<heading>

Sermon III . GISBORNE-1802-2,53.4

On the Nature and Efficacy of Divine Grace . GISBORNE-1802-2,53.5

<$$heading>

2 Cor. xii. 9 . GISBORNE-1802-2,53.7

<font> And he said unto me , " My Grace is sufficient for thee :
GISBORNE-1802-2,53.8

for my Strength is made perfect in Weakness . " GISBORNE-1802-2,53.9

For the accomplishment of any useful design , it appears necessary ,
that all inferior instruments should be subjected to one superintending
power . GISBORNE-1802-2,53.10

In the structures of human mechanism , however numerous , however
complicated may be the contrivances by which the ultimate object is
pursued ; some main-spring , some master-wheel , some ruling force ,
some preponderating weight , actuates and controls all the subordinate
parts , GISBORNE-1802-2,53.11

and gives motion and efficacy to the whole . GISBORNE-1802-2,53.12

It <P_54> is thus , if we may presume to connect together by any
semblance of comparison the labours of terrestrial feebleness and
ignorance with the operations of infinite perfection ; that the divine
wisdom conducts its plans to their appointed success .
GISBORNE-1802-2,54.13

Earth and air , cold and heat , clouds and sunshine , the interchange of
day and night , the gradual vicissitudes of seasons , and all the
principles of vegetation by which food is produced and ripened for
mankind : these are all but means governed and directed by the
providence of God . GISBORNE-1802-2,54.14

Youth and age , health and sickness , affluence and poverty , prosperity
and distress : these and all other secondary causes through which
salvation is vouchsafed to man , are all but instruments in the hands of
the First Cause : GISBORNE-1802-2,54.15

these are all but ministering agents subservient to the sway of the
grace of Christ . GISBORNE-1802-2,54.16

Never perhaps was the power of divine grace more gloriously displayed
than in its effects wrought through the instrumentality of St. Paul !
GISBORNE-1802-2,54.17

Never perhaps among all the children of Adam did it form to itself a
more able , or a more willing minister ! GISBORNE-1802-2,54.18

This great instructor of the Gentiles , in vindicating his character and
his apostolical authority against the insinuations of false teachers
among the Corinthians , was led to specify , among other <P_55>
evidences of his divine commission , the visions and revelations with
which he had been favoured in a very uncommon measure by his Lord .
GISBORNE-1802-2,55.19

He describes himself as having been caught up into Paradise ; into the
third Heaven , whether in the body or out of the body he knew not ; and
as having heard unspeakable words , words not to be uttered by human
lips . GISBORNE-1802-2,55.20

The Saviour of the world , however , shewed himself not unmindful that
his holy apostle was but man . GISBORNE-1802-2,55.21

According to the wisdom displayed in all the dispensations of this
providence , he tempered his extraordinary mercies with such a portion
of humiliation and fatherly chastisement , as might guard his beloved
servant against spiritual pride , and extravagant ideas of his
superiority over his fellow Christians . GISBORNE-1802-2,55.22

<font> There was given <$$font> to St. Paul , to use his own words ,
<font> a thorn in the flesh , the messenger of Satan to buffet him ,
lest he should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelations . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,55.23

This thorn in the flesh , the precise nature of which , as being well
known to the Corinthians , among whom had resided eighteen months , it
was not necessary to particularise ; evidently appears to have been some
personal infirmity , which St. Paul regarded as likely to impair his
ability and lessen his usefulness <P_56> as a preacher of religion .
GISBORNE-1802-2,56.24

In this verse from which the text is taken , he stiles it an <font>
infirmity <$$font> . GISBORNE-1802-2,56.25

In his epistle to the Corinthians , he alludes to it in similar
expression . GISBORNE-1802-2,56.26

<font> Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel
with you at the first . GISBORNE-1802-2,56.27

And my temptation which was in my flesh , ye despised not nor rejected .
<$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,56.28

From the tenth and eleventh chapters of his second epistle to the church
at Corinth , we learn that the enemies of the apostle represented him as
<font> rude in speech , contemptible in speech , and weak in bodily
presence . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,56.29

Here perhaps we obtain some insight into the nature of the infirmity
with which he was visited . GISBORNE-1802-2,56.30

But whatever the thorn in the flesh might be , the apostle , grieved at
the prospect of its interference with the efficaciousness of his
ministry , GISBORNE-1802-2,56.31

with earnest and repeated supplication besought the Lord Jesus that it
might depart from him . GISBORNE-1802-2,56.32

The prayer Christ did not see fit to grant . GISBORNE-1802-2,56.33

The motive which prompted it he beheld with complacence .
GISBORNE-1802-2,56.34

He beheld the heart of his apostle filled with zeal for his glory .
GISBORNE-1802-2,56.35

But he knew , what the apostle could not know , the methods by which his
glory might best be promoted . GISBORNE-1802-2,56.36

He knew that the feebleness of the servant would conduce to the glory of
his Lord ; that the imperfection of the instrument would magnify the
strength <P_57> of him by whom it was wielded ; that the successful
labours of the apostle , in the face of circumstances which might in
some degree contribute to excite scorn or disgust , would prove that the
<font> faith <$$font> of his converts <font> stood not in the wisdom of
men , but in the power of God . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,57.37

He replied unto the petitions of St. Paul ; <font> My grace is
sufficient for thee : GISBORNE-1802-2,57.38

for my strength is made perfect in weakness . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,57.39

" Be not afraid ; GISBORNE-1802-2,57.40

be not dispirited . GISBORNE-1802-2,57.41

I the Lord am able to complete my own work . GISBORNE-1802-2,57.42

My grace , without which thou canst do nothing , shall be with thee :
GISBORNE-1802-2,57.43

and that grace can accomplish every thing . " GISBORNE-1802-2,57.44

In this reply of our Saviour to the request of his apostle , we read a
distinct intimation of the nature and the importance of divine grace .
GISBORNE-1802-2,57.45

The instruction thus conveyed to St. Paul is applicable to every man .
GISBORNE-1802-2,57.46

In the farther consideration therefore of the subject , I propose , in
the present and in two subsequent discourses , to explain the necessity
of the grace of Christ to salvation ; to prove that every man is enabled
to obtain this grace ; to indicate the means by which it is to be
acquired ; to point out the tests and proofs by which the possession of
it is to be ascertained ; and to evince its complete and unalterable
sufficiency . GISBORNE-1802-2,57.47

Some observations will afterwards <P_58> be severally addressed , to
those who disregard or despise the grace of God , and to those who
labour to obtain and to improve it . GISBORNE-1802-2,58.48

1. The grace of Christ is indispensably necessary to salvation .
GISBORNE-1802-2,58.49

Is a long train of argument requisite to establish this proposition ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,58.50

Contemplate the picture which the Scriptures present of the corruption
of human nature ; and of the consequences , in which that corruption by
its own inherent tendencies would terminate . GISBORNE-1802-2,58.51

If <font> the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth ;
<$$font> if <font> the heart is deceitful above all things , and
desperately wicked ; <$$font> if <font> in us <$$font> , by nature ,
<font> dwelleth no good thing ; <$$font> if <font> we are altogether
gone out of the way , altogether become abominable , <$$font> so that by
nature <font> there is no one that seeketh after God , no one that is
righteous , no not one : <$$font> how is sanctification to be attained ;
GISBORNE-1802-2,58.52

how is destruction to be escaped ? GISBORNE-1802-2,58.53

How is the Ethiopian to change his skin , and the leopard his spots ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,58.54

How is the servant of sin , to become the servant of holiness ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,58.55

How is the soul , groaning under the chains of the prince of darkness ,
to be restored to the glorious liberty of the children of God ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,58.56

How is the bosom which is the habitation of every impure thought , every
unhallowed desire , <P_59> to become the temple of the Holy Ghost ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,59.57

Will you answer , " By repentance ; by faith in Christ ; by perseverance
in every good work ? " GISBORNE-1802-2,59.58

Be it so . GISBORNE-1802-2,59.59

Is repentance , is faith , is perseverance in good works in your own
power ? GISBORNE-1802-2,59.60

Consult the Scriptures on each of these points . GISBORNE-1802-2,59.61

The Scriptures call upon every man every where to repent .
GISBORNE-1802-2,59.62

But do they affirm , do they imply , that man can repent by his own
strength ? GISBORNE-1802-2,59.63

Do they admit the possibility of such a supposition ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,59.64

What then is the import of the expressions of the prophet Jeremiah ,
expressions not less wisely , than piously interwoven into the liturgy
of our church ; GISBORNE-1802-2,59.65

<font> Turn thou us unto thee , O Lord ; and we shall be turned :
GISBORNE-1802-2,59.66

turn thou me , O Lord ; and I shall be turned ; GISBORNE-1802-2,59.67

for thou art the Lord my God ? <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,59.68

What is the import of the following passages in the writings of St.
Luke and St. Paul ? GISBORNE-1802-2,59.69

<font> God hath exalted Jesus to be a Prince and a Saviour , to give
repentance unto Israel . GISBORNE-1802-2,59.70

Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto Life .
GISBORNE-1802-2,59.71

In meekness instruct those that oppose themselves ; if God peradventure
will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,59.72

Is it not clear that repentance is to be sought as a gift from God ; as
a gift through the grace of Jesus Christ ? GISBORNE-1802-2,59.73

Enquire farther how the case <P_60> stands with respect to faith .
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.74

<font> Without faith it is impossible to please God .
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.75

By faith a man is to be justified . GISBORNE-1802-2,60.76

Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ , and thou shalt be saved . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.77

But do the Scriptures describe faith as an attainment within the grasp
of human ability ? GISBORNE-1802-2,60.78

What is the language of the Son of God ? GISBORNE-1802-2,60.79

<font> No man can come to me , except the Father who hath sent me draw
him . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,60.80

What saith St. Luke ? GISBORNE-1802-2,60.81

<font> Apollos helped them much , which had believed through grace .
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.82

The Lord opened the heart of Lydia , that she attended unto the things
which were spoken of Paul , and was baptized . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.83

How speaks St. Paul ? GISBORNE-1802-2,60.84

<font> Faith is the fruit of the Spirit . GISBORNE-1802-2,60.85

No man can say that Jesus is the Lord , but by the Holy Ghost .
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.86

To you , O Philippians , it is given to believe on Christ . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.87

Then with respect to practical holiness . Are Christian tempers and
good works the produce of your own exertions ? GISBORNE-1802-2,60.88

Do you learn such imaginations from the Scriptures ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.89

<font> It is God that worketh in you both to will and to do .
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.90

It is God who maketh you perfect in every good work , to do his will ,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight .
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.91

Let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably .
GISBORNE-1802-2,60.92

Righteousness , truth , love , long-suffering , gentleness , goodness ,
meekness , temperance , <P_61> are the fruits of the Spirit . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,61.93

It is thus that an examination into the natural state of the human heart
, and an enquiry into the method by which the different graces of the
Christian character are wrought in man , constrain us to ascribe every
thing in us which is good , to God , the Author of every good and
perfect gift . GISBORNE-1802-2,61.94

They constrain us to acknowledge , that as St. Paul , depressed by his
thorn in the flesh , could be enabled to preach the gospel with success
, only by the grace of Christ : so by that grace only , can man ,
labouring under his natural corruption , be enabled to attain eternal
life . GISBORNE-1802-2,61.95

They constrain us to acknowledge as indispensably necessary to salvation
that total change , which the Scriptures delineate under a variety of
figurative expressions , essentially of the same meaning , and
calculated , partly to exemplify its magnitude and effect , partly to
denote its supreme importance : a change which the word of God
attributes exclusively to the sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost
purchased for us by the sacrifice of Jesus Christ .
GISBORNE-1802-2,61.96

They constrain us to confess , that <font> Except a man be born of water
and of the Spirit ; <$$font> emblematically of water by baptism , and
substantially of the Spirit by the renovation of his corrupt nature unto
holiness ; <font> he can@ @not enter into the kingdom <P_62> of God .
GISBORNE-1802-2,62.97

They constrain us to confess , that we must become <font> new creatures
<$$font> ; that we must <font> be transformed by the renewing of our
minds ; <$$font> that we must <font> put off the old man , which is
corrupt , and be renewed in the spirit of our minds ; <$$font> that we
must <font> put on the new man , which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness <$$font> . GISBORNE-1802-2,62.98

They constrain us to confess , that if we are to be saved , <font> we
are to be served by the washing of regeneration , and the renewing of
the Holy Ghost . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,62.99

We are to be saved by receiving from the Spirit of God , not those
extraordinary and now no longer needed powers , which were requisite to
enable the first preachers of Christianity to confirm the truth of the
new religion by the evidence of miraculous attestations ; but that
influence which in every age is no less necessary to the salvation of
every Christian , than it was in primitive times to the salvation of the
apostles ; that influence which alone can enlighten the understanding ,
rectify the will , dispose us to repentance , establish us in faith ,
renew the heart unto godliness , supply strength to withstand temptation
, inspire holy resolutions and ability to fulfil them , and finally seal
the steadfast {TEXT:stedfast} servants of Christ through continuance in
faith , and in good works the fruits of faith , to eternal life .
GISBORNE-1802-2,62.100

<P_63>

II. The grace of Christ , as necessary to salvation , is placed within
the reach of every man . GISBORNE-1802-2,63.102

Does this assertion , so full of consolation and encouragement to the
terrified sinner , stand firm on Scriptural authority ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,63.103

On that authority it stands immovable . GISBORNE-1802-2,63.104

<font> God hath no pleasure that the wicked should die ; but that he
should return from his ways and live . GISBORNE-1802-2,63.105

God our Saviour will have all men to be saved , and to come to the
knowledge of the truth . GISBORNE-1802-2,63.106

Go ye into all the world , GISBORNE-1802-2,63.107

and preach the Gospel to every creature . GISBORNE-1802-2,63.108

He that spared not his own Son , but delivered him up for us all ; how
shall he not with him also freely give all things : <$$font> all things
needful to salvation , and as of all things the most needful , his grace
? GISBORNE-1802-2,63.109

<font> If ye , being evil , know how to give good gifts unto your
children : how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit
to them that ask him ! <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,63.110

But of what avail is the rope , which you hold forth to the shipwrecked
mariner ; if his eye is too dim to discern it , his hand too feeble to
grasp it ? GISBORNE-1802-2,63.111

Although it is apparent that God freely offers his grace to every man ;
is it also clear that every man has the power of accepting it ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,63.112

May there not be a natural or a moral impossibility , which may disable
the perishing <P_64> sinner from deriving benefit from the means of
deliverance when placed before him ? GISBORNE-1802-2,64.113

Among the numerous doubts and suspicions which have disquieted the
breasts of Christians , that which is here presented , if one of the
most distressing , is also one of the most extraordinary .
GISBORNE-1802-2,64.114

Do you ascribe to the Most High delusive offers ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,64.115

To the God of truth , do you ascribe shifts , and pretences and evasion
, which in the common transactions of life you would disclaim yourself ,
which you would condemn in any one of your fellow-creatures ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,64.116

Is it thus that you dishonour the Father of mercies , and render
nugatory his gracious proposal of universal salvation ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,64.117

<font> God is no respecter of persons . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,64.118

The offer which he makes to every man , he enables every man to accept .
GISBORNE-1802-2,64.119

No man ever committed any sin , but the grace of God was ready to have
qualified him to withstand it . GISBORNE-1802-2,64.120

No man ever committed any sin , but he might have obtained the grace of
God necessary for effectual resistance , had he antecedently chosen to
apply for it in proportion to this knowledge . GISBORNE-1802-2,64.121

Such has been the fact with respect to every sin which ever was
committed . GISBORNE-1802-2,64.122

Such will be the fact with respect to every sin which ever shall be
committed . GISBORNE-1802-2,64.123

God is not the Author of evil . GISBORNE-1802-2,64.124

<P_65>

He tempts no man to sin . GISBORNE-1802-2,65.126

He places no man under a necessity of transgressing the divine law .
GISBORNE-1802-2,65.127

He leaves no man , in any instance , destitute of the power of obtaining
that grace which would have preserved him from transgression .
GISBORNE-1802-2,65.128

He mocks no man ; GISBORNE-1802-2,65.129

however some , who have blindly misinterpreted his word , have presented
him as mocking the great mass of the human race ; GISBORNE-1802-2,65.130

he mocks no man by groundless hopes , by calls which can@ @not be heard
, by commands which can@ @not be obeyed , by offers which can@ @not be
accepted . GISBORNE-1802-2,65.131

He subjects no man , he permits no man to be subject , to a natural or
to a moral impossibility ; distinctions , if tried by fair reasoning ,
in this case without a difference , of accepting the mercy which he
proposes to all . GISBORNE-1802-2,65.132

God , the God of mercy , is faithful and just and true in all his
dealings . GISBORNE-1802-2,65.133

Could he be faithful and just and true in all his dealings , if , while
describing himself in terms the most comprehensive as holding forth a
blessing to all , he held it forth only to some : if , while in language
the most impressive , he urged every man to accept his mercy , he knew
that numbers were by his predetermined purpose ordained to remain for
ever destitute of the power of accepting it ? GISBORNE-1802-2,65.134

<P_66>

<font> God is love : <$$font> love to every being which he has made .
GISBORNE-1802-2,66.136

Could he be <font> love <$$font> to a being , who might have grounds for
replying to him at the day of judgment : " Thou sentest me into the
world incapable of serving thee . GISBORNE-1802-2,66.137

Thou calledst me ; GISBORNE-1802-2,66.138

but thou continuedst me under an impossibility of turning unto thee when
thou calledst . GISBORNE-1802-2,66.139

And now thou consignest me to everlasting perdition , for not doing that
which by nature I could not do ; that which by grace thou wouldst
{TEXT:wouldest} not enable me to perform . " GISBORNE-1802-2,66.140

God will be clear when he is judged . GISBORNE-1802-2,66.141

The judge of the whole earth shall do right . GISBORNE-1802-2,66.142

He is <font> love <$$font> , universal love . GISBORNE-1802-2,66.143

On St. Paul he freely bestowed the grace , which under the apostle's
infirmity was requisite . GISBORNE-1802-2,66.144

To every man the grace necessary to counteract and purify human
corruption is freely offered . GISBORNE-1802-2,66.145

To every man is the power given of accepting it , of improving under it
, of profiting by it unto salvation . GISBORNE-1802-2,66.146

<font> The grace of God , which bringeth salvation , hath appeared unto
all men ; teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts , we
should live soberly , righteously , and godly in this present world :
<$$font> enabling every man to discern <P_67> and to will that which is
right , to live acceptably to his Maker in godliness and true holiness ;
and thus stopping every mouth before God , thus cutting off all excuses
from those who complain of strictness and difficulties in religion , and
allege their natural weakness and depravity as a plea for disobeying the
commandments of the Lord . GISBORNE-1802-2,67.147

III. The means , by which the grace of God is to be obtained , as
distinctly revealed to us . GISBORNE-1802-2,67.148

What are these means ? GISBORNE-1802-2,67.149

The first is prayer . GISBORNE-1802-2,67.150

<font> Ask , and it shall be given unto you : GISBORNE-1802-2,67.151

seek , and ye shall find : GISBORNE-1802-2,67.152

knock , and it shall be opened unto you . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,67.153

But do these promises relate to the gift of the Holy Spirit ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,67.154

Our Saviour proceeds to shew by a familiar and most encouraging
illustration , that the Holy Ghost is their immediate object .
GISBORNE-1802-2,67.155

<font> If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father ; will he
give him a stone ? GISBORNE-1802-2,67.156

Or , if he ask a fish ; will he for a fish give him a serpent ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,67.157

Or , if he shall ask an egg ; will he offer him a scorpion ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,67.158

If ye there , being evil , know how to give good gifts unto your
children : how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit
to them that ask him ! <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,67.159

But is it not possible that <P_68> we may pray for the Holy Spirit ; and
yet fail of receiving the full blessing which we desire ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,68.160

Undoubtedly it is possible . GISBORNE-1802-2,68.161

<font> You <$$font> may <font> ask and receive not , because you ask
amiss . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,68.162

Can prayer then fail to obtain that blessing , which God has promised to
bestow on those who seek it by prayer ? GISBORNE-1802-2,68.163

Genuine prayer will never be disappointed . GISBORNE-1802-2,68.164

Let your prayers be real prayers , GISBORNE-1802-2,68.165

and they shall succeed . GISBORNE-1802-2,68.166

But if your prayers for sanctification through the spirit of God are
destitute of the qualifications which are necessary to render any prayer
acceptable ; if while you draw nigh unto your Lord with your mouth , and
honour him with your lips , your heart is far from him ; assuredly you
will worship him in vain . GISBORNE-1802-2,68.167

What then are the qualifications essential to the success of our prayers
for the Holy Spirit ? GISBORNE-1802-2,68.168

In the first place , faith ; a steadfast {TEXT:stedfast} conviction that
God will perform his promise of bestowing the gift of the Holy Ghost on
every man who seeks it aright . GISBORNE-1802-2,68.169

<font> If any of you lack wisdom <$$font> , saith St. James ; <font>
let him ask of God , that giveth to all men liberally and upbraideth not
, and it shall be given him . GISBORNE-1802-2,68.170

But let him ask in faith , nothing wavering ; GISBORNE-1802-2,68.171

for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and
tossed : GISBORNE-1802-2,68.172

for let not that man <P_69> think that he shall receive any thing of the
Lord . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,69.173

Wisdom is to be derived only through the Holy Ghost , who is denominated
the <font> Spirit of Wisdom . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,69.174

The faith , which is indispensable to the success of petitions for this
gift of the Holy Ghost , is equally necessary when you pray for any
other of the Christian graces . GISBORNE-1802-2,69.175

In the next place , your supplications must be accompanied with an
humble consciousness of your helpless state by nature , and of the value
of the blessings which you request . GISBORNE-1802-2,69.176

For otherwise , they will be devoid of that earnestness and fervency ,
which St. Paul connects with the service of the Lord ; which another
apostle describes as characteristic of <font> the prayer that availeth
much . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,69.177

And farther , your petitions for the aid of the Holy Spirit must be
persevering . GISBORNE-1802-2,69.178

Your heavenly Father may wisely determine to prove you by delaying to
comply with them . GISBORNE-1802-2,69.179

Will you lose that renewal of heart , without which you can@ @not enter
into the kingdom of God , by discontinuing your supplications ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,69.180

Be not discouraged : GISBORNE-1802-2,69.181

your supplications , though not yet granted , are heard .
GISBORNE-1802-2,69.182

The Lord is not slack concerning his promise . GISBORNE-1802-2,69.183

God only waiteth to be gracious . GISBORNE-1802-2,69.184

<P_70>

<font> Be not weary in well-doing <$$font> , in urging your request
before the throne of grace ; GISBORNE-1802-2,70.186

<font> for in due time you will reap , if you faint not : <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,70.187

in due time , and that too a time sufficiently speedy to meet the
exigences of your situation , you shall obtain the guidance , the
support , the consolation of the Spirit of God : guidance , support , or
consolation , not perhaps exactly according in kind or degree with the
special object of your prayer , but better adapted to promote your true
interest and the glory of the all-knowing giver .
GISBORNE-1802-2,70.188

St. Paul thrice besought the Lord in vain , that his infirmity might
depart from him . GISBORNE-1802-2,70.189

Was his persevering supplication unrewarded ? GISBORNE-1802-2,70.190

He received in return an assurance , that the grace of Christ should be
with him ; and in a measure abundantly sufficient to secure those
objects , for the attainment of which the apostle had been solicitous
that his thorn in the flesh should be removed . GISBORNE-1802-2,70.191

In addition to habitual prayer , you have yet another duty to fulfil ,
if you are sincerely desirous of the continual assistance of divine
grace . GISBORNE-1802-2,70.192

You must diligently labour to profit in piety and holiness by the grace
which has already been bestowed . GISBORNE-1802-2,70.193

<font> To him <$$font> , saith our Lord , <font> that hath , shall be
given : <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,70.194

to him who <P_71> has studied to improve , as instruments of godliness ,
the means and supplies of divine grace which have been placed within his
power , additional grace shall be afforded . GISBORNE-1802-2,71.195

<font> From him that hath not ; <$$font> from that slothful and wicked
servant who has neglected the talent which his rightful master had
entrusted to his care , under an injunction that it should be turned to
advantage ; <font> even that which he hath shall be taken away <$$font>
; GISBORNE-1802-2,71.196

the grace which he had received and despised shall be withdrawn .
GISBORNE-1802-2,71.197

Finally , if you would obtain the assistance of divine grace , you must
apply for it through the mediation of your Redeemer .
GISBORNE-1802-2,71.198

Through whose merits have we access to God ? GISBORNE-1802-2,71.199

Through the merits of him who died for us . GISBORNE-1802-2,71.200

In whose name are all our prayers to be presented to the Father ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,71.201

In the name of his beloved Son . GISBORNE-1802-2,71.202

Whose is the grace which we solicit ? GISBORNE-1802-2,71.203

The grace of the Lord Jesus . GISBORNE-1802-2,71.204

" My grace , " said Christ to this apostle , " is sufficient for thee .
" GISBORNE-1802-2,71.205

Through him , and unto him , let us apply for the sanctifying influence
of his Spirit . GISBORNE-1802-2,71.206

The consideration , however brief , of the subjects which have already
been noticed , has unavoidably occupied so much time , that the
remaining heads must be deferred unto a <P_72> future discourse .
GISBORNE-1802-2,72.207

Let me conclude , therefore , with addressing to you some few words of
general application , drawn from the remarks which have been laid before
you . GISBORNE-1802-2,72.208

Endeavour throughout life to bear in mind that of yourselves you can do
nothing : that you inherit a nature radically corrupted , prone to sin ,
averse to piety and holiness . GISBORNE-1802-2,72.209

Unless you build your religion upon this foundation , you build it upon
sand : GISBORNE-1802-2,72.210

for you do not build it upon the only solid foundation , that foundation
, that corner-stone , which is laid in the word of God .
GISBORNE-1802-2,72.211

But beware of deceiving yourselves by imagining , that this original
corruption of your nature affords you any plea for continuing in sin .
GISBORNE-1802-2,72.212

The grace of God , by which you may be preserved from falling into sin ,
by which you may be redeemed from the strongest bonds of depravity , is
freely offered to you through Christ at all times ;
GISBORNE-1802-2,72.213

and power is at all times given unto you from God to accept it .
GISBORNE-1802-2,72.214

Consider St. Paul's account of himself . GISBORNE-1802-2,72.215

<font> In my flesh , <$$font> saith he , <font> dwelleth no good thing .
GISBORNE-1802-2,72.216

I can@ @not do that which I would . GISBORNE-1802-2,72.217

The good which I approve , I do not . GISBORNE-1802-2,72.218

The evil which I disapprove , I do . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,72.219

This is the description of his state by nature . GISBORNE-1802-2,72.220

But how speaks he in another passage ? GISBORNE-1802-2,72.221

<font> I can do all things through Christ that <P_73> strengtheneth me .
GISBORNE-1802-2,73.222

Here he speaks of himself as under the influence of divine grace : and
as thus enabled to perform the whole of his duty .
GISBORNE-1802-2,73.223

Christ is at all times ready to strengthen every one of you to perform
your whole duty ; GISBORNE-1802-2,73.224

and whenever you fail , you fail by your own fault .
GISBORNE-1802-2,73.225

Turn your eyes then upon the Bible to learn the full extent of your duty
. GISBORNE-1802-2,73.226

Beware of being satisfied with that half-religion , that shadow of
Christianity , which in the eyes of the world is regarded as the
complete substance ; that counterfeit coin which passes current with
multitudes , but bears not the stamp of the King of kings .
GISBORNE-1802-2,73.227

Take your standard of duty from the word of God ; GISBORNE-1802-2,73.228

for by that standard you will be tried at the last day .
GISBORNE-1802-2,73.229

See what devotedness to God , what holiness of temper and of conduct ,
what living not unto yourself but to Christ who died for you , the
Scriptures require . GISBORNE-1802-2,73.230

Say not within your heart , " These things can@ @not be required of me ;
GISBORNE-1802-2,73.231

for I can@ @not attain unto them . " GISBORNE-1802-2,73.232

They are required of you ; GISBORNE-1802-2,73.233

for so God hath announced to you beforehand . GISBORNE-1802-2,73.234

You can attain unto them ; GISBORNE-1802-2,73.235

for God offers to enable you by his grace . GISBORNE-1802-2,73.236

Seek then his grace , that you may attain to that holiness , without
which no man shall see the Lord . GISBORNE-1802-2,73.237

<P_74>

So shall your sins be blotted out , and mercy and salvation extended to
you through the atonement of the Lord Jesus . GISBORNE-1802-2,74.239

But if you vainly persuade yourself that you may make religion a
secondary concern : if you fall short of scriptural holiness , because
you would not strive for the grace through which you might have
performed it : you will stand self-condemned at the judgement-seat of
Christ , GISBORNE-1802-2,74.240

and will confess that God would have had you to be saved , but that you
have yourself pulled down destruction with your own hands upon your own
head . GISBORNE-1802-2,74.241

<P_75>

<heading>

Sermon IV . GISBORNE-1802-2,75.244

On the Nature and Efficacy of Divine Grace . GISBORNE-1802-2,75.245

<$$heading>

2 Cor. xii. 9 . GISBORNE-1802-2,75.247

<font> And he said unto me , " My Grace is sufficient for thee :
GISBORNE-1802-2,75.248

for my Strength is made perfect in weakness . " GISBORNE-1802-2,75.249

In a former discourse on the same passage , when I had explained to you
the occasion on which the words of Christ , as quoted in the text , were
spoken ; and the particular sense in which they referred to the existing
situation of St. Paul : I endeavoured to shew that the instruction
which they conveyed was applicable to all men . GISBORNE-1802-2,75.250

I laid open to you , first , the evidence which the scriptures furnish
of the indispensable necessity of divine grace to salvation : secondly ,
the unbounded mercy <P_76> with which God offers his grace to every man
, and gives to every man the power of accepting it : and thirdly , the
means by the proper use of which this sanctifying influence of the Holy
Spirit may assuredly be obtained . GISBORNE-1802-2,76.251

Regarding therefore the observations which were stated under those three
branches of the general subject , as in an adequate measure present to
your recollection ; I now proceed , in humble dependence on the blessing
of God , to unfold to you the marks by which you may judge
{COM:missing_comma} every man for himself , whether your hearts are
under the government of the Holy Spirit . GISBORNE-1802-2,76.252

I trust to be enabled , on a future occasion , to execute the remainder
of my plan as originally stated , by manifesting the complete and
certain sufficiency of divine grace for every purpose for which it can
be desired or bestowed ; and by a general application of the whole
subject to persons of different descriptions . GISBORNE-1802-2,76.253

IV. I propose to set before you the tests and proofs by which the
effectual possession of divine grace is ascertained .
GISBORNE-1802-2,76.254

A tree is known by its fruits . GISBORNE-1802-2,76.255

A good tree can@ @not bring forth evil fruit : GISBORNE-1802-2,76.256

neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit .
GISBORNE-1802-2,76.257

If <P_77> your dispositions and your conduct are characterised by the
fruits of the Holy Spirit ; you may humbly confide that you are under
his effectual guidance . GISBORNE-1802-2,77.258

If your hearts and lives do not habitually display those demonstrations
of his prevailing influence ; you are not authorised to draw that
conclusion . GISBORNE-1802-2,77.259

What then are <font> the fruits of the Spirit ? <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,77.260

All <font> good and perfect gifts ; <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,77.261

for <font> every good and perfect gift is from above : <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,77.262

all the graces of the Christian character ; GISBORNE-1802-2,77.263

for every one of those graces is a plant foreign to the corrupt soil of
the human heart , GISBORNE-1802-2,77.264

and can flourish there only in consequence of being sown and nurtured by
the fostering care of the Spirit of God . GISBORNE-1802-2,77.265

In the sacred writings , these fruits or gifts of the Holy Ghost are
sometimes mentioned singly ; GISBORNE-1802-2,77.266

accordingly , as the inspired penman was led by his immediate subject to
delineate some particular feature of true religion : sometimes , when
the train of his argument carried him into a wider range of description
, several of them are noticed at once , and exhibited in one view .
GISBORNE-1802-2,77.267

To collect from the word of God the various fruits of the Holy Spirit
into one glorious assemblage ; to illustrate the nature of each ; and to
trace the precise course of enquiry necessary to qualify you to estimate
the degree , in which <P_78> they are severally produced in yourself ;
this would be a task which would demand , in addition to other
requisites , the compass of many discourses . GISBORNE-1802-2,78.268

On the present occasion , therefore , I must content myself with calling
your attention to some few of those fruits , and with selecting such as
are of prime importance . GISBORNE-1802-2,78.269

<font> To this man will I look , saith the Lord : even to him that is
poor and of a contrite spirit , and trembleth at my word .
GISBORNE-1802-2,78.270

Blessed are the poor in spirit : GISBORNE-1802-2,78.271

for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven . GISBORNE-1802-2,78.272

Thus saith the high and lofty one , that inhabiteth eternity , whose
name is holy : GISBORNE-1802-2,78.273

I dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,78.274

Have these fruits of the Holy Ghost , humility , and repentance , been
wrought in you ? GISBORNE-1802-2,78.275

Are you thoroughly penetrated with the conviction of the inherent
heinousness of sin ? GISBORNE-1802-2,78.276

Do you acknowledge that every transgression of the divine law is treason
against the sovereign of the universe : ingratitude to your most
bounteous benefactor : abomination in the sight of a God of holiness : A
forfeiture of the whole of that future reward , which was promised only
to perfect obedience : and a just ground for the punishment denounced
against all , who after <P_79> receiving , as all men have received ,
ability to perform their duty , shall be found guilty of any act of
rebellion ? GISBORNE-1802-2,79.277

Are you convinced , that by wilful transgression you have proved
yourself rebellious ? GISBORNE-1802-2,79.278

Are you convinced , by contemplating the depravity of the nature common
to all men , and the result of your personal experience , that you must
despair , if abandoned to yourself , of resisting the future allurements
of sin ? GISBORNE-1802-2,79.279

Do you feel an abhorrence of sin , because of its sinfulness ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,79.280

Are you earnestly solicitous to be delivered from sin , not merely on
account of the penalty which it entails , but on account of its native
deformity , its offensiveness in the sight of God ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,79.281

Do you begin to see the beauty and excellence of holiness ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,79.282

Are you submissively willing to be rescued from guilt and its
consequences , and to be reconciled to God , by such methods , whatever
they may be , as he in his wisdom shall ordain ? GISBORNE-1802-2,79.283

Then <font> hath God granted <$$font> unto you the grace of <font>
repentance ! <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,79.284

Then hath he wrought in you by his Spirit that self-abasement which is
the foundation of justifying faith in the Lord Jesus !
GISBORNE-1802-2,79.285

<font> The just shall live by faith : <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,79.286

and <font> faith is the fruit of the spirit . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,79.287

Is that fruit manifested <P_80> in you ? GISBORNE-1802-2,80.288

Do you receive with reverent acquiescence the scriptural revelation of
the nature and the office of the Messiah ? GISBORNE-1802-2,80.289

With respect to mysteries , concerning which the limited understanding
of man is of itself utterly incompetent to pronounce any decision ; do
you bring every thought into captivity before the declarations of God ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,80.290

Do you behold your Redeemer as the teacher of the will of God to man ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,80.291

Do you behold his blood as the fountain opened for the washing away of
sin ? GISBORNE-1802-2,80.292

Do you look to him as the Lamb of God ; the only , the all-sufficient
sacrifice , by which atonement is made for transgressors ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,80.293

Do you cordially believe that there is salvation in no other : that
there is no other name under heaven given among men , whereby you may be
saved : GISBORNE-1802-2,80.294

Do you look up to him as your advocate , your continual intercessor with
the Father ? GISBORNE-1802-2,80.295

Do you elevate your thoughts to him as the King of kings , seated on the
throne of glory at the right hand of God , Lord of angels and archangels
, of principalities and powers throughout the whole extent of creation :
as head over all things to his church , dispenser of light and strength
and life , the raiser of the dead , the appointed judge of the world ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,80.296

<P_81>

Do you renounce as altogether indefensible , as irreconcilably repugnant
to the divine plan of redemption , every pretension to the pardon of sin
, every claim to the inheritance of the saints , grounded on any
supposed merit of your own ? GISBORNE-1802-2,81.298

Do you desire to be found at the last day clothed exclusively in the
righteousness of Christ ; acceptable solely through the merits of his
atonement ? GISBORNE-1802-2,81.299

Then has <font> the grace of our Lord Jesus , the author and finisher of
our faith , <font> been <font> exceeding abundant <$$font> to you <font>
with faith which is in Christ , <$$font> even the <font> faith which is
the operation of God . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,81.300

All Christians however are not as yet perfect Christians .
GISBORNE-1802-2,81.301

All who are genuine members to the true church , the mystical body of
our Lord , are not yet <font> come in the unity of the faith , and of
the knowledge of the Son of God , unto a perfect man ; unto the measure
of the stature of the fulness of Christ . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,81.302

There may be some in this congregation , who , at the same time that
they humbly trust that they have laboured to attain grace unto
repentance and faith , perceive such ample grounds for deploring their
deficiencies in both , that they tremble lest they should be regarded in
the sight of God as effectually <P_82> possessed of neither .
GISBORNE-1802-2,82.303

Christ will not break the bruised reed . GISBORNE-1802-2,82.304

His lambs he will carry in his bosom . GISBORNE-1802-2,82.305

He beholds with compassion and forbearance ; GISBORNE-1802-2,82.306

he cheers with consolation and encouragement , the mourner who feareth
for his soul . GISBORNE-1802-2,82.307

He strengthens the weak hands GISBORNE-1802-2,82.308

and confirms the feeble knees . GISBORNE-1802-2,82.309

Examine then thine own breast , whosoever thou mayest be who art tempted
to despond ; GISBORNE-1802-2,82.310

examine whether it be thy earnest and habitual desire to be enabled to
repent and to believe . GISBORNE-1802-2,82.311

Examine whether this be the spirit of thy supplications before the
throne of grace : " Make me a contrite heart , O God !
GISBORNE-1802-2,82.312

Lord ! I believe : GISBORNE-1802-2,82.313

help thou mine unbelief . " GISBORNE-1802-2,82.314

Examine whether thy sorrow for sin , thy exertions in pursuit of
holiness , correspond with thy prayers . GISBORNE-1802-2,82.315

If to these enquiries thou receivest the answer of a good conscience ,
be comforted . GISBORNE-1802-2,82.316

Thou art already under the teaching of divine grace .
GISBORNE-1802-2,82.317

Persevere in thy course ; and the Lord Jesus will cause thy <font> godly
sorrow to work repentance to salvation not to be repented of ;
GISBORNE-1802-2,82.318

and will perfect that which is lacking in thy faith .
GISBORNE-1802-2,82.319

Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness :
GISBORNE-1802-2,82.320

for they shall be filled . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,82.321

<P_83>

I proceed to the consideration of other fruits of the Holy Spirit .
GISBORNE-1802-2,83.323

<font> The Lord direct your hearts <$$font> , saith St. Paul , <font>
into the love of God . GISBORNE-1802-2,83.324

The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost .
<$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,83.325

Has the Holy Ghost shed abroad the love of God in your heart ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,83.326

Have you evidences to prove that you possess this fruit of the Spirit ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,83.327

Do you love the Lord your God with all your heart , with all your mind ,
with all your soul , and all your strength ; and the Lord Jesus Christ ,
whom he hath sent ? GISBORNE-1802-2,83.328

Do you serve your Creator and Redeemer in simplicity and godly sincerity
? GISBORNE-1802-2,83.329

Are you anxious to further , according to the talents and opportunities
which you enjoy , the glory of God , and the kingdom of his Son ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,83.330

Among the fruits of the Spirit particularly mentioned by St. Paul ,
righteousness stands conspicuous : GISBORNE-1802-2,83.331

and righteousness , as exemplified in the exercise of holy dispositions
towards the Deity , for of that branch alone of righteousness I at
present speak , is a convincing proof of love to God .
GISBORNE-1802-2,83.332

Have you this proof to bring forward ? GISBORNE-1802-2,83.333

By piety , by devotion , by every act of religion which has God for its
immediate object ; by the cultivation of faith , and fear , and love ,
and gratitude , and resignation ; do you witness before <P_84> the world
a good confession , that his favour is your aim , his salvation the
prize which you pursue ? GISBORNE-1802-2,84.334

If it be your fervent desire and your habitual prayer to be enabled to
love the Lord your God ; then are you already under the teaching of his
Spirit . GISBORNE-1802-2,84.335

If you are thus enabled to set your heart upon him ; then <font> hath
God given unto you the Spirit of love : <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,84.336

then <font> the love of the Father is in you . GISBORNE-1802-2,84.337

Ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another .
GISBORNE-1802-2,84.338

The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one towards another
<$$font> , <font> and towards all men . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,84.339

This also is the language of St. Paul to the Thessalonians .
GISBORNE-1802-2,84.340

Has God wrought in you the grace of love towards your fellow creatures ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,84.341

Do you love your neighbour as yourself , with a pure heart , and with
charity unfeigned , fervently ? GISBORNE-1802-2,84.342

Do you love him thus because God commands you to love him thus ; because
an apostle hath said , that if God so loved us that he sent his Son to
be the propitiation for our sins , we ought also to love one another ;
because your Saviour has declared that love to others is the
distinguishing mark , by which all men shall know that you are his
disciples ? GISBORNE-1802-2,84.343

Do you <P_85> love your enemies ? GISBORNE-1802-2,85.344

And do you love them because , while we were yet enemies , God loved us
? GISBORNE-1802-2,85.345

<font> Love worketh no ill to his neighbour . GISBORNE-1802-2,85.346

Love <$$font> , or as it is elsewhere expressed , <font> Charity ,
suffereth long GISBORNE-1802-2,85.347

and is kind ; GISBORNE-1802-2,85.348

envieth not , GISBORNE-1802-2,85.349

vaunteth not itself ; GISBORNE-1802-2,85.350

is not puffed up , GISBORNE-1802-2,85.351

doth not behave itself unseemly , GISBORNE-1802-2,85.352

seeketh not its own , GISBORNE-1802-2,85.353

is not easily provoked ; GISBORNE-1802-2,85.354

thinketh no evil , GISBORNE-1802-2,85.355

rejoiceth not in iniquity , GISBORNE-1802-2,85.356

but rejoiceth in the truth ; GISBORNE-1802-2,85.357

beareth all things , GISBORNE-1802-2,85.358

believeth all things , GISBORNE-1802-2,85.359

hopeth all things , GISBORNE-1802-2,85.360

endureth all things . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,85.361

Do you fulfil the law of justice to your neighbour by working no ill to
him ; by carefully abstaining from offering injury to his person , to
his property , or to his good-name ? GISBORNE-1802-2,85.362

Have you that love for him which suffereth long ; which is slow to take
offence , unwearied in forgiveness ? GISBORNE-1802-2,85.363

Have you that love which is kind : which not only abounds in acts of
good will to those who have manifested friendship towards you , or
gratitude for benefits received from your hand ; but , like that love of
your heavenly Father , who maketh his sun to shine on the evil as well
as on the good , and sendeth rain both on the just and on the unjust ,
overflows in bounteousness to the unthankful and the froward ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,85.364

Have you that love which envieth not : which coveteth not the advantages
enjoyed by any other , <P_86> grudgeth not his comforts , repineth not
at his welfare ? GISBORNE-1802-2,86.365

Have you that love which vaunteth not itself : that love which prompts
you in honour to prefer one another ; nourishes that distinguished fruit
of the Spirit , <font> meekness ; <$$font> remembers the words of the
Lord Jesus , <font> Blessed are the meek ; <$$font> restrains you from
an ostentatious display of the pre-eminence in rank , in wealth , in
authority , in abilities , in knowledge , with which the common Master
of all may have entrusted you ? GISBORNE-1802-2,86.366

Have you that love which is not puffed up : which is clothed with
humility ; inspires a conviction of our own unworthiness ; admonishes us
to regard every additional degree of influence , every additional
instrument of doing good , as a talent for the use of which we are to
render an account before the judgement-seat of Christ ; and thus , by
reminding us of an aweful responsibility , tempers the joy excited by
the acquisition with awakened circumspection and holy fear ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,86.367

Have you that love which doth not behave itself unseemly : which assumes
not a demeanour unsuitable to its station ; but conducts itself with
respectfulness to superiors , with courteousness to inferiors , with
modesty and gentleness to all ? GISBORNE-1802-2,86.368

Have you that love which seeketh not its own : that love which <P_87>
extinguisheth selfishness ; which persuades you rather to submit to
injustice than either to displease God , or needlessly to give offence
to man ; inclines you , when despoiled of your cloak , rather to
surrender your coat also than to maintain your rights with passion , or
by unwarrantable methods ; that love which proclaims , <font> look not
every man on his own things , but every man also on the things of others
; <$$font> disposes you to consult in all your undertakings the benefit
of others no less than of yourself ; and determines you cheerfully to
make large sacrifices of your own ease and advantage for the sake of
promoting even the earthly comforts , and more especially the spiritual
interests , of your neighbour ? GISBORNE-1802-2,87.369

Have you that love which is not easily provoked : that love which
governs the temper no less than the conduct ; is not only long-suffering
, unalienated by repeated injuries , but proves itself to be genuine by
curbing every tendency to irritation , sharpness of humour , hastiness
of language , harshness of deportment ? GISBORNE-1802-2,87.370

Have you that love which thinketh no evil : that love which meditates no
evil ; permits not any unjust or ungenerous purpose against another to
<P_88> find shelter in your bosom , and starts back with pain from every
suggestion which tempts you to thwart his welfare : that love which
imputeth no evil ; entertains not hard thoughts of our neighbour ,
charges him not with unsubstantiated guilt , nor treasures up
unauthorised suspicions against him ? GISBORNE-1802-2,88.371

Have you that love which rejoiceth not in iniquity , but rejoiceth in
the truth ; that love , which beholds with grief not merely the success
, but the very existence , of rapacity , of fraud , of malice , of
slander , of every scheme and device of sin , the enemy of human
happiness present and future ; that love , which exults in the triumph
of righteousness , in the manifestation of innocence , in the
establishment of truth ; in every event which evinces or confirms the
power of the gospel over the hearts of men , and thus , while it
redounds to the glory of God , ministers consolation and strength to his
servants ? GISBORNE-1802-2,88.372

Have you that love , which beareth all things ; that love , which bears
with the infirmities , whether bodily or mental , of others ; dwells not
upon errors , looks not upon defects ; covers , draws a veil over a
multitude of failings ; and , when they are forced upon thy notice ,
leads thee to behold them with tenderness and pity , and without any
diminution of that <P_89> affection , to which , on other grounds , thy
relation , thy friend , or thy companion , is entitled from thee : and
when it perceives <font> a man overtaken with a fault <$$font> ,
whispers to thee , <font> restore such an one in the spirit of meekness
; considering thyself , lest thou also be tempted ? <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,89.373

Have you that love , which believeth all things ; not that credulous
facility , which turns away its ear from the lessons of reason and
experience ; not that blind candour which <font> calls evil good
<$$font> , and confounds the distinction established from everlasting to
everlasting between him who serveth God and him who serveth him not :
but that love , which presupposes uprightness where it discerns not
evidence of iniquity , listens with delight to any favourable
interpretation of the conduct of another ; puts the kindest construction
on such of his words or actions as appear ambiguous ; and welcomes every
circumstance which tends to prove that he has not committed the offence
ascribed to him , or that , if he committed it , he has returned from
the error of his ways ? GISBORNE-1802-2,89.374

Have you that love which hopeth all things ; that love which , where it
can@ @not rationally believe that good exists , encourages itself to
presume that it will exist ; is almost prepared , like Abraham , <P_90>
against hope to believe in hope ; despairs not of the conversion of the
sinner , nor slackens its labours to promote it ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,90.375

Have you that love , which endureth all things ; that love , which is
ready to sustain hardships , to encounter dangers , to stand the brunt
of ridicule and scorn ; if thus it may be enabled to forward its first
and dearest purpose , the advancement of the temporal and eternal
welfare of mankind ? GISBORNE-1802-2,90.376

If the attainment of this scriptural love of your neighbour be the
object of your fervent wishes , or your continual supplications ; then
are you already under the teaching of the Spirit of God .
GISBORNE-1802-2,90.377

If your dispositions and your conduct towards your neighbour correspond
with the characteristics of Christian charity ; then hath God empowered
you by the Holy Ghost to reverence the command <font> Let him who loveth
God , love his brother also : <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,90.378

then <font> have you purified your soul in obeying the truth through the
Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,90.379

There yet remains one class of gifts of the Holy Spirit , which require
, even in this very imperfect enumeration , briefly to be noticed : that
class , namely , which respects the government of the sensual appetites
. GISBORNE-1802-2,90.380

Among the <P_91> fruits of the Spirit expressly mentioned by St. Paul
in his Epistle to the Galatians , we find <font> temperance . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,91.381

Among the <font> works of the flesh <$$font> , which in the same chapter
he describes as opposed to <font> the fruits of the spirit ; for the
flesh lusteth against the spirit , and the spirit against the flesh ,
and these are contrary the one to the other ; <$$font> sins of impurity
stand foremost . GISBORNE-1802-2,91.382

This observation may be extended to those portions of the Epistles to
the Ephesians and to the Colossians , in which he treats of the same
subject . GISBORNE-1802-2,91.383

Purity , therefore , in its largest import and in its minutest
subdivisions ; purity of thought , of word , and of deed , is the gift
of the Holy Ghost . GISBORNE-1802-2,91.384

Are you able to prove that these fruits of the Spirit are habitually
brought forth and ripened in you GISBORNE-1802-2,91.385

Are temperance and purity distinguishing marks in your character ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,91.386

In proportion as your mind abhors the opposite crimes , you are under
the teaching of the Spirit of God . GISBORNE-1802-2,91.387

If you are actually preserved <font> from fulfilling the lusts of the
flesh ; <$$font> then have you decisive evidence that you <font> walk in
the spirit . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,91.388

Having placed before you these select examples of the proofs by which
the possession of divine grace is to be ascertained ; let me <P_92>
remark , in quitting this branch of the subject , the unequivocal
demonstrations by which St. Paul evinced that his heart was under the
effectual influence of the Holy Spirit . GISBORNE-1802-2,92.389

What repentance and humility , what faith , what gratitude , what love
towards God and our Saviour , breathe in the following expressions !
GISBORNE-1802-2,92.390

<font> I was a blasphemer , and a persecutor , and injurious .
GISBORNE-1802-2,92.391

I am the least of the apostles , that am not meet to be called an
apostle ; because I persecuted the church of God .
GISBORNE-1802-2,92.392

But by the grace of God I am what I am . GISBORNE-1802-2,92.393

I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who hath enabled me .
GISBORNE-1802-2,92.394

Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners , of whom I am chief .
GISBORNE-1802-2,92.395

For this cause I obtained mercy , that in me first Jesus Christ might
shew forth all long-suffering ; for a pattern to them , which should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting . GISBORNE-1802-2,92.396

Now unto the King eternal , immortal , invisible , the only wise God ,
be honour and glory for ever and ever . GISBORNE-1802-2,92.397

Amen . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,92.398

When he learns that the continuance of his thorn in the flesh will
redound to the honour of his Lord ; the infirmity which had so deeply
grieved him instantly becomes a theme of rejoicing .
GISBORNE-1802-2,92.399

<font> Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities ,
that the power of Christ may rest upon me . GISBORNE-1802-2,92.400

Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities , <P_93> in reproaches , in
necessities , in persecutions , in distresses for Christ's sake .
<$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,93.401

Hear his ardent declarations of affection for mankind , whether of the
Jewish or of the Gentile race . GISBORNE-1802-2,93.402

<font> I say the truth in Christ , GISBORNE-1802-2,93.403

I lie not , my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost ;
that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart .
GISBORNE-1802-2,93.404

For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ ; <$$font> that I
were subjected to the temporal vengeance about to overtake the Jewish
nation ; or , as some learned expositor understand the original phrase ,
that I were made , after the example of Christ , a sacrifice unto death
; <font> for my brethren , my kinsmen according to the flesh .
GISBORNE-1802-2,93.405

My heart's desire and prayer to God for Israel is , that they might be
saved . GISBORNE-1802-2,93.406

I , Paul , the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles , desire that
ye faint not at my tribulations for you . GISBORNE-1802-2,93.407

Yea , and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith ;
I joy and rejoice . <$$font> GISBORNE-1802-2,93.408

Observe his earnest solicitude to subdue the corrupt appetites of human
nature . GISBORNE-1802-2,93.409

<font> I keep under my body , GISBORNE-1802-2,93.410

and bring it into subjection ; lest that by any means , when I have
preached to others , I myself should be a <P_94> cast-away . <$$font>
GISBORNE-1802-2,94.411

The testimony which in these passages of his writings the apostle
incidentally bears concerning himself , is true .
GISBORNE-1802-2,94.412

It was confirmed by his life and by his death . GISBORNE-1802-2,94.413

The indefatigable zeal which he exerted for the advancement of the
gospel ; the long course of sufferings which he cheerfully endured until
they were closed by martyrdom ; bore witness upon earth and will bear
witness at the day of retribution , that his heart was governed by the
Spirit of God . GISBORNE-1802-2,94.414

In concluding this discourse , for the length , to which the foregoing
observations have extended themselves , compels me to defer the
consideration of the remainder of the subject to another occasion ; let
me recommend to the attention of every person present , the character of
that eminent apostle . GISBORNE-1802-2,94.415

Was he bound by the sovereignty of God , by the mercies of creation , or
preservation , and of redemption , to be a faithful servant and soldier
of the Lord Jesus ? GISBORNE-1802-2,94.416

So likewise are you . GISBORNE-1802-2,94.417

Did he confess the obligation ? GISBORNE-1802-2,94.418

You have confessed the same obligation times without number .
GISBORNE-1802-2,94.419

Was the hand of Omnipotence stretched forth to help him ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,94.420

It is at all times stretched forth to help you . GISBORNE-1802-2,94.421

Were life and death eternal <P_95> set before him ?
GISBORNE-1802-2,95.422

They are set before you likewise . GISBORNE-1802-2,95.423

Compare then his frame of mind with your own . GISBORNE-1802-2,95.424

Compare the proofs , which he gave , of acting steadfastly
{TEXT:stedfastly} under the influence of divine grace , with the proofs
which your conscience may be able to produce , that you are acting in
your station of life in obedience to the influence of the Holy Spirit .
GISBORNE-1802-2,95.425

Examine whether , like St. Paul , with an humble and penitent heart ,
you have discovered and acknowledged , that by the deeds of the law , by
the least impure and imperfect of human works , no flesh shall be
justified in the sight of God . GISBORNE-1802-2,95.426

Examine whether , like him , you have sought for salvation solely
through the blood of the Cross . GISBORNE-1802-2,95.427

Examine whether , like him , you have looked for sanctification solely
by the grace of Christ : whether , like him , you attribute to that
grace alone whatever measure of holiness you enjoy .
GISBORNE-1802-2,95.428

Examine whether , like him , you love God and your Redeemer with all
your soul . GISBORNE-1802-2,95.429

Examine whether , like him , you love your neighbour as yourself ,
without dissimulation , with charity unfeigned , with a pure heart ,
fervently . GISBORNE-1802-2,95.430

Examine whether , like him , you keep under your body , and bring it
into subjection . GISBORNE-1802-2,95.431

Thus may you be powerfully <P_96> assisted in forming your judgement ,
whether as yet , like St. Paul , you are under the effectual guidance
of the Spirit of grace ; whether you are at present authorised to hope ,
that you are one of those , to whom , as unto St. Paul , the Lord Jesus
will give a crown of glory at the last day . GISBORNE-1802-2,96.432

<P_97>

<heading>

Sermon IV . GISBORNE-1802-2,97.435

On the Nature and Efficacy of Divine Grace . GISBORNE-1802-2,97.436

<$$heading>

2 Cor. xii. 9 . GISBORNE-1802-2,97.438

<font> And he said unto me , " My Grace is sufficient for thee :
GISBORNE-1802-2,97.439

for my Strength is made perfect in weakness . " GISBORNE-1802-2,97.440

The necessity , and the universality , of divine grace , the means by
which it is to be obtained , and the fruits by which its influence is
characterised , have already been laid before you .
GISBORNE-1802-2,97.441

In pursuance , therefore of my original design , I proceed to
demonstrate , on scriptural grounds , the truth of the concluding lesson
which I stated as deducible from the text . GISBORNE-1802-2,97.442

V. The Grace of Christ is all-sufficient . GISBORNE-1802-2,97.443

<P_98>

For the elucidation of this general proposition , let the leading
particulars which it comprehends be distinctly examined .
GISBORNE-1802-2,98.445

1. Divine grace is sufficient to supply strength to withstand
temptation . GISBORNE-1802-2,98.446

He who is Head over all things to his church , he who hath all power in
earth and heaven , is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto
God by him . GISBORNE-1802-2,98.447

He who has instructed , who has commanded , his disciples to make
deliverance from temptation one of the objects of their daily prayer ,
will not disregard the petition . GISBORNE-1802-2,98.448

He will not suffer them to be tempted above that which they are able to
endure ; GISBORNE-1802-2,98.449

but with the temptation will also make a way to escape , that they may
be able to bear it . GISBORNE-1802-2,98.450

However attractive may be the allurement , however profound the deceit ,
however rugged the obstacle , however alarming the danger , by which sin
may strive to seduce or to deter you from the way that leadeth unto life
; He who knoweth whereof we are made , and remembereth that we are but
dust , will open a path by which you may turn aside from the extremity
of the trial : GISBORNE-1802-2,98.451

and that path he will give you wisdom to discern , and strength to
pursue . GISBORNE-1802-2,98.452

