<BEGIN_gladstone-1873-1>

<P_2,368>

{ED:806_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,368.4

Jan 2 . 1873 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,368.5

1. I telegraph to you this forenoon my assent to the rather absurd
surtaxe d' entrep√¥t . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,368.6

2. Yesterday I sent you a private letter which Elliot had written to me
about the Bulgarian Schism . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,368.7

I can@ @not help fearing that that schism may become a source of
political danger as it will bring in Russia to meddle in the religious
concerns of the Turkish Empire under the plea of ecclesiastical
communion . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,368.8

Being thus <P_2,369> dangerous it is also if I am rightly informed a
quarrel without any fair ground of difference ; as I understand that the
Patriarch of Constantinople who was wrong at the outset has been willing
for some time to grant the Bulgarians their independence of his ordinary
jurisdiction , but asks some territorial delimitation of the Bulgarian
Church & its inmunities . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.9

If this be the case the demand is so reasonable that I am at a loss to
conceive how it could be evaded : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.10

on its being granted , or agreed to be granted , the excommunication
ought to be rescinded & peace re-established .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.11

Sir H. Elliot's language & conduct seem to me most reasonable .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.12

An attempt at an accommodation may be regarded as lying beyond his
ordinary attributions . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.13

But I wish something could be done . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.14

3. I have read your letter to Paget about Borneo & the Italian Prison
proposed to be founded there . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.15

I am rather behindhand in my information GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.16

but I did not know that we had properly speaking territorial rights in
Borneo . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.17

The plan may be bad GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.18

but if they think it good it would seem that <font> somewhere <$$font>
they ought to be able to do that which France & for all I know other
countries are still doing , & which we in my opinion were obliged to
abandon only because we had so ludicrously overdone it .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.19

In the inclosed tract , sent to me by Sir E. Freshfield , you will find
an interesting account of the Bulgarian affair .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.20

{ED:807_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

<font> No 2 . <$$font> GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.22

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.23

Jan 3 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.24

I think Kennedy's references home in the matter of French Treaty are
either a little over or a little underdone . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.25

This morning I had a draft about woollen duties with a request to reply
' approve ' or ' wait ' while the box is marked ' Pressing ' .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.26

In the explanatory paper I find no material whereupon to found a real
judgment . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.27

It seems to me that where he and the Delegates from the Chambers are
agreed he may safely proceed - & that where they are not agreed the
<font> degree {COM:missing_comma} nature <$$font> and <font> reasons
<$$font> of the difference between them should be clearly stated & that
reference without this is little better than futile in matters which are
not of policy or principle but of the purest technical detail .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.28

2. I send you herewith for perusal a letter from Biddulph on H. M.'s
behalf about Prince Leopold , and copy of my reply .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.29

3. I also send Lord Russell's two last . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.30

You will see that he has in some degree relapsed .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.31

I had asked him , in view of probable discussions on the Alabama
business , to let us know generally what line he would suggest our
taking about himself . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,369.32

<P_2,370>

{ED:808_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.35

Ja 3 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.36

1. Audience question with China . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.37

I have read much about its postponement or its acceleration , & about
what we or others should do on it ; GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.38

but I never recollect to have read a reasoned statement of the merits of
the case <font> pro <$$font> & <font> con <$$font> , and especially of
the arguments which are or might be made by the Chinese against it .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.39

The very first thing for us to do I think is to get this .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.40

The question is not one of the self-evident class
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.41

and among other things may be borne in mind - a. That the dignity of
Foreign Powers may be impaired rather than promoted , if the forms of
presentation should assume a certain character .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.42

I observe that prostration is contemplated by Mr Wade as a part of them
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.43

b. Considering that this matter seems to be regarded as a first class
question in China , I rather hesitate to agree to Mr Wade's demand that
we should decide simply whether the audience is to be pressed for , and
leave the manner to the joint action of the Ministers there .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.44

Mr Wade himself deserves much confidence I believe ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.45

but as to the diplomatic corps at Pekin I am not so sure .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.46

b. {COM:sic} The danger of being tripped up by the Russians is I think
grave . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.47

If they have a territorial question alive with China in all likelihood
it is much more important to <font> them <$$font> than this matter of
the Audience , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.48

and they will work accordingly , and <font> sell <$$font> the common
demand for the particular advantage of which they are in quest .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.49

c. Mr Wade describes the matter as urgent GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.50

but I do not see why - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.51

We surely have very little to complain of as a nation in the conduct of
the Chinese through a series of years . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.52

It is not the practical conduct of business that seems to be in question
but some sort of symbolic manifestation . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.53

This surely will bear at least the lapse of time sufficient to let us
know what is to be pressed for , & why . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.54

In conclusion I must say that I do not quite appreciate the frightful
grievance that all these diplomatists appear to have suffered in having
the announcement of the Marriage conveyed to them <font> together
<$$font> with the request that foreigners should not come into the line
of the procession . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.55

It <font> may <$$font> have been wrong : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.56

but for all I can see there might have been a counter-grievance , if the
marriage had been announced & the intimation reserved for a separate and
subsequent communication when the Chinese might have been told they had
forfeited their right to restrict the free movement of foreigners by not
exercising it at the proper time . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,370.57

<P_2,371>

{ED:811_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

{ED:Hawarden_Castle}

Jan 10 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,371.61

1. Your account of Schouvaloff and of his communication is very
agreeable . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,371.62

I am sorry to miss him . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,371.63

2. I can see no objection to your asking Clarendon and Vernon - or
Aberdeen <P_2,372> in case of need . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.64

He has entered the Carlton but as I understand on an assurance from G.
Hamilton that it meant nothing political ! GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.65

3. I hope measure will be observed in talking about the poor Emperor's
fidelity to England . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.66

It was a matter of policy ; and of feeling subordinate to policy .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.67

<font> How <$$font> subordinate it was we had proofs enough ; most of
all the Benedetti business , which no one wished to bring into the
notice it deserved , and of the disgrace of which certainly France & I
presume therefore Napoleon bears much more than half .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.68

4. Those interesting but most sad letters from Spain suggest one or two
observations . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.69

They are strangely unfortunate in having to bring in so to speak their
Puerto Rico Bill & then adjourn for three weeks .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.70

In this country , when matters were in our small way critical , we
should regard this as certain death to a measure & a ministry .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.71

Again what can be more left-handed than to provide that the emancipation
shall take place at a certain time <font> after <$$font> an event of
which they may not be masters viz. publication in the Island Gazette .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.72

The date of legal freedom ought to have been fixed absolutely with
reference to the passing of the Act in Spain .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.73

I wish it were possible by any slight complimentary act to give a token
of good will to King Amadeus . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.74

I am just off to a rent-dinner GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.75

& must say no more today . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.76

{ED:812_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.78

Jan 11 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.79

1. With regard to Ld O. Russell's letter on the anti_English feeling
at Berlin . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.80

He seems to found it on the preposterous charge about Arms , in which it
seems they think they have a case . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.81

Why should we not invite a general conference of nations , either
including America or without her if she would not sit to discuss the
question without prejudice - to have submitted to it the cases in which
during the recent wars complaints have been made as to the supply of
arms and to inquire whether any impediment ought to be placed in its way
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.82

I do not see that inconvenience could well arise from such an
international commission so to call it , while there would I should
think be decided advantage in our proposing it , if the Cabinet thought
fit . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.83

2. I read Gen. Walker's report inclosed in the Dispatch with greater
interest than any one I have ever seen from him .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.84

Of course it will go to Cardwell . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.85

I have always understood that our Staff Arrangements and Appointments
were by far the most expensive in the world . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.86

Lowe told me the other day he found there were three Colonels over
Netley Hospital ! GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,372.87

As to details Cardwell has been a great <P_2,373> deal too much & too
well employed in great matters to be responsible for all that was done
in the strange business called our Army reorganisation in 1855 & the
subsequent years . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,373.88

I can hardly suppose General Walker right in his facts :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,373.89

if he were so it would be a sad disgrace to us .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,373.90

As to the German invasion it would pull down that nation very much , at
least in my opinion , if they thought of it as a practical or
practicable business except in the case of some combination of all
Europe against us which is not an easy one to conceive .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,373.91

But they are quite right to include our little country in their
exercises . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,373.92

I dare say it will not make you very nervous if some energetic pupil
demonstrates the mode in which even Walmer Castle might be taken .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,373.93

3. The Parliamentary aspects of the central parts of our Irish Univ.
plan rather improve to my eye as I gradually try to acquire a closer
acquaintance with this very large subject . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,373.94

4. I think of calling the Cabinet on Wednesday 22d , which I shall
assume to suit you unless you telegraph by Monday to the contrary .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,373.95

<P_2,374>

{ED:814_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

<font> Private & Confidential . <$$font> GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.98

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.99

Jan 12 . 1873 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.100

I do not quite gather from your note received today or from the
accompanying draft <paren> or copy <$$paren> how or in what shape the
question of the Duke of Edinburgh's marriage to the Czarewna has revived
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.101

But this is not very material . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.102

The fact being so , I agree that the balance of reasons against any
attempt to interfere with it still subsists .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.103

Indeed it is strengthened by the fact that the Duke himself is now by
three or four years farther advanced into manhood so as to have passed
beyond those periods of life to which any thing like restraint except in
the form of advice is principally applicable .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.104

It is further strengthened , as far as appears , by the circumstance
that a <font> greater <$$font> amount of difficulty attends any other
course than was at the former period in full view .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.105

I should not feel the smallest hesitation in arguing the case for the
grant before the House of Commons if the arrangement now apparently in
contemplation should take effect ; GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.106

and no Parliamentary obstacle could arise unless it were in a state of
things little likely to prevail where empty and shallow pretexts are
through foregone purpose made to perform the work of reasons .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,374.107

<P_2,375>

{ED:816_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,375.110

Jan 15 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,375.111

1. I am truly glad you were able to throw over the plan for the
Prince's attending the Emperor's funeral ; GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,375.112

and I must say I am rather surprised that the Queen should have given in
to it . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,375.113

In the Prince it does not surprise me : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,375.114

for it is accounted {TEXT:account} for by his good points and his weak
ones ; his love of movement and excitement , his real good nature and
sympathy , and his I fear total want of political judgment either
inherited or acquired . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,375.115

2. The odds seem now to be much in favour of the Russian marriage after
the turn which matters have taken . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,375.116

3. Does Bismarck make a fool of Bancroft or Bancroft make a fool of
himself in supposing that the Yankees intend to be the catspaws of
Germany or any other Power ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,375.117

If Bancroft makes himself too conspicuous in this kind of activity his
Government may serve him as they served Catucazy for minding other
peoples' business instead of his own . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,375.118

<P_2,376>

{ED:819_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

10 , Downing Street . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,376.121

Feb. 5 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,376.122

I had no communication from you at Osborne which we left about 2.40 :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,376.123

but I suppose from your letter that we go on as we are notwithstanding
Gortchakoff's P.S. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,376.124

<P_2,377_omitted>

<P_2,378>

{ED:823_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

11 , Carlton House Terrace . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.128

Feb. 16 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.129

In reading your letter to Lyons my only scruple is about the word '
obliged ' lest it should be quoted against us -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.130

I do not very well know what to suggest - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.131

could it be put " under which we had formerly defended Portugal from
external aggression ; GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.132

and the disposition of the people of this country in such a case might
probably be much what it had been before . " GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.133

But I am not particularly enamoured of this .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.134

I am confirmed in the disposition towards <font> reserve <$$font> by
noticing that Thiers is at his old tricks and talks of the United
Peninsula just as he used to talk of United Italy and United Germany .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.135

{ED:824_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

{ED:Copy}

19 Feb. 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.138

I see in this intelligence no obstacle to the prosecution of the design
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.139

What Loftus reports makes her to be all the better woman & perhaps not
the worse Princess . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.140

{ED:825_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

11 , Carlton House Terrace . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.142

Mch 14 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.143

10 Pm . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.144

Will you kindly read these - revise with your most critical eye - and
see me here in the morning <paren> GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.145

or I can come to you <$$paren> as soon after ten or 10.30 as you can
make it convenient . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.146

{ED:826_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

<font> Secret . <$$font> GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.148

11 , Carlton House Terrace . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.149

Mch 15 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.150

In consequence of a command through Ponsonby I have been at the Palace -
not for any very distinct object , but partly to fill the blank before
the public . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,378.151

<P_2,379>

H. M. was in perfect humour . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.153

She will use the whole or part of my long letter by sending it to
Disraeli : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.154

she seemed quite to understand our point of view :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.155

and told me plainly what shows that the artful dodger <font> did
<$$font> say if it came back to him again at this juncture he would not
be bound by his present refusal . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.156

I said ' But Madam that is not before me . ' GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.157

' But he told it to me ' she said . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.158

{ED:827_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

16 , Bruton Street . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.160

Mch 17 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.161

I miss you on my way from Paddington home . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.162

If you will read the inclosed <paren> & please send or bring them
<$$paren> you will come up to the present state of the transactions .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.163

Disraeli as usual escapes the real point GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.164

and argues against a proposition which I have nowhere stated or implied
viz. that Opposition are unconditionally bound to take office .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,379.165

<P_2,380>

{ED:830_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

10 , Downing Street . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.168

Ap 8 , 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.169

The Telegram from Thomson today about the Reuter Railroad {TEXT:R_R}
from the Caspian to Teheran is sufficiently sensational if not alarming
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.170

But has Persia freely given this Railway Concession ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.171

If she has upon what pretext could we object to it ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.172

There may be here matter for consideration GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.173

but I write my first impression . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.174

I sent the letter to Baxter as it was after showing it to Glyn & F.
Cavendish {TEXT:C} . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.175

{ED:832_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.177

Ap. 13 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.178

1. I found the Queen in excellent health and humour .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.179

I tried to comfort her about the Advent of more Eastern Sovereigns , as
not immediately probable : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.180

and I also advised that if she wished such a personage not to entail
charge upon her she should beware of inviting him herself to the palace
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.181

It is however not bad policy all things considered that he should come &
she should pay something : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.182

it will tend to keep the Londoners content to see the Palace used , &
used at the Queen's charge . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.183

2. You will have observed that much notice has been taken of my dry
answer about the Carlist subscriptions . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.184

I had no idea that there was any shadow of doubt about the law :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.185

and I think it would be very advantageous if you would direct a <font>
pr√©cis <$$font> to be prepared of the legal opinions & the transactions
, at any rate in recent times , on and about the subject .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.186

We shall hear more of it . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.187

It is full of difficulty . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.188

But certainly the case which has occurred is a scandalous one :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.189

& so was that society for promoting war in Italy , to which I some time
ago referred . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,380.190

<P_2,381>

3. I should be very glad if the Foreign Office would give or get us
some recent and trustworthy map of the Central Asian district .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,381.192

I suppose Arrowsmith & other Atlases which one would naturally refer to
are out of date . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,381.193

{ED:835_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden {TEXT:Hw} . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,381.195

Ap. 16 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,381.196

With reference to the inclosed notice , I have asked Mr Stapleton to
postpone until Thursday . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,381.197

<P_2,382>

The practice is I think objectionable ; but in some cases extremely
popular . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.199

I do not know even whether we could prohibit associations & public
appeals . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.200

The prohibition would be evaded by asking the money for Carlist wounded
, or Polish wounded ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.201

Would it be worth while to have a <font> pr√©cis <$$font> of the Suez
Canal & judicial reforms case made for the Cabinet .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.202

{ED:836_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.204

Ap. 17 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.205

I have read Sir Bartle Frere's letters . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.206

There are two points on which I should like to have full information
when we come to consider the question . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.207

1. How far does the position of France as co-Guarantor of the Sultan's
independence affect our right of sole coercive interference in Zanzibar
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.208

2. What does Sir B. Frere propose to do with regard to ships suspected
of carrying slaves but carrying the flags of countries which have not
conceded to us the right of search ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.209

{ED:837_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

H of C. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.211

May 12 1873 {TEXT:missing_"1873"} . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.212

We are between two fires on Wedy of early & late Bills
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.213

but I will say 3.15 which means 3.30 for <font> work . <$$font>
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.214

I go to Windsor tomorrow <paren> at 12 from Paddington {TEXT:Pn}
<$$paren> . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,382.215

<P_2,383>

{ED:839_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

11 , Carlton House Terrace . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.218

May 22 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.219

Lowe and I have heard the Sugar Refiners in the presence of the
Customhouse authorities about the agreement lately signed at Paris .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.220

It appears to me as at present advised that they make out their case ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.221

but I am going to discuss it with Lowe , who rather differs , in the
presence of Cardwell , who thoroughly understands the matter .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.222

This will probably {TEXT:probable} be in my room today at the H of C.
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.223

but if you would like to come we could appoint some other time & place .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.224

{ED:840_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Chatsworth . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.226

June 1 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.227

If there be a question of an instruction to Jervoise about the place of
the Papal election , I should for the moment , incline to confining it
to his recommending , as far as he can , that it be held in Rome .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.228

One step farther it might be right for him to go , but only I think
after we have fully considered it - namely to point out the difficulty
we should feel as to Speeches & Addresses publicly delivered in British
Territory by so high a personage as a Pope , of a nature contemplating
not only moral resistance but <font> voies de fait <$$font> against an
Allied Government . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.229

I am not sure what ground we should have for objecting to the election
of a Pope in Malta particularly : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.230

it is of course the likeliest place in the Queen's dominions .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.231

{ED:841_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

11 , Carlton House Terrace . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.233

June 8 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.234

The L. Lieutcy of Essex was <font> offered <$$font> to Petre in 1869 ,
and seemingly declined , though no letter of refusal can be found .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.235

Under these circs perhaps you , or Bessborough , or some other suitable
person , could sound him , before I commit myself a second time in a
formal manner ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.236

If pressure <font> can <$$font> be applied , it would be useful .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,383.237

<P_2,384>

{ED:842_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

10 , Downing Street . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.240

June 10 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.241

I have seen Captain Goodenough , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.242

and liked him much , as far as a single interview goes .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.243

He sails tomorrow morning . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.244

Kimberley sent me , by him , the Memorandum herewith which sets out a
great deal , & very well , in small compass .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.245

I think <font> No 2 <$$font> should become <font> No 1 . <$$font>
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.246

{ED:843_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

10 , Downing Street . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.248

June 11 . 1873 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.249

The First Lord of the Treasury presents his compliments to Lord
Granville , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.250

and begs to call attention to the following Minute of the Cabinet
recently adopted . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.251

' The Cabinet desire that when it is proposed to include in any Bill ,
which is to be introduced into Parliament on the responsibility of the
Government , or of any of its officers , any charge on the local rates ,
notice of such intention be given beforehand to the Cabinet , and its
authority obtained for the same , before the introduction of the Bill .
' {ED:added_close_quote} GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.252

{ED:844_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

<font> Private . <$$font> GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.254

10 Downing Street , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.255

June 12 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.256

After the loathsome account of the Shah , can any thing be done to give
the wretch a hint as to his behaviour ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.257

Could not a very mild paragraph be made to appear in some Brussels paper
on European & Eastern manners & then copied into the English newspapers
? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.258

Keeping back O. Russell's dispatch from the Queen will not diminish her
annoyance if the conduct at Berlin is repeated in London .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,384.259

<P_2,385>

{ED:845_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

10 , Downing Street . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.262

June 21 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.263

This note embodies a request made to me orally by Ld R. Grosvenor .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.264

There seems to be a little mixture of the two questions 1. How far new
means of communication are desirable . 2. How far we are to give an
opinion as between this & other modes of providing them .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.265

On the second question it is for us to say as little as possible .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.266

Still it occurs to me that the Tunnel is free from an objection to the
Ferry plan viz. that it might give an excuse for a great naval harbour
on the French side at the narrowest point of the Channel .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.267

But on the first question I suppose we really while renouncing all
interference regard with a friendly and lively interest all schemes
framed with this object and open to no just objection , which is the
case of the Tunnel . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.268

I presume this to be as much as Ld R. G. desires -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.269

would there be any harm in writing it ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.270

{ED:846_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

11 , Carlton House Terrace . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.272

June 25 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.273

1. The proposed presentation of a Persian Bible to the Shah can only be
taken as a kindly and becoming act . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.274

2. As to addresses pressing him about Toleration , they seem to me much
more questionable . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.275

It is like getting a man into your own house , & then hustling him .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.276

This even if there are grievances ; of which I know nothing one way or
the other . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.277

Such addresses ought surely not to be presented in a Church .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.278

3. Though St Pauls is so much less interesting , it might be much more
effective & impressive for the Shah , than the Abbey ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.279

But this may I suppose take its course . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.280

The offer is , again , a kindly and becoming act .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.281

I return the papers . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,385.282

<P_2,386>

{ED:850_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

{ED:Copy}

July 7 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,386.286

It is unfortunate that the circulation {TEXT:circuln} Box on the Lord
Mayor's Dinner affair did not reach me until after the Cabt. on Sat.
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,386.287

With a considerable number of our <P_2,387> Colleagues anxious to accept
I probably ought not to throw him over , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.288

but I think the inconvenience of my having to make a political speech at
the close of this session wd be serious , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.289

& I am not inclined personally to attend , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.290

nor do I see any reason why unless so inclined you shd do so .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.291

Two City Dinners with the Lord Mayor in one Session for the first time -
take it as you will it is a very bad precedent .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.292

{ED:851_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

10 , Downing Street . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.294

Jul 7 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.295

I understand from your note that the Queen now invites all the Ministers
who are to attend at Balmoral for " weeks " .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.296

This being so I shall be happy to take my turn <paren> it is likely
enough to be the last <$$paren> , and if , as I suppose , it would fall
somewhere about the last week of August , to take the first turn .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.297

{ED:852_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

11 , Carlton House Terrace . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.299

7.45 Pm . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.300

Jul 8 1873 . {TEXT:missing_"1873"}

I see no better plan than that of the separate Bill - but in the Commons
or the Lords as you think best . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.302

I am utterly at a loss to comprehend the ' privilege ' .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.303

{ED:854_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

18 , Carlton House Terrace . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.305

July 16 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.306

11 1$$4 Pm . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.307

The suggestion in Col. Ponsonby's note appears to be that Parlt shd
present 100,000 crowns or some analogous sum to the Grand Duchess .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,387.308

<P_2,388>

This would be a departure from the arrangement made in the time of Lord
Palmerston and approved by the members of the Opposition .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.310

It would destroy the whole argument from authority .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.311

Every one would be free to take a new starting point for himself as to
the whole subject . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.312

We could not plead before the House the weighty assents wh the existing
plan had received . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.313

I saw at Lansville , {TEXT:.} Argyll Kimberley Cardwell Bruce Goschen
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.314

None of these saw their way to a departure from what was formerly
arranged . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.315

Anything sent to my House will find me for reply if need be before you
go in the morning . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.316

{ED:855_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

10 , Downing Street . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.318

Jul 17 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.319

I have got the Telegram of yesterday from Sir Elliot threatening the
failure of your plans with respect to the Shah's visit to Constantinople
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.320

He takes offence it seems at the defined term of 3 months .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.321

Why not make it a suspension during pleasure ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.322

The Turks could not object to this ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.323

And if the Persians did it wd be so unreasonable as at least to acquit
us of responsibility . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.324

It is singular that this acute man does not sufficiently see the vital
importance of a thorough union with the Ottoman Power .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.325

I have written this to save time . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,388.326

<P_2,389>

{ED:857_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

<font> Private . <$$font> GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,389.329

Carlton House Terrace . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,389.330

July 23 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,389.331

When I encouraged your discussing on all sides with the members of the
Cabinet , I need hardly say I meant as to the more general & obvious
likelihoods of the Reports of the several Committees , not as to the
contingent intimations conveyed to me by Glyn about supposed leanings or
intentions of colleagues . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,389.332

<P_2,390_omitted>

<P_2,391>

{ED:863_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.336

Aug. 13 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.337

1. I take these four dispatches of Sir A. Paget's <paren> on their way
back to the F. O. <$$paren> almost at random as examples in which the
dockets are to <paren> you or <$$paren> me quite useless for their main
purpose , i.e. enabling me to judge whether I need read the paper .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.338

I have daringly added words to show my meaning - not as the best ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.339

for I hold that docketing is an art , & a practised docketer would do it
much better . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.340

2. I think it would be a convenience if you had lithographed forms for
all <font> mere <$$font> covering letters , such in colour or otherwise
that they might be recognised on the outside .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.341

The covering letters sometimes contain in a few words the point of the
whole thing GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.342

& are like a good docket to the paper inclosed .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.343

Then they are <font> most <$$font> useful . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.344

But one has to open & read in order to see whether they are of this
class , or <font> merely <$$font> covering : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.345

and sometimes this is not discovered , such is the diffusiveness of
forms , until over the leaf . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.346

All this is important to men who only get through their business by
acting on this version of an old rule - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.347

" take care of the seconds , & the minutes will take care of themselves
" . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.348

There would , if this suggestion were adopted , be an economy of manual
labour . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,391.349

<P_2,392>

{ED:865_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.352

Aug 14 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.353

1. The postponement of my journey to Balmoral is rather a convenience .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.354

I hope to be there on Wednesday morning . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.355

2. Many thanks for your interesting account of the conversation with
Delane . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.356

I have no vow recorded against Bouverie ; GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.357

but his value would be chiefly negative - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.358

and we have no room . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.359

3. The question about my election is a disquieting addition to my
present plurality . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.360

Yet I can@ @not but feel rather hopeful about the argument , which goes
before Jessel tomorrow . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.361

Lambert , who at first was adverse , has I think come to my side .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.362

4. Fred. Cavendish's triumph is a real pleasure .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.363

The Duke writes in great delight . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,392.364

<P_2,393>

5. Lowe's mind is more than ever incomprehensible to me .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.366

I have written to him a very free letter . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.367

I think you wise to do the same . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.368

If you care to see mine I will send it you . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.369

He has <font> rushed <$$font> now into the adverse opinion about
Greenwich , having started in the opposite view :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.370

much too rapid , though he may prove right . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.371

6. I hope the Commander of the Swiftsure will give , & if needful will
be desired to give , a complete account of his proceedings , which seem
to have gone a trifle beyond the mark . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.372

{ED:866_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.374

Aug 15 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.375

1. On receiving your Monsell papers today I have telegraphed to you as
follows . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.376

' I have received your envelope GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.377

can@ @not agree to postpone announcement or to accelerate in any degree
what is to follow after the performance of the act agreed upon for the
beginning of October . ' GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.378

In other words announcement , resignation , peerage , must all stand in
the relative order & at the times fixed for them .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.379

He really has pottered with this matter too much & too long ;
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.380

and the only alternative will be a sharper method of proceeding .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.381

I hold his letter to me as <font> non avenu <$$font> till I hear again -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.382

it had better I think be with you . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.383

2. I send you a letter which has just arrived from Hartington and copy
of my reply . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.384

I hope for <font> his own sake <$$font> he will retract .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.385

3. It is a curious point which has been raised in Germany about taking
German sailors GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.386

and will require the very best advice . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.387

4. The question about the seat <font> looms <$$font> larger & deeper :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.388

but through with it I go , come what may . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.389

5. I inclose my letter to Lowe , in case it may remind you to do what
you can to keep him straight . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.390

I go on Tuesday to Balmoral . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,393.391

<P_2,394>

{ED:868_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.394

Aug 17 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.395

I was stupid about your first Telegram of today :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.396

it oddly happens that the Barba Rossa and the great Library in the
Midland counties apply in a degree to both . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.397

Your second came after post : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.398

and I can hardly answer by wire . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.399

This letter will be in London tomorrow afternoon by 3 .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.400

Spencer's claim to retire appeared to me very fair .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.401

I have no doubt he has been sorely missed in Northamptonshire .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.402

Hardly any one has been so long Lord Lieutenant of Ireland .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.403

All withdrawals of good men are rather injurious to the Govt under
present circs : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.404

but our fate must be decided by much bigger causes one way or the other
than this . So that I did not feel entitled to remonstrate .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.405

Thus viewing it as a fact I connected it with Hartington's changing his
place , and this again with Forster's replacing him .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.406

This last circumstance is not immaterial . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.407

Indeed it is very much indeed the reverse in the view of Bright :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.408

and I think any change in this respect might bring into question the
fulfilment of the engagement , as the expectation of this change in the
Education {TEXT:Educn} Dept was mentioned when that engagement was
entered into , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.409

and he attached much importance to it . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.410

This I think is the whole matter so far as I am concerned .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,394.411

<P_2,395>

Sir G. Jessel declares decidedly that my seat is not vacant ; as
decidedly , that I have taken an office of profit .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,395.413

About Delane another day . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,395.414

{ED:869_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,395.416

Aug 17 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,395.417

With reference to your question about the Cabinets my impression is that
they will depend mostly on the state of the Ashantee business ;
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,395.418

but I should think the time would be about the 5th October , or soon
after . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,395.419

<P_2,396_omitted>

<P_2,397>

{ED:872_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

{ED:On_the_rail}

Aug 19 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.424

I return Spencer's letter . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.425

I have just received , <font> on the rail , <$$font> your telegrams of
this morning : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.426

but you will be clever if you catch me again before Balmoral .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.427

I imagined Spencer to have settled the matter rather more than he seems
to have thought GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.428

but am quite content either way . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.429

Only I think a change in the Secretaryship desirable .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.430

Ld Strafford's note is more flattering I fear than just :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.431

I can only plead hard work towards deserving it .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.432

I am so glad of the good opinion of so consummate a judge about my
letters to Lowe . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.433

I can@ @not admit Hartington's right to be sore .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.434

There have been so many <font> obita dicta <$$font> to me , & , as I
learn , to Spencer , and not only to F. Cavendish {TEXT:C} .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.435

A man has no right to put himself in the position of being able to say "
I gave you clearly enough to understand I should go " or at his choice
to say ' my place was not vacant GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.436

& you had no right to think or speak of it to any one ' .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.437

You will observe that I have only dealt with it contingently & have
given Forster no pledge whatever . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.438

Harrington has many good & fine qualities beside his birth :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.439

but I am tempted to say he sells them rather dear .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.440

I earnestly hope he will not go , & especially will not go in a huff -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.441

I am <font> altogether taken by surprise . <$$font>
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.442

I assure you I am not without the fear of Bright's bolting .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.443

I am past all matter of fear in a case like Hartington's {TEXT:H's} ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.444

for I think the fate of the Govt will depend upon bigger things .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.445

But your letter has been of great use to me GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.446

& I send you a copy of one I have written to him .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,397.447

<P_2,398_omitted>

<P_2,399>

{ED:875_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Balmoral Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.451

Aug. 20 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.452

1. One thing I omitted to say yesterday in writing about Hartington -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.453

I feel he has been unjustly dealt with as to the G. P. O.
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.454

Monsell seems never to have bestowed a thought in this matter upon any
body but himself - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.455

and I considered that his return to the G. P. O. <paren> which as I
have told you I supposed would be otherwise agreeable - & this explains
the succinctness of my words in writing to him <$$paren> would be the
most emphatic assertion on our part at least that he had been wholly
free from blame in his administration there .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.456

Had I dreamed of his preference for the B. of W. I should not have
closed that door so speedily . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.457

2. I have sent for the list of possible or intending Peers .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.458

I think your suggestion good . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.459

3. I arrived this morning , in most brilliant clear cold .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.460

Ponsonby tells me <font> you <$$font> follow .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.461

On what day do you <paren> or the second man <$$paren> stand to arrive ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.462

There must it seems be a Council for me to take the Oath .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.463

4. I postpone acting about Monsell till tomorrow -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.464

but the time is running on . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.465

{ED:876_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Balmoral Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.467

Aug. 20 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.468

Many thanks for the inclosures . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.469

I do not see what you could have said more or better than you have said
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.470

We are in truth surprised all round . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.471

I will not discuss any question about complaint .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.472

The question is what is best to be done . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.473

Circular correspondences on these matters are difficult to conduct
satisfactorily to an issue . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.474

I think that the best way will be to let these matters lie over until
the October meeting and that this had better follow Oct. 1 as closely
as may be . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,399.475

I regret Bessborough's strong language about Cowper ; and even more
about <P_2,400> Forster . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.476

Cowper's antecedents are certainly far better than those of Abercorn :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.477

and to call Forster a gorilla simply shows unacquaintance with him , &
with the secret of his strength , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.478

for strength undoubtedly he has . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.479

It would be very unfortunate , & would indeed be a strong measure , that
Spencer & Hartington , if they go , should go at the same moment like
Siamese . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.480

If you agree about postponement perhaps you will work in that sense .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.481

In personal nearness there will at any rate be less risk of the rather
ridiculous misunderstandings which have marked this last series of
proceedings . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.482

My only desire in the matter is to act for the best .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.483

No man willingly makes a fool of himself , when things draw near a final
wind_up . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.484

What a strange Mem. of P. about Bismarck . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.485

I should like a copy of it for record . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.486

One would rather have anticipated a more sympathetic view ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.487

I am afraid that were I off my own hook and by letter to retract about
S. and H. I should expose myself to stronger & more warrantable
complaint in other quarters . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.488

{ED:879_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Balmoral . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.490

Aug 22 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.491

It has been fixed that we shall have a Council here on Saturday the 30th
when I am to complete the formalities of my change in office .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.492

I sent your congratulations to the Queen . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,400.493

It does not appear that the swimmers <P_2,401> were exhausted :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.494

but they seem to hint they were glad of assistance .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.495

The Queen evidently means him a jobation . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.496

The Queen is very desirous now that the ex_Duke of Brunswick is dead
that progress should if possible be made in the matter of securing that
succession to the son of the King of Hanover {TEXT:Hannover} by way of
compensation for the titular succession to his Father which he would
resign , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.497

Bismarck as the incarnation of evil seems to be the impediment , with
the Crown Prince and Princess behind him . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.498

It is a great misfortune if he is governed by a mania of centralisation
and absorption . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.499

The Queen is quite satisfied with Lord Odo about this matter .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.500

She is on the other hand afraid of her daughter's views in politics & in
religion . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.501

There may be some resemblance between this question in Germany , and
that of the native princes in India : where I for one am on the side of
those who wish not to absorb . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.502

I have written to Monsell , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.503

& have disposed of the ' early intelligence ' according to your
suggestion . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.504

{ED:881_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Balmoral Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.506

Aug 23 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.507

I send you very privately an interesting letter from Granville Vernon .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.508

He is I apprehend a faithful relator . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.509

I have not yet before me a complete list of Peerables <paren> papabili
<$$paren> . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.510

Rothschild is one of the best I know , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.511

and if I could but get from him a Mem. of certain services of his
father as to money during the war I think it wd carry the case over all
difficulty . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.512

But though I have begged & they have promised for about 4 years , I have
never been able to get this in an available form .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.513

I hope you have not thought me fractious on one of the subjects of our
late correspondence . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,401.514

<P_2,402>

The Chancellor recommends James for Sol._General .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.516

I suppose he may be the right man : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.517

but will hear what the Attorney_General {TEXT:A_G} has to say .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.518

Is Dizzy affecting to play Bismarck in speech ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.519

P.S. I refer to you a letter just come from Ebury : & copy of my reply
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.520

{ED:882_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Balmoral Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.522

Aug 24 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.523

Spencer's letter is indeed just like himself GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.524

& comforts me much . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.525

Your recommendation to him is the right one .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.526

At the same time I know of no reason that would justify me in hesitating
to say at once that if his view is altered as to his resignation , I
hope he will stay . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.527

If I feel the delay till October to be desirable as to Hartington , it
is from no dissatisfaction , but because though unpledged there are
considerations of policy which may give that case a somewhat different
aspect . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.528

I write in haste GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.529

for the messenger has been delayed by an accident , happily a harmless
one . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.530

I have just received with regret the inclosed letter from Cowper .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.531

Please consider whether to remonstrate . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.532

It is odd that it should come just at the moment when his name had been
in question for a high place . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.533

It is not wise . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.534

I return your letter to Lowe which I frankly think much more likely to
be of use to him than mine . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.535

The Council here will be early on the 30th : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.536

I leave after it . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.537

I will give your message to Ponsonby . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.538

As the French are so obstructive in the Egyptian question , I do not
think it will be bad for them if they get a lesson .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.539

The basis of the old <font> entente <$$font> or special alliance with
that country is gone . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.540

But what has become of the intense anxiety of the Austrians to be in all
things one with us ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,402.541

<P_2,403>

{ED:885_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Balmoral Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,403.544

Aug 28 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,403.545

1. I am not aware of any intention or disposition to delay acting on
the vote of the House of Commons in the case of Dover Harbour :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,403.546

but I will send your note to Dodson with a minute in that sense .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,403.547

2. You were right in supposing that my communication to Delane {TEXT:D}
was confined to the case of Monsell {TEXT:M} ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,403.548

I do not think his appended speculations conveyed much daylight
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,403.549

but they were not ill meant . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,403.550

3. I have had a good letter from Bright about Education .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,403.551

I have told him that I think it must be for the present to a <font>
certain extent <$$font> an open question among us .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,403.552

<P_2,404>

{ED:886_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Balmoral Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.555

Aug 28 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.556

Please to send Cowper's letter to Downing Street .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.557

I write to him as you advise . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.558

But the office is I am sorry to say pre-engaged - to the House of
Commons . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.559

Our official staff there is very low GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.560

and we can@ @not afford to weaken it by transfer to the House of Lords .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.561

I go Sat. afternoon - to reach Hawarden Thursday - Naworth Tuesday .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.562

{ED:887_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Balmoral Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.564

Aug 29 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.565

1. I have been examining the Russian counter-project of Marriage Treaty
and comparing it with some old ones . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.566

My observations on it are in a paper of which H. M. has been in
possession & which will doubtless come to you .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.567

I do not see , after long conversations with the Queen , that it is
likely to present any insurmountable difficulty as to the substance ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.568

but it raises a number of points which will require careful handling
both to clear the meaning & to set the expression right , besides some
real amendment . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.569

It seems to me , and the Queen is strong in this sense , that the matter
is not likely to be readily adjusted except by personal conference
between well qualified people . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.570

I suppose the first thing will be to let the lawyers see it : and then
to proceed with the materials which may be in hand .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.571

It would be well settled between you & Brunnow
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.572

but I do not know whether this is possible . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.573

2. The Queen makes much difficulty about the Army Complaints Commission
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.574

I have not at all given in as to the argument GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.575

but have said probably it would be well that the Cabinet should again be
consulted . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.576

She expressed an opinion that you were in some way more favourable to
her views . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.577

Please to consider the case of the Maharajah GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.578

<paren> see the inclosure <$$paren> : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.579

& give me your view of it as a House of Lords matter .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,404.580

<P_2,405>

{ED:890_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Naworth Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.583

Sept 3 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.584

I now learn from Kimberley that the probable period for further
consideration of our plans about the expedition against Ashantees will
not be till the close of November . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.585

This being so , <font> that <$$font> cause for a Cabinet at the
beginning of October no longer exists . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.586

I think I might perhaps manage the matter of the Army Grievances
Commission in writing with the aid of what you have done .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.587

Could you contrive to take Hawarden on your way northwards or southwards
? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.588

The former of the two would be far preferable , as sooner : & also
because I think Bright will soon be wishing to fix the terms of his
Address . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.589

Should I try to get him to meet you ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.590

I should like you to be in possession of the most exact knowledge of his
position with reference to the question of Education .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.591

My fear is that that question will eventually either split the party ,
or fatally cripple it for a time in regard to Parliamentary action .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.592

I personally have no fear of the secular system :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.593

but I can@ @not join in measures of repression against voluntary Schools
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.594

The present question however is what we are to expect from Bright whose
return to office we are making use of as a means of at least temporary
reconciliation . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.595

We must not therefore omit to consider on what terms we can expect him
to arrange matters with his constituents . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.596

I return Spencer's letter . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,405.597

<P_2,406>

{ED:892_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.600

Sept 7 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.601

I must begin , in a very unbusiness-like manner , by thanking you for
your beautiful gift to Agnes , and still more for the letter with which
it is accompanied . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.602

I am so glad , after a domestic crisis of this kind , to find myself
back here with my wife & all my children . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.603

It was with compunction that I sent you yesterday a Tel. proposing the
12th as preferable to the 30th . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.604

But I feel it will be advantageous to consider with you , if you can
come , earlier than the 30th , the position of Bright , the question of
changes in the Irish Government , the time for a Cabinet , besides the
Greenwich seat , the Maharajah , & perhaps some other minor matters
<paren> though the G. seat <font> might <$$font> grow out of that
category <$$paren> . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.605

Shall I ask Bright to come on the 12th ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.606

You will I hope stay as long as you can . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.607

There is some question of the Odos in the offing .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.608

My brother in law I am afraid will not be here , on account of a visit
to Chatsworth . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.609

I hope you will ' think thrice ' before agreeing to other than moral
protection , or at least to protection involving the <font> use of force
, <$$font> for Austrians & Swedes . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,406.610

<P_2,407>

{ED:894_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.613

Sept 9 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.614

Lowe's speech at Sheffield is really too bad ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.615

& , free as I believe it is from all evil intention , it illustrates the
incurable solecisms of his extraordinary mind .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.616

1. He begins with half a column on a wonderful meeting of elderly
gentlemen at the inception of the Government .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.617

It is pure romance . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.618

2. He says no C. of E. before him did Treasury business but left it
to a subordinate official . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.619

Pleasant for Stansfield , Baxter , Dodson ! GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.620

Wise , to depreciate & disparage perhaps the most important secondary
office of the Government ! GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.621

Consistent when he was incessantly complaining Baxter would not do the
Secretary's work , & threw it upon him ! GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.622

Also wholly untrue . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.623

Some have done more some less . No one probably more than Lowe , but
some as much . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.624

I did less , perhaps much less . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.625

But I hold that the first duties of C. of E. are outside the Treasury
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.626

One of these is to look after & controul the great expenditures &
Estimates . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.627

In this duty I am sorry to say he was wretchedly deficient :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.628

yet he coolly takes to himself the credit of Army & Navy reductions
which is due to Cardwell & Childers <paren> who in his admirable speech
did not say a word , I think , for himself <$$paren> and with which
every member of the Cabinet had about as much to do as he had .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.629

I can speak from experience GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.630

for I know what it has been to have had cast upon my shoulders the most
important & most offensive duty of the Finance Minister .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.631

I must also say he has been most unsatisfactory in another capital duty
, that of attending the H. of C. on questions of expenditure .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.632

3. Take even his Thames Embankment question -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.633

Unless my memory deceives me I had to use some effort to keep him up to
the mark and prevent his receding & giving up the point !
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.634

I think it well to deposit this explanation with you - with no one else
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.635

This exorbitant boasting is very foolish . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.636

He has ample merit to stand on , in a great amount of patient labour
done , & generally well done & with good results , for the public .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,407.637

Much <P_2,408> of the unpopularity is unjust :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.638

a little patience would set all right . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.639

I am afraid this speech may provoke attack or criticism ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.640

and these will be formidable if they come from competent men - in or out
of office . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.641

I have been telegraphing hard to Hammond today about the Austrian &
Swedish request <paren> where I want to generalise the answer more
<$$paren> & about Deerhound as bearing on the case of the Ironclads .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.642

{ED:895_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.644

Sept 9 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.645

I have thought it best to send through Hammond by wire a suggestion
which occurred to me that the conduct of the Spaniards in the case of
the Deerhound might afford us a fair plea for holding our hands in the
case of the Ironclads - & thus open a way of escape from a serious
though I hope a temporary difficulty . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.646

<font> Before <$$font> I got the facts about the Deerhound I had been
inclining to the following conclusions . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.647

1. Loyalty <paren> <font> loyaut√© <$$font> <$$paren> binds us to
restore the ships if the Spanish Govt is really able or presumably able
to receive them . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.648

2. That being so it would be unworthy to be deterred by rebel threats
at Carthagena . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.649

3. These threats should be met by sending to that place <font> all
<$$font> the British Naval force we can collect for the occasion .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,408.650

<P_2,409>

{ED:897_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.653

Sept 10 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.654

11.45 Pm . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.655

Receiving your Messenger & proposed telegram at 11.30 P._M. I send it
on by Messenger during the night to Hammond GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.656

and do not telegraph to him at this hour . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.657

I only altered ' destroy all ' into ' impair the ' <paren> appearance of
spontaneity <$$paren> . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.658

I would telegraph to Yelverton , I think , that on account of new
circumstances on which it is not necessary to enter he is absolutely to
hold the vessels until further orders ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.659

I had no idea until yesterday of the scandalous character of the case of
the Deerhound . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.660

I hope you will be able to give us a pretty liberal length of visit .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.661

No time for answer from Bright yet - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.662

Wolverton is also asked - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.663

Jim Wortley here , a bachelor . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.664

{ED:898_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.666

Sept. 18 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.667

I learn from Forster that I am perfectly free as regards him
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.668

and therefore Hartington is quite welcome to remain where he is if he
likes . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.669

I have laid to heart your words on parting ; which have given me food
for reflection because I think I have been as civil to him as I can
honestly be : having a high opinion of his gifts , but being
dissatisfied with the manner in which he uses them with reference to the
business of the Government in the House of Commons .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.670

Under these circumstances , and as he <paren> very properly <$$paren>
called you into council , I should be glad if you would carry on this
matter with him , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.671

and perhaps you might not dislike it . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,409.672

<P_2,410>

{ED:899_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.675

Sept. 19 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.676

You will have received my Telegram . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.677

I hope it was in time . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.678

The main points are the two first . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.679

1. As to Peerages please to read Wolverton's letter within .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.680

I do not say we ought permanently to stay our hand ;
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.681

but he is always well worth hearing . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.682

I write to C. Howard . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.683

2. Cardwell & Kimberley wish me to agree to the purchase for 30000 +L
{TEXT:+L30000} of 15 miles of Railway for the contingency of our
deciding to invade South Africa . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.684

I had already stated the need of information about this business for the
Cabinet as well as myself - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.685

we have never had any I think except a few sentences <font> viv√¢_voce .
<$$font> GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.686

And I have told Cardwell that if it be necessary to proceed in this
matter now , I do not feel able to do it without a Cabinet .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.687

At such a Cabinet Bright should if possible be present -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.688

and I <font> may <$$font> therefore have to ask you to get an earlier
day fixed for the Council than we had contemplated .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.689

3. The Chancellor evidently took the right point about the Deerhound
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.690

but it is fortunate for us that the Spanish Government are so
unreasonable . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.691

From the way they behave I am now thankful that we have something to
hold against the Deerhound . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.692

{ED:P.S.}

Hammond might come separately a while after if thought right .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.694

I had almost forgotten Wolverton's mention of my son .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.695

There is I think more than one conclusive reason against moving him at
present . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,410.696

<P_2,411>

{ED:901_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.699

Sept. 21 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.700

I send you a letter from Spencer which I received this morning :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.701

I hope he will remain . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.702

I also send a letter <font> to <$$font> Goschen which may lead to an
application to you about a Council . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.703

I trust you will not think me over fastidious :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.704

but I think that in London they have in zeal & anxiety about the thing
itself proceeded rather far upon their own authority , as will sometimes
happen . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.705

Please send my letter back through <font> Halifax , <$$font> who should
see it . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.706

{ED:902_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.708

Sept. 22 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.709

I am very well pleased that I had not inadvertently given Hartington
offence . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.710

My view of him is I think the same as yours .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.711

There is every likelihood that he may yet have to pass from 10 to 20
years in the House of Commons ; GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.712

and his role there ought to be a very important one with his excellent
brother F. to back him . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,411.713

I hope my Telegram was in time this morning to remove the
misapprehension <P_2,412> into which I had misled you .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.714

It also expressed a scruple of mine about Morocco
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.715

but perhaps our warning is to be on behalf of British Jews & Christians
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.716

From what is going on in London I presume we shall have a Cabinet some
10 or 12 days hence . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.717

If Hartington remains , as I expect , there will be the G. P. O. to
fill . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.718

Perhaps this had better be reserved until we meet .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.719

The Queen is very kind . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.720

I hope my manners will continue to mend : also , that she will not
change her mind when she finds <paren> today <$$paren> that I am obliged
to thwart her about a Winchester canonry for which she wants me to
recommend a respectable man of no calibre , Mr Phipps .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.721

I really think my own relations as good as Sir C. Phipps's ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.722

and I have never put them forward . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.723

I had recommended Dr Lowe a man of very eminent services to Middle Class
Church Education , and a valued supporter also of Dodson .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.724

I am glad to find we are to see your brother here tomorrow .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.725

{ED:904_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.727

Sept. 24 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.728

1. I propose to fix a Cabinet for Thursday in next week if I find that
you can be present . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,412.729

<P_2,413>

It is rather urgent on account of War Office & Admiralty preparations
for movements on the Gold Coast against Ashantee .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.731

I have not been able to sanction without the Cabinet all that Cardwell &
Goschen wished . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.732

2. Will you kindly consider the inclosed GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.733

& let me have an answer as soon as you can . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.734

If you are able to speak by Telegraph call him Hurst and I shall
understand . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.735

3. A letter from me which Spencer would receive yesterday will I hope
have settled the businses of the Lord Lieutenancy .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.736

It is a little difficult , even with that excellent man , to hit the
right point between wind & water . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.737

Your brother is here GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.738

but I am sorry to say inenviably goes tomorrow .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.739

H. M. has behaved right well & kindly about the Canonry .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,413.740

<P_2,414>

{ED:906_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.743

Sept. 27 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.744

1. Perhaps you have informed H. M. that the matter of the Lord
Lieutenancy of Ireland is at rest , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.745

or if not please to do so before you leave Balmoral .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.746

2. I know of no reason for more than one or two Cabinets :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.747

at any rate I would not now propose to begin a series until Lord Mayor's
Day comes . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.748

The ministerial manifesto of that day will be a queer affair .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.749

3. Undoubtedly I think our friends in London , in their anxiety to make
due & full provision for emergencies on the Gold Coast , have not been
sufficiently alive to the question by what authority certain acts were
to be done . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.750

I have myself under pressure gone farther than I could have wished in
giving Treasury sanction to a part of the order for a Railway in order
that time might not be lost : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.751

but I acted for the best . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.752

I do not telegraph about the Cabinet as I have no doubt you will get
today the regular notice . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.753

You will see that there is no necessity for your being in town on
Thursday . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.754

I am much concerned to hear you have not had the advantage of the
Balmoral air . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.755

It did me great good , now as always : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.756

& I am just getting out of old shoes - those dear old friends .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.757

I am so glad you arranged to have B. & C. as guests .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.758

{ED:907_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.760

Sept. 28 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.761

1. What do you think now as to the Maharajah ? {TEXT:.}
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.762

See Gurdon's Mem. within . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.763

2. And what do you recommend as to Cowper's Ofice ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.764

The offer to Morley has done good . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.765

But should you not dissuade him from giving over the business he has
hitherto managed . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.766

3. Hammond's case might be dealt with when he goes
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.767

& therefore I suppose a little after the contemplated Peerages .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,414.768

<P_2,415>

4. Remember we have the P.M.G._ship to deal with .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.770

5. You give up the D of Leeds for Cambridgeshire ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.771

I think he was named . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.772

{ED:908_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.774

Oct. 15 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.775

When I was at Balmoral , the Queen observed as I thought with great
force that large as was the fortune of the Grand Duchess there might be
<font> gaspillage <$$font> which would much reduce it on its way .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.776

I suggested that in the preliminary practical arrangements for the
marriage it would be well to lay down some precise plan for the
transmission of the money at a certain & precise charge , or with a
maximum , subject to which it should be payable in London , or else to
some agent of the married couple in St Petersburgh .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.777

I did not say quite so much to the Queen GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.778

but spoke to this effect . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.779

Sine then I have had the inclosed communications from Ponsonby , the
latter of which desires me to call your attention to the matter .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.780

{ED:909_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.782

Oct. 17 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.783

1. I send you a Mem. on the Yemen question .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.784

2. Dizzy has indeed made a mess of it . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.785

Among other reasons for my gratitude , he has furnished me with a good
additional reason for shirking political demonstrations in the West &
elsewhere , lest I should put a counter-reproach into the mouth of the
adversary . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.786

3. I am very sorry to say Whitbread declines , and Wolverton <paren> by
Telegraph <$$paren> seems to hesitate about Baxter whom I thought you &
he agreed in recommending , or approving , for No 2 .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.787

Whitbread writes as if pleased . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.788

4. So are Howard & Moncreiff about the Peerages .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.789

But both ask for time to consider . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.790

The Admiral is unwell . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.791

5. I hope to remain here till the 4th & spend the week until Lord
Mayor's day in visiting the Sneyds , & the Spencers .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,415.792

<P_2,416>

6. I have thought a good deal over the questions of legislation for the
coming year GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.794

& think I can see pretty well what our programme should be .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.795

On the large subject of County Suffrage I believe our best course would
probably be to encourage Trevelyan to come forward on a very early day ,
and to give him at least individually such aid as we can .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.796

{ED:911_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

{ED:Copy}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.799

Oct. 18 . 1873 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.800

Pray tell Monsell that the delay in the appointment of his successor
which I much regret has been due to causes beyond my control
{TEXT:controul} . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.801

But I am aware of no reason why , if he is desirous to accelerate the
proceeding , he should not at once execute his resignation by a letter .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.802

I write however rather at a venture on this point ;
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.803

he will know whether for his statutory duties an absolute continuity in
the office is required . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.804

I rather gather from his letter that he expects the Peerage will <font>
accompany <$$font> the retirement . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.805

This could not be , as the union would lead to serious misapprehensions
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.806

It can only be <font> after <$$font> his retirement :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.807

but no very long interval need separate the two .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.808

I return the letter . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.809

P.S. I send you Wolverton's letters about Baxter .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.810

They are much at variance with my recollections of his conversation with
us . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.811

Baxter is not very good , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.812

but what can we do better ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.813

Most seats <paren> not B.'s <$$paren> are in danger .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.814

I think W. Cowper would be better than Massey -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.815

but Hampshire ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,416.816

<P_2,417>

{ED:912_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.819

Oct. 18 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.820

I have received this morning a box of papers respecting the Tunis Bank .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.821

They do not include the Prime Minister's letter of concession .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.822

And I am very far indeed from comprehending the whole question .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.823

But there are many points which suggest to me misgiving .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.824

I think the great object for the moment should be to obtain time if
possible for a thorough examination . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.825

1. Mr Wood's case is not fully before me . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.826

I do not know his character , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.827

& much depends upon this . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.828

Upon the surface , his language to the Bey savours as much of dictation
and pressure , as any thing we <font> know <$$font> of the French agents
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.829

2. De Broglie alleges that he sought the concession originally for
himself . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.830

Is he now free from all pecuniary interest in the matter ?
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.831

3. The remonstrance is stated by the Bey of Tunis in his note to have
been addressed to him by the Consuls generally and the Traders of the
place . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.832

This statement from such a source tells strongly against peremptory
action of any kind . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.833

4. I can@ @not say that the Words ' Banque Priv√©e ' cover a <font>
soci√©t√© anonyme <font> with limited liability so as to enable us to
argue high the question of good faith . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.834

5. I find nothing in the papers to explain the strange stipulation for
' preference ' to this English Bank . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.835

It is an ominous and inauspicious word on which it would seem that
almost any claim might be founded . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.836

For all these reasons I am very glad that by the Telegram of the 17th
you have directed Mr Wood to press for time .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.837

One point of difficulty seems to be the determination of the degree in
which the letter of the Prime Minister pledges the Government or rather
the Bey . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.838

This would be plain enough here . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.839

Mr Wood speaks of the Bey & Tunisian Govt as under coercion
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.840

but the tone of their documents is that of resistance to him .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.841

If we have to go farther into the matter perhaps a F. O. pr√©cis will
be advantageous . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.842

It is delightful to hear that the Audience question is for the present
at an end . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.843

I hope Wade will not be emboldened by your approval , which I suppose
could scarcely be withheld , to assume too much .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.844

I am not greatly pleased at the satisfaction expressed by the
missionaries and especially the Romish missionaries .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,417.845

<P_2,418>

{ED:914_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.848

Oct 21 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.849

1. I shall await Wolverton's verdict with much interest .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.850

I was not warmly for Baxter , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.851

but I do not quite understand W.s reasons against him .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.852

Your brother would certainly be the best Post_Master_General of the
three : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.853

& I think Baxter the next . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.854

So undoubtedly he would be a wiser Under_Secretary for the Colonies -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.855

but then he would not with his views be able to talk the Bunkum in which
, on that subject , the House too much delights .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.856

He would I am sure deliver very sound Ashantee & Gold Coast doctrine .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.857

2. Chancing to hear from some authentic source an excellent account of
Erle's recovered health , I wrote to the Chancellor ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.858

and I inclose his reply , which I interpret as meaning that E should now
be No 1 for the legal Peerage . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.859

Do you agree ? GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.860

3. Reading your Draft on the Three Rules moved me to put down in a
short memorandum what I have to say on the subject -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.861

It has reference to future stages of the matter .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.862

We expect to be at Althorp <paren> probably <$$paren> on the 6th .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,418.863

<P_2,419_omitted>

<P_2,420>

{ED:916_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

{ED:Copy}

<font> Private . <$$font> GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.868

Oct. 24 . 73 GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.869

Wolverton has set out the reasons <font> for <$$font> in the case of
Hugessen ; GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.870

I am sorry to say they do not at all satisfy me .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.871

1. Nothing but <font> necessity <$$font> should lead us to open a
ministerial seat to which any doubt can attach .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.872

W. gives a favourable opinion but with " I think " .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.873

2. The P. O. with its huge & growing establishment {TEXT:estabt}
requires a real economist . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.874

I own I have never seen a sign of this in H. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.875

3. He is a good fellow , a clever fellow , a very good speaker ;
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.876

but he has the P. C. given him very lately -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.877

another step wd now be quite gratuitous , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.878

& he like Baxter has never earned a reputation as a hard worker .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.879

4. A gratuitous promotion in his case is the more questionable ,
because he very needlessly ran amuck at the Dissenters .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.880

5. Two important appts are voided by a Scot & an Irishman -
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.881

it is hardly desirable to make upon this two important appts both of
Englishmen . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.882

In or among these considerations I find more than enough reason for a
negative after thinking the matter over . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.883

I send a copy of them to Wn GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.884

& I telegraphed to you both this morning - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.885

I send his letter . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,420.886

<P_2,421>

{ED:918_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.889

Oct. 25 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.890

Your cover which reached me today covered two letters dated the <font>
21st <$$font> . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.891

On one of the subject I have already written .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.892

With regard to the other , the Russian fortune , you will judge better
than I can whether there should be any thing in the Treaty .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.893

But it does not seem to me out of the question .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.894

Whatever is given in a marriage settlement should be placed at the ready
and easy command of the married pair , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.895

and the G. D.'s fortune should be as accessible as the dividends on the
Russian Funds , subject to any reasonable charge , if there be occasion
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.896

But at any rate I should think full subsidiary provision should be made
contemporaneously with the Treaty . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.897

I have named the 10th at 3 for the Cabinet . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.898

{ED:919_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.900

Oct. 29 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.901

Having no answer to my Telegram of Monday morning I sent off yesterday
from London an offer of the P. O. to Baxter .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.902

There may I fear have been some mischance in the dispatch of your reply
which came here today <paren> Wednesday <$$paren> afternoon .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.903

Nothing could be more unfortunate than the breaking up when we were
separated of the understanding arrived at <font> viv√¢_voce <$$font> with
Wolverton ; GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.904

for it is almost impossible , in nice cases , to settle these things
properly by letter , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.905

& for us , under present circumstances , every case is a nice case .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.906

I am afraid the Monarchists in France are mad :
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.907

they seem to have hitched themselves into a position when it is a
disgrace to recede & disaster of the highest order to advance .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,421.908

<P_2,422>

We shall not be at Althorp till Friday of next week .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.910

I could hardly hope that the Sec.ship of B. of Trace would have any
attractions for your brother , remarkable as I know his modesty to be .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.911

{ED:921_Mr._Gladstone_to_Lord_Granville}

Hawarden Castle . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.913

Oct 31 . 73 . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.914

I am I assure you extremely concerned at the failure of my little plot
against your brother : GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.915

& he ' heaps coals of fire on my head ' by the way in which he takes it
. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.916

I did not change my mind about the suggestion ,
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.917

but only gave way to his modest unwillingness .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.918

On the other hand it is really necessary , in the present state of Civil
Service agitation for increase of pay , to put a man firm in such
matters to the P. O. GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.919

and such I think Baxter will be - GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.920

but I have no idea whether he will accept . GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.921

I have not yet heard from you whether you accept <font> Erle <$$font> in
lieu of James - it appearing that his health is quite adequate , & the
Chancellor having on this ground altered his preference .
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.922

What a letter of Chambord's , GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.923

and what an explosion of a grand conspiracy against liberty !
GLADSTONE-1873-1,2,422.924

