<BEGIN_godwin-1805-1>

<P_59>

<heading>

Chapter II . GODWIN-1805-1,59.4

<$$heading>

The proper topic of the narrative I am writing is the record of my
errors . GODWIN-1805-1,59.6

To write it , is the act of my penitence and humiliation .
GODWIN-1805-1,59.7

I can expect , however , few persons to interest themselves respecting
my errors , unless they are first informed what manner of man I am ,
what were my spontaneous and native dispositions , and whether I am such
a one as that my errors are worthy of commiseration and pity .
GODWIN-1805-1,59.8

This must be my apology for the topic I am here to introduce , - a topic
on which all ingenuous minds are disposed to be silent , and which shall
in this place be passed over as slightly as possible , - my beneficence
and charities . GODWIN-1805-1,59.9

I was fond of penetrating into the cottages of the poor .
GODWIN-1805-1,59.10

I should be greatly unjust to myself , if I suffered the reader to
suppose that the wild elevation and intellectual luxuries I indulged ,
had the effect to render me insensible to the miseries of man .
GODWIN-1805-1,59.11

Nothing was squalid , loathsome , and disgusting in my eyes , where it
was possible for me to be useful . GODWIN-1805-1,59.12

I shrunk from the society of man in general ; GODWIN-1805-1,59.13

and foresaw , in the intercourse of my species , something for ever
prepared to thwart my sensibility , and to jar against the unreal world
in which I lived . GODWIN-1805-1,59.14

But I never shrank from the presence of calamity . GODWIN-1805-1,59.15

From the liberal allowance with which my father supplied me , I relieved
its wants ; GODWIN-1805-1,59.16

I sheltered it from the menaces of a prison ; GODWIN-1805-1,59.17

and I even prevailed on myself to resort willingly to such towns as our
vicinity afforded , to plead its cause , and parley with its oppressor .
GODWIN-1805-1,59.18

<P_60>

No doubt , my pride did not come away ungratified from these enterprises
. GODWIN-1805-1,60.20

Far be it from me to assert , with certain morose and cold-blooded
moralists , that our best actions are only more subtle methods by which
self-love seeks its gratification . GODWIN-1805-1,60.21

My own heart , in every act of benevolence I ever performed , gave the
lie to this execrable doctrine . GODWIN-1805-1,60.22

I felt that it was the love of another , and not of myself , that
prompted my deed ; GODWIN-1805-1,60.23

I experienced a disinterested joy in human relief and human happiness ,
independently of the question whether I had been concerned in producing
it ; GODWIN-1805-1,60.24

and , when the season of retrospect arrived , I exulted in my own
benevolence , from the divine consciousness that , while I had been most
busily engaged in the task , my own gratification was forgotten .
GODWIN-1805-1,60.25

There is , however , as I have intimated , a very subtle and complicated
association in human feelings . GODWIN-1805-1,60.26

The generous sympathy which animated my charitable deeds was pure ;
GODWIN-1805-1,60.27

it flowed from a celestial source , GODWIN-1805-1,60.28

and maintained its crystal current , as unmingled with the vulgar stream
of personal passions as the oil extracted from the most aromatic fruits
flows separate , and unconfounded with the mire of the kennel on which
it may have fallen . GODWIN-1805-1,60.29

There is no doubt , however , that the honourable character I exhibited
on these occasions prompted me the more joyfully to seek their
repetition . GODWIN-1805-1,60.30

Humanity and self-complacency were distinct causes of my beneficence ;
GODWIN-1805-1,60.31

but the latter was not less powerful than the former in nourishing it
into a habit . GODWIN-1805-1,60.32

In other scenes of human intercourse , I played an equal and a doubtful
part : GODWIN-1805-1,60.33

the superior eloquence or information of my competitor might overwhelm
me ; GODWIN-1805-1,60.34

he might have more passion to pursue his purpose , or more want of
feeling to harden him against the obstacles that opposed :
GODWIN-1805-1,60.35

but in the cottage to which my benevolence led me , I appeared like a
superior nature ; GODWIN-1805-1,60.36

I had here no opposition to contend with , no insult to awaken my
irritability , and no superciliousness to check the operations of my
sentiment . GODWIN-1805-1,60.37

It was also fortunate for me , that the cases of distress which came
before me in this remote part of the island were not numerous enough to
distract my choice , or to render me callous by the too great frequency
of their impressions . GODWIN-1805-1,60.38

<P_61>

One adventure of this sort interested me so much by the liveliness of
its incidents , that I can@ @not refuse briefly to describe it in this
place . GODWIN-1805-1,61.40

The season had for many days been uncommonly wet . GODWIN-1805-1,61.41

The waters were swelled with continual rains , GODWIN-1805-1,61.42

and the low lands were almost inundated . GODWIN-1805-1,61.43

It was July . GODWIN-1805-1,61.44

After a series of heavy showers , one afternoon the sky brightened ,
GODWIN-1805-1,61.45

the sun burst forth with redoubled splendour , GODWIN-1805-1,61.46

and all nature smiled . GODWIN-1805-1,61.47

This is a moment particularly dear to the lover of rural scenery .
GODWIN-1805-1,61.48

Dry weather tarnishes the face of nature , GODWIN-1805-1,61.49

fades the lovely colours of hill and valley , GODWIN-1805-1,61.50

and profanes and destroys those sweet odours which , more than any thing
else , give the last finish to the charms of nature .
GODWIN-1805-1,61.51

I hastened to enjoy the golden opportunity . GODWIN-1805-1,61.52

By long practice , I knew how to find the paths where mire and swamps
would not occur to interrupt my pleasure . GODWIN-1805-1,61.53

My way led me by a steep acclivity of the mountain , which overhangs the
basin that forms the source of the Desunny . GODWIN-1805-1,61.54

I gained the eastern extremity of the ridge , that I might the more
amply enjoy the beams of the setting sun as he sunk beneath the waves of
the Irish Sea . GODWIN-1805-1,61.55

It was the finest evening my eyes ever beheld . GODWIN-1805-1,61.56

The resplendent colours of the clouds , the rich purple and burnished
gold in various streaks fantastically formed and repeated , were beyond
any imagination to conceive . GODWIN-1805-1,61.57

The woods were vocal . GODWIN-1805-1,61.58

The scents that surrounded me , the steaming earth , the fresh and
invigorating air , the hay and the flowers , constituted , so to express
myself , an olfactory concert , infinitely more ravishing than all the
concords of harmonious sound that human art ever produced .
GODWIN-1805-1,61.59

This lovely moment combined in one impression the freshness of the
finest morning , with all the rich and gorgeous effects peculiar to the
close of a summer's day . GODWIN-1805-1,61.60

I stood , as I have said , on the edge of the precipice .
GODWIN-1805-1,61.61

I gazed for a long time upon the various charms that what we ordinarily
, but improperly , call inanimate nature unfolded . GODWIN-1805-1,61.62

I saw the rustic , as he retired from endeavouring to repair the injury
his hay had sustained ; and the flocks , as they passed slowly along to
their evening's repose . GODWIN-1805-1,61.63

Presently an individual object engrossed <P_62> my attention .
GODWIN-1805-1,62.64

A young lamb had wandered by some accident to the middle of the
precipice , GODWIN-1805-1,62.65

and a peasant was pursuing it , and endeavouring to call it to his arms
. GODWIN-1805-1,62.66

I shuddered at the sight . GODWIN-1805-1,62.67

The precipice was in some parts almost perpendicular .
GODWIN-1805-1,62.68

The rains had rendered the surface exceedingly slippery .
GODWIN-1805-1,62.69

The peasant caught at the shrubs and tufts of grass as he descended ;
GODWIN-1805-1,62.70

and , with a skill peculiar to the inhabitants of the mountains , seemed
to proceed securely in the most desperate places . GODWIN-1805-1,62.71

The lamb , whether from heedlessness or wantonness , advanced further
along the mountain-side {COM:sic} , as the shepherd pursued .
GODWIN-1805-1,62.72

While I was engaged in observing this little manoeuvre , I suddenly
heard a scream . GODWIN-1805-1,62.73

It came from a spot exceedingly near to me . GODWIN-1805-1,62.74

Two boys sat in a nook where I had not perceived them ,
GODWIN-1805-1,62.75

and cried out , " My brother ! GODWIN-1805-1,62.76

my brother ! " GODWIN-1805-1,62.77

A venerable grey-headed man was with them . GODWIN-1805-1,62.78

He exclaimed , " My son ! GODWIN-1805-1,62.79

my William ! " GODWIN-1805-1,62.80

and prepared to plunge down the precipice . GODWIN-1805-1,62.81

The scream I had heard was the effect of what at that moment happened
before my eyes ; GODWIN-1805-1,62.82

yet such is the curious structure of the human senses , that what I
heard seemed to be prior in time to what I saw . GODWIN-1805-1,62.83

The peasant had almost overtaken his lamb . GODWIN-1805-1,62.84

The lamb was on the point of escaping by a sudden leap ;
GODWIN-1805-1,62.85

the peasant sprung upon him , GODWIN-1805-1,62.86

and both were at the bottom of the precipice , GODWIN-1805-1,62.87

and plunged in the basin , now swelled into a lake , with the rapidity
of lightning . GODWIN-1805-1,62.88

I flew to the group I have described ; GODWIN-1805-1,62.89

I laid hold of the old man at the moment of his purposed descent ;
GODWIN-1805-1,62.90

I cried out , " Stay , poor man ! GODWIN-1805-1,62.91

what can you do ? GODWIN-1805-1,62.92

I will save your son ! " GODWIN-1805-1,62.93

I knew a path , more secure , yet scarcely more circuitous than that
which the peasant had followed . GODWIN-1805-1,62.94

I had the advantage over him , that I was not diverted from my course by
any object whose deviations I pursued . GODWIN-1805-1,62.95

For some time I went on safely ; GODWIN-1805-1,62.96

I saw the peasant rise to the surface of the water , and sink again ;
GODWIN-1805-1,62.97

my impatience was too great to combine any longer with wariness ;
GODWIN-1805-1,62.98

I lost my footing , GODWIN-1805-1,62.99

and in an instant I also was in the lake . GODWIN-1805-1,62.100

My fall had been from a less terrible height than his ,
GODWIN-1805-1,62.101

and I recovered myself . GODWIN-1805-1,62.102

I swam toward the place where he had last sunk ; GODWIN-1805-1,62.103

he rose ; GODWIN-1805-1,62.104

I threw my arm round his neck , GODWIN-1805-1,62.105

and supported him . GODWIN-1805-1,62.106

The difficulty , however , which remained appeared insuperable ;
GODWIN-1805-1,62.107

<P_63>

the shores on almost every side were shelving , and impossible to be
scaled with the peasant in my arms , who was in a state of insensibility
. GODWIN-1805-1,63.109

As I was endeavouring to find the means of escaping from this difficulty
, I saw a boat advancing toward us ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.110

it was rowed by a young woman ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.111

it approached ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.112

she was William's mistress , and the owner of the lamb for which he had
ventured his life ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.113

we got him into the boat ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.114

he was more stunned with the fall , than injured by the water ;
GODWIN-1805-1,63.115

he appeared to be gradually recovering ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.116

even the lamb was saved . GODWIN-1805-1,63.117

By the time we had reached the shore , the father and the two brothers
were come round to our landing-place . GODWIN-1805-1,63.118

All their attention was at first turned upon William ;
GODWIN-1805-1,63.119

I was nothing to them : GODWIN-1805-1,63.120

I retired to a little distance , GODWIN-1805-1,63.121

and observed the group . GODWIN-1805-1,63.122

The eldest boy supported William , as he sat ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.123

the blooming maid rubbed his temples ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.124

the father sat before him , GODWIN-1805-1,63.125

and clasped his son's hands between his . GODWIN-1805-1,63.126

It was an interesting spectacle ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.127

a painter might have sketched them as they sat . GODWIN-1805-1,63.128

The eye of the boy glistened with eagerness ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.129

the girl hung over her lover , while her colour alternately changed from
its natural ruddiness to a languid paleness ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.130

the hairs of the old man were as white as snow . GODWIN-1805-1,63.131

Presently William uttered a profound sigh ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.132

it was a welcome sound to the whole assembly . GODWIN-1805-1,63.133

The least boy was at first wrapped in silent attention ;
GODWIN-1805-1,63.134

but presently began to play with Molly , the pet lamb , that frisked
about him . GODWIN-1805-1,63.135

In a short time the old man exclaimed , " Where is our deliverer ? "
GODWIN-1805-1,63.136

It was now my turn ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.137

I was at a short distance ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.138

they were all tumultuous in their expressions of gratitude .
GODWIN-1805-1,63.139

The peasant-girl and myself supported William to his cottage ;
GODWIN-1805-1,63.140

I offered my other arm to the father ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.141

the biggest boy led their favourite lamb by a string which hung from his
neck ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.142

the youngest bore in triumph his father's stick , who , as he leaned on
my arm , no longer needed its support . GODWIN-1805-1,63.143

Such was the commencement of my acquaintance with an honest family .
GODWIN-1805-1,63.144

The habitation of the girl was at a small distance from theirs ;
GODWIN-1805-1,63.145

she was one of a numerous assemblage of sisters who lived with their
mother . GODWIN-1805-1,63.146

I found that the young persons had been lovers for more than a year ,
but had deferred their marriage for prudential reasons .
GODWIN-1805-1,63.147

The industry of William was the support of his own house ;
GODWIN-1805-1,63.148

his father was past his labour ; GODWIN-1805-1,63.149

<P_64>

they had resolved not to marry till the next brother should be able to
take the place now filled by the eldest . GODWIN-1805-1,64.151

The accident that had just occurred , in which the cottage-maid
preserved the life of her lover , increased their affection ,
GODWIN-1805-1,64.152

and doubled their impatience ; an impatience , however , which they were
resolute to subject to the most honourable considerations .
GODWIN-1805-1,64.153

I saw them often ; GODWIN-1805-1,64.154

I loved them much . GODWIN-1805-1,64.155

William , was ingenuous and active ; GODWIN-1805-1,64.156

the maid added to a masculine intrepidity most of the more lovely graces
of her own sex . GODWIN-1805-1,64.157

The father often lamented , even with tears , that he was no longer
capable of those exertions which might enable William freely to obey the
dictates of his heart . GODWIN-1805-1,64.158

The attachment which I felt to them was that of a patron and a preserver
; GODWIN-1805-1,64.159

when I observed the degree of content which prevailed among them , when
I witnessed the effusions of their honest esteem and affection , my
heart whispered me {COM:sic} , " This would not have existed but for me
! " GODWIN-1805-1,64.160

I prevailed on my father to bestow a farm upon the lovers ;
GODWIN-1805-1,64.161

I engaged , out of my own little stock , to hire a labourer for the old
man ; GODWIN-1805-1,64.162

they married , GODWIN-1805-1,64.163

and I had the satisfaction to convert one virtuous establishment into
two . GODWIN-1805-1,64.164

Such were the principal occupations of my juvenile years .
GODWIN-1805-1,64.165

I loved the country , without feeling any partiality to what are called
the sports of the country . GODWIN-1805-1,64.166

My temper , as I have already said , was somewhat unsocial ; and so far
as related to the intercourse of my species , except when some strong
stimulus of humanity called me into action , unenterprising .
GODWIN-1805-1,64.167

I was therefore no hunter . GODWIN-1805-1,64.168

I was inaccessible to the pitiful ambition of showing , before a gang of
rural squires , that I had a fine horse , and could manage him
gracefully . GODWIN-1805-1,64.169

I had not the motive , which ordinarily influences the inhabitants of
the country to the cultivation of these sports , - the want of
occupation . GODWIN-1805-1,64.170

I was young : GODWIN-1805-1,64.171

the world was new to me : GODWIN-1805-1,64.172

I abounded with occupation . GODWIN-1805-1,64.173

In the scenery of Merionethshire I found a source of inexhaustible
amusement . GODWIN-1805-1,64.174

Science , history , poetry , engaged me by turns , GODWIN-1805-1,64.175

and into each of them my soul plunged itself with an ardour difficult to
describe . GODWIN-1805-1,64.176

In the train of these came my visions , my beloved and variegated
inventions , the records , which to me <P_65> appeared voluminous and
momentous , of my past life , the plans of my future , the republics I
formed , the seminaries of education for which I constructed laws , the
figure I proposed hereafter to exhibit in the eyes of a wondering world
. GODWIN-1805-1,65.177

I had a still further and more direct reason for my rejection of the
sports of the field . GODWIN-1805-1,65.178

I could not with patience regard torture , anguish , and death , as
sources of amusement . GODWIN-1805-1,65.179

My natural temper , or my reflective and undebauched habits as a
solitaire , prevented me from overlooking the brutality and cruelty of
such pursuits . GODWIN-1805-1,65.180

In very early youth I had been seduced , first by a footman of my father
, and afterwards by my tutor , who was a great lover of the art , to
join in an excursion of angling . GODWIN-1805-1,65.181

But , after a short trial , I abjured the amusement for ever ;
GODWIN-1805-1,65.182

and it was one among the causes of the small respect I entertained for
my tutor , that he was devoted to so idle and unfeeling an avocation .
GODWIN-1805-1,65.183

<heading>

Chapter III . GODWIN-1805-1,65.185

<$$heading>

At the usual age I entered myself of the university of Oxford .
GODWIN-1805-1,65.187

I felt no strong propensity to this change ; GODWIN-1805-1,65.188

but I submitted to it , as to a thing in the regular order of proceeding
, and to which it would be useless to object . GODWIN-1805-1,65.189

I was so much accustomed to self-conversation as to have little
inclination to mix in the world ; GODWIN-1805-1,65.190

and was to such a degree satisfied with my abilities , and progress ,
and capacity of directing my own studies and conduct , as not to look
with any eager craving for the advice and assistance of professors and
doctors . GODWIN-1805-1,65.191

In setting out for the university , I was to part with my father and my
preceptor . GODWIN-1805-1,65.192

The first of these was a bitter pang to me : GODWIN-1805-1,65.193

I had scarcely , from the earliest of my remembrance , ever been a week
removed from the sight of the author of my being . GODWIN-1805-1,65.194

He was the wisest and the best man I knew . GODWIN-1805-1,65.195

He had all those advantages from nature , and from the external
endowments of fortune , which were calculated to maintain my reverence .
GODWIN-1805-1,65.196

We had gradually become more qualified for each other's society and
confidence . GODWIN-1805-1,65.197

Our characters had many points of resemblance : GODWIN-1805-1,65.198

<P_66>

we were both serious , both contemplative , both averse to the commerce
of the world . GODWIN-1805-1,66.200

My temper , as I have said , was to an uncommon degree impatient of
contradiction ; GODWIN-1805-1,66.201

and a certain degree of heart-burning had not failed occasionally to
invade my breast on this score , even toward this excellent parent .
GODWIN-1805-1,66.202

But my resentment and indignation in these instances had been
short-lived . GODWIN-1805-1,66.203

As the only representative of his person in existence , my father was
ardently attached to me , GODWIN-1805-1,66.204

and the occasions he administered to my impatience and displeasure were
exceedingly few . GODWIN-1805-1,66.205

On the other hand , whatever faults of character might justly be imputed
to me , I had yet betrayed no tokens of an unmanageable boisterousness ;
GODWIN-1805-1,66.206

my propensities were innocent ; and my pursuits , most of them , such as
seemed to conduce to the improvement of my understanding and my heart .
GODWIN-1805-1,66.207

In a word , my father and I , allowing for these failings , which in
some form or other are inseparable from the human character , were
excellent friends ; GODWIN-1805-1,66.208

and it was not without many tears shed on both sides that we parted ,
when I mounted the chaise in which I set out for Oxford .
GODWIN-1805-1,66.209

The separation between me and my tutor , which took place at the same
time , was productive of a mixed sensation . GODWIN-1805-1,66.210

I had long nourished in my mind a supercilious disregard of his mental
discernment , GODWIN-1805-1,66.211

and felt as if it were a degradation to me to listen to his instructions
. GODWIN-1805-1,66.212

The lessons he gave me appeared as a sort of shackles , the symbols of
infantine imbecility . GODWIN-1805-1,66.213

I was confident of my virtue and my perseverance , GODWIN-1805-1,66.214

and longed to shake off these tokens of my nonage .
GODWIN-1805-1,66.215

But , besides these intellectual sources of weariness and impatience ,
there was an animal sensation , which made me regard the day of my
separation from my tutor as the epoch of my liberty .
GODWIN-1805-1,66.216

His voice was sickly and unpleasing to my ear . GODWIN-1805-1,66.217

He had cultivated the art of being amiable ; GODWIN-1805-1,66.218

and his cadences were formed by habit to a kind of tune of candour , and
gentleness , and humanity . GODWIN-1805-1,66.219

His gentleness was , unfortunately , twin-brother to the softness of his
understanding , GODWIN-1805-1,66.220

and expressed nothing so plainly as his ignorance of all the avenues of
persuasion , and all the secret springs of hope , and fear , and passion
, and will . GODWIN-1805-1,66.221

In addition to this , the good gentleman loved to hear himself talk ;
GODWIN-1805-1,66.222

and his explanations and <P_67> exhortations were as long as the
homilies of Archbishop Cranmer . GODWIN-1805-1,67.223

At my age , - the age of restlessness , and activity , and enterprise ,
- these discourses , unhappily , did not generate a propensity to sleep
, GODWIN-1805-1,67.224

and therefore produced in me an insupportable listlessness and <font>
ennui . <$$font> GODWIN-1805-1,67.225

Yet I did not finally part with my old friend without pain .
GODWIN-1805-1,67.226

It was impossible a more innocent creature should live .
GODWIN-1805-1,67.227

If I did not highly respect him , I could not help approving and loving
him . GODWIN-1805-1,67.228

Had it been otherwise , there is something in the nature of habit which
will for ever prevent us from parting with that to which we have been
long accustomed , with indifference . GODWIN-1805-1,67.229

I had been used to see my preceptor every morning .
GODWIN-1805-1,67.230

He was part of the furniture of our eating-room . GODWIN-1805-1,67.231

As we had very unfrequent opportunities of various society , I often
found relief in entering into conversation with him .
GODWIN-1805-1,67.232

If he could tell me nothing that appeared to me highly worthy of
attention , in the way of fancy or deduction , he was at least well
qualified to inform me of what he had read in books , relatively either
to chronology , geography , or science . GODWIN-1805-1,67.233

I am persuaded that if , when my tutor left me , I had remained among
the same scenes , the crisis would have been a severe one .
GODWIN-1805-1,67.234

As it was , my understanding approved of the separation :
GODWIN-1805-1,67.235

I recollected that it was an event for which I had often and anxiously
sighed ; GODWIN-1805-1,67.236

yet to part with a good man , - a man to whose cares and patience I owed
much , who had bestowed on me a_thousand benefits , and between whom and
myself there had , from familiarity , grown up a considerable affection
, - was no desirable task . GODWIN-1805-1,67.237

I kissed his hand ; GODWIN-1805-1,67.238

I thanked him a_hundred times for his constant exertions ;
GODWIN-1805-1,67.239

with bitter self-reproach , I entreated him to forgive every act of
rudeness , impetuousness , and disrespect , I had been guilty of toward
him : GODWIN-1805-1,67.240

at this moment , these things struck upon my conscience like crimes .
GODWIN-1805-1,67.241

My father was anxious that a decent provision should be made for his
declining years . GODWIN-1805-1,67.242

There was an ecclesiastical living of considerable value vacant in my
father's gift , GODWIN-1805-1,67.243

and he entreated my tutor to enter into holy orders , and accept of it ;
GODWIN-1805-1,67.244

but this <P_68> my old friend strenuously declined .
GODWIN-1805-1,68.245

His creed did not exactly accord with the principles of orthodoxy
contained in the code of the Church of England ; GODWIN-1805-1,68.246

and he disdained to compromise with his conscience .
GODWIN-1805-1,68.247

Besides , regarding himself , as he undoubtedly did , as the first
luminary of his age , he could not think with perfect temper of devoting
the last maturity of his mind to the society of fox-hunting squires ,
and the reading prayers and sermons to rustics and old women .
GODWIN-1805-1,68.248

He retired , upon a small annuity which my father settled upon him , to
a narrow lodging in an obscure street of the metropolis ,
GODWIN-1805-1,68.249

and published from time to time pocket volumes of poetry , and sketches
of a synopsis of his mythological discoveries , which some persons
bought out of respect to the good qualities of their author , but which
no person read . GODWIN-1805-1,68.250

A third separation which took place on this occasion , and which , I
hope , the reader will not think it beneath the dignity of history to
record , was between me and my dog . GODWIN-1805-1,68.251

He was my old and affectionate friend , GODWIN-1805-1,68.252

and the hours I had spent <font> tête-à-tête <$$font> in his society
were scarcely less numerous than those I had spent with my tutor .
GODWIN-1805-1,68.253

He had often been the confidant of my sorrows ; GODWIN-1805-1,68.254

and I had not found it less natural to complain to him , than the
heroines of fable or romance to the woods and the wilds , the rocks and
the ocean , of the cruelties they experienced , or the calamities that
weighed them down to the earth . GODWIN-1805-1,68.255

One instance in particular I remember in very early youth , when my
father had spoken to me with unusual sharpness about some fault that ,
in my eyes , by no means merited great severity of censure .
GODWIN-1805-1,68.256

I retired to the terrace in the garden which has already been mentioned
, GODWIN-1805-1,68.257

threw myself at my length upon the turf , GODWIN-1805-1,68.258

and indulged a short fit of mutiny and misanthropy .
GODWIN-1805-1,68.259

As I lay , poor Chilo <paren> that was the dog's name <$$paren>
discovered me , GODWIN-1805-1,68.260

and leaped toward me with his usual demonstrations of joy .
GODWIN-1805-1,68.261

I was in too ill a humour to notice him ; GODWIN-1805-1,68.262

and he , who seemed to have at least as much skill as my tutor in
discerning what passed in my mind , crept along the turf toward the spot
which supported my head , with pleading and most diffident advances .
GODWIN-1805-1,68.263

At length <P_69> I suffered my eye to fall on him .
GODWIN-1805-1,69.264

This brought him close to me in a moment . GODWIN-1805-1,69.265

He licked my hands and face , with every token of gratitude , affection
, and delight . GODWIN-1805-1,69.266

I threw my arms round him . GODWIN-1805-1,69.267

" Fond fool ! " said I , GODWIN-1805-1,69.268

" every one else treats me with unkindness and injustice ;
GODWIN-1805-1,69.269

but you will love me still ! " GODWIN-1805-1,69.270

It was judged proper that this animal , who had passed the meridian of
his life , should not accompany me in my entrance into the world , but
should remain at home . GODWIN-1805-1,69.271

I accordingly left him in Merionethshire . GODWIN-1805-1,69.272

What was my surprise , then , one day , as I came down the steps of the
chapel from morning prayers , after having been a week at Oxford , at
meeting my dog ! GODWIN-1805-1,69.273

He fawned upon me , GODWIN-1805-1,69.274

played a_thousand extravagant antics , GODWIN-1805-1,69.275

and was transported out of himself at the joy of finding me .
GODWIN-1805-1,69.276

I afterward learned that he had been at my rooms , had been repulsed
there , and finally found his way to the chapel . GODWIN-1805-1,69.277

By what sort of instinct an animal is thus enabled , for a distance of
one_hundred_and_seventy miles , to discover the trace of his master , I
am unable to say . GODWIN-1805-1,69.278

The thing itself , I am told , is not uncommon . GODWIN-1805-1,69.279

But every ingenuous mind to whom such an incident has occurred , feels ,
no doubt , as I did a most powerful impulse of affection toward the
brute who has shown so distinguished an attachment .
GODWIN-1805-1,69.280

What is the nature of this attachment ? GODWIN-1805-1,69.281

A dog , I believe , is not less attached to a fool than to a wise man ,
to a peasant than to a lord , to a beggar inhabiting the poorest hut ,
than to a prince swaying the sceptre of nations and dwelling in a palace
. GODWIN-1805-1,69.282

Ill usage scarcely makes a difference . GODWIN-1805-1,69.283

At least , the most sparingly dealt kindness of the surliest groom
affords a sufficient basis of attachment . GODWIN-1805-1,69.284

The case is considerably parallel to that of a nobleman I have somewhere
read of , who insisted that his mistress should not love him for his
wealth nor his rank , the graces of his person nor the accomplishments
of his mind ; but <font> for himself . <$$font> GODWIN-1805-1,69.285

I am inclined to blame the man who should thus subtly refine , and
wantonly endeavour at a separation between him and all that is most
truly his ; GODWIN-1805-1,69.286

but , where the course of nature produces this separation , there is a
principle in the human mind which compels us to find gratification in
this unmerited and metaphysical love . GODWIN-1805-1,69.287

At Oxford , the whole tone of my mind became speedily <P_70> changed .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.288

The situation was altogether new , GODWIN-1805-1,70.289

and the effects produced were strikingly opposed to those which I had
hitherto sustained . GODWIN-1805-1,70.290

In Merionethshire , I had been a solitary savage . GODWIN-1805-1,70.291

I had no companions , GODWIN-1805-1,70.292

and I desired none . GODWIN-1805-1,70.293

The commerce of my books and of my thoughts was enough for me .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.294

I lived in an ideal world of my own creation . GODWIN-1805-1,70.295

The actual world beneath me I intuitively shunned .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.296

I felt that every man I should meet would be either too ignorant , too
coarse , or too supercilious , to afford me pleasure .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.297

The strings of my mind , so to express it , were tuned to too delicate
and sensitive a pitch : GODWIN-1805-1,70.298

it was an Eolian harp , upon which the winds of heaven might " discourse
excellent music " ; GODWIN-1805-1,70.299

but the touch of a human hand could draw from it nothing but discord and
dissonance . GODWIN-1805-1,70.300

At the university all that I experienced for some weeks was pain .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.301

Nature spoils us for relishing the beauties of nature .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.302

Formed as my mind had been , almost from infancy , to delight itself
with the grand , the romantic , the pregnant , the surprising , and the
stupendous , as they display themselves in North Wales , it is
inconceivable with what contempt , what sensations of loathing , I
looked upon the face of nature as it shows itself in Oxfordshire .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.303

All here was flat and tame and tedious . GODWIN-1805-1,70.304

Wales was nature in the vigour and animation of youth :
GODWIN-1805-1,70.305

she sported in a_thousand wild and admirable freaks ;
GODWIN-1805-1,70.306

she displayed a master-hand ; GODWIN-1805-1,70.307

every stroke of her majestic pencil was clear , and bold , and free .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.308

But , in the country to which I had now removed , nature to my eyes
seemed to be in her dotage ; GODWIN-1805-1,70.309

if she attempted any thing , it was the attempt of a driveller ;
GODWIN-1805-1,70.310

she appeared like a toothless and palsied beldame , who calls upon her
visitors {TEXT:visiters} to attend , who mumbles slowly a set of
inarticulate and unintelligible sounds , and to whom it exceeds the
force of human resolution to keep up the forms of civility .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.311

Why does the world we live in thus teach us to despise the world ?
GODWIN-1805-1,70.312

My father's house had been built in a style of antique magnificence .
GODWIN-1805-1,70.313

The apartments were spacious , the galleries long and wide ,
GODWIN-1805-1,70.314

and the hall in which I was accustomed to walk in unfavourable weather
was of ample dimensions . GODWIN-1805-1,70.315

The rooms <P_71> appropriated to my use at Oxford appeared comparatively
narrow , squalid , and unwholesome . GODWIN-1805-1,71.316

My very soul was cabined in them . GODWIN-1805-1,71.317

There were spacious buildings in Oxford ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.318

there were open and cheerful walks : GODWIN-1805-1,71.319

but how contrasted with those to which I had been accustomed !
GODWIN-1805-1,71.320

There I expatiated free ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.321

I possessed them alone ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.322

Nature was my friend , GODWIN-1805-1,71.323

and my soul familiarly discoursed with her , unbroken in upon by the
intrusion of the vulgar and the profane . GODWIN-1805-1,71.324

Here I had no green and heaven-formed retreat in which I could hide
myself ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.325

my path was crossed by boys ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.326

I was elbowed by gownmen ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.327

their vulgar gabble and light laughter perpetually beset my ears ,
GODWIN-1805-1,71.328

and waked up curses in my soul . GODWIN-1805-1,71.329

I could pursue no train of thought ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.330

the cherished visions of my former years were broken and scattered in
a_thousand fragments . GODWIN-1805-1,71.331

I know that there are men who could pursue an undivided occupation of
thought amidst all the confusion of Babel ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.332

but my habits had not fitted me for this . GODWIN-1805-1,71.333

I had had no difficulties to struggle with ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.334

and I was prepared to surmount none . GODWIN-1805-1,71.335

The morning of life is pliable and docile . GODWIN-1805-1,71.336

I speedily adapted myself to my situation . GODWIN-1805-1,71.337

As I could not escape from the coxcombs of the university , I
surrendered myself with the best grace I could into their hands .
GODWIN-1805-1,71.338

It is the first step only that costs a struggle . GODWIN-1805-1,71.339

At the commencement , the savage of Merionethshire made but an uncouth
and ludicrous figure among the pert youngsters of Oxford .
GODWIN-1805-1,71.340

Their speech and gestures were new to me . GODWIN-1805-1,71.341

I had hitherto spent more words , the repetition of lessons only
excepted , in soliloquy than in conversation . GODWIN-1805-1,71.342

My phrases were those of enthusiasm and the heart .
GODWIN-1805-1,71.343

They had the full and pregnant form which was given them by a mind
crowded with ideas and impelled to unload itself , not the sharp , short
, pointed turn of a speaker whose habitual object is a jest .
GODWIN-1805-1,71.344

My muscles were not formed to a smile ; GODWIN-1805-1,71.345

or , if at any time they had assumed that expression , it was the smile
of elevated sentiment , not that of supercilious contempt , of petty
triumph , or convivial jollity . GODWIN-1805-1,71.346

As soon , however , as I had chosen my part in the dilemma before me , I
became instinct with a principle , from which the mind of ingenuous
youth is never totally free , - the principle <P_72> of curiosity .
GODWIN-1805-1,72.347

I was prompted to observe these animals , so different from any that had
been before presented to my view , to study their motives , their
propensities , and their tempers , the passions of their souls , and the
occupations of their intellect . GODWIN-1805-1,72.348

To do this effectually , it was necessary that I should become familiar
with many , and intimate with a few . GODWIN-1805-1,72.349

I entered myself an associate of their midnight orgies ,
GODWIN-1805-1,72.350

and selected one young person for a friend , who kindly undertook my
introduction into the world . GODWIN-1805-1,72.351

It happened in this , as in all cases of a similar nature , that
familiarity annihilated wonder . GODWIN-1805-1,72.352

As the hero is no hero to his <font> valet-de-chambre , <$$font> so the
monster is no monster to his friend . GODWIN-1805-1,72.353

Through all the varieties of the human race , however unlike in their
prominent features , there are sufficient chords of sympathy , and
evidences of a common nature , to enable us to understand each other ,
and find out the clue to every seeming irregularity .
GODWIN-1805-1,72.354

I soon felt that my new associates were of the same species as myself ,
and that the passions which stimulated them , had seeds of a responsive
class , however hitherto unadverted to and undeveloped in my own bosom .
GODWIN-1805-1,72.355

It is surprising how soon I became like to the persons I had so lately
wondered at and despised . GODWIN-1805-1,72.356

Nothing could be more opposite , in various leading respects , than the
Fleetwood of Merionethshire and the Fleetwood of the university .
GODWIN-1805-1,72.357

The former had been silent and apparently sheepish , not , perhaps ,
more from awkwardness than pride . GODWIN-1805-1,72.358

He was contemplative , absent , enthusiastical , a worshipper of nature
. GODWIN-1805-1,72.359

His thoughts were full of rapture , elevation , and poetry .
GODWIN-1805-1,72.360

His eyes now held commerce with the phenomena of the heavens ,
GODWIN-1805-1,72.361

and now were bent to earth in silent contemplation and musing .
GODWIN-1805-1,72.362

There was nothing in them of the level and horizontal .
GODWIN-1805-1,72.363

His bosom beat with the flattering consciousness that he was of a class
superior to the ordinary race of man . GODWIN-1805-1,72.364

It was impossible to be of a purer nature , or to have a soul more free
from every thing gross , sordid , and groveling . GODWIN-1805-1,72.365

The Fleetwood of the university had lost much of this ,
GODWIN-1805-1,72.366

and had exchanged , the generous and unsullied pride of the wanderer ,
for a pride of a humbler cast . GODWIN-1805-1,72.367

Once I feared not the eye of man , except as I was reluctant to give him
pain ; GODWIN-1805-1,72.368

now <P_73> I was afraid of ridicule . GODWIN-1805-1,73.369

This very fear made me impudent . GODWIN-1805-1,73.370

I hid the qualms and apprehensiveness of my nature under " a swashing
and a martial outside . " GODWIN-1805-1,73.371

My jest was always ready . GODWIN-1805-1,73.372

I willingly engaged in every scheme of a gay and an unlucky nature .
GODWIN-1805-1,73.373

I learned to swallow my glass freely , and to despise the character of a
flincher . GODWIN-1805-1,73.374

I carefully stored my memory with convivial and licentious songs ,
GODWIN-1805-1,73.375

and learned to sing them in a manner that caused the walls of our
supper-room to echo with thunders of applause . GODWIN-1805-1,73.376

Here , as in Wales , I advanced toward the summit of the class of
character to which I devoted my ambition , GODWIN-1805-1,73.377

and was acknowledged by all my riotous companions for an accomplished
pickle . GODWIN-1805-1,73.378

In the contrast of the two personages I have described , I confess , my
memory has no hesitation on which side to determine her preference .
GODWIN-1805-1,73.379

Oh , Cader Idris ! GODWIN-1805-1,73.380

oh , genius of the mountains ! GODWIN-1805-1,73.381

oh , divinity , that president over the constellations , the meteors ,
and the ocean ! GODWIN-1805-1,73.382

how was your pupil fallen ! GODWIN-1805-1,73.383

how the awestruck and ardent worshipper of the God who shrouds himself
in darkness , changed into the drinker and debauchee , the manufacturer
of " a fool-born jest , " and the shameless roarer of a licentious catch
! GODWIN-1805-1,73.384

I did not , however , entirely depart from the dispositions which had
characterised me in Wales . GODWIN-1805-1,73.385

My poetical and contemplative character was gone ; all that refinement
which distinguished me from the grosser sons of earth .
GODWIN-1805-1,73.386

My understanding was brutified ; GODWIN-1805-1,73.387

I no longer gave free scope to the workings of my own mind ,
GODWIN-1805-1,73.388

but became an artificial personage , formed after a wretched and
contemptible model . GODWIN-1805-1,73.389

But my benevolence and humanity were still the same .
GODWIN-1805-1,73.390

Among the various feats of a college-buck I attempted , there was none
in which I came off with so little brilliancy , as that of " quizzing a
freshman {TEXT:fresh-man} , " and making a fellow-creature miserable by
a sportive and intemperate brutality . GODWIN-1805-1,73.391

What scenes of this sort I have witnessed ! GODWIN-1805-1,73.392

There is no feature of man , by which our common nature is placed in so
odious and despicable a light , as the propensity we feel to laugh at
and accumulate the distresses of our fellow-creatures , <P_74> when
those distresses display themselves with tokens of the ungainly and
uncouth . GODWIN-1805-1,74.393

I engaged in a project of this sort once or twice , GODWIN-1805-1,74.394

and then abjured the ambition for ever . GODWIN-1805-1,74.395

Thenceforward it was my practice to interfere in behalf of the sufferers
by such hostilities ; GODWIN-1805-1,74.396

and my manner carried with it that air of decision , that , though the
interference was unwelcome , it was successful ; GODWIN-1805-1,74.397

and the dogs of the caustic hunt let go their hold of the bleeding game
. GODWIN-1805-1,74.398

Another motive actuated me in this plan of proceeding .
GODWIN-1805-1,74.399

Though I had assumed an impudent and licentious character , I despised
it ; GODWIN-1805-1,74.400

and I made conscience of debauching new converts into the inglorious
school , which was usually the object and end of these brutal jests .
GODWIN-1805-1,74.401

I was contented to associate with those whose characters I judged to be
finished already , and whom I persuaded myself my encouragement would
not make worse ; GODWIN-1805-1,74.402

and thus with wretched sophistry I worked my mind into the belief that ,
while I yielded to a vicious course , I was doing no harm .
GODWIN-1805-1,74.403

In the midst of all this , my heart entered with prompt liberality into
the difficulties and distresses of others ; GODWIN-1805-1,74.404

and as in Wales I was assiduous to relieve the wants of the industrious
and the poor , so in Oxford , the embarrassments of those young men ,
whose funds derived from their families did not keep pace with the
demands of their situation , excited in me particular sympathy ,
GODWIN-1805-1,74.405

and received frequent and sometimes secret relief from the resources
with which my father's bounty supplied me . GODWIN-1805-1,74.406

<heading>

Chapter IV . GODWIN-1805-1,74.408

<$$heading>

In this place I feel inclined to relate one of those stories of
ingenious intellectual victory , as they considered them , of dull and
unfeeling brutality , as they really were , in which too many of my
college contemporaries prided themselves . GODWIN-1805-1,74.410

A young man , during my residence at the university , entered himself of
our college , who was judged by the gayer Oxonians singularly well
formed to be the butt of their ridicule . GODWIN-1805-1,74.411

The dress in which he made his appearance among us was ungainly and
ludicrous : GODWIN-1805-1,74.412

the flaps of his waistcoat extended to his knees , and those of his
<P_75> coat almost to his heels : GODWIN-1805-1,75.413

his black , coarse , shining hair , parted on the forehead , was every
where of equal length , GODWIN-1805-1,75.414

and entirely buried his ears beneath its impervious canopy .
GODWIN-1805-1,75.415

He had hitherto been brought up in solitude under the sole direction of
his father , a country clergyman ; GODWIN-1805-1,75.416

but he was an excellent classic scholar and a mathematician ,
GODWIN-1805-1,75.417

and his manners were the most innocent and unsuspecting that it is
possible to imagine . GODWIN-1805-1,75.418

In addition to these qualities , he had an exalted opinion of his own
intellectual accomplishments ; GODWIN-1805-1,75.419

and he had brought with him , among his other treasures , the offspring
of his stripling meditations , a tragedy founded on the story of the
Fifth Labour of Hercules . GODWIN-1805-1,75.420

In this performance the contents of the Augean stable were set out in
great pomp of description ; GODWIN-1805-1,75.421

the ordure which had accumulated in thirty years from the digestion and
dejection of three_thousand oxen was amplified and spread out to the
fancy ; GODWIN-1805-1,75.422

and Withers <paren> this was the name of the poet <$$paren> might be
said , like Virgil , to " fling about his dung with an air of majesty .
" GODWIN-1805-1,75.423

The tragedy opened with a pathetic lamentation between the groom and the
herdsman of the king , respecting the melancholy condition of the stable
, and the difficulty of keeping the cattle which were so unroyally
lodged in any creditable appearance . GODWIN-1805-1,75.424

A herald then entered with a proclamation , declaring that three_hundred
of the king's oxen should be the prize of him who should restore the
stable to a wholesome and becoming state . GODWIN-1805-1,75.425

The chorus next sang an ode , in which they exposed the miseries of
procrastination , and declared that none but a demigod could accomplish
the task which had so long been postponed . GODWIN-1805-1,75.426

In the second act Hercules appeared , GODWIN-1805-1,75.427

and offered to undertake the arduous operation . GODWIN-1805-1,75.428

He has an audience of the king , who dwells upon the greatness of the
effort , and exposes , in a loftier style , what had already been
described by his <P_76> servants in familiar verse , the filth the hero
would have to encounter . GODWIN-1805-1,76.429

Hercules answers modestly , GODWIN-1805-1,76.430

and enters into the history of the four labours he had already
accomplished . GODWIN-1805-1,76.431

The bargain is struck ; GODWIN-1805-1,76.432

and the chorus admire the form and port of the hero ,
GODWIN-1805-1,76.433

and pray for his success . GODWIN-1805-1,76.434

The third act begins with expressing the general terror and astonishment
. GODWIN-1805-1,76.435

Hercules removes the oxen from their stalls ; GODWIN-1805-1,76.436

and then a mighty rushing sound is heard of the river leaving its
ancient bounds , and pouring its tide through the noisome and infectious
walls . GODWIN-1805-1,76.437

The rest of the play consisted of the arguments on the part of the king
and of the hero , as to whether Hercules had fulfilled his engagement ;
and the punishment of the tyrant . GODWIN-1805-1,76.438

Here many hints were borrowed from the contention of Ajax and Ulysses in
Ovid , respecting the preference of wisdom and ingenuity over brute
force : King Augeas insisting that the nuisance should have been
displaced with shovel and wheelbarrow ; while Hercules with great
eloquence maintained that to remove the whole evil at once , by changing
the course of a river , was a more wonderful and meritorious achievement
. GODWIN-1805-1,76.439

This tragedy soon became a source of inexhaustible amusement to the wits
and satirists of our college . GODWIN-1805-1,76.440

One of the drollest and demurest of the set had first wormed himself
into the confidence of Withers , and extorted from him his secret , and
then , under the most solemn engagements not to name the matter to a
living creature , obtained the loan of this choice morsel of scenic
poetry . GODWIN-1805-1,76.441

He had no sooner gained possession of it , than he gave notice to four
or five of his associates ; GODWIN-1805-1,76.442

and they assembled the same evening , to enjoy over a bottle the
treasure they had purloined . GODWIN-1805-1,76.443

It must be owned that the subject of the drama was particularly
calculated to expose the effusions of its author to their ridicule .
GODWIN-1805-1,76.444

The solemn phrases , and the lofty ornaments , with which every thing
was expressed , afforded a striking contrast to the filth and slime
which constituted the foundation of the piece . GODWIN-1805-1,76.445

A topic of this sort , however slightly mentioned , <P_77> must appear
low and absurd ; GODWIN-1805-1,77.446

but , when the dung , accumulated in thirty years , by three_thousand
oxen , together with the solemn engagement between a demigod and a king
for its removal , is set out in all the pomp of verse , the man must be
more sad than Heraclitus , and more severe than Cato , who could resist
the propensity to laughter at the hearing of such a tale .
GODWIN-1805-1,77.447

In the present case , where every joyous companion was predetermined to
find materials for merriment , the peals of laughter were obstreperous
and innumerable ; GODWIN-1805-1,77.448

many passages were encored by the unanimous voice of the company ;
GODWIN-1805-1,77.449

and , in conclusion , the scoffer , who had obtained for them their
present amusement , was deputed to procure them the higher and more
exquisite gratification of hearing the piece gravely declaimed to them
by its author . GODWIN-1805-1,77.450

Accordingly , in a few days , he waited on Withers with a grave and
melancholy face , manuscript in hand , GODWIN-1805-1,77.451

and confessed , that by a very culpable neglect , he had fallen into a
breach of the engagement he had made to the author on receiving it .
GODWIN-1805-1,77.452

He then named a young man of ingenuity and fancy in the same college ,
who had obtained considerable notoriety by several pieces of fugitive
poetry , which were much admired at Oxford . GODWIN-1805-1,77.453

Withers had heard of him , GODWIN-1805-1,77.454

and felt that respect which might naturally be expected for a brother of
his own vocation . GODWIN-1805-1,77.455

Morrison , the jester , added , that this votary of the muses , and
himself , were upon so intimate terms , that each had a key to the
other's chamber ; that he , not recollecting this at the moment , had
left the manuscript , being called away by a particular occasion , open
upon his desk , had locked the door , and departed ; and that the poet ,
arriving soon after , had discovered , and seized with avidity , the
Fifth Labour of Hercules . GODWIN-1805-1,77.456

Withers was greatly distressed at this tale . GODWIN-1805-1,77.457

He had those feelings of modesty , which , under certain modifications ,
are most incident to such persons as are pervaded with an anticipation
of their future eminence . GODWIN-1805-1,77.458

He did not pretend , however , to blame his friend for a fault into
which he seemed so innocently to have fallen , and which he so
ingenuously confessed . GODWIN-1805-1,77.459

On the <P_78> other hand , Morrison soothed the dramatist , by
describing to him the transports of admiration with which the poet had
been impressed in the perusal of this virgin tragedy .
GODWIN-1805-1,78.460

While they were yet in conversation , the poet knocked at the
chamber-door . GODWIN-1805-1,78.461

The verses of this young man , Frewen by name , were not deficient in
merit , or even in delicacy ; GODWIN-1805-1,78.462

but his features were harsh and his manners coarse .
GODWIN-1805-1,78.463

He began with saying , that he could by no means deny himself the
pleasure of soliciting the acquaintance and friendship of a youth , to
whose mind he had the vanity to believe his own was in so many respects
congenial . GODWIN-1805-1,78.464

He then launched out in rapturous praise of the Fifth Labour of Hercules
. GODWIN-1805-1,78.465

Seeing the manuscript on the table , he requested permission to open it
, and point out to the author one or two places which had struck him as
particularly excellent . GODWIN-1805-1,78.466

He then read part of a speech from King Augeas's groom , and that with
such emphasis of delivery , and seeming enthusiasm of intonation , as
might have persuaded the most sceptical bystander that he was really
smitten with approbation of the verses he pronounced .
GODWIN-1805-1,78.467

The eyes of Withers glistened with joy . GODWIN-1805-1,78.468

His self-love had never experienced so rich a treat .
GODWIN-1805-1,78.469

Frewen then proceeded to descant , with great ingenuity , upon certain
metaphors and ornaments of style interspersed through the composition ;
showing how happily they were chosen , how skilfully adapted , how
vigorously expressed , and how original they were in the conception ;
GODWIN-1805-1,78.470

and , though some of the clauses he fixed upon were to such a degree
absurd , that the poet himself , when he heard them thus insulated from
their connection , began to suspect that all was not right , yet the
remarks of his panegyrist were so subtle , and above all , were
delivered with an air of such perfect sincerity , that he finished with
being completely the dupe his false friends had purposed to make him .
GODWIN-1805-1,78.471

In conclusion , Mr. Frewen observed that he had a select party of
friends , whom he was accustomed to make judges of his own productions ;
GODWIN-1805-1,78.472

and he earnestly entreated Withers that he would no longer conceal his
talent , but would condescend to recite the tragedy he had written , to
the same circle . GODWIN-1805-1,78.473

Withers unaffectedly shrunk back , with the diffidence of a young man ,
who had never yet , in so striking a manner , burst <P_79> the bounds of
modesty ; GODWIN-1805-1,79.474

but , urged alternately by the solicitations and the encomiums of his
tempters , he suffered them to " wring from him his slow consent . "
GODWIN-1805-1,79.475

A day was then to be fixed . GODWIN-1805-1,79.476

He refused to make it the same evening : GODWIN-1805-1,79.477

he confessed to his visitors {TEXT:visiters} that it would be an
unprecedented exertion to him , and that he must string up his mind to
the task : GODWIN-1805-1,79.478

it was ultimately fixed for the day following . GODWIN-1805-1,79.479

In the interval Withers had many qualms . GODWIN-1805-1,79.480

{COM:verse_omitted}

He felt the sort of arrogance which was implied , in the seating himself
in the chair of honour , fixing the eyes of different persons ,
strangers , upon him , and calling their attention to the effusions of
his brain , as to something worthy of their astonishment .
GODWIN-1805-1,79.482

He recollected the faults of his poem , the places where he had himself
doubted , whether he had not embraced a Sycorax instead of an angel .
GODWIN-1805-1,79.483

He recollected his youth and inexperience , and the temerity of which he
had in reality been guilty , in undertaking , in his first essay , to
celebrate , perhaps , the most prodigious of the labours of the immortal
Hercules . GODWIN-1805-1,79.484

He remembered what he had somewhere heard , of the satirical and
malicious turn of the elder Oxonians , GODWIN-1805-1,79.485

and feared to become their butt . GODWIN-1805-1,79.486

On the other hand , he called to mind the beauties of his poem ,
GODWIN-1805-1,79.487

and was encouraged . GODWIN-1805-1,79.488

Above all , he considered his character and fortitude as at stake , in
the engagement he had contracted , GODWIN-1805-1,79.489

and was determined , at every hazard , to complete it .
GODWIN-1805-1,79.490

The evening arrived ; GODWIN-1805-1,79.491

the company assembled ; GODWIN-1805-1,79.492

the unhappy poet , the victim of their ridicule , was introduced .
GODWIN-1805-1,79.493

Mr. Frewen , at his entrance , took him by the hand ,
GODWIN-1805-1,79.494

led him into the middle of the room , GODWIN-1805-1,79.495

made a short oration in his praise , GODWIN-1805-1,79.496

and , in the name of the company , thanked him for his condescension ,
in <P_80> admitting them to such a pleasure as they were about to
receive . GODWIN-1805-1,80.497

After a variety of grimaces on the part of the persons present , the
manuscript was laid on the table . GODWIN-1805-1,80.498

The poet took it up to read ; GODWIN-1805-1,80.499

but , in the first line , his voice failed him , GODWIN-1805-1,80.500

he turned pale , GODWIN-1805-1,80.501

and was obliged to desist . GODWIN-1805-1,80.502

Morrison , his original seducer , and another , had so placed their
chairs , that their countenances and action could not be perceived by
the reader , they being partly behind him : GODWIN-1805-1,80.503

they winked the eye , GODWIN-1805-1,80.504

and pointed the finger to each other , GODWIN-1805-1,80.505

and by various gestures endeavoured to heighten the entertainment of the
party . GODWIN-1805-1,80.506

The table was covered with bottles and glasses . GODWIN-1805-1,80.507

Frewen , when he saw the unaffected marks of Withers's distress , began
to feel an impulse of compunction ; GODWIN-1805-1,80.508

but he knew that such an impulse would render him for ever contemptible
to the present society , GODWIN-1805-1,80.509

and he suppressed it . GODWIN-1805-1,80.510

He filled Withers a bumper , which he obliged him to take off ;
GODWIN-1805-1,80.511

he snatched the play from his hand , GODWIN-1805-1,80.512

and read with much gravity and articulation , the opening speech from
the stable-keeper to the herdsman , in which the former bewails the
miserable state of the stalls , and , not knowing what to quarrel with ,
shows himself ready to quarrel with his fellow-officer , laments that
there are such animals as oxen , or that oxen can@ @not live but by food
and digestion . GODWIN-1805-1,80.513

This speech was received with bursts of applause , GODWIN-1805-1,80.514

and Frewen particularly commended the " long majestic march and energy
divine " of the concluding verse . GODWIN-1805-1,80.515

The poet was encouraged ; GODWIN-1805-1,80.516

he had had time to reason with himself , and recover his fortitude ;
GODWIN-1805-1,80.517

Frewen restored to him his manuscript , GODWIN-1805-1,80.518

filled him another bumper , GODWIN-1805-1,80.519

and the scene commenced . GODWIN-1805-1,80.520

That my readers may more exactly understand the spirit of the
transaction , I will insert here a part of the chorus at the end of the
third act , with which the auditors pretended to be especially struck :
- GODWIN-1805-1,80.521

{COM:verse_omitted}

<P_81_contains_only_verse>

<P_82>

{COM:verse_omitted}

One apology may be made for the contrivers of this scene , that they by
no means foresaw , in the outset , how far they should be drawn in to go
, and the serious evils of which they might become authors .
GODWIN-1805-1,82.526

The purpose of the auditors was , under extravagant and tumultuous
expressions of applause , to smother the indications of their ridicule
and contempt . GODWIN-1805-1,82.527

In this , however , they could not uniformly succeed .
GODWIN-1805-1,82.528

A phrase of a ludicrous nature in the piece , an abrupt fall from what
was elevated to something meanly familiar or absurd , would some_times
unexpectedly occur , and produce a laughter that could not be restrained
. GODWIN-1805-1,82.529

Nor would the feelings allied to laughter always occur in the right
place . GODWIN-1805-1,82.530

Persons eager in search of the ludicrous , will often find it in an
image , or mode of expression , which by others , not debauched with
this prepossession , would be found fraught with pleasing illustration
and natural sentiment . GODWIN-1805-1,82.531

The circle , too , assembled on this occasion , acted by <P_83> sympathy
upon each other , GODWIN-1805-1,83.532

and pointed many a joke , GODWIN-1805-1,83.533

and gave vigour to many a burlesque idea , which perhaps , to any one of
the associates , in his retirement , would have appeared unworthy to
move a risible muscle . GODWIN-1805-1,83.534

For a short time the jesters , who had made Withers their prey ,
observed a certain degree of decorum . GODWIN-1805-1,83.535

They bit their lips , GODWIN-1805-1,83.536

affectedly raised their eyes , GODWIN-1805-1,83.537

applied the finger to the mouth , the nose , or the forehead ,
GODWIN-1805-1,83.538

and thus pacified and appeased their propensities to ridicule .
GODWIN-1805-1,83.539

One and another incessantly showed themselves lavish in commendation of
the beauties of the poem ; GODWIN-1805-1,83.540

and with every compliment the glass of Withers was filled ,
GODWIN-1805-1,83.541

and he was excited to drink . GODWIN-1805-1,83.542

Presently the laugh , imperfectly suppressed , broke out in one solitary
convulsion , GODWIN-1805-1,83.543

and was then disguised in a cough , or an effort to sneeze .
GODWIN-1805-1,83.544

The dumb gestures of the auditors were unperceived by the reader , who
for the most part kept his eyes on the paper , and but rarely ventured ,
when he came to some bolder flight , to look round him for applause .
GODWIN-1805-1,83.545

Then the countenances of the hearers suddenly fell ,
GODWIN-1805-1,83.546

and their limbs were at once composed into serenity .
GODWIN-1805-1,83.547

This transition produced an effect singularly humorous , but which was
wholly lost upon Withers , who had the misfortune to be purblind .
GODWIN-1805-1,83.548

By_and_by an outrageous laugh burst forth at once from one of the
audience . GODWIN-1805-1,83.549

The poor novice , their victim , started , as if he had trod on a
serpent . GODWIN-1805-1,83.550

Frewen , making a motion to him to be tranquil , addressed the offender
with much apparent gravity , GODWIN-1805-1,83.551

and begged to know what he could find ludicrous in the passage which had
just been read , at the same time repeating the two last lines with a
full and lofty voice . GODWIN-1805-1,83.552

The culprit , as soon as he could resume his seriousness , humbly sued
for pardon , GODWIN-1805-1,83.553

and declared that he laughed at nothing in the poem , of which no one
could be a sincerer admirer , but that his fancy had been tickled at the
sight of a corkscrew <paren> picking it up <$$paren> , which had just
dropped from Jack Jones's pocket . GODWIN-1805-1,83.554

This apology was admitted . GODWIN-1805-1,83.555

In a few minutes the same person broke out into an equally loud and
clamorous fit of merriment , in which he was now joined by two or three
others . GODWIN-1805-1,83.556

Greater anger , as the tumult subsided , was expressed toward him ;
GODWIN-1805-1,83.557

a more bungling and imperfect <P_84> apology was tendered ;
GODWIN-1805-1,84.558

and Frewen offered , if Mr. Withers required it , to turn the culprit
out of the room . GODWIN-1805-1,84.559

In one or two instances the poet was requested to read again some
passage which the requester affected particularly to admire ;
GODWIN-1805-1,84.560

and these repetitions were ever attended with additional merriment ,
sometimes suppressed , and sometimes ungovernable .
GODWIN-1805-1,84.561

In one or two of the choruses , several of the auditors repeated the
concluding verses after the reader , sometimes as nearly as possible
keeping pace with him , and at other times pursuing one another after
the manner of a <font> fugue <$$font> in music ; GODWIN-1805-1,84.562

and , when the author expressed his surprise at this phenomenon , they
defended it , first , from the enthusiastic admiration they felt , and
next , from the nature of a chorus , which was designed to be sung , or
chanted , and not spoken , and from their desire to enhance their
pleasure , by bringing the tragedy they were hearing to as near a
resemblance as they could , in this respect , to the state of actual
exhibition . GODWIN-1805-1,84.563

By this time the mind of Withers was in a pitiable situation .
GODWIN-1805-1,84.564

That noviceship and total inexperience on his part , which made his
torture , constituted the great pleasure of his remorseless tormentors .
GODWIN-1805-1,84.565

He was unaccustomed to wine ; GODWIN-1805-1,84.566

and they had made him extremely inebriated . GODWIN-1805-1,84.567

He was unaccustomed to high commendations and vociferous applause ;
GODWIN-1805-1,84.568

and they had raised his mind and purer feelings into a state of
intoxication , little inferior to that of the more ponderous and
corporeal particles of his nerves and brain . GODWIN-1805-1,84.569

All was confusion and tempest within him . GODWIN-1805-1,84.570

Upon this state of the man were superinduced the demonstrations of
ridicule and laughter , which by degrees broke out in the audience .
GODWIN-1805-1,84.571

His brain was clouded ; GODWIN-1805-1,84.572

his understanding was in a maze ; GODWIN-1805-1,84.573

he apprehended nothing distinctly . GODWIN-1805-1,84.574

Grave apologies were made to him ; GODWIN-1805-1,84.575

and he accepted them seriously ; though , presently after , he was
compelled to doubt whether they did not wholly originate in the grossest
hypocrisy . GODWIN-1805-1,84.576

Had he possessed the smallest portion of knowledge of the world , he
could not have harboured a moment's uncertainty ; GODWIN-1805-1,84.577

but he was in all these respects a child . GODWIN-1805-1,84.578

They nursed him , so to speak , in mistake , GODWIN-1805-1,84.579

and rocked him in the cradle of delusion . GODWIN-1805-1,84.580

By degrees they persuaded him to mount upon the table , that he might
recite some of the most brilliant passages with <P_85> greater effect .
GODWIN-1805-1,85.581

They crowned him with wreaths of parsley , which happened to be the
vegetable at hand ; GODWIN-1805-1,85.582

they anointed him with libations of wine ; GODWIN-1805-1,85.583

and by this time his apprehension was so completely subverted , that he
was unable to distinguish whether these things were done in mockery or
honour , and willingly resigned himself to the more agreeable
construction . GODWIN-1805-1,85.584

At length the reading was finished ; GODWIN-1805-1,85.585

and the rioters <paren> for all was now in a state of riot <$$paren>
burst open the door , GODWIN-1805-1,85.586

placed the poet , crowned with parsley , and trickling with wine , in a
chair , GODWIN-1805-1,85.587

and carried him triumphantly through the streets to his apartment , with
shouts , and vociferation , and uproar , enough to awake the dead .
GODWIN-1805-1,85.588

The deluded rioters , for they laboured under a state of delusion not
less complete than their victim , persuaded themselves to look back with
complacency upon the diversion of the evening , GODWIN-1805-1,85.589

and even agreed that they had not yet extracted amusement enough from so
rich a subject as the unhappy Withers . GODWIN-1805-1,85.590

The ringleaders , in their insatiate thirst after this species of
gratification , planned a further scene to be grafted on what had passed
in the evening of the reading . GODWIN-1805-1,85.591

Morrison accordingly waited on Withers the next morning ,
GODWIN-1805-1,85.592

and found him a prey to a miserable headache . GODWIN-1805-1,85.593

The poet was also , now that the fumes of wine were dissipated , full of
melancholy reflections on the incidents of the day , and extremely
apprehensive that in all that had passed he had been an object of
mockery to the assembly . GODWIN-1805-1,85.594

