<BEGIN_goldsmith-1766-2>

{COM:In_this_text,"gaol"_and_related_words_are_generally_spelled_"goal"}

<P_2,84>

<heading>

Chap. VII . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.5

{COM:chapter_26}

A reformation in the goal . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.7

To make laws complete , they should reward as well as punish .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.8

<$$heading>

The next morning early I was awakened by my family , whom I found in
tears at my bed-side . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.10

The gloomy strength of every thing about us , it seems , had daunted
them . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.11

I gently rebuked their sorrow , assuring them I had never slept with
greater tranquillity , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.12

and next enquired after my eldest daughter , who was not among them .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.13

They informed me that yesterday's uneasiness and fatigue had encreased
her fever , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.14

and it was judged proper to leave her behind . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.15

My next care was to send my son to procure a room or two to lodge the
family in , as near the prison as conveniently could be found .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.16

He obeyed ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,84.17

but could only find one apartment , which was hired at a small expence ,
<P_2,85> for his mother and sisters , the goaler with humanity
consenting to let him and his two little brothers lie in the prison with
me . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,85.18

A bed was therefore prepared for them in a corner of the room , which I
thought answered very conveniently . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,85.19

I was willing however previously to know whether my little children
chose to lie in a place which seemed to fright them upon entrance .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,85.20

" Well , " cried I , " my good boys , how do you like your bed ?
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,85.21

I hope you are not afraid to lie in this room , dark as it appears . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,85.22

" No , papa , " says Dick , " I am not afraid to lie any where where you
are . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,85.23

" And I , " says Bill , who was yet but four years old , " love every
place best that my papa is in . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,85.24

After this , I allotted to each of the family what they were to do .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,85.25

My daughter was particularly directed to watch her declining sister's
health ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,85.26

my wife was to attend <P_2,86> me ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.27

my little boys were to read to me : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.28

" And as for you , my son , " continued I , " it is by the labour of
your hands we must all hope to be supported . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.29

Your wages , as a day-labourer , will be full sufficient , with proper
frugality , to maintain us all , and comfortably too .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.30

Thou art now sixteen years old , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.31

and hast strength , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.32

and it was given thee , my son , for very useful purposes ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.33

for it must save from famine your helpless parents and family .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.34

Prepare then this evening to look out for work against to-morrow ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.35

and bring home every night what money you earn , for our support . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.36

Having thus instructed him , and settled the rest , I walked down to the
common prison , where I could enjoy more air and room .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.37

But I was not long there when the execrations , lewdness , and brutality
that invaded me on every side , drove me back to my apartment again .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,86.38

Here I sat {TEXT:sate} for some time , pondering upon the strange
infatuation of wretches , who finding all mankind in open arms against
them , were , however , <P_2,87> labouring to make themselves a future
and a tremendous enemy . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.39

Their insensibility excited my highest compassion ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.40

and blotted my own uneasiness from my mind . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.41

It even appeared a duty incumbent upon me to attempt to reclaim them .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.42

I resolved therefore once more to return , and in spite of their
contempt to give them my advice , and conquer them by perseverance .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.43

Going therefore among them again , I informed Mr. Jenkinson of my
design , at which he laughed heartily , but communicated it to the rest
. GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.44

The proposal was received with the greatest good-humour , as it promised
to afford a new fund of entertainment to persons who had now no other
resource for mirth , but what could be derived from ridicule or
debauchery . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.45

I therefore read them a portion of the service with a loud unaffected
voice , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.46

and found my audience perfectly merry upon the occasion .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.47

Lewd whispers , groans of contrition burlesqued , winking and coughing ,
alternately excited laughter . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,87.48

However , {TEXT:.} <P_2,88> I continued with my natural solemnity to
read on , sensible that what I did might amend some , but could itself
receive no contamination from any . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,88.49

After reading , I entered upon my exhortation , which was rather
calculated at first to amuse them than to reprove .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,88.50

I previously observed , that no other motive but their welfare could
induce me to this ; that I was their fellow prisoner , and now gained
nothing by preaching . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,88.51

I was sorry I said , to hear them so very prophane ; because they got
nothing by it , but might lose a great deal : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,88.52

" For be assured , my friends , " cried I , " for you are my friends ,
however the world may disclaim your friendship , though you swore
twelve_thousand oaths in a day , it would not put one penny in your
purse . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,88.53

Then what signifies calling every moment upon the devil , and courting
his friendship , since you find how scurvily he uses you .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,88.54

He has given you nothing here , you find , but a mouthful of oaths and
an empty belly ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,88.55

and by the best accounts I have of him , <P_2,89> he will give you
nothing that@ @'s good hereafter . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.56

If used ill in our dealings with one man , we naturally go elsewhere .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.57

Were it not worth your while then , just to try how you may like the
usage of another master , who gives you fair promises at least to come
to him . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.58

Surely , my Friends , of all stupidity in the world , his must be
greatest , who , after robbing an house , runs to the thief-takers for
protection . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.59

And yet how are you more wise ? GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.60

You are all seeking comfort from one that has already betrayed you ,
applying to a more malicious being than any thief-taker of them all ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.61

for they only decoy , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.62

and then hang you ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.63

but he decoys and hangs , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.64

and what is worst of all , will not let you loose after the hangman has
done . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.65

When I had concluded , I received the compliments of my audience , some
of whom came and shook me by the hand , swearing that I was a very
honest fellow , and that they desired my further acquaintance .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,89.66

<P_2,90>

I therefore promised to repeat my lecture next day ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,90.68

and actually conceived some hopes of making a reformation here ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,90.69

for it had ever been my opinion , that no man was past the hour of
amendment , every heart lying open to the shafts of reproof , if the
archer could but take a proper aim . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,90.70

When I had thus satisfied my mind , I went back to my apartment , where
my wife had prepared a frugal meal , while Mr. Jenkinson begged leave
to add his dinner to ours , and partake of the pleasure , as he was kind
enough to express it , of my conversation . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,90.71

He had not yet seen my family , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,90.72

for as they came to my apartment by a door in the narrow passage ,
already described , by this means they avoided the common prison .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,90.73

Jenkinson at the first interview therefore seemed not a little struck
with the beauty of my youngest daughter , which her pensive air
contributed to heighten , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,90.74

and my little ones did not pass unnoticed . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,90.75

" Alas , Doctor , " cried he , " these children are too handsome and too
good for such a place as this ! " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,90.76

<P_2,91>

" Why , Mr. Jenkinson " , replied I , " thank heaven my children are
pretty tolerable in morals , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.78

and if they be good , it matters little for the rest . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.79

" I fancy , sir , " returned my fellow prisoner , " that it must give
you great comfort to have this little family about you . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.80

" A comfort , Mr. Jenkinson , " replied I , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.81

" yes it is indeed a comfort , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.82

and I would not be without them for all the world ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.83

for they can make a dungeon seem a palace . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.84

There is but one way in this life of wounding my happiness ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.85

and that is by injuring them . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.86

" I am afraid then , sir , " cried he , " that I am in some measure
culpable ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.87

for I think I see here <paren> looking at my son Moses <$$paren> one
that I have injured , and by whom I wish to be forgiven . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.88

My son immediately recollected his voice and features , though he had
before seen him in disguise , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.89

and taking him by the hand , with a smile forgave him .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,91.90

" Yet , " <P_2,92> continued he , " I ca@ @n't help wondering at what
you could see in my face , to think me a proper mark for deception . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,92.91

" My dear sir , " returned the other , " it was not your face , but your
white stockings and the black ribbond in your hair , that allured me .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,92.92

But no disparagement to your parts , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,92.93

I have deceived wiser men than you in my time ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,92.94

and yet , with all my tricks , the blockheads have been too many for me
at last . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,92.95

" I suppose , " cried my son , " that the narrative of such a life as
yours must be extremely instructive and amusing . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,92.96

" Not much of either , " returned Mr Jenkinson .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,92.97

" Those relations which describe the tricks and vices only of mankind ,
by increasing our suspicion in life , retard our success .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,92.98

The traveller that distrusts every person he meets , and turns back upon
the appearance of every man that looks like a robber , seldom arrives in
time at his journey's end . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,92.99

<P_2,93>

" Indeed I think from my own experience I may say , that the knowing one
is the silliest fellow under the sun . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.101

I was thought cunning from my very childhood : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.102

when but seven years old the ladies would say that I was a perfect
little man ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.103

at fourteen I knew the world , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.104

cocked my hat , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.105

and loved the ladies ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.106

at twenty , though I was perfectly honest , yet every one thought me so
cunning , that not one would trust me . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.107

Thus I was at last obliged to turn sharper in my own defence ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.108

and have lived ever since , my head throbbing with schemes to deceive ,
and my heart palpitating with fears of detection .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.109

" I used often to laugh at your honest simple neighbour Flamborough ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.110

and one way or another generally cheated him once a year .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.111

Yet still the honest man went forward without suspicion ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.112

and grew rich , while I still continued tricksy and cunning , and was
poor , without the consolation of being honest .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,93.113

<P_2,94>

" However , " continued he , " let me know your case , and what has
brought you here ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,94.115

perhaps though I have not skill to avoid a gaol myself , I may extricate
my friends . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,94.116

In compliance with his curiosity , I informed him of the whole train of
accidents and follies that had plunged me into my present troubles , and
my utter inability to get free . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,94.117

After hearing my story , and pausing some minutes , he slapt his
forehead , as if he had hit upon something material ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,94.118

and took his leave , saying he would try what could be done .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,94.119

<P_2,95>

<heading>

Chap. VIII . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,95.122

{COM:chapter_27}

The same subject continued . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,95.124

<$$heading>

The next morning I communicated to my wife and children the scheme I had
planned of reforming the prisoners , which they received with universal
disapprobation , alledging the impossibility and impropriety of it ;
adding , that my endeavours would no way contribute to their amendment ,
but might probably disgrace my calling . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,95.126

" Excuse me , returned I , " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,95.127

these people , however fallen , are still men ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,95.128

and that is a very good title to my affections .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,95.129

Good council rejected returns to enrich the giver's bosom ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,95.130

and though the instruction I communicate may not mend them , yet it will
assuredly mend myself . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,95.131

If these wretches , my children , were princes , there would be
thousands ready <P_2,96> to offer their ministry ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.132

but , in my opinion , the heart that is buried in a dungeon is as
precious as that seated upon a throne . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.133

Yes , my treasures , if I can mend them I will ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.134

perhaps they will not all despise me . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.135

Perhaps I may catch up even one from the gulph ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.136

and that will be great gain ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.137

for is there upon earth a gem so precious as the human soul ? "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.138

Thus saying , I left them , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.139

and descended to the common prison , where I found the prisoners very
merry , expecting my arrival ; and each prepared with some gaol trick to
play upon the doctor . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.140

Thus , as I was going to begin , one turned my wig awry , as if by
accident , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.141

and then asked my pardon . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.142

A second , who stood at some distance , had a knack of spitting through
his teeth , which fell in showers upon my book .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.143

A third would cry amen in such an affected tone as gave the rest great
delight . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.144

A fourth hath slily picked my pocket of my spectacles .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,96.145

But there was one whose trick gave more universal pleasure than all the
<P_2,97> rest ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.146

for observing the manner in which I had disposed my books on the table
before me , he very dextrously displaced one of them ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.147

and put an obscene jest-book of his own in the place .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.148

However I took no notice of all that this mischievous groupe of little
beings could do ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.149

but went on , perfectly sensible that what was ridiculous in my attempt
, would excite mirth only the first or second time , while what was
serious would be permanent . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.150

My design succeeded , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.151

and in less than six days some were penitent , and all attentive .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.152

It was now that I applauded my perseverance and address , at thus giving
sensibility to wretches divested of every moral feeling ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.153

and now began to think of doing them temporal services also , by
rendering their situation somewhat more comfortable .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.154

Their time had hitherto been divided between famine and excess ,
tumultous riot and bitter repining . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.155

Their only employment was quarrelling {TEXT:qurrelling} among each other
, playing at cribbage , and cutting tobacco stoppers .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,97.156

From this last mode of idle industry <P_2,98> I took the hint of setting
such as chose to work at cutting pegs for tobacconists and shoemakers ,
the proper wood being bought by a general subscription , and when
manufactured , sold by my appointment ; so that each earned something
every day : a trifle indeed , but sufficient to maintain him .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,98.157

I did not stop here , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,98.158

but instituted fines for the punishment of immorality , and rewards for
peculiar industry . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,98.159

Thus in less than a fortnight I had formed them into something social
and humane , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,98.160

and had the pleasure of regarding myself as a legislator , who had
brought men from their native ferocity into friendship and obedience .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,98.161

And it were highly to be wished , that legislative power would thus
direct the law rather to reformation than severity . That it would seem
convinced that the work of eradicating crimes is not by making
punishments familiar , but formidable . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,98.162

Then instead of our present prisons , which find or make men guilty ,
which enclose wretches for the commission of one crime , and return them
, <P_2,99> if returned alive , fitted for the perpetration of thousands
; it were to be wished we had , as in other parts of Europe , places of
penitence and solitude , where the accused might be attended by such as
could give them repentance if guilty , or new motives to virtue if
innocent . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,99.163

And this , but not the encreasing punishments , is the way to mend a
state : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,99.164

nor can I avoid even questioning the validity of that right which social
combinations have assumed of capitally punishing offences of a slight
nature . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,99.165

In cases of murder their right is obvious , as it is the duty of us all
, from the law of self-defence , to cut off that man who has shewn a
disregard for the life of another . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,99.166

Against such , all nature arises in arms ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,99.167

but it is not so against him who steals my property .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,99.168

Natural law gives me no right to take away his life , as by that the
horse he steals is as much his property as mine .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,99.169

If then I have any right , it must be from a compact ; made between us ,
that he who deprives the other of his horse shall die .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,99.170

But this is a false compact ; because no man has a right to barter his
life , no more than <P_2,100> to take it away , as it is not his own .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.171

And next , the compact is inadequate , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.172

and would be set aside even in a court of modern equity , as there is a
great penalty for a very trifling convenience , since it is far better
that two men should live , than that one man should ride .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.173

But a compact that is false between two men , is equally so between
an_hundred , or an_hundred_thousand ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.174

for as ten millions of circles can never make a square , so the united
voice of myriads can@ @not lend the smallest foundation to falsehood .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.175

It is thus that reason speaks , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.176

and untutored nature says the same thing . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.177

Savages that are directed by natural law alone are very tender of the
lives of each other ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.178

they seldom shed blood but to retaliate former cruelty .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.179

Our Saxon ancestors , fierce as they were in war , had but few
executions in times of peace ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.180

and in all commencing governments that have the print of nature still
strong upon them , scarce any crime is held capital .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,100.181

It is among the citizens of a refined <P_2,101> community that penal
laws , which are in the hands of the rich , are laid upon the poor .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.182

Government , while it grows older , seems to acquire the moroseness of
age ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.183

and as if our property were become dearer in proportion as it encreased
, as if the more enormous our wealth , the more extensive our fears ,
our possessions are paled up with new edicts every day , and hung round
with gibbets to scare every invader . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.184

Whether it is from the number of our penal laws , or the licentiousness
of our people , that this country should shew more convicts in a year ,
than half the dominions of Europe united ? GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.185

Perhaps it is owing to both ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.186

for they mutually produce each other . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.187

When by indiscriminate penal laws a nation beholds the same punishment
affixed to dissimilar degrees of guilt , from perceiving no distinction
in the penalty , the people are led to lose all sense of distinction in
the crime , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.188

and this distinction is the bulwark of all morality :
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.189

thus the multitude of laws produce new vices ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.190

and new vices call for fresh restraints . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,101.191

<P_2,102>

It were to be wished then that power , instead a contriving new laws to
punish vice , instead of drawing hard the cords of society till a
convulsion come to burst them , instead of cutting away wretches as
useless , before we have tried their utility , instead of converting
correction into vengeance , it were to be wished that we tried the
restrictive arts of government , and made law the protector , but not
the tyrant of the people . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,102.193

We should then find that creatures , whose souls are held as dross ,
only wanted the hand of a refiner ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,102.194

we should then find that wretches , now stuck up for long tortures ,
lest luxury should feel a momentary pang , might if properly treated ,
serve to sinew the state in times of danger ; that , as their faces are
like ours , their hearts are so too ; that few minds are so base as that
perseverance can@ @not amend ; that a man may see his last crime without
dying for it ; and that very little blood will serve to cement our
security . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,102.195

<P_2,103>

<heading>

Chap. IX . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.198

{COM:chapter_28}

Happiness and misery rather the result of prudence than of virtue in
this life . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.200

Temporal evils or felicities being regarded by heaven as things merely
in themselves trifling and unworthy its care in the distribution .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.201

<$$heading>

I had now been confined more than a fortnight ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.203

but had not since my arrival been visited by my dear Olivia ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.204

and I greatly longed to see her . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.205

Having communicated my wishes to my wife , the next morning the poor
girl entered my apartment , leaning on her sister's arm .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.206

The change which I saw in her countenance struck me .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.207

The numberless graces that once resided there were now fled ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.208

and the hand of death seemed to have molded every feature to alarm me .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.209

Her temples were sunk , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.210

her forehead was tense , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.211

and a fatal paleness sat {TEXT:sate} upon her cheek .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,103.212

<P_2,104>

" I am glad to see thee , my dear , " cried I ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.214

" but why this dejection , Livy ? GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.215

I hope , my love , you have too great a regard for me , to permit
disappointment thus to undermine a life which I prize as my own .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.216

Be chearful child , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.217

and we yet may see happier days . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.218

" You have ever , sir , " replied she , " been kind to me ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.219

and it adds to my pain that I shall never have an opportunity of sharing
that happiness you promise . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.220

Happiness , I fear , is no longer reserved for me here ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.221

and I long to be rid of a place where I have only found distress .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.222

Indeed , sir , I wish you would make a proper submission to Mr.
Thornhill ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.223

it may , in some measure , induce him to pity you ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.224

and it will give me relief in dying . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.225

" Never child , " replied I , " never will I be brought to acknowledge
my daughter a prostitute ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.226

for tho' the world may look upon your offence with scorn , let it be
mine to regard it as a mark of credulity , not of guilt .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,104.227

My dear , I am no way miserable in this place , however <P_2,105> dismal
it may seem , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,105.228

and be assured that while you continue to bless me by living , he shall
never have my consent to make you more wretched by marrying another . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,105.229

After the departure of my daughter , my fellow prisoner , who was by at
this interview , sensibly enough expostulated upon my obstinacy , in
refusing a submission , which promised to give me freedom .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,105.230

He observed , that the rest of my family was not to be sacrificed to the
peace of one child alone , and she the only one who had offended me .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,105.231

" Beside , " added he , " I do@ @n't know if it be just thus to obstruct
the union of man and wife , which you do at present , by refusing to
consent to a match which you can@ @not hinder , but may render unhappy .
" GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,105.232

" Sir , " replied I , " you are unacquainted with the man that oppresses
us . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,105.233

I am very sensible that no submission I can make could procure me
liberty even for an hour . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,105.234

I am told that even in this very room a debtor of his , no later than
last <P_2,106> year , died for want . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,106.235

But though my submission and approbation could transfer me from hence ,
to the most beautiful apartment he is possessed of ; yet I would grant
neither , as something whispers me that it would be giving a sanction to
adultery . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,106.236

While my daughter lives , no other marriage of his shall ever be legal
in my eye . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,106.237

Were she removed , indeed , I should be the basest of men , from any
resentment of my own , to attempt putting asunder those who wish for an
union . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,106.238

No , villain as he is , I should then wish him married , to prevent the
consequences of his future debaucheries . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,106.239

But should I not now be the most cruel of all fathers , to sign an
instrument which must send my child to the grave , merely to avoid a
prison myself ; and thus to escape one pang , break my child's heart
with a_thousand ? " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,106.240

He acquiesced in the justice of this answer , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,106.241

but could not avoid observing , that he feared my daughter's life was
already too much wasted to keep me long a prisoner .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,106.242

<P_2,107>

" However , {COM:missing_close_quote} continued he ,
{COM:missing_open_quote} though you refuse to submit to the nephew , I
hope you have no objections to laying your case before the uncle , who
has the first character in the kingdom for every thing that is just and
good . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.244

I would advise you to send him a letter by the post , intimating all his
nephew's ill usage , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.245

and my life for it that in three days you shall have an answer . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.246

I thank'd him for the hint , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.247

and instantly set about complying ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.248

but I wanted paper , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.249

and unluckily all our money had been laid out that morning in provisions
, GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.250

however he supplied me . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.251

For the three ensuing days I was in a state of anxiety , to know what
reception my letter might meet with ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.252

but in the mean time was frequently solicited by my wife to submit to
any conditions rather than remain here , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.253

and every hour received repeated accounts of the decline of my
daughter's health . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.254

The third day and the fourth arrived , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.255

but I received no answer to my letter : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,107.256

the complaints of a stranger against a favourite nephew , were no way
likely to <P_2,108> succeed ; so that these hopes soon vanished like all
my former . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.257

My mind , however , still supported itself though confinement and bad
air began to make a visible alteration in my health , and my arm that
had suffered in the fire , grew worse . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.258

But my children still sat {TEXT:sate} by me , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.259

and while I was stretched on my straw , read to me by turns
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.260

or listened and wept at my instructions . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.261

But my daughter's health declined faster than mine ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.262

every message from her contributed to encrease my apprehensions and pain
. GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.263

The fifth morning after I had written the letter which was sent to Sir
William Thornhill , I was alarmed with an account that she was
speechless . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.264

Now it was , that confinement was truly painful to me ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.265

my soul was bursting from its prison to be near the pillow of my child ,
to comfort , to strengthen her , to receive her last wishes , and teach
her soul the way to heaven ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.266

Another account came . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.267

She was expiring , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.268

and yet I was debarred the small comfort of weeping by her .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.269

My fellow prisoner , some time after , came with the last account .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.270

He bade me be patient . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,108.271

She was <P_2,109> dead ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.272

- The next morning he returned , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.273

and found me with my two little ones , now my only companions , who were
using all their innocent efforts to comfort me .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.274

They entreated to read to me , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.275

and bade me not to cry , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.276

for I was now too old to weep . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.277

" And is not my sister an angel , now papa , " cried the eldest , "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.278

and why then are you sorry for her ? GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.279

I wish I were an angel out of this frightful place , if my papa were
with me . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.280

" Yes , " added my youngest darling , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.281

" Heaven , where my sister is , is a finer place than this ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.282

and there are none but good people there , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.283

and the people here are very bad . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.284

Mr Jenkinson interupted their harmless prattle , by observing that now
my daughter was no more , I should seriously think of the rest of my
family , and attempt to save my own life , which was every day declining
, for want of necessaries and wholesome air .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,109.285

He added , that it was now incumbent on me to sacrifice any pride or
resentment of my own , to the welfare of those who depended on me for
support ; <P_2,110> and that I was now , both by reason and justice ,
obliged to try to reconcile my landlord . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.286

" Heaven be praised , " replied I , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.287

" there is no pride left me now , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.288

I should detest my own heart if I saw either pride or resentment lurking
there . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.289

On the contrary , as my oppressor has been once my parishioner , I hope
one day to present him up an unpolluted soul at the eternal tribunal .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.290

No , sir , I have no resentment now , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.291

and though he has taken from me what I held dearer than all his
treasures , though he has wrung my heart , for I am sick almost to
fainting , very sick , my fellow prisoner , yet that shall never inspire
me with vengeance . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.292

I am now willing to approve his marriage , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.293

and if this submission can do him any pleasure , let him know , that if
I have done him any injury , I am sorry for it . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.294

Mr. Jenkinson took pen and ink , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.295

and wrote down my submission nearly as I have exprest it , to which I
signed my name . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,110.296

My son was employed <P_2,111> to carry the letter to Mr. Thornhill ,
who was then at his seat in the country . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,111.297

He went , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,111.298

and in about six hours returned with a verbal answer .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,111.299

He had some difficulty , he said , to get a sight of his landlord , as
the servants were insolent and suspicious ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,111.300

but he accidentally saw him as he was going out upon business ,
preparing for his marriage , which was to be in three days .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,111.301

He continued to inform us , that he stept up in the humblest manner ,
and delivered the letter , which , when Mr. Thornhill had read , he
said that all submission was now too late and unnecessary ; that he had
heard of our application to his uncle , which met with the contempt it
deserved ; and as for the rest , that all future applications should be
directed to his attorney , not to him . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,111.302

He observed , however , that as he had a very good opinion of the
discretion of the two young ladies , they might have been the most
agreeable intercessors . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,111.303

" Well , sir , " said I to my fellow prisoner , " you now discover the
temper of <P_2,112> the man that oppresses me .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.304

He can at once be facetious and cruel ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.305

but let him use me as he will , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.306

I shall soon be free , in spite of all his bolts to restrain me .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.307

I am now drawing towards an abode that looks brighter as I approach it :
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.308

this expectation cheers my afflictions , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.309

and though I leave an helpless family of orphans behind me , yet they
will not be utterly forsaken ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.310

some friend perhaps , will be found to assist them for the sake of their
poor father , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.311

and some may charitably relieve them for the sake of their heavenly
father . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.312

Just as I spoke , my wife , whom I had not seen that day before ,
appeared with looks of terror , and making efforts , but unable to speak
. GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.313

" Why , my love , " cried I , " why will you thus encrease my
afflictions by your own , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,112.314

what though no submissions can turn our severe mister , tho' he has
doomed me to die in this place of wretchedness , and though we have lost
a darling child , yet still you will find comfort in your other children
when I shall <P_2,113> be no more . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.315

" We have indeed lost , " returned she , " a darling child .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.316

My Sophia , my dearest , is gone , snatched from us , carried off by
ruffians ! " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.317

" How madam , " cried my fellow prisoner , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.318

" miss Sophia carried off by villains , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.319

sure it can@ @not be ? " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.320

She could only answer with a fixed look and a flood of tears .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.321

But one of the prisoner@ @s wives , who was present , and came in with
her , gave us a more distinct account : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.322

she informed us that as my wife , my daughter , and herself , were
taking a walk together on the great road a little way out of the village
, a post-chaise and pair drove up to them and instantly stopt . Upon
which , a well drest man , but not Mr. Thornhill , stepping out ,
clasped my daughter round the waist , and forcing her in , bid the
postillion drive on , so that they were out of sight in a moment .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.323

" Now , " cried I , " the sum of my misery is made up ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,113.324

nor is it in the power of any thing on earth to give me another
<P_2,114> pang . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.325

What ! not one left ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.326

not to leave me one ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.327

the monster ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.328

the child that was next my heart ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.329

she had the beauty of an angel , and almost the wisdom of an angel .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.330

But support that woman , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.331

nor let her fall . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.332

Not to leave me one ! " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.333

- " Alas ! my husband , {COM:missing_close_quote} said my wife , " you
seem to want comfort even more than I . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.334

Our distresses are great ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.335

but I could bear this and more , if I saw you but easy .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.336

They may take away my children and all the world , if they leave me but
you . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.337

My Son , who was present , endeavoured to moderate our grief ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.338

he bade us take comfort , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.339

for he hoped that we might still have reason to be thankful .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.340

- " My child , " cried I , " look round the world ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.341

and see if there be any happiness left me now .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.342

Is not every ray of comfort shut out ; while all our bright prospects
only lie beyond the grave ! " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.343

- " My dear father , " returned he , " I hope there is still something
that will give you an interval of satisfaction ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,114.344

for I have a letter from my brother <P_2,115> George " -
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.345

" What of him , child , " interrupted I , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.346

" does he know our misery . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.347

I hope my boy is {TEXT:his} exempt from any part of what his wretched
family suffers ? " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.348

- " Yes , sir , " returned he , " he is perfectly gay , chearful , and
happy . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.349

His letter brings nothing but good news ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.350

he is the favourite of his colonel , who promises to procure him the
very next lieutenancy that becomes vacant ! "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.351

" And are you sure of all this , " cried my wife ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.352

" are you sure that nothing ill has befallen my boy ? "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.353

- " Nothing indeed , madam , " returned my son ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.354

" you shall see the letter , which will give you the highest pleasure ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.355

and if any thing can procure you comfort , I am sure that will . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.356

" But are you sure , " still repeated she , {TEXT:.} " that the letter
is from himself , and that he is really so happy ? "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.357

- " Yes , Madam , " replied he , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.358

" it is certainly his , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.359

and he will one day be the credit and the support of our family ! "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,115.360

- " Then I thank providence , " cried she , <P_2,116> " that my last
letter to him has miscarried . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.361

" Yes , my dear , " continued she , turning to me , " I will now confess
that tho' the hand of heaven is sore upon us in other instances , it has
been favourable here . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.362

By the last letter I wrote my son , which was in the bitterness of anger
, I desired him , upon his mother's blessing , and if he had the heart
of a man , to see justice done his father and sister , and avenge our
cause . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.363

But thanks be to him that directs all things , it has miscarried ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.364

and I am at rest . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.365

" Woman , " cried I , " thou hast done very ill ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.366

and at another time my reproaches might have been more severe .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.367

Oh ! what a tremendous gulph hast thou escaped , that would have buried
both thee and him in endless ruin . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.368

Providence , indeed , has here been kinder to us than we to ourselves .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.369

It has reserved that son to be the father and protector of my children
when I shall be away . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,116.370

How unjustly did I complain of being stript of every comfort , when
still I hear that he is happy and insensible of our afflictions ; still
kept <P_2,117> in reserve to support his widowed mother , and to protect
his brothers and sisters . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.371

But what sisters has he left , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.372

he has no sisters now , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.373

they are all gone , robbed from me , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.374

and I am undone . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.375

- " Father , " interrupted my son , " I beg you will give me leave to
read this letter , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.376

I know it will please you . " Upon which , with my permission , he read
as follows : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.377

Honoured Sir , I Have called off my imagination a few moments from the
pleasures that surround me , to fix it upon objects that are still more
pleasing , the dear little fire-side at home .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.378

My fancy draws that harmless groupe as listening to every line of this
with great composure . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.379

I view those faces with delight which never felt the deforming hand of
ambition or distress ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.380

But whatever your happiness may be at home , I am sure it will be some
addition to it , to hear that I am perfectly pleased with my situation ,
and every way happy here . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,117.381

<P_2,118>

Our regiment is countermanded GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.383

and is not to leave the kingdom ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.384

the colonel , who professes himself my friend , takes me with him to all
companies where he is acquainted , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.385

and after my first visit I generally find myself received with encreased
respect upon repeating it . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.386

I danced last night with Lady G- , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.387

and could I forget you know whom , I might be perhaps successful .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.388

But it is my fate still to remember others , while I am myself forgotten
by most of my absent friends , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.389

and in this number , I fear , Sir , that I must consider , you ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.390

for I have long expected the pleasure of a letter from home to no
purpose . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.391

Olivia and Sophia too , promised to write , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.392

but seem to have forgotten me . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.393

Tell them they are two arrant little baggages , and that I am this
moment in a most violent passion with them : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.394

yet still , I know not how , tho' I want to bluster a little , my heart
is respondent only to softer emotions . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.395

Then tell them , sir , that after all , I love them affectionately ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.396

and be assured of my ever remaining . Your dutiful son .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,118.397

<P_2,119>

" In all our miseries , " cried I , " what thanks have we not to return
, that one at least of our family is exempted from what we suffer .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.399

Heaven be his guard , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.400

and keep my boy thus happy to be the supporter of his widowed mother ,
and the father of these two babes , which is all the patrimony I can now
bequeath him . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.401

May he keep their innocence from the temptations of want , and be their
conductor in the paths of honour . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.402

I had scarce said these words , when a noise , like that of a tumult ,
seemed to proceed from the prison below ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.403

it died away soon after , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.404

and a clanking of fetters was heard along the passage that led to my
apartment . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.405

The keeper of the prison entered , holding a man all bloody , wounded
and fettered with the heaviest irons . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.406

I looked with compassion on the wretch as he approached me , but with
horror when I found it was my own son . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.407

- " My George ! My George ! and do I find thee thus . Wounded !
Fettered ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.408

Is this thy happiness ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.409

Is this the manner you return to me ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,119.410

O that this sight <P_2,120> could break my heart at once and let me die
! " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.411

" Where , Sir , is your fortitude , " returned my son with an intrepid
voice . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.412

" I must suffer , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.413

my life is forfeited , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.414

and let them take it ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.415

it is my last happiness that I have committed no murder , tho' I have
lost all hopes of pardon . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.416

I tried to restrain my passions for a few minutes in silence ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.417

but I thought I should have died with the effort -
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.418

" O my boy , my heart weeps to behold thee thus ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.419

and I can@ @not , can@ @not help it . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.420

In the moment that I thought thee blest , and prayed for thy safety , to
behold thee thus again ! Chained , wounded .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.421

And yet the death of the youthful is happy . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.422

But I am old , a very old man , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.423

and have lived to see this day . To see my children all untimely
falling about me , while I continue a wretched survivor in the midst of
ruin ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.424

May all the curses that ever sunk a soul fall heavy upon the murderer of
my children . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.425

May he live , like me , to see - " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,120.426

<P_2,121>

" Hold , Sir , " replied my son , " or I shall blush for thee .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.428

How , sir , forgetful of your age , your holy calling , thus to arrogate
the justice of heaven , and fling those curses upward that must soon
descend to crush thy own grey head with destruction !
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.429

No , Sir let it be your care now to fit me for that vile death I must
shortly suffer , to arm me with hope and resolution , to give me courage
to drink of that bitterness which must shortly be my portion . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.430

" My child , you must not die : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.431

I am sure no offence of thine can deserve so vile a punishment .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.432

My George could never be guilty of any crime to make his ancestors
ashamed of him . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.433

" Mine , Sir , " returned my son , " is , I fear , an unpardonable one .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.434

I have sent a challenge , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.435

and that is death by a late act of Parliament .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.436

When I received my mother's letter from home , I immediately came down ,
determined to punish the betrayer of our honour ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,121.437

and sent him an <P_2,122> order to meet me , which he answered , not in
person , but by his dispatching four of his domestics to seize me .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.438

I wounded one , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.439

but the rest made me their prisoner . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.440

The coward is determined to put the law in execution against me ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.441

the proofs are undeniable ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.442

and as I am the first transgressor upon the statute , I see no hopes of
pardon . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.443

But you have often charmed me with your lessons of fortitude ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.444

let me now , Sir , find them in your example . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.445

" And , my son , you shall find them . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.446

I am now raised above this world , and all the pleasures it can produce
. GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.447

From this moment I break from my heart all the ties that held it down to
earth , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.448

and will prepare to fit us both for eternity .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.449

Yes , my son , I will point out the way , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.450

and my soul shall guide yours in the ascent , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.451

for we will take our flight together . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.452

I now see and am convinced you can expect no pardon here ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.453

and I can only exhort you to seek it at that greatest tribunal where we
both shall shortly answer . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.454

But let us not be niggardly in our exhortation ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,122.455

<P_2,123>

but let all our fellow prisoners have a share :
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.457

good goaler {COM:missing_comma} let them be permitted to stand here ,
while I attempt to improve them . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.458

Thus saying , I made an effort to rise from my straw ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.459

but wanted strength , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.460

and was able only to recline against the wall .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.461

The prisoners assembled according to my direction ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.462

for they loved to hear my council , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.463

my son and his mother supported me on either side ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.464

I looked GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.465

and saw that none were wanting , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.466

and then addressed them with the following exhortation .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,123.467

<P_2,124>

<heading>

Chap. X . {COM:chapter_29} GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,124.470

The equal dealings of providence demonstrated with regard to the happy
and the miserable here below . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,124.471

That from the nature of pleasure and pain , the wretched must be repaid
the balance of their sufferings in the life hereafter .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,124.472

<$$heading>

My friends , my children , and fellow sufferers , when I reflect on the
distribution of good and evil here below , I find that much has been
given man to enjoy , yet still more to suffer .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,124.474

Though we should examine the whole world , we shall not find one man so
happy as to have nothing left to wish for ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,124.475

but we daily see thousands who by suicide shew us they have nothing left
to hope . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,124.476

In this life then it appears that we can@ @not be entirely blest , but
yet we may be completely miserable ! GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,124.477

<P_2,125>

Why man should thus feel pain , why our wretchedness should be requisite
in the formation of universal felicity , why , when all other systems
are made perfect by the perfection of their subordinate parts , the
great system should require for its perfection , parts that are not only
subordinate to others , but imperfect in themselves ? These are
questions that never can be explained , and might be useless if known .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,125.479

On this subject providence has thought fit to elude our curiosity ,
satisfied with granting us motives to consolation .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,125.480

In this situation , man has called in the friendly assistance of
philosophy , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,125.481

and heaven seeing the incapacity of that to console him , has given him
the aid of religion . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,125.482

The consolations of philosophy are very amusing , but often fallacious .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,125.483

It tells us that life is filled with comforts , if we will but enjoy
them ; and on the other hand , that though we unavoidably have miseries
here , life is short , and they will soon be over .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,125.484

Thus do these consolations destroy each other ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,125.485

for if life is a place of comfort , its <P_2,126> shortness must be
misery , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.486

and if it be long , our griefs are protracted .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.487

Thus philosophy is weak ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.488

but religion comforts in an higher strain . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.489

Man is here , it tells us , fitting up his mind , and preparing it for
another abode . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.490

When the good man leaves the body and is all a glorious mind , he will
find he has been making himself a heaven of happiness here , while the
wretch that has been maimed and contaminated by his vices , shrinks from
his body with terror , and finds that he has anticipated the vengeance
of heaven . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.491

To religion then we must hold in every circumstance of life for our
truest comfort ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.492

for if already we are happy , it is a pleasure to think that we can make
that happiness unending , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.493

and if we are miserable , it is very consoling to think that there is a
place of rest . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.494

Thus to the fortunate religion holds out a continuance of bliss , to the
wretched a change from pain . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.495

But though religion is very kind to all men , it has promised peculiar
rewards to the unhappy ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,126.496

the sick , the naked , the <P_2,127> houseless , the heavy-laden , and
the prisoner , have ever most frequent promises in our sacred law .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.497

The author of our religion every where professes himself the wretch's
friend , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.498

and unlike the false ones of this world , bestows all his caresses upon
the forlorn . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.499

The unthinking have censured this as partiality , as a preference
without merit to deserve it . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.500

But they never reflect that it is not in the power even of heaven itself
to make the offer of unceasing felicity as great a gift to the happy as
to the miserable . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.501

To the first eternity is but a single blessing , since at most it but
encreases what they already possess . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.502

To the latter it is a double advantage ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.503

for it diminishes their pain here , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.504

and rewards them with heavenly bliss hereafter .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.505

But providence is in another respect kinder to the poor than the rich ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.506

for as it thus makes the life after death more desirable , so it smooths
the passage there . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.507

The wretched have had a long familiarity with every face of terror .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.508

The man of sorrows lays himself quietly down ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,127.509

he has no possessions <P_2,128> to regret , and but few ties to stop his
departure : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,128.510

he feels only nature's pang in the final separation ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,128.511

and this is no way greater than he has often fainted under before ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,128.512

for after a certain degree of pain , every new breach that death opens
in the constitution , nature kindly covers with insensibility .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,128.513

Thus providence has given the wretched two advantages over the happy in
this life , greater felicity in dying , and in heaven all that
superiority of pleasure which arises from contrasted enjoyment .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,128.514

And this superiority , my friends , is no small advantage ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,128.515

and seems to be one of the pleasures of the poor man in the parable ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,128.516

for though he was already in heaven , and felt all the raptures it could
give , yet it was mentioned as an addition to his happiness , that he
had once been wretched and now was comforted , that he had known what it
was to be miserable , and now felt what it was to be happy .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,128.517

Thus , my friends , you see religion does what philosophy could never do
: GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,128.518

it shews <P_2,129> the equal dealings of heaven to the happy and the
unhappy , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,129.519

and levels all human enjoyments to nearly the same standard .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,129.520

It gives to both rich and poor the same happiness hereafter , and equal
hopes to aspire after it ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,129.521

but if the rich have the advantage of enjoying pleasure here , the poor
have the endless satisfaction of knowing what it was once to be
miserable , when crowned with endless felicity hereafter ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,129.522

and even though this should be called a small advantage , yet being an
eternal one , it must make up by duration what the temporal happiness of
the great may have exceeded by intenseness . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,129.523

These are therefore the consolations which the wretched have peculiar to
themselves , and in which they are above the rest of mankind ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,129.524

in other respects they are below them . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,129.525

They who would know the miseries of the poor must see life and endure it
. GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,129.526

To declaim on the temporal advantages they enjoy , is only repeating
what none either believe or practise . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,129.527

The men who have the necessaries of living are not <P_2,130> poor ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.528

and they who want them must be miserable . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.529

Yes , my friends , we must be miserable . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.530

No vain efforts of a refined imagination can sooth the wants of nature ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.531

can give elastic sweetness to the dank vapour of a dungeon , or ease to
the throbbings of a broken heart . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.532

Let the philosopher from his couch of softness tell us that we can
resist all these . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.533

Alas ! the effort by which we resist them is still the greatest pain !
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.534

Death is slight , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.535

and any man may sustain it ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.536

but torments are dreadful GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.537

and these no man can endure . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.538

To us then , my friends , the promises of happiness in heaven should be
peculiarly dear ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.539

for if our reward be in this life alone we are then indeed of all men
the most miserable . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,130.540

When I look round these gloomy walls , made to terrify , as well as to
confine us ; this light that only serves to shew the horrors of the
place , those shackles that tyranny has imposed , or crime made
necessary ; when I survey these emaciated looks , and hear those groans
, O my friends , what a glorious exchange would heaven be for <P_2,131>
these . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.541

To fly through regions unconfined as air , to bask in the sunshine of
eternal bliss , to carrol over endless hymns of praise , to have no
master to threaten or insult us , but the form of goodness himself for
ever in our eyes , when I think of these things , death becomes the
messenger of very glad tidings ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.542

when I think of these things , his sharpest arrow becomes the staff of
my support ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.543

when I think of these things , what is there in life worth having ?
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.544

When I think of these things , what is there that should not be spurned
away ? GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.545

Kings in their palaces should groan for such advantages ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.546

but we , humbled as we are , should yearn for them .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.547

And shall these things be ours ? GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.548

Ours they will certainly be if we but try for them ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.549

and what is a comfort , we are shut out from many temptations that would
retard our pursuit . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.550

Only let us try for them , and they will certainly be ours , and what is
still a comfort , shortly too ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.551

for if we look back on past life , it appears but a very short span ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.552

and whatever we may think of the rest of life , it will yet be found of
less duration ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,131.553

<P_2,132>

as we grow older , the days seem to grow shorter ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.555

and our intimacy with time , ever lessens the perception of his stay .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.556

Then let us take comfort now , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.557

for we shall soon be at our journey's end ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.558

we shall soon lay down the heavy burthen laid by heaven upon us ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.559

and though death , the only friend of the wretched , for a little while
mocks the weary traveller with the view , and like his horizon , still
flies before him ; yet the time will certainly and shortly come , when
we shall cease from our toil ; when the luxurious great ones of the
world shall no more tread us to the earth ; when we shall think with
pleasure on our sufferings below ; when we shall be surrounded with all
our friends , or such as deserved our friendship ; when our bliss shall
be unutterable , and still , to crown all , unending .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.560

<heading>

Chap. XI . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.562

{COM:chapter_30}

Happier prospects begin to appear . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.564

Let us be inflexible , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.565

and fortune will at last change in our favour .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.566

<$$heading>

When I had thus finished and my audience was retired , the goaler , who
was one of the most humane of his profession , hoped I would not be
displeased , as what he did was but his duty , observing that he must be
obliged to remove my son into a stronger cell , but that he should be
permitted to revisit me every morning . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.568

I thanked him for his clemency , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.569

and grasping my boy's hand , bade him farewell , and be mindful of the
great duty that was before him . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.570

I again , therefore laid me down , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,132.571

and one of my little ones sat {TEXT:sate} by my bedside reading , when
Mr. Jenkinson entering , informed me that there was news of my daughter
; <P_2,134> for that she was seen by a person about two hours before in
a strange gentleman's company , and that they had stopt at a
neighbouring village for refreshment , and seemed as if returning to
town . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,134.572

He had scarce delivered this news , when the gaoler came with looks of
haste and pleasure , to inform me , that my daughter was found .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,134.573

Moses came running in a moment after , crying out that his sister Sophy
was below , and coming up with our old friend Mr. Burchell .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,134.574

Just as he delivered this news my dearest girl entered ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,134.575

and with looks almost wild with pleasure , ran to kiss me in a transport
of affection . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,134.576

Her mother's tears and silence also shewed her pleasure .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,134.577

- " Here , papa , " cried the charming girl , " here , is the brave man
to whom I owe my delivery ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,134.578

to this gentleman's intrepidity I am indebted for my happiness and
safety - " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,134.579

A kiss from Mr. Burchell , whose pleasure seemed even greater than hers
, interrupted what she was going to add . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,134.580

<P_2,135>

" Ah , Mr Burchell , " cried I , " this is but a wretched habitation you
now find us in ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.582

and we are now very different from what you last saw us .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.583

You were ever our friend : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.584

we have long discovered our errors with regard to you , and repented of
our ingratitude . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.585

After the vile usage you then received at my hands I am almost ashamed
to behold your face ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.586

yet I hope you@ @'ll forgive me , as I was deceived by a base ungenerous
wretch , who , under the mask of friendship , has undone me . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.587

" It is impossible , " replied Mr. Burchell , " that I should forgive
you , as you never deserved my resentment . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.588

I partly saw your delusion then , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.589

and as it was out of my power to restrain , I could only pity it ! "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.590

" It was ever my conjecture , " cried I , " that your mind was noble ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.591

but now I find it so . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.592

But tell me , my dear child , how hast thou been relieved , or who the
ruffians were who carried thee away ? " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,135.593

<P_2,136>

" Indeed , Sir , " replied she , " as to the villain {TEXT:villian} who
carried me off , I am yet ignorant . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.595

For as my mamma and I were walking out , he came behind us ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.596

and almost before I could call for help , forced me into the post chaise
, GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.597

and in an instant the horses drove away . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.598

I met several on the road , to whom I cried out for assistance ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.599

but they disregarded my entreaties . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.600

In the mean time the ruffian himself used every art to hinder me from
crying out : GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.601

he flattered and threatened by turns , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.602

and swore that if I continued but silent , he intended no harm .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.603

In the mean time I had broken the canvas that he , had drawn up ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.604

and whom should I perceive at some distance but your old friend Mr.
Burchell , walking along with his usual swiftness , with the great stick
for which we used so much to ridicule him . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.605

As soon as we came within hearing , I called out to him by name ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.606

and entreated his help . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.607

I repeated my exclamations several times , upon which , with a very loud
voice , he bid the postillion stop ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.608

but the boy took no notice , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,136.609

<P_2,137>

but drove on with still greater speed . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.611

I now thought he could never overtake us , when in less than a minute I
saw Mr. Burchell come running up by the side of the horses , and with
one blow knock the postillion to the ground .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.612

The horses when he was fallen soon stopt of themselves ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.613

and the ruffian stepping out , with oaths and menaces drew his sword ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.614

and ordered him at his peril to retire ; GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.615

but Mr. Burchell running up , shivered his sword to pieces ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.616

and then pursued him for near a quarter of a mile ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.617

but he made his escape . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.618

I was at this time come out myself , willing to assist my deliverer ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.619

but he soon returned to me in triumph . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.620

The postillion , who was recovered , was going to make his escape too ;
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.621

but Mr. Burchell ordered him at his peril to mount again , and drive
back to town . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.622

Finding it impossible to resist , he reluctantly complied , though the
wound he had received seemed , to me at least , to be dangerous .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,137.623

He continued to complain of the pain as we drove along , so that he at
last excited Mr. Burchell's <P_2,138> compassion , who , at my request
, exchanged him for another at an inn where we called on our return . "
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.624

" Welcome then , " cried I , " my child , and thou her gallant deliverer
, a_thousand welcomes . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.625

Though our chear is but wretched , yet our hearts are ready to receive
you . GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.626

And now , Mr. Burchell , as you have delivered my girl , if you think
her a recompence she is yours , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.627

if you can stoop to an alliance with a family so poor as mine , take her
, GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.628

obtain her consent , as I know you have her heart , and you have mine .
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.629

And let me tell you , Sir that I give you no small treasure ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.630

she has been celebrated for beauty it is true ,
GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.631

but that is not my meaning , GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.632

I give you up a treasure in her mind . " GOLDSMITH-1766-2,2,138.633

