<BEGIN_gordon-1781-2>

<P_1,6>

<heading>

Mr. Norton . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.4

<$$heading>

May it please your Lordship , and you , Gentlemen of the Jury , the
noble prisoner at the bar , George Gordon , Esq. commonly called Lord
George Gordon , stands indicted of high treason , in intending to levy
war against his present Majesty , within the kingdom of Great Britain ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,6.6

and Gentlemen {COM:missing_comma} the indictment further states , that
the prisoner to effect this traitorous {TEXT:traiterous} intention , did
, on the 2d of June last , and at divers other times , between that day
and the 10th of the same month , at the parish of St. Margaret's within
the liberty of Westminster , in this country , with a great multitude of
persons , armed and arrayed in a warlike manner , with weapons offensive
and defensive , and with colours flying ; being then and there
unlawfully and traiterously assembled , most wickedly , maliciously ,
and traiterously did prepare and levy publick war against our sovereign
Lord the king , contrary to the duty of his allegiance against the peace
of our said Lord the king , his crown and dignity , and against the
statute , in such case made and provided . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.7

To this indictment the prisoner has pleaded that he is not guilty ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,6.8

and hath put himself upon his trial ; GORDON-1781-2,1,6.9

we who are of counsel for the crown shall call our witnesses in support
of the prosecution ; GORDON-1781-2,1,6.10

and if the evidence shall prove the charge to your satisfaction , then
it will be your duty , under the direction of the court , to find the
prisoner guilty . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.11

<heading>

Mr. Attorney-General . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.13

<$$heading>

May it please your Lordship , and you Gentlemen of the Jury , I am also
of counsel in support of this prosecution against the prisoner at the
bar , which imputes to him a crime in the highest class of offences
known to the law of this country - that of High Treason ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,6.15

and the particular species of high treason you find , from the opening
of the indictment , is levying war against the King within his realm .
GORDON-1781-2,1,6.16

The offence of levying war against the King within the statute of the
25th of Edward the Third , is of two sorts , the one directly and
immediately against the person of the King , GORDON-1781-2,1,6.17

the other , called constructive levying of war , is against the majesty
of the King , as a great and numerous insurrection of the people to
effect by force an alternation of the established law of the country ,
the redress of national grievances , or the reformation of evils , real
or imaginary , in which the insurgents have no particular or special
interest . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.18

It is of the latter kind of levying war with which the prisoner at the
bar stands accused by this indictment . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.19

You , Gentlemen , who reside in this county , are not strangers to the
occasion of this prosecution - GORDON-1781-2,1,6.20

In the latter end of the year 1778 , an act of parliament passed to
repeal certain provisions affecting the Roman_Catholicks in this country
, contained in an act of parliament made in the eleventh and twelfth
year of the reign of King William the Third . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.21

The particular provisions which it was the object of this act to repeal
were these : GORDON-1781-2,1,6.22

By the statute of King William every Popish priest , exercising any part
of his function in this kingdom , was liable to perpetual imprisonment ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,6.23

every person of the Popish religion keeping a school , or taking upon
himself the education , government , or boarding of youth , was liable
to the same punishment . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.24

And by another part of this act , Roman_Catholicks were rendered
incapable of inheriting or taking by devise or limitation any estates
from their parents or others , unless they should take oaths and
subscribe a declaration , which by their religion they could not
conscientiously do , GORDON-1781-2,1,6.25

and their estates were to go immediately over to their next of kin being
protestants , and them {COM:sic} and their families left to starve .
GORDON-1781-2,1,6.26

There was another provision too which made them incapable of taking an
estate by purchase . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.27

This act containing such severe penalties could only be justified by the
necessity of the case , for the salvation of the state and our religion
. GORDON-1781-2,1,6.28

It is the height of severity to punish men for serving God in their own
way , or employing themselves in one of the most important duties to
society , the education of youth ; GORDON-1781-2,1,6.29

that men shall for these reasons alone be doomed to a loathsome prison
for their lives , and to the perpetual society of the most profligate
and wretched of mankind , is cruel and horrid . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.30

The other part of the act was extremely severe in depriving a man of his
birthright and inheritance . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.31

The history of the time indeed does not furnish any proof of the
necessity , nor afford an apology for the hardship of these provisions ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,6.32

an account of the commencement and progress of the act is given by a
very learned divine , who was at that time a member of the House of
Peers , Bishop Burnet . GORDON-1781-2,1,6.33

It originated in party faction , in opposition to the court <P_1,7> at
that time . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.34

The bill was brought into the House of Commons that the court party
might reject it , and draw upon themselves the odium of a measure in
favour of the Catholicks GORDON-1781-2,1,7.35

for those that brought in the bill did not mean it should pass ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,7.36

they were disappointed in their views , GORDON-1781-2,1,7.37

for the court party made no opposition to it . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.38

They then wished to drop it GORDON-1781-2,1,7.39

but they could not ; upon which Bishop Burnet says they added very
severe and unreasonable clauses to the bill and sent it up to the House
of Lords , in hopes that that House would reject it ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,7.40

in this they were disappointed too , GORDON-1781-2,1,7.41

for the House of Lords did not reject the bill , GORDON-1781-2,1,7.42

but suffered it to pass with the severe penalties and punishments I have
stated . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.43

It is too much , in my opinion , for any party or faction to stake upon
their game the liberties and fortunes of others . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.44

The Catholicks submitted to this law , GORDON-1781-2,1,7.45

they expected no doubt , that parliament would see the hardship imposed
upon them by these provisions , and administer redress .
GORDON-1781-2,1,7.46

They made no application , GORDON-1781-2,1,7.47

and indeed the penalties and punishments appeared to every body so
extremely harsh and severe , that very few prosecutions were carried on
upon this act ; GORDON-1781-2,1,7.48

in my own time I only remember one , which was against a person for
saying mass in a house somewhere about Wapping ; GORDON-1781-2,1,7.49

he was convicted , and of course doomed by the provisions of this act to
perpetual imprisonment . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.50

But the Roman_Catholicks were still liable to private extortionary
demands , which they yielded to , to avoid either prosecution , or that
they might have the liberty of enjoying what had long been in their
families and had descended to them as their birth-right .
GORDON-1781-2,1,7.51

This law remained in the statute book <paren> and though seldom put in
execution was sufficient to occasion perpetual alarm <$$paren> till the
year 1778 , when an act of parliament was brought into the House of
Commons to relieve his Majesty's Roman_Catholick subjects against the
particular provisions I have stated . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.52

The propriety and justice of that measure , the circumstances attending
it pretty plainly evince . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.53

The bill was brought in by a member of the House of Commons
distinguished for his love of the civil rights of mankind , and for his
firm and zealous attachment to the Protestant religion , and who besides
possesses every publick and private virtue that can adorn the citizen
and the man . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.54

I mean Sir George Savile - GORDON-1781-2,1,7.55

It passed through the House of Commons with almost unamimity ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,7.56

the opposition made to it from some was not to the principle of the bill
, but that it did not {TEXT:no} go far enough in the redress ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,7.57

it should in the opinion of those have been extended to other penalites
, GORDON-1781-2,1,7.58

for I must inform you that in the time of passing the act of King
William , the Roman_Catholicks stood by law excluded from any share in
government , for any office of trust , civil or military , and the
persons of that religion performing any part of their functions , as
priests or keeping of schools or educating youth , stood liable to many
pecuniary penalties , and in some instances to temporary imprisonments .
GORDON-1781-2,1,7.59

This was their situation at the time when these additional penalties and
punishments were inflicted upon them . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.60

This repeal was not absolute and extending to all affected by the
statute of King William GORDON-1781-2,1,7.61

but was conditional , and restrained to those who should take an oath
established , by that act , of the strongest assurance of their loyalty
and affection to the government , and an abjuration in explicit terms of
every pretender to the crown and government of this kingdom , and
besides a positive renunciation of any authority of the see of Rome , in
civil or temporal cases , within this kingdom . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.62

None could receive the benefit of this repeal , who did not give the
public that pledge . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.63

Upon the passing of this act , many of the Roman_Catholicks of the first
characters and fortunes in the kingdom , and others of all descriptions
, came in , GORDON-1781-2,1,7.64

and gave the security to government , under the sanction of an oath ,
which the act required ; GORDON-1781-2,1,7.65

no person at the time seemed dissatified ; GORDON-1781-2,1,7.66

but in the winter following it was supposed that a Bill would be brought
into parliament , to take off some penalties which were inflicted by the
laws of Scotland upon the Roman_Catholicks of that country .
GORDON-1781-2,1,7.67

And in the beginning of February were received from Edinburgh , and
published in every paper , accounts of a most violent insurrection in
that country , to put a stop to that measure . GORDON-1781-2,1,7.68

It appeared from these accounts that , upon the 2d of February , an
insurrection happened in the city of Edinburgh , the two Roman_Catholick
chapels had been attacked and set on fire ; that the houses of the
Roman_Catholicks there in different parts of the town , were attacked ,
ransacked , and demolished ; that the utmost exertions of the civil
magistrate , assisted by some of the fencibles , could not suppress the
tumult ; not until the provost of the city gave assurances in the most
publick manner , that the scheme was dropped , that no act of parliament
would be applied for , respecting the Roman_Catholicks of Scotland ,
could any check be given to the violence and outrages committing to the
destruction {TEXT:distruction} of many innocent men .
GORDON-1781-2,1,7.69

This put an end to an attempt to obtain the act of parliament ,
conceived by some gentlemen of distinction of that country , to be a
very salutary , <P_1,8> proper , and just measure .
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.70

I take notice of this insurrection in Scotland , because when I come to
state to you the conduct of the prisoner at the bar , it will be found
to be a very material circumstance . GORDON-1781-2,1,8.71

Things remained for some time quiet in this country ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.72

but an Association was formed , called the Protestant Association ,
every one of you , Gentlemen , have heard of it , and where pains were
taken to create a belief that the repeal of the statute of King William
would be attended with immediate danger to the state , and to the
Protestant religion ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.73

upon that ground it seems a petition was determined upon ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.74

and if they apprehended danger , they did right to petition ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.75

it is the inherent right of the subject to petition parliament ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.76

and whenever they imagine a case proper for the consideration of
parliament , they do right to bring it before them ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.77

and I believe this petition was at one time intended to have been
presented in a legal , constitutional , and orderly manner .
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.78

You will find , for I shall give you the general outlines of the
business before I state the particular conduct of the prisoner , that
upon the 2d of June , in consequence of publick advertisements published
in the news papers , and pasted up at the corners of streets , and of
hand bills distributed , there was collected together in St. George's
Fields , a multitude of people , or more properly , a very large army ;
I believe consisting <paren> the particulars we may hear from the
witnesses <$$paren> of many thousands - twenty , thirty , or
forty_thousand - under the pretext of presenting a petition to
parliament , GORDON-1781-2,1,8.79

yet the petitioners are not to dictate to parliament , or take from
parliament their deliberation and judgement upon the subject ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.80

that would tend directly to the dissolution of the constitution , and
the subversion of government . GORDON-1781-2,1,8.81

This body of men were arranged , according to the direction of the
advertisement , into three or four divisions ; the London to the right ,
the Scotch division to the left , and the Westminster to one part , and
the Southwark division in another ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.82

one division , consisting of many many thousands , marched over
London-bridge , through the city , down the Strand , and so to the House
of Commons , with colours flying , distinguished by blue cockades , and
making a march as regular as an army trained to it ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.83

they had bagpipes , which belonged , I fancy , to the Scotch division ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.84

in this way they marched ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.85

they arrived at the House of Commons about one o'clock ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.86

and , being joined by the other divisions , took possession of all the
avenues leading to the House , and of the lobby , GORDON-1781-2,1,8.87

and it was with the utmost difficulty the members got admittance into
the house ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.88

some members of each house were insulted and ill-treated by the populace
, as examples I presume of what the rest were to expect , if the wishes
of the mob were not complied with ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.89

in this situation the petition was presented , GORDON-1781-2,1,8.90

and those in the lobby were desired to withdraw . GORDON-1781-2,1,8.91

If it was a constitutional purpose they had in coming to the house , it
was answered ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.92

but they would not stir , GORDON-1781-2,1,8.93

and with great riot and confusion insisted upon a repeal of the act ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.94

the cry was A repeal ! A repeal ! No popery . GORDON-1781-2,1,8.95

- The civil power was in vain sent for to disperse them ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.96

they still kept possession ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.97

they besieged the House , GORDON-1781-2,1,8.98

they kept the members imprisoned . GORDON-1781-2,1,8.99

Thus they continued till between nine and ten at night , when the civil
power , by the assistance of the military , were able to deliver the
House of Commons from the disgraceful situation in which they had been
in {COM:sic_doubled_preposition} to that time , and must have been
confined till they had granted , as far as they could , the prayer of
this petition . GORDON-1781-2,1,8.100

As soon as the house was delivered , they ordered the business to be
considered , GORDON-1781-2,1,8.101

and adjounred to the Tuesday following ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.102

but the mob , not having succeeded in their purpose , and being driven
from the house in the manner I have stated , immediately betook
themselves to other measures ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.103

they instantly resolved to attack the chapels of the foreign ministers ,
which , in every civilized country are protected and deemed sacred from
insult ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.104

some of them were apprehended , I think about thirteen , that night or
the next morning . GORDON-1781-2,1,8.105

On Saturday they paraded in different parts of the town ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.106

but I do not find that much mischief was done : GORDON-1781-2,1,8.107

On the Sunday they appeared in Moorfields , GORDON-1781-2,1,8.108

they there attacked a chapel in that neighborhood , and the houses of
many Roman_Catholicks , situated thereabouts , GORDON-1781-2,1,8.109

and completely demolished the houses and effects of these unfortunate
people . GORDON-1781-2,1,8.110

I only give in general , an account of what they did .
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.111

I am convinced many of you were eye-witnesses to what I am now stating .
GORDON-1781-2,1,8.112

On the Monday , the men who were taken up were examined at Sir John
Fielding's : GORDON-1781-2,1,8.113

five of them were committed to Newgate : GORDON-1781-2,1,8.114

they were examined under the apprehension of a rescue from the violence
that was without the door ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.115

it was with difficulty that they were conducted to Newgate by the Guards
; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.116

but , as soon as they were lodged there , these people made an attack
upon the house of a Mr. Rainsforth , who had been active in
apprehending them , and a witness against them ; GORDON-1781-2,1,8.117

they made an attack too upon the <P_1,9> house of a Mr. Maberly , who
had been a witness before the magistrate ; and also upon the house of
Sir George Savile ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.118

and they did other injury that night . GORDON-1781-2,1,9.119

The next day , being the Tuesday when the parliament was to meet again ,
all the parties of this army re-assembled about the House of Commons ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.120

and there continued with great riot and confusion , with shouts for A
repeal , and No popery , till the house was obliged to adjourn .
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.121

Upon this their first attack was upon the house of Mr. Hyde ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.122

the offence given by Mr. Hyde , was partly his attendance at the
justices upon the Monday at the examination , but principally for his
activity as a magistrate in saving the life of a member of the House of
Peers , the Earl of Sandwich , who in going to attend his duty , had
been violently attacked by the mob . GORDON-1781-2,1,9.123

They ransacked and set fire to Mr. Hyde's house , GORDON-1781-2,1,9.124

and burnt the furniture , GORDON-1781-2,1,9.125

and totally demolished every thing they could . GORDON-1781-2,1,9.126

In this they were accompanied with their colours , GORDON-1781-2,1,9.127

for they appeared again with their flags and with their cockades .
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.128

Very large parts of the mob marched to Newgate ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.129

they set fire to the keeper's house ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.130

they attacked the prison ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.131

and , in a very short time , they set at large all the prisoners ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.132

a place which for its security seemed to be equal to a prison in the
centre of the earth . GORDON-1781-2,1,9.133

They afterwards attacked and demolished many houses belonging to
Roman_Catholicks , GORDON-1781-2,1,9.134

burnt and destroyed the furniture and effects . GORDON-1781-2,1,9.135

Upon the Wednesday they attacked and broke open the other prisons in and
about this metropolis , with an exception of the Poultry Compter ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.136

and set at liberty all the prisoners ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.137

they continued their proceedings without control or check all that night
, and until some time the next morning ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.138

in that night various houses in different parts of the town were in
flames at the same time ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.139

in short nothing was expected less than general conflagration .
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.140

The next day an attack was meditated upon the Bank , and I believe upon
the Pay and Excise offices , GORDON-1781-2,1,9.141

happily his Majesty by his anxious care , and extraordinary and
unremitting exertions , had been able to collect together a force ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.142

all the troops within a considerable distance were brought up to the
metropolis , GORDON-1781-2,1,9.143

and they gave a check to the fury of the mob ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.144

this was upon the Thursday , when they were making an attempt upon the
Poultry Compter . GORDON-1781-2,1,9.145

Every person I believe is convinced , that if a stop had not been then
put to the outrages , the whole of this Town would have been destroyed
in a very short time ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.146

for though the repeal of the Bill was the pretended cause , and the
Roman_Catholicks the object at first of their violence , that
distinction would soon have vanished - GORDON-1781-2,1,9.147

the reputed papist - the friend of the papist , and those who had not
the least connection with them , if in any respect obnoxious to the mob
, would have suffered - GORDON-1781-2,1,9.148

It is astonishing to me , that the whole town was not destroyed ,
considering the number of Roman_Catholicks employed in our manufacturies
here , and others who are doomed to the most laborious employments in
this town ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.149

had they interposed in defence of their innocent bretheren to preserve
them from ruin what must have been the consequence !
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.150

- A bloody war must have taken place ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.151

and if an attack upon the houses of protestants had been provoked , the
whole of this town , even before the military could have arrived to our
assistance , might have been destroyed - GORDON-1781-2,1,9.152

Before the insurrection was put an end to there appeared strong marks of
the machinations of our inveterate enemies . GORDON-1781-2,1,9.153

What was the meaning of opening the prisons - GORDON-1781-2,1,9.154

what was the intent of that attack upon the national credit of the
Kingdom , the Bank of England ? GORDON-1781-2,1,9.155

was that upon the ground of Popery , or for the repeal of this Bill ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.156

Other circumstances concurring , leave no doubt that greater designs
than at first appeared were opening to the Public .
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.157

Having stated in general the outlines of the violences committed during
these few days , to the eternal disgrace of this Country , for it can
never be wiped off , it remains for me to state to you , what share the
prisoner at the bar had in them ; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.158

for there can be no doubt that all persons who contributed to the
perpetration of them are as criminal as the very persons who committed
the act , and more so , especially , if they are to be {TEXT:he}
ascribed to their incitement and encouragement . GORDON-1781-2,1,9.159

Gentlemen , you have now before you , as will appear upon the evidence ,
the author of all these violent and disgraceful proceedings , to whom
the whole is to be imputed , GORDON-1781-2,1,9.160

an offender of such a description has not often appeared in a court of
justice . GORDON-1781-2,1,9.161

I have already stated to you the Protestant Association ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.162

but have not mentioned to you , leaving it to this stage of the business
, that the prisoner was the president of that association .
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.163

I stated to you , that I have great reasons to believe , and I hope it
will come out before this day is over , that there were some of that
association who meant no more than to lay their apprehensions before
parliament , willing to leave them to their consideration and judgment ,
intended to present their petition in the ordinary form , and in a
constitutional way , attended by very few of the petitioners .
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.164

But that did not square with the view of their president .
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.165

Their president had been in parliament , GORDON-1781-2,1,9.166

- he had observed the sentiments of many upon the subject of this repeal
; GORDON-1781-2,1,9.167

he possibly despaired of any immediate relief being given ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,9.168

for <P_1,10> certainly the subject required great consideration ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.169

the circumstances , if any , to shew danger to be apprehended from the
repeal of the Bill were to be investigated . GORDON-1781-2,1,10.170

A difficulty was thrown upon the business ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.171

this Bill invited the Catholicks to give a pledge of their fidelity and
loyalty ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.172

this they had done upon the faith of enjoying that degree of freedom
from penalties and punishments which the act held out to them ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.173

there were besides other weighty considerations .
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.174

But deliberate proceedings would not answer the purpose ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.175

the session of parliament was near expiring ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.176

the prisoner at the bar advertized for a general meeting to propose an
attendance on this petition by numbers ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.177

the proposal at a general meeting , where all came that pleased without
distinction , was immediately assented to ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.178

there are people who attend these places who can@ @not exist without the
opportunity of plunder ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.179

the prisoner upon this declared that he would not present the petition
unless he was attended by twenty_thousand people ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.180

did such an idea ever strike any man that meant well to the peace and
tranquillity of the country , that he would not present it without he
was attended by twenty_thousand people , and they were to be marked ,
they were to be distinguished by cockades , that he might know the
friends of the petition or the friends to the protestant cause .
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.181

Good God ! GORDON-1781-2,1,10.182

is a cockade the test of adherence to any good cause ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.183

every man that came there with a cockade , whatever his views were , was
considered as a friend to the Protestant religion ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.184

there was no other title to admission into this body , but merely having
cockades in their hats - GORDON-1781-2,1,10.185

Then he gave directions , that they should be formed into divisions ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.186

a general could not make a more proper disposition of his army ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.187

the London division was to go to the right , the Scotch to the left ,
Westminster to one part , Southwark to the other part ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.188

and then they were to be marched off in these divisions .
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.189

I dare say it struck many who were there , that this proposal must be
attended with tumult and breaches of the peace at the least ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.190

the very collection of so great a number was never made in any country
without doing mischief ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.191

but to take off apprehensions of that kind , he {TEXT:be} bid them
recollect what the Scotch had done . GORDON-1781-2,1,10.192

By their firm conduct they had prevented the Bill from extending to them
; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.193

he recommended to this body , to twenty_thousand men ! the firm conduct
of the Scotch , which consisted in the most violent insurrection and
tumult that ever was known in that city , and in acts of violence
against the Roman_Catholicks who committed no fault , nor applied for
redress , but were taken up as men innocently suffering and men that
ought to be relieved . GORDON-1781-2,1,10.194

Is a mob not able to take the hint ? GORDON-1781-2,1,10.195

it should have been too much for the prisoner to have said , Gentlemen
go GORDON-1781-2,1,10.196

and pull down all the houses of the Roman_Catholicks ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.197

the civil magistrates would have interposed ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.198

but it was , Recollect what the Scotch did by their firm conduct ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.199

and he added , he did not desire them to run any danger which he was not
ready to share with them , and that he would meet them there ; and was
ready to go to the gallows for their cause ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.200

greater encouragement could not be given to a set of men ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.201

they looked up to him as a man of education and high birth ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.202

they probably did not at that time suspect the snare he was drawing them
into , when he offered and pledged himself , and that he would even go
to the gallows with them in the business ; GORDON-1781-2,1,10.203

he published an advertisement for a meeting of these people ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.204

and though he mentioned only twenty_thousand , he had an expectation of
a much larger army . GORDON-1781-2,1,10.205

The advertisement I will read to you , GORDON-1781-2,1,10.206

" Protestant Association . GORDON-1781-2,1,10.207

Whereas no hall in London can contain forty_thousand men , Resolved that
this association do meet on Friday next
{COM:sentence_interrupted_and_continued_below} . "
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.208

<font> Court . <$$font> Gentlemen of the Jury . I observe some of you
are taking notes , GORDON-1781-2,1,10.209

you are not to attend to any thing stated to you by the counsel unless
it is afterwards proved by the witnesses . GORDON-1781-2,1,10.210

Mr. Attorney_General . I open to you from my instructions what is
given me as facts , and where witnesses are put down to prove them ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.211

I am not answerable for the truth of them , GORDON-1781-2,1,10.212

God forbid that any thing I mention unsupported by proof should turn to
the prejudice of the prisoner at the bar . GORDON-1781-2,1,10.213

The first resolution says , " Resolved that this association do meet on
Friday next , June the 2d , in St. George's Fields , at ten o'clock in
the morning ; to consider of the most prudent and respectful manner of
attending their petition , which will be presented the same day to the
House of Commons . GORDON-1781-2,1,10.214

Forty_thousand men to meet to consider of the most prudent and
respectful manner of presenting a petition , GORDON-1781-2,1,10.215

how are they to be consulted ! GORDON-1781-2,1,10.216

how is their opinion to be asked ! GORDON-1781-2,1,10.217

this is a disguised business . GORDON-1781-2,1,10.218

- " Resolved , for the sake of good order and regularity , that this
association , on coming to the grounds , do separate themselves into
four divisions ; to wit , the London division , the Westminster division
, the Southwark division , and the Scotch division .
GORDON-1781-2,1,10.219

Resolved , that the London division do take place upon the right of the
ground toward Southwark ; the Westminster division second ; the
Southwark division third ; and the Scotch division upon the left ; all
wearing blue cockades in their hats to distinguish themselves from the
Papists , and those who approved of the late act in favour of <P_1,11>
popery . " GORDON-1781-2,1,11.220

So every man that did not wear a cockade in his hat was to be
distinguished as a favourer of Popery and of the late act of parliament
; and that every man who would put a cockade in his hat , be his
description what it might , was to be considered as a friend to this
petition ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.221

in short he was to be a friend to the purposes in view .
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.222

" Resolved , that the magistrates of London , Westminster , and
Southwark , are requested to attend , that their presence may over-awe
and control any riotous or evil_minded persons who may wish to disturb
the legal and peaceable deportment of his majesty's protestant subjects
. " GORDON-1781-2,1,11.223

- Now , Gentlemen , what an insult is this upon the civil magistrates !
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.224

this last parpagraph adds to the mockery of the advertisement ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.225

is of a piece with the other I observed upon in the circumstances of
these people calling for a protection from the civil magistrates against
those who should disturb their legal and peaceable deportment ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.226

for God's sake , who is there that durst look in the face of
forty_thousand men ! GORDON-1781-2,1,11.227

this army wants a protection , GORDON-1781-2,1,11.228

and calls upon the magistrates for it ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.229

but what magistrates ? GORDON-1781-2,1,11.230

the London , Westminster , and Southwark ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.231

of the two first none could act but in London and Westminster ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.232

and in Southwark I believe hardly one magistrate resided ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.233

and besides these men were out of the Borough of Southwark so that not
one of the magistrates , if called upon to keep the peace , and to
protect forty_thousand men , could act at all . GORDON-1781-2,1,11.234

This advertisement was evidently to disguise the real purpose and views
of the meeting . GORDON-1781-2,1,11.235

I have already stated to you the assembly the advertisement produced on
the 2d of June ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.236

the prisoner at the bar appeared at their head with his cockade ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.237

they were drawn up and under orders , I presume , under him .
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.238

Upon a person's carrying a message from the prisoner to them the march
began , that I have already stated to you ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.239

he received them , GORDON-1781-2,1,11.240

or came along with them , I do not know which , to the House of Commons
, GORDON-1781-2,1,11.241

and there presented the petition . GORDON-1781-2,1,11.242

This body of men will appear to you to have been totally under his
influence and management ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.243

the insult and violence at the House of Commons , I have already
described to you , and the force used there ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.244

no persuasion whatever , no exertion could deliver the House of Commons
from the situation they were in till very late at night .
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.245

He had it in his power at any moment to have done it ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.246

nay in the height of the tumult those in the lobby called to him to know
whether they should quit the lobby ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.247

it was impossible to have a division until the lobby was cleared ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.248

but nothing could be done without his directions ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.249

it was not safe for him to order them to stay and obstruct the
proceedings of the House in plain terms ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.250

but he did that which was equivalent ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.251

he told them to be steady and persevere ; that he would state to them
the case ; that he had called for a division , that there was no doubt
at all that it was against them , but , if they continued in the lobby ,
the house could not divide ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.252

this he stated to them , not that he advised them ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.253

and then that he might not appear to have given them any directions , he
left it to them to do as they pleased ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.254

it was enough to leave to them that by clearing the lobby the business
would be put off , whereas they wanted it to be instantly urged on , and
carried through ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.255

he was applied to over and over to desire them to go out ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.256

a word from him would have done it , GORDON-1781-2,1,11.257

and then parliament would not have been compelled to suffer the disgrace
of passing an act without examination , and without forming a judgement
upon the subject . GORDON-1781-2,1,11.258

Gentlemen , you will find that he reminded them over and over of the
conduct of the Scotch ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.259

he told them the civil magistrate was sent for , but they need not
regard him , for he believed he was a petitioner ; that the Guards , if
they came , would do them no hurt ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.260

in short , by his persuasions and incitement , he kept that body at the
door , imprisoning the members . GORDON-1781-2,1,11.261

When the Scotch , said he , pulled down the mass-houses , they had
redress . GORDON-1781-2,1,11.262

Lord Weymouth sent an assurance that the bill should not be extended to
Scotland , GORDON-1781-2,1,11.263

and shall the Scotch be better than you ? GORDON-1781-2,1,11.264

No language could convey more intelligible directions to these people ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.265

if they did not succeed by the force upon the House of Commons , they
were to resort to the other plan ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.266

the Scotch , said he , had redress when they pulled down the mass-houses
, GORDON-1781-2,1,11.267

you know what the Scotch did by their firm conduct ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,11.268

this he said to them who were under his influence and command ; men who
would have departed if he had given them the word ; who looked to him
solely for instructions for their conduct , GORDON-1781-2,1,11.269

and besides he mentioned too that there was no doubt that his majesty ,
when he heard of the insurrections within ten miles of London , and of
their flocking up to town , would send his ministers to promise a repeal
: GORDON-1781-2,1,11.270

if the prisoner and his adherents were not able to accomplish their
purposes at the House , the Scotch plan he had recommended was to be
adopted ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.271

they instantly {TEXT:instanty} flew to the chapels of the ambassadors ,
afterwards to the houses of the Roman_Catholicks , and of those who had
given obstruction to the mob . GORDON-1781-2,1,11.272

What became of the prisoner does not appear ; GORDON-1781-2,1,11.273

but you will find when they re-assembled again upon the Tuesday , after
the violent outrages on the preceding evening , Sunday and Monday , he
came to the House of Commons , with the same symbol of being their head
and leader , that of a cockade , and which <P_1,12> was a plain token of
his approbation of their actions . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.274

They had all their colours flying about Palace Yard .
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.275

- Without remorse , without advising them to depart peaceably , without
remonstrating with them about the mischiefs they had done ; he was led
off in triumph through the city of London to the Mansion-house , and
other places , by a large body ; GORDON-1781-2,1,12.276

this happened upon the Tuesday . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.277

On the Wednesday he sent an advertisement to the papers of a very
singular nature to be inserted in the Thursday's papers ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.278

it did get into some papers , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.279

it is this ; GORDON-1781-2,1,12.280

- " Lord George Gordon went in person to three different places , where
the tumults were subsisting , to harangue the mob , and exhort them to a
peaceable and legal deportment ; GORDON-1781-2,1,12.281

he stood for a considerable time among parties of foot soldiers ,
accompanied by one of the London sheriffs , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.282

but all this was without effect Lord George Gordon not being able to
give them any assurances that the act would be repealed . "
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.283

This advertisement held out to the mob , that they were to look forward
to some assurances ; that they were to continue their depredations till
some assurance should be given , and that this was the only reason why
the violences were not stopped . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.284

Did he flatter himself that he should have assurance from any quarter
that this bill would be repealed ! GORDON-1781-2,1,12.285

He adds , several merchants requested Lord George Gordon to sign papers
that they were friends to the Protestant interest , &c.
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.286

So he states himself in his own hand-writing , that he was the person
who had been , and was to be applied to , for protections ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.287

we shall shew you one of his protections granted upon the Wednesday ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.288

but nothing carries with it stronger evidence , under his own hand ,
that all the world looked upon him as the only person who had the
government of the mob , in the depredations they were then committing ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.289

he does not say I refused them , or that I granted them ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.290

he certainly meant that others should apply in the same way for
protections , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.291

it was to demonstrate that he was , and was looked upon to be the only
man whose name and signature would protect them from the violence of
this mob ; GORDON-1781-2,1,12.292

his name did furnish a protection in one case which we shall give in
evidence ; GORDON-1781-2,1,12.293

he gave a protection to a person who had a Roman_Catholick tenant or
lodger in his house - GORDON-1781-2,1,12.294

he found his house had been threatened GORDON-1781-2,1,12.295

and applied to the prisoner for a protection - GORDON-1781-2,1,12.296

he got one GORDON-1781-2,1,12.297

and experienced the benefit of it . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.298

Can any body doubt , after this evidence , that the prisoner at the bar
was not the author of these disturbances , and that to his encouragement
, incitement , and means , they are to be ascribed .
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.299

Perhaps he will tell us , he had no other object but the repeal of this
bill ; and that if other views , or a more alarming and extensive nature
, mixed in the operations of the mob , they are not imputable to him ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.300

but if he had no other object than the repeal of this bill , sure , his
measure of guilt is of no ordinary size ; GORDON-1781-2,1,12.301

will it be enough for him to say , I would have checked the mob in the
violence of their proceedings , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.302

but I was not able to do it ; GORDON-1781-2,1,12.303

that will be no excuse , if he exhorted them to begin , and look to that
as the means to procure a repeal . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.304

If he has turned out upon the public , this many_headed monster , to
ravage and destroy , it will be no excuse , to say , I wanted to check
its rage and fury ! GORDON-1781-2,1,12.305

he has designedly given birth to the outrage , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.306

and must stand by the consequences , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.307

it is just he should . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.308

Gentlemen , if these facts are proved , lay your hands upon your hearts
, GORDON-1781-2,1,12.309

and ask yourselves , whether to the prisoner , all that was done , is
not to be imputed . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.310

It is not an accidental assistance , or encouragement ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.311

but he is the contriver of the whole . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.312

If you are satisfied of this , you will pronounce him guilty ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.313

and your verdict will teach the present and future ages this lesson ,
that no man , however exalted in birth , situation , or connexion , can
violate the peace , the order , the government , and the laws of his
country , with impunity . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.314

I shall , in order to prove the case , call some witnesses , not so many
, I hope , as you may have seen in a list , which , by some means , has
been published ; GORDON-1781-2,1,12.315

it is not the object I know , of delivering lists of witnesses , that
they should appear in the public news-papers , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.316

but you have seen a great many in a list of witnesses published -
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.317

the necessity of putting down many will be obvious to you ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.318

for we had no power over the witnesses at the time their names were
inserted , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.319

several are to the same fact , that if any , from accident , sickness ,
or any other cause , could not attend , others , in that list , might be
called , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.320

for we can@ @not supply their {TEXT:there} place by witnesses not named
in the list ; GORDON-1781-2,1,12.321

it is therefore of necessity , that we have inserted so many witnesses
to the same transaction , GORDON-1781-2,1,12.322

but I shall not trouble you with more than I think sufficient to
establish the facts . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.323

Gentlemen , I beg pardon for taking up so much of your time ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,12.324

but in a cause of such importance and expectation , it becomes my duty
to be as particular in the state of the facts , materially affecting the
prisoner , as it is in my power to do . GORDON-1781-2,1,12.325

<P_1,13>

<heading> Counsel for the Crown . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.327

Mr. Attorney_General , Mr. Solicitor_General , Mr. Bearcroft , Mr.
Lee , Mr. Howarth , Mr. {TEXT:M.} Dunning , Mr. Norton ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.328

Counsel for the Prisoner . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.329

Mr. Kenyon , Mr. Erskine . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.330

Evidence for the Crown . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.331

William Hay <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.332

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Solicitor_General . <$$heading>
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.333

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you know the prisoner Lord George Gordon ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.334

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.335

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you remember seeing him at any time at
Coachmaker's-Hall ? GORDON-1781-2,1,13.336

<font> A. <$$font> I saw the prisoner at Coachmaker's-Hall on the 7th
of January , 1780 . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.337

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see him at different times at that meeting
between the 7th of January and the 2d of June , the day the multitude
went to the House of Commons ? GORDON-1781-2,1,13.338

<font> A. <$$font> Five or six times , GORDON-1781-2,1,13.339

but not at that place , GORDON-1781-2,1,13.340

the association - GORDON-1781-2,1,13.341

<font> Q. <$$font> What association ? GORDON-1781-2,1,13.342

<font> A. <$$font> The association called the Protestant Association ;
was adjourned from place to place . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.343

It was adjourned to Greenwood's Rooms , in the Hay_market ; to the Old
Crown_and_Rolls , in Chancery lane ; to the London Tavern , in
Bishopsgate-street ; and to St. Margaret's-Hall , in the Borough of
Southwark . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.344

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see the prisoner at all or at any of those
places ? GORDON-1781-2,1,13.345

<font> A. <$$font> Not at all but at most of them .
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.346

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you recollect which of them you saw him at ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.347

<font> A. <$$font> I saw him at St. Margaret's-Hall , at Greenwood's
rooms , at the Old Crown_and_Rolls Tavern , Chancery-lane , and at
Coachmaker's-Hall . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.348

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you remember seeing him at Coachmaker's-Hall , at
the last meeting , previous to their going up to the House of Commons ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.349

<font> A. <$$font> I remember it very well . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.350

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you recollect at that time any thing said by the
prisoner , GORDON-1781-2,1,13.351

and if you do , mention what it was ? GORDON-1781-2,1,13.352

<font> A. <$$font> It was on the 29th of May I heard the prisoner
announce to a very numerous assembly , the Hall was crowded , " That the
associated Protestants <paren> as they were called <$$paren> amounted to
upwards of forty_thousand in number ; that on Friday the 2d of June it
was resolved , they should meet , at ten o'clock in the morning , in St.
George's-fields , in four separate divisions or columns , arrayed or
dressed in their best clothes . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.353

<font> Mr. Kenyon . <$$font> Was it arrayed or dressed ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.354

A. I think his words were , " to have your best clothes on , with blue
cockades in your hats , as he himself should wear a blue cockade , to
distinguish them from other people who were Papists or friends to
Roman_Catholicks . " GORDON-1781-2,1,13.355

His lordship gave orders how these four different bodies should take
their ground , and what fields they should assemble in .
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.356

I can@ @not charge my memory exactly with the positions of those four
columns , GORDON-1781-2,1,13.357

but I think the London division were to go to the field on the right of
the road . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.358

<font> Court . <$$font> Do you at all recollect the order ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.359

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not charge my memory .
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.360

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you recollect any thing you heard said by the
prisoner ? GORDON-1781-2,1,13.361

<font> A. <$$font> Not that evening ; GORDON-1781-2,1,13.362

but I recollect some evenings before , at the Crown_and_Rolls , Lord
George Gordon being present , his lordship read over the preambles or
certain parts of penal laws of Charles the Second , William and Mary ,
and George the Second . GORDON-1781-2,1,13.363

After reading those acts , he observed , " That by his Majesty's giving
his assent to the Quebeck law , and the late act of parliament
tolerating the Roman_Catholicks in England , his counsellors had brought
him to that pass or situation in which James the Second was after his
abdication . " GORDON-1781-2,1,13.364

<font> One of the Jury . <$$font> Were those his lordship's words ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.365

<font> A. <$$font> As nearly as I can recollect .
GORDON-1781-2,1,13.366

- He then read his Majesty's coronation oath , GORDON-1781-2,1,13.367

and said " It was his opinion , that his Majesty had broken that oath .
" GORDON-1781-2,1,13.368

He observed , that " the people in his country did not mince the matter
, they spoke out , or spoke their minds freely , and avowed it to be
true , " GORDON-1781-2,1,13.369

<P_1,14>

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you remember any thing else ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.371

<font> A. <$$font> I do not recollect any thing else ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.372

these are the most emphatical expressions I can charge my memory with .
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.373

<font> Q. <$$font> You do not recollect , at present , any other
inflammatory expressions made use of by Lord George Gordon , either at
Coachmaker's-Hall , or any of the preceding meetings ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.374

<font> A. <$$font> None . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.375

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you go to the meeting in St. George's-Fields on
the 2d of June ? GORDON-1781-2,1,14.376

<font> A. <$$font> I went there , GORDON-1781-2,1,14.377

but did not mix among the people . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.378

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see a multitude of people gathered together
there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,14.379

<font> A. <$$font> A vast multitude . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.380

<font> One of the Jury . <$$font> What number do you imagine there
might be ? GORDON-1781-2,1,14.381

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not tell ; GORDON-1781-2,1,14.382

I had never seen so many together before , GORDON-1781-2,1,14.383

and could not make a calculation . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.384

<font> Q. <$$font> Had they any particular marks or badges ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.385

<font> A. <$$font> They had all cockades , GORDON-1781-2,1,14.386

and there were banners . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.387

<font> Q. <$$font> Was any thing written upon the banners or the
cockades ? GORDON-1781-2,1,14.388

<font> A. <$$font> Nothing on the cockades that I observed .
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.389

On the banners I think I saw <font> Protestant Association <$$font> ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.390

and one banner I believe had <font> No Popery ! <$$font> on it .
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.391

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see the prisoner there ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.392

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . I saw him at a great distance ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.393

he was going off the field then towards the House of Commons .
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.394

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you hear him address himself to this multitude ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.395

<font> A. <$$font> I could see Lord George Gordon was haranguing the
people , GORDON-1781-2,1,14.396

but I was not near enough to hear what he said . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.397

<font> Q. <$$font> Which way did this multitude march ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.398

<font> A. <$$font> I can say nothing of their marching , further than
what I saw in Fleet-street . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.399

I came home GORDON-1781-2,1,14.400

and saw them come through Fleet-street , and march by St. Dunstan's
church , in their way to the House of Commons . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.401

<font> Q. <$$font> Was there a large number came that way ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.402

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.403

<font> Q. <$$font> Had they the same cockades and banners ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.404

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , the same cockades , and one or two of the
banners . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.405

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you afterwards on that day come down towards the
House of Commons ? GORDON-1781-2,1,14.406

<font> A. <$$font> I did . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.407

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see a number of the same people about the
House ? GORDON-1781-2,1,14.408

<font> A. <$$font> I did ; GORDON-1781-2,1,14.409

they appeared to be the same people . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.410

<font> Q. <$$font> Had they the same cockades and banners ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.411

<font> A. <$$font> Yes they had . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.412

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you get into the lobby of the House of Commons ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.413

<font> A. <$$font> I was there about three hours .
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.414

<font> Q. <$$font> Was that filled with some of this multitude ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.415

<font> A. <$$font> The lobby was crowded with them .
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.416

<font> Q. <$$font> What was their behaviour ? GORDON-1781-2,1,14.417

<font> A. <$$font> Very riotous . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.418

The noise was generally occasioned by <font> chiming <$$font> of Lord
George Gordon's name . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.419

- Lord George Gordon's name was the constant <font> chime . <$$font>
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.420

The great noise appeared to me to be made by those words <font> Lord
George Gordon . <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,14.421

Q. {TEXT:missing_"Q."} Do you recollect their calling out at all to any
of the members of the House of Commons who were in the lobby .
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.422

<font> A. <$$font> I remember two or three members coming into the
gallery over the lobby of the House and speaking to them .
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.423

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you remember the mob crying out to the people in
the lobby ? GORDON-1781-2,1,14.424

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not pretend to say , GORDON-1781-2,1,14.425

there was such great confusion and noise . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.426

<font> Q. <$$font> While these people were in the lobby , and you was
there , did you see Lord George Gordon ? GORDON-1781-2,1,14.427

<font> A. <$$font> I saw my Lord George Gordon once in the place over
the lobby . GORDON-1781-2,1,14.428

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you hear him say any thing at that time ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.429

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . He exhorted them , " To continue steadfastly
to adhere to so good and glorious a cause as their's was .
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.430

He promised he would persevere in it himself , GORDON-1781-2,1,14.431

and he hoped , although there was very little expectation from the House
of Commons , that they would meet with redress from their mild or
gracious sovereign . " GORDON-1781-2,1,14.432

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you recollect any thing else in particular ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,14.433

<P_1,15>

A. I think that is the substance of every thing I heard his Lordship
say ; GORDON-1781-2,1,15.435

I have repeated all the words that I thoroughly remember .
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.436

<font> One of the Jury . <$$font> Are you thoroughly satisfied that you
have repeated the words of Lord George Gordon ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.437

A. I am . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.438

Q. Do you recollect seeing any flags at any other place in the course
of the mischief which followed ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.439

A. I saw one of the flags at the burning of the Fleet-prison ; that
flag which had the words <font> No popery ! <$$font> on it .
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.440

Q. Could you perceive whether the person who had the flag at the Fleet
prison , was one you had seen in St. George's fields , or about the
House of Commons ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.441

A. I am very clear it was the same man , GORDON-1781-2,1,15.442

for I looked at him . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.443

Q. Where was it you had before seen that man , you saw with the flag at
the Fleet prison ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.444

A. I saw him carrying that flag in Fleet-street .
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.445

Q. Do you mean at the time when the multitude marched to the House of
Commons ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.446

A. Yes ; and I saw that very man at Westminster .
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.447

Q. It was on Friday the multitude were here ; GORDON-1781-2,1,15.448

were you at either the Sardinian or Bavarian Ambassador's chapels ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.449

A. I was at that chapel in Lincoln's-Inn-fields . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.450

Q. At what time on Friday night was you there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.451

A. I think it was about ten o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.452

Q. Did you see any mischief done there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.453

A. A great deal . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.454

I was astonished at the cruelty of what I saw . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.455

Q. What was the cry of the people who were employed in that business ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.456

A. It generally was , <font> No Popery ! <$$font>
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.457

Q. Had the persons that were doing that mischief blue cockades in their
hats ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.458

A. I did not see a single cockade in the chapel ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.459

I saw many with blue cockades before I got into the chapel , in the same
street , Duke-street . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.460

Q. Did those persons form a part of the same mob that did the mischief
? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.461

A. They seemed to be by-standers , GORDON-1781-2,1,15.462

they stood encouraging them . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.463

Q. Did the people with blue cockades join with the people who were
crying <font> No popery ? <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,15.464

A. It was while I was within the chapel , I heard the cry without the
chapel . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.465

The person who did all the mischief , whom I saw in the chapel , had no
hat on ; GORDON-1781-2,1,15.466

there were about five or six people in the chapel ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.467

but that man was the most active . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.468

<font> One of the Jury . <$$font> You say those that did the mischief ,
had no cockades in their hats ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.469

A. I did not see them have any . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.470

<font> One of the Jury . <$$font> You said those that had cockades
encouraged them ; GORDON-1781-2,1,15.471

what do you mean by encouraging them ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.472

A. The same as at all the fires ; GORDON-1781-2,1,15.473

they stood by GORDON-1781-2,1,15.474

and protected and encouraged them . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.475

Q. Were you present at any other fires , or the demolition of any other
houses ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.476

A. I was present at several of the fires . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.477

Q. Were you present at Mr. Langdale's ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.478

A. I stood there about a quarter of an hour , GORDON-1781-2,1,15.479

I do not recollect the exact day , GORDON-1781-2,1,15.480

but it was the same day of the fire at the King's Bench , and the fire
at the Fleet Market , the Fleet prison . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.481

Q. did the same cry prevail there of <font> No popery ? <$$font>
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.482

A. The very same , GORDON-1781-2,1,15.483

that was obvious to every body . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.484

Q. Do you recollect being present at any other fire ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.485

A. Yes , at a public house the corner of Lincoln-Inn-fields ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.486

they brought the furniture out GORDON-1781-2,1,15.487

and burnt it . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.488

Q. Do you recollect any other ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.489

A. Yes I saw another house demolished in Great Queen-street ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.490

but I do not know whose house it was . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.491

<heading> William Hay <font> Cross-examined by Mr. <$$font> Kenyon .
<$$heading> GORDON-1781-2,1,15.492

<font> Q. <$$font> Pray what are you ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.493

<font> A. <$$font> By trade , a printer . GORDON-1781-2,1,15.494

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you print on your own account ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,15.495

or are you a servant to any person ? GORDON-1781-2,1,15.496

<P_1,16>

<font> A. <$$font> I print on my own account . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.498

<font> Q. <$$font> I believe you have had misfortunes in the world ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.499

you were a bankrupt ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.500

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.501

<font> Q. <$$font> When did you first resort to these meetings of the
Protestant Association as they called themselves ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.502

<font> A. <$$font> I said on the evening of the 10th of December .
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.503

<font> Q. <$$font> Was that the first time ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.504

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.505

<font> Q. <$$font> And you went , from time to time , to all the
meetings that were held afterwards ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.506

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , to the publick meetings .
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.507

<font> Q. <$$font> You were at several places where Lord George Gordon
did not attend ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.508

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.509

<font> Q. <$$font> You have mentioned one place where Lord George
Gordon was , at Greenwood's Rooms ; GORDON-1781-2,1,16.510

now I desire you to recollect , and say , whether you saw him at
Greenwood's Rooms ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.511

<font> A. <$$font> I think I saw my Lord once there ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.512

and I was there once when he was not ; GORDON-1781-2,1,16.513

I was there twice . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.514

<font> Q. <$$font> I caution you to be upon your guard . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.515

<font> A. <$$font> I will ; GORDON-1781-2,1,16.516

it is a very serious matter ; GORDON-1781-2,1,16.517

I think Lord George was once at Greenwood's Rooms , and that the
association was there once without his lordship .
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.518

<font> Q. <$$font> Then you can@ @not speak with certainty ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.519

<font> A. <$$font> Unless I look at some notes I can@ @not tell ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.520

I have some notes here . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.521

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you make them at the time ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.522

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , I generally made them that evening .
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.523

<font> Court . <$$font> You may refresh your memory with them .
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.524

<font> <paren> Looks at his notes . <$$paren> <$$font>
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.525

<font> A. <$$font> On the 21st of January , Lord George Gordon was not
, I find , present at Green-wood's . {TEXT:?} GORDON-1781-2,1,16.526

<font> Q. <$$font> Then you was mistaken in that part of your evidence
? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.527

<font> A. <$$font> I was mistaken . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.528

<font> Q. <$$font> How came you , from time to time , to make notes of
what passed at these several meetings ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.529

<font> A. <$$font> I shall be very free in telling you , that I had an
idea then , that this would be the consequence of these meetings ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.530

I went almost purposely to take notes of them . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.531

<font> Q. <$$font> And you went on that account to take notes of what
passed ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.532

<font> A. <$$font> A curiosity at first led me there ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.533

but when I saw what sort of people they were , I was willing to look
farther after them , GORDON-1781-2,1,16.534

for I dreaded the consequence of their meetings . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.535

<font> Q. <$$font> How soon had you this foresight of what would happen
? {TEXT:.} GORDON-1781-2,1,16.536

In the month of December you foresaw what would happen ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.537

<font> A. <$$font> I did not , GORDON-1781-2,1,16.538

I said no such thing ; GORDON-1781-2,1,16.539

I foresaw it on the 20th of February . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.540

<font> Q. <$$font> Then the first time you foresaw it was on the 20th
of February ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.541

<font> A. <$$font> I had foreseen the evil consequences , as far as man
could , before that time , GORDON-1781-2,1,16.542

but on the 20th of February I had even written my thoughts upon it .
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.543

<font> Q. <$$font> Then the 20th of February was the first time you
began to draw your conclusions ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.544

<font> A. <$$font> It was . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.545

<font> Q. <$$font> Then how came your notes and memorandums to have a
date prior to that , GORDON-1781-2,1,16.546

you have notes so early as the 21st of January ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.547

<font> A. <$$font> Without those notes , I could not come to that
conclusion in my own mind about the consequences ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.548

I took notes on the 10th of December . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.549

<font> Q. <$$font> I must return again to the question I asked before ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.550

how came you first to take notes . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.551

Q. I never go to any publick meeting but I have an errand ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.552

I wished to learn what those gentlemen would be at ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.553

I put down then what occurred , GORDON-1781-2,1,16.554

and then entered it down after I came home . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.555

Q. That is your constant course in all occurrences of life ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.556

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,16.557

Q. Can you tell us any one occurrence of your life , where you have
committed to writing every thing that passed ? GORDON-1781-2,1,16.558

A. I do not know any one meeting of that kind , GORDON-1781-2,1,16.559

but I have put down as much as my memory would help me to .
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.560

Q. How many meetings of this kind have you resorted to ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.561

A. I never resorted to any others of this kind .
GORDON-1781-2,1,16.562

Q. You said you never attended any meetings respecting this kind of
business ; where <P_1,17> you did not commit to writing what passed ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.563

now I want to know , what other meetings besides the Protestant
Association you have attended ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.564

A. I have attended a great many meetings , GORDON-1781-2,1,17.565

but I can@ @not pretend to recite them . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.566

Q. Have , you upon your oath , before God and your Country , put down
every thing that passed at those meetings ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.567

A. I do not comprehend the nature of your question .
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.568

Q. Have you set down any transactions at any other meetings , except
those of the Protestant Association ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.569

A. I have many times undoubtedly . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.570

Q. Tell me when and where ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.571

A. The first notes I made in my life , were in the general assembly of
the church of Scotland , the very first church I was ever in , in my
life . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.572

Q. How long is that ago ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.573

A. Twenty_two years ago ; GORDON-1781-2,1,17.574

so early as that , and in 1765 and 1766 , I took notes again .
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.575

Q. Did you do that because you had a foresight of any ill consequences
that would ensue from those meetings ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.576

A. I wished to know what was going on there , or to oblige a friend to
inform him what was doing . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.577

Q. You were not only at meetings of the Protestant Association that
were advertised , GORDON-1781-2,1,17.578

but happened likewise to be casually at the chapel in Duke-street , at
Mr. Langdale's , at a house-burning in Lincoln-Inn-fields , at a
house-burning in Great Queen-street , and at Newgate ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.579

A. The first you mention , was the burning the Roman_Catholick chapel .
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.580

I was coming home ; GORDON-1781-2,1,17.581

a young gentleman was with me . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.582

Q. Tell me his name . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.583

A. M'Millan , GORDON-1781-2,1,17.584

he is here . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.585

Q. Where did you meet with him ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.586

A. I met with him accidentally ; GORDON-1781-2,1,17.587

when we had notice they were demolishing the chapel , we were I think
coming by Covent Garden , GORDON-1781-2,1,17.588

and we directed our course there . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.589

Q. Coming home from whence ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.590

A. From Westminster . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.591

Q. From the lobby I suppose ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.592

A. Very likely so . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.593

Q. At the time when you was in St. George's-fields had you a blue
cockade in your hat ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.594

A. I never had in my life . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.595

Q. You say you was in the lobby of the House of Commons ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.596

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.597

Q. Did you go into the lobby with persons who had blue cockades in
their hats ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.598

A. They were all there long before me . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.599

I went down after I had dined . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.600

Q. Being crowded , and the place being full , still there was room for
you to get in ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.601

A. Scarcely . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.602

I went in with Alderman Sawbridge . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.603

Q. What hour did you get there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.604

A. At six or seven o'clock , I believe . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.605

Q. When did you leave the lobby ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.606

A. At nine o'clock ; GORDON-1781-2,1,17.607

I looked at my watch when I came out , GORDON-1781-2,1,17.608

it was nine or perhaps ten minutes after nine . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.609

Q. You say , at the time you was in the lobby , there was a great riot
and confusion , and you could not hear what passed there ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.610

A. I heard exceeding well , too well what passed there ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.611

there was a great noise , GORDON-1781-2,1,17.612

I heard Lord George Gordon's name pronounced vociferously .
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.613

Q. The lobby is not a very large room . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.614

Were there a good number of people of the same description as yourself ,
that were there merely from curiosity ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.615

A. I saw none such , GORDON-1781-2,1,17.616

it did not come from curiosity . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.617

Q. Then you was the single individual , that stood distinguished from
all the rest , who were there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.618

Q. There were more than I there ; GORDON-1781-2,1,17.619

there was that man M'Millan , and an apprentice of my own ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,17.620

I took them on purpose with me . GORDON-1781-2,1,17.621

Q. That they might be of what use ? GORDON-1781-2,1,17.622

<P_1,18>

A. I wanted to enquire after some particular friends ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.624

I was afraid they might be hurt , GORDON-1781-2,1,18.625

I was afraid of myself . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.626

Q. Being afraid of yourself , you who were not in the crowd before ,
nor in danger of being hurt , under ideas you might be hurt you went
into the crowd in the lobby ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.627

A. I was willing to see what they were about . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.628

Q. Which of your friends did you conceive to be in danger ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.629

A. When an alarm of that kind is gone out , one can@ @not but have some
friend in danger ; GORDON-1781-2,1,18.630

I can@ @not charge my memory with any particular friend .
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.631

Q. You said Lord George Gordon desired they would meet at ten in the
morning , and put on their best clothes , or , as you choose to
introduce it in your discourse , to be arrayed in their best clothes ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.632

which was the word as far as you can recollect ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.633

A. I think it was , " be sure to be <font> in <$$font> your best
clothes , or be <font> dressed <$$font> in your best clothes . "
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.634

Q. He gave orders they should be in four what - ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.635

A. Divisions . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.636

Q. <font> Columns <$$font> you called them ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.637

A. I said columns or divisions . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.638

Q. In St. George's-fields you were a considerable distance from Lord
George ; GORDON-1781-2,1,18.639

how near were you to the persons who carried the two flags ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.640

A. I saw one of the flags carried by a constable on my left hand ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.641

I was in the road ; GORDON-1781-2,1,18.642

I did not go into the field . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.643

Q. The persons who carried the flags were I suppose surrounded by the
rest of the multitude ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.644

A. No ; they were not surrounded ; GORDON-1781-2,1,18.645

I remember the London division marching round , GORDON-1781-2,1,18.646

and the flags were carried but not surrounded ; GORDON-1781-2,1,18.647

I saw them pass . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.648

The flag was in the front of them . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.649

Q. Did you accompany the London division over the bridge ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.650

A. No ; I came over Blackfriars bridge , GORDON-1781-2,1,18.651

and went home directly . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.652

Q. About what hour was that ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.653

A. About two o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.654

Q. At what hour did you leave your house to go down to the House of
Commons ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.655

A. I will not positively swear to that , GORDON-1781-2,1,18.656

it was between five and six o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.657

Q. And you went down immediately to the lobby of the House of Commons ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.658

A. I was there between six and seven o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.659

<font> Q. <$$font> Then all the people that had passed by were in the
avenues of the House of Commons before this ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.660

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.661

<font> Q. <$$font> By what good luck then did you happen to see the
flag in Fleet-street . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.662

- Where is your house ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.663

<font> A. <$$font> Next St. Dunstan's Church ; GORDON-1781-2,1,18.664

I went upon the leads on purpose to see them with this Mr. M'Millan .
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.665

<font> Q. <$$font> One of the persons you saw with a flag in
Fleet-street you saw afterwards ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.666

A. Yes ; at the Fleet-prison and in Westminster .
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.667

<font> Q. <$$font> Can you describe his dress ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.668

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not charge my memory ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.669

it was a dress not worth minding , a very common dress .
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.670

<font> Q. <$$font> Had he his own hair or a wig ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.671

<font> A. <$$font> If I recollect he had black hair ; shortish hair I
think . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.672

<font> Q. <$$font> Was there something remarkable about his hair ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.673

<font> A. <$$font> No ; I do not remember any thing remarkable ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.674

he was a coarse_looking man ; GORDON-1781-2,1,18.675

he appeared to me like a brewer's servant in his best clothes .
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.676

<font> Q. <$$font> How do you know a brewer's servant when he is in his
best clothes from another man ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.677

<font> A. <$$font> It is out of my power to describe it better than I
do ; GORDON-1781-2,1,18.678

he appeared to me to be such . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.679

<font> Q. <$$font> I ask you how , by what mark , do you distinguish a
brewer's servant from another man ? GORDON-1781-2,1,18.680

<font> A. <$$font> There is something in a brewer's servant , in his
condition of life , different from other men . GORDON-1781-2,1,18.681

<font> Q. <$$font> There may be for what I know ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.682

but tell me how you distinguish a brewer's servant from another man .
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.683

<font> A. <$$font> Be so good as to state the question again .
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.684

<font> Q. <$$font> If there can be a doubt what the question means in
any one of this audience you shall have it repeated ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,18.685

you said this man was like a brewer's servant , GORDON-1781-2,1,18.686

I asked you by what <P_1,19> mark you are able to distinguish a man to
be a brewer's servant rather than of any other trade ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.687

<font> A. <$$font> I think a brewer's servant's breeches , clothes ,
and stockings have something very distinguishing .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.688

<font> Q. <$$font> Tell me what in his breeches , and the cut of his
coat and stockings it was by which you distinguished him ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.689

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not swear to any particular mark .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.690

<font> Q. <$$font> Then you had no reason upon earth to use that word
which came so flippant over your tongue that he was like a brewer's
servant ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.691

<font> A. <$$font> I can@ @not answer that question if you put it to me
a_hundred times . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.692

<font> Q. <$$font> You said that one of the persons who carried one of
the flags in St. George's-fields was a constable ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.693

<font> A. <$$font> Yes ; I said so . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.694

<font> Q. <$$font> How do you know he was a constable ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.695

<font> A. <$$font> The man was very remarkable ; GORDON-1781-2,1,19.696

his name is Payne , GORDON-1781-2,1,19.697

he is a city constable . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.698

Q. Are you of the Kirk of Scotland or a Roman_Catholick ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.699

<font> A. <$$font> I am of the Church of England .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.700

<font> Q. <$$font> How came you to stay so long in the lobby of the
House of Commons ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.701

<font> A. <$$font> I wished to see an end to it .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.702

<font> Q. <$$font> At what time did you see Lord George Gordon in the
Balcony ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.703

A. I heard him GORDON-1781-2,1,19.704

and saw him once ; GORDON-1781-2,1,19.705

he was twice I think in the balcony while I was in the lobby .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.706

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you inform the Secretaries of State or any civil
magistrate of your apprehensions in February of what would happen ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.707

A. Yes ; I did communicate my fears then . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.708

<font> Q. <$$font> To whom ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.709

A. A gentleman ; GORDON-1781-2,1,19.710

I would rather not mention the gentleman's name .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.711

<font> Q. <$$font> But you must do it ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.712

A. I wrote my sentiments of these matters to a very particular friend ,
my sentiments of this association meeting . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.713

<font> Q. <$$font> You are asked who that particular friend is ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.714

A. Mr. Butler of Lincoln's Inn . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.715

<font> Q. <$$font> Mr. Butler is a gentleman I have likewise the
honour of knowing ; GORDON-1781-2,1,19.716

Mr. Butler is I understand a Roman_Catholick ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.717

A. I never asked him the question . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.718

<font> Q. <$$font> If he is your particular friend have you any doubt
about it ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.719

A. I have heard he is a Roman_Catholick , GORDON-1781-2,1,19.720

I do@ @n't know that he is ; GORDON-1781-2,1,19.721

I have a very high opinion of him . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.722

<font> Q. <$$font> So have I ; GORDON-1781-2,1,19.723

but have you the least doubt of his being a Roman_Catholick .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.724

A. I have heard he is . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.725

I will not answer the question because I do@ @n't know it .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.726

<heading>

Mr. William Metcalf <font> sworn ; GORDON-1781-2,1,19.728

Examined by <$$font> Mr. Bearcroft . <$$heading>
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.729

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you know the prisoner Lord George Gordon ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.730

A. I do . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.731

<font> Q. <$$font> Was you at Coachmaker's-hall at any time in the
course of last summer ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.732

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.733

<font> Q. <$$font> On what day ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.734

A. I really do not know what day it was , farther than it was the day
when the meeting in St. George's-fields was fixed on .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.735

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you see Lord George Gordon there ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.736

A. I did . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.737

<font> Q. <$$font> What number of people might be at Coachmaker's-hall
? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.738

A. I am not able to judge what number of people there were ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.739

but the hall was so full that I could not get in .
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.740

Q. Did you learn what the purpose of the meeting was ; by what was
going forwards there . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.741

A. I did not at that time ; GORDON-1781-2,1,19.742

no farther than it was a meeting where Lord George Gordon was to be ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.743

and I went there merely out of curiosity . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.744

<font> Q. <$$font> Recollect yourself GORDON-1781-2,1,19.745

and inform the Court what passed during the time you was there ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.746

A. I went to a gentleman who had some knowledge of the person who I
believe lives at the Hall , GORDON-1781-2,1,19.747

and by his means I got into the gallery . GORDON-1781-2,1,19.748

<font> Q <$$font> Relate what passed there , particularly what fell from
Lord George Gordon himself ? GORDON-1781-2,1,19.749

A. Lord George Gordon was speaking at the time I went in ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.750

I heard him desire them to meet him in St. George's Fields ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,19.751

he reminded them " that the Scotch had <P_1,20> succeeded by unanimity ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.752

and he desired that they would likewise be unanimous ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.753

he hoped no one who had signed the petition would be ashamed or afraid
to shew himself in the cause ; that he would not present the petition ,
or that he begged leave to decline it <paren> I do@ @n't attempt to use
his lordship's words , it is impossible <$$paren> unless he was met in
St. George's-fields by twenty_thousand people ; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.754

and he recommended to them to come with some mark of distinction such as
a blue ribband in their hats , " or words to that effect ; " that they
might be able to distinguish their friends from their foes , " or to
that purport ; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.755

" that he himself would be there to meet them , and would be answerable
for any of them that should be molested for meeting there ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.756

that he wished so well to the cause that he would go to the gallows
<font> in <$$font> it or <font> for <$$font> it , " words to that effect
; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.757

I know the word " gallows " was mentioned ; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.758

but the concomitant words I do not recollect , " but that he would not
present the petition of a lukewarm people . " GORDON-1781-2,1,20.759

I forgot to tell your Lordship that Lord George Gordon told them to "
meet in four bodies in St. George's-fields ; " GORDON-1781-2,1,20.760

each body I think was " to take one quarter of St. George's-fields . "
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.761

Q. Do you recollect any thing more that fell from Lord George Gordon at
the time you are speaking of ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.762

A. I do not . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.763

Q. Was you in the lobby of the House of Commons on Friday the 2d of
June ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.764

A. I was not there at all . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.765

Q. Was you about the House of Commons at all ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.766

A. I was not . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.767

Q. Was you in St. George's-fields at the time that had been appointed
? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.768

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.769

Q. What time did you get there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.770

A. I believe I might be there at about half past ten or eleven o'clock
. GORDON-1781-2,1,20.771

Q. Did you see the prisoner there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.772

A. I saw him come in a coach . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.773

Q. Recollect yourself GORDON-1781-2,1,20.774

and give an account of what passed there , particularly what fell from
Lord George Gordon himself ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.775

A. I did not hear a word from Lord George ; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.776

all that I saw was , that there was a vast number of people , and that
they were occupying four different parts of the field , in four distinct
bodies ; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.777

there were two bodies that were forming like soldiers almost , eight or
nine a-breast , a vast number of them ; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.778

I did not see them so well formed in any other part as in that part .
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.779

Q. Was there any particular distinction amongst them ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.780

A. I saw blue ribbands in their hats ; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.781

some had the words <font> No popery ! <$$font> upon the ribband .
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.782

Q. What number of people might there be assembled in the fields ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.783

A. I imagine I speak within compass when I say there were
thirty_thousand . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.784

Q. Did you stay till they quitted the place ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.785

A. I did not ; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.786

I left them there . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.787

Q. Did you see any thing that struck you particularly ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.788

A. I saw Lord George Gordon standing surrounded by a vast number of
people , GORDON-1781-2,1,20.789

and I understood him to be speaking to them , GORDON-1781-2,1,20.790

but I was not near enough to hear him speak . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.791

Q. You left Lord George Gordon in St. George's Fields I believe ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.792

A. I can@ @not say whether his Lordship was not gone at that time .
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.793

Q. Did you see any thing more of the prisoner that day ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.794

A. I did not . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.795

<heading>

Mr. William Metcalf <font> Cross-examined by <$$font> Mr. Erskine .
<$$heading> GORDON-1781-2,1,20.797

Q. You say the Hall was so crowded you could not have got in unless by
a friend ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.798

A. I could not . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.799

Q. And you was placed in the gallery ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.800

A. I got into the gallery . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.801

Q. Can you recollect what time of the evening it was when you got into
the gallery ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.802

A. I took no notice of it at the time ; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.803

the only way I can judge of it is , I dined that day at Goldsmith's-Hall
, which is close to that Hall ; and after dinner we proposed to go there
; GORDON-1781-2,1,20.804

I suppose it was after six o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.805

Q. How long did you stay ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.806

A. I do not think I was there more than a quarter of an hour ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.807

if I was there a quarter of an hour it was the outside .
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.808

Q. Where was Lord George Gordon when he spoke this ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,20.809

was he in the chair ? GORDON-1781-2,1,20.810

A. At the upper end of the room . GORDON-1781-2,1,20.811

<P_1,21>

Q. You made use of an expression which afterwards you said you was not
sure about ; GORDON-1781-2,1,21.813

you used the word <font> gallows ? <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,21.814

A. I said I would not be positive to the exact words in which Lord
George Gordon expressed himself ; but that he would go to the <font>
gallows <$$font> in the cause , or for the cause , or to that effect .
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.815

Q. Are you sure of the word <font> gallows ? <$$font>
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.816

A. I am very sure he made use of that word . GORDON-1781-2,1,21.817

Q. You did not hear any more about what the cause was , did you ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.818

A. I understood at the time , that the meeting was for the purpose of
presenting the petition . GORDON-1781-2,1,21.819

Q. You said you went out of curiosity , not knowing the purpose of the
meeting ; GORDON-1781-2,1,21.820

and then you spoke of hearing of the cause ? GORDON-1781-2,1,21.821

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,21.822

<heading>

John Anstruther , <font> Esq. sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,21.824

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Lee . <$$heading> GORDON-1781-2,1,21.825

Q. Was you at Coachmaker's-hall on the 29th of May ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.826

A. I was there upon a Monday ; GORDON-1781-2,1,21.827

I will not be positive as to its being the 29th of May ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.828

it was the latter end of May . GORDON-1781-2,1,21.829

Q. Did you see Lord George Gordon there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,21.830

A. I did . GORDON-1781-2,1,21.831

Q. Did he or any person else act as president in any meeting that was
then held ? GORDON-1781-2,1,21.832

A. I understood him to be acting as president ; GORDON-1781-2,1,21.833

he appeared to me to be acting as president . GORDON-1781-2,1,21.834

Q. What was the substance of the conversation at that meeting ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.835

A. I heard Lord George Gordon say " he called that meeting for the
purpose of informing them that he meant to present their petition "
<paren> meaning the petition of the Protestant Association , <$$paren> "
upon the Friday following to the House of Commons ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.836

he desired them to meet him in St. George's-fields , on the Friday
following , for the purpose of presenting their petition . "
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.837

I do not mean to be very accurate as to the words ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.838

it is impossible to recollect the very words at this distance of time ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.839

he said , " if there was one man less than twenty_thousand he would not
present the petition . " GORDON-1781-2,1,21.840

He declared , after stating that if there was one less than
twenty_thousand people he would not meet them there , " that without
that number he did not think that their petition would be of consequence
enough . " GORDON-1781-2,1,21.841

He declared " if they were fewer they must find some other president
upon that occasion ; GORDON-1781-2,1,21.842

he would have no more to do with them ; GORDON-1781-2,1,21.843

he recommended to them the example of the Scotch , who by their firmness
had carried their point . GORDON-1781-2,1,21.844

He recommended temperance and firmness " GORDON-1781-2,1,21.845

and concluded with telling them " he did not mean them to go into any
danger that he would not share ; GORDON-1781-2,1,21.846

for he was ready to go to death for the Protestant cause . "
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.847

<font> Court . <$$font> Was <font> death <$$font> the word ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.848

A. No ; I rather believe <font> gallows <$$font> was the word ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.849

but I will not pretend to be accurate to the very words ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.850

that was the principal purport of the speech I heard there .
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.851

Q. Was any thing said that evening about the manner in which the people
were to be distinguished when they came to St. George's-fields ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.852

A. That is a circumstance I had forgot ; GORDON-1781-2,1,21.853

" he desired all true Protestants and friends of the petition to
distinguish themselves by the mark of blue cockades ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.854

he told them he would meet them in St. George's-fields ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.855

and when they came there , the body that were the London Association
should take the right hand , GORDON-1781-2,1,21.856

and the Scotch should take the left hand . " GORDON-1781-2,1,21.857

He disposed of the other two I do not exactly remember how .
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.858

Q. Was you present near , or about the House of Commons , upon the
Friday after the day when the petition was actually presented ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.859

A. Upon the Friday after I was in the lobby of the House of Commons ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.860

and was about the House of Commons in the evening .
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.861

Q. Did you see Lord George Gordon there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,21.862

A. I came in by the door that goes down to the House of Lords ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.863

I came forward towards the door of the House of Commons ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.864

when I came near the door of the House of Commons , I saw Lord George
leaning from a gallery that looks down into the lobby of the House of
Commons ; GORDON-1781-2,1,21.865

it is the gallery that goes from the committee rooms to the back door :
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.866

I heard Lord George Gordon address the people from that place .
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.867

He came out , as I understood , for the purpose of telling them what had
passed in the House . GORDON-1781-2,1,21.868

He told them " that they had been called a mob within the House ; "
GORDON-1781-2,1,21.869

he mentioned " that the peace-officers had been called in to disperse
them , " GORDON-1781-2,1,21.870

I think he said " them peaceable petitioners . " GORDON-1781-2,1,21.871

<P_1,22>

<font> One of the Jury . <$$font> Did he or not say that ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.873

A. I think he did , " That they had not given their reasons to the
house why they had not dispersed them ; GORDON-1781-2,1,22.874

he believed the peace officers had signed the petition . That some
people had mentioned in the house something relating to calling in the
military . That he hoped nobody would think of taking a step of that
sort , as it would infallibly tend to create great divisions amongst his
Majesty's subjects . " GORDON-1781-2,1,22.875

He went on stating the impropriety of calling a military force in upon
such occasions in a free country . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.876

He again mentioned the Scotch , pretty much in the same terms that he
had done before , " how they by their steadiness and firmness had
carried their point ; that he had no doubt his Majesty would send to his
ministers to desire them to repeal the act , when he found the confusion
it created " - or rather , which is nearer the idea , " when his Majesty
heard that his subjects were coming up , were flocking from miles round
, and wishing its repeal . " GORDON-1781-2,1,22.877

There was a great deal of confusion in the lobby ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.878

several people called to Lord George Gordon , whether he desired them to
disperse ? GORDON-1781-2,1,22.879

" Do you desire us to go away ? GORDON-1781-2,1,22.880

Does Lord George Gordon desire us to go away ? " GORDON-1781-2,1,22.881

He replied , " You are the best judges of what you ought to do ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.882

but I will tell you how the matter stands : GORDON-1781-2,1,22.883

the House are going to divide upon the question , whether your petition
shall be taken into consideration now or upon Tuesday .
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.884

There are for taking it into consideration now , myself and six or seven
others . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.885

If it is not taken into consideration now , your petition may be lost .
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.886

To-morrow the house does not meet ; GORDON-1781-2,1,22.887

Monday is the King's birth-day ; GORDON-1781-2,1,22.888

upon Tuesday the parliament may be dissolved " - or - " prorogued "
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.889

I forget which was the expression . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.890

That is almost all I heard him say . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.891

There was a good deal of confusion in the lobby ; GORDON-1781-2,1,22.892

several other members attempted to speak , particularly Mr. Turner ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.893

but he was not heard . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.894

I observed some further conversation pass between Lord George Gordon and
the Chaplain of the House , which I could not overhear .
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.895

Q. Were the people , whom Lord George Gordon was then addressing ,
distinguished from the other people ? GORDON-1781-2,1,22.896

A. There were a vast number of people in the lobby of the house in blue
cockades to whom he was addressing himself . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.897

Q. Did you happen to be in Scotland at the time of any riots there ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.898

A. I was not . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.899

Q. Of course you do not know what happened there ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.900

A. Not from my own knowledge . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.901

<heading>

<font> The Rev. <$$font> Thomas Bowen <font> sworn .
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.903

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Howarth . <$$heading> GORDON-1781-2,1,22.904

Q. Did you officiate as chaplain in the House of Commons upon the 2d of
June last ? GORDON-1781-2,1,22.905

A. I did . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.906

Q. Did you observe , in the course of that day any uncommon concourse
of people about the House of Commons , and in the lobby ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.907

A. I attended the Speaker to the House ; GORDON-1781-2,1,22.908

the lobby was exceedingly crowded , and the people there very clamourous
. GORDON-1781-2,1,22.909

We got in without much interruption . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.910

After prayers were over , I went GORDON-1781-2,1,22.911

and sat under the gallery , not far from the door .
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.912

The tumult in the lobby continued , GORDON-1781-2,1,22.913

and while the house were deliberating what measures they should take to
quel it , I saw Lord George Gordon frequently go to the door ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.914

and heard him repeat to the people in the lobby what different members
had said in the debates . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.915

The Speaker was relating to the house , for the information of those
members , who had not been present from the beginning , several
circumstances that had occurred . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.916

<font> Mr. Howarth . <$$font> You will confine yourself to the
expressions Lord George Gordon made use of to the people in the lobby ,
while he was out of the House , and not relate any expressions he made
use of in the House ? GORDON-1781-2,1,22.917

A. I saw him go to the door , GORDON-1781-2,1,22.918

and heard him say to the people , " The Speaker of the House of Commons
has just said that you are all come here under a pretence of religion .
" GORDON-1781-2,1,22.919

And I think his lordship then added , " you are good people ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,22.920

your's is a good cause . " GORDON-1781-2,1,22.921

Afterwards I heard him say , " Mr. Burke , member for Bristol has laid
" - GORDON-1781-2,1,22.922

the door was then shut , GORDON-1781-2,1,22.923

and I heard no more . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.924

Afterwards he called out , " Mr. Rous , member for <paren> I forget the
place which he mentioned <$$paren> has just moved that the civil power
be sent for , GORDON-1781-2,1,22.925

but do@ @n't you mind , GORDON-1781-2,1,22.926

keep yourselves cool , GORDON-1781-2,1,22.927

be steady . " GORDON-1781-2,1,22.928

At another time his lordship called out , " Lord North calls you a mob .
" GORDON-1781-2,1,22.929

Once , while Lord George Gordon was at the door , I saw a gentleman go
up to him , who seemed to me to be persuading his lordship to return to
his seat . GORDON-1781-2,1,22.930

Q. You say <font> seemed <$$font> to persuade ? GORDON-1781-2,1,22.931

<P_1,23>

<font> A. <$$font> I judged so from the manner of it .
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.933

As soon as Lord George Gordon turned round and saw who it was , he
called out to the people " this is Sir Michael le Fleming ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.934

he has just been speaking for you . " GORDON-1781-2,1,23.935

His lordship seemed to me remarkably pleased with Sir Michael ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.936

he patted or stroaked his shoulder , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.937

and expressed a kind of joy in his countenance which I hardly know how
to describe ; GORDON-1781-2,1,23.938

it seemed to me extravagant , and if I may use the expression , childish
. GORDON-1781-2,1,23.939

This is all I recollect , to this period , whilst I was sitting under
the gallery of the House . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.940

When the division was called for , upon the question in the house , I
withdrew . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.941

During the delay and confusion , which was occasioned by the people ,
who refused to quit the lobby , and by that means prevented the House
from dividing , I was frequently in the adjoining room ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.942

once while I was standing near the little gallery over the lobby , I saw
some gentlemen {TEXT:genelemen} endeavouring to persuade the people to
retire , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.943

one of the gentlemen asked me to speak to them ; GORDON-1781-2,1,23.944

accordingly I spoke a few words ; GORDON-1781-2,1,23.945

I told them they stopped their own business GORDON-1781-2,1,23.946

and begged them to retire , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.947

I heard a person in the lobby say very distinctly , " if his lordship
would come and say that it was necessary for them to go they would go .
" GORDON-1781-2,1,23.948

Some time after this I went up into the eating room ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.949

while I was sitting at table Lord George Gordon came into the room ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.950

soon afterwards there were scarce any person left in the room besides
Lord George Gordon and myself ; GORDON-1781-2,1,23.951

his lordship had thrown himself into a chair near me ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.952

and seemed overcome with heat and fatigue ; GORDON-1781-2,1,23.953

I thought the opportunity so favourable that I could not help telling
his lordship what I had just heard from the lobby ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.954

I told him that a person there had said that , " if his lordship would
come and say that it was necessary for them to go ; they would go , "
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.955

and I added as my own opinion , that I believed it depended wholly upon
his lordship to disperse them ; GORDON-1781-2,1,23.956

his lordship made no reply , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.957

and soon after left the room . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.958

Some time after this , I went down stairs , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.959

and seeing his lordship go towards the little gallery to address the
people , I hastened to get near him ; GORDON-1781-2,1,23.960

his lordship I think began with advising them , in general terms , " to
be quiet and peaceable , and steady ; GORDON-1781-2,1,23.961

his majesty <paren> said his lordship <$$paren> is a gracious monarch ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.962

and when he hears that the people ten miles round <paren> I think ten
miles round was the expression <$$paren> are collecting ; there is no
doubt but that he will send his ministers private orders to repeal the
bill . " GORDON-1781-2,1,23.963

His lordship then mentioned the attempt that was made to introduce a
bill into Scotland ; " GORDON-1781-2,1,23.964

the Scotch <paren> said his lordship <$$paren> had no redress , till
they pulled down the Mass-houses ; GORDON-1781-2,1,23.965

Lord Weymouth then sent official assurances , that the act should not be
extended to them , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.966

and why should they be better off than you . " GORDON-1781-2,1,23.967

Here I must observe I have a doubt upon my mind , whether his lordship
said " the Scotch had no redress till they pulled down the Mass-houses ,
" or whether he said , " when the Scotch pulled down the Mass houses
they had redress ; " GORDON-1781-2,1,23.968

his lordship then " advised them to be quiet and peaceable ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.969

and told them to beware of evil-minded persons who would mix among them
and intice them to mischief , the blame of which <paren> I think his
lordship added <$$paren> would be imputed to them . "
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.970

It was then I think a person in the lobby asked his lordship " if it was
not necessary for them to retire . " GORDON-1781-2,1,23.971

<font> One of the Jury . <$$font> Had that person a blue cockade in his
hat ? GORDON-1781-2,1,23.972

<font> A. <$$font> I did not see his person , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.973

I only heard his voice . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.974

" I will tell you <paren> said his lordship <$$paren> how it is ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.975

the question was put , " I think he said " I moved the question , that
your petition be taken into consideration this night .
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.976

Now , says he , it was clearly against you , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.977

there can be no doubt , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.978

but I insisted upon dividing the House : GORDON-1781-2,1,23.979

No division can " take place while you are there ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.980

but to go or not I leave to yourselves . " GORDON-1781-2,1,23.981

As soon as his lordship had finished , he asked me , " if I would speak
to the people ? " GORDON-1781-2,1,23.982

I said , by no means , that his lordship was the only person who could
speak to them with any good effect . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.983

His lordship then took hold of my gown GORDON-1781-2,1,23.984

and presenting me to the people called out , " this is the clergyman of
the House of Commons . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.985

I desire you will ask him what his opinion of the Popish Bill is , "
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.986

and immediately urged me to give it . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.987

I replied to his lordship , with considerable warmth , that the only
opinion I should give , was , that all the consequences which might
arise from that night would be entirely owing to his lordship .
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.988

Several gentlemen that were about us repeated my words .
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.989

His lordship made no reply , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.990

and went into the House . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.991

<font> Q. <$$font> Had you an opportunity of observing what number of
people were in the lobby , and about the House at any time during this
conversation ? GORDON-1781-2,1,23.992

A. The lobby was full . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.993

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you observe any thing in the hats of the persons
to whom his lordship addressed himself ? GORDON-1781-2,1,23.994

A. I can@ @not say absolutely that I did , GORDON-1781-2,1,23.995

I saw his lordship had a blue cockade . GORDON-1781-2,1,23.996

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you hear any general cry by the people in the
lobby ? GORDON-1781-2,1,23.997

A. They often called out for Lord George Gordon :
GORDON-1781-2,1,23.998

as I followed the Speaker in , they called out <font> Repeal , Repeal ,
Repeal . <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,23.999

<P_1,24>

<font> Q. <$$font> What was the conduct of the persons in the lobby ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1001

A. They were exceedingly clamorous , GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1002

I do not recollect any particular act of violence , only they made a
great noise . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1003

<font> Q. <$$font> Was there any articulate cry ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1004

A. I do not remember any . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1005

<font> Court . <$$font> Could the members pass to and from the House ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1006

A. I saw several members come in with blue cockades in their hats ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1007

they seemed as if they could hardly pass through the mob .
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1008

<heading>

<font> The Rev. Mr. <$$font> Bowen <font> Cross-examined by Mr.
<$$font> Kenyon . <$$heading> GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1010

Q. You saw several members with blue cockades ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1011

A. I do not know that they were members ; GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1012

I saw several gentlemen come in to take their seats ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1013

therefore I presume they were members . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1014

Q. Several ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1015

A. I believe there were two . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1016

I saw one take out the cockade , as soon as he came into the House , and
put it into his pocket ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1017

Q. Do you recollect who that member was ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1018

A. I do not . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1019

Q. Was this conversation with Lord George in the gallery or the lobby ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1020

A. At the gallery that looks into the lobby . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1021

Q. During that time there was a great tumult and noise ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1022

A. Not during the time Lord George was speaking .
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1023

Q. But during the time you had that private conversation ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1024

A. That was not in the gallery . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1025

Q. Where then was it ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1026

A. It was in the kitchen , I believe it is called ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1027

Q. The other conversation you say was in the gallery , when he spoke to
the people ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1028

A. In the gallery . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1029

Q. Were there many people there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1030

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1031

Q. Did you see Mr. Anstruther there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1032

A. I did not . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1033

Q. I presume you were under some agitation of mind at the time ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1034

A. I was under none till Lord George spoke to me to give my opinion .
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1035

Q. Before that time you was under no apprehensions ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1036

A. No particular apprehensions . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1037

Q. You had your full memory about you , GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1038

and now undertake to speak to the very words . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1039

You have not reduced them into writing , have you ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1040

A. On Friday this happened ; GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1041

the next day there was an account in the papers of what happened there ,
in which I was mentioned ; GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1042

as I attended the Speaker as his Chaplain , I thought it necessary to
write to the Speaker to give him an account of it , which I did in part
. GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1043

Q. When Lord George told the people , that you was chaplain of the
House of Commons , that put you into a considerable flurry of spirits ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1044

A. In a degree it did . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1045

<font> Mr. Howarth . <$$font> How long did you stay in the House ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1046

A. I came away with Mr. Bacon in his carriage .
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1047

Q. At what time was the lobby cleared ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1048

A. I stayed till the House broke up , GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1049

the passages were then quite clear . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1050

Q. Do you know how they came cleared ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1051

A. I do not . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1052

Q. Did you see any soldiers there when you came away ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1053

A. I saw some at some of the avenues . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1054

Q. Did you go away as soon as you were able ? GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1055

A. I wished to go away much earlier . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1056

I went away after the House broke up . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1057

I had an engagement on duty that evening . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1058

I went to the door-keeper of the back stair-case ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1059

he said if I went out they would not admit me again ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1060

therefore I was obliged to stay . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1061

I was afraid to go out with my gown on . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1062

<heading>

John Cater , <font> Esq. sworn , GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1064

examined by Mr. <$$font> Dunning . <$$heading> GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1065

Q. On the 2d of June last you was in the House of Commons ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1066

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,24.1067

<P_1,25>

Q. Had you any occasion to observe any thing that passed in the lobby
at the time ? GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1069

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1070

Q. What did you see or hear from the lobby on the 2d of June ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1071

A. As I had the honour of being in the last parliament with the noble
lord , I shall be obliged to the Court for one moment's indulgence to
explain my situation , out of respect to the noble prisoner .
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1072

Having publickly related all that I have now to relate , in another
place , and in the presence of the noble prisoner , immediately after it
happened , when I could have no view of this trial , I suppose to be a
reason why I have been applied to by those whose duty it is to carry on
this prosecution . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1073

I hope the court and the noble prisoner will see that I am here without
being officious , and free from malice or ill will ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1074

but having said this , I must take the liberty of saying , when called
before a court , I shall not shrink from that evidence .
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1075

<font> Court . <$$font> There is no apology necessary ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1076

every man must give his evidence . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1077

A. On Friday the 2d of June , as I was passing from one of the
Committee-rooms , while the lobby was filled with a multitude of
strangers , and the House of Commons was under a question which they
could not decide , as the serjeant and the officers of the House could
not clear the lobby ; as I was going through the passage at the top of
the stair-case , where there is a rail that looks into the lobby , I
heard and saw a person in the lobby who called aloud two or three times
<font> Lord George Gordon ! <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1078

I turned round GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1079

and saw the noble prisoner near , who on hearing himself called came to
the rail and looked over . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1080

I did the same close to him . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1081

The same person said , " My Lord we are ordered to clear the lobby ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1082

if your lordship wishes we should clear it , we will do it directly ,
and without any trouble . " GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1083

<font> One of the Jury . <$$font> Was this one of the officers of the
House ? GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1084

A. No , a stranger . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1085

The noble prisoner replied , " I will tell you how the case stands :
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1086

I have moved to have your petition taken now into consideration .
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1087

Alderman Bull and two or three more are for it , GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1088

the rest are against it ; GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1089

therefore if you wish your petition should be taken now into
consideration you may stay or do as you please . "
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1090

All in the lobby were silent and attentive ; GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1091

as soon as the noble prisoner had said what I last related they pulled
off their hats GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1092

and cried , " <font> Now , now , now . <$$font> "
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1093

I do not recollect any thing else . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1094

Q. Was any thing said by you to Lord George , or by Lord George to you
? GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1095

A. I recollect there was a kind of pause . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1096

The noble lord leaned over again , GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1097

and said , " Would not you wish to be in the same state they are in in
Scotland ? " GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1098

they answered " Yes , yes , " GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1099

and he said , " Well well ; " GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1100

that is all I recollect . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1101

<heading>

<font> Mr. <$$font> Joseph Pearson <font> sworn .
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1103

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Norton . <$$heading> GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1104

Q. You are door-keeper of the House of Commons ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1105

A. Yes , I am . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1106

Q. Was you at the House of Commons on Friday the 2d of June last ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1107

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1108

Q. At what time ? GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1109

A. Between one and two o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1110

Q. Inform the court what you observed in the lobby at that time ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1111

A. A great crowd of people , most , if not all , of whom had blue
cockades in their hats . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1112

Q. Was there any general cry used by these people ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1113

A. Yes ; <font> No Popery , no popery ! GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1114

a repeal , a repeal ! <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1115

Q. How long did these persons continue in the lobby ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1116

A. Till near nine o'clock at night I believe . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1117

Q. What was their conduct and behaviour during the time they were in
the lobby ? GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1118

A. What I mentioned before , calling out , <font> A repeal , a repeal !
No popery , no popery ! <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1119

When any members came in they cried out , <font> a repeal , a repeal !
<$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1120

Q. Did you observe any thing done by any of them ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1121

A. No . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1122

Q. Did you observe the noble prisoner at the bar there ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1123

A. He came to the door two or three times ; GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1124

I am not certain to the number of times ; GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1125

he told them " he should come out and let them know what was going on in
the House ; they had a good cause , and they had nothing to fear . "
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1126

Lord George Gordon came up once , GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1127

and said " Sir Michael le Fleming had spoke in their behalf , and that
he spoke like an angel . " GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1128

They crowded much upon me . GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1129

I said for God's sake , Gentlemen , keep from the door .
GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1130

Lord George put out his hand in this manner , <font> <paren> waving it
<$$paren> <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,25.1131

<P_1,26>

" and said , Pray , Gentlemen , make what room you can ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1133

your cause is good , GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1134

and you have nothing to fear . " GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1135

Q. How was the passage to the House of Commons ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1136

A. Very much crowded in the lobby . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1137

Q. You say they continued till near nine o'clock in the evening ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1138

how were they at last got out , and at what time ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1139

A. I do not know , GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1140

for in my confusion and hurry I did not mark what time it was .
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1141

Thomas Baker <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1142

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Attorney_General . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1143

Q. You are the lower door-keeper of the House of Commons ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1144

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1145

Q. Was you there on the 2d of June last ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1146

A. Yes , from twelve o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1147

Q. When did the people come to the lobby ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1148

A. There were a great many people in the passage when I got there .
{TEXT:?} GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1149

Q. What was their behaviour ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1150

A. They were all very quiet when I went ; GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1151

afterwards the passage was very much crowded , so that it was difficult
to make room for the members to go up to the lobby ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1152

by my endeavouring to make room for them they knew they were members ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1153

then they called out , <font> Repeal ! GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1154

No popery , no popery ! <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1155

Q. How long did they continue in this way ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1156

A. ' Till eight or nine o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1157

Q. How were they got out ? {TEXT:.} GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1158

Do you remember any guards coming ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1159

A. Yes , they came before the lobby was cleared .
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1160

Q. Was you there the Tuesday following ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1161

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1162

Q. What happened upon the Tuesday ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1163

A. The crowd was all kept out on the Tuesday . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1164

Q. How were they kept out ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1165

A. By the constables I believe . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1166

Q. Did you see them in the house or street ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1167

A. I did not . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1168

Sampson Wright , <font> Esq. sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1169

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Solicitor_General . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1170

Q. You are a Justice_of_the_Peace for this city ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1171

A. I am . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1172

Q. Was you called for on the 2d of June last to the House of Lords and
the House of Commons ? GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1173

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1174

Q. Relate the occasion of your coming there ; what you observed ; what
directions you received ; and how you executed them . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1175

A. I first came down , between two and three o'clock ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1176

I observed a vast number of people there , GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1177

but seeing no disturbance at all , I went back to dinner .
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1178

I returned back to Guildhall , Westminster , at about four o'clock ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1179

as soon as I entered the Guildhall , a messenger from the House of Lords
told me I was wanted there . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1180

I went with him to the House of Lords , where I received directions to
clear the avenues to that House . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1181

The messenger who came from the Lords having told me the Lords were much
interrupted in going to and coming from the House , I directed Smith ,
the court-keeper at Guildhall , to collect what constables he could and
come to me . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1182

Having received the directions I mentioned I returned to the Guildhall ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1183

I found the windows were much broken ; GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1184

when I entered the Guildhall I found many people running about the House
as if seeking for somebody . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1185

I enquired the occasion . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1186

Q. That is immaterial , GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1187

mention what you observed when you came to the House of Commons .
{TEXT:?} GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1188

A. There were prodigious crowds there ; GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1189

I never saw such a number of people collected together in my life ,
except upon one occasion , the coronation . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1190

I went to the Horse-Guards ; GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1191

from thence I was directed to St. James's to get some of the military
to assist . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1192

From thence I was instructed to go to the Savoy .
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1193

After some time a number of the military came to the Horse-Guards ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1194

and I came down with them to the House of Lords .
GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1195

The Lords were that moment broke up ; GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1196

I then went to the House of Commons , GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1197

and with the guards I cleared the avenues to the House of Commons and
the House of Lords . GORDON-1781-2,1,26.1198

<P_1,27>

Q. Had you a difficulty in doing it ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1200

A. Yes ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1201

and it took up a considerable time , GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1202

but I effected it at last . {TEXT:?} GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1203

Q. What time of night might it be ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1204

A. I can@ @not speak with certainty , GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1205

I think it must be past eight o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1206

Q. Were you there on Tuesday ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1207

A. I was at Charing-Cross on Tuesday . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1208

Q. Did you see the mob go down with any marks upon them on Tuesday ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1209

A. I saw a vast many people go up in a body with colours flying on
Tuesday . {TEXT:?} GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1210

Q. Had they any thing in their hats ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1211

A. Yes , blue cockades . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1212

Sampson Wright , <font> Esq. Cross-examined by Mr. <$$font> Kenyon .
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1213

Q. Do you know what the colours were ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1214

A. I did not take notice . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1215

Q. I believe they were not properly speaking colours , but rags ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1216

A. I can@ @not say , GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1217

there was something they carried in their hands , streamers or something
of that sort , GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1218

but I can@ @not say particularly what they were .
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1219

Sampson Rainforth <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1220

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Bearcroft . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1221

Q. Was you in Palace-yard on the 2d of June last ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1222

A. I was at the King's Arms tavern GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1223

and saw all the procession go by . {TEXT:?} GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1224

Q. What time of day was you there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1225

A. At twelve o'clock . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1226

At about one , a party came over Westminster-bridge with blue cockades
in their hats . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1227

Q. What number might there be ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1228

A. May_be two_hundred or thereabouts , GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1229

they came across the bridge GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1230

and marched directly down George-street GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1231

and went into the Park . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1232

Q. Did they say any thing ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1233

was there any cry amongst them ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1234

A. No ; they were very peaceable ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1235

at about two the whole cavalcade came with flags ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1236

I do not know whether there were not bagpipes , GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1237

they went very orderly . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1238

A gentleman was with me , GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1239

I said we will go to the lobby of the House of Commons and see what they
are doing there . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1240

Q. Which way did the second party come ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1241

A. From Charing-Cross . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1242

Q. Which way did they march ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1243

A. Towards the House of Commons . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1244

Q. Did you observe any ribbands in their hats ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1245

A. Almost every one that walked in the procession had a blue ribband .
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1246

My friend and I went to the lobby of the House of Commons ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1247

it was exceedingly full ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1248

the door of the House was open ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1249

the Speaker was not in the chair . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1250

Lord George had his cockade in his hat ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1251

he was standing in the door-way . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1252

Q. What sort of people were got there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1253

A. The lower sort of people ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1254

some were decently dressed . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1255

Q. Were they the same sort of people you saw pass ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1256

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1257

Q. How long did you stay there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1258

A. I stayed about ten minutes ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1259

Colonel Miles was there ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1260

he was ordering them to make a lane , GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1261

and he was directing them to say as the members came past , <font>
Repeal the bill <$$font> , <font> repeal the bill ! <$$font>
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1262

Then I went to see what was doing at the House of Lords ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1263

I saw a noble lord not very well treated . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1264

At about eleven o'clock in the evening a messenger brought word to the
company where , I was spending the evening , that the mob were burning
down the Sardinian ambassador's chapel in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields .
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1265

I proposed for us to go there . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1266

I went . GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1267

I made my way into the chapel ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1268

it was not then on fire ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1269

they had torn down the organ GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1270

and had made fires in the street ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1271

some were throwing the inside of the chapel out ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1272

and other people threw it into the fire ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1273

there were not above five or six people in the chapel ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1274

I immediately seised a young fellow who was in the chapel .
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1275

<font> Mr. Kenyon . <$$font> I must submit to the court whether this
is evidence to affect Lord George Gordon ; GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1276

these people were no ways connected with him . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1277

<font> Court . <$$font> No doubt it is evidence ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1278

they are to shew that these people were illegally assembled , and
committing acts of violence to the intent of forcing a repeal .
GORDON-1781-2,1,27.1279

You have not examined yet to the procession coming down , and the
obstruction given to the <P_1,28> members . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1280

The witness said , but he was stopped short in the examination , that he
saw one of the lords ill-treated . {TEXT:?} GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1281

A. When I quitted the lobby , I went to see what was doing at the House
of Lords ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1282

Lord Mansfield came in his carriage ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1283

several of the bishops came , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1284

and were all insulted . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1285

I said to my friend , here will be an open insurrection in my opinion
before this business is done . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1286

Q. Did you observe any thing more , at either of the two Houses of
Parliament , till you went to Lincoln's-inn-fields ? {TEXT:.}
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1287

A. Nothing more , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1288

for I stayed but a little while ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1289

I went to the Sardinian ambassador's chapel at about half after eleven
clock ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1290

I seised one by the collar in the chapel . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1291

Mr. Maberly who was along with me , joined ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1292

we {TEXT:me_we} brought him almost as far out of the mob as Mr. Carpues
, a silk dyer@ @'s door ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1293

some of the mob said of me " d-n him , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1294

that is the late high constable , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1295

knock him on the head , " GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1296

then they rescued the man . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1297

Q. What number of people do you suppose there were about the chapel ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1298

<font> A. <$$font> There might be two or three_hundred .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1299

Q. What was the cry amongst them ? GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1300

A. <font> No Popery <$$font> ! was the reigning cry amongst them .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1301

Q. Had they any cockades in their hats ? {TEXT:.}
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1302

A. Most of them had blue cockades in their hats .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1303

Q. What became of the man you got out of the mob ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1304

A. He was rescued from me by the mob , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1305

and I was in great danger of being knocked on the head .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1306

I went down to Somerset-House barracks immediately for the Guards ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1307

General Winyard , as commanding officer , gave me his assistance ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1308

and mustered one_hundred men with their bayonets .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1309

I desired Mr. Maberly to get some of Sir John Fielding's people and
seise some of the ringleaders , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1310

and I would come up with the Guards and assist .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1311

Upon my going up I desired every person in the chapel might be taken
into custody . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1312

The gentlemen there thought I understood something of rioting business .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1313

I formed the soldiers round three deep , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1314

and made a prison in the street . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1315

Q. Were {TEXT:Where} the mob dispersed ? GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1316

A. At last they were ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1317

with the assistance of the soldiers we took up thirteen ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1318

we took them to the Savoy ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1319

for I believe {TEXT:beleive} the watch-houses would not have long
existed if we had put them there . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1320

When I came back they had got some more in custody ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1321

the Russian officer was one ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1322

he was in the ambassador's house . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1323

More soldiers being brought up the mob dispersed .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1324

The next morning , which was Saturday , they were examined at Sir John
Fielding's office ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1325

one was discharged ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1326

the rest were remanded back to prison till Monday .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1327

On Monday they were examined again GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1328

and five of them were fully committed to Newgate .
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1329

Q. Did you give any evidence before the justice ? {TEXT:!}
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1330

<font> A. <$$font> No , but I attended there . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1331

Q. Was it attended with any ill consequences to you ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1332

<font> A. <$$font> I had notice that they intended to destroy my house
. GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1333

I went out of it ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1334

my property was taken out into the street and burnt ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1335

and the inside of my house was destroyed . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1336

<font> Court . <$$font> You said some lords and bishops were insulted
as they went down to the House of Lords ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1337

in what manner were they insulted ? GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1338

A. They were hissed , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1339

and I saw the mob shoving them about . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1340

Charles Jealous <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1341

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Howarth . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1342

Q. Were you on the 2d of June in Palace-Yard ? GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1343

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1344

Q. Give an account of what you observed there ; the number of persons ;
and in what manner they assembled themselves . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1345

A. I saw a great number of people there ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1346

I had not been there long before I saw a carriage stopped ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1347

I was informed it was the Bishop of Lincoln@ @'s ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1348

the wheels of that carriage were taken off , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1349

and I saw a gentleman pulled out , which they told me was the Bishop of
Lincoln ; GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1350

they pulled off his wig GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1351

and struck him in the face with it . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1352

Q. Were his horses going towards the House of Lords ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1353

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1354

Q. What was the cry at that time ? GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1355

A. <font> No Popery . <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1356

Q. Was any other cry made use of ? GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1357

A. I do@ @n't recollect . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1358

Q. In what manner did the Bishop of Lincoln escape from them ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1359

A. He got into an house , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1360

but whose house I do not know , GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1361

I saw no more of them . GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1362

Q. What number of persons got about his carriage do you think , and
were assembled in Palace-Yard at that time ? GORDON-1781-2,1,28.1363

<P_1,29>

A. A great number . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1365

Q. Had they any thing in their hats ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1366

A. Those that I saw pull off the Bishop's wig had no cockades at all .
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1367

Q. Were there many persons there who had ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1368

A. Yes a great many . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1369

Patrick Macmanus <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1370

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Howarth . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1371

Q. You was I believe in Palace-Yard {COM:sic} on the 2d of June ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1372

A. I was stationed at Guildhall , in King-Street .
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1373

Q. Did you observe any number of people assemble themselves about
Palace-Yard and the avenues leading to the House of Commons ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1374

if you did give an account in what manner they came there , and what
their conduct was . {TEXT:?} GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1375

A. I was sent from Bow Street to Guildhall ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1376

I heard a noise ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1377

a gentleman ran in there , and a number of people after him ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1378

they cried out <font> No Popery {TEXT:Nopery} <$$font> ! and <font>
repeal the act ! <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1379

Mr. Smith , the house-keeeper , and I , attempted to shut the door ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1380

but could not do it , GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1381

they forced it open . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1382

Mr. Smith went down Stairs GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1383

and brought up some broomsticks in his hand , GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1384

and said we would keep them out . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1385

Q. Did you learn who this Gentleman was who ran through ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1386

A. I heard them say it was Mr. Welbore Ellis , GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1387

but I did not know him . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1388

Q. Did you observe his carriage ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1389

A. I did not see his carriage , GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1390

I was in the house . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1391

<font> Q. <$$font> What did the people proceed to do ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1392

A. They searched all the place GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1393

and could not find him ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1394

they broke the back-door which goes out of the hall into the passage ,
which they said he went through , GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1395

but they could not find him ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1396

some of the windows in front of the house were broke .
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1397

David Miles <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1398

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Norton . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1399

<font> Q. <$$font> You are a constable ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1400

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1401

<font> Q. <$$font> Was you in Warwick Street on the 2d of June ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1402

A. Yes ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1403

I went from the House of Commons there at past eleven o'clock ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1404

I had been home to my own house , GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1405

and understood there was a mob at Warwick-Street chapel ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1406

I went to Count Haslang's house ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1407

the chapel was broke open before I got there . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1408

<font> Q. <$$font> Was you at Sir John Fielding's on the Monday
following ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1409

A. I was ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1410

I took a man up for robbing Count Haslang's chapel by order of Justice
Hyde . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1411

I took him to Saint James's watch-house and from thence to Bow-Street ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1412

I attended the examination of this man ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1413

my name was in the papers on Tuesday the 6th , GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1414

and my house was burnt down between Tuesday the 6th and three o'clock on
Wednesday the 7th . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1415

<font> Mr. <$$font> Thomas Gates <font> sworn .
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1416

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Attorney_General . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1417

Q. You are the City Marshal ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1418

A. I am . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1419

Q. Do you recollect any disturbances in the City of London on Sunday
the 4th of June ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1420

A. I recollect a disturbance on both Sunday and Monday the 4th and 5th
of June . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1421

On the 4th it was in Whites-Alley , Moorfields , GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1422

it was at a Roman_Catholick chapel . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1423

Q. Were there any houses destroyed ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1424

A. Yes , three houses were destroyed there . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1425

Q. Were {TEXT:Where} they the houses of Roman_Catholicks ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1426

A. I believe they were ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1427

they were reputed so . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1428

Q. What was the cry ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1429

A. <font> No Popery <$$font> ! GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1430

Q. What was done upon the Monday ? GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1431

<font> Mr. Kenyon . <$$font> I shall not permit improper questions to
be asked without objecting to them ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1432

this is not connected with the business of Friday ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1433

it is a different overt act ; GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1434

it is in a different county . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1435

<font> Mr. Attorney_General <$$font> After proving an overt act in one
county I may give evidence of one in another . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1436

<font> Mr. Kenyon . <$$font> I object to it , because it is irregular
; not for fear of the consequences to my client .
GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1437

<font> Mr. Attorney_General . <$$font> I submit to the court , that
after the incitement we have proved , whether the business was all done
on Saturday night , or continued for several days , it is evidence to be
received - GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1438

it was the same cry . GORDON-1781-2,1,29.1439

<P_1,30>

<font> Court . <$$font> No doubt you are at liberty to give in evidence
every thing which shews that the mob , so assembled , on the 2d of June
, had a general intent , by terror and acts of violence , to force a
repeal of the law . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1441

That does not affect the prisoner till you make him accessary and privy
to it , GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1442

but every circumstance that tends to shew their intent you may give in
evidence . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1443

If you give evidence of an overt act in the county where it is laid ,
you may to be sure give evidence of an overt act in another county ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1444

and you have done it already , GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1445

for you began with an overt act in the county of Surry .
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1446

We can@ @not adjourn in this case at all . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1447

I wonder you do@ @n't rather confine your examination to acts of
violence at the very time , on the 2d of June , upon the members of both
Houses of Parliament . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1448

Q. Had the people any cockades ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1449

A. They had blue cockades . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1450

Q. What was done upon the Monday ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1451

A. They had not completely finished the business they were about ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1452

they assembled again to pull up the floors and demolish the walls .
{TEXT:,} GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1453

Q. What was done on the Tuesday ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1454

A. They had fired the gaol of Newgate , the Fleet , Mr Langdale's , and
several other houses . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1455

Q. Were they the houses of reputed Roman_Catholicks ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1456

A. They were . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1457

Q. They set fire to the gaols ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1458

A. Yes , and delivered all the prisoners . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1459

Q. What was done the next day ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1460

A. They met a repulse the next day . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1461

Q. What was the cry , at all these times , when they pulled down these
houses ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1462

A. <font> No Popery . <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1463

<font> Court . <$$font> You said the cry was <font> No popery <$$font>
, GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1464

do you mean to confine that to one day , GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1465

or was it everyday ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1466

A. That cry continued every day till the soldiers fired at them .
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1467

William Hyde <font> Esq. sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1468

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Howarth . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1469

Q. You are a justice_of_the_peace for this county ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1470

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1471

Q. Was you on the 2d of June observing the conduct of the people at the
foreign ministers' {TEXT:ministers} chapels ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1472

A. Yes ; I was in Warwick-Street on Friday at about 12 o'clock at night
; GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1473

when I came down to Warwick-Street I saw a vast number of people with
cockades in their hats ; GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1474

I went with a party of soldiers to secure as many of the rioters as I
possibly could ; GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1475

as soon as I came to the front of the house I saw a man bringing
something out belonging to the chapel . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1476

I struck at him , GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1477

I knocked him down , GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1478

and sent him to the watch-house . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1479

Q. Was the chapel destroyed ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1480

A. All the inside of it was . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1481

Q. Was any cry made use of by the people you saw assembled there with
cockades ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1482

A. Yes , <font> Down with it ! GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1483

No popery ! <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1484

Q. What force had you to disperse this mob ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1485

A. About twenty soldiers . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1486

Q. Do you remember , on the Sunday evening following , being called
upon to act any where as a magistrate ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1487

A. I was called upon , on the Sunday evening , to go to
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields , GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1488

there were a number of people demolishing the remainder of that chapel .
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1489

Q. What number of persons did you observe there ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1490

A. Some hundreds or thousands . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1491

Q. Did you observe whether they had any cockades ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1492

A. I can@ @not take upon me to say . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1493

Q. What did you observe on the Monday ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1494

A. I was at Warwick-Street chapel on the Monday ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1495

information came to me , that they were going to destroy Sir George
Savile's house ; GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1496

I set out ; GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1497

there were a vast number of people with cockades in their hats ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1498

the horse guards immediately came into the square ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1499

I went at the head of them , GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1500

and with a great deal to do we drove the people away .
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1501

Q. Was any general cry made use of by the people at Sir George Savile's
? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1502

A. Yes , <font> down with it ! GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1503

No Popery ! <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1504

Q. Do you recollect on the Tuesday , the 6th of June , being called
upon any where ? GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1505

A. {TEXT:Q.} On Tuesday the 6th of June I met some of my brother
magistrates at Westminster ; GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1506

my station was fixed at Charing Cross . GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1507

While I was there I was informed a vast number of people had come with
flags , and stopped all the avenues to both Houses of Parliament .
GORDON-1781-2,1,30.1508

<P_1,31>

I found several coaches were stopped in Parliament-Street , and several
in Palace-Yard ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1510

some they wrote upon <font> No Popery <$$font> , GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1511

others they would not let go along at any rate .
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1512

I immediately set off to acquaint some more magistrates , who were in
the neighbourhood ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1513

I then went to call out the horse and foot guards ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1514

when we came into Palace-yard we saw several coaches stopped by the mob
; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1515

we drove the mob away GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1516

and the coaches went peaceably along . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1517

Q. Do you know to whom those coaches belonged ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1518

A. No ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1519

while we were in Palace-yard clearing the way , information was brought
that many coaches were stopped in coming to the House ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1520

I set out to clear Parliament-street several times ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1521

at last a gentleman came GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1522

and said " Lord Sandwich was killed or lay dying in Parliament-street ;
that he was murthered or near it , or would be before we could arrive .
{TEXT:?} " GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1523

We set off directly ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1524

at the end of Parliament-street we found Lord Sandwich's carriage broke
, GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1525

and his lordship was cut upon the left side of his head .
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1526

<font> Court . <$$font> Was that done by part of this multitude ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1527

A. By part of the mob . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1528

Q. In what state did you find him ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1529

A. The mob was about his lordship ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1530

he was cut on the head , GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1531

and the glasses of the chariot were broke ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1532

I asked his lordship which way he would please to go ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1533

he said home ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1534

I conducted him home . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1535

Q. What force had you with you at that time ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1536

A. I suppose a_dozen or fourteen of the light-horse ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1537

after conducting his lordship home we came back again to
Parliament-street where the coaches as usual were stopped ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1538

we cleared the street as well as we could GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1539

and got into Palace-yard again . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1540

Q. Had those persons about Lord Sandwich's coach any cockades in their
hats ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1541

A. They had blue cockades in their hats . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1542

Q. Was there any cry made use of by these people ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1543

A. In Parliament-street {TEXT:Parliament_street} the cry was <font> No
popery ! <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1544

Q. Did you observe that this multitude , who assembled on Tuesday , had
any thing in their hands ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1545

A. At first they had no weapons ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1546

there were flags flying , GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1547

they were shouting and making a noise , and crying <font> No popery !
<$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1548

In the beginning of the afternoon , or about three or four o'clock they
got some weapons . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1549

Q. What weapons ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1550

A. New faggot sticks , oak sticks , the bark of which had been peeled
off ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1551

this was on Tuesday the 6th of June . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1552

Q. What number of these people were there thus assembled ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1553

A. I suppose some thousands . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1554

Q. In consequence of this conduct of yours {TEXT:your's} , was any
thing done to your house ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1555

A. My house in St. Martin's-street was pulled down on Tuesday ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1556

and on Wednesday my house at Islington was pulled down .
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1557

William Hyde Esq. <font> Cross-examined by Mr. <$$font> Kenyon .
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1558

Q. You was not present when Lord Sandwich was stopped , and his
carriage broken ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1559

A. I was not . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1560

Q. You knew nothing of the parties who did that ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1561

A. No . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1562

<font> Mr. Attorney_General . <$$font> You found Lord Sandwich in the
hands of the mob ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1563

A. I did ; GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1564

one man , a resolute impudent fellow , had a stick with a large head ,
with a leather apron or something twisted round the top of it ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1565

he said " if he did not murder him then he would before he had done with
him . " GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1566

<font> Mr. Kenyon . <$$font> Who that man was you do not know ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1567

A. I do not , GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1568

my attention was to his lordship . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1569

<font> The Right Hon. <$$font> Henry <font> Lord <$$font> Porchester
<font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1570

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Attorney_General GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1571

Q. Was your lordship at the House of Commons on the 2d of June last ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1572

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1573

Q. Was there a riot at the House ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1574

A. There was . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1575

Q. Did you observe any thing in the hats of the rioters ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1576

A. Yes , blue cockades . GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1577

Q. Did your lordship observe , whether the prisoner had or not a blue
cockade that day ? GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1578

A. I did not see the prisoner that day but in the House of Commons .
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1579

I shall wish , if I may be permitted , to ask of the Court -
GORDON-1781-2,1,31.1580

<P_1,32>

<font> Court . <$$font> It is not worth while to lose a minute about it
, GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1582

for several of the witnesses have said they saw him with a blue cockade
. GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1583

<font> One of the Jury . <$$font> Had Lord George Gordon a blue cockade
on Tuesday the 6th ? GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1584

A. I only saw the prisoner in the House . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1585

<font> Court . <$$font> No matter where ; GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1586

did you see him with a blue cockade on the Tuesday ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1587

A. I certainly did in the House . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1588

John Lucy <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1589

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Norton . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1590

Q. Was you in Palace yard on Tuesday the 6th of June ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1591

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1592

Q. At what time ? GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1593

A. Between four and five o'clock in the afternoon .
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1594

Q. What did you observe there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1595

A. A very large mob . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1596

Q. Had they any thing in their hats ? {TEXT:.} GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1597

A. Some had blue cockades GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1598

but I had not one in my hat . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1599

Q. Was there any general cry amongst them ? {TEXT:;}
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1600

A. The cry of <font> No popery ! <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1601

Q. Did you see them have any flag ? GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1602

A. I saw three flags . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1603

Q. Do you know any of the persons who carried those flags ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1604

A. Yes one , James Jackson . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1605

As soon as Justice Hyde had ordered the horse to ride amongst the mob to
disperse them in Palace yard , then Jackson hoisted the flag
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1606

and said " to Hyde's house a-hoy , " for them to destroy it because Mr.
Hyde had ordered the horse to ride amongst the mob .
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1607

Jackson carried a black and red flag , GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1608

he proceeded in front of the mob GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1609

and was followed by some hundreds of people to Justice Hyde's house .
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1610

I went to Mr. Hyde's house GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1611

and saw James Jackson there with the same flag , GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1612

and I saw the goods thrown out of Mr. Hyde's house .
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1613

Q. How long did the mob stay there ? GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1614

A. Near an hour I believe . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1615

Q. What was done afterwards ? GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1616

A. After the goods were thrown into the street and burnt , James
Jackson waved his flag GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1617

and walked backwards and forwards in St. Martinis-street ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1618

and then cried out " a-hoy for Newgate ; " GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1619

the mob followed him in great numbers to Newgate to let out the
prisoners , GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1620

I saw him afterwards at Newgate , GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1621

and I saw him inside Mr. Akerman's parlour at the window , with the
flag in his hand . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1622

Q. Was Newgate burnt ? GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1623

A. It was . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1624

I was one of the Protestant Association ; GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1625

I knew this James Jackson to be a very desperate young fellow .
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1626

Barnard Turner , Esq. <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1627

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Howarth . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1628

<font> Mr. Kenyon . <$$font> What business are you ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1629

A. A sugar refiner . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1630

<font> Mr. Howarth . <$$font> You will please to inform the Court of
the disturbances on the Wednesday night which fell within your
observation ? GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1631

A. On Wednesday evening , about six or seven o'clock , the London
Military Association , which I had the honour to command , marched to
Broad-street , to disperse a mob which was then destroying a Mr.
Donavan's house . GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1632

We came in sight of Mr. Donavan's house , GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1633

and saw a very large mob were taking out the furniture from Mr.
Donavan's house , and burning it in the street before the house ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1634

we halted a little before we came to them , GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1635

and I as commanding officer of that detachment , used all the arguments
{TEXT:auguments} I could to disperse them without force ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1636

but I found it ineffectual GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1637

and we were afterwards obliged to fire ; GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1638

after firing for four or five minutes , the mob dispersed
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1639

and some prisoners were taken in Mr. Donavan's house ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1640

afterwards the Association marched down to St. Catherine's , where some
of the mob were destroying the house of one Lebarty ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,32.1641

the rest of Wednesday evening and Thursday morning , the Association
were employed in marching after the mob , where-ever they heard they
were assembled , and dispersing <P_1,33> them on Thursday , about six or
seven o'clock in the morning , GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1642

the Association were dismissed for that time . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1643

Q. Was there any general cry made use of by the persons concerned in
the destruction of these houses ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1644

<font> A. <$$font> the general cry I observed was <font> " No popery ,
no popery ! Down with the papists , " <$$font> and expressions of that
kind . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1645

Q. Mention to the jury the several places which you observed destroyed
on the Wednesday night and Thursday morning . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1646

A. We saw the house of Mr. Mulliner in the Poultry attacked ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1647

but the Guards had dispersed that mob before the Association assembled -
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1648

We saw besides , the fire at Mr. Donavan's , the destruction of
Lebarty's house , and several fires at a distance ; that of Mr.
Langdale's , the distiller , at Holbourn-bridge , the Toll-houses , and
the King's Bench Prison . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1649

All those fires we saw from different parts of the town when we were
upon duty . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1650

Q. Did you observe whether the mob had any thing in their hands ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1651

A. Some had iron bars , GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1652

some had spokes of wheels , GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1653

and some few had cutlasses . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1654

There were one or two old pieces of fire-arms among the mob , at Mr.
Donavan's house ; GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1655

but they were chiefly armed with bludgeons , spokes of wheels , and iron
bars . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1656

Q. Did you observe whether these persons had any cockades in their hats
? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1657

A. A great number of blue cockades were worn all Wednesday evening .
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1658

Q. Did you see in Cheapside , either that night or next morning , a
considerable number of people ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1659

A. The Association assembled at the Paul's-Head , about six in the
evening . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1660

In marching down from thence to the Mansion-house , the part of
Cheapside and the Poultry we marched through , were so full of the mob ,
that it was with difficulty we got through . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1661

Q. Had those persons any cockades in their hats ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1662

A. Many of them had , GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1663

but that assembly were not armed in the manner those persons assembled
at Mr. Donavan's house were . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1664

Q. Was any cry then among them ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1665

A. The general cry was , <font> " No Popery ! Down with the papists !
" <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1666

Richard Pond <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1667

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Attorney_General . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1668

Q. Look at that paper <font> <paren> handing it to the Witness
<$$paren> <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1669

is the name to that , the signature of the prisoner at the bar , Lord
George Gordon ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1670

A. I saw a person sign it , who I was told was his lordship .
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1671

Q. Have you seen the same person since ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1672

A. I do not recollect that I have . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1673

Q. Look round the court GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1674

and see if the person is present who signed it . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1675

A. That is the person <font> <paren> pointing to Lord George Gordon .
<$$paren> <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1676

Q. Why did you apply to him ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1677

A. I thought it might have the effect to obtain a security to my house
. GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1678

Q. Did it obtain that security to your house ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1679

A. That I can@ @not say . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1680

Q. Did you produce it on any occasion ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1681

A. I did to the mob . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1682

Q. Was your house pulled down ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1683

A. It was not . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1684

Q. What was the ground of your application about your house ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1685

A. I was informed by some neighbours , that my house was upon the list
amongst others which were intended to be pulled down .
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1686

Q. Was you any way connected with the Roman_Catholicks ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1687

A. The house was inhabited by one of that religion .
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1688

Q. Inhabited , or a lodger ? GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1689

A. It is an house I have upon lease ; GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1690

the person who inhabits it has a lease under me ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1691

he is my under tenant . GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1692

<paren> <font> The paper read - GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1693

it was literally as followeth : <$$font> <$$paren>
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1694

" All true friends to Protestants I hope will particular and do no
injury to the property of any true Protestant , as I am well assured the
proprietor of this house is a staunch and worthy friend to the cause .
GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1695

G. Gordon . " GORDON-1781-2,1,33.1696

<P_1,34>

Richard Pond <font> Cross-examined by Mr. <$$font> Kenyon .
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1698

Q. Where was Lord George Gordon when that paper was signed by him ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1699

A. In a coach near the place . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1700

Q. Was there not one of the magistrates in the coach with him , Mr.
Pugh , the sheriff ? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1701

A. Yes , Mr. Pugh I can swear to . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1702

Q. Did you bring that paper ready written and produce it to his
lordship ? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1703

A. I did . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1704

Q. And you told him it would be of use to you if he would sign it ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1705

A. I did . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1706

Q. On what day of the week was it ? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1707

A. I believe on Wednesday . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1708

Q. He was in the coach with Sheriff Pugh ; GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1709

you took the paper to him ready written ; GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1710

you told him you thought it would be of use to you if he would sign it ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1711

and in compliance with your request he signed it ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1712

A. Yes , he did . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1713

Q. Do you know whether he read it or not ? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1714

A. That I can@ @not positively say . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1715

Q. How came that piece of paper out of your hands ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1716

A. Upon the application of Mr. White and Mr. Alderman Wilkes .
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1717

John Dingwall <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1718

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Bearcroft . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1719

Q. Do you know Lord George Gordon ? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1720

A. Yes , I do . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1721

Q. Did you ever see him write ? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1722

A. Never . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1723

Q. Upon your oath did you never see him write ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1724

A. Never to my knowledge ; GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1725

I never saw him subscribe his name in my life , GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1726

nor I never received a letter from him . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1727

Q. Will you take upon you to say you never saw him write any thing ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1728

A. Not to my knowledge . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1729

Q. Did you ever see him write any thing but his name ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1730

A. To my knowledge I never saw him write . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1731

Q. Do you mean to say to the best of your recollection and belief you
never saw him write ? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1732

A. To the best of my recollection and belief I never saw him write .
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1733

Q. Nor had any correspondence with him ? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1734

A. None that I know of . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1735

John Dingwall <font> Cross-examined by Mr. <$$font> Erskine .
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1736

Q. Though you have had no correspondence in writing with Lord George
Gordon , yet you are well acquainted with him
{COM:for_his_writings;_see_errata} ? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1737

A. Yes , but I never had any business with him .
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1738

Q. How long have you been acquainted with Lord George Gordon ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1739

A. From his birth . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1740

Q. Did you see Lord George Gordon at any time , GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1741

and how long before this meeting that took place in St. George's-fields
? GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1742

A. I saw him the night before the meeting in May .
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1743

Q. Do you recollect whether Lord George Gordon , that night in May ,
said any thing to you upon the subject of this business ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1744

<font> Mr. Attorney_General . <$$font> What Lord George Gordon said
may be evidence against himself GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1745

but can@ @not be evidence for him . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1746

<font> Court . <$$font> Unless it is connected with the time that they
have spoke of at Coachmaker's-hall , or St. George's-fields .
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1747

<font> Mr. Erskine . <$$font> It is connected with that particular
time . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1748

- I submit to your Lordship , that I have a right to put this question ,
whether or no he saw Lord George Gordon the night before the 29th of May
, and whether Lord George Gordon said any thing to him upon the subject
of that meeting . GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1749

<font> Court . <$$font> The distinction is this .
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1750

If you call him to the meeting upon the 29th they having given evidence
of what he said at that meeting , you may shew the whole connexion of
what he said there besides , GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1751

but you can@ @not go into evidence relating to the day before .
GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1752

<font> Mr. Kenyon . <$$font> The meeting which was held in St.
George's-fields on the 2d of June , either was or was not legally
assembled ; GORDON-1781-2,1,34.1753

the motives for which they assembled , if Lord <P_1,35> George Gordon
was the assembler of it , will go a great way to shew whether they were
legally assembled or not . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1754

If assembled for purposes hostile to the laws , it was illegal ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1755

but if Lord George Gordon conceived it constitutional to go up with it ,
with a considerable number of persons , and if he had assigned the
reason why he was so to go up , that it was to remove the imputation
that he was carrying up a petition with forged names to it , I submit to
your lordship , that whatever the motives were , it constitutes either
criminality or guilt , or absolves him from the guilt with which he is
charged ; GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1756

therefore I humbly conceive , that if Lord George Gordon , can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of your lordship and the jury , what the
motives were which induced him to take the people there , it will go a
great way , not only in extenuation of his offence , but will totally
{COM:totally_to} extirpate the crime . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1757

<font> Court . <$$font> There can@ @not be a doubt of it -
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1758

his motive can@ @not be proved by his own private declaration .
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1759

<font> Mr. Erskine . <$$font> Your lordship was pleased to observe to
me that I was going to a time antecedent to the time put ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1760

your lordship will remember Mr. Hay , the first witness on the part of
the crown , has spoken to the expressions of Lord George Gordon , as
early as the February before ; GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1761

and these are declarations subsequent to that , GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1762

and it seems an extraordinary thing that a man should be called up to
condemn Lord George Gordon for words he has spoken , and that another
man , who has heard him speak words subsequent to that period , shall
not be permitted to explain that . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1763

Your lordship said it was a time antecedent - GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1764

I conceive it was not antecedent , because evidence has been given of
expressions of his lordship's antecedent to that .
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1765

I am now speaking of the 29th of May , GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1766

and Hay speaks of December , January , and February .
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1767

<font> Court . <$$font> Not of any particular expressions he made use
of previous to the 29th of May . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1768

- It makes no difference whether it is precedent or subsequent ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1769

he can@ @not give evidence of his motives by his own private
declarations . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1770

<font> <paren> Mr. Metcalf gave into court extracts from the journals
of the House of Commons , of the progress through the House of the act
of parliament to repeal part of the act of the 11th and 12th of William
III <$$paren> . <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1771

<font> Mr. Attorney_General . <$$font> Call General Skene .
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1772

<font> Mr. Kenyon . <$$font> My Lord , I understand the witness now
called , is to be examined to prove there were riots in Scotland ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1773

I object to the receiving such testimony . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1774

<font> Mr. Attorney_General . <$$font> The example Lord George Gordon
held out to them is the very riot in Scotland . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1775

<font> Mr. Kenyon . <$$font> If the legislature found this was
contrary to the sense of the people in Scotland , they did wisely
perhaps in complying with the wishes of the people .
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1776

It is the duty of governors , in general , to comply with the sense of
the governed . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1777

Any riot that may have happened in Scotland , I submit to your lordship
, can@ @not be proved ; GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1778

it would be an eternal disgrace upon government if it should be proved
that the Legislature gave way to riots in Scotland .
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1779

Your lordship will recollect the language of the witnesses :
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1780

Lord George Gordon exhorted the people to be temperate and firm ; that
the people in Scotland had by such means prevailed upon the legislature
not to extend the laws to that country . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1781

<font> Mr. Erskine . <$$font> I submit to your lordship , all the
witnesses that have spoken upon what Lord George Gordon said with
respect to this business in Scotland , have said he desired them to be
firm and temperate GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1782

for by that means the brethren in Scotland had redress from parliament ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1783

but it can@ @not be mentioned in this court , without an eternal
disgrace to the legislature , that that redress was given to them
because of those riots , which are supposed to have existed in Scotland
, which riots have not been proved to exist , and which ought not to be
proved to exist , because they have no relation to the present enquiry ,
unless the gentlemen on the other side can shew that Lord George Gordon
had desired the people here to burn houses as the mob did in Scotland ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1784

therefore I conceive it is impossible to be brought home as evidence in
this cause . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1785

<font> Court . <$$font> The counsel for the crown do not mean to impute
the demolition of the mass-houses in Scotland to Lord George Gordon .
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1786

I understand the evidence offered is with a view to shew , that the
speech which is attributed to Lord George Gordon related to a fact which
had existence ; GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1787

for some of the witnesses have told us that Lord George Gordon said the
Scotch had no redress till they pulled down the mass-houses .
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1788

<font> Mr. Erskine . <$$font> Who pulled down the mass-houses ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1789

will it be shewn that the Protestant Association pulled down these
mass-houses ? {TEXT:.} GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1790

Lord George Gordon addressing himself to the Protestant Association in
England , mentioned the firmness and unanimity of his brethren of the
Protestant Association in Scotland . GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1791

Will any witness attempt to prove that the Protestant Association in
Scotland were ever guilty of such riots ? {TEXT:.}
GORDON-1781-2,1,35.1792

<P_1,36>

<font> Mr. Solicitor_General . <$$font> The question is , whether we
are to give evidence of the destruction of these mass-houses , of which
Lord George Gordon has spoken in express terms ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1794

The question now is not , as to the operation and force of that evidence
. GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1795

The prisoner's language is , that in Scotland some mass-houses were
destroyed ; GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1796

that must have a meaning . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1797

The single question is , whether we are not at liberty to prove that the
mass-houses in Scotland were destroyed ? GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1798

<font> Court . <$$font> They have given in evidence , by two or three
witnesses , that when those people were assembled together the example
of the Scotch had been held forth , GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1799

and it is delivered in different expressions ; GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1800

one says he told them , " the Scotch by their firmness and steadiness
had carried their point , and he had no doubt but when his Majesty heard
his subjects were flocking from miles around he would send to his
ministers to repeal the act ; " GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1801

in another place , he says , " the Scotch carried their point by their
firmness , " GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1802

and more particularly the evidence of Mr. Bowen is expressly this , "
there was an attempt to introduce a bill for Scotland - that the Scotch
had no redress till they pulled down the mass-houses , "
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1803

and there are two or three other allusions , to understand which it is
absolutely necessary to know what the fact was ; GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1804

it is not imputed to any particular person , GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1805

but the fact is , that the Scotch pulled down the mass-houses ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1806

and there has not any bill been brought into parliament including them
in it . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1807

General Skene <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1808

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Attorney-General . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1809

Q. Were you at Edinburgh in 1779 ? GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1810

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1811

Q. Was there any insurrection or disturbance in that city then ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1812

A. There was ; GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1813

there was a mob there . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1814

Q. What did the mob do ? GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1815

A. They pulled down a house belonging to a person called Bishop Hay .
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1816

<font> Q. <$$font> Was it a Roman_Catholick's ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1817

A. Yes ; and they burnt what they called the chapel .
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1818

<font> Q. <$$font> Did they do any more ? GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1819

A. Not that I know of . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1820

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you know what was the cry , or how they were
appeased ? GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1821

A. They wanted to pull down Popery . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1822

<font> Q. <$$font> Do you know how they were appeased ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1823

A. I can@ @not say ; GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1824

I ordered troops from all quarters to march into town , which I believe
was the cause of their being appeased . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1825

General Skene <font> cross-examined by Mr. <$$font> Kenyon .
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1826

Q. You did not see this house or the chapel burnt down , did you ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1827

A. No , I did not see that house or chapel burnt .
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1828

Hugh Scott , <font> Esq. sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1829

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Lee . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1830

Q. Did you happen to be in Edinburgh in 1779 ? GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1831

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1832

Q. Were there any riots or disturbances there , upon any account ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1833

A. There were . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1834

Q. When ? GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1835

A. In the beginning of the year 1779 , I believe ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1836

but I do not remember the exact date . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1837

Q. What did the people do that assembled together there ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1838

A. I can@ @not say I saw them proceed to do any violence , or commit
any outrages , but according to common report and information .
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1839

Q. You must not mention any thing you do@ @n't yourself know ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1840

did you see what was done ? GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1841

A. No ; GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1842

I saw no act of the mob with my own eyes . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1843

Robert Grierson <font> Sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1844

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Howarth . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1845

Q. I understand you are a servant to the Duke of Buccleugh ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1846

A. I am . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1847

Q. Was you at Edinburgh in the month of February , 1779 .
GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1848

A. I was . GORDON-1781-2,1,36.1849

<P_1,37>

Q. Was there any riot or tumult in Edinburgh at the time ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1851

A. There was . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1852

Q. Give an account of what you saw the rioters do . {TEXT:?}
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1853

A. I saw them set fire to an house and burn it .
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1854

Q. What house was it ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1855

A. A chapel . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1856

Q. What sort of a chapel , a Protestant or a Roman_Catholick ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1857

A. I do@ @n't know ; GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1858

I believe it was a Roman_Catholick chapel . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1859

Q. What was the cry or call of the mob ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1860

A. I do@ @n't know ; GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1861

I was not nigh the mob , GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1862

I was two_hundred yards off . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1863

Q. Was it a great mob ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1864

A. There were a great many . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1865

Q. Did they do any thing besides burning that chapel ;
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1866

did they burn a house ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1867

A. Not that I know of {TEXT:of} . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1868

Q. Do you know Mr. Hay's house ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1869

A. No . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1870

Q. Was it what they call Bishop Hay's house ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1871

A. I believe he lived in that house . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1872

Robert Grierson , <font> Cross-examined by <$$font> Mr. Kenyon .
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1873

Q. The house was on fire when you first saw it ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1874

A. Yes ; it was . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1875

Q. Who set it on fire you do@ @n't know ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1876

<font> A. <$$font> No . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1877

Q. Nor do you know that it was a chapel , GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1878

only somebody told you so ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1879

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1880

<font> Mr. Attorney_General . <$$font> Was the mob there at the time ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1881

<font> A. <$$font> Yes , it was . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1882

William M'Kenzie <font> sworn . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1883

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Dunning . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1884

Q. Was you in Scotland in the beginning of the year 1779 ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1885

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1886

Q. Was you at Edinburgh ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1887

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1888

Q. Did you see any mischief done there to any Roman_Catholicks ?
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1889

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1890

Q. What was the mischief , GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1891

and by whom was it done ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1892

A. {TEXT:Q.} They set the papist chapel on fire .
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1893

Q. Did you see what kind of people it was , by whom it was set on fire
, GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1894

did you see it set on fire ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1895

A. No . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1896

I saw it burning . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1897

Q. Was there any mob about it at the time ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1898

A. Yes . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1899

there was a mob . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1900

Q. Did you hear them say any thing ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1901

A. No . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1902

Q. Did you hear any cry among them ? GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1903

A. No . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1904

<font> Mr. Attorney_General . <$$font> My Lord , I have evidence to
prove the destruction of all the gaols about this town and the number of
private houses , that were demolished , GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1905

but I believe I need not trouble the Court with evidence of it ,
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1906

it is so notorious . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1907

<font> Court . <$$font> Some of the witnesses have spoke of all the
gaols I believe . GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1908

<font> Mr. Attorney_General . <$$font> I shall call no more witnesses
. GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1909

<font> The End of the Evidence for the Crown . <$$font>
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1910

The remainder of this Trial will be published in a few days .
GORDON-1781-2,1,37.1911

<P_2,3>

<heading>

<font> For The Prisoner . <$$font> GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1914

Mr. Kenyon . <$$heading> <font> Gentlemen of the Jury <$$font> , The
counsel for the prosecution having stopped in this stage of the business
, giving as a reason for not producing more witnesses , that they are
afraid of tiring out the patience of the Court and the Jury , it is the
misfortune of the prisoner to make his defence at that period of the day
, when the attention of the Court and the Jury must be , in some measure
, exhausted . GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1915

There are other difficulties which he also labours under ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1916

for , upon this occasion , I , who am assigned , by the Court , to be
one of his Counsel , confess myself to be a person very little versed in
the Criminal Courts ; GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1917

I never yet stood as a Counsel for a person who had so great a stake put
in hazard ; GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1918

and therefore , Gentlemen , in addressing you for him , I stand as a
person in very considerable agitation of mind for the consequences which
may happen through my defects . GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1919

When persons are accused of actions of great enormity , one is apt to
look round about one to see what the motives were that could induce the
parties so to act ; GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1920

the prisoner at the bar stands before you a member of one of the most
considerable families in this country . GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1921

At the time when this conduct is imputed to him , he was a member of the
legislature ; GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1922

he stood in a situation which he was not likely to better by throwing
the country into convulsions . GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1923

A person that stood in the situation he stood in , could not make his
prospect better than in seeing the affairs of the country conducted
under legal government ; GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1924

and if he thought any inroads had been made upon those laws which the
wisdom of our ancestors had enacted , it was his business to bring about
the repeal of those laws , to redress those grievances , by proper legal
means , and not by causing a revolt in this country .
GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1925

This being the case , and as his conduct may be imputed to good or bad
motives , it seems reasonable , and humanity will induce you to impute
it to proper , rather than improper motives , the noble prisoner being ,
as I have said , a man standing in a situation who had every thing to
expect so long as law prevailed ; but nothing to expect when anarchy was
substituted in the place of law . GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1926

The crime imputed to the noble prisoner is , that he being a liege
subject of the King , had levied war against the King .
GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1927

The crime is imputed to him under an act of parliament enacted for the
wisest purpose , that crimes of this very enormous nature should not
depend upon loose construction ; but that men , in their journey through
life , might , by looking upon the statute , see what the plan of their
duty was , might see what the rocks were upon which they were not to run
; and might see , in the plain words of the statute , what they were to
do , and what to avoid . GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1928

The Attorney_General has told you , very properly , that the crime which
he meant to impute to him was not a crime against the person of the King
, but that it was a constructive treason . GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1929

Gentlemen , I have only to lament , that there is such a phrase in the
law as <font> constructive <$$font> treason . GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1930

At the time when the law was enacted , I verily believe the legislature
had it not in their contemplation , that the words constructive treason
, would find their way into the Courts at Westminster ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1931

but however , so it seems , the law is ; GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1932

for so it seems , upon some certain occasions , judges have decided .
GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1933

The offence <paren> when it comes to be more particularly described
<$$paren> which is imputed to the prisoner is , that he had levied war
by collecting together a numerous assembly to effect , by violence , an
alteration of a law , and procure a redress of grievances ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1934

and in order that Mr. Attorney_General might get your inclinations to
run before the evidence he gave , and that he might be in possession of
that which ought never to be roused upon these occasions , namely , the
passions of those who are to try the cause ; he , in terms of great
aggravation , compared with the evidence that has been given , stated to
you , that the whole city might have been burnt ; that there was great
reason to believe this had been concerted by our foreign enemies ; that
they mixed in this business ; and that , therefore , the Bank was to be
attacked , the public credit sapped , and every thing thrown into
confusion , and we to be delivered up , bound neck and heels , an easy
prey to our enemies abroad . GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1935

I dare say , he did not mean to do what was improper ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,3.1936

but , surely , <P_2,4> it was most improper . GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1937

In businesses of this kind it is not the duty of an advocate , in
stating his case to a jury , to enhance the crime beyond the degree of
guilt it will fairly bear when the evidence is produced before you :
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1938

and if any thing has been said beyond the fair import of the evidence ,
it has not been well said , by the counsel who conducts the prosecution
for the Crown . GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1939

Gentlemen , the other part of his speech was confined in stating to you
the evidence which he meant to give : GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1940

but , Gentlemen , in stating that evidence , I wish he had not used some
of the phrases which he did use . GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1941

I wish , when he spoke of the multitude collected together , he had not
called them an army ; GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1942

I wish , when he spoke of them in other parts of his speech , he had not
compared them to armies , talked of their being led in triumph , and
supposed they had gone arrayed in military form , to bring about this
redress of grievances , which he supposed was , and which was perhaps to
a certain extent , the intent of their meeting . GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1943

Several witnesses have been called ; GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1944

you have observed the manner in which they have given their evidence ,
and attended to the effect of it . GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1945

The first was William Hay ; GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1946

he has stated to you the several meetings at which Lord George Gordon
was : GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1947

and when he came to correct himself , upon the cross-examination , it
appeared he had over-stated it ; GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1948

for he was forced at last to admit that Lord George never had , to his
knowledge , been in Greenwood's Room . GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1949

How he came to have been in a situation to give evidence , is not
disclosed to you . GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1950

He appears to have been at all the meetings , at more than Lord George
Gordon was at ; - that he was in the Lobby of the House of Commons ; in
the Chapel at Duke-street ; at the burning of the Fleet ; at the Chapel
in Moorfields ; and that he was in Great Queen-street .
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1951

What the motives were , which led him there , I do not know .
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1952

But this I know ; GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1953

it has ascertained one fact , and a pretty important fact in this case ;
that at every and all of these places there were persons who had nothing
to do with Lord George Gordon ; GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1954

they were officious persons who crouded into the business ; encreased ,
if they did not make the croud , which was at many of these places .
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1955

He tells you , that the people who got together in Saint George's Fields
were <font> arrayed <$$font> , as he calls it , in their best clothes .
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1956

Now , why the word <font> arrayed <$$font> got into his mouth , I do not
know ; except he had been told , that if people came there arrayed in a
military manner , it considerably enhanced their guilt .
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1957

He told you also , that the people marched in <font> columns <$$font> ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1958

you will observe again another military word : GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1959

he was upon his cross-examination asked whether Lord George Gordon
desired they should march in columns or divisions ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1960

he admitted the language he used was divisions : GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1961

why then should he vary from the conversation or directions of the
prisoner he was giving evidence against ? GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1962

If it was done to give a different colour to the transaction , and the
phrase is so differenced as not to give the colour on the side of mercy
, which a man speaking in the case of blood ought to give , I impute it
as misbehaviour to that witness . GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1963

He tells you , that at one of the meetings at the Crown_and_Rolls ,
<paren> and he is the single person who speaks to it <$$paren> Lord
George Gordon said , " that by the King's assenting to the Quebec bill ,
his Majesty , or his Counsellors , had brought him to that pass to which
king James the second was brought after his abdication . "
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1964

Now , could a man of sense possibly use these words ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1965

How was he like king James the second after his abdication ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1966

had his Majesty abdicated the Government ? GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1967

was not he in possession of the throne ? GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1968

was he not in possession of all the force of the Country ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1969

How was it possible to conceive that the noble person at the bar then
could use such language ? GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1970

When witnesses come singly to state facts which never existed , it is
impossible , perhaps , to prove that those words might not pass .
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1971

But if one travels into the field of probability , and if you see the
whole of their evidence is improbable , and they supported by no other
witnesses , then the great improbability on the one side , opposed to
the unsupported evidence of such a witness on the other , is sufficient
to get rid of the evidence of that witness . GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1972

Was it not possible that other witnesses might be called , supposing
this witness spoke true , to confirm his testimony ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1973

- he does not state the transaction he speaks of , to have passed in a
corner , where nobody was present , but in a room where a great
multitude of witnesses were present ; witnesses , who were accessible by
the persons employed by the Crown , GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1974

and the great list of witnesses which have been talked of by the
Attorney_General , to the amount of one_hundred_and_seventy , shews ,
that those who were concerned in this prosecution for the Crown have not
been negligent in this business ; but have got together those from all
quarters who they thought could speak to the business .
GORDON-1781-2,2,4.1975

<P_2,5>

When I state this witness , hesitating and stammering as he did in some
part of his evidence , and standing unsupported in parts in which he
might have been supported if his testimony was true , for there were
parts of his evidence which were not likely to slip out of the memories
of other people , {TEXT:.} I have a right to conclude that he is
speaking that which is not the truth of the case .
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1977

Why did he make notes upon this occasion ? GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1978

He said he always does , GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1979

yet never made memorandums but once , and that 20 years ago , in one
place . GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1980

Who was the person to whom he made a communication of this ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1981

To one person only , a man whose respectability I admit , but whose
inclination must be known , because he is stated to be a Roman_Catholic
. GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1982

Gentlemen , he tells you , that he went home from St. George's Fields ;
that he went over Blackfryars bridge , and went to his house ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1983

and in that house at first , he told me , he staid till he went down to
the lobby in the evening : GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1984

- However , in the former part of his evidence he had mentioned a fact
which passed in Fleet-street ; GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1985

it was necessary for him indeed to reconcile the different parts of the
evidence , to bring himself out of the House before the time he went
down to the lobby , GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1986

for he admitted the croud came by a long time before .
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1987

You recollect , he said he saw the flags in Fleet-street ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1988

therefore in order that he might be consistent <paren> and I did not
choose to wrangle with him upon the occasion , though it certainly was
not exactly correspondent with the evidence he first gave , for he said
he went over Black Fryars Bridge , and was not out of his house till he
went down to the lobby <$$paren> it seems he was out of his house , upon
the leads of St. Dunstan's church , and saw this vast cavalcade of
people , to the amount of 30,000 , and was able to distinguish one man
so as to know that the man he saw afterwards with the flag at the House
of Commons , was the very man he saw with the flag in Fleet-street .
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1989

Here I must refer to the probability of the case ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1990

if Juries are to believe Witnesses , merely because they will swear to
facts , Juries are become of little use indeed . GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1991

Those who are acquainted with the profession see it ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1992

and lament when they see it , that there is no fact whatever , that
Witnesses may not be brought up to prove . GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1993

It is for Juries , therefore , to discriminate , to judge between the
probable and the improbable , to judge by comparison of the testimony he
gives , with the probability of the case , and to form their judgment
whether that which he says is true . GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1994

Juries become of no use if they are to believe it because a witness
swears it ; GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1995

they have to lay aside their judgment , and only make use of the faculty
of hearing and speaking , GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1996

and the whole is done . GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1997

But that is not their province ; GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1998

they are to exercise their judgments ; GORDON-1781-2,2,5.1999

they are to winnow the evidence , and get rid of that which is the chaff
; GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2000

and are only to abide by that which informs their sober judgment , and
enables them to say , that here deciding upon the life of a fellow
citizen we can@ @not mistake ; we see this man has probability added to
his testimony ; we see that he is supported by other witnesses .
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2001

Upon this part of the evidence , I conceive , that can never be said to
be the case . GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2002

When he is brought down to the lobby of the House of Commons , you
recollect he told you at first there was great confusion there :
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2003

yet in the midst of that confusion , this man is enabled to go through a
long detail of what passed , circumstantially , minutely , and in the
words in which it is given : GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2004

and yet , Gentlemen , when he has made the most of it , what is it his
testimony proves ? GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2005

" That Lord George Gordon only exhorted them to adhere to so good a
cause , that he himself would persevere in it " : GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2006

and he said , " that though he had no great expectations from the House
of Commons , yet that they would meet with redress from their mild and
gracious Sovereign . " GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2007

Were they then not to have redress from the House of Commons ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2008

How does this consist with the hypothesis on the other side ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2009

The House of Commons were to be coerced to do whatever he should dictate
to them . GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2010

But he tells them , " If the House will not do it for you , you must
apply to the King and his ministers . " GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2011

Is this the language of the man who intended in the moment that the
House of Commons were collected together , that they should by force and
violence be influenced to come to a vote , should do that , which , as
one branch of the legislature , they could not achieve {TEXT:atchieve} ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2012

Gentlemen , he found afterwards that it was necessary , if he could , to
couple these parties with those he had seen in St. George's Fields ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2013

and when he was asked after the parties about the House of Commons , and
stopping up the avenues of the House , how he knew they were the same
persons ; did he know any of them ? GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2014

He said , he only saw they had the same flags , and that one of the men
he had seen was the man who carried the flag in Fleet-street .
GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2015

I have before observed upon that , GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2016

you will recollect the station he was in , when he had the view of that
man in Fleet-street , GORDON-1781-2,2,5.2017

and you will , if you can , believe he carried <P_2,6> his ideas of this
man , one man selected from 30,000 , and having the ideas of that man's
face in his mind , he was able , when he came to the House of Commons ,
to see that man , out of 100 or 200 that he had so happily fixed upon in
Fleet-street . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2018

This Witness then says he went to the Sardinian Ambassador's Chapel ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2019

and he would have you believe that the persons doing the mischief there
were part of the company who were collected in St. George's Fields .
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2020

But were they so ? GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2021

Did he know any of them ? GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2022

- Did he see any of the actors in the business ? GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2023

Yes ; they were a banditti of boys , not any one of them having a
cockade . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2024

I beg you will bear it in your minds , because it was possible , and is
probable , that men of another description were those that did that
business . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2025

If it shall appear in the sequel of the cause , that that was the case ,
even from the testimony of this witness - a witness not much inclined
for the defendant ; yet he may be pressed into the service of the
prisoner at the bar . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2026

Gentlemen , he tells you there was one person who did the principal
mischief at that chapel . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2027

He does not tell you that - that one man had any badges belonging to the
Association he had seen in St. George's Fields ; GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2028

he did not say that man had a cockade ; GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2029

that man certainly was a man of a different description from those that
met Lord George Gordon in St. George's Fields , GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2030

or the Counsel for the Crown would have proved who he was .
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2031

But the witness says there was a multitude there .
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2032

What did they do ? GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2033

They <font> seemingly <$$font> , says the Witness , protected them .
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2034

I do not know what <font> seemingly protecting <$$font> is ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2035

but this I know , that a Witness well inclined to a prosecution will
construe every light action into a <font> seeming <$$font> ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2036

when you are to decide you can@ @not anchor upon such evidence as that ;
it is impossible to say that conveys any information to your mind ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2037

therefore , it seems to me , that the whole of what this Witness says
can@ @not be looked upon to be important in this case .
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2038

Gentlemen , as I said before , he might have been supported if the facts
that he speaks of were true , GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2039

and who the witnesses were that might have supported his testimony ,
might have been learnt by the examination of the man himself ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2040

for he states to you , that M'Millan , by name , and another person ,
walked with him from the lobby of the House of Commons through the whole
detail of this business , seeing what he saw , and judging of those
occurrences he states to you . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2041

Why is not M'Millan called ? GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2042

Is not M'Millan here ? GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2043

The Witness tells you he is down in the hall . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2044

Why is he not called ? GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2045

Is it that intelligence may be withheld from you ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2046

Is it that a witness , suspicious in himself , and speaking suspiciously
, ought not to be supported ? GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2047

Is it that the case is to stand or fall by that suspicious testimony ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2048

Or is it because this witness , if called , would have ripped up the
case told by his principal , and therefore the learned conductor of the
prosecution durst not call him , because he would have stated such
contradictions , and imputed such flagrant falsities to the account
given by Hay , as would not only have taken from Hay all credit , but
would in the outset of the case have stained the prosecution .
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2049

The second witness who is called to you is William Metcalf :
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2050

He states to you that he was at Coachmakers-hall ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2051

and the great matter to affect the noble Prisoner , I presume , is that
he happened to be there called to the chair ; that he was the President
of the meeting , and he said " the Scotch had succeeded by unanimity ; "
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2052

the voice of the people was against the wishes of individuals ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2053

and the wisdom of the legislature yielded {TEXT:yeilded} to the voice of
the people , not to the force and violence of the people , but to the
wishes of the people . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2054

- He desired , therefore , that the same kind of arguments might prevail
here . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2055

As to the wisdom of the act of repeal , I shall say nothing :
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2056

I am as great a friend to toleration as any man that ever addressed a
Jury . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2057

All I can say upon that subject is , that good men and wise men possibly
entertain different opinions . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2058

" He tells you the Scotch had succeeded by unanimity ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2059

he desired , if he was to do anything for them , that they would be
unanimous upon the subject ; GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2060

and he said that those who had signed the petition neither need be
afraid nor ashamed to shew that they had signed it , and to appear at
the House ; and that he would not present the petition , or begged leave
to decline it , unless he was met by 20,000 people in St. George's
Fields . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2061

He recommended that they should have some mark of distinction , and that
he would answer for any that should be molested ; that he wished so well
to the cause , that he would go to the gallows for it . "
GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2062

The other honourable Gentleman called afterwards , said he would either
go to the gallows for it , or to death for it . GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2063

If this matter is capable of explanation , and shall be explained
hereafter to your satisfaction , much as the stress was that was laid
upon the words , I am sure , in your sober judgment , they will not
weigh a feather ; GORDON-1781-2,2,6.2064

and having stated the words , it is proper . I <P_2,7> should accompany
the poison with the antidote , if it should come out , that at this very
meeting at the Hall , there was a contrariety of opinion in the persons
there , whether an act of parliament was in force , or not , which act
prohibited persons , above the number of twenty , carrying any petition
to the legislature ; that a gentleman there , of the profession of the
law , was of opinion that that was a subsisting law ; and that ,
therefore , the parties who went up might be involved in the penalties
of that law . GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2065

The prisoner's language arose from a difference of opinion on that
Subject . GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2066

- Speaking on the sudden , I conceive that that is not a subsisting law
. GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2067

Persons who read that statute , and the bill of Rights upon the
Revolution , will , perhaps , find , that one of the articles of the
Bill of Rights was levelled at that law ; as we learn from the Bill of
Rights , that it is the birthright of subjects of this country to
petition the legislature ; and if they do it in a peaceable manner ,
whether signed by twenty or two-hundred , the number makes no difference
. GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2068

Supposing I should be mistaken , yet that point stands very remote from
this case , and at a distance from the question ; the degree of guilt
imputed to the prisoner ; GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2069

for , by that act , a misdemeanor , perhaps , might be introduced ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2070

and the party might say , I am so clear upon the subject , I will run
the risque of committing the misdemeanor ; GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2071

but does it from thence follow , that Lord George Gordon had the most
distant allusion to that which followed afterwards , and is now imputed
to him as guilt of this enormous size , that he is guilty of high
treason ? GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2072

Your imagination must outrun what the witnesses have said ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2073

and must , by conjecture and inference , in a case of blood , make out
that kind of charge which this evidence has not fixed upon the prisoner
. GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2074

Gentlemen , the next witness that was called , I ask your pardon for
going through the evidence ; GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2075

but I have much anxiety for the cause , GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2076

and choose to omit nothing material . GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2077

Mr. Anstruther states , that he saw Lord George Gordon at Coachmakers
hall ; he understood he was acting as president ; " he desired the
parties to meet him at St. George's Field's ; assuring them , that
unless there were twenty-thousand people , he would not present the
petition ; " GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2078

he says , very honorably and candidly , that , at this distance of time
, considering the variety of conversations by different parties there ,
that it was impossible for him to recollect the words of the speaker ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2079

he says , the prisoner " recommended following the example of the Scotch
, who , by perseverance , had carried their point ; and he recommended
to them temperance upon the subject . " GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2080

That being stated to you by an attentive witness , a man of sense , and
of a considerable station in life , I have no doubt he states truly what
did pass , and states all that materially did pass ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2081

the same witness speaks to what passed in the House of Commons on the
Friday following ; GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2082

he speaks to all the conversation which Lord George Gordon held when he
was leaning over the rails , and talking to the parties who were in the
lobby below ; and that when they asked him whether they should go away ,
he told them , " that they were the judges ; GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2083

- I@ @'ll tell you how the matter stands : GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2084

the House is going to divide upon the question , whether your petition
shall be taken into consideration now , or upon Tuesday ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2085

there are for taking it into consideration now , myself , and six or
seven others ; GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2086

if not , your petition may be lost ; GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2087

to-morrow the House does not sit , GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2088

Monday is the King's birth-day , GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2089

and Tuesday , possibly , the parliament may be prorogued . "
GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2090

Now , Gentlemen , this he tells you was all that passed when Lord George
Gordon addressed them over the rails ; GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2091

and here I wish you would recollect this evidence , bear it in your mind
, and see how far all that is recollected by this witness , and all I
shall presently state to you to be recollected by another witness ,
comports with the testimony of the next witness , the Reverend Mr.
Bowen . GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2092

Mr. Bowen states to you that he was in the Gallery , that he saw Lord
George Gordon frequently go in and out of the house , that one of the
parties asked him whether it was necessary that they should go or not ;
that he told them in the language Mr. Anstruther mentioned ; that he
told them in what situation the business was , and left them to judge
whether they would go or not . GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2093

But this witness went further , GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2094

and told you that his Lordship stated to them , " that an attempt had
been made to introduce the bill into Scotland ; that the Scotch had no
redress , till they pulled down the Mass-houses ; that Lord Weymouth
sent official assurances that the act should not be extended to them ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2095

and why should the Scotch be in a better condition than we ? "
GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2096

Here again , upon words extremely important in this case , you are left
to believe that this is so upon the testimony of a single witness .
GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2097

Mr. Anstruther they called to you , who was present when all this
passed . GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2098

Mr. Cater was called , who was also in the lobby , and heard what
passed . GORDON-1781-2,2,7.2099

Neither of these witnesses have stated to you any conversation of the
kind ; nor out of the great multitude who were there , men of all
colours <P_2,8> and descriptions , who might easily have been found ,
the door-keepers of the House , who were in a situation where it was
impossible that any thing could be said in the lobby , but what they
might hear , and at a time when silence was occasioned by his Lordship's
speaking to them . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2100

I say here again , upon a very important part of the case , you are left
to decide upon the credit of a single witness . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2101

The observation which I before made to you upon this sort of evidence ,
will apply to this part of the case . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2102

It is enough for me to observe , that in the most important parts of
this case , as far as you have hitherto travelled in the cause , the
Counsel for the Crown have chosen to leave the most important parts of
the case not only not supported by more than one witness , but not
attempted to be supported by a second witness : GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2103

it is not because a second witness might not be called , if the matter
was true ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2104

but it is because no industry whatever could induce other witnesses to
come to swear in the same language . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2105

I do not wonder that parties are not extremely accurate in their
recollection of what passed on that day : it was a day of tumult and
confusion ; a day of much agitation of mind , undoubtedly ; and that
this gentleman at that time was frightened , that his mind was agitated
, that he conceived things which perhaps never passed ; and that
conception being once got into his mind , he has not been able to erase
the ideas from his mind since . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2106

I can only say that this is possible ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2107

and if you put him in a situation in which his mind was agitated , you
put him in a situation where you can@ @not decide upon the impressions
he received , when he is giving evidence against a man standing in the
situation of the prisoner , who has so much at stake .
GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2108

The next witness was Mr. Cater ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2109

he states , in the same manner Mr. Anstruther does , what passed in the
lobby of the House ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2110

he tells you of the very conversation which accompanied that Mr. Bowen
spoke to ; namely , Lord George Gordon talking to them about their going
or not going away ; the very words which were concomitant to those words
about the Mass-house in Scotland ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2111

and yet not one word did he recollect of that aggravating kind of
language . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2112

The three door-keepers are called - GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2113

the question is not put to one of them , because the gentlemen knew what
they would say : GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2114

<paren> for undoubtedly their evidence has been canvassed backwards and
forwards before , and put upon paper , GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2115

otherwise the duty of the officers of the Crown has not been done
<$$paren> GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2116

yet not one of these witnesses has been brought to state to you , that
that obnoxious conversation , which Mr. Bowen states , was held by Lord
George Gordon at the time . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2117

Gentlemen , the testimony of some of the other witnesses has introduced
into the lobby , persons who state themselves not to be connected with
Lord George Gordon ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2118

as that testimony has introduced some , it is not improbable but many
others , of the like description , were there ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2119

it is not only probable that that was the case ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2120

but the testimony of subsequent witnesses state , beyond all controversy
, that was the case ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2121

for Mr. Rainforth , the next witness , whose name meets my eye , states
, that the person who was there , urgent for the repeal , was a man of a
very different description to any of those who accompanied Lord George
Gordon , a Colonel Miles . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2122

Will any man state , that Colonel Miles was one of the Protestant
Association ? GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2123

was he not , notoriously , a man of a different description ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2124

yet he was the person who harangued , as Mr. Rainforth calls it , the
mob , in the lobby of the House of Commons ; and who called out <font>
repeal , repeal ! <$$font> and who seems the very soul of that meeting
so got together . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2125

What then does this prove ? GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2126

not that the persons under Lord George Gordon's controul , but men of a
very different description , and under the controul of persons of a very
different description , held that conversation in the lobby which has
been imputed to Lord George Gordon as criminal ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2127

and yet Lord George Gordon is now , by inference , intendment ,
suspicion and conjecture , to be made answerable for that guilt which is
specifically , by witnesses , attributed to , and fastened upon other
men . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2128

Gentlemen , much pains has been used in order to shew , that the members
of two of the bodies of the legislature were interrupted in their
journey down , to attend the national business , by persons brought
together , for that ill purpose , by Lord George Gordon .
GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2129

In the first place , no interruption of the kind is proved by any body
but one witness ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2130

you are told that Mr. Welbore Ellis was interrupted ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2131

why was not he here ? GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2132

he was here ; GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2133

why not called to prove it true ? GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2134

Was it not possible to bring the Bishop of Lincoln here ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2135

yet none of these persons are called . GORDON-1781-2,2,8.2136

A person is called to tell you , somebody told him , he had been told by
another , that the Bishop of Lincoln was <P_2,9> obliged to go out of
his chariot , and his wheels were taken off . GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2137

It is not fair ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2138

I do not impute blame to the Attorney_General ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2139

for his candour is equal to his abilities ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2140

when I say that , I state him high indeed ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2141

but it is not fair , in a case of this kind , by telling a story , and
wishing the Jury should believe it because the witness <font> believed
<$$font> it , but not knew it , that the Jury should believe , and have
it once impressed in their minds , at an hour when their minds are
harrassed out , and all attention asleep ; when it is difficult for the
most attentive to distinguish what is material from what is not material
; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2142

and yet it is by evidence of this kind , and this kind only , that a
very important , possibly the most important feature , in this cause ,
is to be laid before you . GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2143

In one instance only , is any thing of the kind , by legal evidence ,
imputed : GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2144

and that was the case of Lord Sandwich ; which was , I observed , <font>
with some eagerness <$$font> , asked after ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2145

and how is that proved ? GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2146

Mr. Hyde , the Justice_of_peace , says , that , when he came there ,
Lord Sandwich was hurt in his chariot ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2147

the witness did not tell you by whom he was hurt ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2148

but there were parties there with blue cockades ; and persons there not
with the badges of those in St. George's Fields ; but men of totally
another description ; men not with that mark by which you are told the
Protestant Association were to be distinguished , GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2149

they had red and black flags ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2150

they were men of another description ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2151

it is possible they might be , it is probable they were , a different
set of people ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2152

it is certain they <font> might be <$$font> ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2153

they had not those badges which discriminated the other .
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2154

This , I think , is the whole of the evidence which has been laid before
you on the behalf of the Crown ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2155

and if , upon this evidence alone , you were to retire to consider of
your verdict , dispensing justice with mercy , going upon sober , solid
, and sure ground , giving your verdict , in a manner , for which your
minds will never upbraid you , where you could never ask yourselves
whether you had gone upon conjecture or certainty , I conceive you would
think it much , too much , upon evidence of such kind , to impute to a
person who stood prior to this time , in a situation that little called
for suspicion upon him , who stood in a situation having every thing to
expect from good government , nothing to get by things being thrown into
confusion , anarchy and rebellion . GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2156

Upon such evidence , I should think you would conceive it too much to
draw conclusions against him which must lead to the infliction of the
last punishment , which must be the case if high treason is imputed to
him . GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2157

I can@ @not forbear relying much upon that which has <font> not been
proved <$$font> by the other side . GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2158

Does it appear , after the many prosecutions that were commenced , that
one single individual , connected with Lord George , or belonging to
that association which he was president of , have ever been found
obnoxious to the laws of the country ? GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2159

Has criminal guilt been fastened on any one of them ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2160

Has one of them been indicted ? GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2161

Has one of them been put to hazard ? GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2162

Has a crime been imputed to them , legally , in a Court of Justice ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2163

Gentlemen , it has not ; active and anxious as the officers of the Crown
have been ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2164

and it became them well , as far as they could , to investigate
enormities of the kind , that have been so feelingly , and I wish I
could not say , in rather an aggravated manner , stated to you ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2165

it was their duty to drag the offender from the corner in which he lay
concealed , to bare his head in the face of justice , and punish him if
he is guilty ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2166

yet all that anxiety , conducted by great abilities , has not been able
to impute a crime to any one man of the denomination of those Lord
George Gordon was the head of ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2167

if that is so , permit me to submit to you the case upon which I stand .
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2168

I admit that there were enormities committed of so gross , so flagrant a
kind , as to be a reproach to the country ; that punishment ought , and
did tread upon the heels of the offenders ; that it is impossible for
eloquence much superior to mine , for imaginations much more lively than
mine , to paint these enormities in too high colours .
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2169

But it may be supposed , that when a multitude of people , not a mob of
people , were got together , for good , at least , not for illegal
purposes , at least not for traiterous purposes , for that is enough for
me , not for traiterous purposes , if you can suppose that other people
, of much worse principles , and having much worse designs to achieve
{TEXT:atchieve} , availing themselves of the meeting of the Association
, did get together from all corners of town , and found that banditti
represented to be at the Sardinian Ambassador's Chapel , and perpetrated
the conflagrations that happened . GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2170

How is this to be imputed to Lord George Gordon ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2171

The Attorney_General tells you , if a man turns out a wild beast , he is
guilty of murder , if a man is killed by it . GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2172

I deny it ; GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2173

it is not the law of the land , nor the law of humanity .
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2174

If a man turns a wild beast into a room , where death must necessarily
ensue , no doubt he is as guilty as if a man shot into a crowd
{TEXT:croud} : GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2175

But where a beast is turned out , and the probable consequences will not
be that death will ensue , then is the crime to be imputed to him ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2176

it never has been , GORDON-1781-2,2,9.2177

<P_2,10>

there is not a decision , not a <font> dictum <$$font> upon the point .
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2179

I have looked into the place from which the Attorney_General supposes he
got his doctrine . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2180

But suppose it was so , GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2181

for God's sake how does that bear upon this point ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2182

Was Lord George Gordon's Association this wild beast ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2183

If he had a tame beast in his hand , and another taking occasion from
the tame beast being brought there , lets out a wild beast , will the
Attorney_General say that he that leads the tame beast in his hand is to
be answerable because another person opens a place and lets out a tyger
or hyena ? GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2184

In the name of common humanity , and common sense , I call upon the
counsel for the prosecution to press the point .
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2185

I know they will not : GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2186

If they should , the law would fail them , GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2187

and humanity would fail them also . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2188

I know they will not state it , because it is not the law of the land .
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2189

Lord George Gordon was the President of a Protestant Association ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2190

an act had passed which gave offence , right or wrong I will not say ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2191

perhaps my opinion may be it gave causeless ground of offence :
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2192

But God forbid , that because I differ with men in opinions , that
therefore I am to treat them as traitors to the laws of their country .
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2193

It is the happiness of our nation that our laws are not like the laws of
the Medes and Persians ; GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2194

they are subject to revision , and to be discussed and decided upon
soberly : GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2195

and it is not only the province of Englishmen , but their duty , if they
think there are laws which press upon legal liberty , or if there are
laws which improperly tolerate men whose principles are hostile to the
constitution , to petition for a review of such laws .
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2196

I do not say that that is the case of the law which gave rise to the
Association ; GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2197

but if they think so , they have a right to ask Parliament , that the
matter should be decided upon ; GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2198

and if the wisdom of Parliament think it ought to be repealed , they
have a right to ask for the repeal . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2199

With these principles , which I never will disavow , which no man will
state to you to be unconstitutional principles , this Association met ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2200

and after some time , for they had an existence long before Lord George
Gordon was called in ; but thinking well of him from his character , I
presume , being a man of blameless life and conversation , a man not
mixing in the vices of this age , a man irreproachable in his moral and
religious walk too - They thought that having such a man at their head
would give weight to their deliberations , and that such a man , if he
carried their request to the foot of the throne , would be attended to
as a man of moral conversation and religious life ought to be attended
to . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2201

- Whether these were the motives that weighed with them , or not , I do
not know ; GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2202

but some motives , however , did induce them to invite him to sit at the
head of that Association . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2203

He went with them , GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2204

conversed with them ; GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2205

he told the House of Commons he had been sitting with men of such
description ; GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2206

he was told that his petition would have no weight ; that there were
forged names to it : GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2207

he was told that other petitions had been treated with neglect , and
that the names he should bring were forgeries . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2208

He knew the uprightness of his own intentions , GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2209

and was conscious of the falsity of that aspersion ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2210

for it was a foul aspersion indeed ; GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2211

and it belonged to him to take away all possibility of doubt on the
imputation of forgery , in order that those who were to judge of this
Petition , might be informed whether it contained the wishes of such a
number of people ; GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2212

for that reason Lord George Gordon wished the Petitioners might attend
him to the House of Commons : GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2213

But how were they to come ? GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2214

Were they to have banners flying , and be arrayed for war ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2215

for the language that has been used to you , conveys every idea short of
that . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2216

The word <font> array <$$font> was not so often thundered in your ears ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2217

and <font> columns <$$font> and <font> divisions <$$font> , and <font>
marching under banners <$$font> , was not a language used for no purpose
. GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2218

Witnesses do not describe actions which passed in those words , which it
appears were not used , without some purpose ; GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2219

and when that same purpose can only be a bad purpose , because it
distorts the facts beyond their ordinary force ; I say then you must
suspect the whole of the evidence . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2220

- But I was turned a little on one side from what I was disposed to say
to you . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2221

How were these people brought together ? GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2222

were they brought together in military array ? GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2223

It has not been suggested . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2224

It is true , an Officer of the military association from the city of
London told you that he met some of these people with sticks , cutlasses
, musquets . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2225

But were those any of the parties who were in Saint George's fields ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2226

had they any such things ? GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2227

They were ordered to be there at ten o'clock in the morning :
GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2228

the reason that was given why they were to meet so early , was , it was
an hour no drunken people would mix with them . GORDON-1781-2,2,10.2229

That no offence might be given , it was desired that no stick might be
in their hands ; that they would come in their best clothes ; and , in
order that they might be known from other persons , that they would have
their blue cockades ; <P_2,11> that they would be in certain divisions ,
in order that those who were in one part , might know their fellows ,
and be known by them ; in order that if any strangers committed any
outrage and excess , they might be singled out , and delivered over to
the civil power , to be punished ; GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2230

and in order that there might be no riot and confusion when the petition
was delivered , they were ordered to go round London bridge .
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2231

In the mean time the petition was delivered , GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2232

they came through the city : GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2233

in the course of that journey , when people routinely inclined would
hardly have missed an opportunity to riot ; you do not find the least
excess , not the least violation of good behavior imputed to them .
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2234

But if you shall find that before they arrived there , another mob , not
belonging to them , were got together ; if you shall find that the
avenues of the House of Commons were got in possession by others ; if
you shall find that excesses were committed ; if you shall find , in
confirmation of the testimony given you by the witnesses you have
already heard , that men of another description , of Colonel Miles's
description , were there ; where then is the great imputation on Lord
George Gordon ? GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2235

I do not tell you that this business was not fit for the most sober and
solemn enquiry . GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2236

Most undoubtedly , it was behoveful for government that it should be
enquired into : GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2237

but it would be a libel upon Government to suppose that guilt should be
affixed to that man to whom it does not belong .
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2238

- Sufficient for every man are his own offences .
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2239

- If other men have been guilty of a violation of the laws of the
country , these violations are not to be placed to the reckoning of Lord
George Gordon . GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2240

But excesses were committed , GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2241

and were committed in other parts of the town ; GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2242

and Lord George Gordon has , say the Gentlemen , by his subsequent acts
, taken to himself , has adopted these excesses ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2243

and I am sorry to see by what medium of proof that is made out ; by no
single act of Lord George Gordon's , but that he signed what is called a
protection . GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2244

You will be struck with wonder and astonishment when you hear how that
happened : GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2245

Lord George Gordon , alarmed and filled with consternation at the riots
which had taken place in the town , finding that the blame was imputed
to him , and wishing to shew all the alacrity which man could shew to
get rid of the imputation if he possibly could , desired that he might
have access to his Sovereign ; GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2246

it will be proved to you that he went to the Palace ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2247

the Secretary of State will be called , who will state to you Lord
George Gordon's application ; that he came humbly to throw himself at
the feet of the throne , professing his own innocence ; but sorry from
the consequences that were supposed to result from acts of his :
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2248

He had not access to his Sovereign , GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2249

I do not know that he has any reason to complain ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2250

but he was told that he ought , as a test of his loyalty , to go into
the city , and see if he could do any thing to stop it .
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2251

When he went into the city , how did he go ? GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2252

Did he go at the head of , or mix with , the mob ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2253

instead of that , he went with one of those who are conservators of
peace , a magistrate of high authority in the city of London , Mr.
Sheriff Pugh ; GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2254

in company with that magistrate , he was going to effect , as far as he
could , that which he was ordered to effect as a test of his loyalty .
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2255

A person came to him GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2256

and told him , if a note , which he brought to him , was signed by him ,
it might have a good effect . GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2257

Suppose he had refused to sign it , GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2258

I am sure it would have bore hard upon him ; GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2259

it would have been said , a person having a house , inhabited by a
Roman_Catholic , applied to him to use his supposed influence , that it
would be doing him a good turn , and he refused it :
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2260

He felt it his duty to attempt it ; GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2261

if he had refused it , and if that argument had been urged against him ,
I should have found some difficulty in turning the edge of it ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2262

but when what he did on that occasion is to bring upon his shoulders all
the violence that was committed in the city , when by this he is to be
supposed to have adopted the acts of the miscreants who committed all
the enormities you have heard of , and to acknowledge that he was
connected with those men , in my apprehension , that evidence is
strained much beyond its fair import . GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2263

It seems to me , that that is the only medium of proof by which he is
attempted to be affected as to what passed in the City ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2264

I am sure it will not be laid much stress upon , because I know it ought
not ; GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2265

and , in a case of this kind , things are not to be strained beyond
their proper import . GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2266

I know it ought not to be urged against him that , at several days
distance , people with blue cockades committed violences .
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2267

You , yourselves , surveyed the town ; GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2268

you know that men , of all denominations and descriptions , used blue
cockades ; GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2269

you know that there walked about the city banditties , different , in
all respects , from this association , that robbed and plundered ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2270

women have been executed for these riots , GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2271

but it is not pretended that they were of the association .
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2272

It is by inference and intendment that you are to fix this guilt .
GORDON-1781-2,2,11.2273

<P_2,12>

Gentlemen , I have opened to you as much as seems necessary to open , of
the case of Lord George Gordon . GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2275

I have made those observations which occurred to me on the case laid
before you for the Crown . GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2276

Gentlemen , from your own knowledge in the discharge of your duty , you
know that in this case the facts are to be made out , the guilt to be
ascertained beyond all doubt . GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2277

It is not at hazard that men are to be convicted of such offences :
GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2278

You are to separate one transaction from the other , and to see how far
each separately goes : GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2279

You are not to bundle them together , and see whether that bundle of
nothing makes out something . GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2280

Juries must see that there is ground upon which they go , carrying
conviction to their minds that the imputed guilt is proved .
GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2281

If that is not made out to your satisfaction , however your passions may
be warmed by what you saw in those calamitous days , you will , I am
sure , divest your minds of these circumstances :
GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2282

You come to this trial with minds totally clear and impartial :
GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2283

You bring into Court no knowledge nor suspicions upon the subject ,
which are to influence your judgment : GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2284

You come here to attend to the evidence given , attending at the same
time to the oaths you have taken , GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2285

you are to decide upon the evidence , GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2286

you are to say whether Lord George Gordon is guilty or not guilty .
GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2287

I know that I speak to men of character and station in the world , and
of good sense ; and who know that their duty is to do justice ; and know
at the same time that every favourable construction is to be made in
behalf of the Prisoner . GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2288

That has always been the language of Courts , GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2289

and will be the language of this Court this day .
GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2290

Under these observations I shall call a few witnesses ; and hope you
will in the result find that Lord George Gordon , whatever blame or
fault may be imputed to him , is not guilty of High Treason with which
he now stands charged . GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2291

Mr. Erskine . My Lord , I mean to reserve my address to the Jury till
after the witnesses for the prisoner have been called .
GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2292

There is a precedent for it in the state trials ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2293

and I take it for granted , that Lord George Gordon will be indulged in
every thing that any man has been since the Statute of King William .
GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2294

<font> Court <$$font> . As far as I am concerned in it , I shall be
very glad to hear you at any stage , when it is most desirable to
yourself . GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2295

Mr. Attorney_General . I am sure no objection will be made on the part
of the Counsel for the prosecution . GORDON-1781-2,2,12.2296

<P_2,13>

<heading>

Evidence for the Prisoner . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2299

<font> The Rev. <$$font> Erasmus Middleton <font> sworn ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2300

Examined by Mr. <$$font> Erskine . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2301

<$$heading>

<font> Q. <$$font> You are a clergyman of the church of England ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2303

<font> A. <$$font> I am . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2304

<font> Q. <$$font> And , I believe , a member of the Protestant
Association ? GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2305

<font> A. <$$font> Yes . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2306

<font> Q. <$$font> Are you pastor of any church ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2307

<font> A. <$$font> I am Lecturer of St. Bennet's Gracechurch-street ,
and St. Helen's , Bishopsgate-street . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2308

<font> Q. <$$font> How long have you been a member of the Protestant
Association ? GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2309

<font> A. <$$font> From some time in February 1779 .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2310

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you attend the meetings held by that Association
, previous to the delivery of the petition to Parliament ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2311

<font> A. <$$font> I did . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2312

<font> Q. <$$font> Did you attend them regularly ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2313

<font> A. <$$font> Yes ; regularly . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2314

<font> Q. <$$font> Was you a member of the committee ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2315

<font> A. <$$font> I was . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2316

<font> Q. <$$font> State to the Court and the Jury , beginning at that
time , all that you saw and heard at these meetings of the Protestant
Association , previous to the delivery of the petition , when Lord
George Gordon was present . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2317

Give an account of the constitution of the Association , and its object
previous to the time Lord George Gordon became president of it .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2318

<font> A. <$$font> The Association was formed some time in February
1778 , in consequence of a bill brought into the House of Commons by Sir
George Savile ; to repeal certain penalties against the papists ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2319

a few persons met at Coachmaker's Hall , in Foster-lane , Cheapside , in
the same month of February . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2320

<font> Mr. Attorney-General . <$$font> What is it you are reading ?
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2321

<font> A. <$$font> Some notes respecting dates and times .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2322

<font> Q. <$$font> When did you make them ? GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2323

<font> A. <$$font> I really can@ @not tell . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2324

<font> Q. <$$font> Lately ? GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2325

<font> A. <$$font> No ; I made them from time to time as they occurred
. GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2326

The Association met from time to time in order to oppose the growth and
increase of popery , by publishing little books , and by making
enquiries into the schools , and the increase of those schools ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2327

and they agreed , that this Association should be open to all
protestants and protestant ministers ; and they should meet quarterly ,
in the months of July , October , January , and April .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2328

Several public meetings were held , and several resolutions come to of
that nature , of publishing books . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2329

The Lord Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry was requested to permit two
sermons of his Lordship's to be printed for that purpose .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2330

His Lordship declined that , looking upon it , that if they were taken
out of the connection in which they stood , they would not be so
serviceable as some others which his Lordship recommended to us of
Archbishop Secker's , Tillotson , and others . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2331

We then printed one of Bishop Gibson's letters in his Pastoral Care ,
and some other little things , GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2332

and dispersed them abroad ; GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2333

we likewise wrote an Appeal to the Public , which was published on the
5th of November , 1779 . GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2334

On the 12th of November , 1779 , we wrote a letter soliciting Lord
George Gordon to become our president ; GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2335

his Lordship condescendingly acceded to our petition ,
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2336

and from that time became our honorable president .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2337

In this Association we had all along in our view , as our model , the
Protestant Association in 1696 , when the King , with both Houses of
Parliament , the Bishops and Clergy , signed it , and his Majesty King
William III. proposed it should be lodged in the Records of the Tower .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2338

His Lordship first met us in the committee about three or four days
after he had condescended to become our president .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2339

<font> Court . <$$font> It can@ @not be material to go through the
history of your meetings , but only what is relative to this petition .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2340

<font> A. <$$font> I can only mention his Lordship's conduct , publick
and private , throughout the business of the Association .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2341

His Lordship demeaned himself every way in the most loyal affectionate
manner : GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2342

for my own part , I must confess I watched over his Lordship's conduct
and conversation with a degree of jealousy , knowing that we were
ourselves all well known to one another , the committee well attached to
our present sovereign and constitution , and that we were resolved to
give nor allow any speech or conversation that should tend in the least
to reflect upon any people whatever , and particularly administration .
GORDON-1781-2,2,13.2343

His Lordship appeared always the most calm and dispassionate of any one
of us , from all <P_2,14> I could ever learn ; GORDON-1781-2,2,14.2344

and , as I said before , I looked at his Lordship at all times with a
kind of jealousy . GORDON-1781-2,2,14.2345

I never could discover that his Lordship had any other design or end in
view , but simply that which we had in view , the Protestant interest ,
and by all legal and constitutional means to petition the House of
Commons to repeal , or to explain that Act , according to our petition .
GORDON-1781-2,2,14.2346

In all private conversation I have ever had with his Lordship , he
always expressed the warmest attachment of affection and loyalty to the
King , the constitution , and the Protestant interest ;
GORDON-1781-2,2,14.2347

we looked upon ourselves as happy in having his Lordship as our
president , not only on account of his rank , but on account of his good
moral character and of his abilities . GORDON-1781-2,2,14.2348

