<BEGIN_grafting-1780-1>

{COM:In_this_text,"scion"_is_always_spelled_"cion"}

<P_1>

<heading>

A New Treatise On the Art of Grafting <font> and <$$font> Inoculation .
GRAFTING-1780-1,1.5

<$$heading>

Grafting is an artificial method of transplanting a shoot of <font> one
tree <$$font> into <font> another , <$$font> in such a manner , that
both may unite and form <font> one tree . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,1.7

This art is pretty ancient , GRAFTING-1780-1,1.8

and probably was discovered in the first ages of the world by some of
the Antideluvians ; perhaps by <font> Noah <$$font> himself , the first
inhabitant , who was placed in the terrestrial paradise , in order to
cultivate it , and enjoy its first <P_2> fruits . GRAFTING-1780-1,2.9

Gardening in those days was highly esteemed , and reckoned an <font>
honourable employment <$$font> ; GRAFTING-1780-1,2.10

it was even the study and delight of princes . GRAFTING-1780-1,2.11

<font> Nihil homini libero dignius , <$$font> nothing more becoming a
gentleman , was the saying of the Roman Orator . GRAFTING-1780-1,2.12

Books of husbandry were written by men whose exalted station
sufficiently indicates the high value then set upon the art they taught
. GRAFTING-1780-1,2.13

For the truth of this , the <font> Fabii , <$$font> the <font> Cato's ,
<$$font> the <font> Varro's , <$$font> the <font> Virgil's , <$$font>
the <font> Pliny's , <$$font> and other great names , are sufficient
witnesses . GRAFTING-1780-1,2.14

There is indeed something truly magnificent in this kind of amusement ,
as it fills the earth with a variety of beautiful scenes , and has
something in it like <font> creation . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,2.15

Whenever therefore we can breathe in freedom a few moments , we are
sensible of an innate propensity to gardening , among which amusements
<font> grafting , <$$font> and <font> inoculation <$$font> in particular
, are as <font> pleasing <$$font> and <font> profitable <$$font> as any
thing belonging to it . GRAFTING-1780-1,2.16

It is also less laborious and fatiguing than most other of these rural
avocations . GRAFTING-1780-1,2.17

<P_3>

- And nothing I think can be more innocent and delightful to the mind ,
than to mark the gradual process of germination in the tender cion ,
when it begins to thrive , and draw its nourishment from the mother
stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,3.19

But it is infinitely more pleasing when we see it spread , bear fruit ,
and become a perfect tree ; when we reap the advantages of our labour ,
and can walk in the groves of <font> Pomona , <$$font> and even under
those shades which our <font> own industry <$$font> has raised .
GRAFTING-1780-1,3.20

Amusements of this nature compose the spirits , GRAFTING-1780-1,3.21

fill the mind with calmness and tranquillity , GRAFTING-1780-1,3.22

lay all its turbulent passions to rest , GRAFTING-1780-1,3.23

and conduct us to every social virtue ; GRAFTING-1780-1,3.24

besides that they naturally engender good thoughts ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,3.25

and dispose us to laudable contemplations . GRAFTING-1780-1,3.26

Many of the old Philosophers passed away the greatest part of their
lives among their <font> gardens . GRAFTING-1780-1,3.27

Epicurus <$$font> himself could not think sensual pleasure attainable in
any other <font> scene . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,3.28

Gardening has had , <paren> as before observed <$$paren> in all ages ,
and all parts of the world , some of the greatest Princes , the wisest
Philosophers , <P_4> the chief Politicians , and bravest Warriors , as
well as the most humble vulgar , for its admirers .
GRAFTING-1780-1,4.29

Every reader , who is acquainted with <font> Homer , Virgil , <$$font>
and <font> Horace , <$$font> the greatest geniusses of all antiquity ,
knows very well with how much rapture they have spoken on this subject ,
and that the two former have each of them left us a particular <font>
picture <$$font> of a garden , wherein those great masters have given a
full idea of what they esteemed the most excellent in the art of
gardening . GRAFTING-1780-1,4.30

<font> Virgil <$$font> has also written a whole book on the art of
planting . GRAFTING-1780-1,4.31

He describes in his writings the serenity of such employments ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,4.32

and highly extols the salutary exercises , and the unparalleled
pleasures of a rural life , which certainly can@ @not be too much
commended : GRAFTING-1780-1,4.33

Indeed I can@ @not but think the very complacency and satisfaction which
a man takes in these works of nature , to be a <font> laudable <$$font>
if not a <font> virtuous <$$font> habit of mind . GRAFTING-1780-1,4.34

The man who is fond of grafting and inoculation , and other rural
employments , <P_5> generally enjoys <font> sound health , <$$font> and
an uninterrupted <font> tranquillity <$$font> of mind .
GRAFTING-1780-1,5.35

We may say a man in such a situation tastes in perfection the pleasures
of life . GRAFTING-1780-1,5.36

And are such the advantages of these amusements ? GRAFTING-1780-1,5.37

surely then they can@ @not be too strongly recommended .
GRAFTING-1780-1,5.38

The person who can with delight spend his time in such innocent and
healthful avocations , must certainly be happy , if he will ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,5.39

for , as the Poet saith , {COM:verse_omitted} GRAFTING-1780-1,5.40

<P_6>

But enough of this ; GRAFTING-1780-1,6.42

we come now to the subject itself , GRAFTING-1780-1,6.43

and shall first consider <font> Grafting . <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,6.44

The reason for <font> grafting <$$font> is , that as all good fruits
have been accidentally obtained from seeds , so these when sown will
often <font> degenerate , <$$font> and produce such fruits as are not
worth cultivating ; GRAFTING-1780-1,6.45

but when the shoots , cions , or grafts , are taken from such trees as
yield good fruit , these will never <font> vary <$$font> from their kind
, whatever be the stock , or tree , on which they are grafted .
GRAFTING-1780-1,6.46

The proper season for grafting is in the <font> spring , <$$font> just
before the rising of the sap , or at least before it rises in any great
quantity . GRAFTING-1780-1,6.47

The cions should be cut off from the trees before the buds <font> begin
to swell , <$$font> which is generally three weeks or a month before the
season for grafting . GRAFTING-1780-1,6.48

The proper time for cutting the cions of plumbs , apricots , and peaches
, is about the middle of February ; GRAFTING-1780-1,6.49

but medlars , cherries , pears , &c. should not be cut till the latter
end of that month , unless the spring season come earlier <P_7> than
usual . GRAFTING-1780-1,7.50

As for the apple , we seldom graft them before the beginning or middle
of April ; GRAFTING-1780-1,7.51

however , the season is the <font> best rule ; <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,7.52

for , remember , no kind of fruit trees should be grafted till there is
a sufficient quantity of sap to seed the cions , and the bark of the
stock will separate easily from the wood , which is sooner or later ,
according to the state and temperament of the season .
GRAFTING-1780-1,7.53

The <font> implements <$$font> generally made use of in the art of
grafting are the following : A <font> fine small hand saw , <$$font> to
cut off the heads of large stocks ; a <font> good strong knife ,
<$$font> with a thick back , to make clefts in the stocks ; a <font>
sharp penknife , <$$font> to cut the grafts ; a <font> grafting chissel
, <$$font> and a <font> small mallet , <$$font> to pare away the wood ;
<font> bass <$$font> or <font> woollen yarn <$$font> to tie the grafts
with ; and a quantity of <font> clay <$$font> or <font> cement ,
<$$font> properly prepared , to lay over the incisions , in order to
prevent their bleeding , and keep out the air . GRAFTING-1780-1,7.54

The method of preparing the clay intended for this purpose , is to mix
thoroughly <P_8> together a quantity of strong , fat loam , some new
stone-horse dung , broken into small bits , a little tanner's hair or
straw , cut very small , with a little salt , and as much water as will
make the whole of the consistence of pretty stiff mortar .
GRAFTING-1780-1,8.55

In the choice of grafts , the following directions should be carefully
observed : 1st , That they are shoots of the <font> former <$$font> year
. 2dly , That they are taken from <font> healthy fruitful trees .
<$$font> And 3dly , that you prefer those grafts which are taken from
the <font> lateral <$$font> or <font> horizontal <$$font> branches , to
those taken from the <font> perpendicular <$$font> shoots .
GRAFTING-1780-1,8.56

These grafts <paren> as before observed <$$paren> should be cut off from
the trees some weeks before the season for grafting , that the stocks in
the mean time may gather sap , and the cions be more empty of it .
GRAFTING-1780-1,8.57

As soon as they are taken from the trees , to keep them from drying ,
and to preserve them from the frost , they should be laid in the ground
with the cuts downwards , burying them half their length , or more , and
covering <P_9> the tops with dry stubble . GRAFTING-1780-1,9.58

If a small joint of the former year's wood be cut off with the cion , it
will preserve it the better ; GRAFTING-1780-1,9.59

and when it is grafted , this may be cut off ; GRAFTING-1780-1,9.60

for the grafts must be cut to a proper length before they are inserted
into the stocks ; GRAFTING-1780-1,9.61

but , 'till then , the shoots should remain their <font> full length ,
<$$font> as they were taken from the tree , which will preserve them the
better from <font> striking . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,9.62

- <font> Note , <$$font> When the grafts are to be carried a
considerable distance , it will be proper to put their cut ends into a
lump of clay , and to wrap them up in moss , which will preserve them
fresh for a month , or longer : GRAFTING-1780-1,9.63

But these should always be cut off earlier from the trees , than those
that are to be grafted near the place where the trees are growing .
GRAFTING-1780-1,9.64

Directions <font> how to choose <$$font> your stocks , &c. for grafting
, will be given hereafter . GRAFTING-1780-1,9.65

There are <font> divers <$$font> ways of performing the art of grafting
; GRAFTING-1780-1,9.66

but the best and most successful method that hath been discovered <P_10>
is the <font> following , <$$font> which is now universally practiced .
GRAFTING-1780-1,10.67

The top of the stock is first cut off in a smooth strait place ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,10.68

and your cion <paren> which for a standard tree should be four inches
long , and for a dwarf six <$$paren> is to be sloped off with a sharp
knife an inch or more , that it may be the better fixed to the stock ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,10.69

this done , give a cut at the top of the slope , so that there may be a
kind of shoulder to rest on the top of the stock ; GRAFTING-1780-1,10.70

but care must be taken that it be not too deep . GRAFTING-1780-1,10.71

The whole slope also must be plain and smooth , without dints and
risings , so that it may fall close to the side of the stock .
GRAFTING-1780-1,10.72

Your cion being thus prepared , to receive the same , you must make a
slit in the rind of the stock , about two inches in length , drawing
your knife downwards ; GRAFTING-1780-1,10.73

but be careful not to wound the stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,10.74

This incision should be made on the south-west side of the stock .
GRAFTING-1780-1,10.75

At the top of the slit , loosen the bark with the flat haft of your
penknife , clear to the wood , GRAFTING-1780-1,10.76

and with your instrument <paren> which should be made <P_11> of ivory ,
smooth hard wood , or the like <$$paren> make way for the cion , by
thrusting it down between the inner bark , and the wood of the stock .
GRAFTING-1780-1,11.77

Before you put in the cion , cut off a little of the bark at the thin
end of the slope , that it double not in going down ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,11.78

however , observe to leave it with a sharp end , GRAFTING-1780-1,11.79

and so contrive it , that it may fit well , and fall close to the wood
of the stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,11.80

Thus having exactly fitted the one to the other , bind them closely
round with bass mats , woollen yarn , or some such thing , beginning at
the lower part , and so proceeding to the top . GRAFTING-1780-1,11.81

The cement , or clay , <paren> the use of which is to keep out the air
<$$paren> must then be applied , which must be daubed about the stock
and cion a <font> compleat inch <$$font> above and below the stock's
head . GRAFTING-1780-1,11.82

It should also be smoothed with a trowel , and worked in such a manner ,
that it may come sharp at the top , that the rain may the better run off
. GRAFTING-1780-1,11.83

If , some time after it is done , the clay <font> crack <$$font> or
<font> cleave , <$$font> as it sometimes does , by the frost , or heat
of the sun , the cracks should be filled up , or the grafts clayed again
, GRAFTING-1780-1,11.84

<P_12>

for the air is <font> very pernicious , <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,12.86

and frequently destroys the grafts , even after they have taken the sap
, and begun to thrive . GRAFTING-1780-1,12.87

This is called <font> grafting in the bark , <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,12.88

and it is certainly preferable to any other way . GRAFTING-1780-1,12.89

I shall now briefly specify the other different methods mentioned by the
Ancients , or practised at present by our gardeners .
GRAFTING-1780-1,12.90

<font> Grafting in the cleft <$$font> was formerly very much practised
by the gardeners ; GRAFTING-1780-1,12.91

but it is now seldom made use of , except for very large , and very
small stocks : GRAFTING-1780-1,12.92

For the latter , it is indeed preferable to the other , because the bark
of very young stocks will not easily separate from the wood to admit the
cion . GRAFTING-1780-1,12.93

Grafting in the cleft is performed in the following manner :
GRAFTING-1780-1,12.94

The head of the stock is first cut off with a sharp knife , or saw , as
smooth and even as possible : GRAFTING-1780-1,12.95

It is then cleft with a knife or chissel , about two inches deep ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,12.96

a piece of wood cut thin at one end is to be put into the cleft , in
order to open the gap , to make room for <P_13> the cion , which is
prepared by cutting it down a-slope on each side , about an inch , in
length , observing to leave it much thinner on that side which goes
nearest to the heart of the stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,13.97

Some cut it with a shoulder , as in the former case ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,13.98

but this is very immaterial . GRAFTING-1780-1,13.99

If the stock is pretty large , you may put in two or three cions ,
taking care to place them in such a manner , that the passage of the sap
between the bark and wood of the stock and cion may meet all along the
cleft , as near as possible . GRAFTING-1780-1,13.100

After the cions are properly inserted , bind them well round with bass
matting , GRAFTING-1780-1,13.101

and clay them , as before directed . GRAFTING-1780-1,13.102

In <font> whip grafting , <$$font> as it is usually termed , the stock
and cion should be nearly of the same bigness . GRAFTING-1780-1,13.103

The cion is sloped off a full inch or more , the same being done to the
stock ; after which they are joined , the one being tied upon the other
. GRAFTING-1780-1,13.104

This method is improved by what we call <font> tipping , <$$font> or
tonguing , which is to make a slit with a knife in the bare place of the
stock <P_14> downward , beginning towards the top of the slope , and so
slitting it a little way , and doing the like in the sloped part of the
cion ; GRAFTING-1780-1,14.105

but in the latter , observe to begin at the same distance from the lower
end of it , as was done before from the top of the stock ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,14.106

and carry it upward . GRAFTING-1780-1,14.107

This done , join them , by thrusting the one into the other , till the
cut part of the cion cover the cut part of the stock ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,14.108

bind , GRAFTING-1780-1,14.109

and properly cement it . GRAFTING-1780-1,14.110

In <font> side grafting , <$$font> the cion is prepared as above ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,14.111

but instead of cutting off the head of the stock , you must take out
from the west side thereof as much bark as the cut part of the cion will
cover , slitting both cion and stock as before ; GRAFTING-1780-1,14.112

afterwards it must be bound and clayed . GRAFTING-1780-1,14.113

The succeeding spring the top of the stock must be taken off sloping ,
about <font> two inches <$$font> above the graft ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,14.114

and care must be taken that the head of the stock does not overgrow the
cion the first year , which may be prevented by nipping the shoots , or
cutting off part of the branches . GRAFTING-1780-1,14.115

There is another <P_15> way of doing this kind of grafting ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,15.116

but 't@ @is only made use of when the bark will not <font> part <$$font>
from the stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,15.117

The method is this : GRAFTING-1780-1,15.118

Make a horizontal cut in a smooth place of the stock ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,15.119

and from the middle of that cut make a slit downwards , about two inches
in length , so that it may be in the form of a great T ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,15.120

then loosening the bark with the point of a knife , thrust in a cion ,
which may be prepared as before mentioned ; GRAFTING-1780-1,15.121

then bind them round , GRAFTING-1780-1,15.122

and carefully clay them . GRAFTING-1780-1,15.123

Grafting by <font> approach , <$$font> called by the ancients <font>
ablactation {COM:see_errata} , <$$font> and by the moderns <font>
inarching , <$$font> or <font> enarching , <$$font> is a method wherein
the cion of one tree is united to another by degrees , and then cut off
, and weaned from its mother stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,15.124

This way of grafting by approach is practicable only when two trees grow
so near together that the <font> cion of one <$$font> may be applied ,
without cutting off , to the stock of the <font> other . <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,15.125

It is done by cutting the side of the branch and stock about three
inches long , so contriving them , that they may shut well <P_16>
together , so that the passage of the sap may join , in which position
they should be fast bound and clayed . GRAFTING-1780-1,16.126

When they are well cemented , cut off the head of the stock , about four
inches above the binding , and in March following the other part may be
taken off , about an inch from the grafted place .
GRAFTING-1780-1,16.127

There is <font> another <$$font> method of doing this , by cutting off
the head of the stock at first , sloping half off , about two inches in
length , and joining the cion thereunto . GRAFTING-1780-1,16.128

This last method was anciently practised on oranges , lemons ,
pomegranates , vines , &c. GRAFTING-1780-1,16.129

Observe , when you graft , that the weather be <font> mild <$$font> and
<font> seasonable . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,16.130

It should be neither frosty nor wet , GRAFTING-1780-1,16.131

nor should the wind blow very bleak or strong when this operation is
performed ; GRAFTING-1780-1,16.132

for on <font> these circumstances , <$$font> and upon the <font> exact
joining <$$font> of the inner bark of the cion with the inner bark of
the stock , so that the sap which flows between the bark and the wood
may <font> be communicated <$$font> from one to the other , the <font>
success <$$font> of grafting chiefly depends . GRAFTING-1780-1,16.133

<P_17>

The cement or composition which some have of late used for grafting ,
and which has been found to keep out the air <font> better <$$font> than
the clay before-@ @mention'd , is made of turpentine , bees wax , and
rosin , melted together . GRAFTING-1780-1,17.135

This composition , when of a proper consistence , is laid about a
quarter of an inch thick , upon the cut part of the stock round the
graft , GRAFTING-1780-1,17.136

and has this further advantage over the clay , that there is no danger
of its being hurt by frost ; GRAFTING-1780-1,17.137

for cold hardens it ; GRAFTING-1780-1,17.138

and when the heat of summer comes on , by which time it is no longer
wanted on the tree , it will melt and fall off , without any trouble .
GRAFTING-1780-1,17.139

The stocks for grafting upon ought to be <font> smooth <$$font> in the
bark , <font> healthy , <$$font> and <font> sound . <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,17.140

Crab is allowed to be the most durable , and the best for apples .
GRAFTING-1780-1,17.141

In the nurseries there are three sorts of stocks generally used to graft
apples upon : GRAFTING-1780-1,17.142

The first are called <font> free stocks ; <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,17.143

these are raised from the kernels of all apples indifferently ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,17.144

and are also termed crab-stocks ; GRAFTING-1780-1,17.145

for all those trees that are produced from the seeds <P_18> are called
crabs , without any distinction ; GRAFTING-1780-1,18.146

but I should always prefer such stocks as are raised from the kernels of
crabs , where they are pressed for verjuice ; GRAFTING-1780-1,18.147

and I find several of the old writers on this subject of the same mind .
GRAFTING-1780-1,18.148

Mr. <font> Austin , <$$font> who wrote an_hundred years ago says , the
stocks which he accounts best for apple grafts is the crab , which is
better than sweeter apples , and will make fruits more strong and hardy
to endure frosts ; GRAFTING-1780-1,18.149

and it is very certain , that by frequently grafting some sorts of
apples upon free stocks , the fruits have been rendered less firm and
poignant , and of a shorter duration . GRAFTING-1780-1,18.150

The second sort of stocks is the <font> Dutch Creeper ; <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,18.151

these are designed to stint the growth of the trees , and keep them
within compass for dwarfs , or espaliers . GRAFTING-1780-1,18.152

The third sort is the <font> Paradise Apple , <$$font> which is a very
low shrub , so only proper for trees which are kept in pots by way of
curiosity , GRAFTING-1780-1,18.153

for these do not continue long . GRAFTING-1780-1,18.154

<P_19>

Some persons have made use of codlin trees for grafting of apples , in
order to stint their growth ; GRAFTING-1780-1,19.156

but as these are commonly propagated by suckers , I would by no means
advise the use of them ; GRAFTING-1780-1,19.157

nor would I choose to raise the codlin trees from suckers , but rather
graft them upon <font> crab stocks , <$$font> which will cause the fruit
to be finer , last longer , and have a sharper flavour ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,19.158

and these trees will last much longer sound , and never put out suckers
, as the codlins always do ; which , if not constantly taken off , will
weaken the trees , and cause them to <font> canker . <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,19.159

The method of raising the stocks from the kernels of crabs or apples is
, to procure them where they are pressed for verjuice or cyder ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,19.160

and after they are cleared of the pulp , they may be sown on a bed of
light earth , covering them over about half an inch thick with the same
light earth : GRAFTING-1780-1,19.161

These may be sown in November or December where the ground is dry ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,19.162

but in wet ground it will be better to defer it till February ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,19.163

but then the seed should be <P_20> preserved in dry sand , and kept out
of the reach of vermin ; GRAFTING-1780-1,20.164

for if mice or rats can get to them , they will devour the seeds :
GRAFTING-1780-1,20.165

There should also be care taken of the seeds when they are sown , to
protect them from those vermin , by setting of traps to take them , &c.
GRAFTING-1780-1,20.166

In the spring , when the plants appear , they must be carefully weeded ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,20.167

and if the season should prove dry , it will be of great service to
water them two or three times a week . GRAFTING-1780-1,20.168

If they thrive well , they will be fit to transplant into the nursery
the October following . GRAFTING-1780-1,20.169

When they are thus transplanted out of the seed bed , the first autumn
after sowing , they need not be headed ; GRAFTING-1780-1,20.170

but where they are inclined to shoot downward , the tap_root must be
shortened , in order to force out horizontal shoots .
GRAFTING-1780-1,20.171

If the ground is pretty good in which the stocks are planted , and the
weeds constantly cleared away , the stocks will make great progress ; so
that those which are intended for dwarfs may be grafted the spring
twelvemonth after they are planted out of the seed beds ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,20.172

but those which are designed for standards will require <P_21> two years
more growth before they will be fit to graft ; by which time they will
be upwards of six feet high , and of a competent bigness .
GRAFTING-1780-1,21.173

All the sorts of <font> pears <$$font> propagated in gardens are
produced by budding , or grafting them upon stocks ; of their <font> own
kind , <$$font> which are commonly called <font> tree stocks , <$$font>
or else upon the <font> quince <$$font> or <font> white thorn stocks ;
<$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,21.174

but the last are now generally disused , the fruit produced this way
being apt to be dry and meally . GRAFTING-1780-1,21.175

The quince stocks are , however , in great esteem for the trees designed
for dwarfs , or for walls , because they do not let the shoots grow so
fast and luxuriant . GRAFTING-1780-1,21.176

But there are objections against even these , which are of some
consequence ; GRAFTING-1780-1,21.177

for there are many kinds of pears that will not prosper upon them , but
will die , or become weak and good for nothing , after three or four
years ; GRAFTING-1780-1,21.178

and the hard baking pears are rendered very unpleasant by being grafted
on these stocks , while the buttery or melting ones are meliorated by
them . GRAFTING-1780-1,21.179

And it is also to be minded that no sort of pear <P_22> will thrive upon
a quince stock in a poor or gravelly soil . GRAFTING-1780-1,22.180

The <font> medlar <$$font> is propagated by grafting it on a <font> pear
stock , crab , white thorn , <$$font> or <font> service tree . <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,22.181

I have seen it thrive extremely well on a pear , GRAFTING-1780-1,22.182

but white thorn stocks are now more frequently used .
GRAFTING-1780-1,22.183

The great Dutch medlar is preferable to the common English medlar , and
much better tasted . GRAFTING-1780-1,22.184

The proper time for grafting these is generally <paren> unless the
season indicate the contrary <$$paren> about the beginning of April .
GRAFTING-1780-1,22.185

Apricots of every kind are propagated by breeding them on <font> plum
stocks , <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,22.186

and will readily take upon almost any sort of plum , except the <font>
Brussels , <$$font> provided the stock be free and thriving .
GRAFTING-1780-1,22.187

These should be grafted pretty early in the season ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,22.188

and it is rarely too soon at the beginning of March .
GRAFTING-1780-1,22.189

The proper time , however , may easily be ascertained , by observing
when the buds begin to swell . GRAFTING-1780-1,22.190

<P_23>

The best stocks for grafting <font> peaches <$$font> on are of the
<font> plum kind . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,23.192

Those of the <font> muscle , <$$font> or <font> white pear plum ,
<$$font> are accounted the best . GRAFTING-1780-1,23.193

These trees , however , and most of the stone fruit kind , are now
raised by <font> budding <$$font> ; GRAFTING-1780-1,23.194

for they take better by the <font> latter , <$$font> than by the <font>
former <$$font> method . GRAFTING-1780-1,23.195

Stocks <font> for cherry trees <$$font> are raised from cherry stones
set or sowed , from slips , and frequently from young wild cherry trees
, that are found in the woods and hedges . GRAFTING-1780-1,23.196

The best stocks , however , are those of the <font> black , <$$font> or
<font> wild red cherry , <$$font> which are strong shooters , and of a
longer duration than any of the garden kinds . GRAFTING-1780-1,23.197

The stones of these two sorts should be sown in a bed of light sandy
earth , in autumn , GRAFTING-1780-1,23.198

and the young stocks produced from them are to remain where they are
sown till the second autumn ; when in October they should be planted out
into a rich earth , at three feet distance from row to row , and about
ten inches distant in the rows . GRAFTING-1780-1,23.199

In about three years after they are planted out , they will be fit to
graft , if designed for dwarfs ; GRAFTING-1780-1,23.200

<P_24>

but if for standards , they will not be tall enough till the fourth or
fifth year ; GRAFTING-1780-1,24.202

for they should be grafted <font> six <$$font> feet from the ground .
GRAFTING-1780-1,24.203

I would rather recommend budding for the breeding of cherry trees ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,24.204

for grafting is seldom successful . GRAFTING-1780-1,24.205

Plums are generally grafted on inferior stocks of their own kind ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,24.206

sometimes they will take very well , when grafted on white thorn or
damson , GRAFTING-1780-1,24.207

and they seldom fail on the black thorn , or sloe tree .
GRAFTING-1780-1,24.208

Some have grafted them on cherry stocks with success ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,24.209

and this season I myself made the experiment , GRAFTING-1780-1,24.210

and found it answer beyond my expectation ; GRAFTING-1780-1,24.211

for the cion of the plum readily took the sap of the cherry stock ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,24.212

and put forth two or three long shoots . GRAFTING-1780-1,24.213

At the same time I made other trials of the same kind , which shall be
taken notice of in their proper places . GRAFTING-1780-1,24.214

All such trees as are of the same <font> genus , <$$font> i.e. which
agree in their flower and fruit , will generally <font> take <$$font>
upon each other ; GRAFTING-1780-1,24.215

for instance , all nut-bearing trees may be <P_25> safely grafted upon
each other , as may also the plum-bearing trees , under which head I
reckon not only the several sorts of plums , but also the almond , peach
, nectarine , apricot , &c. which agree exactly in their general
characters by which they are distinguished from all other trees ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,25.216

but many of these are very subject to emit large quantities of gum from
such parts of the trees as are deeply cut and wounded , which in the
tender trees of this kind , viz. peaches and nectarines , being more
common and hurtful , it is found to be the surest method to <font> bud
<$$font> or inoculate them . GRAFTING-1780-1,25.217

All such trees as bear cones will do well upon each other , though they
may differ in one being evergreen , and the other shedding its leaves in
winter ; as is observable in the cedar of Libanus , and the larch tree ,
which are found to succeed upon each other very well ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,25.218

but these must be grafted by approach , for they abound with a great
quantity of resin which is apt to evaporate from the graft , if
separated from the tree before it be joined <P_26> with the stock ,
whereby they are often destroyed , as also the laurel on the cherry , or
the cherry on the laurel . GRAFTING-1780-1,26.219

All the mast-bearing trees will also take upon each other ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,26.220

and those which have a tender soft wood will do well if grafted in the
common way ; GRAFTING-1780-1,26.221

but those of a more firm contexture , and that are slow growers , should
be grafted by <font> approach . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,26.222

By observing this rule we shall seldom miscarry , provided the operation
be rightly performed , and at {COM:see_errata} a proper season , unless
the weather should prove very bad . GRAFTING-1780-1,26.223

It is by this method that many kinds of exotic trees are not only
propagated , but also rendered hardy enough to endure the cold of our
climate in the open air ; GRAFTING-1780-1,26.224

for being grafted upon stocks of the same sort that are hardy , the
grafts are rendered more capable of enduring the cold , as has been
experienced of most of our valuable fruits now in England , which were
formerly transplanted here from more southerly climates .
GRAFTING-1780-1,26.225

<P_27>

The improvements , &c. that may be made in grafting and inoculation ,
and the <font> different cions <$$font> that have been found to succeed
when grafted on <font> different stocks , <$$font> I shall more
particularly consider in treating of inoculation .
GRAFTING-1780-1,27.227

<font> Reiterated grafting , <$$font> or <font> grafting <$$font> by a
<font> double <$$font> or <font> treble incision , <$$font> is a method
recommended by Lord Bacon : GRAFTING-1780-1,27.228

It is also mentioned by Agricola , whose work , though chimerical enough
, contains , notwithstanding , several very good things .
GRAFTING-1780-1,27.229

To perform this , first graft a good cion on the stock ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,27.230

and cut it away to one half , or a third part ; GRAFTING-1780-1,27.231

then fix to that remaining part of the cion another graft of a better
kind , and to that a third ; GRAFTING-1780-1,27.232

for the oftener the tree is grafted , the finer fruit it produceth .
GRAFTING-1780-1,27.233

By this method Agricola assures us , that he produced <font> muscat
pears <$$font> which were admirable , making at first use of a stock
grafted with a pound pear , on which he grafted a <font> summer
bon-cretien <$$font> ; GRAFTING-1780-1,27.234

and when <P_28> the branch of this last had shot , he grafted on it a
cion of a <font> bergamot , <$$font> which he also cut ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,28.235

and grafted on it a cion of a muscat pear . GRAFTING-1780-1,28.236

To have <font> several kinds <$$font> of fruit upon <font> one <$$font>
tree , the best way is to graft <font> divers sorts <$$font> of cions
upon the branches of an old spreading tree . GRAFTING-1780-1,28.237

Thus the cions of medlars , pears , or quinces , may be grafted with
success on an <font> apple tree ; <$$font> as also apples , medlars &c.
with like success , may be inserted in <font> pear stocks , &c.
<$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,28.238

And if done with skill , and at the proper season , they seldom fail .
GRAFTING-1780-1,28.239

I have frequently grafted apples and medlars , on several kinds of
stocks , particularly <font> pear , <$$font> and on the contrary , the
cions of pears and medlars on apple or crab stocks ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,28.240

and they took very sure , GRAFTING-1780-1,28.241

and thrived extremely well : GRAFTING-1780-1,28.242

But it is to be observed , that this will not do , unless the trees on
which they are grafted be <font> sound , and , of a good growth <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,28.243

Care must be also taken that each cion be inserted in its proper season
, i.e. as soon as the buds of the trees from which the cions are taken
begin to swell , <P_29> which happens sooner or later , in different
kinds of trees , GRAFTING-1780-1,29.244

but in this judgment must direct . GRAFTING-1780-1,29.245

The best and most successful way for this kind of grafting is in the
bark . GRAFTING-1780-1,29.246

<font> Root grafting <$$font> is a modern invention , the design of
which is somewhat different from that of any of the former methods :
this being for the propagation or multiplication of plants , already
fitted to produce their fruits . GRAFTING-1780-1,29.247

To perform this , take a graft or sprig of a young tree , which you
intend to propagate , and a small piece of the root of another tree of
the same kind , or of a like genus , GRAFTING-1780-1,29.248

and whip-graft them together , observing that the rind of the root join
closely to that of the graft . GRAFTING-1780-1,29.249

These may afterwards be planted out at pleasure , GRAFTING-1780-1,29.250

and the piece of root will collect the nutritive juices , and seed the
graft , as the stock does the other way . GRAFTING-1780-1,29.251

This method of propagation is certainly <font> very curious , <$$font>
and at the same time both <P_30> easy and expeditious in the operation ,
roots being more plentiful than stocks ; GRAFTING-1780-1,30.252

by this means the pieces or roots of one crab stock , for example , or
of one apple stock , will serve for <font> twenty <$$font> or <font>
thirty <$$font> apple grafts ; and the like of other trees .
GRAFTING-1780-1,30.253

It is also an excellent way for raising such trees , which will hardly
bear of being grafted in the stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,30.254

Add , that trees thus grafted bear sooner , and are more easily dwarfed
than any other way . GRAFTING-1780-1,30.255

The only objection against this method is , that the young tree grows
but <font> slowly <$$font> at first , which is occasioned by the
smallness of the root that seeds the graft ; GRAFTING-1780-1,30.256

for in all trees the head must follow the increase of the roots , from
whence it has its nourishment . GRAFTING-1780-1,30.257

All grafts , particularly young cions are subject to be injured by
<font> birds <$$font> ; GRAFTING-1780-1,30.258

but that may be prevented by binding some small bushes about the tops of
the stocks . GRAFTING-1780-1,30.259

The binding of grafts should be loosened when the cions have pushed
forth about <P_31> an inch and a half , or two inches ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,31.260

for if it is continued longer , its too great tightness will hinder the
swelling of the stock , so as to hazard the cion being broke by the
winds at the place of the bandage ; GRAFTING-1780-1,31.261

as a substitute in this case , if the cion is so ordered in cutting ,
that an <font> eye <$$font> be left against the place of <font> junction
, <$$font> between the stock and graft , there is a probability of the
buds putting forth after the damage has so happened , provided it is
broke off above it , GRAFTING-1780-1,31.262

and thereby a year is gained . GRAFTING-1780-1,31.263

Ablactation , or <font> Grafting by approach , <$$font> is not so much
in vogue as formerly . GRAFTING-1780-1,31.264

It was a method universally practised by the ancients on orange trees ,
jasmines , &c. GRAFTING-1780-1,31.265

but as we have now better ways to manage them , either by cuttings or
inoculation , we seldom make use of it , except for those sorts of
plants which are of a <font> firm contexture , <$$font> and <font> slow
growth , <$$font> which will not take otherwise .
GRAFTING-1780-1,31.266

For such , the best way of performing it is thus :
GRAFTING-1780-1,31.267

The branch to be inarched is <P_32> fitted to that part of the stock ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,32.268

the rind and part of the wood of one side of that branch is then pared
away very smooth and even , for the length of three inches ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,32.269

and afterwards the other branch , which is to serve for the stock to
which the graft is to be united , is served in the same manner , so that
the two may join close and equally together , that the sap vessels may
meet . GRAFTING-1780-1,32.270

A little tongue is then cut upwards in the graft ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,32.271

and a slit is made in the stock to receive it , so that when they are
joined together , the tongue prevents their slipping , and the graft is
more closely united to the stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,32.272

When they are thus placed exactly together , they must be tied with bass
, worsted , or some other soft stuff , GRAFTING-1780-1,32.273

and the place of junction must be well covered over with grafting clay ,
to prevent the air from drying the wound , and the wet from rotting the
stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,32.274

A stake must also be fixed in the ground , GRAFTING-1780-1,32.275

and both the stock and graft must be tied thereto , to prevent their
being displaced by the winds . GRAFTING-1780-1,32.276

When they have remained in this state four months , they will be
sufficiently <P_33> united , GRAFTING-1780-1,33.277

and the graft may then be cut off from the mother tree , observing to
slope it <font> close <$$font> to the stock . GRAFTING-1780-1,33.278

It is of great service to the graft then to lay a fresh coat of clay all
round the graft or jointed part . GRAFTING-1780-1,33.279

This operation should be performed in April or May ; that the graft may
be perfectly united to the stock before the ensuing winter .
GRAFTING-1780-1,33.280

The bass used for this , or for any other binding , should be taken from
a sound mat , and be soaked in water for some hours to encrease its
strength , and render it more pliable . GRAFTING-1780-1,33.281

<font> Whip Grafting , <$$font> or <font> Tongue Grafting , <$$font> is
most proper for small stocks , from an inch diameter to a quarter of an
inch , or less . GRAFTING-1780-1,33.282

This method I would <font> particularly <$$font> recommend , because it
is generally <font> successful . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,33.283

Mr. <font> Worlidge , <$$font> Mr. <font> Loudon , <$$font> Mr.
<font> Miller , <$$font> and others , speak of it as the most successful
way of any , and that which is most in use , because the cion covers the
stock much sooner in this method than in any other .
GRAFTING-1780-1,33.284

But it must be observed , that <P_34> the cion and stock must be always
of the <font> same bigness . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,34.285

If the reader please to look back in the preceding pages , he will find
I have already mentioned how it is performed ; GRAFTING-1780-1,34.286

however , it may not be improper to observe , that some , instead of
sloping the cion and stock as before recited , cut off the latter as
smooth and even as possible ; and after having made a slope , and at the
top of that slope a shoulder in the cion , join them close together ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,34.287

a ligature is then made round them , with bass or woolen yarn ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,34.288

and the engrafted part is well covered with clay or cement .
GRAFTING-1780-1,34.289

<P_35>

<heading>

<font> Of <$$font> Inoculation , <font> or <$$font> Budding , <font> &c.
<$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,35.292

<$$heading>

This , as before observed , is usually practised upon <font> all sorts
of stone fruit , <$$font> as nectarines , peaches , apricots , plums ,
cherries , &c. as also upon oranges and jasmines , &c.
GRAFTING-1780-1,35.294

And indeed this is <font> preferable <$$font> to any sort of grafting ,
for <font> most <$$font> kinds of fruit . GRAFTING-1780-1,35.295

- It is usually performed in the following manner :
GRAFTING-1780-1,35.296

- You must be provided with a <font> sharp penknife , <$$font> with a
<font> flat haft <$$font> which is to <font> raise <$$font> the bark of
the stock , to admit the bud , and some <font> sound bass mat <$$font>
which should be soaked in water to encrease its strength , and render it
more pliable ; GRAFTING-1780-1,35.297

then having taken off the cuttings from the trees you would propagate ,
you must choose a <font> smooth part <$$font> of the stock , about
<font> five <$$font> or <font> six <$$font> inches above the surface of
the ground , if designed for dwarfs ; GRAFTING-1780-1,35.298

but if for standards , they should be budded six feet above the ground ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,35.299

then with your knife make an horizontal cut across <P_36> the rind of
the stock , GRAFTING-1780-1,36.300

and from the middle of that cut make a slit downwards , about <font> two
<$$font> inches in length , so that it may be in the form of a T ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,36.301

but you must be careful not to cut too deep , lest you wound the stock ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,36.302

then having , fixed upon a leaf that hath a fresh and fair bud growing
out between it and the bark , cut off the leaf from the bud , leaving
the foot stalk remaining ; GRAFTING-1780-1,36.303

this done , you must make a cross cut , about half an inch above the eye
, and with your knife slit off the bud , with part of the wood to it :
GRAFTING-1780-1,36.304

You must also with your knife pull off that part of the wood which was
taken with the buds , observing whether the <font> eye <$$font> of the
bud be left to it or not GRAFTING-1780-1,36.305

for all those buds which <font> lose <$$font> their eyes in stripping
are good for <font> nothing <$$font> ; GRAFTING-1780-1,36.306

then having gently raised the bark of the stock with the flat haft of
your penknife clear to the wood , thrust the bud therein , observing to
place it <font> smooth <$$font> between the rind and wood of the stock ,
cutting off any part of the rind belonging to the bud , that may be too
long for the <P_37> slit made in the stock ; GRAFTING-1780-1,37.307

and so having <font> exactly <$$font> fitted the bud to the stock , tie
them <font> closely <$$font> round with bass mats , beginning at the
lower part of the slit , and so proceeding to the top , taking care not
to bind round the <font> eye <$$font> of the bud , which must be left
<font> open . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,37.308

Some gardeners , after having prepared the bud as above directed , cut
out the bark <font> entirely , <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,37.309

and apply the cion to the disbarked place . GRAFTING-1780-1,37.310

Others make a cut downward in the bark about two inches long , and
another across the middle of that ; GRAFTING-1780-1,37.311

then gently raising the four corners of the bark , thrust in the bud ,
taking care that it fits <font> close <$$font> to the wood of the stock
. GRAFTING-1780-1,37.312

Another method practised by some is , to make a cut downward as before ,
and another horizontal one at the bottom of that ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,37.313

then loosening the bark with an instrument provided for that purpose ,
the bud being made sharp at one end , is thrust gently up between the
bark and the wood . GRAFTING-1780-1,37.314

All these different methods are made use of by different persons ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,37.315

but the first method I proposed <P_38> above is preferable to any other
, and the most <font> successful <$$font> , as I have found by
experience . GRAFTING-1780-1,38.316

When your buds have been inoculated three weeks or a month , those which
are <font> fresh <$$font> and <font> plump <$$font> you may be sure are
<font> joined <$$font> ; GRAFTING-1780-1,38.317

and at this time you should <font> loosen <$$font> the bandage , which
if it be not done in time , will injure , if not totally destroy the bud
. GRAFTING-1780-1,38.318

Note also , if you perceive the bark <font> swell <$$font> where the
binding is , cut it off ; GRAFTING-1780-1,38.319

and if the first inoculation fail , which may be known by the colour ,
&c. the stock may be inoculated again the next summer , or the very
same year , provided the inoculation be done early .
GRAFTING-1780-1,38.320

When your buds thrive luxuriantly , and are in danger of being <font>
displaced <$$font> by winds , fasten them to the stocks with matting ,
or some such thing . GRAFTING-1780-1,38.321

The March following , cut off the stock sloping , about three inches
above the bud , GRAFTING-1780-1,38.322

and to what is left fasten the shoot ; GRAFTING-1780-1,38.323

but this must continue no longer than <font> one year <$$font> ; after
which the stock must be cut off close above the bud .
GRAFTING-1780-1,38.324

When <P_39> you inoculate , always make choice of <font> cloudy weather
<$$font> ; GRAFTING-1780-1,39.325

for if it be done in the middle of the day , when the weather is hot ,
the shoots will perspire so fast , as to leave the buds <font> destitute
of moisture . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,39.326

The proper time for inoculating is from <font> Midsummer <$$font> to the
<font> middle of August ; <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,39.327

but the most general rule is , when you observe the buds <font> formed
<$$font> at the extremity of the same year's shoot , which is an
indication of their having finished their spring growth ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,39.328

The evening of a fair day is reckoned the <font> properest <$$font> time
for this business . GRAFTING-1780-1,39.329

The first sort of trees commonly inoculated is the <font> apricot
<$$font> , next the <font> peach , plum , cherry <$$font> , &c. and the
last the <font> orange tree <$$font> , which should never be done till
the latter end of August . GRAFTING-1780-1,39.330

Great care must be taken that the buds are not <font> injured <$$font>
in the operation . GRAFTING-1780-1,39.331

Stocks raised of peach stones {COM:see_errata} are commonly big enough
to be inoculated the <font> second <$$font> or <font> third <$$font>
summer . GRAFTING-1780-1,39.332

The buds should be chosen from a <font> healthy <$$font> tree , which
produces <P_40> a great deal of fruit . GRAFTING-1780-1,40.333

And the inoculation should be always done in the <font> morning <$$font>
or <font> evening <$$font> of a fair day , when the sun has not much
power : Also , in a dry time if possible ; GRAFTING-1780-1,40.334

and the stocks should be treated with the usual care afterwards .
GRAFTING-1780-1,40.335

Sometimes peaches are budded on <font> plum stocks <$$font> with success
, particularly in what we call the <font> wheat plum <$$font> , on which
stock they usually take <font> sure <$$font> , and thrive well .
GRAFTING-1780-1,40.336

The <font> white pear plum <$$font> is in the same predicament .
GRAFTING-1780-1,40.337

Peach trees should be always budded within about an <font> handful
<$$font> of the ground . GRAFTING-1780-1,40.338

As for plums , cherries , pears , and other fruit , they may be
inoculated <font> higher <$$font> on the stocks : GRAFTING-1780-1,40.339

The young trees should be brought up in the nursery , and grow there
three or four years before they are removed . GRAFTING-1780-1,40.340

As for the choice of shoots from which you take your buds , care must be
taken that they come <font> from healthy , fruitful <$$font> trees ;
that they be of a <font> strong <$$font> growth , <font> firm <$$font>
bark , and not any ways <font> spungy . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,40.341

- Nectarines , peaches , and apricots , are now <P_41> seldom raised
otherwise than by inoculation : GRAFTING-1780-1,41.342

Cherries and pears take very sure ; GRAFTING-1780-1,41.343

most plums hit very well ; GRAFTING-1780-1,41.344

but apples <font> fail <$$font> for the most part , their bark being
tender , and buds weak ; GRAFTING-1780-1,41.345

however , I have found the latter succeed very well , by taking a bud
from the <font> former <$$font> year to inoculate with , provided the
same be well chosen . GRAFTING-1780-1,41.346

Upon the whole , where inoculation succeeds well , it is <paren> as
before said <$$paren> to be preferred before grafting ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,41.347

for the stock for inoculation will be <font> much sooner <$$font> big
enough than for grafting ; GRAFTING-1780-1,41.348

besides , the tree , when the nature is so changed , will thrive much
better than it did before , GRAFTING-1780-1,41.349

and will be sooner ready to transplant ; GRAFTING-1780-1,41.350

neither will the stock be so <font> much hurt <$$font> as in grafting ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,41.351

and if it chance to fail , it may be inoculated again the next year , or
perhaps the very same season , if done timely . GRAFTING-1780-1,41.352

The operation is also much more decent , speedy , easy , and delightful
, than grafting . GRAFTING-1780-1,41.353

The insertion or inoculation of a cion or bud into the bole of a stock ,
for the improvement and propagation of fruit trees , <P_42> seems to be
nothing more than an <font> artificial transplanting <$$font> of those
trees , just the same as though they were put into suitable earth ; by
putting their seeds into a good proper soil , whereby the seminal
principles concentred in the seed , or {COM:see_errata} contracted into
those prolific buds , are put into their proper matrix , which , with
other requisites concurring , are set into their vegetative spring , or
fermental motion . GRAFTING-1780-1,42.354

And 't@ @is apparent that the <font> fitness <$$font> of stocks answers
the <font> peculiarity <$$font> of soils . GRAFTING-1780-1,42.355

For <font> all sorts <$$font> of cions or buds are not proper , or with
expected success , to be grafted or inoculated in <font> any sort
<$$font> of stock , no more than any kind of soil is naturally fitted
and qualified for every kind of seed . GRAFTING-1780-1,42.356

There is , indeed , this difference , that in the one <paren> viz. in
the earth <$$paren> the juice prepared lies more <font> crude <$$font>
and scattered , whereas in the other <paren> viz. in the stocks
<$$paren> it is <font> digested <$$font> and <font> naturalized <$$font>
, as it were , if I may be allowed the expression .
GRAFTING-1780-1,42.357

'T@ @is plain that the bole of any tree is as a <font> peculiar soil
<$$font> to the proper engrafted <P_43> or inoculated cion or bud ;
because if a sufficient quantity of earth {COM:see_errata} be cast about
the tree , <paren> after it has begun to thrive , and put forth branches
<$$paren> above the place where it was grafted or inoculated , the cion
or bud will shoot out <font> fibrous roots <$$font> just as if it
<paren> or the seed <$$paren> was <font> originally <$$font> planted
into any well prepared soil ; GRAFTING-1780-1,43.358

hence 't@ @is evident that the root and bole of the tree do nothing more
than prepare a <font> liquor <$$font> or <font> juice ; <$$font> proper
for the nourishment , growth , and increase of any suitable graft or bud
inserted therein ; which the aforesaid cion imbibes and transmits by its
own fermental principles into its own nature , admitting not of the
<font> least tincture <$$font> of the native disposition , or seminal
inclination , from the <font> assumed sap . <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,43.359

Thus , for instance , we commonly inoculate a fruitful bud or cion of an
apricot or peach into a <font> plum stock <$$font> , whose thriving ,
budding , putting forth branches , &c. are in fact nothing more than
the evident <font> indexes <$$font> of the action of the seminal
principles of those inoculated buds , which <P_44> being set into motion
, <paren> by requisites duly concurring <$$paren> admit of the juice or
sap of the bole , , and becomes fermental , dashing the preconceived
seminal tincture of the stock , <paren> whereby it was disposed to the
putting on the form of a plum tree <$$paren> transmutes that juice into
its own nature , and so from the <font> intestine strugglings <$$font>
of the said seminal principles of the <font> inoculated bud <$$font> ,
proceeds the vegetation and growth of the whole , clothing itself with
all those natural liveries peculiar to the texture of such seminal
prolific principles . GRAFTING-1780-1,44.360

If you cut off the old root and bole of a tree , after the inserted cion
or bud has begun to thrive , and sent forth roots as before mentioned ,
the said cion or bud , if transplanted , will become an <font> entire
tree <$$font> of itself . GRAFTING-1780-1,44.361

From the same cause it is , that you may by <font> splicing <$$font> ,
as the gardeners call it , propagate as many trees as you please :
GRAFTING-1780-1,44.362

Also by layers you may raise almost as many trees as there are prolific
buds , if in case they could be all conveniently laid ; from whence it
appears , as I said before , that <P_45> the sap of the stock is to a
cion or fruitful bud , the same as the <font> earth <$$font> to <font>
seed <$$font> , or as the <font> earth <$$font> to a <font> laid cion .
<$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,45.363

Hence , t@ @is evident , that by grafting and inoculation , there may be
<font> great improvements <$$font> made , as to the <font> acceleration
, melioration <$$font> , and <font> fructification <$$font> of some
fruit trees . GRAFTING-1780-1,45.364

Thus we see the bud or cion of an apricot is <font> hastened <$$font> as
to its fructifying , by being inserted into <font> plum stocks ;
<$$font> peaches by being put into <font> apricot ; <$$font> as also
cherries , such as the Flanders kind , hart , duke , &c. put into wild
or black <font> cherry stocks <$$font> , by which means in <font> two
<$$font> or <font> three <$$font> years they become <font> fruit-bearing
trees <$$font> , which if raised from the stones , or propagated from
suckers , would not come to pass till after many more ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,45.365

and they are not only hastened as to their growth and maturity ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,45.366

but are also bettered both as to bulk of fruit , and pleasantness and
gratefulness of taste . GRAFTING-1780-1,45.367

'T@ @is probable that , if the bud of a quince were skilfully inoculated
into some <font> early apple stock <$$font> , the same might be hastened
<P_46> as to <font> maturity : <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,46.368

Also <font> later <$$font> grapes of a more delicate taste ,
artificially inoculated into <font> more early <$$font> , might do the
same . GRAFTING-1780-1,46.369

- And 't@ @is not unlikely , if accurate trials were made of this nature
, but melons , inserted into pompions , might make them both <font> more
early <$$font> and <font> more large <$$font> , especially if the seeds
of pompions were to be brought up in <font> hot beds <$$font> , to be
ready early in the spring , while the others are also fostered in the
same , 'till they were fit for inserting . GRAFTING-1780-1,46.370

Again , 't@ @is probable , if the prolific buds of oranges <paren>
trained up from their seedlings in hot beds , or other suitable soil
<$$paren> were inserted in some sort of trees that grow well with us ,
and seem somewhat to resemble them , as for instance , in some <font>
choice apples <$$font> , <paren> as pippins or pearmains <$$paren> or in
<font> quinces <$$font> , we might have oranges grow frequently with us
in England ; GRAFTING-1780-1,46.371

for the reason why such tender trees do not fructify with us is , the
want of a <font> competent heat <$$font> , or the effect of our intense
cold or frost in the winter season , which reaching the roots of such
weak trees , stints them , and prevents their fruit bearing , <P_47> by
suspending the fermental action of the seminal principles ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,47.372

nay , sometimes it so overpowers them , that it totally kills them .
GRAFTING-1780-1,47.373

If , therefore , instead of training up orange-trees from hot nurseries
, we take their prolific buds , <paren> which we can by hot beds easily
procure <$$paren> and insert them by inoculation into the stocks of the
before-mentioned trees , we shall absolutely <font> secure <$$font> them
from <font> frosts <$$font> , which being removed by the aforesaid
artificial expedient , bids fair , on such trial , to have plenty of
oranges grow with us in England . GRAFTING-1780-1,47.374

Thus , also , if the fruitful buds of <font> figs <$$font> <paren> which
rarely in England come to maturity for want of sufficient heat <$$paren>
were inoculated into some kinds of <font> good pear <$$font> , such as
the <font> bergamots <$$font> , &c. it might probably procure their
maturity . GRAFTING-1780-1,47.375

These , I think , and <font> many other <$$font> observations and
experiments , concerning the <font> maturation <$$font> and <font>
melioration <$$font> of plants and fruits , might be made , not yet
taken notice of . GRAFTING-1780-1,47.376

<P_48>

What improvements might also be made are only here proposed to further
trial , in order to the having of <font> roses <$$font> , and perhaps
some other flowers , <font> all the year <$$font> , by inoculating their
buds reasonably into some <font> evergreens <$$font> , such as <font>
yew , fir <$$font> , or <font> pine , <$$font> especially if those trees
were assisted by some <font> artificial heat <$$font> , by being planted
near some <font> stoves <$$font> or <font> furnaces <$$font> , where a
proper heat might be kept and conveyed to them all the winter :
GRAFTING-1780-1,48.378

For the principles in any prolific bud being set into motion , by being
planted into any proper stock , the juice of that stock at the same time
being warmed by any adventitious heat , or what way soever kept in
action , becomes like a <font> soil <$$font> adapted for them , whereby
the aforesaid principles become <font> fermental , vegetate <$$font> ,
and put on the intire form of the whole plant or tree .
GRAFTING-1780-1,48.379

There might , as I said before , be a great many curious experiments
made to advantage , by judicious persons , in grafting and inoculation ,
which have never yet been tried , or so much as thought of .
GRAFTING-1780-1,48.380

<P_49>

- I have known plums frequently grafted , and sometimes inoculated , on
<font> cherry trees <$$font> , GRAFTING-1780-1,49.382

and it is certain , that the cions will sometimes <font> take <$$font> ,
and thrive well ; GRAFTING-1780-1,49.383

by this means also the fruit comes <font> earlier <$$font> ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,49.384

and is more grateful and palatable . GRAFTING-1780-1,49.385

- Cherries may also be grafted on <font> plum stocks <$$font> ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,49.386

but these seldom prosper long . GRAFTING-1780-1,49.387

Apples grafted on pear stocks often take <font> easily ; <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,49.388

and pears on apple generally <font> succeed well <$$font> , as I have
been convinced by experience . GRAFTING-1780-1,49.389

The cions of <font> pears <$$font> may also be inserted on <font> quince
<$$font> and <font> thorn stocks <$$font> , GRAFTING-1780-1,49.390

and Lord <font> Bacon <$$font> saith , that some have grafted apples on
<font> elm stocks <$$font> with success . GRAFTING-1780-1,49.391

It is also asserted by some of the ancients , that the <font> oak
<$$font> will take the <font> pear <$$font> , or almost any other kind
of fruit , by grafting ; GRAFTING-1780-1,49.392

but , as Mr. <font> Evelyn <$$font> observes , this is very improbable
, because the sap of the oak is <font> unkind <$$font> to most trees .
GRAFTING-1780-1,49.393

The <font> medlar <$$font> may be grafted on thorn , cherry , or pear
stocks , GRAFTING-1780-1,49.394

and seldom <font> fails <$$font> if done seasonably .
GRAFTING-1780-1,49.395

<font> Filberts <$$font> may be grafted or inoculated on <font> common
hazel ; <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,49.396

and the large <font> Spanish nut <$$font> sometimes thrives pretty
<P_50> well on the <font> filbert tree <$$font> or <font> common hazel .
GRAFTING-1780-1,50.397

Walnuts <$$font> are usually propagated from their own kernels , or
grafted with their <font> own cions . <$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,50.398

It is said , if grafted on <font> ash <$$font> , they prosper well ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,50.399

but this is fictitious , as I have found by experiment .
GRAFTING-1780-1,50.400

Sometimes the season is so very <font> unfavourable <$$font> to grafts
in general , that the greatest part of them are destroyed , and your
labour is all thrown away . GRAFTING-1780-1,50.401

Excessive dry springs are hurtful . GRAFTING-1780-1,50.402

Bleak northern winds and frosts are very prejudicial ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,50.403

and even when the cions have begun to thrive , these will <font> stint
<$$font> their growth , if not <font> entirely <$$font> destroy them .
GRAFTING-1780-1,50.404

There is no remedy to prevent these evils . GRAFTING-1780-1,50.405

The best method , however , to secure them from the frost , is , to lay
on a pretty deal of cement , and to keep the clay from cracking as much
as possible , by mixing it with a sufficient quantity of hair , &c.
GRAFTING-1780-1,50.406

When your grafts have thrived well and luxuriantly , they are in great
danger of being taken off by the <font> wind . <$$font>
GRAFTING-1780-1,50.407

To prevent this , pinch , or cut off the <font> tops <$$font> of those
shoots that are most in <P_51> danger . GRAFTING-1780-1,51.408

Some make it a practice to take off the cement when they begin to shoot
, GRAFTING-1780-1,51.409

but this should never be done , GRAFTING-1780-1,51.410

for it not only exposes them more to the power of the winds ,
GRAFTING-1780-1,51.411

but injures them exceedingly , by opening them to the <font> sun
<$$font> and <font> air <$$font> before the cions and stocks are <font>
properly <$$font> joined . GRAFTING-1780-1,51.412

If a <font> vine <$$font> be grafted on a common cherry , or any other
of the kind , the grapes which it produces will be so <font> remarkably
<$$font> forward as to be ripe in the season of <font> cherries .
<$$font> GRAFTING-1780-1,51.413

But it is very difficult to graft a vine well on a cherry stock , so as
to make it thrive and flourish . GRAFTING-1780-1,51.414

The following method has , however , been generally successful .
GRAFTING-1780-1,51.415

First bore a hole with an augur in the trunk of a cherry tree ;
GRAFTING-1780-1,51.416

in this hole insert the cion of the vine , GRAFTING-1780-1,51.417

and let it grow there till it has filled the hole of the augur , and is
closely joined to the cherry tree . GRAFTING-1780-1,51.418

Then cut off the vine branch from the vine , after which it will draw
all its nourishment from the cherry tree , whose sap <P_52> will hasten
the formation and maturity of the grapes , which will be ripe near
<font> two months <$$font> sooner than ordinary .
GRAFTING-1780-1,52.419

It is said that the fruits of any kind of tree may be rendered more
delicious by <font> boring a hole <$$font> in the trunk of the tree near
the root , and afterward filling up the aperture with the <font> sap
<$$font> of the <font> same tree <$$font> , in which you have previously
infused some sweet and odoriferous matter . GRAFTING-1780-1,52.420

Lord <font> Bacon <$$font> saith , that the leaves of shady trees , by
grafting , may be made <font> larger <$$font> than ordinary :
GRAFTING-1780-1,52.421

And he delivers it for a certainty , that if the cion of a <font> witch
elm <$$font> be grafted upon the stock of an <font> ordinary <$$font>
elm , it will put forth leaves almost so broad as the brim of one's hat
; GRAFTING-1780-1,52.422

for as in fruit trees the graft maketh a <font> greater <$$font> fruit ,
so in trees that bear no fruit , it will make the <font> greater
<$$font> leaves . - <font> Nat. Hist. cent. <$$font> 5 , <font> pa.
<$$font> 100 . GRAFTING-1780-1,52.423

Finis . GRAFTING-1780-1,52.424

