<BEGIN_green-1874-2>

<P_3,217>

<heading>

Chapter IX . GREEN-1874-2,3,217.4

<font> The Civil War . <$$font> GREEN-1874-2,3,217.5

1642 - 1646 . GREEN-1874-2,3,217.6

<$$heading>

The breaking off of negotiations was followed on both sides by
preparations for immediate war . GREEN-1874-2,3,217.8

Hampden , Pym , and Hollis became the guiding spirits of a Committee of
Public Safety which was created by Parliament as its administrative
organ . GREEN-1874-2,3,217.9

On the twelfth of July 1642 the Houses ordered that an army should be
raised " for the defence of the King and the Parliament , "
GREEN-1874-2,3,217.10

and appointed the Earl of Essex as its captain-general and the Earl of
Bedford as its general of horse . GREEN-1874-2,3,217.11

The force soon rose to twenty_thousand foot and four_thousand horse ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,217.12

and English and Scotch officers were drawn from the Low_Countries .
GREEN-1874-2,3,217.13

The confidence on the Parliamentary side was great .
GREEN-1874-2,3,217.14

" We all thought one battle would decide , " Baxter confessed after the
first encounter ; GREEN-1874-2,3,217.15

for the King was almost destitute of money and arms ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,217.16

and in spite of his strenuous efforts to raise recruits he was
embarrassed by the reluctance of his own adherents to begin the struggle
. GREEN-1874-2,3,217.17

Resolved however to force on a contest , he raised the Royal Standard at
Nottingham " on the evening of a very stormy and tempestuous day , " the
twenty-third of August , GREEN-1874-2,3,217.18

but the country made no answer to his appeal . GREEN-1874-2,3,217.19

Meanwhile Lord Essex , who had quitted London amidst the shouts of a
great multitude with orders from the Parliament to follow the King , "
and by battle or other way rescue him from his perfidious councillors
and restore him to Parliament , " was mustering his army at Northampton
. GREEN-1874-2,3,217.20

<P_3,218>

Charles had but a handful of men , GREEN-1874-2,3,218.22

and the dash of a few regiments of horse would have ended the war ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.23

but Essex shrank from a decisive stroke , GREEN-1874-2,3,218.24

and trusted to reduce the King peacefully to submission by a show of
force . GREEN-1874-2,3,218.25

But while Essex lingered Charles fell back at the close of September on
Shrewsbury , GREEN-1874-2,3,218.26

and the whole face of affairs suddenly changed . GREEN-1874-2,3,218.27

Catholics and Royalists rallied fast to his standard ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.28

and the royal force became strong enough to take the field .
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.29

With his usual boldness Charles resolved to march at once on the capital
and force the Parliament to submit by dint of arms .
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.30

But the news of his march roused Essex from his inactivity .
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.31

He had advanced to Worcester to watch the King's proceedings ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.32

and he now hastened to protect London . GREEN-1874-2,3,218.33

On the twenty-third of October , 1642 , the two armies fell in with one
another on the field of Edgehill , near Banbury . GREEN-1874-2,3,218.34

The encounter was a surprise , GREEN-1874-2,3,218.35

and the battle which followed was little more than a confused combat of
horse . GREEN-1874-2,3,218.36

At its outset the desertion of Sir Faithful Fortescue with a whole
regiment threw the Parliamentary forces into disorder , while the
Royalist horse on either wing drove their opponents from the field ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.37

but the reserve of Lord Essex broke the foot , which formed the centre
of the King's line , GREEN-1874-2,3,218.38

and though his nephew , Prince Rupert , brought back his squadrons in
time to save Charles from capture or flight , the night fell on a drawn
battle . GREEN-1874-2,3,218.39

The moral advantage however rested with the King .
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.40

Essex had learned that his troopers were no match for the Cavaliers ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.41

and his withdrawal to Warwick left open the road to the capital .
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.42

Rupert pressed for an instant march on London , where the approach of
the King's forces had roused utter panic . GREEN-1874-2,3,218.43

But the proposal found stubborn opponents among the moderate royalists ,
who dreaded the complete triumph of Charles as much as his defeat ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,218.44

and their pressure forced the King to pause for a time at Oxford , where
he was received with uproarious welcome . GREEN-1874-2,3,218.45

When the cowardice of its garrison delivered Reading to <P_3,219>
Rupert's horse , and his daring capture of Brentford in November drew
the royal army in his support almost to the walls of the capital , the
panic of the Londoners was already over ; GREEN-1874-2,3,219.46

and the junction of their trainbands with the army of Essex forced
Charles to fall back again on his old quarters . GREEN-1874-2,3,219.47

But though the Parliament rallied quickly from the blow of Edgehill ,
the war , as its area widened through the winter , went steadily for the
King . GREEN-1874-2,3,219.48

The fortification of Oxford gave him a firm hold on the midland counties
; while the balance of the two parties in the north was overthrown by
the march of the Earl of Newcastle , with a force he had raised in
Northumberland , upon York . GREEN-1874-2,3,219.49

Lord Fairfax , the Parliamentary leader in that county , was thrown back
by Newcastle's attack on the manufacturing towns of the West Riding ,
where Puritanism found its stronghold ; GREEN-1874-2,3,219.50

and the arrival of the Queen in February , 1643 , with arms from Holland
encouraged the royal army to push its scouts across the Trent , and
threaten the eastern counties , which held firmly for the Parliament .
GREEN-1874-2,3,219.51

The stress of the war was shown by the vigorous efforts of the Houses .
GREEN-1874-2,3,219.52

Some negotiations which had gone on into the spring were broken off by
the old demand that the King should return to his Parliament ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,219.53

London was fortified ; GREEN-1874-2,3,219.54

and a tax of two {TEXT:too} millions a year was laid on the district ;
which adhered to the Parliamentary cause . GREEN-1874-2,3,219.55

In the spring of 1643 Lord Essex , whose army had been freshly equipped
, was ordered to advance upon Oxford . GREEN-1874-2,3,219.56

But though the King held himself ready to fall back on the West , the
Earl shrank from again risking his raw army in an encounter .
GREEN-1874-2,3,219.57

He confined himself to the recapture of Reading , and to a month of idle
encampment round Brill . GREEN-1874-2,3,219.58

But while disease thinned his ranks and the royalists beat up his
quarters the war went more and more for the King .
GREEN-1874-2,3,219.59

The inaction of Essex enabled Charles to send a part of his small force
at Oxford to strengthen a royalist rising in the west .
GREEN-1874-2,3,219.60

Nowhere was the royal cause to take so brave or noble a form <P_3,220>
as among the Cornishmen . GREEN-1874-2,3,220.61

Cornwall stood apart from the general life of England : cut off from it
not only by differences of blood and speech , but by the feudal
tendencies of its people , who clung with a Celtic loyalty to their
local chieftains , and suffered their fidelity to the Crown to determine
their own . GREEN-1874-2,3,220.62

They had as yet done little more than keep the war out of their own
county ; GREEN-1874-2,3,220.63

but the march of a small Parliamentary force under Lord Stamford upon
Launceston forced them into action . GREEN-1874-2,3,220.64

In May , 1643 , a little band of Cornishmen gathered round the
chivalrous Sir Bevil Greenvil , " so destitute of provisions that the
best officers had but a biscuit a day , " and with only a handful of
powder for the whole force ; GREEN-1874-2,3,220.65

but , starving and outnumbered as they were , they scaled the steep rise
of Stratton Hill , sword in hand , GREEN-1874-2,3,220.66

and drove Stamford back on Exeter with a loss of two_thousand men , his
ordnance and baggage-train . GREEN-1874-2,3,220.67

Sir Ralph Hopton , the best of the royalist generals , took the command
of their army as it advanced into Somerset , GREEN-1874-2,3,220.68

and drew the stress of the war into the West . GREEN-1874-2,3,220.69

Essex despatched a picked force under Sir William Waller to check their
advance ; GREEN-1874-2,3,220.70

but Somerset was already lost ere he reached Bath ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,220.71

and the Cornishmen stormed his strong position on Lansdowne Hill in the
teeth of his guns . GREEN-1874-2,3,220.72

The stubborn fight robbed the victors of their leaders ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,220.73

Hopton was wounded , Greenvil slain , GREEN-1874-2,3,220.74

and with them fell the two heroes of the little army , Sir Nicholas
Slanning and Sir John Trevanion , " both young , neither of them above
eight_and_twenty , of entire friendship to one another , and to Sir
Bevil Greenvil . " GREEN-1874-2,3,220.75

Waller too , beaten as he was , hung on their weakened force as it moved
for aid upon Oxford , GREEN-1874-2,3,220.76

and succeeded in cooping up the foot in Devizes . GREEN-1874-2,3,220.77

But in July the horse broke through his lines ; GREEN-1874-2,3,220.78

and joining a force which Charles had sent to their relief , turned back
, GREEN-1874-2,3,220.79

and dashed Waller's army to pieces in a fresh victory on Roundway Down .
GREEN-1874-2,3,220.80

The Cornish rising seemed to decide the fortune of the war ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,220.81

and the succours which his Queen was bringing him <P_3,221> from the
army of the North determined Charles to make a fresh advance upon London
. GREEN-1874-2,3,221.82

He was preparing for this advance , when Rupert sallied from Oxford to
beat up the quarters of the army under Essex , which still remained
encamped about Thame . GREEN-1874-2,3,221.83

Foremost among this Parliamentary force were the " Greencoats " of John
Hampden . GREEN-1874-2,3,221.84

From the first outbreak of warfare Hampden had shown the same energy in
the field that he had shown in the Parliament . GREEN-1874-2,3,221.85

He had contributed two_thousand pounds to the loan raised by the Houses
for the equipment of an army . GREEN-1874-2,3,221.86

He had raised a regiment from among his own tenantry , with the parson
of Great Hampden for their chaplain . GREEN-1874-2,3,221.87

The men wore his livery of green , as those of Hollis or Brooke or
Mandeville wore their leaders' liveries of red , and purple , and blue ;
the only sign of their common soldiership being the orange scarf , the
colour of Lord Essex , which all wore over their uniform .
GREEN-1874-2,3,221.88

From the first the " Greencoats " had been foremost in the fray .
GREEN-1874-2,3,221.89

While Essex lay idly watching the gathering of an army round the King ,
Hampden was already engaged with the royal outposts .
GREEN-1874-2,3,221.90

It was the coming up of his men that turned the day at Edgehill ; and
that again saved Lord Brooke from destruction in the repulse of the
royal forces at Brentford . GREEN-1874-2,3,221.91

It was Hampden's activity that saved Reading from a second capture .
GREEN-1874-2,3,221.92

During the gloomy winter , when the fortunes of the Houses seemed at
their worst , his energy redoubled . GREEN-1874-2,3,221.93

His presence was as necessary in the Parliament as in the field ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,221.94

and he was continually on the road between London and Westminster .
GREEN-1874-2,3,221.95

It was during these busy months that he brought into practical shape a
league which was destined to be the mainstay of the Parliamentary force
. GREEN-1874-2,3,221.96

Nowhere was the Puritan feeling so strong as in the counties about
London , in his own Buckinghamshire , in Hertfordshire , Bedfordshire ,
and the more easterly counties of Huntingdon , Cambridge , and
Northampton . GREEN-1874-2,3,221.97

Hampden's influence as well as that of his cousin , Oliver Cromwell ,
who was already active in the war , <P_3,222> was bent to bind these
shires together in an association for the aid of the Parliament , with a
common force , a common fund for its support , and Lord Manchester for
its head . GREEN-1874-2,3,222.98

The association was at last brought about ; GREEN-1874-2,3,222.99

and Hampden turned his energies to reinforcing the army of Essex .
GREEN-1874-2,3,222.100

The army was strengthened ; GREEN-1874-2,3,222.101

but no efforts could spur its leader into activity .
GREEN-1874-2,3,222.102

Essex had learned his trade in the Thirty Years War ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,222.103

and like most professional soldiers he undervalued the worth of
untrained levies . GREEN-1874-2,3,222.104

As a great noble , too , he shrank from active hostilities against the
King . GREEN-1874-2,3,222.105

He believed that in the long run the want of money and of men would
force Charles to lay down his arms , and to come to a peaceful
understanding with the Parliament . GREEN-1874-2,3,222.106

To such a fair adjustment of the claims of both a victory of the
Parliament would , he thought , be as fatal as a victory of the King .
GREEN-1874-2,3,222.107

Against this policy of inaction Hampden struggled in vain .
GREEN-1874-2,3,222.108

It was to no purpose that he urged Essex to follow Charles after
Edgehill , or to attack him after his repulse before Brentford .
GREEN-1874-2,3,222.109

It was equally to no purpose that he urged at the opening of 1643 an
attack upon Oxford . GREEN-1874-2,3,222.110

Essex drew nearer to the town indeed ; GREEN-1874-2,3,222.111

but at the news of the Queen's junction with her husband , and of the
successes of the Cornishmen , he fell back to his old cantonment about
Thame . GREEN-1874-2,3,222.112

Hampden's knowledge of the country warned him of danger from the loose
disposition of the army , GREEN-1874-2,3,222.113

and he urged Essex to call in the distant outposts and strengthen his
line ; GREEN-1874-2,3,222.114

but his warnings were unheeded . GREEN-1874-2,3,222.115

So carelessly were the troops scattered about that Rupert resolved to
beat up their quarters ; GREEN-1874-2,3,222.116

and leaving Oxford in the afternoon of Saturday , the 17th of June , he
seized the bridge over the Thame at Chiselhampton ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,222.117

and leaving a force of foot to secure his retreat , threw himself boldly
with his horsemen into the midst of the Parliamentary army .
GREEN-1874-2,3,222.118

Essex with the bulk of his men lay quietly sleeping a few miles to the
northward at Thame as Rupert struck in the darkness through the leafy
lanes that led to the Chilterns , and <P_3,223> swooped on the villages
that lay beneath their slopes . GREEN-1874-2,3,223.119

At three in the morning he fell on the troops quartered at Postcombe ,
then on those at Chinnor . GREEN-1874-2,3,223.120

Here some fifty were slain , and more taken prisoners , as they sprang
half-naked from their beds . GREEN-1874-2,3,223.121

The village was fired , GREEN-1874-2,3,223.122

and Rupert again called his men together to pursue their foray .
GREEN-1874-2,3,223.123

But the early summer sun had now risen ; GREEN-1874-2,3,223.124

it was too late to attack Wycombe as he had purposed ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,223.125

and the horsemen fell back again through Tetsworth to secure their
retreat across the Thames . GREEN-1874-2,3,223.126

It was time to think of retreat , GREEN-1874-2,3,223.127

for Hampden was already in pursuit . GREEN-1874-2,3,223.128

He had slept at Watlington ; GREEN-1874-2,3,223.129

but the tidings of the foray in the village hard by roused him from
slumber , GREEN-1874-2,3,223.130

and he at once despatched a trooper to Essex to bid the Earl send foot
and horse and cut off the Prince from Chiselhampton bridge .
GREEN-1874-2,3,223.131

Essex objected and delayed till Hampden's patience broke down .
GREEN-1874-2,3,223.132

The thought of his own village blazing in that Sunday dawn , his own
friends and tenants stretched dead in the village streets , carried him
beyond all thought of prudence . GREEN-1874-2,3,223.133

A troop of horse volunteered to follow him ; GREEN-1874-2,3,223.134

and few as they were , he pushed at once with them for the bridge .
GREEN-1874-2,3,223.135

The morning was now far gone ; GREEN-1874-2,3,223.136

and Rupert had reached Chalgrove Field , a broad space without
enclosures , where he had left his foot drawn up amidst the standing
corn to secure his retreat . GREEN-1874-2,3,223.137

To Hampden the spot was a memorable one ; GREEN-1874-2,3,223.138

it was there , if we trust a royalist legend , that " he first mustered
and drew up men in arms to rebel against the King . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,223.139

But he had little time for memories such as these .
GREEN-1874-2,3,223.140

His resolve was to hold Rupert by charge after charge till Essex could
come up ; GREEN-1874-2,3,223.141

and the arrival of these troops of horse with some dragoons enabled him
to attack . GREEN-1874-2,3,223.142

The attack was roughly beaten off , and the assailants thrown into
confusion , GREEN-1874-2,3,223.143

but Hampden rallied the broken troops GREEN-1874-2,3,223.144

and again led them on . GREEN-1874-2,3,223.145

Again they were routed , GREEN-1874-2,3,223.146

and Rupert drew off across the river without further contest .
GREEN-1874-2,3,223.147

It was indeed only the courage of Hampden that had fired his little
<P_3,224> troop to face the Cavaliers ; GREEN-1874-2,3,224.148

and he could fire them no more . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.149

In the last charge a shot struck him in the shoulder
GREEN-1874-2,3,224.150

and disabled his swordarm . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.151

His head bending down , his hands resting on his horse's neck , he rode
off the field before the action was done , " a thing he never used to do
. " GREEN-1874-2,3,224.152

The story of the country side told how the wounded man rode first
towards Pyrton . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.153

It was the village where he had wedded the wife he loved so well ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,224.154

and beyond it among the beech-trees of the Chilterns lay his own house
of Hampden . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.155

But it was not there that he was to die . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.156

A party of royalists drove him back from Pyrton , GREEN-1874-2,3,224.157

and turning northwards he paused for a moment at a little brook that
crossed his path , GREEN-1874-2,3,224.158

then gathering strength leaped it , GREEN-1874-2,3,224.159

and rode almost fainting to Thame . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.160

At first the surgeons gave hopes of his recovery ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,224.161

but hope was soon over . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.162

For six days he lay in growing agony , sending counsel after counsel to
the Parliament , till on the twenty-fourth of June the end drew near .
GREEN-1874-2,3,224.163

" Oh Lord , save my country , " GREEN-1874-2,3,224.164

so ended Hampden's prayers ; GREEN-1874-2,3,224.165

" O Lord , be merciful to - ! " GREEN-1874-2,3,224.166

here his speech failed him , GREEN-1874-2,3,224.167

and he fell back lifeless on his bed . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.168

With arms reversed and muffled flags , his own men bore him through the
lanes and woods he knew so well to the little church that still stands
unchanged beside his home . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.169

On the floor of its chancel the brasses of his father and his
grandfather mark their graves . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.170

A step nearer to the altar , unmarked by brass or epitaph , lies the
grave in which , with bitter tears and cries , his greencoats laid the
body of the leader whom they loved . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.171

" Never were heard such piteous cries at the death of one man as at
Master Hampden's . " GREEN-1874-2,3,224.172

With him indeed all seemed lost . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.173

But bitter as were their tears , a noble faith lifted these Puritans out
of despair . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.174

As they bore him to his grave they sang , in the words of the ninetieth
psalm , how fleeting in the sight of the Divine Eternity is the life of
man . GREEN-1874-2,3,224.175

But as they turned away the yet nobler words of the forty-third psalm
broke from their lips , as they prayed that the God <P_3,225> who had
smitten them would send out anew His light and His truth , that they
might lead them and bring them to His holy hill .
GREEN-1874-2,3,225.176

" Why art thou cast down , O my soul , GREEN-1874-2,3,225.177

and why art thou so disquieted within me ? GREEN-1874-2,3,225.178

Hope in God , GREEN-1874-2,3,225.179

for I shall yet praise him , which is the help of my countenance and my
God ! " GREEN-1874-2,3,225.180

To royalists as to parliamentarians the death of Hampden seemed an omen
of ruin to the cause he loved . GREEN-1874-2,3,225.181

Disaster followed disaster : GREEN-1874-2,3,225.182

Essex , more and more anxious for a peace , fell back on Uxbridge ;
while a cowardly surrender of Bristol to Prince Rupert gave Charles the
second city of the kingdom , and the mastery of the West .
GREEN-1874-2,3,225.183

The news of the loss of Bristol fell on the Parliament " like a sentence
of death . " GREEN-1874-2,3,225.184

The Lords debated nothing but proposals of peace .
GREEN-1874-2,3,225.185

London itself was divided . GREEN-1874-2,3,225.186

" A great multitude of the wives of substantial citizens " clamoured at
the door of the Commons for peace ; GREEN-1874-2,3,225.187

and a flight of six of the few peers who remained at Westminster to the
camp at Oxford proved the general despair of the Parliament's success .
GREEN-1874-2,3,225.188

From this moment however the firmness of the Parliamentary leaders began
slowly to reverse the fortunes of the war . GREEN-1874-2,3,225.189

If Hampden was gone , Pym remained ; GREEN-1874-2,3,225.190

and while weaker men despaired Pym was toiling night and day to organize
a future victory . GREEN-1874-2,3,225.191

The spirit of the Commons was worthy of their great leader :
GREEN-1874-2,3,225.192

and Waller was received on his return from Roundway Hill " as if he had
brought the King prisoner with him . " GREEN-1874-2,3,225.193

The Committee of Public Safety were lavish of men and money .
GREEN-1874-2,3,225.194

Essex was again reinforced . GREEN-1874-2,3,225.195

The new army of the associated counties , which had been placed under
the command of Lord Manchester , was ordered to check the progress of
Newcastle in the North . GREEN-1874-2,3,225.196

But it was in the West that the danger was greatest .
GREEN-1874-2,3,225.197

Prince Maurice continued his brother Rupert@ @'s career of success ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,225.198

and his conquest of Barnstaple and Exeter secured Devon for the King .
GREEN-1874-2,3,225.199

Gloucester alone interrupted the communications between the royal forces
in Bristol and those in the North ; GREEN-1874-2,3,225.200

and at the opening <P_3,226> of August Charles moved against the city
with hope of a speedy surrender . GREEN-1874-2,3,226.201

But the gallant resistance of the town called Essex to its relief .
GREEN-1874-2,3,226.202

It was reduced to a single barrel of powder when the Earl's approach
forced Charles to raise the siege on the sixth of September ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,226.203

and the Puritan army fell steadily back again on London after an
indecisive engagement near Newbury , in which Lord Falkland fell , "
ingeminating ' Peace , peace ! ' " and the London train-bands flung
Rupert's horsemen roughly off their front of pikes .
GREEN-1874-2,3,226.204

The relief of Gloucester proved to be the turning point of the war .
GREEN-1874-2,3,226.205

It was not merely that Charles had met with a repulse ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,226.206

it was that he had missed a victory , and that in the actual posture of
affairs nothing but a great victory could have saved the King .
GREEN-1874-2,3,226.207

For the day which witnessed the triumphant return of Essex witnessed the
solemn taking of the Covenant . GREEN-1874-2,3,226.208

Pym had resolved at last to sling the Scotch sword into the wavering
balance ; GREEN-1874-2,3,226.209

and in the darkest hour of the Parliament's cause Sir Harry Vane had
been despatched to Edinburgh to arrange the terms on which the aid of
Scotland would be given . GREEN-1874-2,3,226.210

First amongst these terms stood the demand of a " unity in Religion ; "
an adoption , in other words , of the Presbyterian system by the Church
of England . GREEN-1874-2,3,226.211

To such a change Pym had been steadily opposed . GREEN-1874-2,3,226.212

He had even withstood Hampden when , after the passing of the bill for
the expulsion of bishops from the House of Peers , Hampden had pressed
for the abolition of episcopacy . GREEN-1874-2,3,226.213

But events had moved so rapidly since the earlier debates on Church
government that some arrangement of this kind had become a necessity .
GREEN-1874-2,3,226.214

The bishops to a man , and the bulk of the clergy whose bent was purely
episcopal , had joined the royal cause , GREEN-1874-2,3,226.215

and were being expelled from their livings as " delinquents . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,226.216

Some new system of Church government was imperatively called for by the
religious necessities of the country ; GREEN-1874-2,3,226.217

and though Pym and the leading statesmen were still in opinion moderate
<P_3,227> Episcopalians , the growing force of Presbyterianism , and
still more the absolute need of Scottish aid and the needs of the war ,
forced them to seek such a system in the adoption of the Scotch
discipline . GREEN-1874-2,3,227.218

Scotland , for its part , saw that the triumph of the Parliament was
necessary for its own security . GREEN-1874-2,3,227.219

Whatever difficulties stood in the way of Vane's wary and rapid
negotiations were removed in fact by the policy of the King .
GREEN-1874-2,3,227.220

While the Parliament looked for aid to the North , Charles had been
seeking assistance from the Irish rebels . GREEN-1874-2,3,227.221

Though the massacre had left them the objects of a vengeful hate such as
England had hardly known before , with the King they were simply
counters in his game of kingcraft . GREEN-1874-2,3,227.222

Their rising had now grown into an organized rebellion .
GREEN-1874-2,3,227.223

In October , 1642 , an Assembly of the Confederate Catholics gathered at
Kilkenny . GREEN-1874-2,3,227.224

Eleven Catholic bishops , fourteen peers , and
two_hundred_and_twenty-six commoners , of English and Irish blood alike
, formed this body , which assumed every prerogative of sovereignty ,
communicated with foreign powers , and raised an army to vindicate Irish
independence . GREEN-1874-2,3,227.225

In spite of this Charles had throughout the year been intriguing with
the Confederates through Lord Glamorgan ; GREEN-1874-2,3,227.226

and though his efforts to secure their direct aid were for some time
fruitless he succeeded in September in bringing about an armistice
between their forces and the army under the Earl of Ormond which had as
yet held them in check . GREEN-1874-2,3,227.227

The truce left this army at the King's disposal for service in England ;
while it secured him as the price of this armistice a pledge from the
Catholics that they would support his cause . GREEN-1874-2,3,227.228

With their aid Charles thought himself strong enough to strike a blow at
the Government in Edinburgh ; GREEN-1874-2,3,227.229

and the Irish Catholics promised to support by their landing in
Argyleshire a rising of the Highlanders under Montrose .
GREEN-1874-2,3,227.230

None of the King's schemes proved so fatal to his cause as these .
GREEN-1874-2,3,227.231

On their discovery officer after officer in his own army flung down
their commissions , GREEN-1874-2,3,227.232

the peers who <P_3,228> had fled to Oxford fled back again to London ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,228.233

and the royalist reaction in the Parliament itself came utterly to an
end . GREEN-1874-2,3,228.234

Scotland , anxious for its own safety , hastened to sign the Covenant ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,228.235

and on the twenty-fifth of September , 1643 , the Commons , " with
uplifted hands , " swore in St. Margaret's church to observe it .
GREEN-1874-2,3,228.236

They pledged themselves to " bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in religion ,
confession of faith , form of Church government , direction for worship
, and catechizing ; that we , and our posterity after us , may as
brethren live in faith and love , and the Lord may delight to live in
the midst of us ; " to extirpate Popery , prelacy , superstition ,
schism , and profaneness ; to " preserve the rights and privileges of
the Parliament , and the liberties of the Kingdom ; " to punish
malignants and opponents of reformation in Church and State ; to " unite
the two Kingdoms in a firm peace and union to all posterity . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,228.237

The Covenant ended with a solemn acknowledgement of national sin , and a
vow of reformation . GREEN-1874-2,3,228.238

" Our true , unfeigned purpose , desire , and endeavour for ourselves
and all others under our power and charge , both in public and private ,
in all duties we owe to God and man , is to amend our lives , and each
to go before another in the example of a real reformation . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,228.239

The conclusion of the Covenant had been the last work of Pym .
GREEN-1874-2,3,228.240

He died on December 6 , 1643 , GREEN-1874-2,3,228.241

and a " Committee of the Two Kingdoms " which was entrusted after his
death with the conduct of the war and of foreign affairs did their best
to carry out the plans he had formed for the coming year .
GREEN-1874-2,3,228.242

The vast scope of these plans bears witness to his amazing ability .
GREEN-1874-2,3,228.243

Three strong armies , comprising a force of fifty_thousand men ,
appeared in the field in the spring of 1644 , ready to co-operate with
the Scots in the coming campaign . GREEN-1874-2,3,228.244

The presence of the Scottish army indeed changed the whole face of the
war . GREEN-1874-2,3,228.245

With Lord Leven at its head , it crossed the border in January " in a
great frost and snow ; " GREEN-1874-2,3,228.246

and Newcastle , who was hoping <P_3,229> to be reinforced by detachments
from Ormond's army , was forced to hurry northward single-handed to
arrest its march . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.247

He succeeded in checking Leven at Sunderland , GREEN-1874-2,3,229.248

but his departure freed the hands of Fairfax , who in spite of defeat
still clung to the West-Riding . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.249

With the activity of a true soldier Fairfax threw himself on the forces
from Ormond's army who had landed at Chester , GREEN-1874-2,3,229.250

and after cutting them to pieces at Nantwich on the twenty-fifth of
January , marched as rapidly back upon York . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.251

Here he was joined by the army of the Associated Counties , a force of
fourteen_thousand men under the command of Lord Manchester , but in
which Cromwell's name was becoming famous as a leader .
GREEN-1874-2,3,229.252

The two armies at once drove the force left behind by Newcastle to take
shelter within the walls of York , GREEN-1874-2,3,229.253

and formed the siege of that city . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.254

The danger of York called Newcastle back to its relief ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,229.255

but he was too weak to effect it , GREEN-1874-2,3,229.256

and the only issue of his return was the junction of the Scots with its
besiegers . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.257

The plans of Pym were now rapidly developed . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.258

While Manchester and Fairfax united with Lord Leven under the walls of
York , Waller , who with the army of the West had held Prince Maurice in
check in Dorsetshire , marched quickly to a junction with Essex , whose
army had been watching Charles ; GREEN-1874-2,3,229.259

and the two forces formed a blockade of Oxford . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.260

Charles was thrown suddenly on the defensive . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.261

The Irish troops , on which he counted as a balance to the Scots , had
been cut to pieces by Fairfax or by Waller , GREEN-1874-2,3,229.262

and both in the North and in the South he seemed utterly overmatched .
GREEN-1874-2,3,229.263

But he was far from despairing . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.264

Before the advance of Essex he had answered Newcastle's cry for aid by
despatching Prince Rupert from Oxford to gather forces on the Welsh
border ; GREEN-1874-2,3,229.265

and the brilliant partizan , after breaking the sieges of Newark and
Latham House , burst over the Lancashire Hills into Yorkshire ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,229.266

slipped by the Parliamentary army , GREEN-1874-2,3,229.267

and made his way untouched into York . GREEN-1874-2,3,229.268

But the success of this feat of arms <P_3,230> tempted him to a fresh
act of daring . GREEN-1874-2,3,230.269

He resolved on a decisive battle ; GREEN-1874-2,3,230.270

and on the second of July , 1644 , a discharge of musketry from the two
armies as they faced each other on Marston Moor brought on , as evening
gathered , a disorderly engagement . GREEN-1874-2,3,230.271

On the one flank a charge of the King's horse broke that of the Scotch ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,230.272

on the other , Cromwell's brigade of " Ironsides " won as complete a
success over Rupert's troopers . GREEN-1874-2,3,230.273

" God made them as stubble to our swords , " wrote the general at the
close of the day ; GREEN-1874-2,3,230.274

but in the heat of victory he called back his men from the chase to back
Manchester in his attack on the royalist foot , and to rout their other
wing of horse as it returned breathless from pursuing the Scots .
GREEN-1874-2,3,230.275

Nowhere had the fighting been so fierce . GREEN-1874-2,3,230.276

A young Puritan who lay dying on the field told Cromwell as he bent over
him that one thing lay on his spirit . GREEN-1874-2,3,230.277

" I asked him what it was , " Cromwell wrote afterwards .
GREEN-1874-2,3,230.278

" He told me it was that God had not suffered him to be any more the
executioner of His enemies . " GREEN-1874-2,3,230.279

At night-fall all was over ; GREEN-1874-2,3,230.280

and the royalist cause in the North had perished at a blow .
GREEN-1874-2,3,230.281

Newcastle fled over sea : GREEN-1874-2,3,230.282

York surrendered , GREEN-1874-2,3,230.283

and Rupert , with hardly a man at his back , rode southward to Oxford .
GREEN-1874-2,3,230.284

The blow was the more terrible that it fell on Charles at a moment when
his danger in the South was being changed into triumph by a series of
brilliant and unexpected successes . GREEN-1874-2,3,230.285

After a month's siege the King had escaped from Oxford ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,230.286

had waited till Essex , vexed at having missed his prey , had marched to
attack what he looked on as the main royalist force , that under Maurice
in the West ; GREEN-1874-2,3,230.287

and then , turning fiercely on Waller at Cropredy Bridge , had driven
him back broken to London , two days before the battle of Marston Moor .
GREEN-1874-2,3,230.288

Charles followed up his success by hurrying in the track of Essex , whom
he hoped to crush between his own force and that under Maurice ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,230.289

and when , by a fatal error , Essex plunged into Cornwall , where the
country was hostile , the King hemmed him in among the <P_3,231> hills ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,231.290

and drew his lines tightly round his army . GREEN-1874-2,3,231.291

On the second of September the whole body of the foot were forced to
surrender at his mercy , while the horse cut their way through the
besiegers , and Essex himself fled by sea to London .
GREEN-1874-2,3,231.292

Nor was this the only reverse of fortune which brought hope to the royal
cause . GREEN-1874-2,3,231.293

The day on which the army of Essex surrendered to the King was marked by
a royalist triumph in Scotland which promised to undo what Marston Moor
had done . GREEN-1874-2,3,231.294

The Irish Catholics fulfilled their covenant with Charles by the landing
of Irish soldiers in Argyle ; GREEN-1874-2,3,231.295

and as had long since been arranged , Montrose , throwing himself into
the Highlands , called the clans to arms . GREEN-1874-2,3,231.296

Flinging his new force on that of the Covenanters at Tippermuir , he
gained a victory which enabled him to occupy Perth , to sack Aberdeen ,
and to spread terror to Edinburgh . GREEN-1874-2,3,231.297

The news at once told . GREEN-1874-2,3,231.298

The Scottish army in England refused to march further from its own
country ; GREEN-1874-2,3,231.299

and used the siege of Newcastle as a pretext to remain near the border .
GREEN-1874-2,3,231.300

With the army of Essex annihilated and the Scots at a safe distance no
obstacle seemed to lie between the King and London ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,231.301

and as he came up from the West Charles again marched on the capital .
GREEN-1874-2,3,231.302

But if the Scots were detained at Newcastle the rest of the victors at
Marston Moor lay in his path at Newbury ; GREEN-1874-2,3,231.303

and their force was strengthened by the soldiers who had surrendered in
Cornwall , but whom the energy of the Parliament had again brought into
the field . GREEN-1874-2,3,231.304

On the twenty-seventh of October Charles fell on this army under Lord
Manchester's command ; GREEN-1874-2,3,231.305

but the charges of the royalists failed to break the Parliamentary
squadrons , GREEN-1874-2,3,231.306

and the soldiers of Essex wiped away the shame of their defeat by
flinging themselves on the cannon they had lost , and bringing them back
in triumph to their lines . GREEN-1874-2,3,231.307

Cromwell seized the moment of victory , GREEN-1874-2,3,231.308

and begged hard to be suffered to charge with his single brigade .
GREEN-1874-2,3,231.309

But Manchester shrank like Essex from a crowning victory over the King .
GREEN-1874-2,3,231.310

Charles was allowed <P_3,232> to withdraw his army to Oxford , and even
to reappear unchecked in the field of his defeat .
GREEN-1874-2,3,232.311

The quarrel of Cromwell with Lord Manchester at Newbury was destined to
give a new colour to the war . GREEN-1874-2,3,232.312

Pym , in fact , had hardly been borne to his grave in Westminster Abbey
before England instinctively recognized a successor of yet greater
genius in the victor of Marston Moor . GREEN-1874-2,3,232.313

Born in the closing years of Elizabeth's reign , the child of a cadet of
the great house of the Cromwells of Hinchinbrook , and of kin through
their mothers with Hampden and St. John , Oliver had been recalled by
his father's death from a short stay at Cambridge to the little family
estate at Huntingdon , which he quitted for a farm at St. Ives .
GREEN-1874-2,3,232.314

We have seen his mood during the years of personal rule , as he dwelt in
" prolonging " and " blackness " amidst fancies of coming death , the
melancholy which formed the ground of his nature feeding itself on the
inaction of the time . GREEN-1874-2,3,232.315

But his energy made itself felt the moment the tyranny was over .
GREEN-1874-2,3,232.316

His father had sat , with three of his uncles , in the later Parliaments
of Elizabeth . GREEN-1874-2,3,232.317

Oliver had himself been returned to that of 1628 ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,232.318

and the town of Cambridge sent him as its representative to the Short
Parliament as to the Long . GREEN-1874-2,3,232.319

It is in the latter that a courtier , Sir Philip Warwick , gives us our
first glimpse of his actual appearance . GREEN-1874-2,3,232.320

" I came into the House one morning , well clad , GREEN-1874-2,3,232.321

and perceived a gentleman speaking whom I knew not , very ordinarily
apparelled , GREEN-1874-2,3,232.322

for it was a plain cloth suit , which seemed to have been made by an ill
country tailor . GREEN-1874-2,3,232.323

His linen was plain , and not very clean ; GREEN-1874-2,3,232.324

and I remember a speck or two of blood upon his little band , which was
not much larger than his collar . GREEN-1874-2,3,232.325

His hat was without a hat-band . GREEN-1874-2,3,232.326

His stature was of a good size ; his sword stuck close to his side ; his
countenance swoln and reddish ; his voice sharp and untuneable , and his
eloquence full of fervour . " GREEN-1874-2,3,232.327

He was already " much hearkened unto , " GREEN-1874-2,3,232.328

but his power was to assert itself in deeds rather than in words .
GREEN-1874-2,3,232.329

He <P_3,233> appeared at the head of a troop of his own raising at
Edgehill ; GREEN-1874-2,3,233.330

but with the eye of a born soldier he at once saw the blot in the army
of Essex . GREEN-1874-2,3,233.331

" A set of poor tapsters and town apprentices , " he warned Hampden , "
would never fight against men of honour ; " GREEN-1874-2,3,233.332

and he pointed to religious enthusiasm as the one weapon which could
meet and turn the chivalry of the Cavalier . GREEN-1874-2,3,233.333

Even to Hampden the plan seemed impracticable ; GREEN-1874-2,3,233.334

but the regiment of a_thousand men which Cromwell raised for the
Association of the Eastern Counties , and which soon became known as his
Ironsides , was formed strictly of " men of religion . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,233.335

He spent his fortune freely on the task he set himself .
GREEN-1874-2,3,233.336

" The business ... hath had of me in money between eleven and
twelve_hundred pounds , GREEN-1874-2,3,233.337

therefore my private estate can do little to help the public .
GREEN-1874-2,3,233.338

... I have little money of my own <paren> left <$$paren> to help my
soldiers . " GREEN-1874-2,3,233.339

But they were " a lovely company , " he tells his friends with soldierly
pride . GREEN-1874-2,3,233.340

No blasphemy , drinking , disorder , or impiety were suffered in their
ranks . GREEN-1874-2,3,233.341

" Not a man swears but he pays his twelve pence . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,233.342

Nor was his choice of " men and religion " the only innovation Cromwell
introduced into his new regiment . GREEN-1874-2,3,233.343

The social traditions which restricted command to men of birth were
disregarded . GREEN-1874-2,3,233.344

" It may be , " he wrote , in answer to complaints from the committee of
the Association , " it provokes your spirit to see such plain men made
captains of horse . GREEN-1874-2,3,233.345

It had been well that men of honour and birth had entered into their
employments ; GREEN-1874-2,3,233.346

but why do they not appear ? GREEN-1874-2,3,233.347

But seeing it is necessary the work must go on , better plain men than
none : but best to have men patient of wants , faithful and
conscientious in their employment , GREEN-1874-2,3,233.348

and such , I hope , these will approve themselves . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,233.349

The words paint Cromwell's temper accurately enough ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,233.350

he is far more of the practical soldier than of the reformer ; though
his genius already breaks in upon his aristocratic and conservative
sympathies , and catches glimpses of the social revolution to which the
war was drifting . GREEN-1874-2,3,233.351

" I had <P_3,234> rather , " he once burst out impatiently , " have a
plain russet-coated captain , that knows what he fights for and loves
what he knows , than what you call a gentleman , and is nothing else .
GREEN-1874-2,3,234.352

I honour a gentleman that is so indeed ! " he ends , with a return to
his more common mood of feeling , GREEN-1874-2,3,234.353

but the outburst was none the less a characteristic one .
GREEN-1874-2,3,234.354

The same practical temper broke out in a more startling innovation .
GREEN-1874-2,3,234.355

Against dissidents from the legal worship of the Church the
Presbyterians were as bitter as Laud himself . GREEN-1874-2,3,234.356

But Nonconformity was using into proportions which made its claim of
toleration , of the freedom of religious worship , one of the problems
of the time . GREEN-1874-2,3,234.357

Its rise had been a sudden one . GREEN-1874-2,3,234.358

The sects who rejected in Elizabeth's day the conception of a National
Church , and insisted on the right of each congregation to freedom of
worship , had all but disappeared at the close of the Queen's reign .
GREEN-1874-2,3,234.359

Some of the dissidents , as in the notable instance of the congregation
that produced the Pilgrim Fathers , had found a refuge in Holland ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,234.360

but the bulk had been driven by persecution to a fresh conformity with
the Established Church . GREEN-1874-2,3,234.361

As soon however as Abbott's primacy promised a milder rule , the
Separatist refugees began to venture timidly back again to England .
GREEN-1874-2,3,234.362

During their exile in Holland the main body had contented themselves
with the free developement of their system of independent congregations
, each forming in itself a complete Church , GREEN-1874-2,3,234.363

and to these the name of Independents attached itself at a later time .
GREEN-1874-2,3,234.364

A small part however had drifted into a more marked severance in
doctrine from the Established Church , especially in their belief of the
necessity of adult baptism , a belief from which their obscure
congregation at Leyden became known as that of the Baptists .
GREEN-1874-2,3,234.365

Both of these sects gathered a Church in London in the middle of James's
reign , GREEN-1874-2,3,234.366

but the persecuting zeal of Laud prevented any spread of their opinions
under that of his successor ; GREEN-1874-2,3,234.367

and it was not till their numbers were <P_3,235> suddenly increased by
the return of a host of emigrants from New_England , with Hugh Peters at
their head , on the opening of the Long Parliament , that the
Congregational or Independent body began to attract attention .
GREEN-1874-2,3,235.368

Lilburne and Burton declared themselves adherents of what was called "
the New_England way ; GREEN-1874-2,3,235.369

" and a year later saw in London alone the rise of " fourscore
congregations of several sectaries , " as Bishop Hall scornfully tells
us , " instructed by guides fit for them , cobblers , tailors ,
felt-makers , and such-like trash . " GREEN-1874-2,3,235.370

But little religious weight however could be attributed as yet to the
Congregational movement . GREEN-1874-2,3,235.371

Baxter at this time had not heard of the existence of any Independents .
GREEN-1874-2,3,235.372

Milton in his earlier pamphlets shows no sign of their influence .
GREEN-1874-2,3,235.373

Of the hundred_and_five ministers present in the Westminster Assembly
only five were Congregational in sympathy , GREEN-1874-2,3,235.374

and these were all returned refugees from Holland .
GREEN-1874-2,3,235.375

Among the one_hundred_and_twenty London ministers in 1643 , but three
were suspected of leaning towards the Sectaries .
GREEN-1874-2,3,235.376

The struggle with Charles in fact at its outset only threw new
difficulties in the way of religious freedom . GREEN-1874-2,3,235.377

The great majority of the Parliament were averse from any alterations in
the constitution or doctrine of the Church itself ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,235.378

and it was only the refusal of the bishops to accept any diminution of
their power and revenues , the growth of a party hostile to Episcopalian
government , the necessity for purchasing the aid of the Scots by a
union in religion as in politics , and above all the urgent need of
constructing some new ecclesiastical organization in the place of the
older organization which had become impossible from the political
attitude of the bishops , that forced on the two Houses the adoption of
the Covenant . GREEN-1874-2,3,235.379

But the change to a Presbyterian system of Church government seemed at
that time of little import to the bulk of Englishmen .
GREEN-1874-2,3,235.380

The dogma of the necessity of bishops was held by few ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,235.381

and the change was generally regarded with approval as one which brought
the Church of England nearer to that of <P_3,236> Scotland , and to the
reformed Churches of the Continent . GREEN-1874-2,3,236.382

But whatever might be the change in its administration , no one imagined
that it had ceased to be the Church of England , or that it had parted
with its right to exact conformity to its worship from the nation at
large . GREEN-1874-2,3,236.383

The Tudor theory of its relation to the State , of its right to embrace
all Englishmen within its pale , and to dictate what should be their
faith and form of worship , remained utterly unquestioned by any man of
note . GREEN-1874-2,3,236.384

The sentiments on which such a theory rested indeed for its main support
, the power of historical tradition , the association of " dissidence "
with danger to the State , the strong English instinct of order , the as
strong English dislike of " innovations , " with the abhorrence of "
indifferency " as a sign of lukewarmness in matters of religion , had
only been intensified by the earlier incidents of the struggle with the
King . GREEN-1874-2,3,236.385

The Parliament therefore was steadily pressing on the new system of
ecclesiastical government in the midst of the troubles of the war .
GREEN-1874-2,3,236.386

An Assembly of Divines , which was called together in 1643 at
Westminster , and which sat in the Jerusalem Chamber during the five
years which followed , was directed to revise the Articles , to draw up
a Confession of Faith , and a Directory of Public Worship ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,236.387

and these with a scheme of Church government , a scheme only
distinguished from that of Scotland by the significant addition of a lay
court of superior appeal set by Parliament over the whole system of
Church courts and assemblies , were accepted by the Houses and embodied
in a series of Ordinances . GREEN-1874-2,3,236.388

But while the Divines were drawing up their platform of uniform belief
and worship , dissidence was growing fast into a religious power .
GREEN-1874-2,3,236.389

In the terrible agony of the struggle against Charles individual
conviction became a stronger force than religious tradition .
GREEN-1874-2,3,236.390

Theological speculation took an unprecedented boldness from the temper
of the times . GREEN-1874-2,3,236.391

The shock of war had broken the bonds of custom , and given a violent
impulse to the freest thought . GREEN-1874-2,3,236.392

" Behold now this vast city ! " cried Milton from <P_3,237> London , "
a city of refuge , the mansionhouse of liberty , encompassed with God's
protection ! GREEN-1874-2,3,237.393

The shop of war hath not there more anvils and hammers working to
fashion out the plates and instruments of armed justice in defence of
beleaguered truth than there be pens and heads there , sitting by their
studious lamps , musing , searching , revolving new notions and ideas
wherewith to present us , as with their homage and fealty , the
approaching reformation ; others as fast reading , trying all things ,
according to the force of reason and convincement . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,237.394

The poet himself had drifted from his Presbyterian standpoint
GREEN-1874-2,3,237.395

and saw that " new Presbyter is but old Priest writ large . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,237.396

The same change was going on widely about him . GREEN-1874-2,3,237.397

Four years after the war had begun a horror-stricken pamphleteer
numbered sixteen religious sects as existing in defiance of the law ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,237.398

and , widely as these bodies differed among themselves , all were at one
in repudiating any right of control in faith or in worship on the part
of the Church or its clergy . GREEN-1874-2,3,237.399

Above all , the class which became specially infected with the spirit of
religious freedom was the class to whose zeal and vigour the Parliament
was forced to look for success in the struggle . GREEN-1874-2,3,237.400

Cromwell had wisely sought for good fighting men among the " godly "
farmers of the Associated Counties . GREEN-1874-2,3,237.401

But where he found such men he found dissidents , men who were resolved
to seek God after their own fashion , and who were as hostile to the
despotism of the national Church as to the despotism of the King .
GREEN-1874-2,3,237.402

The problem was a new and a difficult one ; GREEN-1874-2,3,237.403

but Cromwell met it in the same practical temper which showed itself in
his dealings with the social difficulties that stood in the way of
military organization . GREEN-1874-2,3,237.404

The sentiments of these farmers were not his own .
GREEN-1874-2,3,237.405

Bitter as had been his hatred of the bishops , and strenuously as he had
worked to bring about a change in Church government , Cromwell , like
most of the Parliamentary leaders , seems to have been content with the
new Presbyterianism , GREEN-1874-2,3,237.406

and the Presbyterians were more than content with him .
GREEN-1874-2,3,237.407

Lord Manchester " suffered <P_3,238> him to guide the army at his
pleasure . " GREEN-1874-2,3,238.408

" The man Cromwell , " writes the Scotchman Baillie , " is a very wise
and active head , universally well beloved as religious and stout . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,238.409

But they were startled and alarmed by his dealings with these dissident
recruits . GREEN-1874-2,3,238.410

He met the problem in his unspeculative fashion .
GREEN-1874-2,3,238.411

He wanted good soldiers and good men ; GREEN-1874-2,3,238.412

and , if they were these , the Independent , the Baptist , the Leveller
found entry among his Ironsides . GREEN-1874-2,3,238.413

" You would respect them , did you see them , " he answered the
panic-stricken Presbyterians who charged them with " Anabaptistry " and
revolutionary aims : GREEN-1874-2,3,238.414

" they are no Anabaptists : GREEN-1874-2,3,238.415

they are honest , sober Christians ; GREEN-1874-2,3,238.416

they expect to be used as men . " GREEN-1874-2,3,238.417

But he was busier with his new regiment than with theories of Church and
State ; GREEN-1874-2,3,238.418

and the Ironsides were no sooner in action that they proved themselves
such soldiers as the war had never seen yet . GREEN-1874-2,3,238.419

" Truly they were never beaten at all , " their leader said proudly at
its close . GREEN-1874-2,3,238.420

At Winceby fight they charged " singing psalms , "
GREEN-1874-2,3,238.421

cleared Lincolnshire of the Cavendishes , GREEN-1874-2,3,238.422

and freed the eastern counties from all danger from Newcastle's
partizans . GREEN-1874-2,3,238.423

At Marston Moor they faced and routed Rupert's chivalry .
GREEN-1874-2,3,238.424

At Newbury it was only Manchester's reluctance that hindered them from
completing the ruin of Charles . GREEN-1874-2,3,238.425

Cromwell had shown his capacity for organization in the creation of the
Ironsides ; GREEN-1874-2,3,238.426

his military genius had displayed itself at Marston Moor .
GREEN-1874-2,3,238.427

Newbury raised him into a political leader . GREEN-1874-2,3,238.428

" Without a more speedy , vigorous , and effective prosecution of the
war , " he said to the Commons after his quarrel with Manchester , "
casting off all lingering proceedings , like those of soldiers of
fortune beyond sea to spin out a war , we shall make the kingdom weary
of us , and hate the name of a Parliament . " GREEN-1874-2,3,238.429

But under the leaders who at present conducted it a vigorous conduct of
the war was hopeless . GREEN-1874-2,3,238.430

They were , in Cromwell's plain words . " afraid to conquer . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,238.431

They desired not to crush Charles , but to force him back , with as much
of his old <P_3,239> strength remaining as might be , to the position of
a constitutional King . GREEN-1874-2,3,239.432

The old loyalty , too , clogged their enterprise ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.433

they shrank from the taint of treason . GREEN-1874-2,3,239.434

" If the King be beaten " {COM:missing_comma} Manchester urged at
Newbury , " he will still be king ; GREEN-1874-2,3,239.435

if he beat us he will hang us all for traitors . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.436

To a mood like this Cromwell's reply seemed horrible ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.437

" If I met the King in battle I would fire my pistol at the King as at
another . " GREEN-1874-2,3,239.438

The army , too , as he long ago urged at Edgehill , was not an army to
conquer with . GREEN-1874-2,3,239.439

Now , as then , he urged that till the whole force was new modelled ,
and placed under a stricter discipline , " they must not expect any
notable success in anything they went about . " GREEN-1874-2,3,239.440

But the first step in such a re-organization must be a change of
officers . GREEN-1874-2,3,239.441

The army was led and officered by members of the two Houses ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.442

and the Self-renouncing Ordinance , which was introduced by Cromwell and
Vane , declared the tenure of military or civil offices incompatible
with a seat in either . GREEN-1874-2,3,239.443

The long and bitter resistance which this measure met in either House
was justified at a later time by the political results that followed the
rupture of the tie which had hitherto bound the army to the Parliament .
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.444

But the drift of public opinion was too strong to be withstood .
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.445

The country was weary of the mismanagement of the war ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.446

and demanded that military necessities should be no longer set aside on
political grounds . GREEN-1874-2,3,239.447

The Ordinance passed the Houses on the third of April , 1645 ,
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.448

and its passage brought about the retirement of Essex , Manchester , and
Waller . GREEN-1874-2,3,239.449

The new organization of the army went rapidly on through the spring
under a new commander-in-chief , Sir Thomas Fairfax , the hero of the
long contest in Yorkshire , and who had been raised into fame by his
victory at Nantwich , and his bravery at Marston Moor .
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.450

But behind Fairfax stood Cromwell ; GREEN-1874-2,3,239.451

and the principles on which Cromwell had formed his Ironsides were
carried out on a larger scale in the " New Model . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.452

The one aim was to get together twenty_thousand " honest " men .
GREEN-1874-2,3,239.453

" Be careful , " Cromwell <P_3,240> wrote , " what captains of horse you
choose , what men be mounted . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.454

A few honest men are better than numbers . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.455

If you choose godly honest men to be captains of horse , honest men will
follow them . " GREEN-1874-2,3,240.456

The result was a curious medley of men of different ranks among the
officers of the New Model . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.457

The bulk of those in high command remained men of noble or gentle blood
, Montagues , Pickerings , Fortescues , Sheffields , Sidneys , and the
like . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.458

But side by side with these , though in far smaller proportion , were
seen officers like Ewer , who had been a serving-man , like Okey , who
had been a drayman , or Rainsborough , who had been a " skipper at sea .
" GREEN-1874-2,3,240.459

A result hardly less notable was the youth of the officers .
GREEN-1874-2,3,240.460

Amongst those in high command there were few who , like Cromwell , had
passed middle age . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.461

Fairfax was but thirty-three years old , GREEN-1874-2,3,240.462

and most of his colonels were even younger . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.463

Equally strange was the mixture of religions in its ranks .
GREEN-1874-2,3,240.464

The remonstrances of the Presbyterians had only forced Cromwell's mind
forward on the road of toleration . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.465

" The State , in choosing men to serve it , " he wrote before Marston
Moor , " takes no notice of these opinions . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.466

If they be willing faithfully to serve it , that satisfies . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,240.467

Marston Moor spurred him to press on the Parliament the need of at least
" tolerating " dissidents ; GREEN-1874-2,3,240.468

and he succeeded in procuring the appointment of a Committee of the
Commons to find some means of effecting this . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.469

But the conservative temper of the bulk of the Puritans was at last
roused by his efforts . GREEN-1874-2,3,240.470

" We detest and abhor , " wrote the London clergy in 1645 , " the much
endeavoured Toleration ; GREEN-1874-2,3,240.471

" and the Corporation of London petitioned Parliament to suppress all
sects " without toleration . " GREEN-1874-2,3,240.472

The Parliament itself too remained steady on the conservative side .
GREEN-1874-2,3,240.473

But the fortunes of the war told for religious freedom .
GREEN-1874-2,3,240.474

Essex and his Presbyterians only marched from defeat to defeat .
GREEN-1874-2,3,240.475

In remodelling the army it was necessary to insert a clause in the Act
which enabled Fairfax to dispense with the signature of the Covenant in
the case of " godly <P_3,241> men ; " GREEN-1874-2,3,241.476

for among the farmers from the eastern counties , who formed the bulk of
its privates , dissidence of every type had gained a firm foothold .
GREEN-1874-2,3,241.477

Of the political and religious aspect of the New Model we shall have to
speak at a later time ; GREEN-1874-2,3,241.478

as yet its energy was directed solely to " the speedy and vigorous
prosecution of the war . " GREEN-1874-2,3,241.479

At the very moment when Fairfax was ready for action the policy of
Cromwell was aided by the policy of the King . GREEN-1874-2,3,241.480

From the hour when Newbury marked the breach between the peace and war
parties in the Parliament , and when the last became identified with the
partizans of religious liberty , the Scotch Commissioners and the bulk
of the Commons had seen that their one chance of hindering what they
looked on as revolution in Church and State lay in pressing for fresh
negotiations with Charles . GREEN-1874-2,3,241.481

These were opened at Oxbridge , and prolonged through the winter ;
GREEN-1874-2,3,241.482

but the hopes of concession which the King held out were suddenly
withdrawn in the spring of 1645 . GREEN-1874-2,3,241.483

He saw , as he thought , the Parliamentary army dissolved and ruined by
its new modelling at an instant when news came from Scotland of fresh
successes on the part of Montrose , and of his overthrow of the troops
under Argyle's command in a victory at Inverlochy .
GREEN-1874-2,3,241.484

" Before the end of the summer , " wrote the conqueror , " I shall be in
a position to come to your Majesty's aid with a brave army . "
GREEN-1874-2,3,241.485

He pressed Charles to advance to the Scottish border , where a junction
of their armies might still suffice to crush any force the Parliament
could bring against them . GREEN-1874-2,3,241.486

The party of war at once gained the ascendant in the royal councils .
GREEN-1874-2,3,241.487

The negotiations at Uxbridge were broken off , GREEN-1874-2,3,241.488

and in May Charles opened his campaign by a march to the north .
GREEN-1874-2,3,241.489

