<BEGIN_greville-1827-2>

<P_1,84>

1827 . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.3

<font> Friday night , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.4

January 5th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , half-@ @past one .
<$$font> GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.5

- I am just come from taking my last look at the poor Duke .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.6

He expired at twenty minutes after nine . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.7

Since eleven o'clock last night the physicians never left his room .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.8

He never moved , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.9

and they repeatedly thought that life was extinct ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.10

but it was not till that hour that they found it was all over .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.11

The Duke of Sussex and Stephenson were in the next room ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.12

Taylor , Torrens and Dighton , Armstrong and I were upstairs .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.13

Armstrong and I had been there about half an hour when they came and
whispered something to Dighton and called out Taylor .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.14

Dighton told Torrens GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.15

and they went out ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.16

immediately after Taylor came up , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.17

and told us it was all over GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.18

and begged we would go downstairs . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.19

We went directly into the room . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,84.20

The Duke was sitting exactly as at the <P_1,85> moment he died , in his
great arm-chair , dressed in his grey dressing-gown , his head inclined
against the side of the chair , his hands lying before him , and looking
as if he were in a deep and quiet sleep . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.21

Not a vestige of pain was perceptible on his countenance , which ,
except being thinner , was exactly such as I have seen it a_hundred
times during his life . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.22

In fact , he had not suffered at all , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.23

and had expired with all the ease and tranquillity which the serenity of
his countenance betokened . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.24

Nothing about or around him had the semblance of death ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.25

it was all like quiet repose , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.26

and it was not without a melancholy satisfaction we saw such evident
signs of the tranquillity of his last moments . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.27

In about a quarter of an hour Taylor and Halford set off to Windsor to
inform the King ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.28

the Duke of Sussex went to the Princess Sophia ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.29

letters were written to all the Cabinet Ministers , to the Archbishop of
Canterbury , the Bishop of London , and the Speaker of the House of
Commons . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.30

Orders were given that the great bell of St. Paul's should toll .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.31

The servants were then admitted to see the Duke as he lay .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.32

Worley was very much affected at the sight , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.33

and one woman , the wife of Kendal , cried bitterly ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.34

and I saw her stoop down and kiss his hand . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.35

The room was then cleared and surrendered to the Lord Chamberlain's
people . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.36

Thus did I take my last leave of the poor Duke .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.37

I have been the minister and associate of his pleasures and amusements
for some years , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.38

I have lived in his intimacy and experienced his kindness ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.39

and am glad that I was present at this last sad occasion to pay my poor
tribute of respect and attachment to his remains .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.40

After the October meetings of 1825 the Duke came to town , not in good
health . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.41

At the end of November the Duchess of Rutland died , which was a great
blow to him , and probably made him worse . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.42

A short time after her funeral he went to Belvoir , when the Duke of
Rutland took him down into the vault , where he stayed an hour and
returned excessively chilled . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,85.43

From that moment he grew <P_1,86> worse till the time of the Ascot races
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.44

We went to Frogmore two days before the party began ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.45

and for those two days he led a quiet life . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.46

When the party was assembled he lived as he had been used to do , going
to the races , sitting at table , and playing for hours at whist .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.47

He slept wretchedly GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.48

and seldom went to bed , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.49

but passed the greater part of the night walking about the room or
dozing in his chair . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.50

I used to go into his room , which was next to mine , the moment I was
out of bed , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.51

and generally found him in his dressing-gown , looking harassed and ill
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.52

He showed me his legs , which were always swelled .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.53

Still he went on till the last day of the party ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.54

and when we got to town he was so ill that M'Gregor , who came to him
that night , thought him in danger . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.55

From that moment the illness was established which has ended in his
death . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.56

They began by putting him through several courses of mercury ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.57

and they sent him to the Greenwoods' villa at Brompton .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.58

Here he continued to receive everybody who called on him ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.59

and went out in his carriage every day . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.60

They always said that he was getting better . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.61

In August he went to Brighton , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.62

and soon after his arrival his legs mortified . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.63

It was then that Taylor went down to him and told him that he was in
great and immediate danger . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.64

He received the information with perfect composure .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.65

The gangrene , however , was stopped , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.66

and he came to town to the Duke of Rutland@ @'s house .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.67

The dropsy continued to make rapid progress , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.68

and some time in September he was tapped ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.69

twenty-two pints of water were drawn from him . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.70

This operation was kept secret , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.71

for the Duke did not like that his situation should be known .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.72

He recovered from the operation GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.73

and regained his strength ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.74

no more water formed in his body , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.75

but there was still water in his system , and a constant discharge from
his legs , which occasioned him great pain and made wounds which were
always open and extending . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.76

These wounds again produced gangrene , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.77

but they always contrived to stop its progress , and put the legs in a
healing condition . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.78

As often , however , as the legs began to heal the water began to rise ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,86.79

and the medicines that were given to expel the water drove it again
<P_1,87> to the legs , through which it made its way , making fresh
sores and entailing fresh mortification . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.80

In this way he went on , the strength of his constitution still
supporting him , till towards the end of December , when the
constitution could resist no longer ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.81

his appetite totally failed , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.82

and . with loss of appetite came entire prostration of strength , and
in short a complete break-up . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.83

From that moment it was obvious that his recovery was impossible ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.84

but he continued to struggle till the 5th of January , although he had
tasted no solid food whatever for above a fortnight .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.85

At all the different periods at which his state was critical it was
always made known to him , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.86

and he received the intimation with invariable firmness and composure .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.87

He said that he enjoyed life but was not afraid to die .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.88

But though perfectly acquainted with his own danger he never could bear
that other people should be informed of it , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.89

and so far from acknowledging it , he always told his friends that he
was better , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.90

and his language was invariably that of a man who did not doubt of his
recovery . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.91

He was particularly anxious that nobody should know he had been tapped ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.92

and it was not till many weeks after that operation that he talked of it
one day to me . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.93

Up to the last moment that I saw him <paren> the day week before he died
<$$paren> he told me he was better , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.94

and he desired me to tell Montrond , who had called upon him , that he
would see him as soon as he was well enough . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.95

He held the same language to everybody until the day previous to his
death , when he sent for Taylor and Stephenson into his room .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.96

He could then hardly speak , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.97

but he took hold of Stephenson's hand , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.98

and looking at Taylor , said , ' I am now dying . '
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.99

He tried to articulate something else , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.100

but he was unintelligible . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.101

About a fortnight before his death , soon after his appetite began to
fail , Taylor had to announce to him his danger .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.102

He received the intelligence with the same coolness he had before shown
, GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.103

but it was not without difficulty that he admitted the conviction ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.104

A few days after he received the Sacrament , which was administered by
the Bishop of London , in the presence of Sir H. Halford , Taylor , and
the Princess Sophia . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,87.105

He was then very weak , but calm <P_1,88> and collected during the
ceremony . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.106

When it was over he shook hands with the men GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.107

and kissed the Princess . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.108

The King saw him the next day , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.109

but he was in a lethargic state nearly the whole time that he was there
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.110

For many days before his death the physicians thought that every day
must close the scene , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.111

but such was the natural strength , of his constitution that he evinced
a tenacity of life and maintained a struggle which astonished them all ,
and of which they unanimously declared that their practice had never
furnished them with a similar instance . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.112

It seems that three years ago , when he was very unwell , M'Gregor told
him that unless he was more prudent he would certainly be afflicted with
dropsy . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.113

He had been subject to spasms , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.114

and in consequence of them was averse to lie down in bed ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.115

and to this pernicious habit and that of sitting for many hours together
at table , or at cards , they attribute the origin of the complaint
which has terminated so fatally . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.116

Had he been a more docile patient , from the amazing vigour of his
constitution he might have looked forward to a very long life .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.117

His sufferings in the course of his illness have been very great , and
almost without cessation . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.118

Nothing could exceed the patience and courage with which he endured them
; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.119

his serenity and good humour were never disturbed ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.120

and he never uttered a word or complaint , except occasionally at the
length of his confinement . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.121

He not only saw all the visitors who chose to call upon him , even those
with whom he was not in habits of intimacy , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.122

but he transacted the whole of his public business every day ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.123

and every paper was laid before him and every detail gone through , as
if he had been in perfect health . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.124

This he continued to within a few days of his death , till his strength
was so entirely exhausted that he lay in a state of almost complete
insensibility . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.125

It is remarkable that from the beginning to the end of his illness I
never saw him that he did not tell me that he was a great deal better ,
and he never wrote to me without assuring me that he was going on as
well as possible . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.126

<font> February 12th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.127

- The Duke of York was no sooner dead than the public press began to
attack him , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,88.128

and while those <P_1,89> private virtues were not denied him for which
he had always been conspicuous , they enlarged , in a strain of severe
invective against his careless and expensive habits , his addiction to
gambling ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.129

and above all they raked up the old story of Mrs. Clark and the
investigation of 1809 , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.130

and published many of his letters and all the disgusting details of that
unfortunate affair , and that in a manner calculated to throw discredit
on his character . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.131

The newspapers , however , soon found they had made a mistake , that
this course was not congenial to public feeling ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.132

and from that moment their columns have been filled with panegyrics upon
his public services and his private virtues . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.133

The King ordered that the funeral should be public and magnificent ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.134

all the details of the ceremonial were arranged by himself .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.135

He showed great feeling about his brother and exceeding kindness in
providing for his servants , whom the Duke was himself unable to provide
for . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.136

He gave 6,000 <font> l. <$$font> to pay immediate expenses
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.137

and took many of the old servants into his own service .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.138

There appeared a few days after the Duke's death an infamous forgery ,
purporting to be a letter or declaration written by him a short time
before his death <paren> principally upon the subject of the Catholic
question <$$paren> , which , however , was disavowed by Taylor , but not
till after many thousand copies had been sold .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.139

I dare say many people believe still that he was the author of this
pamphlet . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.140

All his effects either have been or will be sold by auction .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.141

The funeral took place a fortnight after his death .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.142

Nothing could be managed worse than it was , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.143

and except the appearance of the soldiers in the chapel , which was
extremely fine , the spectacle was by no means imposing ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.144

the cold was intense , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.145

and it is only marvellous that more persons did not suffer from it .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.146

As it is the Bishop of Lincoln has died of the effects of it ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.147

Canning has been dangerously ill , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.148

and is still very unwell ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.149

and the Dukes of Wellington and Montrose were both very seriously unwell
for some days after . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.150

The King was very angry when he heard how miserably the ceremony had
been performed . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,89.151

I have been this evening to hear Peel move the address of condolence to
the King , which Canning would <P_1,90> have done if he had been here ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.152

and it is a pity he was not , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.153

for Peel did it very ill : GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.154

it was poor and jejune , and undistinguished by eloquence or the
appearance of deep feeling . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.155

I was greatly disappointed , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.156

for I expected to hear a worthier tribute to his merits .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.157

Canning was very anxious to have been here to have performed this duty
himself . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.158

The letters which he wrote to the Royal Family abroad announcing the
event of his death were admirable GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.159

and gave great satisfaction to the King . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.160

<font> February 21st {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font> -
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.161

Three days ago Lord Liverpool was seized with an apoplectic or paralytic
attack . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.162

The moment it was known every sort of speculation was afloat as to the
probable changes this event would make in the Ministry .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.163

It was remarked how little anybody appeared to care about the <font> man
; <$$font> GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.164

whether this indifference reflects most upon the world or upon him , I
do not pretend to say . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.165

A report was generally circulated that the Duke of Cumberland was dead ,
which was believed , but turns out to be untrue .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.166

Old Rundell <paren> of the house of Rundell and Bridge , the great
silversmiths and jewellers <$$paren> died last week ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.167

and appointed Robarts one of his executors . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.168

Robarts called on me this morning , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.169

and told me he had been yesterday to Doctors' Commons to prove the will
, GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.170

Rundell was eighty years old , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.171

and died worth between 1,400,000 <font> l. <$$font> and 1,500,000
<font> l. , <$$font> the greater part of which is vested in the funds .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.172

He has left the bulk of his property to his great-nephew , a man of the
name of Neal , who is residuary legatee and will inherit 900,000 <font>
l. <$$font> - GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.173

this Mr. Neal had taken care of him for the last fourteen years
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.174

- to a woman who had lived with him many years , and in whose house he
died , and to two natural sons by her he only left 5,000 <font> l.
<$$font> apiece . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.175

The old man began the world without a guinea , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.176

became in the course of time partner in that house during its most
flourishing period , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.177

and by steady gains and continual parsimony amassed this enormous wealth
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.178

He never spent anything GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.179

and lived wretchedly . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.180

During the panic he came to Robarts , who was his banker ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.181

and offered to place at his disposal any sum he might require .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,90.182

When the executors went to prove the will , they <P_1,91> were told at
Doctors' Commons that it was the largest sum that ever had been
registered there . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.183

<font> March 13th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.184

- Since the debate on the Catholic question there has been a great
expectation that Canning would resign . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.185

Many of his friends think he made an imprudent speech that night , and
if he had not lashed the Master of the Rolls so severely that he would
have got more votes . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.186

The truth is he was mightily nettled by Dr. Philpots' pamphlet and at
Copley making a speech taken entirely from it .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.187

The Master protested that he had no idea of offending Canning , and
until he got up had no notion that Canning had taken offence at his
speech . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.188

The question was lost by accident ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.189

several pro-Catholics were suddenly taken ill GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.190

or arrived too late for the division , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.191

and the election petitions went all against them .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.192

<font> March 16th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.193

- On Wednesday at the Council at St. James's the King desired I would
go down to Windsor , that he might speak to me .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.194

I went down on Thursday to the Cottage , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.195

and , after waiting two hours and a half , was ushered into his bedroom
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.196

I found him sitting at a round table near his bed , in a <font>
douillette , <$$font> and in pretty good health and spirits .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.197

He talked about his horses GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.198

and told some old stories , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.199

lamented the death of the Duke of York , which he said was a loss to him
such as no one could conceive , and that he felt it every instant .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.200

He kept me about an hour , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.201

was very civil , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.202

and then dismissed me . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.203

Canning made an apology to the Master of the Rolls for his severity in
the debate on the Catholic question . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.204

<font> March 25th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.205

- When the King heard of Lord Liverpool's illness he was in great
agitation . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.206

He sent for Peel in the night , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.207

and told him he must see the Duke of Wellington .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.208

Peel endeavoured to dissuade him , but in vain .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.209

The Duke was sent for , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.210

but he refused to go . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,91.211

He sent the King word that he had nothing to say to him , and that it
would not be <P_1,92> fair to his colleagues that he should see the King
at such a moment . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.212

Consequently he saw none of his Ministers till he saw Canning , who was
taken to the Pavilion in a chair one day GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.213

There have been a variety of reports about Lord Liverpool's successor
and a new Administration , as always happens on such occasions .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.214

The King is in very good health and excellent spirits .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.215

He had a large party at the Lodge last week , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.216

and Canning , the Granvilles , Carlisles , Lievens , are going there
next week . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.217

Mount Charles told me yesterday that next week he thinks something must
be decided , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.218

and he told me what I did not know , that the King's opinions on the
Catholic question are just the same as those of the Duke of York , and
equally strong . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.219

This is the great difficulty which Canning has to get over with him .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.220

He does not much like Canning , though C. does everything he can to
gratify and please him . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.221

Mount Charles told me that his mother <paren> Lady Conyngham <$$paren>
has strong opinions in favour of the Catholics , but that she never
talks to the King on the subject , nor indeed upon politics at all .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.222

<font> April 13th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.223

- The King came to town a week ago . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.224

From the moment of his arrival every hour produced a fresh report about
the Administration ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.225

every day the new appointment was expected to be declared ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.226

and the Ministers Peel , Lord Bathurst , Duke of Wellington , and
Canning were successively designated as the persons chosen to form a
Government . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.227

He had no sooner arrived than he saw his Ministers <font> seriatim ,
<$$font> GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.228

but nothing could induce him to come to any determination .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.229

He wavered and doubted , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.230

and to his confidants , with whom he could bluster and talk big , he
expressed in no measured terms his detestation of Liberal principles ,
and especially of Catholic Emancipation . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.231

He begged his Ministers to stand by him , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.232

and day after day elapsed GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.233

and nothing was settled . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.234

In the meantime London was alive with reports ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.235

and the <font> on_dit <$$font> of the day , repeated with every variety
of circumstance and with the usual positiveness of entire ignorance ,
would fill a volume . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,92.236

Time <P_1,93> crept on , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.237

and Parliament was to adjourn on the 13th <paren> this day <$$paren> .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.238

On the 9th Canning went to the King , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.239

and , after a long audience , he came away without anything being
settled . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.240

On the 10th he went again , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.241

and told his Majesty that longer delay was impossible , and that he must
come to some determination . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.242

On the evening of the 10th we received a note from Lord Bathurst ,
saying that the King had desired Canning to form an Administration on
the principles of that of which Lord Liverpool had been at the head .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.243

This was not generally known that evening . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.244

Last night it was said that the Duke of Wellington would not remain in
the new Cabinet , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.245

and we heard that Peel had resigned . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.246

To-day everything will probably be known . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.247

Canning and his friends say that the King has behaved admirably in this
business , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.248

and they affect to consider his appointment unconditional and unfettered
; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.249

but this is by no means the view which the others take of it .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.250

The King , however , has acted in such a way that all his Ministers
<paren> except those whose interest it now is to laud him to the skies
<$$paren> are disgusted with his doubting , wavering , uncertain conduct
, so weak in action and so intemperate in language .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.251

It is now supposed that he has been influenced by Knighton in coming to
this determination , in which he certainly has acted in a manner quite
at variance with his professions and the whole tenor of his language .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.252

It must be owned , if this is so , that although Canning has gained his
point - has got the power into his hands and is nominally Prime Minister
- no man ever took office under more humiliating circumstances or was
placed in a more difficult and uncertain situation ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.253

indeed , a greater anomaly can@ @not be imagined .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.254

Canning , disliked by the King , opposed by the aristocracy and the
nation , and unsupported by the Parliament , is appointed Prime Minister
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.255

The King , irresolute and uncertain , is induced to nominate a man whose
principles and opinions he fears and dislikes by the advice and
influence of his physician . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.256

The measure which is of paramount importance Canning can@ @not carry as
he desires and believes to be necessary ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.257

he must form a Cabinet full of disunion , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,93.258

<P_1,94>

and he is doubtful what support he can expect from the old adherents of
Government , by whom he is abhorred . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.260

The writ was moved for Canning yesterday by Wynne , ' he having accepted
the office of First Commissioner of the Treasury . '
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.261

This morning the Chancellor , Peel , Lord Westmoreland , and the Duke of
Wellington resigned . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.262

Lord Bathurst immediately wrote to Canning , saying that , finding they
had resigned , he could not avoid sending in his resignation also ; that
it was unnecessary to enter into explanations , which could only tend to
widen the breach such a separation must make . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.263

Afterwards Lord Melville resigned , although well with Canning and a
friend to the Catholics ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.264

he said he could not desert the men with whom he had acted for so many
years . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.265

The Whigs seem greatly elated at the breaking up of this Administration
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.266

The Tories evidently think Canning is in a scrape , that he will not be
able to form a Government , and that the power will return into their
hands . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.267

How Canning and his friends feel is not yet known , nor what the King
feels at being deserted by half his Cabinet . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.268

The opinion prevalent with the Opposition is that Canning has been
deserted by his colleagues , who induced him to accept the Government by
promising their support and adherence , and that when he had taken the
final step they left him to make the arrangements and fill up their
places as he could . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.269

This , however , is not the case . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.270

I saw George Dawson this evening , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.271

and he assured me that if he was appointed Prime Minister from all these
Ministers that they would not hold office under him , and that if he was
appointed Prime Minister they should resign . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,94.272

Peel told him this three weeks ago : ' that he could not , with a due
regard to his own character , continue in office under a man whose
opinions are so diametrically opposite to his own upon the most
important question ; that he had no views of personal ambition , but
<P_1,95> that as the administration of Ireland was his peculiar province
, it was impossible they should not come into constant collision upon
that subject . ' GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.273

They had no objection to act with Canning , always considering him as
one of the most influential members of the Cabinet ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.274

but they could not hold offices <font> under <$$font> him .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.275

He said that he could not imagine how Canning with his knowledge could
take such a step , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.276

and it is evident that he has no idea of his being able to carry on the
Government at all . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.277

<font> April 30th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.278

- From the period of Canning's acceptance of office up to Thursday night
there have been continual negotiations between Canning and the Whigs ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.279

and it is not possible to imagine greater curiosity and more intense
anxiety than have been exhibited during the interval .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.280

The violence and confusion of parties have been extreme - the new
Ministers furious with their old colleagues , the ex-Ministers equally
indignant with those they left behind them , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.281

<font> May 12th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.282

- It is necessary to go back to the first formation of the Government .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.283

As soon as Canning had got the King's commission he began to negotiate ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.284

and the Whigs readily enough entered into negotiation .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.285

The friends of Ministers resigned one after another ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.286

and for some time it seemed very doubtful whether Canning would be able
to form a Government at all . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,95.287

His first measure was , however , very <P_1,96> judicious - that of
appointing the Duke of Clarence Lord High . Admiral -
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.288

nothing served so much to disconcert his opponents .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.289

The negotiations went on <paren> through the Duke of Devonshire
<$$paren> up to the end of the Easter recess , when Lord Lansdowne came
to town , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.290

and after much delay it was announced that the Whigs would support the
new Government , but that none of them would take office immediately .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.291

The places were all filled up , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.292

but the appointments were understood to be only provisional ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.293

and the Duke of Portland , Lord Dudley , and Sturges Bourne were
considered to hold their offices until Lord Lansdowne , Lord Carlisle ,
and Tierney should join the Cabinet . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.294

With this arrangement Parliament met , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.295

and the rage which had been accumulating in the minds of the seceders
soon burst forth in a furious attack on this provisional arrangement .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.296

The Whigs have nearly in a body joined Government , with the exception
of Lord Grey in the House of Lords , who in a speech full of eloquence
attacked Canning's political life and character and announced his
intention of remaining neuter . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.297

In the meantime it was understood that there was a reason for Lord
Lansdowne not joining Government immediately , which was not to be made
public till that event took place , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.298

and this secret was only imparted to a very few people ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.299

it was even concealed from Brougham and the leaders of the party .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.300

The secret , however , turns out to be this : Lord Lansdowne insisted
upon modelling the Irish Government as he pleased - that is , in putting
a Lord-Lieutenant , a Chancellor , and a Secretary there favourable to
the Catholic claims , to which the King would not consent .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.301

Canning entreated Lord Lansdowne to have patience , to allow time to
elapse , during which the King's scruples might be removed ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.302

and promised that every endeavour should be made to reconcile the King
to the arrangement Lord Lansdowne desired . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.303

After much discussion it was resolved that Lord Lansdowne should support
Government , but that He should not take office until this point was
settled ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.304

and so the matter has remained . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.305

<font> June 3rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,96.306

- Soon after writing this Lord Lansdowne came <P_1,97> into the Cabinet
, together with Tierney and Lord Carlisle , M'Donald and Abereromby also
taking places . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.307

They found so many objections to the unsettled state of the Cabinet ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.308

and the provisional arrangements had brought so much odium and ridicule
upon the Government , that it was thought necessary to settle this
matter without loss of time , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.309

but Lord Lansdowne would not consent to take the Home Office except upon
the conditions on which he had before insisted .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.310

He therefore came into the Cabinet without a place .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.311

But it is quite evident that the present state of affairs is far from
satisfactory ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.312

the Government is not established on a firm or secure basis ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.313

and the members of it are not altogether satisfied with each other or
themselves . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.314

Lord Lansdowne particularly does not feel comfortable where he is ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.315

and does not think that he has been well treated by his own friends .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.316

It seems that when first overtures were made to him by Canning he called
a meeting of his friends at Lansdowne House , at which he declared his
own sentiments and the conditions on which he would join the Government
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.317

The persons there assembled unanimously agreed with him ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.318

but a few days after a meeting was called at Brooks's which was more
numerously attended , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.319

and there certain resolutions were agreed upon which were not in
conformity with the Opinions expressed in Landsowne House ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.320

and these resolutions were communicated to Canning as the sentiments of
the great body of the Whigs , but without the same being imparted to
Lord Lansdowne , who was then at Bowood GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.321

<paren> this fact I had last night from Duncannon and Hobhouse <$$paren>
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.322

Matters , however , went on quietly enough till the other night , when
the Government was beat in the House of Lords upon the clause in the
Corn Bill , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,97.323

and this defeat it is obvious has enraged and embarrassed them to the
greatest <P_1,98> degree . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.324

Duncannon , who is entirely in the confidence of the moderate Whig party
, says that it is impossible the thing can go on in this way ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.325

three Lords in the King's household <paren> Errol , Macclesfield , and
Delawarr <$$paren> voted against the Bill , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.326

and if they are not dismissed it will be such a proof of the feebleness
of Government as will disgust all the Whigs and make their support very
lukewarm . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.327

Burdett , who was more active and zealous than anybody in bringing about
the Coalition , is very much disgusted already ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.328

and there appears altogether such a want of confidence and unanimity
among them as must lead to the dissolution of the Government unless
Canning can by some vigorous measures establish , his credit and
convince the world of his strength . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.329

In Ireland the Chancellor has refused to put the Great Seal to the
appointment of Doherty as Solicitor-General . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.330

It is supposed that he will take this occasion to resign ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.331

and it will then be seen what part the King will take in the nomination
of his successor . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.332

The King sees numbers of people , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.333

talks incessantly , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.334

and does nothing . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.335

Canning was with him yesterday evening , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.336

and the result of his audience will be very interesting , because it
will appear whether he has insisted upon , and the King consented to ,
the dismissal of the refractory Lords , as well as what he will do about
the Irish Chancellor . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.337

Government are indignant with the Duke of Wellington and the other
ex-Ministers for opposing the Corn Bill , which they had been themselves
<paren> when in office <$$paren> instrumental in framing , as well as
for the use which the Duke made of Huskisson's letter .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.338

<font> June 17th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,98.339

- I was at the Royal Lodge for one night last <P_1,99> Wednesday ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.340

about thirty people sat {TEXT:st} down to dinner ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.341

and the company was changed nearly every day . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.342

It is a delightful place to live in , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.343

but the rooms are too low and too small for very large parties .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.344

Nothing can exceed the luxury of the internal arrangements ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.345

the King was very well and in excellent spirits , but very weak in his
knees GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.346

and could not walk without difficulty . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.347

The evening passed off tolerably , owing to the Tyrolese , whom
Esterhazy brought down to amuse the King , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.348

and he was so pleased with them that he made them sing and dance before
him the whole evening ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.349

the women kissed his face and the men his hand ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.350

and he talked to them in German . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.351

Though this evening went off well enough , it is clear that nothing
would be more insupportable than to live at this Court ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.352

the dulness must be excessive , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.353

and the people who compose his habitual society are the most insipid and
uninteresting that can be found . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.354

As for Lady Conyngham , she looks bored to death ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.355

and she never speaks , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.356

never appears ; to have one word to say to the King , who , however ,
talks himself without ceasing . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.357

Canning came the day I went , away , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.358

and was very well received , by his Majesty ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.359

he looked dreadfully ill . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.360

The only thing which interested me was the account I heard from Francis
Conyngham about Knighton . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.361

He is seldom there , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.362

and when he comes scarcely stays above a night or two .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.363

But he governs everything about the house , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.364

and can@ @not endure anybody who is likely to dispute his empire .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.365

The King certainly does not like him , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.366

is always happier when he is away , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.367

and never presses him to stay or to return . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.368

When he is there he has constant access to the King at all times and
whenever he pleases . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.369

He is on bad terms with Mount Charles , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.370

he bullies Lord Conyngham , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.371

and he is barely civil to Lady C . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.372

; he knows that Mount Charles is independent of him , and that the King
likes him and admits him continually and familiarly to his presence ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.373

and of this it seems that he is jealous . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.374

I was more struck with one word which dropped from him than with all he
told me of Sir W. Knighton . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,99.375

While the Tyrolese were dancing and singing , and there was a sort of
gay uproar going on , with which the King was greatly delighted , he
said , ' I would <P_1,100> give ten guineas to see Knighton walk into
the room now , ' as if it were some master who was absent , and who
should suddenly return and find his family and servants merry-making in
his absence ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.376

it indicates a strange sort of power possessed by him .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.377

The King was very civil to the Duke of Dorset ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.378

and repeatedly told him that what had passed would make no difference in
their private friendship . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.379

In the meantime the Corn Bill has been thrown out ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.380

and I think political animosities are full as strong as ever , though
they have taken rather a sulky than a violent tone .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.381

I had a long conversation with Duncannon yesterday , who is fully
possessed of the sentiments of all the Whigs , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.382

and by what he says it is clear that they are extremely dissatisfied ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.383

they want Canning to display his power by some signal act of authority ,
and to show that he is really supported cordially by the King .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.384

The opposite party are persuaded that the King is secretly inclined to
them and averse to his present Government , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.385

and this opinion obtains more or less with the public in consequence of
the impunity with which Canning has been braved by the Chancellor in
Ireland . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.386

The appointment of Doherty as Solicitor-General has never yet passed the
Great Seal , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.387

and Lord Manners refuses to sanction it ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.388

he has likewise refused to put Sir Patrick Bellew <paren> a Catholic
<$$paren> in the Commission of the Peace , though he is a respectable
man and he has been strongly pressed to do it even by Protestants .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.389

This refusal so disgusted Duncannon that he was very near withdrawing
his name from the Commission , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.390

and if he had his example would have been followed by many others ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.391

but Lord Spencer dissuaded him from doing so .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.392

Lord Grey is in such a state of irritation that he will hardly speak to
any of his old friends , and he declares that he will never set his foot
in Brooks's again . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,100.393

All this is the more extraordinary , and the vivacity of his temper the
more unaccountable , because he has constantly declined taking an active
part in politics when invited to do so for a long time past ; and
whenever Duncannon has asked his advice or consulted his opinions or
wishes , he has invariably referred him to Lord Lansdowne as <P_1,101>
the person whom his friends were to look upon as their leader ,
asserting that he had withdrawn himself from public life and would have
no more concern with politics . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.394

More than this , when first overtures were made by Canning to the Whigs
, it was the unanimous opinion of all those who have since joined the
Government that Lord Lansdowne and his friends could not join an
Administration of which Peel was to be a member
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.395

<paren> for at that time the resignation of Peel was not contemplated as
a probable event <$$paren> , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.396

and this opinion was warmly combated by Lord Grey , who contended that
there was no reason why they should not coalesce with Canning and Peel .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.397

" What induced him to alter his opinion so decidedly and to become so
bitter an enemy to the present arrangements does not appear , unless it
is to be attributed to a feeling of pique and resentment at not having
been more consulted , or that overtures were not made to himself .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.398

The pretext he took for declaring himself was the appointment of Copley
to be Chancellor , when he said that it was impossible to support a
Government which had made such an appointment .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.399

<font> July 5th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.400

- The session is over , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.401

and has been short but violent enough . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.402

There is apparently a majority against the Ministry in the House of
Lords , though they seem safe in the House of Commons .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.403

All depends upon Canning's prudence and firmness during the recess .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.404

As to the King , he seems desirous of living a quiet life mid disposing
of all patronage ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.405

public measures and public men are equally indifferent to him .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.406

The Duke of Wellington , who knows him well , says he does not care a
farthing about the Catholic question , but he does not like to depart
from the example of his father and the Duke of York , to which they owed
so much of their popularity . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.407

His conduct is entirely influenced by selfish considerations ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.408

and he neither knows nor cares what measures the exigencies of the
country demand . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.409

The present state of parties is so extraordinary that it can@ @not last
, GREVILLE-1827-2,1,101.410

and it remains to be seen whether Lord Grey and the other Whigs will
reunite themselves to the main body and support Canning's Government ,
or whether they will join with the Tories in <P_1,102> their efforts to
overturn it . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.411

Lord Grey's temper , irritated by the attacks which have been made on
him , seems likely to urge him to the latter alternative .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.412

<font> July 25th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.413

- Canning is gone to Chiswick , where he has had the lumbago ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.414

and could not go to the Council last week . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.415

He is very unwell , and in a very precarious state , I think .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.416

I was at the Council last Monday week ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.417

it was held for the appointment of Lords Lansdowne and Carlisle , Lord
Lansdowne having consented to take the Home Office , and Lord Carlisle
the Privy Seal ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.418

the only Cabinet Ministers present were the four who changed places .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.419

It was the first time the King had given Lord Lansdowne an audience ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.420

but I believe he was very civil to him . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.421

The King gave him an account of the Duke of Buckingham@ @'s visit to him
<paren> from Drop-more <$$paren> , the result of which was that he sent
his proxy to Lord Goderich , but not with a good grace .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.422

The Duke of Wellington has been to the Lodge , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.423

and great is the speculation thereupon . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.424

It is fiercely debated whether he went by invitation or not , and how
long he stayed . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.425

He was only with the King twenty minutes , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.426

for so Prince Leopold , who was there , told Lambton , who told me .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.427

I do@ @n't know if he was invited or no . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.428

The King has taken from Prince Leopold the plate that was given , or ,
as they now say , lent to him , on his marriage .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.429

The Chamberlain sent to Sir R. Gardiner for it in the Prince's absence
, GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.430

and he refused to give it up without his Royal Highness's orders ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.431

but the Prince , as soon as he heard of it , ordered it to be sent to
the Chamberlain . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.432

The Irish Chancellor has given way about Doherty's appointment , and put
the Great Seal to it before his own resignation .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.433

He did it with a good grace , Lord Lansdowne told me .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.434

We - went all over the Castle the other day ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.435

his Majesty will not let anybody see it now . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,102.436

I do@ @n't think enough is effected for the enormous sums expended ,
though it is a fine <P_1,103> and will be a good house ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.437

still , how far <paren> as a palace <$$paren> from Versailles , St.
Cloud , and the other palaces in France ! GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.438

The external terrace has spoilt the old one , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.439

and is altogether a , frightful excrescence , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.440

and should never have been made . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.441

<font> August 9th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.442

- Canning died yesterday morning at four o'clock .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.443

His danger was only announced on Sunday night , though it had existed
from the preceding Wednesday . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.444

When he saw the King on Monday his Majesty told him he looked very ill ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.445

and he replied that ' he did not know what was the matter with him , but
that he was ill all over . ' GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.446

Nothing could exceed the consternation caused by the announcement of his
danger and the despair of his colleagues . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.447

From the first there was no hope . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.448

He was aware of his danger , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.449

and said , ' It is hard upon the King to have to fight the battle over
again , ' GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.450

The Cabinet met on Monday , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.451

and great unanimity prevailed among them . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.452

They all agreed to stand by each other in the event of his death .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.453

As soon as it happened Lord Lansdowne went down to Windsor
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.454

and saw the King . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.455

His Majesty spoke with great affection of Canning ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.456

and said something of the difficulties in which he was again involved .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.457

Lord L. replied that he had come down , as it was his official duty to
do , to announce to him the event ; that nothing could be further from
his wish or intention than to elicit from him any opinion as to the
future , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.458

and he begged his Majesty would not say one word upon that subject .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.459

The King said that the first thing he should do would be to show every
mark of respect to the memory and attachment to the person of Canning ,
and that he should therefore send for those of his Ministers who had
been the most closely connected with him in public and private life .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.460

He sent immediately for Lord Goderich and Sturges Bourne , who went down
to him when Lord Lansdowne returned . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,103.461

Yesterday I saw some letters from Mr. Arbuthnot <paren> Gosh <$$paren>
<P_1,104> giving an account of the break-up of the old Government , and
of the reasons by which they had been influenced in resigning .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.462

They were three in number , very violent and indignant , defending the
Duke and attacking Canning , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.463

but they contained little more than has since appeared and been made
public . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.464

The only fact that appeared to me of consequence was this : that Peel ,
though he had resigned on different grounds , was indignant at the way
in which the Duke had been treated , and was resolved never to take
office till full reparation had been made to him ; that Lord Bathurst
had begged Gosh <paren> Mr. Arbuthnot <$$paren> not to mention this ,
as it might do harm . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.465

The next letter was a long tirade with a great deal of wrath and
indignation , such as might be expected . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.466

He says that they knew Canning was negotiating with the Whigs while he
was pretending that he wished the old Government to go on ; and that in
the course of the negotiation with , his old colleagues he offered Peel
, if he would stay with him , to recall the pro-Catholic Lord-Lieutenant
and send a Protestant . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.467

Peel wanted the Duke to give up the army and take the Treasury , which
he would not hear of . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.468

He was miserable at the idea , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.469

and opposed it so strongly that they could not press it upon him .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.470

However , the Peers - meaning all the Lords who had made such a stir -
applied to the Duke to put himself at the head of the Government ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.471

but he hardly sent an answer to their application -
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.472

he would not hear of it . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.473

I may here introduce some anecdotes of Canning told me by Lord George
Bentinck , his private secretary : GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.474

Some time after they had been in office <paren> after Lord Londonderry's
death <$$paren> they found in a drawer , which apparently had been
forgotten or overlooked , some papers , which were despatches and copies
of correspondence between Lord Castlereagh and Lord Stewart .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.475

These despatches were very curious , and more particularly so after his
attack last year on Canning for misappropriating the secret service
money , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.476

for they gave an account of his own employment of the secret service
money in getting Italian witnesses for the Queen's trial .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,104.477

There was likewise an account of the discovery <P_1,105> Stewart had
made of the treachery of an office messenger , who had for a long time
carried all his despatches to Metternich before he took them to England
, GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.478

and Lord Stewart says , ' I tremble when I think of the risk which my
despatches have incurred of coming before the House of Commons , as
there were letters of Lord Londonderry's written expressly " to throw
dust in the eyes of the Parliament . " ' GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.479

These were his own expressions , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.480

and he said , ' You will understand this and know what to say to
Metternich . ' GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.481

In fact , while Lord Castlereagh was obliged to pretend to disapprove of
the Continental system of the Holy Alliance he secretly gave Metternich
every assurance of his private concurrence , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.482

and it was not till long after Mr. Canning's accession that Metternich
could be persuaded of his sincerity in opposing their views , always
fancying that he was obliged to act a part as his predecessor had done
to keep the House of Commons quiet . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.483

From the moment Mr. Canning came into the Cabinet he laboured to
accomplish the recognition of the South_American Republics ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.484

but all the Cabinet were against him except Lord Liverpool ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.485

and the King would not hear of it . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.486

The King was supported in his opposition by the Duke of Wellington and
by Lieven and Esterhazy , whom he used to have with him ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.487

and to them he inveighed against Canning for pressing this measure .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.488

The Duke of Wellington and those Ambassadors persuaded his Majesty that
if he consented it would produce a quarrel between him and his allies ,
and involve him in inextricable difficulties .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.489

Canning , who knew all this , wrote to Mrs. Canning in terms of great
bitterness , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.490

and said if the King did not take care he would not let him see these
Ambassadors except in his presence , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.491

and added , ' I can tell his Majesty that his father would never have
acted in such a manner . ' GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.492

At length after a long contest , in the course of which Peel came round
to him , he resolved to carry the measure or resign .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,105.493

After a battle in the Cabinet which lasted three hours , and from which
he came heated , exhausted , and indignant , he prepared a memorial to
the King , and Lord Liverpool another , in which they tendered their
resignations , <P_1,106> alleging at length their reasons ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.494

and this they submitted to the Cabinet the following day .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.495

When their colleagues found they were in earnest they unanimously
surrendered , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.496

and agreed upon a declaration to the King that they would all resign
unless the measure was adopted . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.497

This communication was made to his Majesty by the Duke of Wellington ,
who told him that he found Canning was in earnest , and that the
Government could not go on without him , and he must give way .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.498

The King accordingly gave way , but with a very ill grace .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.499

When he saw Canning he received him very ill , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.500

and in a letter to him signifying his assent to the measure he said that
it must be his business to have it carried into effect in the best way
it would admit of . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.501

Canning took fire at the ungracious tone of the letter ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.502

and wrote for answer that he feared he was not honoured with that
confidence which it was necessary that the King should have in his
Ministers , and that his Majesty had better dismiss him at once .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.503

The King sent no answer , but a gracious message , assuring him he had
mistaken his letter , and desiring he would come to the Cottage , when
he received him very well . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.504

From that time he grew in favour , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.505

for when the King found that none of the evils predicted of this measure
had come to pass , and how it raised the reputation of his Minister , he
liked it very well , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.506

and Canning dexterously gave him all the praise of it , so that he soon
fancied it had originated with himself , and became equally satisfied
with himself and with Canning . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.507

Canning concealed nothing from Mrs. Canning , nor from Charles Ellis .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.508

When absent from Mrs. C. he wrote everything to her in the greatest
detail . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.509

Canning's industry was such that he never left a moment unemployed ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.510

and such was the clearness of his head that he could address himself
almost at the same time to several different subjects with perfect
precision and without the least embarrassment .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,106.511

He wrote very fast , but not fast enough for his mind , composing
<P_1,107> much quicker than he could commit his ideas to paper .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.512

He could not bear to dictate , because nobody could write fast enough
for him ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.513

but on one occasion , when he had the gout in his hand and could not
write , he stood by the fire GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.514

and dictated at the same time a despatch on Greek affairs to George
Bentinck and one on South_American politics to Howard de Walden , each
writing as fast as he could , while he turned from one to the other
without hesitation or embarrassment . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.515

<font> August 10th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.516

- The Cabinet sat yesterday morning and again at night .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.517

It is generally believed that Lord Goderich will succeed Canning at the
Treasury , and Lord Lansdowne has no objection to serve under him .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.518

The Tories were full of hope and joy at first ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.519

but in proportion as they were elated at first so were they dejected
yesterday , when they found that the King sent for Lord Goderich and not
for the Duke of Wellington . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.520

He never seems to have thought of the Duke at all .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.521

It will all be out to-day or to-morrow . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.522

The Tories may now give the King up . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.523

They have taken leave of office , except Peel , who will come in some
day or other . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.524

<bracket> They remained out of office five months .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.525

What a prophecy ! GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.526

- <font> January 28th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} <$$font> ,
1828 . <$$bracket> GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.527

The Duke of Wellington talked of Canning the other day a great deal at
my mother's . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.528

He said his talents were astonishing , his compositions admirable , that
he possessed the art of saying exactly what was necessary and passing
over those topics on which it was not advisable to touch , his fertility
and resources inexhaustible . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.529

He thought him the finest speaker he had ever heard ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.530

though he prided himself extremely upon his compositions , he would
patiently endure any criticisms upon such papers as he submitted for the
consideration of the Cabinet , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.531

and would allow them to be altered in any way that was suggested ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.532

he <paren> the Duke <$$paren> particularly had often ' cut and hacked '
his papers , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.533

and Canning never made the least objection , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.534

but was always ready to adopt the suggestions of his colleagues .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.535

It was not so , however , in conversation and discussion .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,107.536

Any difference of opinion or dissent from his <P_1,108> views threw him
into ungovernable rage , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.537

and on such occasions he flew out with a violence which , the Duke said
, had often compelled him to be silent that he might not be involved in
bitter personal altercation . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.538

He said that Canning was usually very silent in the Cabinet , seldom
spoke at all , but when he did he maintained his opinions with
extraordinary tenacity . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.539

He said that he was one of the idlest of men .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.540

This I do not believe , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.541

for I have always heard that he saw everything and did everything
himself . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.542

Not a despatch was received that he did not read , nor one written that
he did not dictate or correct . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.543

<font> August 20th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.544

- There was a Council at Windsor Castle on Friday last , which was a
very curious scene . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.545

What I saw puzzled me very much till matters have since been explained
to me . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.546

On Tuesday morning Drummond , Lord Goderich's private secretary , came
to me at my office GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.547

and told me the Council would be held on Friday , and that Herries was
to be appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer and was going down that day
with Lord Goderich to Windsor . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.548

Accordingly when I arrived at the Castle I found Herries in the room ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.549

and I asked him if he was to take an oath as Chancellor of the Exchequer
, because there was none in the oath-book for Chancellor , but one for
the Treasurer of the Exchequer , and whether he was to take that .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.550

He said he did not know , upon which I asked Wynn if he knew .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.551

He did not ; when we all agreed to wait till Lord Bexley came , and
enquire of him what he had done . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.552

When Lord Bexley arrived we asked him , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.553

and he said that Herries would only be sworn then as a Privy Councillor
, and must take the oath of Chancellor of Exchequer in the Court of
Exchequer . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.554

Shortly after we walked round the Castle , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.555

and some conversation occurring about the elevation of the Round Tower ,
which Wyattville was anxious to accomplish , Herries said to him , ' But
it is my business now to ask you what you will do it for , how much it
will cost . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.556

Will you do it for 10,000 <font> l. <$$font> ? '
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,108.557

<P_1,109>

Wyattville said , ' You must give me 15,000 <font> l. ' , {TEXT:,'}
<$$font> so that I could have no doubt that Herries was Chancellor of
the Exchequer . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.559

In the meantime all the Ministers arrived , the whole Cabinet being
present except the Chancellor and Lord Anglesey , who arrived afterwards
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.560

As soon as Lord Goderich and Lord Lansdowne were come they retired into
the next room GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.561

and had a long conference . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.562

Shortly afterwards the King came , when Lord Goderich went into his room
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.563

He stayed some time , when the Duke of Portland went in , then Herries .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.564

When Lord Goderich came out he had another conference with Lord
Lansdowne , at the end of which he went again to the King .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.565

He came out , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.566

and at the end of three-quarters of an hour went a third time , and
after him Herries a second time , and with him Lord Bexley .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.567

Another very animated conversation took place between Lord Lansdowne and
Lord Goderich , when the latter went to the King a fourth time , and
after him Lord Lansdowne , Goderich . whispering something to him as he
went in . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.568

Previous to this I remarked a conference between Lord Lansdowne ,
Goderich , and Carlisle , after which Carlisle took Tierney into the
next room , evidently communicating what had passed .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.569

Something was clearly going on , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.570

but I could not make out what . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.571

I fancied that Lord Lansdowne insisted upon Lord Holland's being in the
Cabinet . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.572

Yesterday , however , I discovered that it was all about Herries and his
appointment . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.573

The appointment was the King's , with whom Herries had ingratiated
himself by transacting some of his pecuniary business , and getting odds
and ends for him out of <font> droits , <$$font> &c.
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.574

The King then named him , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.575

and Goderich made no objection . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.576

Herries came to Windsor , not doubting but that he was to receive the
seals , which in fact Goderich brought down with him on purpose .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.577

Lord Lansdowne , however , declared that he would not consent to the
appointment , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.578

and hence arose all the conferences and audiences for which I could not
account at the time . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.579

The Whigs dislike Herries' politics , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.580

and still more do they object to the King taking upon himself to
nominate the members of the Government without consulting his Ministers
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,109.581

They are determined to resist <P_1,110> nomination ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.582

and the consequence of Lord Lansdowne's remonstrance was the suspension
at least of the appointment . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.583

Such is the state of affairs , and not a very agreeable state certainly
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.584

The Whigs are satisfied of the candour , fairness , and plain dealing of
Goderich , but dissatisfied with his facility and want of firmness .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.585

The King is grasping at power and patronage , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.586

and wants to take advantage of the weakness of the Government and their
apparent dependence upon him to exercise all the authority which ought
to belong to the Ministers . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.587

The Whigs are not easy in their places . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.588

They feel that they are not treated with the consideration to which they
are entitled . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.589

But they have got {COM:sic} too far to recede ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.590

and they evidently are alarmed lest , if they exasperate the King , he
should accept their resignation and form a Goverment by a junta of the
old Tories with the rest of his Administration , by which their
exclusion would be made certain and perpetual .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.591

I find that the Duke of Portland was likewise named by the King himself
. GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.592

They do not object to the Duke , on the contrary ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.593

but they object greatly to his being so appointed .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.594

All this I have from Tierney , who added , if the Duke had been proposed
to the King by Lord Goderich , not a member of the Cabinet would have
objected , but they do@ @n't like his being named by the King .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.595

At the end of the Council , on Friday , Lord Anglesey arrived , having
travelled day and night , and brought with him the Duke of Wellington@
@'s acceptance of the command of the army . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.596

Altogether it was a day of unusual interest , and unlike the dulness of
ordinary Councils . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.597

<font> September 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} <$$font>
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.598

- Since the Council on the 17th the affair of Herries has still been
going on . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.599

It appears that when Goderich went in@ @to the King <paren> at the
Council <$$paren> to announce to him the objection that had been raised
, his Majesty was very angry , angry at having been so committed and at
being obliged to give up a nomination he liked .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.600

Herries naturally felt himself very ill treated and nettled by the
attacks upon him in the newspapers . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,110.601

He has ever since insisted upon being admitted to the Cabinet as the
only <P_1,111> thing which could afford due reparation to his honour ,
and prove that he had not been rejected for the reasons which had been
assigned . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.602

This the Ministers opposed , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.603

and it was at length determined that this matter should rest till
Huskisson's return . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.604

Huskisson agreed with his colleagues about Herries ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.605

went to the King , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.606

and spoke to him openly and firmly on the subject .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.607

The King consented that another arrangement should be made ;
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.608

the one proposed was , that Sturges Bourne should be Chancellor of the
Exchequer , and Herries take the Woods and Forests without a seat in the
Cabinet . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.609

Herries , who had constantly refused to accede to any arrangement by
which he was to be excluded from the Cabinet , said he would consider of
it ; GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.610

but in the meantime Sturges took fright , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.611

and refused to take the Exchequer . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.612

In vain Huskisson offered to take all the trouble on himself ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.613

and they all tried to persuade Sturges . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.614

He would not do it , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.615

and so this arrangement fell to the ground . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.616

They went again to the King yesterday to report progress and state to
him what had occurred . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.617

When they came back <paren> Goderich , Huskisson , Sturges , Herries ,
and the Chancellor <$$paren> Goderich wrote a long letter to Lord
Lansdowne , GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.618

and he is to go to the King again this evening .
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.619

I had a long conversation with Tierney yesterday ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.620

and I find that the Whig Ministers are sick to death of their situation
and anxious to resign . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.621

They think they are not treated with the consideration which is due to
them whether as individuals or as the representatives of a great party
who are supporting the Government . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.622

Then they think Goderich has behaved so ill in this affair that they can
have no confidence in him . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.623

They believe so much in the integrity of his character that they do not
suspect him of any duplicity in what has passed ,
GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.624

but his conduct has been marked by such deplorable weakness as shows how
unfit he is for the situation he occupies . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.625

He has acted equally ill to the King , to his colleagues , and to
Herries himself . GREVILLE-1827-2,1,111.626

