<BEGIN_greville-1855-2>

<P_1,248>

<font> March 2nd {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.3

- News just arrived that the Emperor of Russia is dead .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.4

John Russell had telegraphed from Berlin that he was given over .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.5

This great and unexpected event must have the most important
consequences whether for peace or for war . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.6

A disputed succession is not impossible , as it has long been reported
that the Grand Duke Constantine was disposed to contest the succession
with the Cesarewitch , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.7

but this will probably turn out to be a fable . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.8

It is supposed that the new Emperor has been all along inclined to peace
, and that he was in disgrace with his father on that account .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.9

If this be true , it renders it still more probable that he will be
anxious to put an end to this destructive and dangerous war , and the
Allied Powers may be less exacting with him than they were disposed to
be with the late Emperor . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.10

On the other hand , should the war unhappily continue , the death of
Nicholas is likely to damp the ardour of the Russians and to relax their
exertions , so that we can hardly fail to profit by it .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.11

Clarendon is gone over to Boulogne to confer with the Emperor Napoleon .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.12

There seems something like a lull here for the moment , and less of
excitement and violence than there was . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.13

Palmerston has not been in office a fortnight , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.14

and already he is enormously <font> baiss√© ; <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.15

his speeches night after night are miserable . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.16

The truth is , he never had any power as a debater , and he is out of
his element as leader in the House of Commons , where he has to answer
everybody , to speak on every subject , and to be continually debating
more or less . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.17

He has made a few great speeches , prepared , and on his own subject of
foreign affairs , and every now and then a smart chaffing retort which
excited the hilarity of the House , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,248.18

and <P_1,249> that has been all he could do . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.19

Then he seems supine and undecided ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.20

he does not fill up the vacant places or seemingly endeavour to do so ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.21

and he does not put good men in the places he does fill up , all of
which does him harm in general estimation . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.22

Clarendon has told Lady Palmerston very frankly that he will soon ruin
himself in public opinion if he goes on in this way .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.23

Few things are more extraordinary than the notion that was abroad of
Palmerston's fitness and efficacy . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.24

Never was there a greater delusion , and never one that is so rapidly
being dissipated . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.25

<font> March 10th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.26

- It is remarkable that , though seven days have elapsed since the news
of the death of the Emperor of Russia reached us , and that we heard of
it by electric telegraph the very day it happened , we are still without
authentic and detailed information of what has since occurred at St.
Petersburg ; and of the manifesto of the new Emperor , which is looked
for with so much curiosity , we have only a partial extract or imperfect
summary , so that we have still no means of judging whether the chances
of peace are improved by the accession of Alexander II .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.27

Palmerston's Government does not seem to take root or gain much strength
; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.28

every day seems to prove the more clearly that he is unfit for the task
he has taken on himself . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.29

He inspires neither respect nor confidence , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.30

and is totally unable to manage the House of Commons ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.31

his speeches are feeble and bad , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.32

and he is not always prudent and conciliatory , but , on the contrary ,
pettish and almost offensive . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.33

He finds great difficulty in filling the vacant offices ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.34

and he evinces much want of tact and good management in his endeavours
to do so , offering and retracting his offers in a very loose way .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.35

For example , he offered Sir Robert Peel the Clerkship of the Ordnance ,
which he accepted ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.36

and then he found Monsell did not mean to resign it ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.37

so he had to withdraw the offer . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.38

Then he told him he should be Colonial Under-Secretary if John Russell
would consent . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.39

John Russell would not consent , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.40

and then he offered him a seat at the Admiralty .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.41

Sir Robert in some dudgeon demurred , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,249.42

and Palmerston , inferring from his ill humour that he would not
<P_1,250> take this place , offered it to Henry Brand , who accepted ,
desired his writ might be moved for , and went to the railway station to
go down to the place he represented . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.43

Just as he was starting , a messenger arrived with a letter from
Palmerston saying Sir Robert Peel had taken the Admiralty , so he could
not have it , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.44

and the gentleman had to return home without any office at all .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.45

This is a sad way of doing business , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.46

and will not make him more popular . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.47

Grenville Berkeley <paren> whipper-in <$$paren> told me he thought
Palmerston was doing rather better latterly and that there was a better
disposition in the House of Commons ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.48

but Jonathan Peel , who is a shrewd , dispassionate observer , and
tolerably impartial , though with no good will to the present Government
, told me a different story . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.49

He says the Government is as weak as possible , Palmerston wretched ,
and the House of Commons ill disposed and unruly , and he thinks it
absolutely impossible that this concern can last many weeks .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.50

The Derbyites are quite confident of forcing their way to office , and
quite determined to do so ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.51

but it is their game to damage the present Government as much as
possible , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.52

and they will do everything in opposition but what may recoil upon
themselves after they have got into office , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.53

and no other consideration will restrain them .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.54

I regard with the utmost dislike the prospect of their return , because
I think their conduct so monstrously unprincipled .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.55

I hear Gladstone is very much out of humour , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.56

and expect soon to see him and his small band in overt opposition to the
Government . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.57

Many fancy that it will end in his joining Derby ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.58

but so do not I . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.59

I am not sure that he would be indisposed if a proper occasion presented
itself , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.60

but I do not believe any consideration or any circumstances whatever
would induce the Derbyites to admit him again into their party .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.61

Their indignation - that is , of a great many of them - was unbounded at
Derby having offered him office the other day , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.62

and at the great meeting at Eglinton's such manifestations of resentment
were made on that account as to make it nearly impossible <paren> for in
these days nothing is quite impossible <$$paren> for any future attempt
at reconciliation and reunion to be made . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,250.63

<P_1,251>

<font> March 11th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.65

- A fresh shuffling of the cards is being arranged by which Frederick
Peel is to go to the Treasury , <font> vice <$$font> Wilson , Vice
President of the Board of Trade ; Sir Robert to the War Department ,
<font> vice <$$font> his brother ; and Henry Brand to the Admiralty .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.66

Palmerston seemed to consider all the blunders he made about these
offices rather a good joke than a mischievous <font> gaucherie .
<$$font> GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.67

' Ha , ha ! ' he said , ' a Comedy of Errors . '
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.68

George Lewis told me this morning he thinks the temper of the House of
Commons more favourable , and , if he can succeed in producing a
palateable Budget , that they may get on ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.69

he told me the revenue was extremely flourishing and the country very
rich , but the expenses are enormous . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.70

He means to meet them by a loan , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.71

but the question is of what amount , and how much of the additional
expense shall be provided by it . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.72

He will want ninety millions to cover the whole .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.73

Clarendon was much pleased with his visit to the Emperor , who talked to
him very frankly and unreservedly about everything .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.74

They lit their cigars GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.75

and sat and talked with the greatest ease . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.76

He said the Emperor spoke to him about the English press , and all he
said was sensible and true ; that he was aware that a free press was a
necessity in England , and as indispensable as the Constitution itself ,
and that he had hitherto believed that the editors of the principal
newspapers had the good of their country at heart , and always acted
from conscientious motives ; but that he could no longer entertain that
opinion . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.77

The press during the past months , and the ' Times ' particularly , had
done an incalculable amount of mischief to England and to the alliance
between us . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.78

The effect produced by their language in Germany was most injurious ,
and of service only to Russia . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.79

When the English papers talked of their own country in the way they did
, of its degradation and disgrace , its maladministration , the ruin of
its military power , and the loss of all that makes a nation great and
powerful , though he <paren> the Emperor <$$paren> knew what all this
meant , and how much or how little of truth there was in such
exaggerated statements , yet in France they were generally believed ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,251.80

and it became very <P_1,252> difficult for him to reconcile the nation
to an alliance for which he was reproached with making sacrifices and
shaping his policy in accordance with our's , when it was evident from
our own showing that our alliance was not worth having , and our
impotence was so exposed that , whenever peace should put an end to the
necessity of the alliance , we should be entirely at their mercy ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,252.81

and while such was the feeling in France , in Germany it was still
stronger , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,252.82

and there the ' Times ' had succeeded in creating a universal conviction
that we are in the lowest condition of weakness and inefficiency : at
all of which he expressed the greatest regret .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,252.83

I was surprised to hear Clarendon say that he did not believe the
resources of Russia to carry on the contest to be in any sensible degree
exhausted , that her commerce had not suffered at all , and as to her
finances she could go on for a good while with her paper money and the
gold which , in a certain quantity , she drew from the Ural Mountains .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,252.84

<P_1,253>

{ED:CHAPTER_IX}

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<font> March 31st {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} <$$font> , 1855 .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.88

- Three weeks have passed away GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.89

and I have had nothing to say ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.90

nor indeed have I anything now of the least importance ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.91

and can only glance at the general aspect of affairs .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.92

The Government , on the whole , seems in a somewhat better condition .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.93

They say Palmerston speaks better than he did , and his good humour and
civility please . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.94

At last the offices , except the Under-Secretaryship to the Colonies ,
are filled up . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.95

Lord Elgin and Lord Seymour successively refused the Duchy of Lancaster
, GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.96

and after going a begging for many weeks Lord Harrowby has taken it .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.97

Laing and Wilson , and I think somebody else , declined the Vice
Presidency of the Board of Trade , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.98

and they have got Bouverie . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.99

Within these few days the hopes of peace have waxed faint .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.100

The fatal third point is an insurmountable obstacle ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.101

and it seems likely that we shall be condemned to fight it out more
fiercely than ever , and without Austria , who , as I all along expected
, will not join us in forcing hard conditions on Russia .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,253.102

It remains to be seen whether we or Austria <P_1,254> are in fault ,
assuming the rupture of the negotiations to be inevitable .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.103

If Austria recedes from what she had already agreed to , she is ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.104

if we require anything more , we are . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.105

Drouyn de Lhuys has been here for twenty-four hours ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.106

and goes on to Vienna directly to bring things to a conclusion one way
or another . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.107

Clarendon is pleased with him . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.108

The Emperor is to be here in three weeks . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.109

Having no public events nor any secret information to record , I must
put down my own private concerns , uninteresting as they are .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.110

I am busy on the task of editing a volume of Moore's correspondence left
to me by John Russell , and finishing the second article upon King
Joseph's Memoirs . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.111

These small literary occupations interest and amuse me ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.112

and , being quite out of the way of politics , and seeing nobody ,
except Clarendon at rare intervals , who can or will tell me anything ,
it is well I can amuse myself with them ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.113

and now that I am growing old <paren> for I shall be sixty-one the day
after to-morrow <$$paren> it is my aim to cultivate these pleasures more
and more , and make them my refuge against the infirmities which beset
me , and the loss of youth . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.114

My great fear is lest my eyesight should fail ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.115

and I earnestly hope I may die before such a calamity should befall me .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.116

The war goes languidly on , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.117

and I hear Raglan and Canrobert are squabbling instead of acting , and
that it seems to be more the fault of Canrobert ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.118

but the melancholy truth is that there are two incompetent generals in
command , who have no skill or enterprise , and are letting the
opportunity for attacking the enemy slip away .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.119

A divided command and two independent armies are in themselves an
immense drawback , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.120

but when they begin to disagree it becomes fatal .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.121

We have now an enormous force there , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.122

and yet they seem incapable of doing anything and of striking any great
and serious blow . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.123

<font> April 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font> -
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.124

I went to a Council yesterday GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.125

and got into a difficulty . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.126

Without any previous notice , Mr. Monsell , a Roman_Catholic , came to
be made a Privy Councillor . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,254.127

I <P_1,255> had never sworn a Roman_Catholic GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.128

and did not know what to do , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.129

so I proposed to Monsell to put it off till another day ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.130

and meanwhile I would ascertain how he was to be sworn .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.131

The difficulty was told to the Queen , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.132

and the Prince set about finding what was to be done .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.133

He looked out the 10th George IV. <paren> Emancipation Act <$$paren> ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.134

and , just as we were summoned into the Queen's presence , Granville
brought the volume , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.135

put it into my hands , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.136

and told me I must administer to Monsell the oath set forth there , in
lieu of the oaths of abjuration and supremacy .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.137

I was sure it was a mistake ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.138

but there was no time to remonstrate , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.139

and I was compelled to bring him in and administer the oath .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.140

As soon as I got back to my office and looked into the matter I found it
was all wrong , and that he had not , in fact , been sworn at all .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.141

What he ought to have done was to take this oath in one of the Law
Courts , and then to have the Privy Councillor's oath administered to
him , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.142

and so I sent him word . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.143

Afterwards I met Sidney Herbert , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.144

and he told me what he believed to be the cause of Drouyn de Lhuys'
coming here , and the actual state of affairs at Vienna .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.145

We have proposed the reduction of the fleet ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.146

the Russians refuse . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.147

The Emperor Napoleon would like , if possible , to obtain some great
success in the Crimea , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.148

and is not indisposed to continue the war if he can see a reasonable
hope of such an achievement ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.149

but when he despairs of this his mind inclines to the other alternative
, to make peace <paren> which would be popular in France <$$paren> ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.150

and he does not care very much about the terms GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.151

and is not averse to waive the condition as to the fleet .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.152

But our Government want to insist on it , or go on with the war ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.153

and Sidney Herbert believes they have succeeded in talking over Drouyn
de Lhuys and persuading him to join us in this determination , and to
carry it off to Vienna . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.154

However , he is very likely to be talked over again there ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.155

and it remains to be seen whether the Emperor , if he really wishes for
peace , will not join with Austria in opposing us , and accepting some
other conditions . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,255.156

I always fancied that we had come to a regular unmistakeable agreement
with Austria what we should ask of Russia , and that she had <P_1,256>
bound , herself to join in the war if the terms agreed in were refused ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.157

but , according to Sidney Herbert , this has never been done .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.158

Clarendon did , indeed , <font> at last <$$font> state distinctly to
Austria the terms on which France and England meant to insist ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.159

and Austria expressed her concurrence in them as a matter of opinion ,
and her desire to obtain them , consenting also to unite her efforts to
theirs in attempting to obtain them ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.160

but she never consented to go to war if they were not conceded ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.161

therefore we have no reason to complain of her if the negotiations break
off on these grounds , and she refuses to depart from her neutrality .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.162

She has all along said , she wished with all her heart we could succeed
in taking Sebastopol , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.163

but as we had not succeeded , and apparently could not , it was
impossible to press very stringent terms on Russia ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.164

and she has never held out any expectation to us of joining in the war
against Russia , unless Russia refuses such reasonable and not
humiliating terms of peace as she herself thinks indispensable for the
objects to the attainment of which she has all along been a party .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.165

The best chance of peace now is that the Emperor Napoleon may think he
is not likely to do any great things in the Crimea and that peace is his
best policy , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.166

and he is the real arbiter of peace and war . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.167

If he prefers following in the wake of England , and to defer to our war
policy , peace will ascend to Heaven , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.168

and the odious war will be resumed with more fury than ever ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.169

and no one can guess how long it will last , nor what will be the end of
it . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.170

<font> April 17th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.171

- Yesterday I went out ' with all the gazing town ' to see not the least
curious of the many curious events I have lived to witness , the entry
of the Emperor and Empress of the French into London .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.172

The day was magnificent , the crowd prodigious , the reception not very
clamorous , but cordial and respectful . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.173

A fine sight for them to see such vast multitudes , so orderly and so
prosperous , and without a single soldier except their own escort .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.174

The Queen received them with the utmost cordiality ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.175

and omitted none of the usual forms practised between Sovereigns .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.176

She met the Imperial pair at the entrance to the Castle ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,256.177

embraced the <P_1,257> Emperor and then the Empress when she was
presented to her . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.178

<font> April 20th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.179

- The visit of the Emperor has been one continued ovation , and the
success of it complete . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.180

None of the Sovereigns who have been here before have ever been received
with such magnificence by the Court or by such curiosity and delight by
the people . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.181

Wherever and whenever they have appeared , they have been greeted by
enormous multitudes and prodigious acclamations .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.182

The Queen is exceedingly pleased with both of them ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.183

she thinks the Empress very natural , graceful , and attractive , and
the Emperor frank , cordial , and true . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.184

He has done his best to please her , talked to her a great deal , amused
her , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.185

and has completely succeeded . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.186

Everybody is struck with his mean and diminutive figure and vulgar
appearance , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.187

but his manners are good and not undignified .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.188

He talked a very long time to Lord Derby on Tuesday at Windsor and to
Lord Aberdeen on Wednesday . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.189

This last was very proper , because he had a great prejudice against
Aberdeen , and fancied he was his enemy , which Aberdeen knew .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.190

When he was invested with the Garter , he took all sorts of oaths - old
feudal oaths - of fidelity and knightly service to the Queen ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.191

and he then made her a short speech to the following effect :
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.192

- ' I have sworn to be faithful to Your Majesty and to serve you to the
best of my ability , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.193

and my whole future life shall be spent in proving the sincerity with
which I have thus sworn , and my resolution to devote myself to your
service . ' GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.194

The fineness of the weather brought out the whole population of London ,
as usual kept in excellent order by a few policemen , and in perfect
good humour . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.195

It was a beautiful sight last night when the Royal and Imperial party
went to the Opera in state ; the streets lit by gas and the houses
illuminated and light as day , particularly opposite the Travellers'
Club , where I was . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.196

I am glad the success of the visit has been so great , and the
contentment of all the parties concerned so complete ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.197

but it is well that all will be over tomorrow ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.198

for such excitement and enthusiasm could not last much longer ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,257.199

and the <P_1,258> inconvenience of being beset by crowds , and the
streets obstructed , is getting tiresome . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.200

I saw Cowley for a moment yesterday . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.201

He told me the Russians refused any conditions which imposed loss of
territory or limitation of naval forces , and they declined to offer any
counter_project , though they are ready to discuss anything we propose .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.202

He therefore considers the continuance of the war unavoidable ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.203

and does not believe Austria will join in it , though Drouyn de Lhuys
still writes his own expectation that she will .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.204

He said they had never said or done anything which hound them to join ,
and that their diplomacy had been much more adroit and successful than
our's , but that this was principally the fault of the French , who
never would consent to take a peremptory course so as to compel them to
be explicit . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.205

The consequence of this is , that it will be impossible to produce the
diplomatic correspondence , and its retention will put Parliament and
the press in a fury , and expose the Government to attacks which they
will find it very difficult to repel or to silence .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.206

They can@ @not give the reason why , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.207

and their enemies and detractors will believe , or at least insist ,
that they do not dare disclose their own share in the transaction .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.208

I asked Clarendon how it was that the French Government in their last
paper in the ' Moniteur ' said so positively that they had secured the
cooperation of Austria if the last conditions were refused by Russia ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.209

he replied that he supposed they said so in order to make it the ground
of an accusation against Austria when the Conference broke up and she
refuses to declare war . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.210

Clarendon thinks we shall get the better of Russia , but that it will be
by blockading her ports and ruining her commerce , and not by military
operations , and that this may take two or three years or more , but is
certain in the end . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.211

<font> May 24th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.212

- The Sebastopol Committee is finished , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.213

and the result proves that it is a very good thing to have had it ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,258.214

<P_1,259>

for no ill consequences have come of it , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.216

and the evidence has benefited instead of injuring both the Government
and those who were most bitterly abused , especially Hardinge and
Newcastle , about the latter of whom there has been a considerable
reaction of opinion . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.217

In Parliament nothing has taken place of much consequence .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.218

Ellenborough gave battle in the Lords GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.219

and was signally defeated . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.220

Layard had announced a hostile motion in the House of Commons , which he
has since given up to Disraeli , who brings forward a regular want of
confidence motion tonight , which will decide the fate of the Government
. GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.221

Sir Francis Baring has moved an amendment which the Peelites will not
vote for , because it pledges the House to support the war , they having
now become furiously pacific ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.222

as if they were not unpopular enough already , they are now doing all
they can to mar their own efficacy by giving their enemies a plausible
case for attacking and abusing them , and by breasting the tide of
warlike zeal and passion , which , though very absurd and very
mischievous , is too strong and too general to be openly and directly
resisted at present . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.223

It is quite fit and becoming to reason with it , and to endeavour to
bring the public to a more reasonable frame of mind ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.224

but great tact , caution , and good management are required in doing
this . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.225

It is very difficult to make out what Gladstone and his friends <paren>
for it would be ridiculous to call them a party <$$paren> are at , and
what they expect or desire in reference to their political future .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.226

Palmerston is said to have done better in the House of Commons lately
than he did at first , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.227

but it is curious to see how completely his popularity has evaporated .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.228

All the foolish people whose pet he was , and who clamoured for him with
the notion that he was to do every sort of impossible thing , now that
they find he can do no more than other men , and that there never was
any real difference between him and his colleagues , are furious with
him because they so deceived themselves , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.229

and want to break the idol they set up . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.230

<font> May 30th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font> -
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.231

The division last Friday night gave Government a larger majority than
anybody expected , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,259.232

and if it did <P_1,260> not give them permanent strength it averted
immediate danger . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.233

Gladstone made a fine speech , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.234

but gave great offence to all who are not for peace ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.235

and exposed himself to much unpopularity . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.236

The discussion is only suspended till Parliament meets again , when the
amendments will be debated , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.237

and there will no more divisions ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.238

but in the meantime the news which has arrived of the successes in the
Crimea , and the fair prospect there appears of still greater advantages
, must serve to silence the advocates of peace and encourage those who
are all for war , and to render a contest popular which is likely to be
crowned with brilliant results , and , as many imagine , to give us the
means of dictating peace on our own terms , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.239

I believe in the prospect of success , but not that it will reduce the
Russians to make peace on our terms , particularly as the conditions
will infallibly be harder than before . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.240

But I do marvel that they did not make peace at Vienna on the terms
which were there offered them , when they must have known that all the
chances of war were against them . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.241

The Emperor of Russia might have taken warning from the history and fate
of Napoleon , who constantly refused the terms he could have obtained ,
and continually insisted on something more than his enemies would give
him , and by this obstinacy lost his crown . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.242

The most interesting incident which occurred last week was the scene at
the end of the debate between Graham and John Russell , who had a fight
of considerable asperity ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.243

and according to all appearances the Peelites and the Whigs are
completely two . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.244

When Graham was reconciled to Lord John two or three years ago , he
vowed that nothing should separate them again ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.245

but ' quam parum stabiles sunt hominum amicitiae , '
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.246

and now they appear to be as antagonistic as ever .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.247

But , to be sure , Graham could not contemplate or foresee all the
tricks which Lord John played during the whole time he was a member of
Aberdeen's Government . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,260.248

Notwithstanding the success of Government in the House of Commons and of
the armies in the Crimea , things are in <P_1,261> a very unsatisfactory
and uncomfortable state here , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.249

and nobody knows what will happen . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.250

There is no confidence in any party or any men ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.251

and everybody has a vague apprehension of coming but undefined evil and
danger . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.252

The world seems out of joint . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.253

<font> Paris , June 17th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.254

- Having resolved to go to Vichy for my health , here I am on the road ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.255

I crossed over yesterday morning , a very disagreeable but short passage
from Folkestone , good journey by rail , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.256

and got here at nine o'clock , being lodged very hospitably at the
Embassy . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.257

French carriages on the railway are much better than ours , particularly
the second class ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.258

the country between Boulogne and Paris looks well and thriving .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.259

I had some talk with Cowley last night before we went to bed , when he
gave me an account of the circumstances of Drouyn de Lhuys' resignation
. GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.260

He also descanted on the difficulties of the Government here and of the
maintenance of the alliance , which he attributes up to this time
entirely to the good faith and fairness of the Emperor himself , and his
determination that nothing shall interrupt the good understanding
between the two countries , on which he is above all things bent .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.261

The Emperor says it is a great misfortune that there are no men of
capacity or character whose services he can command , nor in fact any
men , if he could command their services , in whom the public would be
disposed to place confidence . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.262

Cowley had no very good opinion of Drouyn de Lhuys ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.263

and said no reliance could be placed in him ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.264

but in some respects he is a loss , because he has a certain capacity
and clean hands , he is enormously rich , and guiltless of any
peculation or jobbery . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.265

When Drouyn announced that he meant to go to Vienna , Lord Cowley urged
him to go to England first and come to an understanding with the Cabinet
there as to the terms which should be proposed at the Conference .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.266

He consented and went , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,261.267

and Cowley <P_1,262> urged Clarendon to have the agreement put down in
writing that there might be no mistake about it .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.268

This was done , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.269

and Drouyn went to Vienna . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.270

When he took upon himself to make the proposition he did , it was in
direct opposition to his agreement with us , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.271

but he thought he should bring the Emperor to concur with him and to
sanction it . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.272

The Emperor seemed at first disposed to do so ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.273

and when he saw Cowley intimated as much to him .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.274

Cowley submitted that it was quite contrary to the understanding with us
, GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.275

and objected on every ground to the proposal .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.276

The Emperor said he really got quite confused in the intricacies and
details of this affair , but he would see Drouyn again and speak to him
upon it . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.277

Cowley requested <paren> a very strange request as he owned <$$paren>
that he might be present at the interview . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.278

The Emperor seemed somewhat surprised , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.279

but acquiesced . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.280

When Cowley came he found Drouyn had been there an hour , and that
Marshal Vaillant was also present . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.281

They went over the ground again GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.282

and Drouyn said what he had to say , when Cowley merely said he would
not go into the general question and would only ask whether M. Drouyn's
proposal was in conformity with what had been settled in London , and he
appealed to Marshal Vaillant whether the termination of the war on such
terms would be advisable . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.283

It was impossible to maintain that the terms were consistent with the
joint agreement , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.284

and Vaillant declared that if the French army was brought away , and a
peace made on conditions which would appear to tarnish the honour of
their arms , he would not answer for the consequences .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.285

This put an end to the discussion . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.286

Drouyn de Lhuys retired , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.287

and as soon as he got home sent his resignation to the Emperor , who
wrote him back a very goodhumoured answer advising him to recall it ,
and expressing a wish that he would come and talk the matter over with
him , when he had no doubt they should come to a satisfactory
understanding . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.288

Drouyn persisted , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.289

and then the Emperor accepted his resignation GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.290

and sent for Walewski . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.291

I asked Cowley how Walewski was likely to do , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.292

and he said wretchedly , and that he was not of a calibre to fill such a
post . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,262.293

<P_1,263>

He told me all about the intended journey of the Emperor to the Crimea
and why it was given up . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.295

The Emperor was bent on it , while all the Ministers deprecated it and
did all they could to prevent it . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.296

They suggested that , if any misfortune occurred while he was there , he
could not quit the army ; if any success , he would infallibly stay to
pursue it , so that his speedy return could not be counted on .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.297

This failed to move him . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.298

The intention was that J√©rome should be , not Regent , but Chief of the
Council of Ministers , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.299

and they advised J√©rome only to consent to take this office on condition
that he was invested with the same despotic power as the Emperor himself
. GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.300

This His Majesty would not consent to , as the Ministers foresaw ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.301

and this was the reason why the expedition was given up .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.302

<font> Paris , June 23rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.303

- I came here to pass through to Vichy , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.304

and accordingly on Tuesday last to Vichy I went .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.305

I arrived there in the evening , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.306

found a detestable apartment without a fireplace ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.307

the weather was intolerable , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.308

it never ceased raining , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.309

and the cold was intense . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.310

Finding that it was useless to take the waters or baths in such weather
, and being disgusted with the whole thing , I resolved to return to
Paris , which I did on Friday , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.311

and here I am comfortably established in the Embassy again .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.312

On my arrival I was greeted with the painful intelligence of the repulse
sustained by the French and English on the 18th in the attack on the
Mamelon and Redan batteries , and of the great losses which both armies
had suffered . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.313

This failure has cast a great gloom over Paris and London ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.314

and the disappointment is greater because we had become so accustomed to
success that everybody regarded failure in anything as impossible .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.315

Cowley told me that the Emperor was excessively annoyed , and the more
because they entirely disapprove of P√©lissier's proceedings .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.316

Without tying him down or attempting from hence to direct the operations
of the campaign , they had given P√©lissier the strongest recommendations
to abstain from assaults which they had reason to believe would not be
decisive and would cost a vast number of lives ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,263.317

and they were very anxious the operations <P_1,264> against the Russians
in the field should be pressed instead . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.318

There had been some half angry communications between the Government and
P√©lissier , who had talked of resigning the command .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.319

The opinions of the Government had been principally formed from those of
General Niel , who had constantly reported his conviction to the above
mentioned effect , and had earnestly deprecated these assaults .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.320

Then there is reason to apprehend that such unsuccessful attempts may
produce bad blood and mutual accusations between the allied forces .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.321

Already P√©lissier and Raglan have begun to cast the blame of the failure
on each other , though apparently the difference has not yet swelled to
any serious amount . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.322

I have always thought that it would have been better to have no divided
command , but to place an English corps under a French
commander-in-chief , and a French squadron under an English admiral .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.323

This was what the Emperor proposed , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.324

and he wrote a letter himself on the subject , which Cowley promised to
show me . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.325

We have had much conversation about the Emperor , his character and his
capacity , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.326

and I am puzzled how to understand and to do justice to the latter .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.327

Being such as he is represented to be , and having the defects he has ,
it is difficult to comprehend his having accomplished the great things
he has , and raised himself to such a situation and such a height of
personal power . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.328

<font> June 24th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.329

- Last night I went to Thiers' , where I found Mignet , Roger du Nord ,
and others of his adherents , none of whom I recollected , nor they me .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.330

This morning I called on Achille Fould , who told me the Emperor knew I
was here and would like me to be presented to him ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.331

and it was settled that this should be done . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.332

I am nothing loth , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.333

for I have a curiosity to see this remarkable man and to converse with
him . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.334

Madame de Lieven told me this morning that not long before the
Revolution of '48 J√©rome Bonaparte had entreated her to exert her
influence to get him made a peer . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.335

<font> June 26th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.336

- Yesterday morning arrived an invitation to dine at the Tuileries the
same evening . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.337

I went there , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,264.338

was ushered into a room with eight or ten men in it , none of <P_1,265>
whom I knew except Count Bacciochi , whom I had met at Fould's the day
before - three in uniform , the rest in plain clothes .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.339

A man , whom I suppose to be the <font> aide_de_camp de service <$$font>
, came forward to receive me GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.340

and invited me to sit down . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.341

Presently the same or another man came GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.342

and said ' Milord ' <paren> they all milorded me <$$paren> , ' vous vous
mettrez √† table , s'il vous pla√Æt , √† c√¥t√© de l'Empereur √† sa droite .
' GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.343

I was then taken into the next room , which adjoins the cabinet of the
Emperor . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.344

In a few minutes His Majesty made his appearance ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.345

he immediately came up to me , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.346

bowed very civilly , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.347

and asked me the usual questions of when I came to Paris , etc.
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.348

In a minute dinner was announced GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.349

and we went in . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.350

As we walked in he said to me , ' L'Imp√©ratrice sera bien f√¢ch√©e de ne
vous avoir pas vu . ' GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.351

At dinner , which did not last above twenty-five minutes , he talked
<paren> a sort of dropping conversation <$$paren> on different subjects
, GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.352

and I found him so easy to get on with that I ventured to start topics
myself . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.353

After dinner we returned to the room we had left ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.354

and after coffee , seeing me staring about at the portraits , he said
all his family were there , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.355

and he told me who they all were and the history of these portraits ,
which , he said , had made the tour of the world .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.356

After this he asked me to sit down , which I did at a round table by his
side , and M. Visconti on the other side of me ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.357

and then we had a conversation which lasted at least an hour and a half
on every imaginable subject . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.358

It was impossible not to be struck with his simplicity , his being so
natural and totally without any air or assumption of greatness , though
not undignified , but perfectly <font> comme_il_faut <$$font> , with
excellent manners , and easy , pleasant , fluent conversation .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.359

I was struck with his air of truth and frankness ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.360

and though of course I could not expect in my position and at this first
interview with him that he should be particularly expansive , yet he
gave me the idea of being not only not reserved but as if , when
intimate , he would have a great deal of <font> abandon <$$font> .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.361

It was difficult to bring away all the subjects he discussed ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.362

and I do not know that he said anything wonderfully striking ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.363

but he made a very favourable impression on me ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,265.364

and <P_1,266> made me wish to know more of him , which I am never likely
to do . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.365

He talked of the war and its conduct , of the faults committed , and of
the characters and talents of the generals engaged , comparing them ,
much to their disadvantage , with the generals of the Empire .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.366

I asked him which were the best , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.367

and he said all the African generals were much of the same calibre :
Changarnier , Lamorici√®re , St. Arnaud , Canrobert , P√©lissier - very
little difference between them . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.368

The war they waged in Africa was of a peculiar character ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.369

and did not render them more capable of conducting great strategical
operations in Europe . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.370

He talked of Thiers and Odilon Barrot , and described scenes with the
latter in Council when Barrot was his Minister ; of the ' Times ' and
its influence ; of Spain ; in short , of a vast variety of subjects ; of
the Exhibition here , and with some appearance of disappointment that
the people will not go to it . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.371

His simplicity and absence of all <font> faste <$$font> were remarkable
; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.372

thus , I asked him what he thought of the Hango affair , when he said it
was not so bad as had been reported . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.373

' I have had an account of it from Admiral Penaud to-day ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.374

should you like to see it ? ' GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.375

I said ' Yes , ' when he got up , went into his cabinet , and came back
with the letter in his hand ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.376

and a little while after , when we were talking of the siege of
Sebastopol , he asked if I had ever seen a very good engineer's map of
the whole thing ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.377

and when I said I had not , he said , ' Then I will show you one ; '
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.378

and he again went into his cabinet GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.379

and brought it out . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.380

After this long palaver he took leave of me , shaking hands with much
apparent cordiality . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.381

<font> June 27th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.382

- Bosquet has written to the Emperor that these assaults on the Russian
works are only a useless waste of time . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.383

Marshal Vaillant has told Cowley that they agree in this , but they must
either recall their general or let him go on in his own way , and if
they interfere , the blame of any disaster will inevitably fall on them
, no matter what might be the cause . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.384

I dined with Flahaut yesterday ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.385

in the morning rode round all the boulevards , a grand promenade by
which Paris is well seen ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,266.386

and I met Guizot at Madame de Lieven's , who <P_1,267> talked of the war
and asked how it was ever to end . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.387

' People go to war , ' he said , ' to make conquests or to make peace ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.388

you profess not to intend the first , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.389

how do you propose to effect the second ? GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.390

By reducing Russia to accept your terms - can you do so ?
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.391

will she yield ? GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.392

If not , what then ? GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.393

- you may wound her , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.394

but you ca@ @n't strike her in a vital part ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.395

and the more barbarous she is , the more she will consent to suffer
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.396

and the less she will be disposed to yield . '
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.397

He gave me an account <paren> in short <$$paren> of the bother about the
Academy and the Emperor's interference . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.398

They do not mean to give way , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.399

but they think he will ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.400

if he does not , he will have to dissolve them .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.401

<font> Paris , July 5th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.402

- One of my attacks of gout came on this day week
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.403

and disabled me from going anywhere , doing anything , and still more
from writing anything . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.404

In the meanwhile we received the news of Lord Raglan's death .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.405

Though they do not care about it here , there has been a very decent
display of sympathy and regret , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.406

and the Emperor wrote to Cowley with his own hand a very proper letter .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.407

There is good reason to believe that the fatal termination of Lord
Raglan's illness was in some <paren> perhaps in great <$$paren> measure
produced by vexation and disappointment at the failure of the 18th , and
annoyance at the many embarrassments of his position .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.408

It is certain that for a considerable time great disunion and poignant
differences existed between him and the French generals .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.409

Canrobert wrote home a very unhandsome letter , in which he gave as one
of his reasons for resigning the impossibility of going on with Raglan .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.410

I believe Raglan complained of Canrobert with much better reason .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.411

On the 18th P√©lissier changed the plan of attack that had been agreed on
between them ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.412

and , besides all the mistakes that occurred in the French operations ,
there seems to have been a want of continual and active concert between
the two commanders-in-chief during the operations .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.413

Raglan proposed a general attack on the town when the assaults failed ,
which P√©lissier refused to agree to . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.414

There is a fair probability this would have succeeded , as an English
force did get into a part of the town , stayed there some time , and got
away unobserved . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,267.415

<P_1,268>

There is now a bad feeling , a disposition to recrimination , between
the two armies which may have very bad effects ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.417

and it is awful to think our army is under an untried man of whom
nothing is known , and who is not likely to have more weight with , and
receive more consideration from , the French generals than his
predecessor . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.418

However desirable unity of command may be , in the present temper of the
troops and after all that has occurred it would be impossible .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.419

General Torrens , who is here , speaks in high terms of Raglan ,
especially of his magnanimity in bearing all the blame which has been
thrown upon him and never saying one word in his own vindication , which
might have entirely exonerated him but have done some injury to the
cause . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.420

Torrens thinks that in all or almost all in which he has appeared most
obnoxious to censure he could have triumphantly excused himself , and
have proved that the causes were attributable to others and not to
himself . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.421

His must have been as {TEXT:a} painful as it was an ungrateful service ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.422

and it was a melancholy and untimely end . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.423

<font> Paris , July 6th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.424

- I went yesterday to the Exhibition in the morning ; then to Notre Dame
and the Luxembourg Gardens GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.425

and drove about Paris ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.426

dined <font> en trio <$$font> with Madame de Lieven and Guizot , when
there was of course nothing but political talk .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.427

Guizot thinks there has been not only a series of diplomatic blunders ,
but a wonderful want of <font> invention <$$font> , not to strike out
some means of adjusting this quarrel , in which I agree with him .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.428

This morning Labouchere and I went to Versailles .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.429

Fould had given me a letter to the Director of the Museum there , M.
Souli√© , whom we found very intelligent , well informed , and obliging .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.430

We told him our object was to avoid the <font> giro regolare <$$font> of
the endless rooms fitted up with bad pictures by Louis Philippe , and to
see the apartments full of historical associations from the time of
Louis XIV. down to the Revolution . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.431

We were completely gratified , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.432

and he took us over everything we wished to see , being admirably
qualified as a cicerone by his familiarity with the localities and the
history belonging to them . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,268.433

We saw all the apartments in which Louis XIV. lived , and what remains
<P_1,269> of those of Madame de Maintenon . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.434

The Palace has been so tumbled about at different times , and such
alterations made in it , that it is not always easy to ascertain
correctly where the rooms of certain personages were ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.435

but our guide proved to our complete satisfaction that certain rooms he
showed us were those which really did belong to Madame de Maintenon .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.436

We saw too in minute detail the apartments of Louis XVI. and Marie
Antoinette , and the passages through which she fled to escape from the
irruption of the mob on the 5th of October . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.437

The whole thing was as interesting as possible .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.438

<font> Paris , July 9th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . - <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.439

I meant to have left Paris last night , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.440

but , an invitation arriving to dine with the Emperor at St. Cloud
today , I put off going till tomorrow . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.441

I went yesterday to Versailles to see the <font> grandes eaux <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.442

and was disappointed , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.443

and dined there with the Ashburtons . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.444

This morning telegraphic news came of a Russian sortie last night ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.445

no details of course . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.446

Yesterday we were thrown into consternation by the intelligence from
London of the revelations of John Russell in the House of Commons and
the discussion thereupon . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.447

Le Marchant wrote to Labouchere GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.448

and told him the effect was as bad as possible , and the whole case very
deplorable . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.449

My own opinion is that nobody could have acted more indiscreetly and
unjustifiably than John Russell has done , and he has sacrificed his
character and authority in a way which he will find it difficult to get
over . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.450

But I am disposed to agree with him that the terms proposed by Austria ,
if they could have been brought to maturity and carried out , were quite
sufficient to make peace upon , and that the negotiations ought to have
continued in order to endeavour to bring about this result .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.451

The effect of this public announcement to the whole world , that the
English Minister at the Congress as well as the French one was willing
to accept the terms proposed by Austria , will not fail to make a great
sensation , and produce a considerable effect both in Germany and in
France . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.452

In England it is doubtful whether it will have any other result than to
damage John Russell himself , and increase the vulgar prejudice against
public men . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,269.453

My own idea is that it will render the war <P_1,270> still more
unpopular in France , and the English alliance likewise , because it
will encourage the prevailing notion that the war is carried on for
English interests and in deference to the wishes of England .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.454

Though John Russell declared that the resolution of the Emperor to part
with Drouyn de Lhuys and reject the Austrian proposal had been made
before the intention of the English Cabinet was known , this will not be
believed , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.455

or at all events everybody will be convinced that he knew what the
sentiments of England were , and that he really acted in conformity with
them , as was beyond all doubt the case . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.456

<font> July 10th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.457

- I dined at Villeneuve l'√âtang . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.458

We went to the Palace of St. Cloud in Cowley's carriage , where we
found an equerry and one of the Emperor's carriages , which took us to
Villeneuve . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.459

A small house , pretty and comfortable enough , and a small party , all
English - GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.460

Duke and Duchess of Hamilton , Lord Hertford , Lord and Lady Ashburton ,
General Torrens and his <font> aide_de_camp <$$font> , Cowley and myself
, the Duc de Bassano , Comte de Montebello , the <font> aide_de_camp de
service <$$font> , and M. Valabr√®gue , <font> √©cuyer <$$font> , that
was the whole party . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.461

The Emperor sat between the two ladies , taking the Duchess in to dinner
. GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.462

It lasted about three quarters of an hour , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.463

and as soon as it was over His Majesty took us all out to walk about the
place , see the dairy and a beautiful Bretonne cow he ordered to be
brought out , and then to scull on the lake , or <font> √©tang <$$font> ,
which gives its name to the place . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.464

There were a number of little boats for one person to scull and one to
sit , and one larger for two each ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.465

the Emperor got into one with the Duchess , and all the rest of the
people as they liked , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.466

and we passed about half an hour on the water .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.467

On landing , ices , etc. , were brought , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.468

and the carriages came to the door at nine o'clock , a <font>
char-√†-banc <$$font> with four <font> percherons <$$font> and
postillions exactly like the old French postboy , and several other open
carriages and pair . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.469

The two ladies got into the centre of the <font> char-√†-banc , <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.470

Cowley , Hertford , and I were invited to get up before ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.471

and the Emperor himself got up behind with somebody else ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.472

I did not see who . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.473

We then set off GREVILLE-1855-2,1,270.474

and drove for some time through the woods and drives of Villeneuve
<P_1,271> and St. Cloud , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.475

and at last , at about ten o'clock , we were set down at the Palace .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.476

There we all alighted , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.477

and , after walking about a little , the Emperor showing us the part
which Marie Antoinette had built and telling some anecdotes connected
with Louis XVIII. and Louis Philippe , and the Ch√¢teau , he shook hands
with all of us very cordially GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.478

and dismissed us . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.479

His Majesty got into the <font> char-√†-banc <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.480

and returned to Villeneuve , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.481

and we drove back to Paris . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.482

When we were walking about the court of the Ch√¢teau <paren> it was quite
dark <$$paren> the sentinel challenged us - ' Qui va l√† ? ' when the
Emperor called out in a loud voice , ' L'Empereur . '
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.483

Of course , in this company there was nothing but general conversation ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.484

and I had no opportunity of having any with His Majesty ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.485

but he was extremely civil , offering me his cigars , which I declined ,
and expressing anxiety that I should not catch cold .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.486

He made the same impression on me as before as to his extreme simplicity
and the easiness of his intercourse ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.487

but I was struck with his appearance being so very <font> mesquin
<$$font> , more than I thought at first . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.488

Lady Ashburton told me she had received a letter from Ellice , telling
her that the affair in the House of Commons had produced the most
serious effect , and that it would probably end in the retirement of
John Russell , and eventually to a change of Government .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.489

He had got a story , which I utterly disbelieve , that Milner Gibson had
been instigated by John Russell himself to give him this opportunity of
saying what he did , which was certainly more than he need have said .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,271.490

Lord John seems for some time past to have <P_1,272> been bereft of his
senses , and to commit nothing but blunders one after another .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.491

What has been passing in his mind , and what his real objects are or
have been , it would puzzle anybody to say . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.492

If he had personal views and wanted to regain the station and power
which he had lost , never did any man take such false steps and pursue
so erroneous a course to obtain his ends . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.493

He had in some measure retrieved the character and consideration which
he forfeited by his conduct at the beginning of this year ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.494

but I do not see how he is ever to get over this , nor how his followers
can any longer have any confidence in him , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.495

and I do not believe the country at large ever will .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.496

As to his opinion on the terms of peace , I agree with it ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.497

and think it would have been wiser to close with Buol's proposal , and
to continue to negotiate ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.498

but this makes no difference as to his conduct in the affair , for which
there is no excuse . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.499

He never ought to have committed himself at Vienna ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.500

his instructions were clear and precise and quite inconsistent with
Buol's proposition . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.501

He might have engaged to bring it before his Government ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.502

but should , especially as he was a Cabinet Minister , have abstained
from expressing any opinion of his own upon it .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.503

He appears at Vienna to have been easily talked over , and to have been
exceedingly wanting in diplomatic finesse and penetration ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.504

but all I have picked up here in conversation proves to me that there
have been errors innumerable and the greatest mistakes in the conduct of
these affairs throughout , and the exigencies of the alliance and the
necessity of concerting everything to the most minute particular with
both Cabinets have produced results not less unfortunate in diplomacy
than in war . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.505

The affair before Sebastopol the night before last turns out to have
been of no importance , only a demonstration against the English lines .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.506

<font> London , July 18th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} .
<$$font> GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.507

- I left Paris on Tuesday night at 7.30 , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.508

got to Calais at three ; low water and steamer three miles out at sea ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,272.509

went out in a boat in a torrent of rain <P_1,273> which had lasted the
whole journey and all day . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.510

Train was just gone when we got to Dover , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.511

but we arrived in town about eleven . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.512

I found a precious state of affairs , all confusion and consternation ,
Bulwer having given notice of a motion of want of confidence on account
of John Russell , whose affair has brought himself and the Government to
the very brink and almost to the certainty of ruin .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.513

There is as much excitement against Palmerston's Government , all on
account of Lord John , as there was a few months ago against Aberdeen .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.514

I found Brooks's in a state of insurrection , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.515

and even the Attorney-General <paren> Cockburn <$$paren> told me that
the Liberal party were resolved to go no further with John Russell , and
that nothing but his resignation could save the Government , even if
that could ; that they might be reconciled to him hereafter , but as
long as the war lasted they repudiated him . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.516

Meanwhile he has not resigned . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.517

There was a long Cabinet the day before yesterday in which they
discussed the state of affairs , and what measures could be taken .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.518

Lord John offered to resign , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.519

but they would not hear of it , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.520

and came to a resolution to stand or fall together .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.521

I saw Clarendon yesterday , who was fully aware of the imminence of the
danger and of the probability of their being out on Monday ;
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.522

he said Lord John's whole conduct was inconceivable , and he knew not to
what to attribute his strange speech , in which he had made for himself
a much worse case than the circumstances really warrant and given to the
world impressions which are not correct ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.523

for in point of fact he did not urge Buol's proposal upon the Cabinet ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.524

but when he laid it before them and found it not acceptable , he at once
yielded to all the arguments against it , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.525

and instead of making any attempt to get peace made on those terms , he
joined with all his colleagues in their conviction of the necessity of
carrying on the war vigorously ; GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.526

and this conviction induced him to make the warlike speech with which he
is now reproached as being inconsistent with the opinions he was
entertaining <paren> as it is said <$$paren> at the time he made it .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.527

Yesterday he attempted to make something of an explanation ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.528

but he only floundered further into the mire , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,273.529

and was laughed <P_1,274> at . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.530

Everybody thinks he made his case worse rather than better ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.531

but he really seems to have lost his head . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.532

His whole conduct at Vienna and here has exhibited nothing but a series
of blunders and faults , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.533

and he has so contrived it , that no explanations he can possibly make
will extenuate them , or place him in a tolerable light in the eyes of
the public . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.534

In the morning yesterday I had occasion to call on Disraeli about some
business , when he talked over the state of affairs very freely and gave
me to understand that he intended and expected to turn out the
Government and to come in with his party , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.535

but he owned that their materials for forming a tolerable Government
were very scanty , that he would not attempt their old Government over
again , but , except Lytton Bulwer , of whom he spoke in terms of high
praise , he knew not where to find any fresh men worth anything .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.536

<font> Bath , July 19th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} . <$$font>
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.537

- I came here on Saturday night . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.538

In the course of Friday morning I met Drumlanrig , who told me the
subordinate_place men had caused John Russell to be informed that if he
did not resign they should , and vote for Bulwer's motion on Monday .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.539

This produced his resignation , but under circumstances as mortifying as
possibly could be , and which must have made him deeply regret that he
did not resign at first , although he is not to be blamed for having
yielded to the wishes of his colleagues , and I am satisfied he did so
from the best motives . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.540

It was no sooner known that he had resigned than the excitement began to
subside , and everybody thought that Bulwer would withdraw his motion ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.541

and at all events nobody doubted that it would come to nothing .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.542

The motion was withdrawn GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.543

but the debate took place , and such a debate !
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.544

- it was impossible to read it without indignation and disgust .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.545

Bulwer's speech was a tissue of foul abuse with the grossest and most
wilful misrepresentations and endeavours to draw inferences he knew to
be false and fallacious , with the hope and purpose of damaging the
characters of the Ministers . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,274.546

In these times , when the great evil is the bad opinion which the public
has been led to entertain of public men , Bulwer endeavours , for a mere
party purpose , to aggravate that hostile <P_1,275> feeling and to make
the world believe that , in a great party and a Cabinet composed of men
whose characters have never been impugned , there is neither truth ,
sincerity , nor good faith , and by producing such an impression to
bring the aristocracy into greater disrepute .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,275.547

Disraeli , of course , spoke in the same tone ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,275.548

Palmerston was very bad , GREVILLE-1855-2,1,275.549

and his speech was quite unbecoming his position .
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,275.550

John Russell's defence was not calculated to relieve him from the weight
of obloquy and unpopularity he had brought on himself ,
GREVILLE-1855-2,1,275.551

and the whole thing was unsatisfactory , except that it denoted the end
of the contest and the disappointment of the Opposition , whose hopes
had been so highly raised . GREVILLE-1855-2,1,275.552

