<BEGIN_grey-1914-2>

<P_1>

{ED:No._1._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_H._Rumbold,_British_Charg√©_d'Affaires_at_Berlin}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,1.4

July <$$font> 20 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,1.5

Sir , I asked the German Ambassador to-day if he had any news of what
was going on in Vienna with regard to Servia . GREY-1914-2,1.6

He said that he had not , but Austria was certainly going to take some
step , and he regarded the situation as very uncomfortable .
GREY-1914-2,1.7

I said that I had not heard anything recently , except that Count
Berchtold , in speaking to the Italian Ambassador in Vienna , had
deprecated the suggestion that the situation was grave , but had said
that it should be cleared up . GREY-1914-2,1.8

The German Ambassador said that it would be a very desirable thing if
Russia could act as a mediator with regard to Servia . GREY-1914-2,1.9

I said that I assumed that the Austrian Government would not do anything
until they had first disclosed to the public their case against Servia ,
founded presumably upon what they had discovered at the trial .
GREY-1914-2,1.10

The Ambassador said that he certainly assumed that they would act upon
some case that would be known . GREY-1914-2,1.11

I said that this would make it easier for others , such as Russia , to
counsel moderation in Belgrade . GREY-1914-2,1.12

In fact , the more Austria could keep her demand within reasonable
limits , and the stronger the justification she could produce for making
any demand , the more chance there would be of smoothing things over .
GREY-1914-2,1.13

I hated the idea of a war between any of the Great Powers ,
GREY-1914-2,1.14

and that any of them should be dragged into a war by Servia would be
detestable . GREY-1914-2,1.15

The Ambassador agreed wholeheartedly in this sentiment .
GREY-1914-2,1.16

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,1.17

<P_2>

{ED:No._3._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_M._de_Bunsen,_British_Ambassador_at_Vienna}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,2.20

July <$$font> 23 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,2.21

Sir , Count Mensdorff told me to-day that he would be able tomorrow
morning to let me have officially the communication that he understood
was being made to Servia to-day by Austria . GREY-1914-2,2.22

He then explained privately what the nature of the demand would be .
GREY-1914-2,2.23

As he told me that the facts would all be set out in the paper that he
would give me to-morrow , it is unnecessary to record them now .
GREY-1914-2,2.24

I gathered that they would include proof of the complicity of some
Servian officials in the plot to murder the Archduke Franz Ferdinand ,
and a long list of demands consequently made by Austria on Servia .
GREY-1914-2,2.25

As regards all this , I said that it was not a matter on which I would
make any comment until I received an official communication , and it
seemed to me probably a matter on which I should not be able to make any
comment at first sight . GREY-1914-2,2.26

But , when Count Mensdorff told me that he supposed there would be
something in the nature of a time-limit , which was in effect akin to an
ultimatum , I said that I regretted this very much . GREY-1914-2,2.27

To begin with a time-limit might inflame opinion in Russia ,
GREY-1914-2,2.28

and it would make it difficult , if not impossible , to give more time ,
even if after a few days it appeared that by giving more time there
would be a prospect of securing a peaceful settlement and getting a
satisfactory reply from Servia . GREY-1914-2,2.29

I admitted that , if there was no time-limit , the proceedings might be
unduly protracted , GREY-1914-2,2.30

but I urged that a time-limit could always be introduced afterwards ;
that , if the demands were made without a time-limit in the first
instance , Russian public opinion might be less excited , after a week
it might have cooled down , and if the Austrian case was very strong it
might be apparent that the Russian Government would be in a position to
use their influence in favour of a satisfactory reply from Servia .
GREY-1914-2,2.31

A time-limit was generally a thing to be used only in the last resort ,
after other means had been tried and failed . GREY-1914-2,2.32

Count Mensdorff said that if Servia , in the interval that had elapsed
since the murder of the Archduke , had voluntarily instituted an enquiry
on her own territory , all this might have been avoided .
GREY-1914-2,2.33

In 1909 , Servia had said in a note that she intended to live on terms
of good neighbourhood with Austria ; GREY-1914-2,2.34

but she had never kept her promise , GREY-1914-2,2.35

she had stirred up agitation the object of which was to <P_3>
disintegrate Austria , GREY-1914-2,3.36

and it was absolutely necessary for Austria to protect herself .
GREY-1914-2,3.37

I said that I would not comment upon or criticise what Count Mensdorff
had told me this afternoon , but I could not help dwelling upon the
awful consequences involved in the situation . GREY-1914-2,3.38

Great apprehension had been expressed to me , not specially by M.
Cambon and Count Benckendorff , but also by others , as to what might
happen , GREY-1914-2,3.39

and it had been represented to me that it would be very desirable that
those who had influence in St. Petersburgh should use it on behalf of
patience and moderation . GREY-1914-2,3.40

I had replied that the amount of influence that could be used in this
sense would depend upon how reasonable were the Austrian demands and how
strong the justification that Austria might have discovered for making
her demands . GREY-1914-2,3.41

The possible consequences of the present situation were terrible .
GREY-1914-2,3.42

If as many as four Great Powers of Europe - let us say , Austria ,
France , Russia , and Germany - were engaged in war , it seemed to me
that it must involve the expenditure of so vast a sum of money , and
such an interference with trade , that a war would be accompanied or
followed by a complete collapse of European credit and industry .
GREY-1914-2,3.43

In these days , in great industrial States , this would mean a state of
things worse than that of 1848 , GREY-1914-2,3.44

and , irrespective of who were victors in the war , many things might be
completely swept away . GREY-1914-2,3.45

Count Mensdorff did not demur to this statement of the possible
consequences of the present situation , GREY-1914-2,3.46

but he said that all would depend upon Russia . GREY-1914-2,3.47

I made the remark that , in a time of difficulties such as this , it was
just as true to say that it required two to keep the peace as it was to
say , ordinarily , that it took two to make a quarrel .
GREY-1914-2,3.48

I hoped very much that , if there were difficulties , Austria and Russia
would be able in the first instance to discuss them directly with each
other . GREY-1914-2,3.49

Count Mensdorff said that he hoped this would be possible , but he was
under the impression that the attitude in St. Petersburgh had not been
very favourable recently . GREY-1914-2,3.50

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,3.51

<P_13>

{ED:No._5._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_M._de_Bunsen,_British_Ambassador_at_Vienna}

<paren> Telegraphic <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,13.54

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,13.55

July <$$font> 24 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,13.56

Note addressed to Servia , together with an explanation of the reasons
leading up to it , has been communicated to me by Count Mensdorff .
GREY-1914-2,13.57

In the ensuing conversation with his Excellency , I remarked that it
seemed to me a matter for great regret that a time limit , and such a
short one at that , had been insisted upon at this stage of the
proceedings . GREY-1914-2,13.58

The murder of the Archduke and some of the Circumstances respecting
Servia quoted in the note aroused sympathy with Austria , as was but
natural , GREY-1914-2,13.59

but at the same time I had never before seen one State address to
another independent State a document of so formidable a character .
GREY-1914-2,13.60

Demand No. 5 would be hardly consistent with the maintenance of
Servia's independent sovereignty if it were to mean , as it seemed that
it might , that Austria-Hungary was to be invested with a right to
appoint officials who would have authority within the frontiers of
Servia . GREY-1914-2,13.61

I added that I felt great apprehension , and that I should concern
myself with the matter simply and solely from the point of view of the
peace of Europe . GREY-1914-2,13.62

The merits of the dispute between Austria and Servia were not the
concern of His Majesty's Government , GREY-1914-2,13.63

and such comments as I had made above were not made in order to discuss
those merits . GREY-1914-2,13.64

I ended by saying that doubtless we should enter into an exchange of
views with other Powers , and that I must await their views as to what
could be done to mitigate the difficulties of the situation .
GREY-1914-2,13.65

Count Mensdorff replied that the present situation might never have
arisen if Servia had held out a hand after the murder of the Archduke ;
GREY-1914-2,13.66

Servia had , however , shown no sign of sympathy or help though some
weeks had already elapsed since the murder ; GREY-1914-2,13.67

a time limit , said his Excellency , was essential , owing to the
procrastination on Servia's part . GREY-1914-2,13.68

I said that if Servia had procrastinated in replying , a time limit
could have been introduced later ; but , as things now stood , the terms
<P_14> of the Servian reply had been dictated by Austria , who had not
been content to limit herself to a demand for a reply within a limit of
forty-eight hours from its presentation . GREY-1914-2,14.69

<P_17>

{ED:No._10._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,17.72

July <$$font> 24 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,17.73

Sir , After telling M. Cambon to-day of the Austrian communication to
Servia , which I had received this morning , and of the comment I had
made to Count Mensdorff upon it yesterday , I told M. Cambon that this
afternoon I was to see the German Ambassador , who some days ago had
asked me privately to exercise moderating influence in St. Petersburgh
. GREY-1914-2,17.74

I would say to the Ambassador that , of course , if the presentation of
this ultimatum to Servia did not lead to trouble between Austria and
Russia , we need not concern ourselves about it ; but , if Russia took
the view of the Austrian ultimatum , which it seemed to me that any
Power interested in Servia would take , I should be quite powerless , in
face of the terms of the ultimatum , to exercise any moderating
influence . GREY-1914-2,17.75

I would say that I thought the only chance of any mediating or
moderating influence being exercised was that Germany , France , Italy ,
and ourselves , who had not direct interests in Servia , should act
together for the sake of peace , simultaneously in Vienna and St.
Petersburgh . GREY-1914-2,17.76

M. Cambon said that , if there was a chance of mediation by the four
Powers , he had no doubt that his Government would be glad to join in it
; GREY-1914-2,17.77

but he pointed out that we could not say anything in St. Petersburgh
till Russia had expressed some opinion or taken some action .
GREY-1914-2,17.78

But , when two days were over , Austria would march into Servia ,
GREY-1914-2,17.79

for the Servians could not possibly accept the Austrian demand .
GREY-1914-2,17.80

Russia would be compelled by her public opinion to take action as soon
as Austria attacked Servia , GREY-1914-2,17.81

and therefore , once the Austrians had attacked Servia , it would be too
late for any mediation . GREY-1914-2,17.82

I said that I had not contemplated anything being said in St.
Petersburgh until after it was clear that there must be trouble between
Austria and Russia . GREY-1914-2,17.83

I had thought that if Austria did move into Servia , and Russia then
mobilised , it would be possible for the four Powers to urge Austria to
stop her advance , and Russia also to stop hers , pending mediation .
GREY-1914-2,17.84

But it would be essential for any chance of success for such a step that
Germany should participate in it . GREY-1914-2,17.85

<P_18>

M. Cambon said that it would be too late after Austria had once moved
against Servia . GREY-1914-2,18.87

The important thing was to gain time by mediation in Vienna .
GREY-1914-2,18.88

The best chance of this being accepted would be that Germany should
propose it to the other Powers . GREY-1914-2,18.89

I said that by this he meant a mediation between Austria and Servia .
GREY-1914-2,18.90

He replied that it was so . GREY-1914-2,18.91

I said that I would talk to the German Ambassador this afternoon on the
subject . GREY-1914-2,18.92

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,18.93

{ED:No._11._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_H._Rumbold,_British_Charg√©_d'Affaires_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,18.95

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,18.96

July <$$font> 24 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,18.97

German Ambassador has communicated to me the view of the German
Government about the Austrian demand in Servia . GREY-1914-2,18.98

I understand the German Government is making the same communication to
the Powers . GREY-1914-2,18.99

I said that if the Austrian ultimatum to Servia did not lead to trouble
between Austria and Russia I had no concern with it ; GREY-1914-2,18.100

I had heard nothing yet from St. Petersburgh , GREY-1914-2,18.101

but I was very apprehensive of the view Russia would take of the
situation . GREY-1914-2,18.102

I reminded the German Ambassador that some days ago he had expressed a
personal hope that if need arose I would endeavour to exercise
moderating influence at St. Petersburgh , GREY-1914-2,18.103

but now I said that , in view of the extraordinarily stiff character of
the Austrian note , the shortness of the time allowed , and the wide
scope of the demands upon Servia , I felt quite helpless as far as
Russia was concerned , and I did not believe any Power could exercise
influence alone . GREY-1914-2,18.104

The only chance I could see of mediating or moderating influence being
effective , was that the four Powers , Germany , Italy , France , and
ourselves , should work together simultaneously at Vienna and St.
Petersburgh in favour of moderation in the event of the relations
between Austria and Russia becoming threatening . GREY-1914-2,18.105

The immediate danger was that in a few hours Austria might march into
Servia and Russian Slav opinion demand that Russia should march to help
Servia ; GREY-1914-2,18.106

it would be very desirable to get Austria not to precipitate military
action and so to gain more time . GREY-1914-2,18.107

But none of us could influence Austria in this direction unless Germany
would propose and participate in such action at Vienna .
GREY-1914-2,18.108

You should inform Secretary of State . GREY-1914-2,18.109

Prince Lichnowsky said that Austria might be expected to move when the
time limit expired unless Servia could give unconditional acceptance of
Austrian demands <font> in_toto . <$$font> GREY-1914-2,18.110

Speaking privately , his Excellency suggested that a negative reply must
in no case be returned by Servia ; GREY-1914-2,18.111

a reply favourable on some points must be sent at once , so that an
excuse against immediate action might be afforded to Austria .
GREY-1914-2,18.112

<P_19>

{ED:No._12._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Mr._Crackanthorpe,_British_Charg√©_d'Affaires_at_Belgrade}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,19.115

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,19.116

July <$$font> 24 , 1914 GREY-1914-2,19.117

Servia ought to promise that , if it is proved that Servian officials ,
however subordinate they may be , were accomplices in the murder of the
Archduke at Serajevo , she will give Austria the fullest satisfaction .
GREY-1914-2,19.118

She certainly ought to express concern and regret . GREY-1914-2,19.119

For the rest , Servian Government must reply to Austrian demands as they
consider best in Servian interests . GREY-1914-2,19.120

It is impossible to say whether military action by Austria when time
limit expires can be averted by anything but unconditional acceptance of
her demands , GREY-1914-2,19.121

but only chance appears to lie in avoiding an absolute refusal and
replying favourably to as many points as the time limit allows .
GREY-1914-2,19.122

Servian Minister here has begged that His Majesty's Government will
express their views , GREY-1914-2,19.123

but I can@ @not undertake responsibility of saying more than I have said
above , GREY-1914-2,19.124

and I do not like to say even that without knowing what is being said at
Belgrade by French and Russian Governments . GREY-1914-2,19.125

You should therefore consult your French and Russian colleagues as to
repeating what my views are , as expressed above , to Servian Government
. GREY-1914-2,19.126

I have urged upon German Ambassador that Austria should not precipitate
military action . GREY-1914-2,19.127

<P_20>

{ED:No._14._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris,_and_to_Sir_G._Buchanan,_British_Ambassador_at_St._Petersburgh}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,20.130

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,20.131

July <$$font> 25 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,20.132

Austrian Ambassador has been authorised to explain to me that the step
taken at Belgrade was not an ultimatum , but a <font> d√©marche <$$font>
with a time limit , and that if the Austrian demands were not complied
with within the time limit the Austro-Hungarian Government would break
off diplomatic relations and begin military preparations , not
operations . GREY-1914-2,20.133

In case Austro-Hungarian Government have not given the same information
at Paris <paren> St. Petersburg {TEXT:Petersburgh} <$$paren> , you
should inform Minister for Foreign Affairs as soon as possible ;
GREY-1914-2,20.134

it makes the immediate situation rather less acute . GREY-1914-2,20.135

<P_25>

{ED:No._24._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_G._Buchanan,_British_Ambassador_at_St._Petersburgh}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,25.138

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,25.139

July <$$font> 25 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,25.140

You spoke quite rightly in very difficult circumstances as to the
attitude of His Majesty's Government . GREY-1914-2,25.141

I entirely approve what you said , as reported in your telegram of
yesterday , GREY-1914-2,25.142

and I can@ @not promise more on behalf of the Government .
GREY-1914-2,25.143

I do not consider that public opinion here would or ought to sanction
our going to war over a Servian quarrel . GREY-1914-2,25.144

If , however , war does take place , the development of other issues may
draw us into it , GREY-1914-2,25.145

and I am therefore anxious to prevent it . GREY-1914-2,25.146

The sudden , brusque , and peremptory character of the Austrian <font>
d√©marche <$$font> makes it almost inevitable that in a very short time
both Russia and Austria will have mobilised against each other .
GREY-1914-2,25.147

In this event , the only chance of peace , in my opinion , is for the
other four Powers to join in asking the Austrian and Russian Governments
not to cross the frontier , and to give time for the four Powers acting
at Vienna and St. Petersburgh to try and arrange matters .
GREY-1914-2,25.148

If Germany will adopt this view , I feel strongly that France and
ourselves should act upon it . GREY-1914-2,25.149

Italy would no doubt gladly co-operate . GREY-1914-2,25.150

No diplomatic intervention or mediation would be tolerated by either
Russia or Austria unless it was clearly impartial and included the
allies or friends of both . GREY-1914-2,25.151

The co-operation of Germany would , therefore , be essential .
GREY-1914-2,25.152

{ED:No._25._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_H._Rumbold,_British_Charg√©_d'Affaires_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,25.154

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,25.155

July <$$font> 25 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,25.156

The Austrian ambassador has been authorised to inform me that the
Austrian method of procedure on expiry of the time limit would be to
break off diplomatic relations and commence military preparations , but
not military operations . GREY-1914-2,25.157

In informing the German Ambassador of this , I said that it interposed a
stage of mobilisation before the frontier was actually crossed , which I
had urged yesterday should be delayed . GREY-1914-2,25.158

Apparently we should now soon be face to face with the mobilisation of
Austria and Russia . GREY-1914-2,25.159

The only chance of peace , if this did happen , would be for Germany ,
France , Russia , and ourselves to keep together , and to join in asking
Austria and Russia not to cross the frontier till we had had time to try
and arrange matters between them . GREY-1914-2,25.160

The German Ambassador read me a telegram from the German Foreign Office
saying that his Government had not known beforehand , and had had no
more than other Powers to do with the stiff terms of the Austrian note
to Servia , but once she had launched that note , Austria could not draw
back . GREY-1914-2,25.161

Prince Lichnowsky said , however , that <P_26> if what I contemplated
was mediation between Austria and Russia , . Austria might be able with
dignity to accept it . GREY-1914-2,26.162

He expressed himself as personally favourable to this suggestion .
GREY-1914-2,26.163

I concurred in his observation , GREY-1914-2,26.164

and said that I felt I had no title to intervene between Austria and
Servia , but as soon as the question became one as between Austria and
Russia , the peace of Europe was affected , in which we must all take a
hand . GREY-1914-2,26.165

I impressed upon the Ambassador that , in the event of Russian and
Austrian mobilisation , the participation of Germany would be essential
to any diplomatic action for peace . GREY-1914-2,26.166

Alone we could do nothing . GREY-1914-2,26.167

The French Government were travelling at the moment , GREY-1914-2,26.168

and I had had no time to consult them , GREY-1914-2,26.169

and could not therefore be sure of their views , GREY-1914-2,26.170

but I was prepared , if the German Government agreed with my suggestion
, to tell the French Government that I thought it the right thing to act
upon it . GREY-1914-2,26.171

{ED:No._26._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_M._de_Bunsen,_British_Ambassador_at_Vienna}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,26.173

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,26.174

July <$$font> 25 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,26.175

The Russian Ambassador has communicated to me the following telegram
which his Government have sent to the Russian Ambassador at Vienna ,
with instructions to communicate it to the Austrian Minister for Foreign
Affairs : GREY-1914-2,26.176

- " The delay given to Servia for a reply is so limited that the Powers
are prevented from taking any steps to avert the complications , which
are threatening . GREY-1914-2,26.177

The Russian Government trust that the Austrian Government will prolong
the time limit , GREY-1914-2,26.178

and as the latter have declared their willingness to inform the Powers
of the data on which they have based their demands on Servia , the
Russian Government hope that these particulars will be furnished in
order that the Powers may examine the matter . GREY-1914-2,26.179

If they found that some of the Austrian requests were well founded ,
they would be in a position to advise the Servian Government accordingly
. GREY-1914-2,26.180

If the Austrian Government were indisposed to prolong the time limit ,
not only would they be acting against international ethics ,
GREY-1914-2,26.181

but they would deprive their communication to the Powers of any
practical meaning . " GREY-1914-2,26.182

You may support in general terms the step taken by your Russian
colleague . GREY-1914-2,26.183

Since the telegram to the Russian Ambassador at Vienna was sent , it has
been a relief to hear that the steps which the Austrian Government were
taking were to be limited for the moment to the rupture of relations and
to military preparations , and not operations . GREY-1914-2,26.184

I trust , therefore , that if the Austro-Hungarian Government consider
it too late to prolong the time limit , they will at any rate give time
in the sense and for the reasons desired by Russia before taking any
irretrievable steps . GREY-1914-2,26.185

<P_27>

{ED:No._27._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris,_Sir_H._Rumbold,_British_Charg√©_d'Affaires_at_Berlin,_and_Sir_G._Buchanan,_British_Ambassador_at_St._Petersburgh}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,27.188

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,27.189

July <$$font> 25 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,27.190

I have communicated to German Ambassador the forecast of the Servian
reply contained in Mr. Crackanthorpe's telegram of to-day .
GREY-1914-2,27.191

I have said that , if Servian reply , when received at Vienna ,
corresponds to this forecast , I hope the German Government will feel
able to influence the Austrian Government to take a favourable view of
it . GREY-1914-2,27.192

{ED:No._29._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_R._Rodd,_British_Ambassador_at_Rome}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,27.194

July <$$font> 25 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,27.195

Sir , The Italian Ambassador came to see me to-day . GREY-1914-2,27.196

I told him in general terms what I had said to the German Ambassador
this morning . GREY-1914-2,27.197

The Italian Ambassador cordially approved of this . GREY-1914-2,27.198

He made no secret of the fact that Italy was most desirous to see war
avoided . GREY-1914-2,27.199

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,27.200

{ED:No._30._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Mr._Crackanthorpe,_British_Charg√©_d'Affaires_at_Belgrade}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,27.202

July <$$font> 25 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,27.203

Sir , The Servian Minister called on the 23rd instant GREY-1914-2,27.204

and spoke to Sir A. Nicolson on the present strained relations between
Servia and Austria-Hungary . GREY-1914-2,27.205

He said that his Government were most anxious and disquieted .
GREY-1914-2,27.206

They were perfectly ready to meet any reasonable demands of
Austria-Hungary so long as such demands were kept on the " terrain
juridique . " GREY-1914-2,27.207

If the results of the enquiry at Serajevo - an enquiry conducted with so
much mystery and secrecy - disclosed the fact that there were any
individuals conspiring or organising plots on Servian territory , the
Servian Government would be quite ready to take the necessary steps to
give satisfaction ; GREY-1914-2,27.208

but if Austria transported the question on to the political ground , and
said that Servian policy , being inconvenient to her , must undergo a
radical change , and that Servia must abandon certain political ideals ,
no independent State would , or could , submit to such dictation .
GREY-1914-2,27.209

He mentioned that both the assassins of the Archduke were Austrian
subjects - Bosniaks ; that one of them had been in Servia , and that the
Servian authorities , considering him suspect and dangerous , had
desired to expel him , but on applying to the Austrian <P_28>
authorities found that the latter protected him , and said that he was
an innocent and harmless individual . GREY-1914-2,28.210

Sir A. Nicolson , on being asked by M. Boschkovitch his opinion on the
whole question , observed that there were no data on which to base one ,
though it was to be hoped that the Servian Government would endeavour to
meet the Austrian demands in a conciliatory and moderate spirit .
GREY-1914-2,28.211

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,28.212

<P_30>

{ED:No._36._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris,_Sir_H._Rumbold,_British_Charg√©_d'Affaires_at_Berlin,_and_Sir_R._Rodd,_British_Ambassador_at_Rome}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,30.215

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,30.216

July <$$font> 26 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,30.217

Would Minister for Foreign Affairs be disposed to instruct Ambassador
here to join with representatives of France , Italy , and Germany , and
myself to meet here in conference immediately for the purpose of
discovering an issue which would prevent complications ?
GREY-1914-2,30.218

You should ask Minister for Foreign Affairs whether he would do this .
GREY-1914-2,30.219

If so , when bringing the above suggestion to the notice of the
Governments to which they are accredited , representatives at Belgrade ,
Vienna , and St. Petersburgh should be authorised to request that all
active military operations should be suspended pending results of
conference . GREY-1914-2,30.220

{ED:No._37._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,30.222

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,30.223

July <$$font> 26 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,30.224

Berlin telegram of 25th July . GREY-1914-2,30.225

It is important to know if France will agree to suggested action by the
four Powers if necessary . GREY-1914-2,30.226

<P_40>

{ED:No._46._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,40.229

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,40.230

July <$$font> 27 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,40.231

German Ambassador has informed me that German Government accept in
principle mediation between Austria and Russia by the four Powers ,
reserving , of course , their right as an ally to help Austria if
attacked . GREY-1914-2,40.232

He has also been instructed to request me to use influence in St.
Petersburgh to localise the war and to keep up the peace of Europe .
GREY-1914-2,40.233

I have replied that the Servian reply went farther than could have been
expected to meet the Austrian demands . GREY-1914-2,40.234

German Secretary of State has himself said that there were some things
in the Austrian note that Servia could hardly be expected to accept .
GREY-1914-2,40.235

I assumed that Servian reply could not have gone as far as it did unless
Russia had <P_41> exercised conciliatory influence at Belgrade , and it
was really at Vienna that moderating influence was now required .
GREY-1914-2,41.236

If Austria put the Servian reply aside as being worth nothing and
marched into Servia , it meant that she was determined to crush Servia
at all costs , being reckless of the consequences that might be involved
. GREY-1914-2,41.237

Servian reply should at least be treated as a basis for discussion and
pause . GREY-1914-2,41.238

I said German Government should urge this at Vienna .
GREY-1914-2,41.239

I recalled what German Government had said as to the gravity of the
situation if the war could not be localised , GREY-1914-2,41.240

and observed that if Germany assisted Austria against Russia it would be
because , without any reference to the merits of the dispute , Germany
could not afford to see Austria crushed . GREY-1914-2,41.241

Just so other issues might be raised that would supersede the dispute
between Austria and Servia , and would bring other Powers in ,
GREY-1914-2,41.242

and the war would be the biggest ever known ; GREY-1914-2,41.243

but as long as Germany would work to keep the peace I would keep closely
in touch . GREY-1914-2,41.244

I repeated that after the Servian reply it was at Vienna that some
moderation must be urged . GREY-1914-2,41.245

{ED:No._47._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_G._Buchanan,_British_Ambassador_at_St._Petersburgh}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,41.247

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,41.248

July <$$font> 27 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,41.249

See my telegram of to-day to Sir E. Goschen . GREY-1914-2,41.250

I have been told by the Russian Ambassador that in German and Austrian
circles impression prevails that in any event we would stand aside .
GREY-1914-2,41.251

His Excellency deplored the effect that such an impression must produce
. GREY-1914-2,41.252

This impression ought , as I have pointed out , to be dispelled by the
orders we have given to the First Fleet , which is concentrated , as it
happens , at Portland , not to disperse for manoeuvre leave .
GREY-1914-2,41.253

But I explained to the Russian Ambassador that my reference to it must
not be taken to mean that anything more than diplomatic action was
promised . GREY-1914-2,41.254

We hear from German and Austrian sources that they believe Russia will
take no action so long as Austria agrees not to take Servian territory .
GREY-1914-2,41.255

I pointed this out , GREY-1914-2,41.256

and added that it would be absurd if we were to appear more Servian than
the Russians in our dealings with the German and Austrian Governments .
GREY-1914-2,41.257

{ED:No._48._Sir_E._Grey_to_Sir_M._de_Bunsen,_British_Ambassador_at_Vienna}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,41.259

July <$$font> 27 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,41.260

Sir , Count Mensdorff told me by instruction to-day that the Servian
Government had not accepted the demands which the Austrian Government
were obliged to address to them in order to secure permanently <P_42>
the most vital Austrian interests . GREY-1914-2,42.261

Servia showed that she did not intend to abandon her subversive aims ,
tending towards continuous disorder in the Austrian frontier territories
and their final disruption from the Austrian Monarchy .
GREY-1914-2,42.262

Very reluctantly , and against their wish , the Austrian Government were
compelled to take more severe measures to enforce a fundamental change
of the attitude of enmity pursued up to now by Servia .
GREY-1914-2,42.263

As the British Government knew , the Austrian Government had for many
years endeavoured to find a way to get on with their turbulent neighbour
, though this had been made very difficult for them by the continuous
provocations of Servia . GREY-1914-2,42.264

The Serajevo murder had made clear to everyone what appalling
consequences the Servian propaganda had already produced and what a
permanent threat to Austria it involved . GREY-1914-2,42.265

We would understand that the Austrian Government must consider that the
moment had arrived to obtain , by means of the strongest pressure ,
guarantees for the definite suppression of the Servian aspirations and
for the security of peace and order on the south-eastern frontier of
Austria . GREY-1914-2,42.266

As the peaceable means to this effect were exhausted , the Austrian
Government must at last appeal to force . GREY-1914-2,42.267

They had not taken this decision without reluctance .
GREY-1914-2,42.268

Their action , which had no sort of aggressive tendency , could not be
represented otherwise than as an act of self-defence .
GREY-1914-2,42.269

Also they thought that they would serve a European interest if they
prevented Servia from being henceforth an element of general unrest such
as she had been for the last ten years . GREY-1914-2,42.270

The high sense of justice of the British nation and of British statesmen
could not blame the Austrian Government if the latter defended by the
sword what was theirs , and cleared up their position with a country
whose hostile policy had forced upon them for years measures so costly
as to have gravely injured Austrian national prosperity .
GREY-1914-2,42.271

Finally , the Austrian Government , confiding in their amicable
relations with us , felt that they could count on our sympathy in a
fight that was forced on them , and on our assistance in localising the
fight , if necessary . GREY-1914-2,42.272

Count Mensdorff added on his own account that , as long as Servia was
confronted with Turkey , Austria never took very severe measures because
of her adherence to the policy of the free development of the Balkan
States . GREY-1914-2,42.273

Now that Servia had doubled her territory and population without any
Austrian interference , the repression of Servian subversive aims was a
matter of self-defence and self-preservation on Austria's part .
GREY-1914-2,42.274

He reiterated that Austria had no intention of taking Servian territory
or aggressive designs against Servian territory . GREY-1914-2,42.275

I said that I could not understand the construction put by the Austrian
Government upon the Servian reply , GREY-1914-2,42.276

and I told Count Mensdorff the substance of the conversation that I had
had with the German Ambassador this morning about that reply .
GREY-1914-2,42.277

Count Mensdorff admitted that , on paper , the Servian reply might seem
to be satisfactory ; GREY-1914-2,42.278

but the Servians had refused the one thing - the co-operation of
Austrian officials and police - which would be a real guarantee that in
practice the Servians would not carry on their subversive campaign
against Austria . GREY-1914-2,42.279

<P_43>

I said that it seemed to me as if the Austrian Government believed that
, even after the Servian reply , they could make war upon Servia anyhow
, without risk of bringing Russia into the dispute . GREY-1914-2,43.281

If they could make war on Servia and at the same time satisfy Russia ,
well and good ; GREY-1914-2,43.282

but , if not , the consequences would be incalculable .
GREY-1914-2,43.283

I pointed out to him that I quoted this phrase from an expression of the
views of the German Government . GREY-1914-2,43.284

I feared that it would be expected in St. Petersburgh that the Servian
reply would diminish the tension , and now , when Russia found that
there was increased tension , the situation would become increasingly
serious . GREY-1914-2,43.285

Already the effect on Europe was one of anxiety . GREY-1914-2,43.286

I pointed out that our fleet was to have dispersed to-day , but we had
felt unable to let it disperse . GREY-1914-2,43.287

We should not think of calling up reserves at this moment ,
GREY-1914-2,43.288

and there was no menace in what we had done about our fleet ;
GREY-1914-2,43.289

but , owing to the possibility of a European conflagration , it was
impossible for us to disperse our forces at this moment .
GREY-1914-2,43.290

I gave this as an illustration of the anxiety that was felt .
GREY-1914-2,43.291

It seemed to me that the Servian reply already involved the greatest
humiliation to Servia that I had ever seen a country undergo ,
GREY-1914-2,43.292

and it was very disappointing to me that the reply was treated by the
Austrian Government as if it were as unsatisfactory as a blank negative
. GREY-1914-2,43.293

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,43.294

{ED:No._49._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_R._Rodd,_British_Ambassador_at_Rome}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,43.296

July <$$font> 27 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,43.297

Sir , The Italian Ambassador informed Sir A. Nicolson to-day that the
Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs agreed entirely with my proposal
for a conference of four to be held in London . GREY-1914-2,43.298

As regards the question of asking Russia , Austria-Hungary , and Servia
to suspend military operations pending the result of the conference ,
the Marquis di San Giuliano would recommend the suggestion warmly to the
German Government , GREY-1914-2,43.299

and would enquire what procedure they would propose should be followed
at Vienna . GREY-1914-2,43.300

I am , &c. , E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,43.301

<P_54>

{ED:No._67._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,54.304

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,54.305

July <$$font> 28 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,54.306

Explanation given in your telegram of the 27th July of what was my idea
in proposing a conference is quite right . GREY-1914-2,54.307

It would not be an arbitration , but a private and informal discussion
to ascertain what suggestion could be made for a settlement .
GREY-1914-2,54.308

No suggestion would be put forward that had not previously been
ascertained to be acceptable to Austria and Russia , with whom the
mediating Powers could easily keep in touch through their respective
allies . GREY-1914-2,54.309

But as long as there is a prospect of a direct exchange of views between
Austria and Russia , I would suspend every other suggestion , as I
entirely agree that it is the most preferable method of all .
GREY-1914-2,54.310

<P_55>

I understand that the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs has proposed
a friendly exchange of views to the Austrian Government ,
GREY-1914-2,55.312

and , if the latter accepts , it will no doubt relieve the tension and
make the situation less critical . GREY-1914-2,55.313

It is very satisfactory to hear from the German Ambassador here that the
German Government have taken action at Vienna in the sense of the
conversation recorded in my telegram of yesterday to you .
GREY-1914-2,55.314

{ED:No._68._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<$$heading>

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,55.317

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,55.318

July <$$font> 28 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,55.319

German Government , having accepted principle of mediation between
Austria and Russia by the four Powers , if necessary , I am ready to
propose that the German Secretary of State should suggest the lines on
which this principle should be applied . GREY-1914-2,55.320

I will , however , keep the idea in reserve until we see how the
conversations between Austria and Russia progress . GREY-1914-2,55.321

{ED:No._69._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_G._Buchanan,_British_Ambassador_at_St._Petersburgh}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,55.323

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,55.324

July <$$font> 28 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,55.325

It is most satisfactory that there is a prospect of direct exchange of
views between the Russian and Austrian Governments , as reported in your
telegram of the 27th July . GREY-1914-2,55.326

I am ready to put forward any practical proposal that would facilitate
this , GREY-1914-2,55.327

but I am not quite clear as to what the Russian Minister for Foreign
Affairs proposes the Ministers at Belgrade should do .
GREY-1914-2,55.328

Could he not first mention in an exchange of views with Austria his
willingness to co-operate in some such scheme ? GREY-1914-2,55.329

It might then take more concrete shape . GREY-1914-2,55.330

<P_60>

{ED:No._77._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,60.333

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,60.334

July <$$font> 29 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,60.335

I much appreciate the language of Chancellor , as reported in your
telegram of to-day . GREY-1914-2,60.336

His Excellency may rely upon it that this country will continue , as
heretofore , to strain every effort to secure peace and to avert the
calamity we all fear . GREY-1914-2,60.337

If he can induce Austria to satisfy Russia and to abstain from going so
far as to come into collision with her , we shall all join in deep
gratitude to his Excellency for having saved the peace of Europe .
GREY-1914-2,60.338

<P_62>

{ED:No._81._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_R._Rodd,_British_Ambassador_at_Rome}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,62.341

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,62.342

July <$$font> 29 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,62.343

With reference to your telegram of yesterday . It is impossible for me
to initiate discussions with Ambassadors here , as I understand from
Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs that Austria will not accept any
discussion on basis of Servian note , and the inference of all I have
heard from Vienna and Berlin is that Austria will not accept any form of
mediation by the Powers as between Austria and Servia .
GREY-1914-2,62.344

Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs must therefore speak at Berlin and
Vienna . GREY-1914-2,62.345

I shall be glad if a favourable reception is given to any suggestions he
can make there . GREY-1914-2,62.346

<P_63>

{ED:No._84._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,63.349

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,63.350

July <$$font> 29 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,63.351

The German Ambassador has been instructed by the German Chancellor to
inform me that he is endeavouring to mediate between Vienna and St.
Petersburgh , and he hopes with good success . GREY-1914-2,63.352

Austria and Russia seem to be in constant touch , GREY-1914-2,63.353

and he is endeavouring to make Vienna explain in a satisfactory form at
St. Petersburgh the scope and extension of Austrian proceedings in
Servia . GREY-1914-2,63.354

I told the German Ambassador that an agreement arrived at direct between
Austria and Russia would be the best possible solution .
GREY-1914-2,63.355

I would press no proposal as long as there was a prospect of that ,
GREY-1914-2,63.356

but my information this morning was that the Austrian Government have
declined the suggestion of the Russian Government that the Austrian
Ambassador at St. Petersburgh should be authorised to discuss directly
with the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs the means of settling the
Austro-Servian conflict . GREY-1914-2,63.357

The press correspondents at St. Petersburgh had been told that Russian
Government would mobilise . GREY-1914-2,63.358

The German Government had said that they were favourable in principle to
mediation between Russia and Austria if necessary . GREY-1914-2,63.359

They seemed to think the particular method of conference , consultation
or discussion , or even conversations <font> √† quatre <$$font> in London
too formal a method . GREY-1914-2,63.360

I urged that the German Government should suggest any method by which
the influence of the four Powers could be used together to prevent war
between Austria and Russia . GREY-1914-2,63.361

France agreed , GREY-1914-2,63.362

Italy agreed . GREY-1914-2,63.363

The whole idea of mediation or mediating influence was ready to be put
into operation by any method that Germany could suggest if mine was not
acceptable . GREY-1914-2,63.364

In fact mediation was ready to come into operation by any method that
Germany thought possible if only Germany would " press the button " in
the interests of peace . GREY-1914-2,63.365

<P_65>

{ED:No._87._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,65.368

July <$$font> 29 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,65.369

Sir , After telling M. Cambon to-day how grave the situation seemed to
be , I told him that I meant to tell the German Ambassador to-day that
he must not be misled by the friendly tone of our conversations into any
sense of false security that we should stand aside if all the efforts to
preserve the peace , which we were now making in common with Germany ,
failed . GREY-1914-2,65.370

But I went on to say to M. Cambon that I thought it necessary to tell
him also that public opinion here approached the present difficulty from
a quite different point of view from that taken during the difficulty as
to Morocco a few years ago . GREY-1914-2,65.371

In the case of Morocco the dispute was one in which France was primarily
interested , and in which it appeared that Germany , in an attempt to
crush France , was fastening a quarrel on France on a question that was
the subject of a special agreement between France and us .
GREY-1914-2,65.372

In the present case the dispute between Austria and Servia was not one
in which we felt called to take a hand . GREY-1914-2,65.373

Even if the question became one between Austria and Russia we should not
feel called upon to take a hand in it . GREY-1914-2,65.374

It would then be a question of the supremacy of Teuton or Slav - a
struggle for supremacy in the Balkans ; GREY-1914-2,65.375

and our idea had always been to avoid being drawn into a war over a
Balkan question . GREY-1914-2,65.376

If Germany became involved and France became involved , we had not made
up our minds what we should do ; GREY-1914-2,65.377

it was a case that we should have to consider . GREY-1914-2,65.378

France would then have been drawn <P_66> into a quarrel which was not
hers , but in which , owing to her alliance , her honour and interest
obliged her to engage . GREY-1914-2,66.379

We were free from engagements , GREY-1914-2,66.380

and we should have to decide what British interests required us to do .
GREY-1914-2,66.381

I thought it necessary to say that , because , as he knew , we were
taking all precautions with regard to our fleet , and I was about to
warn Prince Lichnowsky not to count on our standing aside , but it would
not be fair that I should let M. Cambon be misled into supposing that
this meant that we had decided what to do in a contingency that I still
hoped might not arise . GREY-1914-2,66.382

M. Cambon said that I had explained the situation very clearly .
GREY-1914-2,66.383

He understood it to be that in a Balkan quarrel , and in a struggle for
supremacy between Teuton and Slav we should not feel called to intervene
; should other issues be raised , and Germany and France become involved
, so that the question became one of the hegemony of Europe , we should
then decide what it was necessary for us to do . GREY-1914-2,66.384

He seemed quite prepared for this announcement , GREY-1914-2,66.385

and made no criticism upon it . GREY-1914-2,66.386

He said French opinion was calm , but decided . GREY-1914-2,66.387

He anticipated a demand from Germany that France would be neutral while
Germany attacked Russia . GREY-1914-2,66.388

This assurance France , of course , could not give ; GREY-1914-2,66.389

she was bound to help Russia if Russia was attacked .
GREY-1914-2,66.390

I am , &c. , E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,66.391

{ED:No._88._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,66.393

July <$$font> 29 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,66.394

Sir , I told the German Ambassador this afternoon of the information
that I had received , that Russia had informed Germany respecting her
mobilisation . GREY-1914-2,66.395

I also told him of the communication made by Count Benckendorff , that
the Austrian declaration of war manifestly rendered vain any direct
conversations between Russia and Austria . GREY-1914-2,66.396

I said that the hope built upon those direct conversations by the German
Government yesterday had disappeared to-day . GREY-1914-2,66.397

To-day the German Chancellor was working in the interest of mediation in
Vienna and St. Petersburgh . GREY-1914-2,66.398

If he succeeded , well and good . GREY-1914-2,66.399

If not , it was more important than ever that Germany should take up
what I had suggested to the German Ambassador this morning , and propose
some method by which the four Powers should be able to work together to
keep the peace of Europe . GREY-1914-2,66.400

I pointed out , however , that the Russian Government , while desirous
of mediation , regarded it as a condition that the military operations
against Servia should be suspended , as otherwise a mediation would only
drag on matters , and give Austria time to crush Servia .
GREY-1914-2,66.401

It was , of course , too late for all military operations against Servia
to be suspended . GREY-1914-2,66.402

In a short time , I supposed , the Austrian forces would be in Belgrade
, and in occupation of some Servian territory . GREY-1914-2,66.403

But even then it might be possible to bring some <P_67> mediation into
existence , if Austria , while saying that she must hold the occupied
territory until she had complete satisfaction from Servia , stated that
she would not advance further , pending an effort of the Powers to
mediate between her and Russia . GREY-1914-2,67.404

The German Ambassador said that he had already telegraphed to Berlin
what I had said to him this morning . GREY-1914-2,67.405

I am , &c. , E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,67.406

{ED:No._89._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,67.408

July <$$font> 29 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,67.409

Sir , After speaking to the German Ambassador this afternoon about the
European situation , I said that I wished to say to him , in a quite
private and friendly way , something that was on my mind .
GREY-1914-2,67.410

The situation was very grave . GREY-1914-2,67.411

While it was restricted to the issues at present actually involved we
had no thought of interfering in it . GREY-1914-2,67.412

But if Germany became involved in it , and then France , the issue might
be so great that it would involve all European interests ;
GREY-1914-2,67.413

and I did not wish him to be misled by the friendly tone of our
conversation - which I hoped would continue - into thinking that we
should stand aside . GREY-1914-2,67.414

He said that he quite understood this , GREY-1914-2,67.415

but he asked whether I meant that we should , under certain
circumstances , intervene ? GREY-1914-2,67.416

I replied that I did not wish to say that , or to use anything that was
like a threat or an attempt to apply pressure by saying that , if things
became worse , we should intervene . GREY-1914-2,67.417

There would be no question of our intervening if Germany was not
involved , or even if France was not involved . GREY-1914-2,67.418

But we knew very well , that if the issue did become such that we
thought British interests required us to intervene , we must intervene
at once , and the decision would have to be very rapid , just as the
decisions of other Powers had to be . GREY-1914-2,67.419

I hoped that the friendly tone of our conversations would continue as at
present , and that I should be able to keep as closely in touch with the
German Government in working for peace . GREY-1914-2,67.420

But if we failed in our efforts to keep the peace , and if the issue
spread so that it involved practically every European interest , I did
not wish to be open to any reproach from him that the friendly tone of
all our conversations had misled him or his Government into supposing
that we should not take action , and to the reproach that , if they had
not been so misled , the course of things might have been different .
GREY-1914-2,67.421

The German Ambassador took no exception to what I had said ;
GREY-1914-2,67.422

indeed , he told me that it accorded with what he had already given in
Berlin as his view of the situation . GREY-1914-2,67.423

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,67.424

<P_68>

{ED:No._90._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,68.427

July <$$font> 29 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,68.428

Sir , In addition to what passed with the German Ambassador this morning
, as recorded in my telegram of the 29th July to your Excellency , I
gave the Ambassador a copy of Sir Rennell Rodd's telegram of the 28th
July and of my reply to it . GREY-1914-2,68.429

I said I had begun to doubt whether even a complete acceptance of the
Austrian demands by Servia would now satisfy Austria .
GREY-1914-2,68.430

But there appeared , from what the Marquis di San Giuliano had said , to
be a method by which , if the Powers were allowed to have any say in the
matter , they might bring about complete satisfaction for Austria , if
only the latter would give them an opportunity . GREY-1914-2,68.431

I could , however , make no proposal , for the reasons I have given in
my telegram to you , GREY-1914-2,68.432

and could only give what the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs had
said to the German Ambassador for information , as long as it was
understood that Austria would accept no discussion with the Powers over
her dispute with Servia . GREY-1914-2,68.433

As to mediation between Austria and Russia , I said it could not take
the form simply of urging Russia to stand on one side while Austria had
a free hand to go to any length she pleased . GREY-1914-2,68.434

That would not be mediation , GREY-1914-2,68.435

it would simply be putting pressure upon Russia in the interests of
Austria . GREY-1914-2,68.436

The German Ambassador said the view of the German Government was that
Austria could not by force be humiliated , and could not abdicate her
position as a Great Power . GREY-1914-2,68.437

I said I entirely agreed , but it was not a question of humiliating
Austria , it was a question of how far Austria meant to push the
humiliation of others . GREY-1914-2,68.438

There must , of course , be some humiliation of Servia ,
GREY-1914-2,68.439

but Austria might press things so far as to involve the humiliation of
Russia . GREY-1914-2,68.440

The German Ambassador said that Austria would not take Servian territory
, as to which I observed that , by taking territory while leaving
nominal Servian independence , Austria might turn Servia practically
into a vassal State , and this would affect the whole position of Russia
in the Balkans . GREY-1914-2,68.441

I observed that when there was danger of European conflict it was
impossible to say who would not be drawn into it . GREY-1914-2,68.442

Even the Netherlands apparently were taking precautions .
GREY-1914-2,68.443

The German Ambassador said emphatically that some means must be found of
preserving the peace of Europe . GREY-1914-2,68.444

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,68.445

<P_69>

{ED:No._91._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_M._de_Bunsen,_British_Ambassador_at_Vienna}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,69.448

July <$$font> 29 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,69.449

Sir , The Austrian Ambassador told me to-day he had ready a long
memorandum , which he proposed to leave , and which he said gave an
account of the conduct of Servia towards Austria , and an explanation of
how necessary the Austrian action was . GREY-1914-2,69.450

I said that I did not wish to discuss the merits of the question between
Austria and Servia . GREY-1914-2,69.451

The news to-day seemed to me very bad for the peace of Europe .
GREY-1914-2,69.452

The Powers were not allowed to help in getting satisfaction for Austria
, which they might get if they were given an opportunity ,
GREY-1914-2,69.453

and European peace was at stake . GREY-1914-2,69.454

Count Mensdorff said that the war with Servia must proceed .
GREY-1914-2,69.455

Austria could not continue to be exposed to the necessity of mobilising
again and again , as she had been obliged to do in recent years .
GREY-1914-2,69.456

She had no idea of territorial aggrandisement , GREY-1914-2,69.457

and all she wished was to make sure that her interests were safeguarded
. GREY-1914-2,69.458

I said that it would be quite possible , without nominally interfering
with the independence of Servia or taking away any of her territory , to
turn her into a sort of vassal State . GREY-1914-2,69.459

Count Mensdorff deprecated this . GREY-1914-2,69.460

In reply to some further remarks of mine , as to the effect that the
Austrian action might have upon the Russian position in the Balkans , he
said that , before the Balkan war , Servia had always been regarded as
being in the Austrian sphere of influence . GREY-1914-2,69.461

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,69.462

{ED:No._92._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_R._Rodd,_British_Ambassador_at_Rome}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,69.464

July <$$font> 29 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,69.465

Sir , The Italian Ambassador made to me to-day a communication from the
Marquis di San Giuliano suggesting that the German objections to the
mediation of the four Powers , a mediation that was strongly favoured by
Italy , might be removed by some change in the form of procedure .
GREY-1914-2,69.466

I said that I had already anticipated this by asking the German
Government to suggest any form of procedure under which the idea of
mediation between Austria and Russia , already accepted by the German
Government in principle , could be applied . GREY-1914-2,69.467

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,69.468

<P_77>

{ED:No._101._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,77.471

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,77.472

July <$$font> 30 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,77.473

Your telegram of 29th July . GREY-1914-2,77.474

His Majesty's Government can@ @not for a moment entertain the
Chancellor's proposal that they should bind themselves to neutrality on
such terms . GREY-1914-2,77.475

What he asks us in effect is to engage to stand by while French colonies
are taken and France is beaten so long as Germany does not take French
territory as distinct from the colonies . GREY-1914-2,77.476

From the material point of view such a proposal is unacceptable ,
GREY-1914-2,77.477

for France , without further territory in Europe being taken from her ,
could be so crushed as to lose her position as a Great Power , and
become subordinate to German policy . GREY-1914-2,77.478

Altogether apart from that , it would be a disgrace for us to make this
bargain with Germany at the expense of France , a disgrace from which
the good name of this country would never recover . GREY-1914-2,77.479

The Chancellor also in effect asks us to bargain away whatever
obligation or interest we have as regards the neutrality of Belgium .
GREY-1914-2,77.480

We could not entertain that bargain either . GREY-1914-2,77.481

<P_78>

{ED:No._102._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,78.484

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,78.485

July <$$font> 30 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,78.486

I have warned Prince Lichnowsky that Germany must not count upon our
standing aside in all circumstances . GREY-1914-2,78.487

This is doubtless the substance of the telegram from Prince Lichnowsky
to German Chancellor , to which reference is made in the last two
paragraphs of your telegram of 30th July . GREY-1914-2,78.488

{ED:No._103._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_G._Buchanan,_British_Ambassador_at_St._Petersburgh}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,78.490

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,78.491

July <$$font> 30 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,78.492

German Ambassador informs me that German Government would endeavour to
influence Austria , after taking Belgrade and <P_79> Servian territory
in region of frontier , to promise not to advance further , while Powers
endeavoured to arrange that Servia should give satisfaction sufficient
to pacify Austria . GREY-1914-2,79.493

Territory occupied would of course be evacuated when Austria was
satisfied . GREY-1914-2,79.494

I suggested this yesterday as a possible relief to the situation ,
GREY-1914-2,79.495

and , if it can be obtained , I would earnestly hope that it might be
agreed to suspend further military preparations on all sides .
GREY-1914-2,79.496

Russian Ambassador has told me of condition laid down by M. Sazonof ,
as quoted in your telegram of the 30th July , GREY-1914-2,79.497

and fears it can@ @not be modified ; GREY-1914-2,79.498

but if Austrian advance were stopped after occupation of Belgrade , I
think Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs@ @' formula might be changed
to read that the Powers would examine how Servia could fully satisfy
Austria without impairing Servian sovereign rights or independence .
GREY-1914-2,79.499

If Austria , having occupied Belgrade and neighbouring Servian territory
, declares herself ready , in the interest of European peace , to cease
her advance and to discuss how a complete settlement can be arrived at ,
I hope that Russia would also consent to discussion and suspension of
further military preparations , provided that other Powers did the same
. GREY-1914-2,79.500

It is a slender chance of preserving peace , but the only one I can
suggest if Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs can come to no agreement
at Berlin . GREY-1914-2,79.501

You should inform Minister for Foreign Affairs . GREY-1914-2,79.502

{ED:No._104._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,79.504

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,79.505

July <$$font> 30 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,79.506

You should inform the Minister for Foreign Affairs of my telegram to Sir
G. Buchanan of to-day , and say that I know that he has been urging
Russia not to precipitate a crisis . GREY-1914-2,79.507

I hope he may be able to support this last suggestion at St.
Petersburgh . GREY-1914-2,79.508

{ED:No._105._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,79.510

July <$$font> 30 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,79.511

Sir , M. Cambon reminded me to-day of the letter I had written to him
two years ago , in which we agreed that , if the peace of Europe was
seriously threatened , we would discuss what we were prepared to do .
GREY-1914-2,79.512

I enclose for convenience of reference copies of the letter in question
and of M. Cambon's reply . GREY-1914-2,79.513

He said that the peace of <P_80> Europe was never more seriously
threatened than it was now . GREY-1914-2,80.514

He did not wish to ask me to say directly that we would intervene ,
GREY-1914-2,80.515

but he would like me to say what we should do if certain circumstances
arose . GREY-1914-2,80.516

The particular hypothesis he had in mind was an aggression by Germany on
France . GREY-1914-2,80.517

He gave me a paper , of which a copy is also enclosed , showing that the
German military preparations were more advanced and more on the
offensive upon the frontier than anything France had yet done .
GREY-1914-2,80.518

He anticipated that the aggression would take the form of either a
demand that France should cease her preparations , or a demand that she
should engage to remain neutral if there was war between Germany and
Russia . GREY-1914-2,80.519

Neither of these things could France admit . GREY-1914-2,80.520

I said that the Cabinet was to meet to-morrow morning , and I would see
him again to-morrow afternoon . GREY-1914-2,80.521

I am , &c. E. Grey GREY-1914-2,80.522

{ED:Enclosure_1_in_No._105}

{ED:Sir_Edward_Grey_to_M._Cambon,_French_Ambassador_in_London}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,80.525

November <$$font> 22 , 1912 . GREY-1914-2,80.526

My dear Ambassador , From time to time in recent years the French and
British naval and military experts have consulted together .
GREY-1914-2,80.527

It has always been understood that such consultation does not restrict
the freedom of either Government to decide at any future time whether or
not to assist the other by armed force . GREY-1914-2,80.528

We have agreed that consultation between experts is not , and ought not
to be regarded as , an engagement that commits either Government to
action in a contingency that has not arisen and may never arise .
GREY-1914-2,80.529

The disposition , for instance , of the French and British fleets
respectively at the present moment is not based upon an engagement to
co-operate in war . GREY-1914-2,80.530

You have , however , pointed out that , if either Government had grave
reason to expect an unprovoked attack by a third Power , it might become
essential to know whether it could in that event depend upon the armed
assistance of the other . GREY-1914-2,80.531

I agree that , if either Government had grave reason to expect an
unprovoked attack by a third Power , or something that threatened the
general peace , it should immediately discuss with the other whether
both Governments should act together to prevent aggression and to
preserve peace , and , if so , what measures they would be prepared to
take in common . GREY-1914-2,80.532

If these measures involved action , the plans of the General Staffs
would at once be taken into consideration , GREY-1914-2,80.533

and the Governments would then decide what effect should be given to
them . GREY-1914-2,80.534

Yours , &c. E. Grey GREY-1914-2,80.535

<P_85>

{ED:No._110._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_G._Buchanan,_British_Ambassador_at_St._Petersburgh}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,85.538

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,85.539

July <$$font> 31 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,85.540

I learn from the German Ambassador that , as a result of suggestions by
the German Government , a conversation has taken place at Vienna between
the Austrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Russian Ambassador .
GREY-1914-2,85.541

The Austrian Ambassador at St. Peterburgh has also been instructed that
he may converse with the Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs , and that
he should give explanations about the Austrian ultimatum to Servia , and
discuss suggestions and any questions directly affecting Austro-Russian
relations . GREY-1914-2,85.542

If the Russian Government object to the Austrians mobilising eight army
corps , it might be pointed out that this is not too great a number
against 400,000 Servians . GREY-1914-2,85.543

The German Ambassador asked me to urge the Russian Government to show
goodwill in the discussion and to suspend their military preparations .
GREY-1914-2,85.544

It is with great satisfaction that I have learnt that discussions are
being resumed between Austria and Russia , GREY-1914-2,85.545

and you should express this to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and tell
him that I earnestly hope he will encourage them . GREY-1914-2,85.546

I informed the German Ambassador that , as regards military preparations
, I did not see how Russia could be urged to suspend them unless some
limit were put by Austria to the advance of her troops into Servia .
GREY-1914-2,85.547

<P_86>

{ED:No._110._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,86.550

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,86.551

July <$$font> 31 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,86.552

I hope that the conversations which are now proceeding between Austria
and Russia may lead to a satisfactory result . GREY-1914-2,86.553

The stumbling-block hitherto has been Austrian mistrust of Servian
assurances , and Russian mistrust of Austrian intentions with regard to
the independence and integrity of Servia . GREY-1914-2,86.554

It has occurred to me that in the event of this mistrust preventing a
solution being found by Vienna and St. Peterburgh , Germany might sound
Vienna , and I would undertake to sound St. Petersburgh whether it
would be possible for the four disinterested Powers to offer to Austria
that they would undertake to see that she obtained full satisfaction of
her demands on Servia , provided that they did not impair Servian
sovereignty and the integrity of Servian territory . GREY-1914-2,86.555

As your Excellency is aware , Austria has already declared her
willingness to respect them . GREY-1914-2,86.556

Russia might be informed by the four Powers that they would undertake to
prevent Austrian demands going the length of impairing Servian
sovereignty and integrity . GREY-1914-2,86.557

All Powers would of course suspend further military operations or
preparations . GREY-1914-2,86.558

You may sound the Secretary of State about this proposal .
GREY-1914-2,86.559

I said to German Ambassador this morning that if Germany could get any
reasonable proposal put forward which made it clear that Germany and
Austria were striving to preserve European peace , and that Russia and
France would be unreasonable if they rejected it , I would support it at
St. Petersburgh and Paris , and go the length of saying that if Russia
and France would not accept it His Majesty's Government would have
nothing more to do with the consequences ; GREY-1914-2,86.560

but , otherwise , I told German Ambassador that if France became
involved we should be drawn in . GREY-1914-2,86.561

You can add this when sounding Chancellor or Secretary of State as to
proposal above . GREY-1914-2,86.562

<P_87>

{ED:No._114._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris,_and_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,87.565

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,87.566

July <$$font> 31 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,87.567

I still trust that situation is not irretrievable , GREY-1914-2,87.568

but in view of prospect of mobilisation in Germany it becomes essential
to His Majesty's Government , in view of existing treaties , to ask
whether French <paren> German <$$paren> Government are prepared to
engage to respect neutrality of Belgium so long as no other Power
violates it . GREY-1914-2,87.569

A similar request is being addressed to German <paren> French <$$paren>
Government . GREY-1914-2,87.570

It is important to have an early answer . GREY-1914-2,87.571

{ED:No._115._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Villiers,_British_Minister_at_Brussels}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,87.573

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,87.574

July <$$font> 31 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,87.575

In view of existing treaties , you should inform Minister for Foreign
Affairs that , in consideration of the possibility of a European war , I
have asked French and German Governments whether each is prepared <P_88>
to respect the neutrality of Belgium provided it is violated by no other
Power . GREY-1914-2,88.576

You should say that I assume that the Belgian Government will maintain
to the utmost of their power their neutrality , which I desire and
expect other Powers to uphold and observe . GREY-1914-2,88.577

You should inform the Belgian Government that an early reply is desired
. GREY-1914-2,88.578

{ED:No._115._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,88.580

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,88.581

July <$$font> 31 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,88.582

I have received your telegram of yesterday's date . GREY-1914-2,88.583

Nobody here feels that in this dispute , as far as it has yet gone ,
British treaties or obligations are involved . GREY-1914-2,88.584

Feeling is quite different from what it was during the Morocco question
. GREY-1914-2,88.585

That crisis involved a dispute directly involving France , whereas in
this case France is being drawn into a dispute which is not hers .
GREY-1914-2,88.586

I believe it to be quite untrue that our attitude has been a decisive
factor in situation . GREY-1914-2,88.587

German Government do not expect our neutrality . GREY-1914-2,88.588

We can@ @not undertake a definite pledge to intervene in a war .
GREY-1914-2,88.589

I have so told the French Ambassador , who has urged His Majesty's
Government to reconsider this decision . GREY-1914-2,88.590

I have told him that we should not be justified in giving any pledge at
the present moment , but that we will certainly consider the situation
again directly there is a new development . GREY-1914-2,88.591

<P_90>

{ED:No._119._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_F._Bertie,_British_Ambassador_at_Paris}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,90.594

July <$$font> 31 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,90.595

Sir , M. Cambon referred to-day to a telegram that had been shown to
Sir Arthur Nicolson this morning from the French Ambassador in Berlin ,
saying that it was the uncertainty with regard to whether we would
intervene which was the encouraging element in Berlin , and that , if we
would only declare definitely on the side of Russia and France , it
would decide the German attitude in favour of peace .
GREY-1914-2,90.596

I said that it was quite wrong to suppose that we had left Germany under
the impression that we would not intervene . GREY-1914-2,90.597

I had refused overtures to promise that we should remain neutral .
GREY-1914-2,90.598

I had not only definitely declined to say that we would remain neutral ,
GREY-1914-2,90.599

I had even gone so far this morning as to say to the German Ambassador
that , if France and Germany became involved in war , we should be drawn
into it . GREY-1914-2,90.600

That , of course , was not the same thing as taking an engagement to
France , GREY-1914-2,90.601

and I told M. Cambon of it only to show that we had not left Germany
under the impression that we would stand aside . GREY-1914-2,90.602

M. Cambon then asked me for my reply to what he had said yesterday .
GREY-1914-2,90.603

I said that we had come to the conclusion , in the Cabinet to-day , that
we could not give any pledge at the present time . GREY-1914-2,90.604

Though we should have to put our policy before Parliament , we could not
pledge Parliament in advance . GREY-1914-2,90.605

Up to the present moment , we did not feel , and public opinion did not
feel , that any treaties or obligations of this country were involved .
GREY-1914-2,90.606

Further developments might alter this situation and cause the Government
and Parliament to take the view that intervention was justified .
GREY-1914-2,90.607

The preservation of the neutrality of Belgium might be , {COM:amalgam} I
would not say a decisive , but an important factor , in determining our
attitude . GREY-1914-2,90.608

Whether we proposed to Parliament to intervene or not to intervene in a
war , Parliament would wish to know how we stood with regard to the
neutrality of Belgium GREY-1914-2,90.609

and it might be that I should ask both France and Germany whether each
was prepared to undertake an engagement that she would not be the first
to violate the neutrality of Belgium . GREY-1914-2,90.610

Mr. Cambon repeated his question whether we would help France if
Germany made an attack on her . GREY-1914-2,90.611

I said that I could only adhere to the answer that , as far as things
had gone at present , we could not take any engagement .
GREY-1914-2,90.612

Mr. Cambon urged that Germany had from the beginning rejected proposals
that might have made for peace . GREY-1914-2,90.613

It could not be to England's interest that France should be crushed by
Germany . GREY-1914-2,90.614

We should then be in a very diminished position with regard to Germany .
GREY-1914-2,90.615

In 1870 we had made a great mistake in allowing an enormous increase of
German strength , GREY-1914-2,90.616

and we should now be repeating the mistake . GREY-1914-2,90.617

He asked me whether I could not submit his question to the Cabinet again
. GREY-1914-2,90.618

<P_91>

I said that the Cabinet would certainly be summoned as soon as there was
some new development , but at the present moment the only answer I could
give was that we could not undertake any definite engagement .
GREY-1914-2,91.620

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,91.621

<P_93>

{ED:No._123._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,93.624

August <$$font> 1 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,93.625

Sir , I told the German Ambassador to-day that the reply of the German
Government with regard to the neutrality of Belgium was a matter of very
great regret , because the neutrality of Belgium affected feeling in
this country . GREY-1914-2,93.626

If Germany could see her way to give the same assurance as that which
had been given by France it would materially contribute to relieve
anxiety and tension here . GREY-1914-2,93.627

On the other hand , if there were a violation of the neutrality of
Belgium by one combatant while the other respected it , it would be
extremely difficult to restrain public feeling in this country .
GREY-1914-2,93.628

I said that we had been discussing this question at a Cabinet meeting ,
GREY-1914-2,93.629

and as I was authorised to tell him this I gave him a memorandum of it .
GREY-1914-2,93.630

He asked me whether , if Germany gave a promise not to violate Belgium's
{TEXT:Belgium} neutrality we would engage to remain neutral .
GREY-1914-2,93.631

I replied that I could not say that ; our hands were still free , and we
were considering what our attitude should be . GREY-1914-2,93.632

All I could say was that our attitude would be determined largely by
public opinion here , and that the neutrality of Belgium would appeal
very strongly to public opinion here . GREY-1914-2,93.633

I did not think that we could give a promise of neutrality on that
condition alone . GREY-1914-2,93.634

The Ambassador pressed me as to whether I could not formulate conditions
on which we would remain neutral . GREY-1914-2,93.635

He even suggested that the integrity {TEXT:intregity} of France and her
colonies might be guaranteed . GREY-1914-2,93.636

I said that I felt obliged to refuse definitely any promise to remain
neutral on similar terms , and I could only say that we must keep our
hands free . GREY-1914-2,93.637

I am , &c. E. Grey . GREY-1914-2,93.638

<P_96>

{ED:No._130._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,96.641

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,96.642

August <$$font> 1 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,96.643

We are informed that authorities at Hamburg have forcibly detained
steamers belonging to the Great Central Company and other British
merchant-ships . GREY-1914-2,96.644

I can@ @not ascertain on what grounds the detention of British ships has
been ordered . GREY-1914-2,96.645

You should request German Government to send immediate orders that they
should be allowed to proceed without delay . GREY-1914-2,96.646

The effect on public opinion here will be deplorable unless this is done
. GREY-1914-2,96.647

His Majesty's Government , on their side , are most anxious to avoid any
incident of an aggressive nature , GREY-1914-2,96.648

and the German Government will , I hope , be equally careful not to take
any step which would make the situation between us impossible .
GREY-1914-2,96.649

<P_97>

{ED:No._131._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_E._Goschen,_British_Ambassador_at_Berlin}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,97.652

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,97.653

August <$$font> 1 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,97.654

I still believe that it might be possible to secure peace if only a
little respite in time can be gained before any Great Power begins war .
GREY-1914-2,97.655

The Russian Government has communicated to me the readiness of Austria
to discuss with Russia and the readiness of Austria to accept a basis of
mediation which is not open to the objections raised in regard to the
formula which Russia originally suggested . GREY-1914-2,97.656

Things ought not to be hopeless so long as Austria and Russia are ready
to converse , GREY-1914-2,97.657

and I hope that German Government may be able to make use of the Russian
communications referred to above , in order to avoid tension .
GREY-1914-2,97.658

His Majesty's Government are carefully abstaining from any act which may
precipitate matters . GREY-1914-2,97.659

<P_98>

{ED:No._135._Sir_Edward_Grey_to_Sir_G._Buchanan,_British_Ambassador_at_St._Petersburgh}

<paren> Telegraphic . <$$paren> GREY-1914-2,98.662

<font> Foreign Office , GREY-1914-2,98.663

August <$$font> 1 , 1914 . GREY-1914-2,98.664

Information reaches me from a most reliable source that Austrian
Government have informed German Government that though the situation has
been changed by the mobilisation of Russia they would in full
appreciation of the efforts of England for the preservation of peace be
ready to consider favourably my proposal for mediation between Austria
and Servia . GREY-1914-2,98.665

The effect of this acceptance <P_99> would naturally be that the
Austrian military action against Servia would continue for the present ,
and that the British Government would urge upon Russian Government to
stop the mobilisation of troops directed against Austria , in which case
Austria would naturally cancel those defensive military counter-measures
in Galicia , which have been forced upon Austria by Russian mobilisation
. GREY-1914-2,99.666

You should inform Minister for Foreign Affairs and say that if , in the
consideration of the acceptance of mediation by Austria , Russia can
agree to stop mobilisation , it appears still to be possible to preserve
peace . GREY-1914-2,99.667

Presumably the matter should be discussed with German Government also by
Russian Government . GREY-1914-2,99.668

