<BEGIN_hardy-1874-2>

<P_268>

<heading> LI HARDY-1874-2,268.3

Bathsheba Talks With Her Outrider HARDY-1874-2,268.4

<$$heading>

The arrangement for getting back again to Weatherbury had been that Oak
should take the place of Poorgrass in Bathsheba's conveyance and drive
her home , it being discovered late in the afternoon that Joseph was
suffering from his old complaint , a multiplying eye , and was ,
therefore , hardly trustworthy as coachman and protector to a woman .
HARDY-1874-2,268.6

But Oak had found himself so occupied , and was full of so many cares
relative to those portions of Boldwoods's flocks that were not disposed
of , that Bathsheba , without telling Oak or anybody , resolved to drive
home herself , as she had many times done from Casterbridge Market , and
trust to her good angel for performing the journey unmolested .
HARDY-1874-2,268.7

But having fallen in with Farmer Boldwood accidentally <paren> on her
part at least <$$paren> at the refreshment-tent , she found it
impossible to refuse his offer to ride on horseback beside her as escort
. HARDY-1874-2,268.8

It had grown twilight before she was aware , HARDY-1874-2,268.9

but Boldwood assured her that there was no cause for uneasiness , as the
moon would be up in half an hour {TEXT:half-an-hour} .
HARDY-1874-2,268.10

Immediately after the incident in the tent she had risen to go - now
absolutely alarmed and really grateful for her old lover's protection -
though regretting Gabriel's absence , whose company she would have much
preferred , as being more proper as well as more pleasant , since he was
her own managing-man and servant . HARDY-1874-2,268.11

This , however , could not be helped ; HARDY-1874-2,268.12

she would not , on any consideration , treat Boldwood harshly , having
once already ill-used him , HARDY-1874-2,268.13

and the moon having risen , and the gig being ready , she drove across
the hill-top in the wending ways which led downwards - to oblivious
obscurity , as it seemed , HARDY-1874-2,268.14

for the moon and the hill it flooded with light were in appearance on a
level , the rest of the world lying as a vast shady concave between them
. HARDY-1874-2,268.15

Boldwood mounted his horse , HARDY-1874-2,268.16

and followed in close attendance behind . HARDY-1874-2,268.17

Thus they descended into the lowlands , HARDY-1874-2,268.18

and the sounds of those left on the hill came like voices from the sky ,
HARDY-1874-2,268.19

and the lights were as those of a camp in heaven . HARDY-1874-2,268.20

They soon passed the merry stragglers in the immediate vicinity of the
hill , HARDY-1874-2,268.21

traversed Kingsbere , HARDY-1874-2,268.22

and got upon the high road . HARDY-1874-2,268.23

The keen instincts of Bathsheba had perceived that the farmer's staunch
devotion to herself was still undiminished , HARDY-1874-2,268.24

and she sympathized deeply . HARDY-1874-2,268.25

The sight had quite depressed her this evening ; HARDY-1874-2,268.26

had reminded her of her folly ; HARDY-1874-2,268.27

she wished anew , as she had wished many months ago , for some means of
making reparation for her fault . HARDY-1874-2,268.28

Hence her pity for the man who so persistently loved on to his own
injury and permanent gloom had betrayed Bathsheba into an injudicious
considerateness of manner , which appeared almost like tenderness , and
<P_269> gave new vigour to the exquisite dream of a Jacob's seven years'
service in poor Boldwood's mind . HARDY-1874-2,269.29

He soon found an excuse for advancing from his position in the rear ,
HARDY-1874-2,269.30

and rode close by her side . HARDY-1874-2,269.31

They had gone two or three miles in the moonlight , speaking desultorily
across the wheel of her gig concerning the fair , farming , Oak's
usefulness to them both , and other indifferent subjects , when Boldwood
said suddenly and simply - ' Mrs. Troy , you will marry again some day
? ' HARDY-1874-2,269.32

This point-blank query unmistakably confused her , HARDY-1874-2,269.33

and it was not till a minute or more had elapsed that she said , ' I
have not seriously thought of any such subject . ' HARDY-1874-2,269.34

' I quite understand that . HARDY-1874-2,269.35

Yet your late husband has been dead nearly one year ,
HARDY-1874-2,269.36

and ' HARDY-1874-2,269.37

' You forget that his death was never absolutely proved , and may not
have taken place ; so that I may not be really a widow , ' she said ,
catching at the straw of escape that the fact afforded .
HARDY-1874-2,269.38

' Not absolutely proved , perhaps , HARDY-1874-2,269.39

but it was proved circumstantially . HARDY-1874-2,269.40

A man saw him drowning , too . HARDY-1874-2,269.41

No reasonable person has any doubt of his death ; HARDY-1874-2,269.42

nor have you , ma'am , I should imagine . ' HARDY-1874-2,269.43

' I have , HARDY-1874-2,269.44

or I should have acted differently , ' she said , gently .
HARDY-1874-2,269.45

' From the first I have had a strange unaccountable feeling that he
could not have perished . HARDY-1874-2,269.46

But I have been able to explain that in several ways since .
HARDY-1874-2,269.47

Even were I half persuaded that I shall see him no more , I am far from
thinking of marriage with another . HARDY-1874-2,269.48

I should be very contemptible to indulge in such a thought . '
HARDY-1874-2,269.49

They were silent now a@ @while , HARDY-1874-2,269.50

and having struck into an unfrequented track across a common , the
creaks of Boldwood's saddle and her gig springs were all the sounds to
be heard . HARDY-1874-2,269.51

Boldwood ended the pause . HARDY-1874-2,269.52

' Do you remember when I carried you fainting in my arms into the King's
Arms , in Casterbridge ? HARDY-1874-2,269.53

Every dog has his day : HARDY-1874-2,269.54

that was mine . ' HARDY-1874-2,269.55

' I know - I know it all , ' she said , hurriedly . HARDY-1874-2,269.56

' I , for one , shall never cease regretting that events so fell out as
to deny you to me . ' HARDY-1874-2,269.57

' I , too , am very sorry , ' she said , HARDY-1874-2,269.58

and then checked herself . HARDY-1874-2,269.59

' I mean , you know , I am sorry you thought I - ' HARDY-1874-2,269.60

' I have always this dreary pleasure in thinking over those past times
with you - that I was something to you before <font> he <$$font> was
anything , and that you belonged <font> almost <$$font> to me .
HARDY-1874-2,269.61

But , of course , that@ @'s nothing . HARDY-1874-2,269.62

You never liked me . ' HARDY-1874-2,269.63

' I did ; HARDY-1874-2,269.64

and respected you , too . ' HARDY-1874-2,269.65

' Do you now ? ' HARDY-1874-2,269.66

' Yes . ' HARDY-1874-2,269.67

' Which ? ' HARDY-1874-2,269.68

' How do you mean which ? ' HARDY-1874-2,269.69

<P_270>

' Do you like me , HARDY-1874-2,270.71

or do you respect me ? ' HARDY-1874-2,270.72

' I do@ @n't know - HARDY-1874-2,270.73

at least , I can@ @not tell you . HARDY-1874-2,270.74

It is difficult for a woman to define her feelings in language which is
chiefly made by men to express theirs . HARDY-1874-2,270.75

My treatment of you was thoughtless , inexcusable , wicked !
HARDY-1874-2,270.76

I shall eternally regret it . HARDY-1874-2,270.77

If there had been anything I could have done to make amends I would most
gladly have done it - HARDY-1874-2,270.78

there was nothing on earth I so longed to do as to repair the error .
HARDY-1874-2,270.79

But that was not possible . ' HARDY-1874-2,270.80

' Do@ @n't blame yourself - HARDY-1874-2,270.81

you were not so far in the wrong as you suppose . HARDY-1874-2,270.82

Bathsheba , supposed {COM:sic} you had real complete proof that you are
what , in fact , you are - a widow - would you repair the old wrong to
me by marrying me ? ' HARDY-1874-2,270.83

' I can@ @not say . HARDY-1874-2,270.84

I should@ @n't yet , at any rate . ' HARDY-1874-2,270.85

' But you might at some future time of your life ? '
HARDY-1874-2,270.86

' O yes , I might at some time . ' HARDY-1874-2,270.87

' Well , then , do you know that without further proof of any kind you
may marry again in about six years from the present - subject to
nobody's objection or blame ? ' HARDY-1874-2,270.88

' O yes , ' she said , quickly . HARDY-1874-2,270.89

' I know all that . HARDY-1874-2,270.90

But do@ @n't talk of it - HARDY-1874-2,270.91

seven or six years - where may we all be by that time ? '
HARDY-1874-2,270.92

' They will soon glide by , HARDY-1874-2,270.93

and it will seem an astonishingly short time to look back upon when they
are past - much less than to look forward to now . '
HARDY-1874-2,270.94

' Yes , yes ; I have found that in my own experience . '
HARDY-1874-2,270.95

' Now , listen once more , ' Boldwood pleaded . HARDY-1874-2,270.96

' If I wait that time , will you marry me ? HARDY-1874-2,270.97

You own that you owe me amends - HARDY-1874-2,270.98

let that be your way of making them . ' HARDY-1874-2,270.99

' But , Mr. Boldwood - six years - ' HARDY-1874-2,270.100

' Do you want to be the wife of any other man ? ' HARDY-1874-2,270.101

' No indeed ! I mean , that I do@ @n't like to talk about this matter
now . HARDY-1874-2,270.102

Perhaps it is not proper , HARDY-1874-2,270.103

and I ought not to allow it . HARDY-1874-2,270.104

Let us drop it . HARDY-1874-2,270.105

My husband may be living , as I said . ' HARDY-1874-2,270.106

' Of course , I@ @'ll drop the subject if you wish .
HARDY-1874-2,270.107

But propriety has nothing to do with reasons . HARDY-1874-2,270.108

I am a middle-aged man , willing to protect you for the remainder of our
lives . HARDY-1874-2,270.109

On your side , at least , there is no passion or blamable haste -
HARDY-1874-2,270.110

on mine , perhaps , there is . HARDY-1874-2,270.111

But I ca@ @n't help seeing that if you choose from a feeling of pity ,
and , as you say , a wish to make amends , to make a bargain with me for
a far-@ @ahead time - an agreement which will set all things right and
make me happy , late though it may be - there is no fault to be found
with you as a woman . HARDY-1874-2,270.112

Had@ @n't I the first place beside you ? HARDY-1874-2,270.113

Have@ @n't you been almost mine once already ? HARDY-1874-2,270.114

Surely you can say to me as much as this , you will have me back again
should circumstances permit ? HARDY-1874-2,270.115

Now , pray speak ! HARDY-1874-2,270.116

O Bathsheba , promise - it is only a little promise - that if you marry
again , you will marry me ! ' HARDY-1874-2,270.117

His tone was so excited that she almost feared him at this moment ,
<P_271> even whilst she sympathized . HARDY-1874-2,271.118

It was a simple physical fear - the weak of the strong ;
HARDY-1874-2,271.119

there was no emotional aversion or inner repugnance .
HARDY-1874-2,271.120

She said , with some distress in her voice , for she remembered vividly
his outburst on the Yalbury Road , and shrank from a repetition of his
anger : - ' I will never marry another man whilst you wish me to be your
wife , whatever comes - HARDY-1874-2,271.121

but to say more - HARDY-1874-2,271.122

you have taken me so by surprise - ' HARDY-1874-2,271.123

' But let it stand in these simple words - that in six year's time you
will be my wife ? HARDY-1874-2,271.124

Unexpected accidents we@ @'ll not mention , because those , of course ,
must be given way to . HARDY-1874-2,271.125

Now , this time I know you will keep your word . ' HARDY-1874-2,271.126

' That@ @'s why I hesitate to give it . ' HARDY-1874-2,271.127

' But do give it ! HARDY-1874-2,271.128

Remember the past , HARDY-1874-2,271.129

and be kind . ' HARDY-1874-2,271.130

She breathed ; HARDY-1874-2,271.131

and then said mournfully : ' O what shall I do ? HARDY-1874-2,271.132

I do@ @n't love you , HARDY-1874-2,271.133

and I much fear that I never shall love you as much as a woman ought to
love a husband . HARDY-1874-2,271.134

If you , sir , know that , and I can yet give you happiness by a mere
promise to marry at the end of six years , if my husband should not come
back , it is a great honour to me . HARDY-1874-2,271.135

And if you value such an act of friendship from a woman who does@ @n't
esteem herself as she did , and has little love left , why I - I will -
' ' Promise ! ' ' - Consider , if I can@ @not promise soon . '
HARDY-1874-2,271.136

' But soon is perhaps never ? ' HARDY-1874-2,271.137

' O no , it is not ! HARDY-1874-2,271.138

I mean soon . HARDY-1874-2,271.139

Christmas , we@ @'ll say . ' HARDY-1874-2,271.140

' Christmas ! ' HARDY-1874-2,271.141

He said nothing further till he added : ' Well , I@ @'ll say no more to
you about it till that time . ' HARDY-1874-2,271.142

Bathsheba was in a very peculiar state of mind , which showed how
entirely the soul is the slave of the body , the ethereal spirit
dependent for its quality upon the tangible flesh and blood .
HARDY-1874-2,271.143

It is hardly too much to say that she felt coerced by a force stronger
than her own will , not only into the act of promising upon this
singularly remote and vague matter , but into the emotion of fancying
that she ought to promise . HARDY-1874-2,271.144

When the weeks intervening between the night of this conversation and
Christmas day began perceptibly to diminish , her anxiety and perplexity
increased . HARDY-1874-2,271.145

One day she was led by an accident into an oddly confidential dialogue
with Gabriel about her difficulty . HARDY-1874-2,271.146

It afforded her a little relief - of a dull and cheerless kind .
HARDY-1874-2,271.147

They were auditing accounts , HARDY-1874-2,271.148

and something occurred in the course of their labours which led Oak to
say , speaking of Boldwood , ' He@ @'ll never forget you , ma'am , never
. ' HARDY-1874-2,271.149

Then out came her trouble before she was aware ; HARDY-1874-2,271.150

and she told him <P_272> how she had again got into the toils ; what
Boldwood had asked her , and how he was expecting her assent .
HARDY-1874-2,272.151

' The most mournful reason of all for my agreeing to it , ' she said
sadly , ' and the true reason why I think to do so for good or for evil
, is this - HARDY-1874-2,272.152

it is a thing I have not breathed to a living soul as yet -
HARDY-1874-2,272.153

I believe that if I do@ @n't give my word , he@ @'ll go out of his mind
. ' HARDY-1874-2,272.154

' Really , do ye ? ' said Gabriel , gravely . HARDY-1874-2,272.155

' I believe this , ' she continued , with reckless frankness ;
HARDY-1874-2,272.156

' and Heaven knows I say it in a spirit the very reverse of vain ,
HARDY-1874-2,272.157

for I am grieved and troubled to my soul about it - HARDY-1874-2,272.158

I believe I hold that man's future in my hand . HARDY-1874-2,272.159

His career depends entirely upon my treatment of him .
HARDY-1874-2,272.160

O Gabriel , I tremble at my responsibility , HARDY-1874-2,272.161

for it is terrible ! ' HARDY-1874-2,272.162

' Well , I think this much , ma'am , as I told you years ago , ' said
Oak , ' that his life is a total blank whenever he is@ @n't hoping for
'ee ; HARDY-1874-2,272.163

but I ca@ @n't suppose - I hope that nothing so dreadful hangs on to it
as you fancy . HARDY-1874-2,272.164

His natural manner has always been dark and strange , you know .
HARDY-1874-2,272.165

But since the case is so sad and odd-like , why do@ @n't ye give the
conditional promise ? HARDY-1874-2,272.166

I think I would . ' HARDY-1874-2,272.167

' But is it right ? HARDY-1874-2,272.168

Some rash acts of my past life have taught me that a watched woman must
have very much circumspection to retain only a very little credit ,
HARDY-1874-2,272.169

and I do want and long to be discreet in this ! HARDY-1874-2,272.170

And six years - why we may all be in our graves by that time , even if
Mr. Troy does not come back again , which he may not impossibly do !
HARDY-1874-2,272.171

Such thoughts give a sort of absurdity to the scheme .
HARDY-1874-2,272.172

Now , is@ @n't it preposterous , Gabriel ? HARDY-1874-2,272.173

However he came to dream of it , I can@ @not think .
HARDY-1874-2,272.174

But is it wrong ? HARDY-1874-2,272.175

You know - HARDY-1874-2,272.176

you are older than I . ' HARDY-1874-2,272.177

' Eight years older , ma'am . ' HARDY-1874-2,272.178

' Yes , eight years - HARDY-1874-2,272.179

and is it wrong ? ' HARDY-1874-2,272.180

' Perhaps it would be an uncommon agreement for a man and woman to make
: HARDY-1874-2,272.181

I do@ @n't see anything really wrong about it , ' said Oak , slowly .
HARDY-1874-2,272.182

' In fact the very thing that makes it doubtful if you ought to marry en
under any condition , that is , your not caring about him -
HARDY-1874-2,272.183

for I may suppose ' HARDY-1874-2,272.184

' Yes , you may suppose that love is wanting , ' she said shortly .
HARDY-1874-2,272.185

' Love is an utterly bygone , sorry , worn-out , miserable thing with me
- for him or any one else . ' HARDY-1874-2,272.186

' Well , your want of love seems to me the one thing that takes away
harm from such an agreement with him . HARDY-1874-2,272.187

If wild heat had to do wi' it , making ye long to overcome the
awkwardness about your husband's vanishing , it mid be wrong ;
HARDY-1874-2,272.188

but a cold-hearted agreement to oblige a man seems different , somehow .
HARDY-1874-2,272.189

The real sin , ma'am , in my mind , lies in thinking of ever wedding wi'
a man you do@ @n't love honest and true . ' HARDY-1874-2,272.190

' That I@ @'m willing to pay the penalty of , ' said Bathsheba , firmly
. HARDY-1874-2,272.191

' You know , Gabriel , this is what I can@ @not get off my conscience -
that <P_273> I once seriously injured him in sheer idleness .
HARDY-1874-2,273.192

If I had never played a trick upon him , he would never have wanted to
marry me . HARDY-1874-2,273.193

O if I could only pay some heavy damages in money to him for the harm I
did , and so get the sin off my soul that way ! . . .
HARDY-1874-2,273.194

Well , there@ @'s the debt , which can only be discharged in one way ,
HARDY-1874-2,273.195

and I believe I am bound to do it if it honestly lies in my power ,
without any consideration of my own future at all .
HARDY-1874-2,273.196

When a rake gambles away his expectations , the fact that it is an
inconvenient debt does@ @n't make him the less liable .
HARDY-1874-2,273.197

I@ @'ve been a rake , HARDY-1874-2,273.198

and the single point I ask you is , considering that my own scruples ,
and the fact that in the eye of the law my husband is only missing ,
will keep any man from marrying me until seven years have passed - am I
free to entertain such an idea , even though 't@ @is a sort of penance -
HARDY-1874-2,273.199

for it will be that ? HARDY-1874-2,273.200

I <font> hate <$$font> the act of marriage under such circumstances ,
and the class of women I should seem to belong to by doing it ! '
HARDY-1874-2,273.201

' It seems to me that all depends upon whe'r you think , as everybody
else do , that your husband is dead . ' HARDY-1874-2,273.202

' I shall get to , I suppose , because I can@ @not help feeling what
would have brought him back long before this time if he had lived . '
HARDY-1874-2,273.203

' Well , then , in a religious sense you will be as free to <font> think
<$$font> o' marrying again as any real widow of one year's standing .
HARDY-1874-2,273.204

But why do@ @n't ye ask Mr. Thirdly's advice on how to treat Mr.
Boldwood ? ' HARDY-1874-2,273.205

' No . When I want a broad-minded opinion for general enlightenment ,
distinct from special advice , I never go to a man who deals in the
subject professionally . HARDY-1874-2,273.206

So I like the parson's opinion on law , the lawyer's on doctoring , the
doctor's on business , and my businessman's - that is , yours - on
morals . ' HARDY-1874-2,273.207

' And on love ' HARDY-1874-2,273.208

' My own . ' HARDY-1874-2,273.209

' I@ @'m afraid there@ @'s a hitch in that argument , ' said Oak , with
a grave smile . HARDY-1874-2,273.210

She did not reply at once , HARDY-1874-2,273.211

and then saying , ' Good evening , Mr. Oak , ' went away .
HARDY-1874-2,273.212

She had spoken frankly , and neither asked nor expected any reply from
Gabriel more satisfactory than that she had obtained .
HARDY-1874-2,273.213

Yet in the centremost parts of her complicated heart there existed at
this minute a little pang of disappointment , for a reason she would not
allow herself to recognize . HARDY-1874-2,273.214

Oak had not once wished her free that he might marry her himself -
HARDY-1874-2,273.215

had not once said , ' I could wait for you as well as he . '
HARDY-1874-2,273.216

That was the insect sting . Not that she would have listened to any
such hypothesis . HARDY-1874-2,273.217

O no - for was@ @n't she saying all the time that such thoughts of the
future were improper , HARDY-1874-2,273.218

and was@ @n't Gabriel far too poor a man to speak sentiment to her ?
HARDY-1874-2,273.219

Yet he might have just hinted about that old love of his , and asked ,
in a playful off-hand way , if he might speak of it .
HARDY-1874-2,273.220

It would have seemed pretty and sweet , if no more ;
HARDY-1874-2,273.221

and <P_274> then she would have shown how kind and inoffensive a woman's
' No ' can sometimes be . HARDY-1874-2,274.222

But to give such cool advice - the very advice she had asked for - it
ruffled our heroine all the afternoon . HARDY-1874-2,274.223

<heading>

LII

Converging Courses HARDY-1874-2,274.226

I

<$$heading>

Christmas-Eve came , HARDY-1874-2,274.229

and a party that Boldwood was to give in the evening was the great
subject of talk in Weatherbury . HARDY-1874-2,274.230

It was not that the rarity of Christmas parties in the parish made this
one a wonder , but that Boldwood should be the giver .
HARDY-1874-2,274.231

The announcement had had an abnormal and incongruous sound , as if one
should hear of croquet-playing in a cathedral aisle , or that some
much-respected judge was going upon the stage . HARDY-1874-2,274.232

That the party was intended to be a truly jovial one there was no room
for doubt . HARDY-1874-2,274.233

A large bough of mistletoe had been brought from the woods that day ,
and suspended in the hall of the {TEXT:missing_"the"} bachelor's home .
HARDY-1874-2,274.234

Holly and ivy had followed in armfuls . HARDY-1874-2,274.235

From six that morning till past noon the huge wood fire in the kitchen
roared and sparkled at its highest , the kettle , the saucepan , and the
three-legged pot appearing in the midst of the flames like Shadrach ,
Meshach , and Abednego ; HARDY-1874-2,274.236

moreover , roasting and basting operations were continually carried on
in front of the genial blaze . HARDY-1874-2,274.237

As it grew later the fire was made up in the large long hall into which
the staircase descended , HARDY-1874-2,274.238

and all encumbrances were cleared out for dancing .
HARDY-1874-2,274.239

The log which was to form the back-brand of the evening fire was the
uncleft trunk of a tree , so unwieldy that it could be neither brought
nor rolled to its place ; HARDY-1874-2,274.240

and accordingly two men were to be observed dragging and heaving it in
by chains and levers as the hour of assembly drew near .
HARDY-1874-2,274.241

In spite of all this , the spirit of revelry was wanting in the
atmosphere of the house . HARDY-1874-2,274.242

Such a thing had never been attempted before by its owner ,
HARDY-1874-2,274.243

and it was now done as by a wrench . HARDY-1874-2,274.244

Intended gaieties would insist upon appearing {TEXT:apprearing} like
solemn grandeurs , HARDY-1874-2,274.245

the organization of the whole effort was carried out coldly by hirelings
, HARDY-1874-2,274.246

and a shadow seemed to move about the rooms , saying that the
proceedings were unnatural to the place and the lone man who lived
therein , and hence not good . HARDY-1874-2,274.247

<heading>

II

<$$heading>

Bathsheba was at this time in her room , dressing for the event .
HARDY-1874-2,274.251

She had called for candles , HARDY-1874-2,274.252

and Liddy entered HARDY-1874-2,274.253

and placed one on each side of his mistress's glass .
HARDY-1874-2,274.254

<P_275>

' Do@ @n't go away , Liddy , ' said Bathsheba , almost timidly .
HARDY-1874-2,275.256

' I am foolishly agitated - HARDY-1874-2,275.257

I can@ @not tell why . HARDY-1874-2,275.258

I wish I had not been obliged to go to this dance ; HARDY-1874-2,275.259

but there@ @'s no escaping now . HARDY-1874-2,275.260

I have not spoken to Mr. Boldwood since the autumn , when I promised to
see him at Christmas on business , HARDY-1874-2,275.261

but I had no idea there was to be anything of this kind . '
HARDY-1874-2,275.262

' But I would go now , ' said Liddy , who was going with her ;
HARDY-1874-2,275.263

for Boldwood had been indiscriminate in his invitations .
HARDY-1874-2,275.264

' Yes , I shall make my appearance , of course , ' said Bathsheba .
HARDY-1874-2,275.265

' But I am <font> the cause <$$font> of the party , HARDY-1874-2,275.266

and that upsets me ! HARDY-1874-2,275.267

- Do@ @n't tell , Liddy . ' HARDY-1874-2,275.268

' O no , ma'am . HARDY-1874-2,275.269

You the cause of it , ma'am ? ' HARDY-1874-2,275.270

' Yes . I am the reason of the party - I . HARDY-1874-2,275.271

If it had not been for me , there would never have been one .
HARDY-1874-2,275.272

I ca@ @n't explain any more - HARDY-1874-2,275.273

there@ @'s no more to be explained . HARDY-1874-2,275.274

I wish I had never seen Weatherbury . ' HARDY-1874-2,275.275

' That@ @'s wicked of you - to wish to be worse off than you are . '
HARDY-1874-2,275.276

' No , Liddy . I have never been free from trouble since I have lived
here , HARDY-1874-2,275.277

and this party is likely to bring me more . HARDY-1874-2,275.278

Now , fetch my black silk dress , HARDY-1874-2,275.279

and see how it sits upon me . ' HARDY-1874-2,275.280

' But you will leave off that , surely , ma'am ? HARDY-1874-2,275.281

You have been a sort of widow fourteen months , HARDY-1874-2,275.282

and ought to brighten up a little on such a night as this . '
HARDY-1874-2,275.283

' Is it necessary ? HARDY-1874-2,275.284

No ; I will appear as usual , HARDY-1874-2,275.285

for if I were to wear any light dress people would say things about me ,
HARDY-1874-2,275.286

and I should seem to be rejoicing when I am solemn all the time .
HARDY-1874-2,275.287

The party does@ @n't suit me a bit ; HARDY-1874-2,275.288

but never mind , HARDY-1874-2,275.289

stay HARDY-1874-2,275.290

and help to finish me off . ' HARDY-1874-2,275.291

<heading>

III

<heading>

Boldwood was dressing also at this hour . HARDY-1874-2,275.295

A tailor from Casterbridge was with him , assisting him in the operation
of trying on a new coat that had just been brought home .
HARDY-1874-2,275.296

Never had Boldwood been so fastidious , unreasonable about the fit , and
generally difficult to please . HARDY-1874-2,275.297

The tailor walked round and round him , HARDY-1874-2,275.298

tugged at the waist , HARDY-1874-2,275.299

pulled the sleeve , HARDY-1874-2,275.300

pressed out the collar , HARDY-1874-2,275.301

and for the first time in his experience Boldwood was not bored .
HARDY-1874-2,275.302

Times had been when the farmer had exclaimed against all such niceties
as childish , HARDY-1874-2,275.303

but now no philosophic or hasty rebuke whatever was provoked by this man
for attaching as much importance to a crease in the coat as to an
earthquake in South America . HARDY-1874-2,275.304

Boldwood at last expressed himself nearly satisfied ,
HARDY-1874-2,275.305

and paid the bill , the tailor passing out of the door just as Oak came
in to report progress for the day . HARDY-1874-2,275.306

' Oh , Oak , ' said Boldwood . HARDY-1874-2,275.307

' I shall of course see you here to-night . HARDY-1874-2,275.308

Make yourself merry . HARDY-1874-2,275.309

I am determined that neither expense nor trouble shall be spared .
HARDY-1874-2,275.310

' I@ @'ll try to be here , sir , though perhaps it may not be very early
, ' said Gabriel , quietly . HARDY-1874-2,275.311

' I am glad indeed to see such a change in 'ee from what it used to be .
' HARDY-1874-2,275.312

' Yes - I must own it - I am bright to-night : cheerful and more than
cheerful - so much so that I am almost sad again with the sense that all
<P_276> of it is passing away . HARDY-1874-2,276.313

And sometimes , when I am excessively hopeful and blithe , a trouble is
looming in the distance : so that I often get to look upon gloom in me
with content , and to fear a happy mood . HARDY-1874-2,276.314

Still this may be absurd - HARDY-1874-2,276.315

I feel that it is absurd . HARDY-1874-2,276.316

Perhaps my day is dawning at last . ' HARDY-1874-2,276.317

' I hope it 'ill be a long and a fair one . ' HARDY-1874-2,276.318

' Thank you - thank you . HARDY-1874-2,276.319

Yet perhaps my cheerfulness rests on a slender hope .
HARDY-1874-2,276.320

And yet I trust my hope . HARDY-1874-2,276.321

It is faith , not hope . HARDY-1874-2,276.322

I think this time I reckon with my host . HARDY-1874-2,276.323

- Oak , my hands are a little shaky , or something :
HARDY-1874-2,276.324

I ca@ @n't tie this neckerchief properly . HARDY-1874-2,276.325

Perhaps you will tie it for me . HARDY-1874-2,276.326

The fact is , I have not been well lately , you know . '
HARDY-1874-2,276.327

' I am sorry to hear that , sir . ' HARDY-1874-2,276.328

' Oh , it@ @'s nothing . HARDY-1874-2,276.329

I want it done as well as you can , please . HARDY-1874-2,276.330

Is there any late knot in fashion , Oak ? ' HARDY-1874-2,276.331

' I do@ @n't know sir , ' said Oak . HARDY-1874-2,276.332

His tone had sunk to sadness . HARDY-1874-2,276.333

Boldwood approached Gabriel , HARDY-1874-2,276.334

and as Oak tied the neckerchief the farmer went on feverishly - ' Does a
woman keep her promise , Gabriel ? ' HARDY-1874-2,276.335

' If it is not inconvenient to her she may . ' HARDY-1874-2,276.336

' - Or rather an implied promise . ' HARDY-1874-2,276.337

' I wo@ @n't answer for her implying , ' said Oak , with faint
bitterness . HARDY-1874-2,276.338

' That@ @'s a word as full o' holes as a sieve with them . '
HARDY-1874-2,276.339

' Oak , do@ @n't talk like that . HARDY-1874-2,276.340

You have got quietly cynical lately - HARDY-1874-2,276.341

how is it ? HARDY-1874-2,276.342

We seem to have shifted our positions : HARDY-1874-2,276.343

I have become the young and hopeful man , and you the old and
unbelieving one . HARDY-1874-2,276.344

However , does a woman keep a promise , not to marry , but to enter on
an engagement to marry at some time ? HARDY-1874-2,276.345

Now you know women better than I - HARDY-1874-2,276.346

tell me . ' HARDY-1874-2,276.347

' I am afeard you honour my understanding too much .
HARDY-1874-2,276.348

However , she may keep such a promise , if it is made with an honest
meaning to repair a wrong . ' HARDY-1874-2,276.349

' It has not gone far yet , HARDY-1874-2,276.350

but I think it will soon - HARDY-1874-2,276.351

yes , I know it will , ' he said , in an impulsive whisper .
HARDY-1874-2,276.352

' I have pressed her upon the subject , HARDY-1874-2,276.353

and she inclines to be kind to me , and to think of me as a husband at a
long future time , HARDY-1874-2,276.354

and that@ @'s enough for me . HARDY-1874-2,276.355

How can I expect more ? HARDY-1874-2,276.356

She has a notion that a woman should not marry within seven years of her
husband's disappearance - that her own self should@ @n't , I mean -
because his body was not found . HARDY-1874-2,276.357

It may be merely this legal reason which influences her ,
HARDY-1874-2,276.358

or it may be a religious one , HARDY-1874-2,276.359

but she is reluctant to talk on the point . HARDY-1874-2,276.360

Yet she has promised - implied - that she will ratify an engagement
to-night . ' HARDY-1874-2,276.361

' Seven years , ' murmured Oak . HARDY-1874-2,276.362

' No , no - it@ @'s no such thing ! ' he said , with impatience .
HARDY-1874-2,276.363

' Five years , nine months , and a few days . HARDY-1874-2,276.364

Fifteen months nearly have passed since he vanished ,
HARDY-1874-2,276.365

and is there anything so wonderful in an engagement of little more than
five years ? ' HARDY-1874-2,276.366

<P_277>

' It seems long in a forward view . HARDY-1874-2,277.368

Do@ @n't build too much upon such promises , sir . HARDY-1874-2,277.369

Remember , you have once be'n deceived . HARDY-1874-2,277.370

Her meaning may be good ; HARDY-1874-2,277.371

but there - she@ @'s young yet . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.372

' Deceived ? Never ! ' said Boldwood , vehemently .
HARDY-1874-2,277.373

' She never promised me at that first time , HARDY-1874-2,277.374

and hence she did not break her promise ! HARDY-1874-2,277.375

If she promises me , she@ @'ll marry me . HARDY-1874-2,277.376

Bathsheba is a woman to her word . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.377

<heading>

IV

<$$heading>

Troy was sitting in a corner of The White Hart tavern at Casterbridge ,
smoking and drinking a steaming mixture from a glass .
HARDY-1874-2,277.381

A knock was given at the door , HARDY-1874-2,277.382

and Pennyways entered . HARDY-1874-2,277.383

' Well , have you seen him ? ' Troy inquired , pointing to a chair .
HARDY-1874-2,277.384

' Boldwood ? ' HARDY-1874-2,277.385

' No - Lawyer Long . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.386

' He wad@ @n't at home . HARDY-1874-2,277.387

I went there first , too . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.388

' That@ @'s a nuisance . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.389

' 'T@ @is rather , I suppose . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.390

' Yet I do@ @n't see that , because a man appears to be drowned and was
not , he should be liable for anything . HARDY-1874-2,277.391

I sha@ @n't ask any lawyer - not I . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.392

' But that@ @'s not it , exactly . HARDY-1874-2,277.393

If an man changes his name and so forth , and takes steps to deceive the
world and his own wife , he@ @'s a cheat , HARDY-1874-2,277.394

and that in the eye of the law is ayless a rogue , HARDY-1874-2,277.395

and that is ayless a lammocken vagabond ; HARDY-1874-2,277.396

and that@ @'s a punishable situation . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.397

' Ha-ha ! Well done , Pennyways . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.398

Troy had laughed , HARDY-1874-2,277.399

but it was with some anxiety that he said , ' Now , what I want to know
is this , HARDY-1874-2,277.400

do you think there@ @'s really anything going on between her and
Boldwood ? HARDY-1874-2,277.401

Upon my soul , I should never have believed it ! HARDY-1874-2,277.402

How she must detest me ! HARDY-1874-2,277.403

Have you found out whether she has encouraged him ? '
HARDY-1874-2,277.404

' I hae@ @n't been able to learn . HARDY-1874-2,277.405

There@ @'s a deal of feeling on his side seemingly ,
HARDY-1874-2,277.406

but I do@ @n't answer for her . HARDY-1874-2,277.407

I did@ @n't know a word about any such thing till yesterday ,
HARDY-1874-2,277.408

and all I heard then was that she was gwine to the party at his house
to-night . HARDY-1874-2,277.409

This is the first time she has ever gone there , they say .
HARDY-1874-2,277.410

And they say that she@ @'ve not so much as spoke to him since they were
at Greenhill Fair : HARDY-1874-2,277.411

but what can folk believe o@ @'t ? HARDY-1874-2,277.412

However , she@ @'s not fond of him - quite offish and quite careless , I
know . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.413

' I@ @'m not so sure of that ... . HARDY-1874-2,277.414

She@ @'s a handsome woman , Pennyways , is she not ?
HARDY-1874-2,277.415

Own that you never saw a finer or more splendid creature in your life .
HARDY-1874-2,277.416

Upon my honour , when I set eyes upon her that day I wondered what I
could have been made of to be able to leave her by herself so long .
HARDY-1874-2,277.417

And then I was hampered with that bothering show , which I@ @'m free of
at last , thank the stars . ' HARDY-1874-2,277.418

He smoked on awhile , HARDY-1874-2,277.419

and <P_278> then added , ' How did she look when you passed by yesterday
? ' HARDY-1874-2,278.420

' Oh , she took no great heed of me , ye may well fancy ;
HARDY-1874-2,278.421

but she looked well enough , far@ @'s I know . HARDY-1874-2,278.422

Just flashed her haughty eyes upon my poor scram body ,
HARDY-1874-2,278.423

and then let them go past me to what was yond , much as if I@ @'d been
no more than a leafless tree . HARDY-1874-2,278.424

She had just got off her mare to look at the last wring-down of cider
for the year ; HARDY-1874-2,278.425

she had been riding , HARDY-1874-2,278.426

and so her colours were up and her breath rather quick , so that her
bosom plimmed and fell - plimmed and fell - every time plain to my eye .
HARDY-1874-2,278.427

Ay , and there were the fellers round her wringing down the cheese and
bustling about and saying , " Ware o' the pommy , ma'am :
HARDY-1874-2,278.428

't@ @will spoil yer gown . " HARDY-1874-2,278.429

" Never mind me , " says she . HARDY-1874-2,278.430

Then Gabe brought her some of the new cider , HARDY-1874-2,278.431

and she must needs go drinking it through a strawmote , and not in a
nateral way at all . HARDY-1874-2,278.432

" Liddy , " says she , " bring indoors a few gallons , and I@ @'ll make
some cider-wine . " HARDY-1874-2,278.433

Sergeant , I was no more to her than a morsel of scroff in the
fuel-house ! ' HARDY-1874-2,278.434

' I must go and find her out at once - HARDY-1874-2,278.435

O yes , I see that - HARDY-1874-2,278.436

I must go . HARDY-1874-2,278.437

Oak is head man still , is@ @n't he ? ' HARDY-1874-2,278.438

' Yes , ' a b'lieve . HARDY-1874-2,278.439

And at Little Weatherbury Farm too . HARDY-1874-2,278.440

He manages everything . ' HARDY-1874-2,278.441

' 'T@ @will puzzle him to manage her , or any other man of his compass !
' HARDY-1874-2,278.442

' I do@ @n't know about that . HARDY-1874-2,278.443

She ca@ @n't do without him , HARDY-1874-2,278.444

and knowing it well he@ @'s pretty independent . HARDY-1874-2,278.445

And she@ @'ve a few soft corners to her mind , though I@ @'ve never been
able to get into one , the devil@ @'s in@ @'t ! ' HARDY-1874-2,278.446

' Ah , baily , she@ @'s a notch above you , HARDY-1874-2,278.447

and you must own it : HARDY-1874-2,278.448

a higher class of animal - a finer tissue . HARDY-1874-2,278.449

However , stick to me . and neither this haughty goddess , dashing
piece of womanhood , Juno-wife of mine <paren> Juno was a goddess , you
know <$$paren> , nor anybody else shall hurt you . HARDY-1874-2,278.450

But all this wants looking into , I perceive . HARDY-1874-2,278.451

What with one thing and another , I see that my work is well cut out for
me . ' HARDY-1874-2,278.452

<heading>

V

<$$heading>

' How do I look to-night , Liddy ? ' said Bathsheba , giving a final
adjustment to her dress before leaving the glass . HARDY-1874-2,278.456

' I never saw you look so well before . HARDY-1874-2,278.457

Yes - I@ @'ll tell you when you looked like it - HARDY-1874-2,278.458

that night , a year and a half ago , when you came in so wild-like , and
scolded us for making remarks about you and Mr. Troy . '
HARDY-1874-2,278.459

' Everybody will think that I am setting myself to captivate Mr.
Boldwood , I suppose , ' she murmured . HARDY-1874-2,278.460

' At least they@ @'ll say so . HARDY-1874-2,278.461

Ca@ @n't my hair be brushed down a little flatter ?
HARDY-1874-2,278.462

I dread going - HARDY-1874-2,278.463

yet I dread the risk of wounding him by staying away . '
HARDY-1874-2,278.464

<P_279>

' Anyhow , ma'am , you ca@ @n't well be dressed plainer than you are ,
unless you go in sackcloth at once . HARDY-1874-2,279.466

{COM:amalgam} 'T@ @is your excitement is what makes you look so
noticeable to-night . ' HARDY-1874-2,279.467

' I do@ @n't know what@ @'s the matter , HARDY-1874-2,279.468

I feel wretched at one time , and buoyant at another .
HARDY-1874-2,279.469

I wish I could have continued quite alone as I have been for the last
year or so , with no hopes and no fears , and no pleasure and no grief .
' HARDY-1874-2,279.470

' Now just suppose Mr. Boldwood should ask you - only just suppose it -
to run away with him , HARDY-1874-2,279.471

what would you do , ma'am ? ' HARDY-1874-2,279.472

' Liddy - none of that , ' said Bathsheba , gravely .
HARDY-1874-2,279.473

' Mind , I wo@ @n't hear joking on any such matter .
HARDY-1874-2,279.474

Do you hear ? ' HARDY-1874-2,279.475

' I beg pardon , ma'am . HARDY-1874-2,279.476

But knowing what rum things we women be , I just said -
HARDY-1874-2,279.477

however , I wo@ @n't speak of it again . ' HARDY-1874-2,279.478

' No marrying for me yet for many a year ; HARDY-1874-2,279.479

if ever , 't@ @will be for reasons very , very different from those you
think , or others will believe ! HARDY-1874-2,279.480

Now get my cloak , HARDY-1874-2,279.481

for it is time to go . ' HARDY-1874-2,279.482

<heading>

VI

<$$heading>

' Oak , ' said Boldwood , ' before you go I want to mention what has
been passing in my mind lately - HARDY-1874-2,279.486

that little arrangement we made about your share in the farm I mean .
HARDY-1874-2,279.487

That share is small , too small , considering how little I attend to
business now , and how much time and thought you give to it .
HARDY-1874-2,279.488

Well , since the world is brightening for me , I want to show my sense
of it by increasing your proportion in the partnership .
HARDY-1874-2,279.489

I@ @'ll make a memorandum of the arrangement which struck me as likely
to be convenient , HARDY-1874-2,279.490

for I have@ @n't time to talk about it now ; HARDY-1874-2,279.491

and then we@ @'ll discuss it at our leisure . HARDY-1874-2,279.492

My intention is ultimately to retire from the management altogether ,
HARDY-1874-2,279.493

and until you can take all the expenditure upon your shoulders , I@ @'ll
be a sleeping partner in the stock . HARDY-1874-2,279.494

Then , if I marry her - and I hope - I feel I shall , why - '
HARDY-1874-2,279.495

' Pray do@ @n't speak of it , sir , ' said Oak , hastily .
HARDY-1874-2,279.496

' We do@ @n't know what may happen . HARDY-1874-2,279.497

So many upsets may befall 'ee . HARDY-1874-2,279.498

There@ @'s many a slip , as they say - HARDY-1874-2,279.499

and I would advise you - I know you@ @'ll pardon me this once - not to
be <font> too sure . <$$font> ' HARDY-1874-2,279.500

' I know , I know . HARDY-1874-2,279.501

But the feeling I have about increasing your share is on account of what
I know of you . HARDY-1874-2,279.502

Oak , I have learnt a little about your secret : HARDY-1874-2,279.503

your interest in her is more than that of bailiff for an employer .
HARDY-1874-2,279.504

But you have behaved like a man , HARDY-1874-2,279.505

and I , as a sort of successful rival - successful partly through your
goodness of heart - should like definitely to show my sense of your
friendship under what must have been a great pain to you . '
HARDY-1874-2,279.506

' O that@ @'s not necessary , thank 'ee , ' said Oak , hurriedly .
HARDY-1874-2,279.507

' I must get used to such as that ; HARDY-1874-2,279.508

other men have , HARDY-1874-2,279.509

and so shall I . ' HARDY-1874-2,279.510

Oak then left him . HARDY-1874-2,279.511

He was uneasy on Boldwood's account , HARDY-1874-2,279.512

for he saw anew that this constant passion of the farmer made him not
the man he once had been . HARDY-1874-2,279.513

<P_280>

As Boldwood continued awhile in his room alone - ready and dressed to
receive his company - the mood of anxiety about his appearance seemed to
pass away , and to be succeeded by a deep solemnity .
HARDY-1874-2,280.515

He looked out of the window , HARDY-1874-2,280.516

and regarded the dim outline of the trees upon the sky , and the
twilight deepening to darkness . HARDY-1874-2,280.517

Then he went to a locked closet , HARDY-1874-2,280.518

and took from a locked drawer therein a small circular case the size of
a pill-box , HARDY-1874-2,280.519

and was about to put it into his pocket . HARDY-1874-2,280.520

But he lingered to open the cover and take a momentary glance inside .
HARDY-1874-2,280.521

It contained a woman's finger-ring , set all the way round with small
diamonds , HARDY-1874-2,280.522

and from its appearance had evidently been recently purchased .
HARDY-1874-2,280.523

Boldwood's eyes dwelt upon its many sparkles a long time , though that
its material aspect concerned him little was plain from his manner and
mien , which were those of a mind following out the presumed thread of
that jewel's future history . HARDY-1874-2,280.524

The noise of wheels at the front of the house became audible .
HARDY-1874-2,280.525

Boldwood closed the box , HARDY-1874-2,280.526

stowed it away carefully in his pocket , HARDY-1874-2,280.527

and went out upon the landing . HARDY-1874-2,280.528

The old man who was his indoor factotum came at the same moment to the
foot of the stairs . HARDY-1874-2,280.529

' They be coming , sir - lots of 'em - a-foot and a-driving ! '
HARDY-1874-2,280.530

' I was coming down this moment . HARDY-1874-2,280.531

Those wheels I heard - is it Mrs. Troy ? ' HARDY-1874-2,280.532

' No , sir - 't@ @is not she yet . ' HARDY-1874-2,280.533

A reserved and sombre expression had returned to Boldwood's face again ,
HARDY-1874-2,280.534

but it poorly cloaked his feelings when he pronounced Bathsheba's name ;
HARDY-1874-2,280.535

and his feverish anxiety continued to show its existence by a galloping
motion of his fingers upon the side of his thigh as he went down the
stairs . HARDY-1874-2,280.536

<heading>

VII

<$$heading>

' How does this cover me ? ' said Troy to Pennyways .
HARDY-1874-2,280.540

' Nobody would recognize me now , I@ @'m sure . ' HARDY-1874-2,280.541

He was buttoning on a heavy grey overcoat of Noachian cut , with cape
and high collar , the latter being erect and rigid , like a girdling
wall , and nearly reaching to the verge of a travelling cap which was
pulled down over his ears . HARDY-1874-2,280.542

Pennyways snuffed the candle , HARDY-1874-2,280.543

and then looked up HARDY-1874-2,280.544

and deliberately inspected Troy . HARDY-1874-2,280.545

' You@ @'ve made up your mind to go then ? ' he said .
HARDY-1874-2,280.546

' Made up my mind ? HARDY-1874-2,280.547

Yes ; of course I have . ' HARDY-1874-2,280.548

' Why not write to her ? HARDY-1874-2,280.549

'T@ @is a very queer corner that you have got into , sergeant .
HARDY-1874-2,280.550

You see all these things will come to light if you go back ,
HARDY-1874-2,280.551

and they wo@ @n't sound well at all . HARDY-1874-2,280.552

Faith , if I was you I@ @'d even bide as you be - a single man of the
name of Francis . HARDY-1874-2,280.553

A good wife is good , HARDY-1874-2,280.554

but the best wife is not so good as no wife at all .
HARDY-1874-2,280.555

Now that@ @'s my <P_281> outspoken mind , HARDY-1874-2,281.556

and I@ @'ve been called a long-headed feller here and there . '
HARDY-1874-2,281.557

' All nonsense ! ' said Troy , angrily . HARDY-1874-2,281.558

' There she is with plenty of money , and a house and farm , and horses
, and comfort , HARDY-1874-2,281.559

and here am I living from hand to mouth - a needy adventurer .
HARDY-1874-2,281.560

Besides , it is no use talking now ; HARDY-1874-2,281.561

it is too late , HARDY-1874-2,281.562

and I am glad of it ; HARDY-1874-2,281.563

I@ @'ve been seen and recognized here this very afternoon .
HARDY-1874-2,281.564

I should have gone back to her the day after the fair , if it had@ @n't
been for you talking about the law , and rubbish about getting a
separation ; HARDY-1874-2,281.565

and I wo@ @n't put it off any longer . HARDY-1874-2,281.566

What the deuce put it into my head to run away at all , I ca@ @n't think
! HARDY-1874-2,281.567

Humbugging sentiment - that@ @'s what it was . HARDY-1874-2,281.568

But what man on earth was to know that his wife would be in such a hurry
to get rid of his name ! ' HARDY-1874-2,281.569

' I should have known it . HARDY-1874-2,281.570

She@ @'s bad enough for anything . ' HARDY-1874-2,281.571

' Pennyways , mind who you are talking to . ' HARDY-1874-2,281.572

' Well , sergeant , all I say is this , that if I were you I@ @'d go
abroad again where I came from - HARDY-1874-2,281.573

't@ @is@ @n't too late to do it now . HARDY-1874-2,281.574

I would@ @n't stir up the business and get a bad name for the sake of
living with her - HARDY-1874-2,281.575

for all that about your play-acting is sure to come out , you know ,
although you think otherwise . HARDY-1874-2,281.576

My eyes and limbs , there@ @'ll be a racket if you go back just now - in
the middle of Boldwood's Christmasing ! ' HARDY-1874-2,281.577

' H'm , yes . I expect I shall not be a very welcome guest if he has
her there , ' said the sergeant , with a slight laugh .
HARDY-1874-2,281.578

' A sort of Alonzo the Brave ; HARDY-1874-2,281.579

and when I go in the guests will sit in silence and fear ,
HARDY-1874-2,281.580

and all laughter and pleasure will be hushed , and the lights in the
chamber burn blue , and the worms - HARDY-1874-2,281.581

Ugh , horrible - HARDY-1874-2,281.582

Ring for some more brandy , Pennyways , HARDY-1874-2,281.583

I felt an awful shudder just then ! HARDY-1874-2,281.584

Well , what is there besides ? HARDY-1874-2,281.585

A stick - I must have a walking-stick . ' HARDY-1874-2,281.586

Pennyways now felt himself to be in something of a difficulty ,
HARDY-1874-2,281.587

for should Bathsheba and Troy become reconciled it would be necessary to
regain her good opinion if he would secure the patronage of her husband
. HARDY-1874-2,281.588

' I sometimes think she likes you yet , and is a good woman at bottom ,
' he said , as a saving sentence . HARDY-1874-2,281.589

' But there@ @'s no telling to a certainty from a body's outside .
HARDY-1874-2,281.590

Well , you@ @'ll do as you like about going , of course , sergeant ,
HARDY-1874-2,281.591

and as for me , I@ @'ll do as you tell me . ' HARDY-1874-2,281.592

' Now , let me see what the time is , ' said Troy , after emptying his
glass in one draught as he stood . HARDY-1874-2,281.593

' Half-@ @past six o'clock . HARDY-1874-2,281.594

I shall not hurry along the road , HARDY-1874-2,281.595

and shall be there then before nine . ' HARDY-1874-2,281.596

<P_282>

<heading>

LIII

Concurritur - Horae Momento HARDY-1874-2,282.600

<$$heading>

Outside the front of Boldwood's house a group of men stood in the dark ,
with their faces towards the door , which occasionally opened and closed
for the passage of some guest or servant , when a golden rod of light
would stripe the ground for the moment and vanish again , leaving
nothing outside but the glowworm shine of the pale lamp amid the
evergreens over the door . HARDY-1874-2,282.602

' He was seen in Casterbridge this afternoon - HARDY-1874-2,282.603

so the boy said , ' one of them remarked in a whisper .
HARDY-1874-2,282.604

' And I for one believe it . HARDY-1874-2,282.605

His body was never found , you know . ' HARDY-1874-2,282.606

' 'T@ @is a strange story , ' said the next . HARDY-1874-2,282.607

' You may depend upon@ @'t that she knows nothing about it . '
HARDY-1874-2,282.608

' Not a word . ' HARDY-1874-2,282.609

' Perhaps he do@ @n't mean that she shall , ' said another man .
HARDY-1874-2,282.610

' If he@ @'s alive and here in the neighbourhood , he means mischief , '
said the first . HARDY-1874-2,282.611

' Poor young thing : I do pity her , if 't@ @is true .
HARDY-1874-2,282.612

He@ @'ll drag her to the dogs . ' HARDY-1874-2,282.613

' O no ; he@ @'ll settle down quiet enough , ' said one disposed to take
a more hopeful view of the case . HARDY-1874-2,282.614

' What a fool she must have been ever to have had anything to do with
the man ! HARDY-1874-2,282.615

She is so self-willed and independent too , that one is more minded to
say it serves her right than pity her . ' HARDY-1874-2,282.616

' No , no ! I do@ @n't hold with 'ee there . HARDY-1874-2,282.617

She was no otherwise than a girl mind , HARDY-1874-2,282.618

and how could she tell what the man was made of ? HARDY-1874-2,282.619

If 't@ @is really true , 't@ @is too hard a punishment , and more than
she ought to hae {COM:sic} . HARDY-1874-2,282.620

- Hullo , who@ @'s that ? ' HARDY-1874-2,282.621

This was to some footsteps that were heard approaching .
HARDY-1874-2,282.622

' William Smallbury , ' said a dim figure in the shades , coming up and
joining them . HARDY-1874-2,282.623

' Dark as a hedge , to-night , is@ @n't it ? HARDY-1874-2,282.624

I all but missed the plank over the river ath'art there in the bottom -
HARDY-1874-2,282.625

never did such a thing before in my life . HARDY-1874-2,282.626

Be ye any of Boldwood's workfolk ? ' HARDY-1874-2,282.627

He peered into their faces . HARDY-1874-2,282.628

' Yes - all o' us . HARDY-1874-2,282.629

We met here a few minutes ago . ' HARDY-1874-2,282.630

' Oh , I hear now - HARDY-1874-2,282.631

that@ @'s Sam Samway : HARDY-1874-2,282.632

thought I knowed the voice , too . HARDY-1874-2,282.633

Going in ? ' HARDY-1874-2,282.634

' Presently . HARDY-1874-2,282.635

But I say , William , ' Samway whispered , ' have ye heard this strange
tale ? ' HARDY-1874-2,282.636

' What - that about Sergeant Troy being seen , d'@ @ye mean , souls ? '
said Smallbury , also lowering his voice . HARDY-1874-2,282.637

' Ay : in Casterbridge . ' HARDY-1874-2,282.638

<P_283>

' Yes , I have . HARDY-1874-2,283.640

Laban Tall named a hint of it to me but now - HARDY-1874-2,283.641

but I do@ @n't think it . HARDY-1874-2,283.642

Hark , here Laban comes himself , ' a b'lieve . ' HARDY-1874-2,283.643

A footstep drew near . HARDY-1874-2,283.644

' Laban ? ' HARDY-1874-2,283.645

' Yes , 't@ @is I , ' said Tall . HARDY-1874-2,283.646

' Have ye heard any more about that ? ' HARDY-1874-2,283.647

' No , ' said Tall , joining the group . HARDY-1874-2,283.648

' And I@ @'m inclined to think we@ @'d better keep quiet .
HARDY-1874-2,283.649

If so be 't@ @is not true , 't@ @will flurry her , and do her much harm
to repeat it ; HARDY-1874-2,283.650

and if so be 't@ @is true , 't@ @will do no good to forestall her time
o' trouble . HARDY-1874-2,283.651

God send that it mid be a lie , HARDY-1874-2,283.652

for though Henery Fray and some of 'em do speak against her , she@ @'s
never been anything but fair to me . HARDY-1874-2,283.653

She@ @'s hot and hasty , HARDY-1874-2,283.654

but she@ @'s a brave girl who@ @'ll never tell a lie however much the
truth may harm her , HARDY-1874-2,283.655

and I@ @'ve no cause to wish her evil . ' HARDY-1874-2,283.656

' She never do tell women's little lies , HARDY-1874-2,283.657

that@ @'s true ; HARDY-1874-2,283.658

and 't@ @is a thing that can be said of very few . HARDY-1874-2,283.659

Ay , all the harm she thinks she says to yer face : HARDY-1874-2,283.660

there@ @'s nothing underhand wi' her . ' HARDY-1874-2,283.661

They stood silent then , every man busied with his own thoughts , during
which interval sounds of merriment could be heard within .
HARDY-1874-2,283.662

Then the front door again opened , HARDY-1874-2,283.663

the rays streamed out , HARDY-1874-2,283.664

the wellknown form of Boldwood was seen in the rectangular area of light
, HARDY-1874-2,283.665

the door closed , HARDY-1874-2,283.666

and Boldwood walked slowly down the path . HARDY-1874-2,283.667

' 'T@ @is master , ' one of the men whispered , as he neared them .
HARDY-1874-2,283.668

' We@ @'d better stand quiet - HARDY-1874-2,283.669

he@ @'ll go in again directly . HARDY-1874-2,283.670

He would think it unseemly o' us to be loitering here . '
HARDY-1874-2,283.671

Boldwood came on , HARDY-1874-2,283.672

and passed by the men without seeing them , they being under the bushes
on the grass . HARDY-1874-2,283.673

He paused , HARDY-1874-2,283.674

leant over the gate , HARDY-1874-2,283.675

and breathed a long breath . HARDY-1874-2,283.676

They heard low words come from him . HARDY-1874-2,283.677

' I hope to God she@ @'ll come , HARDY-1874-2,283.678

or this night will be nothing but misery to me ! HARDY-1874-2,283.679

O my darling , my darling , why do you keep me in suspense like this ?
' HARDY-1874-2,283.680

He said this to himself , HARDY-1874-2,283.681

and they all distinctly heard it . HARDY-1874-2,283.682

Boldwood remained silent after that , HARDY-1874-2,283.683

and the noise from indoors was again just audible , until , a few
minutes later , light wheels could be distinguished coming down the hill
. HARDY-1874-2,283.684

They drew nearer , HARDY-1874-2,283.685

and ceased at the gate . HARDY-1874-2,283.686

Boldwood hastened back to the door , HARDY-1874-2,283.687

and opened it ; HARDY-1874-2,283.688

and the light shone upon Bathsheba coming up the path .
HARDY-1874-2,283.689

Boldwood compressed his emotion to mere welcome : HARDY-1874-2,283.690

the men marked her light laugh and apology as she met him :
HARDY-1874-2,283.691

he took her into the house ; HARDY-1874-2,283.692

and the door closed again . HARDY-1874-2,283.693

' Gracious heaven , I did@ @n't know it was like that with him ! ' said
one of the men . HARDY-1874-2,283.694

' I thought that fancy of his was over long ago . '
HARDY-1874-2,283.695

' You do@ @n't know much of master , if you thought that , ' said Samway
. HARDY-1874-2,283.696

' I would@ @n't he should know we heard what 'a said for the world , '
<P_284> remarked a third . HARDY-1874-2,284.697

' I wish we had told of the report at once , ' the first uneasily
continued . HARDY-1874-2,284.698

' More harm may come of this than we know of . HARDY-1874-2,284.699

Poor Mr. Boldwood , it will be hard upon en . HARDY-1874-2,284.700

I wish Troy was in - HARDY-1874-2,284.701

Well , God forgive me for such a wish ! HARDY-1874-2,284.702

A scoundrel to play a poor wife such tricks . HARDY-1874-2,284.703

Nothing has prospered in Weatherbury since he came here .
HARDY-1874-2,284.704

And now I@ @'ve no heart to go in . HARDY-1874-2,284.705

Let@ @'s look into Warren's for a few minutes first , shall us ,
neighbours ? ' HARDY-1874-2,284.706

Samway , Tall , and Smallbury agreed to go to Warren's ,
HARDY-1874-2,284.707

and went out at the gate , the remaining ones entering the house .
HARDY-1874-2,284.708

The three soon drew near the malt-house , approaching it from the
adjoining orchard , and not by way of the street . HARDY-1874-2,284.709

The pane of glass was illuminated as usual . HARDY-1874-2,284.710

Smallbury was a little in advance of the rest , when , pausing , he
turned suddenly to his companions and said , ' Hist ! See there . '
HARDY-1874-2,284.711

The light from the pane was now perceived to be shining not upon the
ivied wall as usual , but upon some object close to the glass .
HARDY-1874-2,284.712

It was a human face . HARDY-1874-2,284.713

' Let@ @'s come closer , ' whispered Samway ; HARDY-1874-2,284.714

and they approached on tiptoe . HARDY-1874-2,284.715

There was no disbelieving the report any longer . HARDY-1874-2,284.716

Troy's face was almost close to the pane , HARDY-1874-2,284.717

and he was looking in . HARDY-1874-2,284.718

Not only was he looking in , HARDY-1874-2,284.719

but he appeared to have been arrested by a conversation which was in
progress in the malt-house , the voices of the interlocutors being those
of Oak and the maltster . HARDY-1874-2,284.720

' The spree is all in her honour , is@ @n't it - hey ? ' said the old
man . HARDY-1874-2,284.721

' Although he made believe 't@ @is only keeping up o' Christmas ? '
HARDY-1874-2,284.722

' I can@ @not say , ' replied Oak . HARDY-1874-2,284.723

' O 't@ @is true enough , faith . HARDY-1874-2,284.724

I can@ @not understand Farmer Boldwood being such a fool at his time of
life as to ho and hanker after thik woman in the way 'a do ,
HARDY-1874-2,284.725

and she not care a bit about en . ' HARDY-1874-2,284.726

The men , after recognizing Troy's features , withdrew across the
orchard as quietly as they had come . HARDY-1874-2,284.727

The air was big with Bathsheba's fortunes to-night :
HARDY-1874-2,284.728

every word everywhere concerned her . HARDY-1874-2,284.729

When they were quite out of earshot all by one instinct paused .
HARDY-1874-2,284.730

' It gave me quite a turn - his face , ' said Tall , breathing .
HARDY-1874-2,284.731

' And so it did me , ' said Samway . HARDY-1874-2,284.732

' What@ @'s to be done ? HARDY-1874-2,284.733

' I do@ @n't see that 't@ @is any business of ours , ' Smallbury
murmured dubiously . HARDY-1874-2,284.734

' But it is ! HARDY-1874-2,284.735

'T@ @is a thing which is everybody's business , ' said Samway .
HARDY-1874-2,284.736

' We know very well that master@ @'s on a wrong tack , and that she@ @'s
quite in the dark , HARDY-1874-2,284.737

and we should let 'em know at once . HARDY-1874-2,284.738

Laban , you know her best - HARDY-1874-2,284.739

you@ @'d better go and ask to speak to her . ' HARDY-1874-2,284.740

' I bai@ @n't fit for any such thing , ' said Laban , nervously ,
HARDY-1874-2,284.741

I should think William ought to do it if anybody . HARDY-1874-2,284.742

He@ @'s oldest . ' HARDY-1874-2,284.743

' I shall have nothing to do with it , ' said Smallbury .
HARDY-1874-2,284.744

' 'T@ @is a ticklish <P_285> business altogether . HARDY-1874-2,285.745

Why , he@ @'ll go on to her himself in a few minutes ye@ @'ll see . '
HARDY-1874-2,285.746

' We do@ @n't know that he will . HARDY-1874-2,285.747

Come , Laban . ' HARDY-1874-2,285.748

' Very well , if I must I must , I suppose , ' Tall reluctantly answered
. HARDY-1874-2,285.749

' What must I say ? ' HARDY-1874-2,285.750

' Just ask to see master . ' HARDY-1874-2,285.751

' O no ; I sha@ @n't speak to Mr. Boldwood . HARDY-1874-2,285.752

If I tell anybody , 't@ @will be mistress . ' HARDY-1874-2,285.753

' Very well , ' said Samway . HARDY-1874-2,285.754

Laban then went to the door . HARDY-1874-2,285.755

When he opened it the hum of bustle rolled out as a wave upon a still
strand - the assemblage being immediately inside the hall -
HARDY-1874-2,285.756

and was deadened to a murmur as he closed it again .
HARDY-1874-2,285.757

Each man waited intently , HARDY-1874-2,285.758

and looked around at the dark tree tops gently rocking against the sky
and occasionally shivering in a slight wind , as if he took interest in
the scene , which neither did . HARDY-1874-2,285.759

One of them began walking up and down , HARDY-1874-2,285.760

and then came to where he started from HARDY-1874-2,285.761

and stopped again , with a sense that walking was a thing not worth
doing now . HARDY-1874-2,285.762

' I should think Laban must have seen mistress by this time , ' said
Smallbury , breaking the silence . HARDY-1874-2,285.763

' Perhaps she wo@ @n't come and speak to him . ' HARDY-1874-2,285.764

The door opened . HARDY-1874-2,285.765

Tall appeared , HARDY-1874-2,285.766

and joined them . HARDY-1874-2,285.767

' Well ? ' said both . HARDY-1874-2,285.768

' I did@ @n't like to ask for her after all , ' Laban faltered out .
HARDY-1874-2,285.769

' They were all in such a stir , trying to put a little spirit into the
party . HARDY-1874-2,285.770

Somehow the fun seems to hang fire , though everything@ @'s there that a
heart can desire , HARDY-1874-2,285.771

and I could@ @n't for my soul interfere and throw damp upon it -
HARDY-1874-2,285.772

if 't@ @was to save my life , I could@ @n't ! ' HARDY-1874-2,285.773

' I suppose we had better all go in together , ' said Samway , gloomily
. HARDY-1874-2,285.774

' Perhaps I may have a chance of saying a word to master . '
HARDY-1874-2,285.775

So the men entered the hall , which was the room selected and arranged
for the gathering because of its size . HARDY-1874-2,285.776

The younger men and maids were at last just beginning a dance .
HARDY-1874-2,285.777

Bathsheba had been perplexed how to act , HARDY-1874-2,285.778

for she was not much more than a slim young maid herself ,
HARDY-1874-2,285.779

and the weight of stateliness sat heavy upon her . HARDY-1874-2,285.780

Sometimes she thought she ought not to have come under any circumstances
; HARDY-1874-2,285.781

then she considered what cold unkindness that would have been ,
HARDY-1874-2,285.782

and finally resolved upon the middle course of staying for about an hour
only , and gliding off unobserved , having from the first made up her
mind that she could on no account dance , sing , or take any active part
in the proceedings . HARDY-1874-2,285.783

Her allotted hour having been passed in chatting and looking on ,
Bathsheba told Liddy not to hurry herself , HARDY-1874-2,285.784

and went to the small <P_286> parlour to prepare for departure , which ,
like the hall , was decorated with holly and ivy , and well lighted up .
HARDY-1874-2,286.785

Nobody was in the room , HARDY-1874-2,286.786

but she had hardly been there a moment when the master of the house
entered . HARDY-1874-2,286.787

' Mrs. Troy - you are not going ? ' he said . HARDY-1874-2,286.788

' We@ @'ve hardly begun ! ' HARDY-1874-2,286.789

' If you@ @'ll excuse me , I should like to go now . '
HARDY-1874-2,286.790

Her manner was restive , HARDY-1874-2,286.791

for she remembered her promise , HARDY-1874-2,286.792

and imagined what he was about to say . HARDY-1874-2,286.793

' But as it is not late , ' she added , ' I can walk home , and leave my
man and Liddy to come when they choose . ' HARDY-1874-2,286.794

' I@ @'ve been trying to get an opportunity of speaking to you , ' said
Boldwood . HARDY-1874-2,286.795

' You know perhaps what I long to say ? ' HARDY-1874-2,286.796

Bathsheba silently looked on the floor . HARDY-1874-2,286.797

' You do give it ? ' he said , eagerly . HARDY-1874-2,286.798

' What ? ' she whispered . HARDY-1874-2,286.799

' Now , that@ @'s evasion ! HARDY-1874-2,286.800

Why , the promise . HARDY-1874-2,286.801

I do@ @n't want to intrude upon you at all , or to let it become known
to anybody . HARDY-1874-2,286.802

But do give your word ! HARDY-1874-2,286.803

A mere business compact , you know , between two people who are beyond
the influence of passion . ' HARDY-1874-2,286.804

Boldwood knew how false this picture was as regarded himself ;
HARDY-1874-2,286.805

but he had proved that it was the only tone in which she would allow him
to approach her . HARDY-1874-2,286.806

' A promise to marry me at the end of five years and three-quarters .
HARDY-1874-2,286.807

You owe it to me ! ' HARDY-1874-2,286.808

' I feel that I do , ' said Bathsheba ; ' that is , if you demand it .
HARDY-1874-2,286.809

But I am a changed woman - an unhappy woman - and not - not - '
HARDY-1874-2,286.810

' You are still a very beautiful woman , ' said Boldwood .
HARDY-1874-2,286.811

Honesty and pure conviction suggested the remark , unaccompanied by any
perception that it might have been adopted by blunt flattery to soothe
and win her . HARDY-1874-2,286.812

However , it had not much effect now , HARDY-1874-2,286.813

for she said , in a passionless murmur which was in itself a proof of
her words : ' I have no feeling in the matter at all .
HARDY-1874-2,286.814

And I do@ @n't at all know what is right to do in my difficult position
, HARDY-1874-2,286.815

and I have nobody to advise me . HARDY-1874-2,286.816

But I give my promise , if I must . HARDY-1874-2,286.817

I give it as the rendering of a debt , conditionally , of course , on my
being a widow . ' HARDY-1874-2,286.818

' You@ @'ll marry me between five and six years hence ? '
HARDY-1874-2,286.819

' Do@ @n't press me too hard . HARDY-1874-2,286.820

I@ @'ll marry nobody else . ' HARDY-1874-2,286.821

' But surely you will name the time , HARDY-1874-2,286.822

or there@ @'s nothing in the promise at all ? ' HARDY-1874-2,286.823

' O , I do@ @n't know , HARDY-1874-2,286.824

pray let me go ! ' she said , her bosom beginning to rise .
HARDY-1874-2,286.825

' I am afraid what to do ! HARDY-1874-2,286.826

I want to be just to you , HARDY-1874-2,286.827

and to be that seems to be wronging myself , HARDY-1874-2,286.828

and perhaps it is breaking the commandments . HARDY-1874-2,286.829

There is considerable doubt of his death , HARDY-1874-2,286.830

and then it is dreadful ; HARDY-1874-2,286.831

let me ask a solicitor , Mr. Boldwood , if I ought or no ! '
HARDY-1874-2,286.832

' Say the words , dear one , HARDY-1874-2,286.833

and the subject shall be dismissed {TEXT:dismisssed} ;
HARDY-1874-2,286.834

a blissful loving intimacy of six years , and then marriage -
HARDY-1874-2,286.835

O Bathsheba , say them ! ' he begged in a husky voice , unable to
sustain the forms of mere friendship any longer . HARDY-1874-2,286.836

' Promise yourself to me ; HARDY-1874-2,286.837

I <P_287> deserve it , HARDY-1874-2,287.838

indeed I do , HARDY-1874-2,287.839

for I have loved you more than anybody in the world !
HARDY-1874-2,287.840

And if I said hasty words and showed uncalled-for heat of manner towards
you , believe me , dear , I did not mean to distress you ;
HARDY-1874-2,287.841

I was in agony , Bathsheba , HARDY-1874-2,287.842

and I did not know what I said . HARDY-1874-2,287.843

You would@ @n't let a dog suffer what I have suffered , could you but
know it ! HARDY-1874-2,287.844

Sometimes I shrink from your knowing what I have felt for you ,
HARDY-1874-2,287.845

and sometimes I am distressed that all of it you never will know .
HARDY-1874-2,287.846

Be gracious , HARDY-1874-2,287.847

and give up a little to me , when I would give up my life for you ! '
HARDY-1874-2,287.848

The trimmings of her dress , as they quivered against the light , showed
how agitated she was , HARDY-1874-2,287.849

and at last she burst out crying . HARDY-1874-2,287.850

' And you@ @'ll not - press me - about anything more - if I say in five
or six years ? ' she sobbed , when she had power to frame the words .
HARDY-1874-2,287.851

' Yes , then I@ @'ll leave it to time . ' HARDY-1874-2,287.852

' Very well . If he does not return , I@ @'ll marry you in six years
from this day , if we both live , ' she said solemnly .
HARDY-1874-2,287.853

' And you@ @'ll take this as a token from me . ' HARDY-1874-2,287.854

Boldwood had come close to her side , HARDY-1874-2,287.855

and now he clasped one of her hands in both his own ,
HARDY-1874-2,287.856

and lifted it to his breast . HARDY-1874-2,287.857

' What is it ? HARDY-1874-2,287.858

Oh I can@ @not wear a ring ! ' she exclaimed , on seeing what he held ;
HARDY-1874-2,287.859

' besides , I would@ @n't have a soul know that it@ @'s an engagement !
HARDY-1874-2,287.860

Perhaps it is improper ? HARDY-1874-2,287.861

Besides , we are not engaged in the usual sense , are we ?
HARDY-1874-2,287.862

Do@ @n't insist , Mr. Boldwood - HARDY-1874-2,287.863

do@ @n't ! ' HARDY-1874-2,287.864

In her trouble at not being able to get her hand away from him at once ,
she stamped passionately on the floor with one foot ,
HARDY-1874-2,287.865

and tears crowded to her eyes again . HARDY-1874-2,287.866

