<BEGIN_hare-183x-2>

<P_2,240>

<heading>

Sermon XIV . HARE-183X-2,2,240.4

Lord's Prayer : HARE-183X-2,2,240.5

Fourth Part . HARE-183X-2,2,240.6

God's Will , Not Ours . HARE-183X-2,2,240.7

Luke xi. 2 . Thy will be done , as in heaven , so in earth .
HARE-183X-2,2,240.8

<$$heading>

In my last sermon I spoke to you about the nature of God's kingdom , for
the coming of which our Lord teaches us to pray . HARE-183X-2,2,240.10

I shewed you that it was a threefold kingdom . HARE-183X-2,2,240.11

I explained to you that , when we say , Thy kingdom come , we pray first
for God's spiritual kingdom , that it may be set up and established in
our hearts ; secondly , for his visible kingdom , or Church , that it
may increase and spread , until it fill the whole earth ; and lastly ,
for his heavenly kingdom , that it may soon drive away and put an end to
every kind of sin and sorrow , and leave nothing to be seen in the new
heavens and the new earth , which God will then create , but a glorious
God , filling all things with his presence , and ruling with a father's
love over his dutiful and holy children . HARE-183X-2,2,240.12

In a word , when we say , Thy kingdom come , we pray God to put forth
his royal power , and to shew himself the sovereign of all the earth so
plainly and openly , that we and all the other sons of men may , both
outwardly with our eyes , and inwardly in our hearts , see and feel and
own him to be our king . HARE-183X-2,2,240.13

But a king must have subjects . HARE-183X-2,2,240.14

A king without subjects to obey him , a king without a people to love
and follow him , would be a sorry sight . HARE-183X-2,2,240.15

He would be merely the mockery of a king , and no more a real one , than
a shadow is a living man . HARE-183X-2,2,240.16

It is not enough therefore that we call God King , and Jesus Lord ,
unless we do the things which they command us . HARE-183X-2,2,240.17

It is not enough for God's kingdom to come , HARE-183X-2,2,240.18

in fact it can@ @not come properly and as it ought to come ,
HARE-183X-2,2,240.19

it can@ @not come in all its fulness and excellence , unless God's will
be also done . HARE-183X-2,2,240.20

This however is so unpleasant to man , HARE-183X-2,2,240.21

- this doing God's will is so hard and grating to flesh and blood ,
especially in the beginning of our course , - that perhaps there is no
truth in the whole Gospel which we are readier and more anxious to
forget , than this great one , that it is <P_2,242> doing , and not
saying only , that God requires of us . HARE-183X-2,2,242.22

The promises of the Gospel are great and glorious ; HARE-183X-2,2,242.23

and we are glad to lay claim to them . HARE-183X-2,2,242.24

The forms of religion may seem a little tiresome to us ;
HARE-183X-2,2,242.25

still we can@ @not feel comfortable , if we keep away from them
altogether ; HARE-183X-2,2,242.26

and so we bring ourselves not to neglect them . HARE-183X-2,2,242.27

But the doing God's will as he would have us , - though this , you must
be aware , is the pith and kernel of the whole matter , - the doing it
wholly and thoroughly , at all times and in all places , the obeying God
with that perfect obedience which he demands of us , - an obedience
which extends to all our words and thoughts , as well as to all our
outward actions , - an obedience which brings every power of our minds ,
and every feeling of our hearts , and every member of our bodies , under
ready subjection to the will of God , - this is the great difficulty
which stops so many in their Christian journey . HARE-183X-2,2,242.28

It is like a great steep mountain , which blocks up the road to heaven :
HARE-183X-2,2,242.29

and some of us waste our time in trying to find a path round it ;
HARE-183X-2,2,242.30

and some of us fall asleep at the foot of it ; HARE-183X-2,2,242.31

and some of us in despair turn our backs on it , HARE-183X-2,2,242.32

and set our faces toward the way of sin and death : HARE-183X-2,2,242.33

but few , very few have the wisdom and the courage to say within
themselves , " The city of our God and King is at the top of that steep
mountain : HARE-183X-2,2,242.34

unless <P_2,243> I climb the mountain , I can never get there :
HARE-183X-2,2,243.35

so the sooner I begin the better . HARE-183X-2,2,243.36

True , the mountain does seem very steep now that I am looking up it
from the bottom : HARE-183X-2,2,243.37

but the ascent may not be so difficult as it appears :
HARE-183X-2,2,243.38

and at any rate , in the strength of my God and King , and through faith
in Jesus Christ , the Bible assures me I can do all things .
HARE-183X-2,2,243.39

Therefore I will begin to climb at once . " HARE-183X-2,2,243.40

Few persons have wisdom and courage enough to make up their minds to
follow the will of God in this plain straightforward manner .
HARE-183X-2,2,243.41

Most men want to avoid it if they can . HARE-183X-2,2,243.42

Some would compound for their duty , by keeping God's law whenever they
have a mind to it , or whenever they are not particularly tempted to the
contrary ; HARE-183X-2,2,243.43

or perhaps they might consent to keep the greater part of it , provided
they are allowed to indulge now and then in some little darling sin .
HARE-183X-2,2,243.44

But the trying to keep the whole of the perfect law of God , the
endeavour to act up to all the heavenly precepts delivered in the Sermon
on the Mount , this is so distasteful to flesh and blood , we have need
to be continually reminded that God will not be satisfied with less .
HARE-183X-2,2,243.45

Therefore Christ has taken care to remind us of it , by making it a part
of our daily prayers . HARE-183X-2,2,243.46

He has commanded us , when we pray , to say , not only , Thy kingdom
come , but also , Thy will be done . HARE-183X-2,2,243.47

<P_2,244>

This indeed is the petition with which we have the closest concern .
HARE-183X-2,2,244.49

It shews us what ought to be the great aim and end of our lives , - that
we may be able to do the will of God . HARE-183X-2,2,244.50

After praying to our Father that his name may be hallowed , and that his
kingdom may come , we pray that his will may be done :
HARE-183X-2,2,244.51

for unless his will be done , his kingdom can@ @not come ,
HARE-183X-2,2,244.52

his name can@ @not be hallowed . HARE-183X-2,2,244.53

Or can a father be said to be honoured by his children , while they are
disobeying him ? HARE-183X-2,2,244.54

Can a king be said to reign over his subjects , while they are rebelling
against him ? HARE-183X-2,2,244.55

Here I would have you mark our Lord's word . HARE-183X-2,2,244.56

He does not bid us pray that God's laws may be obeyed , or that his
commandments may be kept , but that his will may be done .
HARE-183X-2,2,244.57

Now why is this ? HARE-183X-2,2,244.58

Plainly , because the doing God's will embraces everything else .
HARE-183X-2,2,244.59

It includes all obedience and submission and patience and humility , the
virtues most desirable in a Christian . HARE-183X-2,2,244.60

Besides , by teaching us to pray that God's will may be done , or , in
other words , by teaching us that we are to strive to make God's will
our own , which of course is the thing meant , Jesus struck at the
taproot of the evil in our fallen and corrupted nature .
HARE-183X-2,2,244.61

The great mischief of the fall of Adam was , that it burst the golden
chain which bound man to God . HARE-183X-2,2,244.62

Man broke loose from God , HARE-183X-2,2,244.63

and made himself independent of <P_2,245> him , HARE-183X-2,2,245.64

and left the safe and the straight way of his commandments , to walk in
the light of his own eyes , and after the devices of his own heart .
HARE-183X-2,2,245.65

In short , man at the fall set up his own will against God's ;
HARE-183X-2,2,245.66

and so his will became corrupt and tainted , as everything must become
when God's purifying spirit leaves it . HARE-183X-2,2,245.67

Man set up his own will . HARE-183X-2,2,245.68

This is the great disease and the main evil of our nature .
HARE-183X-2,2,245.69

It comes to us from our parents : HARE-183X-2,2,245.70

it shews itself soon after our birth : HARE-183X-2,2,245.71

and the seeds of it continue to lurk , even in the best of men , as long
as they remain in the body . HARE-183X-2,2,245.72

The disease , I say , shews itself soon after our birth .
HARE-183X-2,2,245.73

If you doubt this , look at infants . HARE-183X-2,2,245.74

Mark how violent and fretful they become , even while they are still in
arms , if you do the least thing to cross them . HARE-183X-2,2,245.75

But perhaps you will say , " They are only babies , HARE-183X-2,2,245.76

and do@ @n't know any better . " HARE-183X-2,2,245.77

Well ! wait till they do know better ; HARE-183X-2,2,245.78

wait till they are five or six years old . HARE-183X-2,2,245.79

Is the matter improved then ? HARE-183X-2,2,245.80

You know that , generally speaking , it is not . HARE-183X-2,2,245.81

You know that your complaint of your child at six years old is the same
that it was at fifteen months : " The child will have its own way . "
HARE-183X-2,2,245.82

You are quite right : HARE-183X-2,2,245.83

the child will have its own way , unless you take great pains to teach
it better . HARE-183X-2,2,245.84

And when it grows up to be a boy , it will try to have its own way as a
boy : HARE-183X-2,2,245.85

and when it grows up to be <P_2,246> a man , it will try to have its own
way as a man . HARE-183X-2,2,246.86

Nay , at threescore_and_ten , if God spares its life so long , unless
its heart has been renewed before hand , we should still have the very
same story : HARE-183X-2,2,246.87

we should still see the old man , with white hairs on his head , and a
crutch in his hand , and one foot in the grave , HARE-183X-2,2,246.88

- if we could read his heart , we should still see him making a point of
having his own way . HARE-183X-2,2,246.89

Another proof of the same thing , were further proof needful , might be
found in the common saying , " I will do it , because I choose it , " .
... not because I think it right , not because I shall do myself any
good by it , but because I choose it : that is , because it is my will ,
and I have the power of doing it , and nobody shall hinder me .
HARE-183X-2,2,246.90

A foolisher answer than this , or a worse answer , or an answer more
unworthy of a Christian , or even of a reasonable being , there can@
@not be . HARE-183X-2,2,246.91

Yet I dare say most of you must have heard it . HARE-183X-2,2,246.92

I have myself often heard it made by boys . HARE-183X-2,2,246.93

And though men , when they are grown_up , are mostly too much on their
guard to avow so absurd a feeling , yet the same love of doing a thing
merely because one chooses it , without any better reason , is far too
common among men also : HARE-183X-2,2,246.94

in truth , it lies at the bottom of half the foolish obstinacy in the
world . HARE-183X-2,2,246.95

But it is useless to argue the matter further . HARE-183X-2,2,246.96

It is <P_2,247> a question of mere fact ; HARE-183X-2,2,247.97

every one , without argument , may decide it for himself by looking into
his own heart . HARE-183X-2,2,247.98

Ask yourselves , Do not you like to have your own way , because it is
your own way ? and that too even when some other way , which a
neighbour points out to you , is clearly more for your good .
HARE-183X-2,2,247.99

Now what is the cause of all this ? HARE-183X-2,2,247.100

What is the cause of this desire , which shews itself in us at all the
different stages of life , from the earliest down to the latest ?
HARE-183X-2,2,247.101

What is the origin of this distempered feeling , which stands us in
stead of reason , and which will often lead a man to act against his
plain interest ? HARE-183X-2,2,247.102

The cause is that unreasonable and corrupt self-will {TEXT:selfwill} ,
which we have all inherited from Adam , which shews itself differently
in different men , but which in some way or other is sure to shew itself
in every one not thoroughly converted . HARE-183X-2,2,247.103

Having thus found out the cause of the disorder , we may more easily see
how it is to be cured . HARE-183X-2,2,247.104

We must get rid of that cause : HARE-183X-2,2,247.105

we must root out that self-will {TEXT:selfwill} , which is the source of
the whole evil . HARE-183X-2,2,247.106

We must take God's will for our rule and guide , HARE-183X-2,2,247.107

and must endeavour by all the means in our power , by prayer , by
meditation , by self-denial {TEXT:selfdenial} , to bring our own will
first into complete obedience to God's , and then to make it one with
God's . HARE-183X-2,2,247.108

We must <P_2,248> learn to look upon our own wills as impious and
rebellious , because they set themselves in opposition to God .
HARE-183X-2,2,248.109

We must learn to look upon them as mad , because they set themselves in
opposition to reason . HARE-183X-2,2,248.110

We must learn to look upon them as tyrants , because they govern us
absolutely , without law , and against law . HARE-183X-2,2,248.111

This mad , rebellious , impious tyranny of the will must not be allowed
to trample on us any longer . HARE-183X-2,2,248.112

It must be overthrown : which can only be done by setting up God's will
in its place . HARE-183X-2,2,248.113

Accordingly this is the very remedy which Jesus Christ has pointed out
to us , by teaching us to pray to our heavenly Father that his will ,
and not ours , may be done : HARE-183X-2,2,248.114

Remember then , when you are making this petition to God , you are in
fact asking him to cure the great disorder of your nature , and to
remedy the evil brought upon you by Adam's fall . HARE-183X-2,2,248.115

By that fall our wills were cut off from God's ; HARE-183X-2,2,248.116

and the evil and mischief can never be done away , until they are joined
to God's will again . HARE-183X-2,2,248.117

I said a while ago that the doing God's will includes obedience , and
submission , and patience , and several other Christian graces .
HARE-183X-2,2,248.118

At first perhaps , when we say , Thy will be done , we think only of
that portion of God's will which is to be done by us , such as keeping
his commandments , and doing our duty toward him , and toward <P_2,249>
our neighbour . HARE-183X-2,2,249.119

But there is another portion of God's will , which must also be taken
into account . HARE-183X-2,2,249.120

I mean that portion of it which is done toward us , and which exercises
our patience and our faith , as that portion of it which is to be done
by us , exercises our obedience and activity . HARE-183X-2,2,249.121

Most of us are ready to acknowledge , when any extraordinary affliction
or unforeseen accident befalls us , that it comes from God .
HARE-183X-2,2,249.122

In seasons of sorrow , or of grievous sickness , nothing is commoner
than to hear the sufferer say , " It is the will of God ,
HARE-183X-2,2,249.123

and I must bow to it . " HARE-183X-2,2,249.124

Now though this is good and right , as far as it goes , it does not go
far enough . HARE-183X-2,2,249.125

It is like the fault of the Syrians , who said , " Jehovah is God of the
hills ; HARE-183X-2,2,249.126

but he is not God of the vallies " <paren> 1 Kings xx. 28 <$$paren> .
HARE-183X-2,2,249.127

So we are apt to speak and think of the Lord our God , as if he were God
only of death , and sickness , and the greater visitations or escapes of
life , but not God of the daily wants and common business of our calling
. HARE-183X-2,2,249.128

The Lord is God of the small things , just as truly as he is God of the
great things . HARE-183X-2,2,249.129

He orders and appoints and controls {TEXT:controlls} them all , as seems
to him most fitting . HARE-183X-2,2,249.130

If we were duly aware of this , we should recognize the voice of God ,
and see his hand , in our calling and station . HARE-183X-2,2,249.131

Therefore , instead of wishing to be something different from what we
are , we should be satisfied that he has <P_2,250> placed us all in the
stations best suited to our characters . HARE-183X-2,2,250.132

We , my friends , live here away from the world , and in comparative
obscurity . HARE-183X-2,2,250.133

Shall we repine thereat ? HARE-183X-2,2,250.134

No : it was God who set us here . HARE-183X-2,2,250.135

Let us feel grateful to him for having sheltered us from the cares and
temptations of more exposed spots , and be careful to make our light
shine in a dark place . HARE-183X-2,2,250.136

Others are raised to eminence , or born to live amid the bustle of the
world . HARE-183X-2,2,250.137

Shall they say within themselves , " We could serve God better somewhere
else , with fewer cares to distract us , and fewer temptations to assail
us ? " HARE-183X-2,2,250.138

No : they too must recollect that they are set to be lights upon a hill
, by the same hand which has set us in the valley .
HARE-183X-2,2,250.139

They can@ @not change , they ought not to wish to change their station ,
any more than we ought to wish to change ours . HARE-183X-2,2,250.140

Let each endeavour to do God's will , by filling his own station , if it
be lowly , with contentment , if it be lofty , with humility :
HARE-183X-2,2,250.141

and the higher they are placed , the more careful let them be to make
their light so shine before men , that they may see their good works ,
and glorify their Father which is in heaven . HARE-183X-2,2,250.142

Thus have I set before you the duty of sacrificing our wills to the will
of God , not merely by doing his will , but by suffering his will , with
faith and submission and contentment . HARE-183X-2,2,250.143

It only remains <P_2,251> for me to speak to you of the measure and
degree in which God's will ought to be done by us , - namely , as it is
done in heaven . HARE-183X-2,2,251.144

The measure which Christ lays down for us is always an infinite measure
, HARE-183X-2,2,251.145

and the pattern is always a heavenly pattern . HARE-183X-2,2,251.146

As Moses was commanded to make the tabernacle for the children of Israel
in all things according to the pattern shewn to him in the mount , so we
too are to frame the tabernacle of our Christian life , and all things
belonging thereto , according to the perfect model of heaven .
HARE-183X-2,2,251.147

We are to pray , and to strive , that God's will may be done on earth as
it is done in heaven . That is , we are to do it , as the angels do it
, wholly , readily , cheerfully , and out of the love of God .
HARE-183X-2,2,251.148

We are to do it wholly ; HARE-183X-2,2,251.149

for who can fancy an angel leaving any part of his errand unperformed ?
HARE-183X-2,2,251.150

We are to do it readily ; HARE-183X-2,2,251.151

for they are winged messengers , HARE-183X-2,2,251.152

and run swift as thought to do God's bidding . HARE-183X-2,2,251.153

We are to do it cheerfully , and with the hearts of angels , which are
the abodes of joy and gladness . HARE-183X-2,2,251.154

The mere doing God's will is little . HARE-183X-2,2,251.155

The devils themselves , we may be sure , will be constrained to go as
far as that . HARE-183X-2,2,251.156

Only , while the angels do it with joy , and find all their happiness in
doing it , the evil spirits do it unwillingly , HARE-183X-2,2,251.157

and would fain shake it off if they could . So that , unless we bring
our hearts to do God's will cheerfully , we can@ @not <P_2,252> be said
to do it as the angels do it , we can@ @not be said to do it as it is
done in heaven . HARE-183X-2,2,252.158

Above all we must do it out of the love of God , for his glory , and not
for our own . HARE-183X-2,2,252.159

Glory to God in the highest , was the song of the angels at our
Saviour's birth . HARE-183X-2,2,252.160

The glory of God then is their great object ; HARE-183X-2,2,252.161

the love of God is their chief motive . HARE-183X-2,2,252.162

It is only by the union of love with duty , that the will of God can be
done as it is in heaven , where he rules in the sight of all , and
issues his commands as it seems good to his eternal wisdom .
HARE-183X-2,2,252.163

The angels leave their places before the sapphire throne at God's
bidding . HARE-183X-2,2,252.164

They are his servants , HARE-183X-2,2,252.165

and run to and fro whithersoever he sends them : HARE-183X-2,2,252.166

and they go joyfully , deeming it a blessing to be charged with the
least of his commands . HARE-183X-2,2,252.167

Have we anything of this feeling about us ? HARE-183X-2,2,252.168

Do not say that it is above the measure of earth , that flesh and blood
can@ @not know it . HARE-183X-2,2,252.169

Many a good soldier has felt in this manner toward a great and beloved
commander : HARE-183X-2,2,252.170

many a loyal subject has so felt toward his king .
HARE-183X-2,2,252.171

And is not God our king ? HARE-183X-2,2,252.172

Is not the Captain of our salvation our commander ?
HARE-183X-2,2,252.173

Let us feel toward him as his subjects and soldiers , happy to be
employed by him , ready to obey him , active in his service , but at the
same time prepared to endure hardships , to stand still at our post , to
bear the taunts and reproaches of the enemy , whenever he <P_2,253>
orders us to do so . HARE-183X-2,2,253.174

I once read a story of a great captain , who after a battle was talking
over the events of the day with his officers . HARE-183X-2,2,253.175

He asked them , who had done best that day ? HARE-183X-2,2,253.176

Some mentioned one man who had fought very bravely , some another .
HARE-183X-2,2,253.177

" No <paren> said he <$$paren> you are all mistaken :
HARE-183X-2,2,253.178

the best man in the field to-day was a soldier , who had his arm lifted
up against an enemy , but who , on hearing the trumpet sound a retreat ,
checked himself , and dropt his arm without striking the blow .
HARE-183X-2,2,253.179

That perfect and ready obedience to the will of his general is the
noblest thing that has been done to-day . " HARE-183X-2,2,253.180

Think over this story , my brethren ; endeavour to obey God in all
things , as that soldier obeyed his general ; and you will find out in
time what our Saviour meant by commanding us to pray that God's will may
be done on earth , as it is in heaven . HARE-183X-2,2,253.181

He meant what he himself did . HARE-183X-2,2,253.182

For , as by coming down from his glory to take our nature upon him , he
shewed how earth might be lifted up into heaven , so by his activity in
doing , and by his meekness in suffering God's will , he shewed how his
Father's will might be done on earth as it is in heaven .
HARE-183X-2,2,253.183

Look at his diligence in doing that will , which was so great that he
had not time so much as to eat : HARE-183X-2,2,253.184

look at his devotion to it , which <P_2,254> made the doing it meat and
drink to him : HARE-183X-2,2,254.185

think how careful he was to set forth and exalt , not his own glory ,
but the glory of him that sent him : HARE-183X-2,2,254.186

call to mind the lowliness and patience , and the readiness to suffer as
well as to do his Father's will , which he shewed throughout his blessed
passion , so that even in the moment of that fearful agony the only cry
that burst from his troubled spirit was , " Father , not my will , but
thine be done ! " HARE-183X-2,2,254.187

Such was the example he left us , that we might walk in his steps , both
in our doing and in our praying . HARE-183X-2,2,254.188

Remember therefore , that when you pray to God that his will may be done
, you pray the very prayer which our Lord prayed .
HARE-183X-2,2,254.189

Remember that , when you pray that it may be done on earth as it is done
in heaven , you are in fact praying that you may be enabled to do it as
perfectly as Jesus Christ did : HARE-183X-2,2,254.190

for he came down from heaven . HARE-183X-2,2,254.191

Take him for your model ; and , as he came down to shew you how God's
will should be done , so will the Holy Ghost come down , if you pray for
him , and enable you to do it . HARE-183X-2,2,254.192

So long as your lives are continued to you , God will be with you on
earth ; HARE-183X-2,2,254.193

and death itself will not separate you . HARE-183X-2,2,254.194

Rather will it unite you to the Godhead by new and closer bonds .
HARE-183X-2,2,254.195

For Christ will then lift you up , and take you to himself , that ,
where he is , you may be also , beholding his glory , partaking in his
<P_2,255> joys , and continuing to do the work which you began on earth
, continuing to do God's will , but without the hindrance
{TEXT:hinderance} and alloy of human weakness and earthly imperfections
, in the eternal peace of heaven . HARE-183X-2,2,255.196

<P_2,276>

<heading>

Sermon XVI . HARE-183X-2,2,276.199

Lord's Prayer : Sixth Part . HARE-183X-2,2,276.200

Forgiveness . HARE-183X-2,2,276.201

Luke xi. 4 . HARE-183X-2,2,276.202

And forgive us our sins ; HARE-183X-2,2,276.203

for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us .
HARE-183X-2,2,276.204

<$$heading>

I ended my last sermon by reminding you of the comparisons so common in
the Bible , in which our life is likened to a journey and to a warfare ;
HARE-183X-2,2,276.206

and I told you , that , in praying to God for our daily bread , we are
in fact praying to him for what is needful in order that we may have
strength to reach the end of our journey , and to fight our way through
all the hindrances that beset us , to the city of our Lord and Saviour .
HARE-183X-2,2,276.207

But suppose a <P_2,277> man to be a wayfarer , HARE-183X-2,2,277.208

whether , a soldier or a traveler , what is the thing which above all
others would encumber and fatigue him on his march ?
HARE-183X-2,2,277.209

Assuredly a heavy weight , a great pack or load to carry , would be more
against a man in a long journey than anything else one could mention .
HARE-183X-2,2,277.210

Many of you can lift a sack of wheat , HARE-183X-2,2,277.211

and can carry it some little way . HARE-183X-2,2,277.212

But think of being condemned to walk from here to Devizes , or rather
from here to Bath , with a sack of wheat on your shoulder every day for
a month together . HARE-183X-2,2,277.213

How soon would the stoutest man among you break down under such a load !
HARE-183X-2,2,277.214

He might contrive to stagger on a little way : HARE-183X-2,2,277.215

but his strength before long would fail him ; HARE-183X-2,2,277.216

and if he did not drop his load , it would crush him .
HARE-183X-2,2,277.217

Now sin , - when a man is in his right senses , when he knows whither he
ought to be going , - is a weight on the soul , HARE-183X-2,2,277.218

and presses it down , just as a weight on the back presses down the body
. HARE-183X-2,2,277.219

Many of you must have read or heard of poor Christian in the Pilgrim's
Progress , how , after he had read a while in a book given him by one ,
Evangelist , that is , after he had studied the word of God , he felt a
burthen on his back so heavy that it almost bowed him to the earth .
HARE-183X-2,2,277.220

That burthen is an allegory to express the painful weight of sin , which
is indeed a burthen to awakened conscience , yea , a sore burthen too
<P_2,278> heavy for it to bear . HARE-183X-2,2,278.221

When thus overweighted with the sense of guilt , how can the christian
warrior march forward ? HARE-183X-2,2,278.222

Nay , under such a load , how can he act the soldier in the field ?
HARE-183X-2,2,278.223

A man who fights needs to be nimble and strong , HARE-183X-2,2,278.224

and should have all his limbs free and unshackled .
HARE-183X-2,2,278.225

He must not go into battle tottering under a load :
HARE-183X-2,2,278.226

else a slight thrust will push him over , HARE-183X-2,2,278.227

a slip will lay him on the ground . HARE-183X-2,2,278.228

Therefore our Lord , after teaching us to ask for food , to support us
through the toil of our daily Christian march , and to carry us through
the hardships of our daily Christian warfare , had us ask for the pardon
of our sins ; because , unless we are pardoned , we can neither fight
nor march to good purpose . HARE-183X-2,2,278.229

This is the second petition in that part of the Lord's prayer which we
are now considering , the second petition which our Lord commands us to
offer up for ourselves : HARE-183X-2,2,278.230

" Forgive us our sins ; HARE-183X-2,2,278.231

for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us . "
HARE-183X-2,2,278.232

While a sense of guilt is lying heavy on a man , I said , he can@ @not ,
at least he will not , serve God to good purpose .
HARE-183X-2,2,278.233

He will not move forward on the road to heaven : HARE-183X-2,2,278.234

he will not stand his ground against temptation . HARE-183X-2,2,278.235

The children of this world indeed tell a different story .
HARE-183X-2,2,278.236

According to them the forgiveness of sins so freely offered to sinners
<P_2,279> in the New Testament only encourages men to sin on .
HARE-183X-2,2,279.237

And so it may some . HARE-183X-2,2,279.238

There may be , and I fear there are , persons so wretched and so foolish
, as to abuse the blessed doctrine of forgiveness through the blood of
Christ , to the dishonour of God , and their own ruin .
HARE-183X-2,2,279.239

There may be , and I fear there are , persons who think to take
advantage of God's mercy , and put off repenting year after year ,
saying to themselves , " We shall have time to repent by_and_by . "
HARE-183X-2,2,279.240

Thus they go on , until God's judgement falls on them , and death
overtakes them with all their sins unrepented of , and gives them over
to judgement and to hell . HARE-183X-2,2,279.241

What spirit can such persons be possest by ! HARE-183X-2,2,279.242

Do they fancy that they can cheat God ? HARE-183X-2,2,279.243

Can@ @not they hear the voice of Scripture , which plainly declares that
man can@ @not repent at will ? HARE-183X-2,2,279.244

Does not the Bible say plainly to men of this stamp , - " Can the
Ethiopian change his skin , or the leopard his spots ?
HARE-183X-2,2,279.245

then may ye also do good , that are accustomed to do evil " <paren>
Jerem. xiii. 23 <$$paren> . HARE-183X-2,2,279.246

Does not our own experience too shew the truth of this ?
HARE-183X-2,2,279.247

Is it not the rarest of all things , to see a man , who has spent his
life in sin and in forgetfulness of God , turn to God in good earnest in
his old age ? HARE-183X-2,2,279.248

You must have known many old people , some , I hope , religious , and
some , I am afraid , irreligious . HARE-183X-2,2,279.249

Now of those who really and truly died in the fear <P_2,280> and love of
God , after spending their latter days in his service , how many were
converted and began to turn to God after they became old ?
HARE-183X-2,2,280.250

Do you know three such ? HARE-183X-2,2,280.251

If you do , you know a great number . HARE-183X-2,2,280.252

But I feel almost certain you can none of you recollect so much as three
old persons , who died a godly death , after having lived ungodly till
they grew old . HARE-183X-2,2,280.253

If this be so , is it not a folly and a madness deserving stripes , -
HARE-183X-2,2,280.254

alas ! what has a Christian minister to do with stripes !
HARE-183X-2,2,280.255

- let me rather say , deserving our pity and our prayers ,
HARE-183X-2,2,280.256

- is it not a sad , pitiable folly , brethren , for a man to stake his
soul on this desperate chance of a late repentance , after a life of sin
and ungodliness ? HARE-183X-2,2,280.257

But , though the doctrine of free forgiveness to all who sue to God for
mercy through the blood of Christ may be thus perverted , and abused ,
it is still a blessed and a holy doctrine , HARE-183X-2,2,280.258

and is well fitted to make men holy . HARE-183X-2,2,280.259

Were men no better than beasts or devils , it might encourage them to
sin . HARE-183X-2,2,280.260

But considering what the true nature of man is , - that he has a
conscience to be aroused , and feelings to be touched , and affections
to be won , - this doctrine of forgiveness ought to lead him , and does
lead many , to God . HARE-183X-2,2,280.261

Nothing can be more certain than that sin cuts man off from God , and
raises a bar which keeps him away . HARE-183X-2,2,280.262

The Scripture compares it to a chain , which binds a man <P_2,281> and
holds him prisoner . HARE-183X-2,2,281.263

Would you set the man free ? HARE-183X-2,2,281.264

You must break the chain : HARE-183X-2,2,281.265

and that can only be done by forgiveness . HARE-183X-2,2,281.266

If you ask me how sin is a chain , I answer , it is like a chain ,
because it hangs about a man , and clogs him and hinders him from
seeking God . HARE-183X-2,2,281.267

None of us like to go to a person , to whom we know we have given just
cause of offense . HARE-183X-2,2,281.268

The sight of such a person is irksome to us : HARE-183X-2,2,281.269

we feel awkward and ill at ease in his company ; HARE-183X-2,2,281.270

we stay away from him as much as we can : HARE-183X-2,2,281.271

if we are forced to go to him , we feel it a relief to get away again .
HARE-183X-2,2,281.272

So it is between man and man : HARE-183X-2,2,281.273

so too is it between man and God . HARE-183X-2,2,281.274

While we believe God to be offended with us , while our consciences tell
us that we are at variance with him , we can@ @not be at ease in his
presence . HARE-183X-2,2,281.275

We dare not think of him ; HARE-183X-2,2,281.276

we dare not pray to him ; HARE-183X-2,2,281.277

we get away from him as far as we can . HARE-183X-2,2,281.278

This is no new effect of sin : HARE-183X-2,2,281.279

it has been so from the beginning . HARE-183X-2,2,281.280

After Adam and Eve had committed the first sin , by eating the forbidden
fruit , we read , that they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in
the garden . HARE-183X-2,2,281.281

Now mark what follows : HARE-183X-2,2,281.282

And Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God
amongst the trees of the garden . HARE-183X-2,2,281.283

And the Lord God called to Adam , HARE-183X-2,2,281.284

and said to him , Where art thou ? HARE-183X-2,2,281.285

And Adam said , {COM:missing_open_quote} I heard thy voice in the garden
, HARE-183X-2,2,281.286

and I was afraid , <P_2,282> because I was naked ; HARE-183X-2,2,282.287

and I hid myself . " HARE-183X-2,2,282.288

Naked he was indeed , with the worst of nakedness :
HARE-183X-2,2,282.289

his soul was naked : HARE-183X-2,2,282.290

it was lying bare and open with the black stain of sin upon it ;
HARE-183X-2,2,282.291

and Adam felt that it was so . HARE-183X-2,2,282.292

This was the nakedness he was afraid of . HARE-183X-2,2,282.293

He could not bear to feel the eye of God looking on that black spot ;
HARE-183X-2,2,282.294

so he went HARE-183X-2,2,282.295

and hid himself . HARE-183X-2,2,282.296

And do not sinners in the present day just the same ?
HARE-183X-2,2,282.297

Do they not try to hide themselves from God in business , in pleasure ,
in revelings , in idle company ? HARE-183X-2,2,282.298

Do they not try all means in their power to fly from their own thoughts
, and from their own conscience ? HARE-183X-2,2,282.299

Do they not hate and dread serious self-examination above all things ?
because they know that in such moments God causes his presence to be
felt ; and they are afraid to feel that God is looking on them .
HARE-183X-2,2,282.300

They can@ @not bear to tear the rag off from their festering sins :
HARE-183X-2,2,282.301

they can@ @not bear the torture of probing their hearts :
HARE-183X-2,2,282.302

they can@ @not abide the shame of seeing and knowing how bad their
condition is . HARE-183X-2,2,282.303

So they turn away from all serious thoughts of God in private , and from
all serious talk about him with their neighbours .
HARE-183X-2,2,282.304

They shun all self-examination , HARE-183X-2,2,282.305

and shut their eyes to their danger , with the desperate cowardice of a
ruined man , who will not face a creditor , nor look into a bill , nor
cast up an account-book . HARE-183X-2,2,282.306

How must this end ? HARE-183X-2,2,282.307

How <P_2,283> does it always end with those who dare not face their
earthly creditors ? HARE-183X-2,2,283.308

Common sense and experience tell us : sooner or later in utter ruin .
HARE-183X-2,2,283.309

How then must such a course end with those who have God Almighty for
their creditor ? HARE-183X-2,2,283.310

Reason and conscience unite to tell us : sooner or later in utter ruin .
HARE-183X-2,2,283.311

The man who will not look into the state of his affairs in this world ,
must be ruined in this world : HARE-183X-2,2,283.312

the man who will not look into the state of his soul , must be ruined
for ever . HARE-183X-2,2,283.313

Here are two sad truths plainly made out , that the consciousness of
being sinners keeps men away from God , and that , in keeping away from
God ; we keep away from happiness ; HARE-183X-2,2,283.314

in turning from him , we rush into ruin . HARE-183X-2,2,283.315

How was this evil to be remedied ? HARE-183X-2,2,283.316

Looking at it with the eyes of a man , one should have said , there was
no way . HARE-183X-2,2,283.317

For the more men became sinners , the more need they had of God :
HARE-183X-2,2,283.318

yet the more they became sinners , the more afraid they were of coming
to him . HARE-183X-2,2,283.319

But God seeth not as man seeth : HARE-183X-2,2,283.320

in the depths of his merciful wisdom he discovered a remedy for the evil
. HARE-183X-2,2,283.321

That remedy in one word is forgiveness . HARE-183X-2,2,283.322

He has come to us in the person of his Son , HARE-183X-2,2,283.323

and has called to us in the midst of our sinful courses , saying , " Why
will ye die ? HARE-183X-2,2,283.324

I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth .
HARE-183X-2,2,283.325

Only turn to me , and ye shall live . " HARE-183X-2,2,283.326

Return to the Lord , and he <P_2,284> will have mercy upon you ;
HARE-183X-2,2,284.327

return to our God , for he will abundantly pardon you .
HARE-183X-2,2,284.328

This is the plan which our Father has devised for melting the stubborn
naughtiness of men's hearts . HARE-183X-2,2,284.329

He has begun with offering them forgiveness . HARE-183X-2,2,284.330

It is easy to see how that one offer wholly changes the state of the
question . HARE-183X-2,2,284.331

A God who offers us forgiveness is no longer a terrible God , whom we
need be afraid to look upon . HARE-183X-2,2,284.332

He comes to us in a character of mercy , bringing hopeful gifts .
HARE-183X-2,2,284.333

Nay , he comes to us in a human form , like one of ourselves , that we
may be less frightened at him , and readier to listen to him .
HARE-183X-2,2,284.334

Above all , he comes to us as a suffering man , to move our pity , as a
man suffering undeservedly for our sakes , to awaken our gratitude and
love ; that so all the gates of our hearts may be thrown open to him ,
and that he may enter and take possession of them the more easily .
HARE-183X-2,2,284.335

Was I wrong then in saying that the offer of free forgiveness through
Christ ought to lead sinners to God ? HARE-183X-2,2,284.336

So it does lead those who have sense enough to feel that they are
sinners . HARE-183X-2,2,284.337

He who is labouring and fainting under the burthen of his sins will
creep to the cross of Christ to be rid of his burthen .
HARE-183X-2,2,284.338

But he who does not feel the lump of sin to be a deformity and a
disgrace to him , he who does not desire to run the race set before him
, and therefore does not feel the weight of those <P_2,285> offenses ,
which make him crawl , instead of running - these men of course will not
be anxious to be freed from a burthen which they do not feel :
HARE-183X-2,2,285.339

they will not be anxious for God's forgiveness ; because they are not
aware that they need it . HARE-183X-2,2,285.340

The first lesson for us all to learn then is the evil and wickedness of
sin . HARE-183X-2,2,285.341

We must get a sense of our own unworthiness and guiltiness in the sight
of God . HARE-183X-2,2,285.342

Now this can only be done by a diligent study of the Bible , especially
of the New Testament . HARE-183X-2,2,285.343

Everything in the world about us is fitted to stupefy us , and to blind
us to the true nature of sin . HARE-183X-2,2,285.344

In the world it wears a mask and a disguise . HARE-183X-2,2,285.345

But in God's book it appears without a mask : HARE-183X-2,2,285.346

we may see it there in all its hideousness . HARE-183X-2,2,285.347

It is spoken of there , as they speak of it in heaven , and as Christ
will speak of it when he casts it into hell . HARE-183X-2,2,285.348

Therefore it is only by a diligent study of the New Testament and of
other godly books , that a man can gain a right sense of his guiltiness
in the sight of God . HARE-183X-2,2,285.349

But you must read with both your eyes open , HARE-183X-2,2,285.350

and must listen with both your ears open : HARE-183X-2,2,285.351

and one eye must be turned inward on your own soul ;
HARE-183X-2,2,285.352

one ear must be opened inward to the whispers of your conscience .
HARE-183X-2,2,285.353

When you meet with any of those awful threats , which are scattered
through Scripture against every kind of sin , you must not say to
yourselves , " That does not <P_2,286> apply to me . "
HARE-183X-2,2,286.354

Your first thought should be rather . " It does apply to me , and was
set there to give me warning . " HARE-183X-2,2,286.355

The effect of sin , we have seen , is to frighten us away from God , to
make us hide ourselves from him , as Adam and Eve hid themselves from
him , to make us fly away from him , as Jonah fled from the presence of
the Lord to Tarshish . HARE-183X-2,2,286.356

Thus has it been more or less with all such as have had to struggle and
to squeeze through the narrow gate which separates the ways of death and
life . HARE-183X-2,2,286.357

Everyone , with the exception of the few who have had the happiness to
enter the kingdom of heaven as little children , and to abide therein ,
- every one who has allowed the burthen of unrepented sin to grow upon
him , must have felt at the outset of his Christian march how that
burthen encumbered him and pressed him down : HARE-183X-2,2,286.358

he must have felt too that , had it not been for the hope of being
delivered from his burthen sooner or later , he should never have had
the courage to persevere . HARE-183X-2,2,286.359

It is hope , the hope of being forgiven for Christ's sake , the hope ,
if we turn to God , of being received mercifully , as the prodigal son
was received by his forgiving father , - it is this firm hope that bears
a man up through the dark and dreary season of repentance .
HARE-183X-2,2,286.360

For repentance , true repentance , is oftentimes a dark and stormy
season . HARE-183X-2,2,286.361

Were it <P_2,287> not for the unfailing promises of Christ , which ,
like the rainbow in the clouds , are a sure sign to the sinner that his
trials shall have an end , and that the flood of his sorrows and
iniquities shall not swell so as to drown his soul , - were it not for
those comfortable promises which Jesus Christ in his Gospel makes to all
such as will truly turn to him , many a sinner's heart would fail :
HARE-183X-2,2,287.362

he would say within himself , " This repentance is too painful for me ;
HARE-183X-2,2,287.363

I will go back to my former sins . " HARE-183X-2,2,287.364

Not that the service of sin is easy and pleasant , least of all to the
awakened sinner . HARE-183X-2,2,287.365

On the contrary , no sooner does he return to it , than his bondage
galls and frets him . HARE-183X-2,2,287.366

But as a man in a fever tosses and turns about from side to side ,
seeking rest for his body , and finding none , so would it be with the
awakened sinner , were he not supported by hope during the trial and
struggle of his change . HARE-183X-2,2,287.367

The terrors of the Lord would frighten him into repentance ;
HARE-183X-2,2,287.368

and then the weakness of repentance would carry him back to sin .
HARE-183X-2,2,287.369

So the poor wretch would be driven backward and forward , never resting
, yet never getting on . HARE-183X-2,2,287.370

This is even now the state of many , in spite of God's promises :
HARE-183X-2,2,287.371

and it would be the state of all , if Christ had not saved us from it .
HARE-183X-2,2,287.372

But his promises and invitations are so clear and gracious , that many a
poor soul is encouraged by them to persevere <P_2,288> in the work of
repentance , painful as it may be : until at length God causes his mercy
to shine forth on him , like a sunbeam from a stormy cloud , and speaks
peace to his wounded spirit : HARE-183X-2,2,288.373

and so the sinner knows himself to be forgiven , HARE-183X-2,2,288.374

and hastens on his way rejoicing . HARE-183X-2,2,288.375

In a word , as it happened to the paralytic man , so does it happen to
us . HARE-183X-2,2,288.376

When Christ had said to him , " Thy sins are forgiven thee ; arise and
walk , " he arose , HARE-183X-2,2,288.377

and took up his bed , HARE-183X-2,2,288.378

and went to his home . HARE-183X-2,2,288.379

Thus we too are naturally palsied and lame and halt with sin :
HARE-183X-2,2,288.380

but when Jesus says to us , " Repent , and your sins shall be forgiven ,
" we too are strengthened and encouraged to arise and walk in the paths
of righteousness . HARE-183X-2,2,288.381

We leave our burthen of sin behind us , HARE-183X-2,2,288.382

and take up our bed , HARE-183X-2,2,288.383

and carry it along with us : that is , in our duty we find our rest .
HARE-183X-2,2,288.384

Let none of you say within himself , " This is all very well for gross
and open sinners ; HARE-183X-2,2,288.385

but it does not apply to decent , well-behaved persons , such as I am .
" HARE-183X-2,2,288.386

Remember that a man may sleep upon his burthen , instead of carrying it
; HARE-183X-2,2,288.387

and then to be sure he does not feel it . HARE-183X-2,2,288.388

Yes , he may so sleep , HARE-183X-2,2,288.389

and may even dream that he is moving onward : HARE-183X-2,2,288.390

but he who moves only in a dream , will not make much way .
HARE-183X-2,2,288.391

Besides his dream must come to an end : HARE-183X-2,2,288.392

he must awake at last . HARE-183X-2,2,288.393

Does not St John tell us , that " if a man says he has no <P_2,289> sin
, he deceives himself , HARE-183X-2,2,289.394

and the truth is not in him ? " HARE-183X-2,2,289.395

Does not St James say , " In many things we all offend ? "
HARE-183X-2,2,289.396

Surely these texts are plain enough . HARE-183X-2,2,289.397

He who has never felt the burthen of his sins , and his need of pardon ,
will do well to ponder and consider them . HARE-183X-2,2,289.398

Want of feeling is no proof of life and health , but the contrary .
HARE-183X-2,2,289.399

If one of my hands were benumbed , and had lost all feeling , I should
know something ailed it . HARE-183X-2,2,289.400

Were I speaking of it to a neighbour , I should probably say , " My hand
is just as if it were dead . " HARE-183X-2,2,289.401

Now this is the very way the Bible speaks of those whose souls are not
awake to the evil of their nature : HARE-183X-2,2,289.402

it says of them , that they are " <font> dead <$$font> in trespasses and
sins . " HARE-183X-2,2,289.403

Be not deceived in this matter . HARE-183X-2,2,289.404

Do not mistake a palsied conscience for a healthy one , a dead soul for
a live one : HARE-183X-2,2,289.405

do not fancy that , because you feel nothing , you have therefore no
burthen on your backs . HARE-183X-2,2,289.406

Rather let your fears be aroused by this very thing , that you do feel
nothing . HARE-183X-2,2,289.407

It is a symptom quite dangerous enough to call for all your watchfulness
. HARE-183X-2,2,289.408

Set the looking-glass of Scripture right before you ,
HARE-183X-2,2,289.409

and look yourselves well over therein . HARE-183X-2,2,289.410

To that scriptural self-examination join diligent and hearty prayer .
HARE-183X-2,2,289.411

Pray to God to deliver you from the fumes of self-conceit , which
prevent your seeing yourselves clearly . HARE-183X-2,2,289.412

Pray to him to shew you your sins . HARE-183X-2,2,289.413

You will <P_2,290> find an excellent prayer for that purpose in the last
verses of the 139th Psalm , which you may use with a very slight
alteration : HARE-183X-2,2,290.414

" Search me , O God , that I may know my heart : HARE-183X-2,2,290.415

try me , that I may know my thoughts . HARE-183X-2,2,290.416

Shew me if there be any way of wickedness in me : HARE-183X-2,2,290.417

and lead me in the way everlasting . " HARE-183X-2,2,290.418

Thus would I have you endeavour to quicken your consciences , that your
sense of your misdeeds may carry you with double eagerness to your
Saviour , - and that , feeling all the weight and burthen of your sins ,
you may long the more to be freed from it , and may thus perceive how
gracious the Lord is , in commanding us , when we pray , to say ,
Forgive us our sins : because , unless we had the hope of obtaining
forgiveness , we could never draw nigh to God . HARE-183X-2,2,290.419

But it is not simple forgiveness , that our Lord has here taught us to
ask for . HARE-183X-2,2,290.420

He has been pleased to join a condition to this prayer ; so that , every
time we repeat the prayer for forgiveness , we are to repeat the
condition also . HARE-183X-2,2,290.421

We are not to say , " Forgive us our sins , " without adding , " For we
too forgive every one that is indebted to us . " HARE-183X-2,2,290.422

These are the words as they stand in St Luke : HARE-183X-2,2,290.423

you are all aware that they are not exactly the same as those you are in
the habit of using . HARE-183X-2,2,290.424

You have been taught to say , " Forgive us our trespasses , as we
forgive them that trespass against us . " HARE-183X-2,2,290.425

<P_2,291>

In the text we read , " Forgive us our sins ; HARE-183X-2,2,291.427

for we too forgive every one that is indebted to us : " while in St
Matthew it stands thus , " Forgive us our debts , as we forgive our
debtors . " HARE-183X-2,2,291.428

These little differences may serve to shew you how unimportant the words
are in comparison with the meaning and the spirit .
HARE-183X-2,2,291.429

Whether we say trespasses , or whether we say sins , or whether we say
debts , the meaning is just the same : HARE-183X-2,2,291.430

and the meaning is what really signifies . HARE-183X-2,2,291.431

Perhaps it was to keep us in mind of this , and to prevent our making an
idol of the words of his prayer , and using them as a spell or a charm ,
without giving heed to their meaning , - that our Saviour varied those
words , and said , " Forgive us our debts , " when he taught the people
in his Sermon on the Mount , and Forgive us our sins , " when he taught
them the second time in St Luke . HARE-183X-2,2,291.432

Our prayer , as it stands in the Prayerbook , is probably taken from the
old version of the Lord's prayer , used in early ages in this country .
HARE-183X-2,2,291.433

Now surely if any rule , if any motive could keep us all in peace and
love with each other , it would be that in our daily prayers we are to
declare to God , that we have forgiven every one who has offended us ,
and that we only ask for mercy ourselves , in proportion as we shew
mercy to others : HARE-183X-2,2,291.434

Forgive us , as we forgive them . HARE-183X-2,2,291.435

Shall <P_2,292> we dare then to come before the God of truth , the God
who knoweth all things , who sees into our hearts , and reads our very
thoughts , HARE-183X-2,2,292.436

- shall we dare come before such a God with a falsehood in our mouths ?
HARE-183X-2,2,292.437

Shall we lie to God in our prayers ? HARE-183X-2,2,292.438

Who can be bold enough to do this ? HARE-183X-2,2,292.439

Yet , unless we do it , we must either give over asking for pardon ,
HARE-183X-2,2,292.440

and must depart altogether from God , and be content to remain under his
wrath , HARE-183X-2,2,292.441

or we must ourselves clean forgive every one who has offended us .
HARE-183X-2,2,292.442

Conceive a revengeful , unforgiving man repeating this prayer , which
you all , I hope , repeat daily , HARE-183X-2,2,292.443

- conceive a man with a heart full of wrath against his neighbour , with
a memory which treasures up the little wrongs and insults and
provocations he fancies himself to have received from that neighbour ,
HARE-183X-2,2,292.444

- conceive such a man praying to God most High , to forgive him his
trespasses , as he forgives the man who has trespast against him .
HARE-183X-2,2,292.445

What in the mouth of such a man do these words mean ?
HARE-183X-2,2,292.446

They mean ... HARE-183X-2,2,292.447

but that you may more fully understand their meaning , I will turn them
into a prayer , which we will call the prayer of the unforgiving man :
HARE-183X-2,2,292.448

" O God , I have sinned against thee many times , from my youth up until
now . HARE-183X-2,2,292.449

I have often been forgetful of thy goodness : HARE-183X-2,2,292.450

I have not duly thanked thee for thy mercies : HARE-183X-2,2,292.451

I have neglected thy service : HARE-183X-2,2,292.452

I have broken thy <P_2,293> laws : HARE-183X-2,2,293.453

I have done many things utterly wrong against thee .
HARE-183X-2,2,293.454

All this I know : HARE-183X-2,2,293.455

and beside this doubtless I have committed many secret sins , which in
my blindness I have failed to notice . HARE-183X-2,2,293.456

Such is my guiltiness , O Lord , in thy sight : HARE-183X-2,2,293.457

deal with me , I beseech thee , even as I deal with my neighbour .
HARE-183X-2,2,293.458

He has not offended me one-tenth , one-hundredth part as much as I have
offended thee : HARE-183X-2,2,293.459

but he has offended me very grievously ; HARE-183X-2,2,293.460

and I can@ @not forgive him . HARE-183X-2,2,293.461

Deal with me , I beseech thee , O Lord , as I deal with him .
HARE-183X-2,2,293.462

He has been very ungrateful to me , - though not a tenth , not a
hundredth part as ungrateful as I have been to thee :
HARE-183X-2,2,293.463

yet I can@ @not overlook such base and shameful ingratitude .
HARE-183X-2,2,293.464

Deal with me , I beseech thee , O Lord , as I deal with him .
HARE-183X-2,2,293.465

I remember and treasure up every little trifle , which shews how ill he
has behaved to me . HARE-183X-2,2,293.466

Deal with me , I beseech thee , O Lord , as I deal with him .
HARE-183X-2,2,293.467

I am determined to take the very first opportunity of doing him an ill
turn . HARE-183X-2,2,293.468

Deal with me , I beseech thee , O Lord , as I deal with him . "
HARE-183X-2,2,293.469

Can anything be more shocking and horrible than such a prayer ?
HARE-183X-2,2,293.470

Is not the very sound of it enough to make one's blood run cold ?
HARE-183X-2,2,293.471

Yet this is just the prayer which the unforgiving man offers up every
time he repeats the Lord's prayer . HARE-183X-2,2,293.472

For he prays to God to forgive him in the same <P_2,294> manner in which
he forgives his neighbour . HARE-183X-2,2,294.473

But he does not forgive his neighbour : HARE-183X-2,2,294.474

so he prays to God not to forgive him . HARE-183X-2,2,294.475

God grant that his prayer may not be heard ! HARE-183X-2,2,294.476

For he is praying a curse on his own head . HARE-183X-2,2,294.477

Such is the wisdom of the way , such the strength of the motive , by
which our Lord has endeavoured to establish peace and goodwill among his
people . HARE-183X-2,2,294.478

He has taught us that we can@ @not be forgiven , unless we on our part
forgive all our brethren . HARE-183X-2,2,294.479

Thus he has bound heavenly peace and earthly peace together by the
golden chain of prayer . HARE-183X-2,2,294.480

We can@ @not have , we are not even to ask for heavenly peace , for
peace with God , unless our hearts bear us witness that we have done our
utmost to keep at peace with every man , yea , even with those who have
ill used us , with those who have spoken evil of us , with those who
have borne themselves proudly toward us , or have affronted and insulted
us , or have done us any sort of wrong . HARE-183X-2,2,294.481

Perhaps however you will ask me , what is meant by this forgiveness ?
HARE-183X-2,2,294.482

how are we to forgive our brethren ? HARE-183X-2,2,294.483

The answer is plain enough : even as we wish to be forgiven by God .
HARE-183X-2,2,294.484

The same kind of forgiveness , the same degree of forgiveness , which
you desire of God , are you to shew to each other .
HARE-183X-2,2,294.485

What that is , let your own hearts <P_2,295> tell you ,
HARE-183X-2,2,295.486

your fears of hell , into which God might justly cast you for your sins
, your hopes of heaven , which God for his Son's sake will throw open to
the penitent and forgiving : let these tell you how you ought to forgive
your neighbour . HARE-183X-2,2,295.487

Or shall I rather send you to the old saying , which contains as much
mercy and as much wisdom as was ever put by man into three words ?
HARE-183X-2,2,295.488

the saying , Forgive and forget . HARE-183X-2,2,295.489

Forgiving and forgetting is the pardon which we desire from God :
HARE-183X-2,2,295.490

therefore forgiving and forgetting is the pardon which we are to grant
to man . HARE-183X-2,2,295.491

But some will perhaps say , - at least many have said , - I have heard
it said many times , - " Well , I will forgive ; HARE-183X-2,2,295.492

but I can@ @not forget . " HARE-183X-2,2,295.493

What ! HARE-183X-2,2,295.494

is our memory then better than God's ? HARE-183X-2,2,295.495

For he can forget , and has promised to forget , the sins of his people
. HARE-183X-2,2,295.496

Thus he saith by the prophet Jeremiah <paren> xxxi. 34 <$$paren> : " I
will forgive their iniquity , HARE-183X-2,2,295.497

and I will remember their sin no more . " HARE-183X-2,2,295.498

Shall God say this of our sins , which are so great that they rise up
over our heads ? HARE-183X-2,2,295.499

and shall not we be able to say as much of the petty offenses of our
neighbour ? HARE-183X-2,2,295.500

petty , not in themselves , it may be , yet trifling , insignificant ,
small as a little mote , when compared with our great beams and
mountains of sin against God . HARE-183X-2,2,295.501

But what does God mean , when he says , <P_2,296> he " will remember our
sins no more ? " HARE-183X-2,2,296.502

He means , that he will never think of them , and never mention them
again . HARE-183X-2,2,296.503

Can@ @not we do as much ? HARE-183X-2,2,296.504

Can@ @not we , in looking at our neighbour's behaviour toward us , look
at the better part of it , rather than the worse ?
HARE-183X-2,2,296.505

Can@ @not we let our thoughts dwell on those points which make for him ,
or at least which tend to excuse him , while we turn way from those
parts of his conduct which render his fault uglier and more glaring ?
HARE-183X-2,2,296.506

Can@ @not we take account of all those matters in our behaviour to him ,
which may have seemed to him in any degree harsh , or unkind , or angry
, or disrespectful , or overbearing ? HARE-183X-2,2,296.507

It is not necessary that we should have meant them to be so .
HARE-183X-2,2,296.508

You know how easily mistakes arise , how easily the same thing may be
construed in two different ways . HARE-183X-2,2,296.509

Can@ @not we take account of the ill-judged advice of those false
friends , who so often fan the flame of discord , instead of throwing
water on it and extinguishing it ? HARE-183X-2,2,296.510

If we made due allowance for all these things , our neighbour's offenses
would dwindle very much in our eyes : and all these allowances we ought
in mere justice and fairness to make , whenever we think about his
conduct . HARE-183X-2,2,296.511

But the best way is not to think of it at all , still less to speak of
it : HARE-183X-2,2,296.512

for , if we refrain from speaking of it , the remembrance will soon die
away from our minds . HARE-183X-2,2,296.513

It is <P_2,297> by angry words , that people are wont to swell the fire
of their anger , and to make it burn more fiercely .
HARE-183X-2,2,297.514

Take away the fuel , and in time it will go out . HARE-183X-2,2,297.515

This , my brethren , is the forgiveness that we must shew to others .
HARE-183X-2,2,297.516

We must not only forgive their offenses against us ,
HARE-183X-2,2,297.517

but we must forget them . HARE-183X-2,2,297.518

We must never speak of them : HARE-183X-2,2,297.519

we must try never to think of them : HARE-183X-2,2,297.520

we must look about for what may be said in excuse of them .
HARE-183X-2,2,297.521

Not only must we abstain from rewarding others evil for evil , from
shewing them any unkindness : HARE-183X-2,2,297.522

we must be just as ready to shew them every kindness in our power , as
if they had never offended us . HARE-183X-2,2,297.523

We must try to overcome them by kindness , to melt their hearts by
pouring benefits upon them . HARE-183X-2,2,297.524

For this is the forgiveness which we crave from God .
HARE-183X-2,2,297.525

We not only desire that God should forgive us , not only that he should
blot out our offenses , but also that , for the sake of his blessed Son
, he should receive us into favour , and give us the good things of
heaven . HARE-183X-2,2,297.526

