<BEGIN_harris-1797-2>

<P_18>

<heading>

<paren> No. 10 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,18.4

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_July_6th,_Thursday,_8_P.M._1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , Having had this Morning my first Conference with the French
Plenipotentiaries , and having mutually exchanged our full Powers , I
think it my Duty to dispatch a Messenger , in order that his Majesty may
have the earliest Information of this Circumstance . HARRIS-1797-2,18.7

My Dispatch however must be confined to this alone , as nothing whatever
has yet passed relative to the Negotiation itself . HARRIS-1797-2,18.8

<P_20>

<heading>

<paren> No. 12 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,20.11

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmsbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_July_11th,_1797}

<$$heading>

I had the Honor {COM:sic} in my last , by Brooks , of the 6th instant ,
to inform your Lordship of my Arrival here , of the Manner in which I
had been received , and of my having , in the usual Form , exchanged my
full Powers with the French Plenipotentiaries . HARRIS-1797-2,20.14

On Friday the 7th at Noon we held our Second Conference .
HARRIS-1797-2,20.15

<P_21>

I opened this Second Conference with the French Plenipotentiaries , by
saying , that I myself had no Observations to make on their full Powers
, which appeared to be conformable to those usually given by the
Directory to their Plenipotentiaries , and of course must be considered
as sufficient for the Purposes expressed in them ; that I , however ,
had transmitted them by a Messenger to my Court , and reserved to myself
the Right of communicating any Objections or Remarks which I might
receive by the Return of my Messenger , relative to them .
HARRIS-1797-2,21.17

M. le Tourneur , to which , as President of the Commission , I
addressed myself , replied , that they had taken precisely the same
Steps as myself ; that <font> they <$$font> considered the full Powers I
had given in , as in due Form , and sufficient ; but that they also
reserved to themselves the same Right , in regard to Instructions they
might receive from the Directory on this Subject , as I had claimed in
regard to my Court . HARRIS-1797-2,21.18

To this , of course , I assented . HARRIS-1797-2,21.19

On Saturday the 8th instant I gave in the <font> Projet <$$font>
precisely as I had received it from your Lordship ; a Copy of which
<paren> A <$$paren> , as it is translated into French , I think it my
Duty to inclose . HARRIS-1797-2,21.20

<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> proposed that some
Time should be given them to take the Proposals I had made into
Consideration , HARRIS-1797-2,21.21

and begged of me merely for the Sake of Accuracy , and to help their
Memory , that I would be good enough either to let M. Colchen put down
on Paper , or myself send them a Note containing the Words with which I
wished the Articles left in Blank to be filled up . HARRIS-1797-2,21.22

I readily acquiesced in the latter Mode , HARRIS-1797-2,21.23

and immediately on my Return sent them the inclosed Note <paren> B
<$$paren> . HARRIS-1797-2,21.24

On Sunday Evening I received the inclosed Note <paren> C <$$paren> from
the French Plenipotentiaries , HARRIS-1797-2,21.25

and in consequence of it went to the proposed Conference Yesterday .
HARRIS-1797-2,21.26

<P_22>

<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> informed me on the
Subject of the Project I had given them , and the Note with which I had
accompanied it , that as these Papers contain many Points on which their
Instructions did not enable them to answer , they had , after having
given them a very serious Attention , sent them , with such Observations
as they had thought it their Duty to make on them , to the Directory ,
and that the Moment they received an Answer , they would communicate it
to me . But that in the meanwhile , not to delay the Progress of the
Negotiation , they wished that several Points which he termed insulated
, but which , though not referred to in our Projet , were , he said ,
inseparably connected with the general Subject of Peace , might be
discussed and got rid of now if I had no Objection , and that it was
with this View they had requested me to meet them . HARRIS-1797-2,22.28

- On my not expressing any Disapprobation to this Mode of Proceeding ,
<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> began , by saying ,
that in the Preamble of the Treaty the Title of King of France was used
; that this Title they contended could not longer be insisted on , the
Abolition of it was in a Manner essential to the full Acknowledgment of
the French Republick , and that as it was merely titular , as far as
related to His Majesty , but quite otherwise in the Sense in which it
applied to them , he hoped it would not be considered as an important
Concession . HARRIS-1797-2,22.29

I informed him , that on all former Occasions a separate Article had
been agreed to , which appeared to me to answer every Purpose they
required , and which it was my Intention , as the Treaty advanced , to
have proposed , as proper to make Part of this . HARRIS-1797-2,22.30

The Article <paren> the First of the separate ones in the Treaty of 1783
<$$paren> was then read ; HARRIS-1797-2,22.31

but they object to it , as not fully meeting their Views .
HARRIS-1797-2,22.32

It was to the Title itself , as well as to any Right which might be
supposed to arise from it , that they objected . HARRIS-1797-2,22.33

I could scarce allow myself to treat this mode of reasoning <P_23>
seriously . HARRIS-1797-2,23.34

I endeavoured to make them feel that it was cavilling for a mere word ;
that it was creating Difficulties where none existed ; and that if all
the French Monarchs in the Course of Three Centuries had allowed this to
stand in the Preamble of all Treaties and Transactions between the Two
Countries , I could not conceive , after its having been used for so
long a Period without any Claim or Pretention being set forth in
consequence of it , how it could now affect either the Dignity ,
Security , or Importance of the Republick - that in Fact such Titles
have ever been considered as indefeasible , and as Memorials and Records
of former Greatness , and not as Pretensions to present Power -
HARRIS-1797-2,23.35

and I quoted the Titles of the Kings of Sardinia and Naples , &c. as
Examples exactly in point . HARRIS-1797-2,23.36

I argued however in vain . HARRIS-1797-2,23.37

They treated it very gravely , HARRIS-1797-2,23.38

and made so strong a Stand upon it , that I could not avoid taking it
for Reference , which I thought it better to do , than feeling as I did
at the Moment , to push the Conversation farther . HARRIS-1797-2,23.39

The Second insulated Point was a very material one indeed , and which ,
although it has been adverted to as a Proposal that might possibly be
brought forward , I confess came upon me unexpectedly .
HARRIS-1797-2,23.40

- It was to ask either a Restitution of the Ships taken and destroyed at
Toulon , or an Equivalent for them . HARRIS-1797-2,23.41

They grounded this Claim on the Preliminary Declaration made by Lord
Hood on his taking Possession of Toulon ; and on the Eighth Article of
the Declaration of the Committee of the Sections to him .
HARRIS-1797-2,23.42

They said , Peace they hoped was about to be re-established ; that His
Majesty , in acknowledging the Republic , admitted that a Sovereign
{TEXT:Sovereignto} existed in the French Government ; and of course that
the Ships , held only as a {TEXT:a_as} Deposit by England till this
legal Authority was admitted , ought now to be restored .
HARRIS-1797-2,23.43

I replied that this Claim was so perfectly unlooked-for , that it was
impossible for me to have been provided <P_24> for it in my Instructions
, and that I could therefore only convey my own private Sentiments on it
, which were , that they could not have devised a Step more likely to
defeat the great End of our Mission . HARRIS-1797-2,24.44

<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> said , that he
sincerely hoped not ; that without a Restitution of the Ships , an
Equivalent might be found to effect the Purpose desired , since their
great Object was , that something should appear to prove that this just
Demand had not been overlooked by them , and was not left unsatisfied by
us . HARRIS-1797-2,24.45

I told him fairly , I did not see where this Equivalent was to be found
, or how it could be appreciated ; and that considering the great
Advantages France had already obtained by the War , and those she was
likely to obtain from the Act of Condescension I had already intimated
His Majesty was disposed to make in order to restore Peace , I was much
surprized , and deeply concerned at what I heard . HARRIS-1797-2,24.46

I trusted , therefore , that this very inadmissible Proposal would be
withdrawn . HARRIS-1797-2,24.47

They said it was not in their Power ; HARRIS-1797-2,24.48

and <font> One of them <$$font> , from a written Paper before him ,
which he said were his Instructions , read to me Words to the Effect I
have already stated . HARRIS-1797-2,24.49

Their Third Question was as to any Mortgage we might have upon the
Low_Countries , in consequence of Money lent to the Emperor by Great
Britain - HARRIS-1797-2,24.50

They wished to know if any such existed , since as they had taken the
Low_Countries charged with all their Incumbrances , they were to declare
that they should not consider themselves bound to answer any Mortgage
given for Money lent to the Emperor , for the Purpose of carrying on War
against them . HARRIS-1797-2,24.51

I told them , that without replying to this Question , supposing the
Case , to exist , the Exception they required should have been stated in
their Treaty with the Emperor , and could not at all be mixed up in ours
; that if they had taken the Low_Countries as they stood charged with
<font> all <$$font> their Incumbrances , there could be no Doubt what
these Words meant , and <P_25> that if no Exception was stated in the
First Instance none could be made with a retro-active Effect .
HARRIS-1797-2,25.52

The French Plenipotentiaries , however , were as tenacious on this Point
as on the other Two ; HARRIS-1797-2,25.53

and as I found to every Argument I used that they constantly opposed
their Instructions , I had nothing to do but to desire that they would
give me a written Paper stating their Three Claims , in order that I
might immediately transmit it to your Lordship , HARRIS-1797-2,25.54

and on this being promised , our Conference broke up . Between Four and
Five P.M. HARRIS-1797-2,25.55

Yesterday , I received the enclosed Note <paren> D <$$paren> ,
HARRIS-1797-2,25.56

and I have lost no Time since it is my Possession in preparing to send
away a Messenger , as independent of the disagreeable Subjects brought
forward in this last Conference , and which it is material should be
communicated without Delay . HARRIS-1797-2,25.57

I am anxious His Majesty should be informed of what has passed in
general up to this day , as it may perhaps furnish some Ideas as to the
possible Event of the Negotiation . HARRIS-1797-2,25.58

<P_49>

<heading>

<paren> No. 18 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,49.61

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_16th_July_1797}

<$$heading>

It was at the express Invitation of the French Plenipotentiaries that I
met them on Thursday the 13th instant ; HARRIS-1797-2,49.64

<font> One of them <$$font> stated their Motive for wishing to confer
with me , not to be in consequence of any Answer they had received from
Paris on the Subject of the <font> Projet <$$font> , which he observed
could not be expected so soon , but to resume the Discussion on the
Article which he had objected to on my first reading the <font> Projet
<$$font> , and on which they conceived it <P_50> was possible and even
expedient to argue before we entered on the more important Branches of
the Negotiation . HARRIS-1797-2,50.65

It was Article II. that he referred to . HARRIS-1797-2,50.66

He objected to the Renewal of the Treaties therein mentioned from
various Reasons ; First , That many and even most of them were
irrelevant to that we were now negotiating ; Secondly , That they were
in Contradiction to the new Order of Things established in France , as
they seem to imply an Acknowledgement that a Portion of the Regal
Authority is still existing ; Thirdly , That they might be supposed to
apply to Conventions and Stipulations , in direct Contradiction to their
present Form of Government , HARRIS-1797-2,50.67

and he quoted the Convention of Pilnitz in particular .
HARRIS-1797-2,50.68

I was about to reply to him , and I trust in a Way that would have done
away his Apprehensions on this point , when <font> another of them
<$$font> interposed by saying , That their sincere and only desire was
that the Treaty we were now entering upon might be so framed , as to
secure permanently the Object for which it was intended ; that no
Article likely to produce this end might be omitted , nor any doubtful
one inserted ; but that the whole , as well with regard to the past as
to the future , might be so clearly and distinctly expressed , that no
room for Cavil might be left . HARRIS-1797-2,50.69

This he assured me , in the Name of his Colleagues , was all that was
meant by their Objection to renew so many Treaties in which such various
Interests were blended , and so many Points discussed foreign to the
present Moment . HARRIS-1797-2,50.70

Their renewing them in a Lump , and without examining carefully to what
we were pledged by them , might involve us in difficulties much better
to be avoided , HARRIS-1797-2,50.71

I replied , that I admitted most certainly all he said , and that it was
with this View and on this principle solely that the Renewal of these
Treaties was proposed by His Majesty ; and that if he recollected
<paren> as he undoubtedly did <$$paren> the different Wars which were
terminated by these Treaties , and the many important Regulations <P_51>
stipulated by them , he would admit that the allowing them to remain in
their full Force was simply an Acknowledgement of the Tenure by which
almost all the Sovereigns of Europe , and particularly the French
Republick , held their Dominions up to this Day . That these Treaties
were become the Law of Nations , and that infinite Confusion would
result from their not being renewed . HARRIS-1797-2,51.72

He replied , that our Object was evidently the same , that we only
differed as to the Manner . HARRIS-1797-2,51.73

I thought the renewing these Treaties <font> in_toto <$$font> would the
best contribute to it ; while they were inclined to think , that
extracting from them every Thing which immediately related to the
Interests of the Two Countries , and stating it in One Article , was
more likely to attain this desirable Object . HARRIS-1797-2,51.74

<font> The French Minister <$$font> again repeated , that their First
Wish was , that the Treaty we were now making should be clear , distinct
, solid , and lasting , and such a one as could not , at any future
period , be broken through without a manifest Violation of good Faith ,
HARRIS-1797-2,51.75

And I again repeated , that nothing could be so consonant to my Orders ,
or the Intentions of my Royal Master . HARRIS-1797-2,51.76

<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> was disposed to
dwell on his Objections , which were , that these Treaties were signed
when France was a Monarchy , and that any Retrospect to those Times
implied a Sort of Censure on their present Form of Government ;
HARRIS-1797-2,51.77

but this was arguing on such weak Ground , and so incapable of being
seriously maintained , that I , to avoid superfluous Contradiction , was
very willing to let it pass unnoticed . HARRIS-1797-2,51.78

After a good deal of very conciliatory , and even amicable discussion ,
which , however , neither Party gave much Way to the other , it was
proposed by them that we should return Home , to meet again as soon as
was convenient after an attentive and deliberate perusal of the Treaties
, in order to state respectively our Ideas on this Subject .
HARRIS-1797-2,51.79

I observed , that although I was perfectly prepared to do <P_52> it at
the Moment , and felt almost bold enough to affirm , that no Measure
could be devised which would so completely meet our Intentions as an
unreserved Renewal of the Treaties they hesitated about , yet I was very
willing to acquiesce in their Proposal , with this simple Observation ,
that if any Delay arose from it , such Delay was imputable to them and
not to me . HARRIS-1797-2,52.80

My words were , " Je ne me rends pas responsable des Longueurs dans
lesquelles cette Discussion pourrait nous entrainer . "
HARRIS-1797-2,52.81

<font> The French Minister's <$$font> Answer was , " Si des Longueurs
servent à déterminer des Objets qui pourraient donner lieu à des
Querelles à l'avenir , ce sera du Tems bien employé . "
HARRIS-1797-2,52.82

It was not my Wish to contest this Assertion , HARRIS-1797-2,52.83

and our Conference ended with it . HARRIS-1797-2,52.84

<heading>

<paren> No. 19 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,52.86

{ED:Extracts_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmsbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_July_16,_1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , Yesterday at the Moment I was preparing to attend the
Conference , in which we were to enter into fuller Discussions on the
litigated Subject of the Renewal of the Treaties mentioned in the Second
Article of the Projet , I received from the French Legation the inclosed
paper <paren> A <$$paren> . HARRIS-1797-2,52.89

In about an Hour I returned the enclosed Answer <paren> B <$$paren> , to
which I received the enclosed {TEXT:enlosed} Reply <paren> C <$$paren> ;
HARRIS-1797-2,52.90

and I am this Moment come from the Conference which has taken place in
consequence of it . HARRIS-1797-2,52.91

I began by saying , that I had solicited this Interview from the same
Motive which would actuate every part of my Conduct ; that I wished to
make my Reports not only correct but conciliatory as far as depended on
me , and I now was come in order , if possible , to obtain from them
such Comments and Explanations of the Note they sent to me Yesterday ,
as would enable me , when I transmitted it to my Court , to secure the
Negotiation from being interrupted , perhaps abruptly terminated , by
the perusal {TEXT:perusa} of it . HARRIS-1797-2,52.92

If I understood it right , it meant that the Directory requires as
<font> a sine_qua_non {TEXT:sine_qna_non} Preliminary <$$font> , that
every thing the King has conquered from all and each of His Enemies
should be restored , and that till this Restoration was consented to the
Negotiation was not even to begin . HARRIS-1797-2,52.93

I said , if I was correct in this Statement , and the plain Sense of the
Declaration would bear no other Interpretation , I must add that it
would not only most certainly prevent the Treaty from beginning , but
would leave no Room for treating at all , since it deprived His Majesty
of every Means of Negotiation ; for I could not suppose that it was in
their Thoughts to intimate that the Principle of Treaty , as far as it
related to His Majesty , was to be One of all Cession and no
Compensation , and yet that was precisely the position in which His
Majesty was placed by their Note . HARRIS-1797-2,52.94

<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries , <$$font> who had let me
proceed rather reluctantly , here stopt me , HARRIS-1797-2,52.95

and said , that he and his Colleagues were exceedingly happy that I had
expressed a Wish to see them before I dispatched my Messenger ; that
they wished to assure me , that they had thought it dealing fairly and
honorably to state what they had received from the Directory in the very
Words in which it came to them ; that they should be sorry if the
Declaration they had been directed to make me , should be of a Nature to
interrupt , much less to break off , the Negotiation ; that it was the
sincere Wish of the Directory that the Negotiation should proceed and
end successfully ; and that , far from shutting the door to further
Discussions , they were perfectly ready to hear any proposals we had to
make , and only wished that these proposals should be , if possible ,
such as were compatible with their most sacred Engagements .
HARRIS-1797-2,52.96

I repeated what I had said , that no door was left open if His Majesty
was <font> in_limine <$$font> to restore every Thing ; and that a Peace
on these Conditions would not be heard of by the Country .
HARRIS-1797-2,52.97

I <P_54> observed , that immediately on leaving them , I should dispatch
a Messenger ; but what that Messenger carried would most materially
affect the progress and issue of the Negotiation ; HARRIS-1797-2,54.98

I therefore desired to know whether , in consequence of what I had heard
from them , I might consider the strict and literal Meaning of the
Declaration not to be a decided Negative <paren> which it certainly
seemed to imply <$$paren> on all compensation whatever to be made to His
Majesty , but that proposals tending to this Effect would be listened to
. HARRIS-1797-2,54.99

<font> One of them <$$font> answered , " certainly ,
HARRIS-1797-2,54.100

and if they should be found such as it will be impossible for us to
admit , we will on our Side bring forward others for your Court to
deliberate on . " HARRIS-1797-2,54.101

Under this Assurance , {TEXT:.} which at least ; to a certain Degree ,
qualifies the Declaration of Yesterday , I broke up the Conference .
HARRIS-1797-2,54.102

<P_65>

<heading>

<paren> No. 25 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,65.105

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_25th_July_1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , I have the Honour to acknowledge your Lordship's Dispatches ,
No. 19 and 20 , of the 20th inst. which were delivered to me on
Saturday the 22d inst. by the Messenger Major . HARRIS-1797-2,65.108

It was impossible that the Claim brought forward in the Note inclosed in
my No. 9 , could have produced on your Lordship's Mind any Impression
different from that which you describe , HARRIS-1797-2,65.109

and I am happy to find that the Conduct I observed , when it was first
delivered to me , was such as put it in my power to execute with great
Consistency the spirited Instructions your Lordship now sends me .
HARRIS-1797-2,65.110

Immediately on the Arrival of the Messenger , I proposed an Interview
with the French Plenipotentiaries , HARRIS-1797-2,65.111

and we met on Sunday the 23d , at One P.M. HARRIS-1797-2,65.112

<P_66>

I could not obey His Majesty's Orders in a Manner more likely to command
Attention , and to impress those who heard me with a just Sense of the
Mixture of Firmness and Moderation with which His Majesty was pleased to
conduct this important Negociation , than by employing not only the
Substance , but as far as was practicable in Conversation , the very
Words of your Lordship's Dispatch , No. 19 ; HARRIS-1797-2,66.114

and if I should attempt to relate minutely what I myself said in this
Conference , it would in Fact be little more than a Repetition of them .
HARRIS-1797-2,66.115

I began by observing , that I was certain the French Plenipotentiaries
must be fully prepared for what I now had it in Command to say :
HARRIS-1797-2,66.116

I reminded them that I had taken upon me to affirm when we were last
assembled , and immediately before I dispatched my Messenger , that the
requiring such a Preliminary as that proposed in the Note , was putting
an End at once to all Negotiation , and that I was sure Peace on such
Terms would not be heard of ; that the Orders I was then about to
communicate to them would prove that I had not made this Assertion
lightly , or in consequence of any hasty Opinion of my own , at the same
Time that it would also appear that my Royal Master was as anxiously and
as sincerely inclined to listen to all reasonable and admissible
Conditions , as He was determined to repel and reject all such as were
of an opposite Description . HARRIS-1797-2,66.117

I then , my Lord , took up my Arguments on the precise Grounds set forth
in your Lordship's , No. 19 . HARRIS-1797-2,66.118

I neither omitted any Thing , HARRIS-1797-2,66.119

nor inserted any Thing of my own , which could at all alter its Spirit ;
HARRIS-1797-2,66.120

and I only varied from the Letter inasmuch as was necessary to make it
applicable to a Conference HARRIS-1797-2,66.121

My First Object was to state , in as forcible a way as possible , the
utter Inadmissibility of the Pretension set forth in the Note , the
frivolous and illusory Reasons alledged for bringing it forward ,
HARRIS-1797-2,66.122

and I observed that , if it was persevered in , it must be lead to this
<P_67> necessary Conclusion , that there did exist when it was framed an
Intention on the part of the Directory to break off the Negotiation in
the Outset HARRIS-1797-2,67.123

My Second Object in point of Reasoning , though a very primary One in
point of Importance , was either to prevent the Negotiation breaking off
at all , or if this was not to be prevented , to endeavour to be so
clear and explicit in my Language , and to draw the Line so distinctly
between such Sacrifices as His Majesty might be inclined to make in
order to restore so great a Blessing as Peace , and those to which the
Dignity of His Crown and Interest of His Subjects would never allow him
to attend , as to make it impossible that by any future Cavil or
Subterfuge the Interruption of the Treaty , if unfortunately it should
be interrupted , could be imputed to any other Cause than the exorbitant
demands of the French Government ; HARRIS-1797-2,67.124

and the better to insure this purpose , I explained to them that His
Majesty having already in a detailed Projet stated freely and fully His
Conditions , and these Conditions having been at once rejected by a
sweeping Claim on the Part of the French Government , it was not fitting
or reasonable , neither could it be expected that any new Proposals
should originate with His Majesty : And that on every Ground the King
had a Right to expect a <font> Contre-Projèt <$$font> from them ,
stating at once plainly and without Reserve the Whole of what they had
to ask , instead of bringing forward separate points , One after another
, directly contrary to the principle on which we had agreed to begin the
Negotiation , and which , from their being insulated , could only tend
to protract and impede its progress . HARRIS-1797-2,67.125

On the First Point , on the Inadmissibility of the preliminary
Conditions as proposed by the French Government , <font> One of the
French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> said , it was impossible for them to
do more than {TEXT:that} to take it for Reference , that the
Instructions they had received when the Directory sent them the Note ,
were precise <P_68> and positive , and that they had received none since
. HARRIS-1797-2,68.126

He therefore had on that Point simply to request of me , that I would
state in Writing the several Grounds on which His Majesty rejected this
Proposition , in order that the Report transmitted by them to the
Directory might be correct ; HARRIS-1797-2,68.127

and he assured me , that if I did not think it proper to put in Writing
all the Arguments I had used to them in the Conference , they would have
no Scruple of employing those I omitted in such a Way as was the best
calculated to give them Weight , and to use <font> the French Minister
<$$font> 's own Expression , to place the Negociation once more on its
Legs . HARRIS-1797-2,68.128

In regard to the Second Point , he had no hesitation in agreeing with me
, that the best Method , and indeed the only One , which could
accelerate the Whole of the Business , was for them to give in a <font>
Contre-projet <$$font> , HARRIS-1797-2,68.129

neither did he attempt to disprove our perfect Right to expect One from
them before we made any new Proposals . HARRIS-1797-2,68.130

But he said , that it was not necessary for him to observe that as long
as they were bound by their Instructions not to give way on the
Proposition , I had now so decidedly rejected , that it was impossible
for them to move a Step without new Orders from the Directory ; that
they would ask for these Orders immediately , and lose no time in
acquainting me when they were received . HARRIS-1797-2,68.131

I observed , that in our last Conference he had intimated to me they
were empowered to come to some Explanation with me on the Subject of
Compensation to be made to His Majesty for the great Cessions he was
disposed to make ; that , at the time , I conceived these Explanations
were of a Nature to qualify the wide claim stated in the Note , and that
if I had abstained from pressing him further at the moment , it was from
perceiving a Reluctance on their Part to bring them forward : - That ,
however , if they really had such Proposals to make me , and if they
were of a Nature to meet in Substance and Effect <P_69> the Basis laid
down in the Projet I had given , I should be well disposed to listen to
them . HARRIS-1797-2,69.132

<font> One of the French Ministers , <$$font> after some Hesitation and
a Sort of silent Reference to One of his Colleagues , said he thought as
Matters now stood , it would be much better to wait their Answer from
Paris : - That it was a very important period , a Crisis in the
Negotiation , the Result of which probably would be conclusive as to its
Fate , and that it seemed to be of more Consequence to make this Result
as conformable to what he hoped I was convinced were as much their
Wishes as mine , than to waste our Time in Discussions which were
useless , not to say more , till this was ascertained .
HARRIS-1797-2,69.133

I confined myself in my Reply to saying , I had no Objection whatever to
giving to the French Plenipotentiaries a paper , stating the strong
Motives on which His Majesty rejected the proposition made in their Note
of the 15th ; and that as I , on my part , had considered it a Duty to
make my Reports as conciliatory as was consistent with Truth and
Correctness , so I heard with great pleasure the Assurances he gave me
of their intending to observe the same Line of Conduct . That as we
seemed perfectly agreed as to the propriety of their producing a <font>
Contre-Projèt , <$$font> I had nothing to say on that point , except to
express my most sincere Wish that it would soon appear , and when it did
appear , be such a one as would lead to a speedy and satisfactory
Conclusion of the Negotiation . HARRIS-1797-2,69.134

Right Honourable Lord Grenville . HARRIS-1797-2,69.135

<P_73>

<heading>

<paren> No. 27 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,73.138

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_Sunday,_August_6th,_1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , I fully expected , when I received the inclosed Note on Friday
, that the Conference proposed was to acquaint me with the Instructions
the French Plenipotentiaries had received from the Directory , on the
Note I had given in near a Fortnight ago , as an Answer to that in which
the Restitution of the Whole of His Majesty's Conquests from each of His
Enemies is required as an indispensable Preliminary to all Negotiation .
HARRIS-1797-2,73.141

I was therefore surprised and disappointed , when I had taken my Place
at the Conference , to hear from the French Plenipotentiaries that the
Letters they <P_74> had received that Morning from Paris did not bring
any specifick Reply to my last Note , but only went to inform them that
the Directory had taken the Subject into their most serious
Consideration , and would acquaint them as soon as possible with the
Result . HARRIS-1797-2,74.142

I could not avoid expressing my Concern and Surprise that there existed
any Hesitation whatever in the Mind of the Directory on a Point , which
, although a very important , was certainly a very simple one : - That
to allow it to remain in Doubt whether His Majesty was to have any
Compensation or not , was in other Words to leave it in Doubt whether
the Directory sincerely meant Peace or not : - And that , although I was
very far from wishing for any improper Haste , or not to move in a
Matter of such Magnitude without becoming Prudence and Deliberation ,
yet I could not forbear lamenting that more than a Month had now elapsed
without our having advanced a single Step , notwithstanding His Majesty
had , in the very Outset of the Negotiation , manifested a Moderation
and Forbearance unprecedented under similar Circumstances : - That
anxious as I was not to prejudice it by any Representations of mine , I
must say , this Delay placed me in a very aukward Position , as I really
did not perceive how I could account for it in a Way at all satisfactory
, at the same Time that it was quite impossible for me to suffer a
longer Space of Time to pass over without writing {TEXT:wrising} to my
Court . HARRIS-1797-2,74.143

<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> expressed his
earnest Wish that I would write immediately ; HARRIS-1797-2,74.144

he was confident this Delay would be seen in its true light ;
HARRIS-1797-2,74.145

and added , " Si nous n'avançons pas à pas de Géant , j'espère que nous
marchons d'un pas sur . " HARRIS-1797-2,74.146

- And another of them repeated this Phrase . HARRIS-1797-2,74.147

I expressed my sincere Hope this might be the Case ,
HARRIS-1797-2,74.148

but it would have been much better proved by the Communication of the
Counter Project ; they had <P_75> in a Manner pledged themselves to
procure , than by any vague and indeterminate Assurances of what might
possibly be the Result of the present Suspension of all Business .
HARRIS-1797-2,75.149

They observed to me , that the Counter Project would of course be
<paren> virtually <$$paren> contained in their next Instructions , and
that their only Motive for wishing to see me was , to convince me that
this Delay had neither originated with them , nor been occasioned at
Paris by any Want of Attention to this important Business , or from any
Cause not immediately and closely connected with it .
HARRIS-1797-2,75.150

I desired to know from them when they thought it probable they should
receive positive and explicit Instructions , whether in Three , Four ,
or Five Days ? HARRIS-1797-2,75.151

They said , it would be probably Eight or Ten . HARRIS-1797-2,75.152

And <font> one of them <$$font> observed , that as our not meeting more
frequently gave Rise to many idle Rumours and false Reports , he would
propose to me , if I had no Objection {TEXT:Obejection} , to meet every
other Day at Two o'clock : That it was very possible that in our next
Two or Three Meetings we might have nothing material to say , but that
we should get better acquainted with each other , and in our
Conversations mutually suggest Ideas which might be of Use .
HARRIS-1797-2,75.153

- I readily consented to this . HARRIS-1797-2,75.154

I had a Confederate again this Morning . HARRIS-1797-2,75.155

As I was very desirous of being enabled to transmit to your Lordship
some more satisfactory Account as to the Motives of this Delay , I again
pressed the French Plenipotentiaries on this Point .
HARRIS-1797-2,75.156

Each of them repeated what they had said before , HARRIS-1797-2,75.157

and on my endeavouring to make them feel how impossible it was that His
Majesty should not be hurt at this Demur on so very simple a Point ,
<font> One of them <$$font> said , you ought to augur favourably from it
; HARRIS-1797-2,75.158

your Note was a Refusal to agree to what was stated by the Directory in
their Instructions to us as a sine_quâ_non : HARRIS-1797-2,75.159

If the Directory were determined to persist in this sine_quâ_non , they
would have said so at once - HARRIS-1797-2,75.160

" Je <P_76> vous assure qu'il nous auroit promptement renvoyé Courier ,
" were his words : HARRIS-1797-2,76.161

- The Time they took to deliberate indicates beyond a Doubt that they
are looking for some Temperament , HARRIS-1797-2,76.162

and it scarce can be doubted that one will be found .
HARRIS-1797-2,76.163

- I said I was well pleased to hear him say this ; but that still he
must be aware that it would not be an easy Task for me to make my
Dispatches To-day either interesting or satisfactory .
HARRIS-1797-2,76.164

<font> Another of the French Ministers <$$font> said that he really
believed that this would be the only great Impediment we should have to
encounter , that every Thing would go on quickly and smoothly , and that
I must admit the present to be a very important and difficult Point in
the Negotiation . HARRIS-1797-2,76.165

I agreed with him entirely as to its Importance , HARRIS-1797-2,76.166

but could not acquiesce as to its Difficulty . HARRIS-1797-2,76.167

I am very sorry , my Lord , that in such a Moment and after waiting so
long , I should not be able to send you more explicit and decisive
Assurances ; HARRIS-1797-2,76.168

but it is not in my Power to compel the French Negotiators to move on
faster . HARRIS-1797-2,76.169

All I can do is by my Conduct and Language to take care that no Part
whatever of the Imputation of Delay should attach to me .
HARRIS-1797-2,76.170

I have , at every Conference I have held , always declared my Readiness
, to proceed , HARRIS-1797-2,76.171

and I shall not fail to repeat this every Time we meet .
HARRIS-1797-2,76.172

Right Honourable Lord Grenville , &c. &c. &c. HARRIS-1797-2,76.173

<P_77>

<heading>

<paren> No. 29 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,77.176

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_August_14th,_1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , In consequence of the Resolution we had come to , to meet on
the Days of the Arrival of the Post from Paris , our Conferences for
this last Week have taken place regularly every other Morning , except
on Thursday the 10th of August , which <P_78> being the Anniversary of
One of their National Festivals , the French Legation could not attend .
HARRIS-1797-2,78.179

I have in mine , No. 17 , given your Lordship an Account of every Thing
which passed in these Conferences , up to that of the 6th .
HARRIS-1797-2,78.180

On the 8th nothing was said at all worth transmitting except an
Intimation slung out by {TEXT:by_by} <font> One of the French
Plenipotentiaries <$$font> that it would be necessary to take into
Consideration the Rights of Natural Nations on this Occasion .
HARRIS-1797-2,78.181

But as he spoke very vaguely , and in general Terms , I did not choose
to press him for an Explanation , as I consider it more judicious to
avoid Discussions on separate and collateral Points , and not to enter
into Negotiation till the Whole can be brought under Deliberation at
once . HARRIS-1797-2,78.182

What passed on the 12th was rather more interesting .
HARRIS-1797-2,78.183

The Return of Mr. Wesley afforded me a very natural Opportunity of
expressing the Impatience with which an Answer to my last Note was
expected by my Court ; that Three Weeks had now elapsed since its
Transmission , and that although I by no Means wished to insinuate that
due Attention had not been paid to so very important a Subject as that
on which we were treating , yet I could not but greatly lament , that
Day after Day should be allowed to pass away without our proceeding at
all in the great Business for which we were met . HARRIS-1797-2,78.184

<font> One of the French Ministers <$$font> said , That it was
impossible I could lament this Delay more than they did ; that they had
already declared to me that it was occasioned by a Wish not to create
but to remove Difficulties ; and they could assure me positively , that
the French Government had no other Object in View , and that I should
find , when once we began fairly to negotiate , we should proceed very
rapidly . HARRIS-1797-2,78.185

I replied it was indeed very material to make good the Time we had lost
. HARRIS-1797-2,78.186

<font> The French Minister <$$font> answered , you would not call it
Time lost if you knew how it was employed . HARRIS-1797-2,78.187

On my expressing , by my Manner , <P_79> a Wish to be Informed , he went
on , by saying we will not scruple to tell you , though we feel we ought
not yet to do it officially , that we are consulting with our Allies ;
that we have communicated to them all that has passed here ;
HARRIS-1797-2,79.188

we have stated that , unless they mean to continue the War , they must
release us from our Engagements , and enable us , to a certain Degree ,
to meet your Proposals . HARRIS-1797-2,79.189

The Conference of To-day is this Moment over . HARRIS-1797-2,79.190

<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> informed me , that
he had received this Morning a Letter from the President of the
Directory , assuring him that in Four or Five Days they would receive
their final Instructions ; HARRIS-1797-2,79.191

and he added of himself , that he trusted these would be such as would
enable us to continue our Work without any further Interruption .
HARRIS-1797-2,79.192

I said , I hoped these Instructions would be in Substance a
Counter_Project , as I did not see how any Thing short of One could
enable us to proceed so rapidly as he described . HARRIS-1797-2,79.193

He agreed with me entirely , HARRIS-1797-2,79.194

and assured me , that both he and his Colleagues had repeatedly stated
the Necessity of a Counter_Project being sent them ;
HARRIS-1797-2,79.195

and he observed , that he really thought the French Government might
have foreseen every Thing which had passed , and been prepared with one
; and that this would have saved a great deal of valuable Time .
HARRIS-1797-2,79.196

As I could not myself have said more , I readily gave a full Assent to
what I heard . HARRIS-1797-2,79.197

<P_81>

<heading>

<paren> No. 32 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,81.200

{ED:Copy_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_August_22,_1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , In my Conference of this Morning , I took an Opportunity of
remarking to the French Plenipotentiaries on the very unfair and
extraordinary Assertion which had appeared in the Message of the 9th
Instant , from the Directory to the Council of Five_Hundred , <P_82>
viz. {TEXT:viz,} que les Puissances coalisées ont mis autant de Lenteur
dans les Negotiations , qu'elles avoient montré de l'Ardeur pour les
terminer . " HARRIS-1797-2,82.203

I observed to them that I had Orders from my Court to ask a precise
Explanation , whether this Accusation of Delay was meant to apply to the
Manner in which His Majesty had conducted the Negotiation at Lisle , and
if it was so meant , to declare that no Accusation was ever more
destitute of Foundation , nor a wider Deviation from the real Fact .
HARRIS-1797-2,82.204

I said I was perfectly ready to abide by their Determination on this
Point , convinced that it was impossible for them not to acknowledge
that the Delay <paren> if there had been any blameable Delay <$$paren>
rested with the French Government and not with His Majesty .
HARRIS-1797-2,82.205

The French Plenipotentiaries admitted this to be most strictly true ;
that the Phrase I had quoted was an ill judged one , and <font> mal
redigée <$$font> ; but that it could not in any Point of View whatever
be construed as applying to England ; and they were ready to say , that
when it was written , the Directory alluded solely to the Court of
Vienna ; that they could assure me that they had been very faithful in
their Reports , and that when they said this it was saying in other
Words , that I had carried on the Negotiation with as much Expedition as
possible , and that if it had proceeded slowly for this last Month , the
Slowness arose on their Side and not on mine . HARRIS-1797-2,82.206

I said I could not for an Instant call in question their Feelings on
this Point ; HARRIS-1797-2,82.207

it was the Insinuation conveyed in the Message , and which had gone over
Europe , that it was necessary for me to clear up , and to know whether
the Directory thought and felt as they did . HARRIS-1797-2,82.208

<font> One of the French Ministers <$$font> , with very strong
Expressions , assured me the Directory certainly did think and feel like
them ; that no unfair or insidious Allusion was meant ,
HARRIS-1797-2,82.209

and added , " que ce Message etoit fait pour stimuler les Conseils . "
HARRIS-1797-2,82.210

I went on by observing it was very essential for me to have this fully
explained , and that I should give them <P_83> in a Note to this Effect
; HARRIS-1797-2,83.211

they requested I would not , it would lead to disagreeable Discussions ,
HARRIS-1797-2,83.212

and would not answer the End I proposed . HARRIS-1797-2,83.213

They would take upon themselves <font> now <$$font> to assure me in the
Name of the Directory that nothing at all similar to the Construction I
put on the Phrase was intended , and that as soon as they could receive
an Answer to the Report they should make of To-day's Conversation , they
would say the same from the Directory itself . HARRIS-1797-2,83.214

I hope , my Lord , I have , therefore , by obtaining this very precise
and formal Disavowal of an Intention to fix any Imputation of Delay on
His Majesty's Government , fulfilled the Object of my Instructions on
this particular Point . HARRIS-1797-2,83.215

If when the French Plenipotentiaries speak from the Directory , the
Disavowal should not be equally satisfactory and complete , I then will
not fail , according to your Lordship's Order , to give in a Note .
HARRIS-1797-2,83.216

I have the Honor to be , &c. <paren> Signed <$$paren> Malmesbury .
HARRIS-1797-2,83.217

Right Honourable Lord Grenville . HARRIS-1797-2,83.218

<heading>

<paren> No. 33 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,83.220

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_August_22,_1797}

<$$heading>

The Four Conferences I have held with the French Plenipotentiaries ,
since I last wrote to your Lordship on the 14th instant , will not , I
fear , furnish very interesting Materials for a Dispatch .
HARRIS-1797-2,83.223

Our Conference of this Morning was principally employed in what I have
related in my other Dispatch ; HARRIS-1797-2,83.224

but the French Plenipotentiaries assured me , that by Thursday , or at
the latest by Saturday , they expected to receive their long expected
Messenger . HARRIS-1797-2,83.225

<heading>

<paren> No. 34 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,83.227

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_August_29,_1797}

<$$heading>

I am extremely sorry to be forced to announce to <P_84> your Lordship ,
that fresh Delays occur in the Progress of the Negotiation .
HARRIS-1797-2,84.230

The French Plenipotentiaries informed me at our Conference Yesterday ,
that the last Answer from Holland was so unsatisfactory that the
Directory had ordered the Minister for Foreign Affairs to return it to
the Dutch Ministers at Paris ; that the Dutch Ministers could not take
upon themselves to alter it in the Way the Directory proposed , but had
been obliged to refer to their Government for new Orders ; and that
therefore , supposing no Time to be lost in Deliberation on this Subject
at the Hague , it would be at least a Week from To-day before any
farther Account could be received here . HARRIS-1797-2,84.231

After lamenting this unexpected Procrastination of our Business , I
expressed a Wish to know what the Dutch Answer had been , what
Objections the Directory had made to it , and the Alteration they were
desirous it should undergo . HARRIS-1797-2,84.232

<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> said , it had not
been communicated to them , but that he understood it was <font>
complexe , louche , et peu satisfaisante . <$$font> - That the
Directory expected it should be clear and distinct , and such an one as
would enable them to send such Instructions here , as would allow us to
go on with the Negotiations in a Way to recover the Time we had lost .
HARRIS-1797-2,84.233

<heading>

<paren> No. 35 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,84.235

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_September_5,_1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , I should have considered what has passed in our Conferences
since I last had the Honour of writing to your Lordship by Mr. Wesley ,
as in itself too unimportant to authorize me to dispatch a Messenger ,
but that in general I think it my Duty never to leave your Lordship more
than a Week without hearing from me ; HARRIS-1797-2,84.238

and I was also glad of an Opportunity <P_85> to acknowledge the Receipt
of your Lordship's Dispatch , No. 23 , which was delivered to me by the
Messenger Shaw , on the 31st August , at 10 . P.M.
HARRIS-1797-2,85.239

Nothing but common Conversation passed in our Conferences of the 30th
August and of the 1st September . HARRIS-1797-2,85.240

In that of the 3d the French Plenipotentiaries confirmed what they had
taken upon themselves to assure me on the 22d August , in consequence of
the Representation I had your Lordship's Orders to make on the
Expressions employed by the Directory in their Message of the 9th August
to the Councils , and which Expressions appeared to fix an Imputation of
Delay on his Majesty's Government , in the Progress of the Negotiation .
HARRIS-1797-2,85.241

They said that they had reported to the Directory what I observed on
this Subject , and they were now charged to repeat what I had already
heard from them , and to declare that no Intention similar to that I
supposed ever existed on the Part of the Directory .
HARRIS-1797-2,85.242

In our Conference of this Morning , although I had Reason to expect that
the Answer from the Hague was arrived at Paris , yet it was not admitted
by the French Plenipotentiaries . HARRIS-1797-2,85.243

<heading>

<paren> No. 36 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,85.245

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_9th_September,_1797}

<$$heading>

I need not say that the Two Conferences which have been held since I
dispatched the Messenger , Brooks , were not likely , under the present
Circumstances of this Country , to afford any Thing extremely important
or interesting . HARRIS-1797-2,85.248

In That of Thursday the 7th , <font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries
<$$font> began , on my entering the Room , by announcing a Wish that the
great Event which had taken place at Paris , should not interrupt for a
long Time our Negotiation , or destroy the pleasing Prospect we had of
its soon terminating successfully : HARRIS-1797-2,85.249

and from his Manner I clearly saw he meant {TEXT:ment} to convey the
<P_86> Idea that it was his Opinion it would not . HARRIS-1797-2,86.250

I endeavoured to discover whether he spoke in consequence of any private
Intelligence {TEXT:Inteligence} he had received from Paris , or simply
from his own private Judgement , HARRIS-1797-2,86.251

and I found it was entirely from the latter . HARRIS-1797-2,86.252

In our Conference of this Morning , he said they were still without any
Letters from M. Talleyrand <paren> which rather surprised him <$$paren>
; HARRIS-1797-2,86.253

but he could assure me , <font> with Certainty <$$font> , that by Monday
they should be empowered to go on with the Negotiation , and that I
might safely say so to my Court . HARRIS-1797-2,86.254

<heading>

<paren> No. 38 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,86.256

{ED:Copy_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_Monday,_September_11,_1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , On my going to the Conference this Morning , the French
Plenipotentiaries informed me that the whole <P_87> French Legation was
recalled , and that Messrs. Treilhard and Bonnier d'Alco were appointed
in their Room . HARRIS-1797-2,87.259

They said , their Orders were to communicate this Event to me
immediately , and at the same Time to add , in the Name of the French
Government , that this Alteration , in the Choice of the Negotiators ,
would not produce any {COM:missing_word} in the Disposition of the
Directory , to bring the Negotiation to a happy Issue .
HARRIS-1797-2,87.260

I assured them I was extremely sorry to hear that they were recalled .
That we had hitherto acted together so cordially , that it was to be
lamented any Circumstances had arisen which made the French Government
think it advisable to put the Negotiation into other Hands . That I
received with Satisfaction what they told me as to the Sentiments
manifested by the Directory , relative to the Negotiation , and that I
could assure them , they were such as certainly existed in the Breast of
my Royal Master . HARRIS-1797-2,87.261

I then suggested to them , whether it would not be proper to give me an
Official Note on this Occasion , since it made a very marked Period in
the Negotiation ; HARRIS-1797-2,87.262

and as they perfectly agreed with me on the Propriety of this , they
sent me that I now enclose . HARRIS-1797-2,87.263

I consider this Event as so material , that I do not lose a Moment in
dispatching One of my Servants to England , as I have at present no
Messenger with me . HARRIS-1797-2,87.264

I have the Honour to be &c. <paren> Signed <$$paren> Malmesbury .
HARRIS-1797-2,87.265

Right Honourable Lord Grenville . HARRIS-1797-2,87.266

<P_90>

<heading>

<paren> No. 41 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,90.269

{ED:Extract_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_17th_September,_1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , The new French Plenipotentiaries , Messieurs Treilhard and
Bonnier d'Alco , with their principal Secretary M. Derché , and Two
private Secretaries , arrived here at Five o'Clock A.M. on Wednesday
the 13th Instant . HARRIS-1797-2,90.272

At Eleven A.M. they sent M. Derché to acquaint me with their Arrival ,
and to inquire at what Hour I would receive their Visit .
HARRIS-1797-2,90.273

In consequence of my saying whenever it was convenient to them , they
came immediately , attended by Messieurs Le Tourneur , Maret , and
Colchen . HARRIS-1797-2,90.274

On taking Leave , M. Le Tourneur came forward HARRIS-1797-2,90.275

and said to me , in his Name and that of his Colleagues , that they
could not terminate their Mission without expressing the Satisfaction
they had felt from the Openness and Candour <paren> Loyauté et Franchise
<$$paren> with which I had acted during the Whole of the Negotiation ,
or take Leave of me , without expressing their sincere personal Regrets
; that the Recollection of my Conduct would always be agreeable to them
, and that it had given me the strongest Title to their Esteem and good
Wishes . HARRIS-1797-2,90.276

After giving the new Plenipotentiaries as much Time as was necessary to
return to their own House , I sent Mr. Ross to ask at what Hour I might
return <P_91> their Visit ; HARRIS-1797-2,91.277

and in consequence of the Answer , I went to them , attended by Lord
Morpeth and Mr. Ellis . HARRIS-1797-2,91.278

I took an Opportunity of returning the Compliment M. Le Tourneur had
made me ; HARRIS-1797-2,91.279

and I must in Justice repeat my Lord , what I have already said , that
his Conduct and that of his Colleagues has , in every Point which has
depended on them , been perfectly fair and honorable , and in no
Instance contrary to the Principles they announced , and the Professions
they made . HARRIS-1797-2,91.280

It is therefore impossible for me not to regret them , and not to
consider the Change of Negotiators at least as a very unpleasant , if
not a very unfortunate Incident . HARRIS-1797-2,91.281

<heading>

<paren> No. 42 . <$$paren> HARRIS-1797-2,91.283

{ED:Copy_of_a_Dispatch_from_Lord_Malmesbury_to_Lord_Grenville,_dated_Lisle,_17th_September,_1797}

<$$heading>

My Lord , I shall endeavour in this Dispatch to give your Lordship as
circumstantial an Account as my Memory will allow me to do , of what has
passed in the Two Conferences I have held with the new French
Plenipotentiaries . HARRIS-1797-2,91.286

In that of Friday the 14th , after communicating to me the Arrêté of the
Directory appointing them to succeed Messieurs Le Tourneur and Maret ,
and empowering them to continue the Negotiation with me , <font> One of
them <$$font> began by making the strongest Assurances of the sincere
Desire entertained by the Directory for Peace . HARRIS-1797-2,91.287

He observed , that if this Desire had manifested itself so strongly at a
Moment when the Two great Authorities of the Country were at Variance ,
it must naturally become stronger and be exerted with more Effect when
all spirit of Division was suppressed , and when the Government was
strengthened by the perfect Concord which now reigns between all its
Branches : That the first and most material Point to be ascertained in
every Negotiation was the Extent of the full Powers with which the
Negotiators were vested ; that I should find theirs to be very ample :
and that , as it was necessary to the Success of our Discussions that
mine should be equally so , they had it in Command to present a Note ,
the Object of which was to inquire , whether I was authorized to treat
on the Principle of a general Restitution of every Possession remaining
in His Majesty's Hands , not only belonging to them , but to their
Allies ; that I was not unacquainted with their Laws and with their
Treaties ; that a great Country could not on any Occasion act in
Contradiction to them ; and that , aware as I must be of this , I could
not but expect the Question contained in the Note , neither could I
consider the Requisition of an explicit Answer , previous to entering
upon the Negotiation , as arising from any other Motive than that of the
most perfect Wish , on the Part of the Directory , to bring it to a
successful , and above all , to a speedy Conclusion .
HARRIS-1797-2,91.288

I replied , that if after what I heard I could allow myself to hope for
such an Event as he seemed to think probable , or give any Credit to the
pacifick Dispositions he announced on the Part of the French Government
, such Hope must arise solely from the Confidence I might place in his
Assurances ; since the Measure itself now adopted by the Directory was
certainly calculated to make a directly contrary Impression on my Mind ;
that I could not conceal from him , that far from expecting such a
Question , its being now put surprized me beyond Measure , and still
more so , when from his Comment upon it I was to infer , that he wished
me to consider it as tending to promote a speedy Pacification ; that the
Question expressed in the Note he had delivered for he had given it to
me , and I had read it over as he ended his Speech was Word for Word the
same as that put to me by his Predecessor so long ago as the 14th July ;
that on the 15th I had , from my own Authority , given an Answer , and
that this Answer I confirmed fully and distinctly by Order of my Court
on the 24th July ; that these Notes had to the present Hour remained
unnoticed , and a delay of Two Months had occurred ; that the Reasons
assigned for this Delay were , as I was repeatedly told , a decided
Resolution on the Part of the French Government to listen to the
reasonable Proposals made by His Majesty ; but that being bound by their
Engagements with the Court of Madrid and the Batavian Republick , and
wishing to treat their Allies with Consideration , they were desirous of
Consulting with them previous to any positive Declaration , and
obtaining from them a voluntary Release from those Engagements
sufficient to enable the French Plenipotentiaries here to admit the
Basis His Majesty had established , and to ground on it all future
Discussion which might arise in the Course of the Negotiation ; that if
he had read over the Papers left , undoubtedly , in his Possession by
his Predecessors , he would find what I stated to be strictly true ; and
that of course it could not be difficult to account for my Surprize ,
when , after being told that he and his Colleague were to take up the
Negotiation precisely where they found it , it now became evident that
it was to be flung back to the very Point from which we started , and
flung back in a Way which seemed to threaten a Conclusion very different
from that he foretold . HARRIS-1797-2,91.289

I shall not attempt to follow <font> the French Minister <$$font>
through the very elaborate and certainly able Speech he made in Reply ,
with a View to convince me that the Enquiry into the Extent of my
Full-Powers was the strongest Proof the Directory could furnish of their
pacifick Intention , and the shortest Road they could take to accomplish
the desired End . HARRIS-1797-2,91.290

It was in order to give Activity to the Negotiation , <paren> <font>
activer <$$font> was his Word <$$paren> , and to prevent its stagnating
, that this Demand was made so specifically ; HARRIS-1797-2,91.291

and he <P_94> intimated to me , that it was impossible for the Directory
to proceed till a full and satisfactory Answer had been given to it .
HARRIS-1797-2,94.292

I interrupted him here , by saying , their Manner of acting appeared to
me calculated to decide the Negotiation at once , not to give it
Activity , since it must be known , I could not have Powers of the
Description he alluded to ; and even supposing I had , the admitting it
would be in Fact neither more or less than a compleat Avowal of the
Principle itself , which once agreed on , nothing would be left to
negotiate about . HARRIS-1797-2,94.293

<font> The other French Plenipotentiary <$$font> interposed here , by
saying , <font> that would not be the Case ; HARRIS-1797-2,94.294

many Articles would still remain to be proposed , and many Points for
important Discussion . <$$font> HARRIS-1797-2,94.295

I said , every Word I heard seemed to present fresh Difficulties .
HARRIS-1797-2,94.296

Without replying to me , the <font> first-mentioned Minister <$$font>
went on by endeavouring to prove , that the Avowal of having Powers to a
certain Extent , did not imply the Necessity of exercising them ; that
it was the Avowal alone for which they contended , in order to determine
at once the Form the Negotiation was to take ; that the Note , and the
Time prescribed in it , were in consequence of the most positive Orders
from the Directory ; and that if I drew from it a Conclusion different
from the Assurances they had made me in the Name of the Directory , I
did not make the true Inference . HARRIS-1797-2,94.297

I replied , that , although the prescribing the Day on which the
Question was to put me as the Term within which I was to give my Answer
to it , was both a very unusual and abrupt Mode of proceeding , yet as a
Day was much more than sufficient for the Purpose , I should forbear
making any particular Remark on this Circumstance : That as to the
Inference to be drawn from the positive Manner in which they appeared to
maintain the Question put to me , I really could not make it different
from that I had already expressed : That the reverting , after an
Interval of Two Months , to a Question already answered , and which
Question involved the Fate of the Negotiation , certainly could not be
considered as wearing a very conciliatory Appearance : That in regard to
my Answer , it could not be different from that I had given before :
That my full Powers , which were in their Hands , were as extensive as
any could be , and it did not depend on me to give them more or less
Latitude ; but that in fact their Question went not to the Extent of my
full Powers , but to require of me to declare the Nature of my
Instructions ; and on this Point they certainly would forgive me if I
did not speak out till such Time as the Circumstances of the Negotiation
called upon me to do it . HARRIS-1797-2,94.298

<font> The French Minister <$$font> strove to prove to me , what he had
before attempted , that the claiming a Right of Enquiry into the Nature
of the discretionary Authority confided in a Minister , by no Means
implied an Intention of requiring of him to act up to it to its utmost
Limits . HARRIS-1797-2,94.299

I observed , if no such Intention existed , why institute the Enquiry ?
and if it did exist , why not say so at once ? HARRIS-1797-2,94.300

- <font> He <$$font> said , what we now ask is little more than a Matter
of Form ; HARRIS-1797-2,94.301

when you have given us your Answer , we shall follow it up by another
Step , which we are ordered to take . HARRIS-1797-2,94.302

I said , my Answer was given Two Months ago ; that , although I was
ready to give it them again , and in Writing , as One to their Note ,
yet , as it could not be different , I did not see why they should not
proceed immediately to the other Step , by which I was told the Question
{TEXT:Qestion} was to be followed up . HARRIS-1797-2,94.303

It would be premature , said <font> the French Minister <$$font> ;
HARRIS-1797-2,94.304

but in drawing up your Answer , do not forget the Force of the Arguments
I have used , or in your Report to your Court , the Assurances we have
given of the earnest Wish of the Directory to terminate the War .
HARRIS-1797-2,94.305

I replied , that I still must maintain , that from the Manner in which
they thought proper to define full Powers , I could see no Distinction
between acknowledging the Power and admitting the Principle ; <P_96> and
that the Question itself could not be put with any other Intention -
<paren> Your Lordship will observe , from the subsequent Notes which
passed between us , that I was perfectly grounded in this Assertion
<$$paren> ; - that in my Reports , they might be fully assured I should
act up to that conciliatory Spirit , which , from the earliest Period of
the Negotiation , had always decided my Conduct ; and that ,
inauspicious as Appearances were , I certainly would be careful not to
make them look <font> hostile <$$font> . HARRIS-1797-2,96.306

At the Word hostile , both the French Plenipotentiaries were most warm
in their Protestations , that nothing could be less so ; that the Idea
of the Negotiation breaking off was as far from their Thoughts as from
their Wishes . HARRIS-1797-2,96.307

I said , that although I heard this with Pleasure , yet I could not
avoid adverting to Facts , and that , when instead of an Answer , and
the favourable Answer which I had every Reason to expect , I received
only the Repetition of a Demand , which had been already satisfied Two
Months ago ; I certainly could not think this a good Omen .
HARRIS-1797-2,96.308

If it did not bode an immediate Rupture of the Treaty , it assuredly did
not announce a near and successful Termination of it .
HARRIS-1797-2,96.309

<font> The above-mentioned Minister <$$font> persisted I was mistaken ;
that the Business would end speedily ; that Speed was their Wish , and
Speed with Peace for its Object . HARRIS-1797-2,96.310

On breaking up our Conference , I said , that I took it for granted we
should meet again at the usual Hour , on Sunday . HARRIS-1797-2,96.311

<font> He <$$font> said , that it perhaps might not be necessary , but
that they certainly would let me know in Time ; HARRIS-1797-2,96.312

and this conveyed to me the first Idea of what has since taken place .
HARRIS-1797-2,96.313

I inclose your Lordship the Note A , I receive in this Conference from
the French Plenipotentiaries , and the Answer B , which I made to it
Yesterday Morning at 10 A.M. HARRIS-1797-2,96.314

At 6 P.M. the Note C was transmitted to me ; to which at 8 P.M. I
returned the Answer D , by <P_97> Mr. Ross , whom I sent in order that
he might bring the Passports I asked for ; HARRIS-1797-2,97.315

but at a Quarter before 10 P.M. M. Derché , Secretary of the French
Legation , delivered to me the Paper marked E ; HARRIS-1797-2,97.316

and this Morning at 9 A.M. I replied by the Note F , which immediately
produced that marked G . HARRIS-1797-2,97.317

The Notes sent me by the French Plenipotentiaries speak for themselves ;
HARRIS-1797-2,97.318

and it is unnecessary to enter into any Reflexions on them .
HARRIS-1797-2,97.319

I am willing to hope that the Answers I have made were such as became
the Situation in which I stand , the Importance of the Cause intrusted
to me , and the steady but temperate Conduct which the Spirit of my
Instructions injoin me to hold . HARRIS-1797-2,97.320

It was my Wish to give every Opening to the French Plenipotentiaries to
recall {TEXT:recal} the violent Step they had taken ; and , if possible
, to convince them of its extreme Impropriety . HARRIS-1797-2,97.321

And it was with this View , and with a most anxious Desire not to
exclude all Hope of the Restoration of Peace , that I determined on
suggesting the Idea of our meeting once more before I left Lisle .
HARRIS-1797-2,97.322

This Meeting took place To-day at Noon : HARRIS-1797-2,97.323

I opened it by observing , That the several Notes they had received from
me since the preceding Evening had been too expressive of the Surprize I
felt at the Measure the Directory had thought proper to adopt , to make
it necessary for me to enlarge upon it in this Conference ;
HARRIS-1797-2,97.324

and indeed my sole Motive for suggesting that it might be for our mutual
Satisfaction that it should be held , was , because this Measure
appeared to me to be in such direct Contradiction to the very strong
Assurances I had so constantly and repeatedly heard from them , and to
the pacifick Intentions with which they declared they were sent , that
it was my earnest Wish <paren> before I considered their Conduct as
forcing me to a Step which must so materially affect the Success of the
Negotiation <$$paren> , to be perfectly certain that I understood
clearly and <P_98> distinctly the precise Meaning of their official
Notes . HARRIS-1797-2,98.325

On their admitting that nothing could be more reasonable than that I
should , on so important a Point , require Explanation , or more
satisfactory to them than to give it me <paren> as far as lay in their
Power <$$paren> , I proceeded by saying , that it appeared to me that I
was called upon to produce immediately my full Powers , or rather my
Instructions <paren> for however different these were in themselves , in
their Demand they seemed constantly blended <$$paren> , and that if
either I refused to consent to this , or if on consenting to it , it was
found that I was not authorised to treat on the Principle they laid down
, I was then in the Space of Twenty-four Hours to leave Lille , and
return to my Court ; and that I was required to obtain full Authority to
admit this Principle , if it was wished the Negotiation should proceed .
HARRIS-1797-2,98.326

This I said appeared to me to be the evident Sense of the Notes ,
HARRIS-1797-2,98.327

and I begged to know whether I had mistaken it or not .
HARRIS-1797-2,98.328

<font> One of the French Plenipotentiaries <$$font> said , " You have
understood it exactly ; HARRIS-1797-2,98.329

I hope you equally understand the Intention of the French Government ,
which is to accelerate Peace by removing every Obstacle which stands in
its Way . " HARRIS-1797-2,98.330

I replied , that having now no Doubt left on my Mind as to their exact
Meaning , and being quite sure notwithstanding the Observation they had
made , <font> que j'avais saisi la veritable Intention de leur Note
<$$font> , it would , I feared , be a very unprofitable Employment of
our Time to argue either on the Nature of the Principle they announced
as a sine_quâ_non , to even a preliminary Discussion , or on the extreme
Difficulty of reconciling the peremptory Demand with which they opened
their Mission , to the pacifick Professions that accompanied it ; that
if they were determined to persist in this Demand , it was much better
to avoid all useless Altercation ; and nothing in that Case remained for
me to do , but to ask for my Passport , and to signify to them my
Intention <P_99> of leaving France at an early Hour the next Morning .
HARRIS-1797-2,99.331

They said , they had their Hands tied by an Arrêté of the Directory ,
and were bound to observe the Conduct they had followed by the most
positive Orders ; HARRIS-1797-2,99.332

and although we remained together some Time longer , not a Hint dropped
from them expressive of a Wish that , instead of going myself for new
Instructions , I should either Write for them by a Messenger , or obtain
them by sending to England One of the Gentlemen who are with me .
HARRIS-1797-2,99.333

I endeavoured by every indirect Means to suggest to them the Necessity
of adopting some such Modification , if they meant that their Wishes for
Peace , in the Expression of which they were this Morning more eager
than ever , should meet with the slightest Degree of Credit :
HARRIS-1797-2,99.334

I again brought to their Recollection that I was authorized to receive
any Proposal , any <font> Contre_Projet <$$font> they tendered to me ,
but that they must be aware that it was not possible for me to alter the
Orders I had received , or to assume an Authority with which I was not
invested . HARRIS-1797-2,99.335

I dwelt particularly and repeatedly on my being competent to take any
Thing they said for Reference ; HARRIS-1797-2,99.336

but this availed nothing , except drawing from <font> One of them
<$$font> a Remark , that the full Powers which authorized a Minister to
hear Proposals , were widely different from those which would enable him
to accede to them ; and that it was such full Powers that the Directory
required me to solicit . HARRIS-1797-2,99.337

An easy Answer presented itself to this Mode of Reasoning ;
HARRIS-1797-2,99.338

but I saw no Advantage to be derived from prolonging a Conversation ,
which , after the positive Declaration they had made , could lead to
nothing : HARRIS-1797-2,99.339

I therefore ended the Conference by declaring my Resolution to begin my
Journey at a very early Hour the next Morning , and by saying , that
immediately on my Arrival in England I would make an exact Report of
every Thing that had passed since their Arrival . HARRIS-1797-2,99.340

<P_100>

I trust , my Lord , I shall not incur Censure for having declined to
offer in distinct Terms to wait at Lille till I could know His Majesty's
Pleasure on the peremptory Proposal made to me : HARRIS-1797-2,100.342

But when I considered the Nature of the Proposal itself , the Avowal
<font> that this would not be the last <$$font> nor perhaps the most
humiliating , Condition required of us , and the imperious Style with
which I was enjoined to depart in Twenty-four Hours , it was utterly
impossible for me to assume a Language or affect a Manner that could be
interpreted into Solicitation or Entreaty : HARRIS-1797-2,100.343

I felt myself called upon to treat the Whole of this extraordinary
Proceeding with Calmness and Temper ; HARRIS-1797-2,100.344

and notwithstanding the deep and poignant Concern I must feel at an
Event which I fear will remove all Probability of an immediate
Pacification , I trust that in the Expression of this Sentiment I have
not used a Language unbecoming the Character with which I am invested ,
or the Greatness of the Sovereign and Country whose Dignity and
Interests it is my primary Duty to consult and to maintain .
HARRIS-1797-2,100.345

I have the Honor {COM:sic} to be with great Respect , my Lord , your
Lordship's most obedient humble Servant , <paren> Signed <$$paren>
Malmesbury . HARRIS-1797-2,100.346

Right Honourable Lord Grenville . HARRIS-1797-2,100.347

