<BEGIN_harris-177x-2>

<P_1,84>

{ED:Despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_the_Earl_of_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,84.4

Tuesday , 12th Jan. 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,84.5

My Lord , - The manner in which the Court of Russia appears to interest
herself for the preservation of the town of Dantzic , has convinced his
Prussian Majesty that the Empress will not readily consent to his being
put in possession of that city ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,84.6

and this , joined to the refusal of the magistrates to enter into
negociation with Mons. Richard , has greatly broke into his views ,
since I am confidently assured , that , had he not met with this
<P_1,85> opposition from Petersburg , he would have employed force at
Dantzic , and afterwards have alleged for reason , either the ancient
claims of his family , or some infringements of the Partition Treaty on
the part of Austria , which would have authorized him , on his side , to
exceed the bounds prescribed in it . HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.7

At this moment , however , he does not choose to venture either of these
pretexts , HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.8

and will , I believe , have recourse to every kind of stratagem rather
than give umbrage to the Empress of Russia , of whose friendship and
goodwill he knows the utility . HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.9

I own , at the same time , he has carried matters so very far , that I
can@ @not help considering that sooner or later he will strain them
still a point farther , and rely on the sway he has with several Courts
, and his own established reputation , for the event .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.10

He , in the meanwhile , seems to be calculating every kind of means of
draining his new possessions to the utmost , and , as the revenue he
expected from his salt company is likely to fall short of near
two-thirds of the sum for which it was given in , to be resolved to
recover it by engrossing several other articles of commerce .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.11

I am told <paren> though I can scarcely give credit to it <$$paren> that
he intends laying an embargo on the corn , and every species of grain ,
foreigners and others have agreed to purchase from the Poles , paying
them the sum they bargained for , and afterwards selling the whole on
his own account , and for his own price . HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.12

A scheme has likewise been proposed to him for the monopoly of wine of
all sorts ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.13

and I am assured , as soon as it is thoroughly digested , will be put in
execution . HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.14

All these different exclusive rights will be thrown into the hands of
his new trading company , which at present appears to be his favourite
project . HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.15

I have &c. HARRIS-177X-2,1,85.16

<P_1,86>

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,86.19

6th February , 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,86.20

The step the Hereditary Prince of Brunswick has taken , has given the
greatest concern to his father and family , HARRIS-177X-2,1,86.21

and they express themselves in the strongest terms on the occasion .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,86.22

It was concerted by his Prussian Majesty , during the last reviews in
Silesia , at which the Prince Hereditary assisted .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,86.23

Besides that of having an excellent general in his service , his
Prussian Majesty was particularly desirous of bringing this point to
bear , with a view of lessening the importance of his brother Henry ,
who <paren> and not without reason <$$paren> looked upon him_self as the
only general officer in this service qualified , in case of a war , to
take the command of a separate army . HARRIS-177X-2,1,86.24

<P_1,87>

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,87.27

27th February , 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,87.28

I have good reason to believe that Mons. De Panin has , through Comte
Solms , communicated to his Prussian Majesty the several conversations
he has had with Mr. Gunning , relative to the affairs of Dantzic , and
free navigation of the Vistula ; and that that Minister , in his
despatches to the king , his master , on this subject , has exaggerated
every article , and done his utmost to paint the object of Mr.
Gunning's negociations in as unfavourable colours as possible .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,87.29

This has not a little added to the ill-humour of his Prussian Majesty ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,87.30

and has given him an opportunity of endeavouring to create a coolness
between us and the Court of Petersburg ; since , if I am well informed ,
he , by a messenger despatched a few days back to the Empress of Russia
, after having attempted to prove how ill-grounded all complaints were
against his proceedings in Poland , insinuated that it little became so
great a power as that of her Imperial Majesty to suffer a dictatorial
language to be held to her , or to hear any propositions which could
only tend to separate her from her best allies , and which , at the same
time , if carried into execution , would be very far from being
advantageous to the interests of her empire . HARRIS-177X-2,1,87.31

The dominion his Prussian Majesty has over the councils of Petersburg ,
and the infatuation with which everything is received there that comes
from Potzdam , will , I am afraid , cause the Empress to listen with
more attention to this insidious language than it deserves , and
entirely prevent her from taking any share with us for the preservation
of the liberties of Dantzic and commerce of Poland .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,87.32

Should this be the case , it is to be apprehended that the Court of
Vienna , however favourably she may be disposed , will also decline
interfering in these matters ; and that our representations ,
notwithstanding the just and reasonable grounds on <P_1,88> which they
are founded , will , unless supported by other arguments , prove
fruitless . HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.33

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.35

23rd March , 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.36

In consequence of your Lordship's instructions I despatched , the
following day , my valet_de_chambre , Pierre Lancy , to Dantzic , with
orders to wait till such time as he receives Mr. Corry's answer .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.37

I have already communicated to Prince Dolghorouki the manner in which
his Majesty has been pleased to declare his sentiments to the town of
Dantzic , HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.38

and shall not fail , in obedience to your Lordship's commands , to keep
that Minister acquainted with what I may receive relative to this
subject . HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.39

Your Lordship may , at the same time , depend that I shall avoid , with
the greatest precaution , taking any steps which may lead to an
admission of the rights of his Prussian Majesty , in consequence of the
convention between the three Courts , and at the same time prevent , as
far as lies in my power , any unjust interpretation being given to the
conduct his Majesty has thought proper to adopt on this occasion .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.40

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.42

April 13th , 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.43

As the letter Mr. Corry mentions to your Lordship as written to him by
one of the Magistrates , contains many strong personal reflections on
his Prussian Majesty , and as it is infinitely too long to put it into
cipher , I do not think it safe to trust it to the common conveyance of
the post , HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.44

and hope that the abstract which follows will satisfy your Lordship till
such time as I can send it by the return of Lauzun from Petersburg .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,88.45

<P_1,89>

The writer of it sets forth , in the beginning , the grateful sentiments
of the town for the gracious manner in which his Majesty has been
pleased to interest himself for the welfare of its commerce ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,89.47

but at the same time expresses his alarms lest the King of Prussia ,
seeing he has no reason to apprehend a rupture with us , should not only
refuse desisting from the rights he has hitherto claimed , but even
carry them to still greater lengths . HARRIS-177X-2,1,89.48

He next <paren> after having described the various evils which would
result to the commerce of Europe in general , and to that of England in
particular , by the King of Prussia being in possession of the trade of
Poland <$$paren> attempts to prove that they would not be sufficiently
obviated by the town's acceding to an accommodation with that Monarch ,
after any of the three modes we have suggested to them . That their
admitting him into a share of their duties would not only be a tacit
acknowledgment of his right , but also tend to introduce that
destructive system of commerce which his Prussian Majesty has adopted ,
and which has no other object than that of enriching the sovereign at
the expense of the trader . HARRIS-177X-2,1,89.49

He ventures to send a plan of accommodation between the King of Prussia
and the town , which is enclosed in Mr. Corry's letter ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,89.50

and concludes with saying that the Magistracy have nothing more at heart
than , through the mediation of our Court , to come to some fair
agreement with his Prussian Majesty , providing their rights are fully
assured them , and they are not obliged to deviate from the fidelity
they owe his Polish Majesty . HARRIS-177X-2,1,89.51

I own , my Lord , that I am sorry to find that the Magistrates hesitate
following your Lordship's salutary advice , while they yet have it in
their power to negociate with his Prussian Majesty with a favourable
prospect , and the orders he had given for the stopping his works at the
Fahrwasser , and no longer collecting duties or portcharges there ,
appear as if he was at this moment not ill-disposed towards them .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,89.52

Most of their objections appear to me to be easily answered ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,89.53

and their apprehensions of his Prussian Majesty breaking <P_1,90>
through his engagements are , in fact , none at all , since the very
essence of an accommodation implies a reciprocal guarantee .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.54

The delay they desire will , I am afraid , expose them to fresh evils ,
as General Lentulus has insinuated , that if their arrangement is not
concluded before the assembling of the Diet , their affairs will then be
finally settled in common with those of the Republic of Poland .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.55

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.57

24th April , 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.58

Although the Diet will be very thin of nuncios , yet the three powers
seem determined on its meeting , and carrying , at all events , their
plan into execution . HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.59

I am assured that there are only ninety returned from the Dietines , and
those mostly for such places as fell under the direction of the Prussian
troops ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.60

the Palatinates of Podolia , Volhynia , Lublin , the Ukraine , and the
greatest part of the south-east of Poland , have entered a formal
protest , setting forth the illegality of a Diet to be held under the
influence of three foreign armies . HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.61

The King of Prussia has ordered General Lentulus to instruct the leading
priests and superior officers of justice , in their several districts ,
to declare the Bishop of Cracow to be <font> out of his senses , and to
warn such as have any connexions with him to be aware of the effects of
his insanity . <$$font> HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.62

Your Lordship will perceive , by the enclosed letter from Dantzic , how
little necessary it was for the Magistrates of that town to wait for the
answer of the King of Poland ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.63

and I am afraid their procrastination will cost them dear .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.64

Count Ivan Golowkin , who had a commission from the Empress of Russia to
go to Dantzic and settle the affairs of that town there , has received
counter_orders ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.65

and I am assured that their interests are to be discussed and determined
on at Petersburg , between Count Solms and M. De Panin , or even in the
Diet now assembled at Warsaw . HARRIS-177X-2,1,90.66

<P_1,91>

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.69

1st May , 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.70

An edict has lately appeared in his Prussian Majesty's new acquisitions
in Poland , ordering such Jews as have not one_thousand crowns capital ,
or upwards , immediately to leave the country . HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.71

This has occasioned great distress among that people ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.72

and I am informed a formal deputation will be sent here , praying his
Prussian Majesty to suspend this edict , as , if put in execution , it
will tend to the ruin of numberless Jewish families .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.73

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.75

25th May , 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.76

I Am now confirmed in what I wrote to your Lordship relative to the
transactions of the Diet . HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.77

His Polish Majesty has made his last struggle , HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.78

and , the delegation appointed being totally devoted to the interests of
the three Courts , we shall hear of little or no further disturbance
from that quarter . HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.79

I have , however , some reasons for believing that the Court of Vienna
does not in everything accede to the projects of his Prussian Majesty ,
and that the Empress Queen opposes , contrary to expectation , any
further extension of the dismemberment of Poland .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.80

I am likewise informed , that on this occasion some rather high words
passed between the two Courts ; and though at present , by the King of
Prussia@ @'s having withdrawn his pretensions , all things apparently
remain as they were , yet that some traces of ill-blood are left behind
, and that the unnatural cordiality does no longer subsist with the same
warmth between the two Courts . HARRIS-177X-2,1,91.81

<P_1,92>

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.84

10th July , 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.85

I have good reason for believing that the last audience Mons. de
Swieten had with his Prussian Majesty was to communicate to him a design
of his Court , of augmenting their acquisitions in Poland , and of
extending them towards the Kaminiec , on the north-east side the
Dniester , into the Palatinates of Brahilow and Podolia .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.86

His Prussian Majesty came with great cordiality into the plan ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.87

treated Mons. de Swieten in the most gracious manner ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.88

and acquainted him , on his side , that he also intended adding to his
Polish dominions that tract of land lying between Thorn and the Netze ,
which makes part of the Palatinates of Posen , Calish , and Cujavia .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.89

Mons. de Swieten was authorized to consent , in the name of his Court ,
to this proposition , HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.90

and the audience ended with the strongest assurances of friendship and
good harmony . HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.91

I do not hear whether Russia has been consulted on this occasion , or
whether she is also to be aggrandized at the expense of Poland .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.92

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.94

11th Sept. 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.95

My Lord , - His Prussian Majesty during his stay in Silesia , after
having made particular inquiries into the conduct of Madame de Maltzahn
, stopped all proceedings relative to the divorce , which were already
pretty far advanced ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.96

ordered Mons. de Slabrendorff to the citadel of Breslaw , and her to be
confined to a small habitation in the country , under the care of an
elderly lady . HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.97

He likewise ordered her children to be taken from her , and to be put
into the hands of Monsieur Maltzahn's relations . HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.98

This is the single instance of his Prussian Majesty's interfering in
matters of this kind , HARRIS-177X-2,1,92.99

and it is thought to be <P_1,93> owing to a representation coming from
the husband , who , if his wife's fortune went out of the family , would
be reduced to the greatest extremity . HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.100

I have , &c. HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.101

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.103

23rd Oct. 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.104

If his Prussian Majesty is in earnest in his wishes for peace , the
restoration of Mons. De Panin to his full power will greatly facilitate
the means of effectuating it . HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.105

This event , I am told , was brought about by Count Solms ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.106

and confirms me in the opinion that I long have had , that his Prussian
Majesty , economical as he is , besides the subsidy known to be paid to
Petersburg , employs very considerable sums in his negociations at that
Court . HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.107

He probably now will hear no more of the demand for men ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.108

and , as Mons. De Panin is quite his creature , will guide the
Czarina's councils more despotically than ever , notwithstanding the
fair prospect he has on that side , and no appearance of a
misintelligence with the Court of Vienna . HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.109

He is more assiduous than ever in his attention to the military ; at
least , as far as regards that part of it which comes within the circle
of my observation . HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.110

The garrison of this town are daily exercised , HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.111

and the artillery still go out every day , though nominally they were
dismissed towards the middle of September . HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.112

In his new acquisitions he is raising recruits by every kind of means ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.113

and pays much less attention to the size than usual .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.114

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.116

7th Dec. 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.117

General Lentulus returned from Warsaw , HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.118

and was received graciously a few days ago at Potzdam .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,93.119

I am told , although I do not vouch for it as authentic , that his
<P_1,94> Prussian Majesty assured him that he was so well satisfied with
the manner in which he had conducted his affairs , that he would soon
employ him again on the same errand . HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.120

The Prussian troops retire but slowly , HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.121

and I believe will undoubtedly take up their winter quarters in the
republic of Poland . HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.122

If any conclusions might be drawn from the external behaviour of his
Prussian Majesty , his attention is at this moment taken up with some
great object . HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.123

He lives more alone than ever , HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.124

shortens the duration of his meals <paren> the only moment of relaxation
he allows himself <$$paren> , HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.125

is less talkative at them than usual , HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.126

and passes whole days in his closet . HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.127

I am assured that the private correspondence between him and the Czarina
, which for a while appeared to flag , is now renewed in its full force
; HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.128

and as Count Goertz is a person in whom his Prussian Majesty places some
confidence , and as he has , I believe with reason , the character of an
intriguing , enterprising man , I by no means think it impossible that
he is charged with some more important commission than that of returning
a mere Court compliment . HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.129

These ideas lead me to what I have more than once taken the liberty of
writing to your Lordship ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.130

and although I submit them entirely to your superior judgment , I can@
@not avoid again mentioning my suspicions , that when the Turkish war is
ended , - an event at this period not entirely improbable , - we shall
see the same scene acted with the same concord , though perhaps not with
the same facility towards Sweden , as we lately have been witnesses of
towards Poland . HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.131

I can@ @not pretend to say how far this may be compatible with the
interests of the Court of Vienna , or whether the other two will
endeavour to alleviate all difficulties coming from that quarter , by
allowing the Emperor to extend his new acquisitions , or to augment his
frontiers on the side of Turkey . HARRIS-177X-2,1,94.132

<P_1,95>

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.135

25th December , 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.136

My Lord , - His Prussian Majesty , notwithstanding his appearance of
health , finds himself , in fact , greatly indisposed .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.137

He has inward pains flying about him the whole day , which constantly ,
towards the evening , fix themselves in his stomach ; symptoms which
menace an irregular attack of the gout ; an event he dreads so much at
this season , that , contrary to his usual manner of living , he takes
every precaution temperance and sobriety can afford , to avoid it .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.138

He rides a great deal on horseback , HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.139

endeavours to promote a constant perspiration , HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.140

and sometimes carries this to such lengths as to reduce himself to a
state of excessive weakness . HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.141

His treasure is by no means so great as is imagined .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.142

He has expended within these few years immense sums to encourage
agriculture and population in different parts of his dominions ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.143

and has been ridiculously profuse in his commercial projects ; a branch
he understands so little , and where he is so grossly deceived , that
none of them have answered , or are likely to answer :
HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.144

that particularly of the Maritime Company , established in November ,
1772 , has failed in every point . HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.145

The projectors , however , in order to obtain more money , amuse him
with the most palpable falsehoods . HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.146

They pretend , and make him believe , that the consumption of salt in
Poland amounts yearly to 20,000 lasts , and that the Poles must
necessarily take the whole of this article from him alone , since the
Austrians will be obliged to send their salt into Hungary , where the
pits are under water ; a fact as notoriously false as the calculation is
erroneous , since it is well known that the consumption of salt in
Poland does not exceed 10,000 lasts . HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.147

His great object , in regard to his interior political system , seems to
be that of putting his kingdom in such a position , that his successor ,
at his death , in order to maintain it on the same footing , will be
obliged to live with the same economy as himself .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,95.148

It is for this reason that he wilfully diminishes his treasure , being
apprehensive that <P_1,96> from the love of pleasure , which he knows
predominates in the character of his nephew , it would be exhausted in
luxury and amusement . HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.149

His foreign system is much less indefinite , HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.150

and embraces everything an active mind elated with prosperity can
suggest , or a powerful army accomplish . HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.151

His views , I am convinced , rove from one side of the Continent to the
other ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.152

and as long as he has the means in his hands , no alliance however close
, no convention however sacred , will be able to place bounds to his
ambition . HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.153

Without counting the encroachments on the suburbs of Dantzic , and the
extortions he has exacted there , he has added a tract of Poland over
and above what was given him by the treaty of 18th September ,
containing near 40,000 inhabitants , and producing a proportionate
revenue . HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.154

He obtained the consent of Vienna on this occasion by allowing Brody to
be brought within the limits of her new acquisitions .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.155

In regard to Russia , he disapproves greatly the expense of that Court
in presents and ostentation , HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.156

and recommends strongly peace , in order to withdraw the subsidy of
600,000 crowns he is obliged to pay as long as the Turkish war lasts .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.157

His ill-humour towards our Court subsists in its full force ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.158

and he talks of and treats that of France with the greatest contempt .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.159

Nothing remarkable has passed between him and his brother Henry since
his arrival . HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.160

He behaves to him in public with the same attention as usual ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.161

and I do not hear that in private he has mentioned his name .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.162

I have , &c. HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.163

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.165

29th Oct. 1773 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,96.166

I shall take an opportunity of expressing to Count Finckenstein the
instructions conveyed in your Lordship's despatch ; although I confess I
do not expect that his Prussian Majesty will ever be induced to issue
such a general and decisive order as your Lordship very justly <P_1,97>
suggests , or even enforce properly those contained in his edict of 11th
May . HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.167

He is undoubtedly ambitious of becoming a commercial power ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.168

and at intervals is convinced that this never can be , without
previously encouraging trade , by taking off those fetters with which it
is universally clogged throughout his dominions ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.169

at the same time , however , he never will be able to persuade himself
to forego the petty advantages which he obtains from these restrictions
, and from the chicanery with which his officers execute them .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.170

Immediate gain , however small , will always preponderate with him .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.171

His principles on this subject are so extremely false , so exceedingly
narrow , that I am convinced the result of his great acquisitions of
coast , and numerous sea-ports , will only prove a detriment to others ,
without ever being of any real benefit to himself .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.172

Every commercial enterprise , from the beginning of his reign till this
day , has universally failed ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.173

and the last of any importance , established in the month of October ,
1772 , under the name of <font> Compagnie Maritime , <$$font> which
really carried with it at the beginning some kind of plausibility , is
now at so low an ebb , that he has been obliged to send Commissioners
from hence to Marienwerder , where its principal deposits are , to
examine into the state of its credit , and to see whether he should be
able to recover the capital he advanced towards its promotion .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.174

His mind , notwithstanding , will ever be restless on these subjects .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.175

As he finds none of his old projects answer , he always is ready to
adopt new ones ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.176

and the remaining years of his reign , like those already passed , will
produce a series of commercial edicts , specious , perhaps , in theory ,
impossible in practice , and contradictory to each other .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.177

As long as the source of the evil exists , the evil itself must exist ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.178

and this never will be remedied till such time as his Prussian Majesty's
sentiments on finances and pecuniary matters become liberal and enlarged
. HARRIS-177X-2,1,97.179

<P_1,98>

{ED:Despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.182

Saturday , 29th Oct. 1774 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.183

My Lord , - The courier which the Austrian Chargé_d'Affaires received
last week , related solely to the final determination of the Polish
limits . HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.184

The plan was entirely concluded before M. de Swieten's departure ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.185

and this messenger merely brought the approbation of the Empress Queen .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.186

His Prussian Majesty sent it immediately by one of his chasseurs to
Petersburg , more by way of communication than with a view of asking the
opinion of that Court ; since I am assured , and believe it an undoubted
fact , that the Czarina , after having in vain endeavoured to moderate
the demands of her two allies , has declared that she herself is
resolved to abide by the limits prescribed in the original Treaty of
Partition made at Petersburg , and to leave them to settle their
frontiers in the manner they think proper . HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.187

The original idea of this Court , as well as of that of Vienna , was ,
to send one of their chief Ministers for this purpose into Poland with
full powers ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.188

but , on reflection , his Prussian Majesty objected to this , from the
perpetual complaints to which such a Minister would be liable , and to
which , from the nature of his commission , he necessarily must attend .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.189

He proposed , rather , the sending the three inferior Commissioners ,
who should act in consequence of their instructions , and refer all
doubtful cases to this their chief , having vested in themselves limited
powers . HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.190

This scheme has been adopted ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.191

and Mr. Coccej , one of his Prussian Majesty's aides-de-camp , General
Lossou , and Mons. de Brinckenhoff , are actually either there or on
the road . HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.192

They are to give an account of their operations to Mr. de Hertsberg ,
the Minister at the head of the Commission , who is to reduce the whole
to the form of a memorial , to be presented by Benoit to the Delegation
, and afterwards to the Diet . HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.193

I can@ @not speak with certainty of the extent of country the Court of
Vienna pretends to add to its original share . HARRIS-177X-2,1,98.194

His Prussian Majesty makes the Netze his boundary , from its junction to
the Warta , <P_1,99> to its source ; from whence your Lordship , on
comparing , will find he obtains a large tract of territory , containing
the famous lake of Goblo , the palatinates of Inowroclowiez and Brescia
, and almost all the district of Cujavia , west of the Vistula .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.195

The Delegation , probably , will make no opposition , and the Diet and
his Polish Majesty a very feeble one , to this fresh usurpation of their
territories ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.196

and , as now the several Courts appear to have their respective views
fulfilled , there is reason to believe that this affair once settled ,
that unfortunate Republic , after an uninterrupted series of discord ,
troubles , and disgraces , for nearly ten years , in which it has lost
its liberty , its finest provinces , and all its consideration in the
affairs of Europe , will be left quietly to reflect on its misfortunes ,
and from its insignificance be unmolested . HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.197

I have &c. Jas. Harris . HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.198

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.200

Saturday , 12th November , 1774 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.201

My Lord , - I spare no pains to get the most accurate information
relative to the present state of his Prussian Majesty's health ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.202

and , from as good intelligence as it is in my power to procure , I have
reason to believe that the severe illness with which he was afflicted
last April , contrary to common report , and directly opposite to the
idea he wishes to propagate , has so far shaken his constitution as to
make him very uneasy . HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.203

The constant nocturnal perspirations to which he has been subject from
the earliest period of his life , and which he has always found highly
beneficial to his health , now sometimes fail entirely ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.204

and are generally less profuse . HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.205

He sleeps ill , HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.206

and his spirits are dejected ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.207

the dread , however , he has that any of those about him should perceive
him breaking overcomes every other consideration ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.208

and he increases his illness by the pains he takes to conceal it .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,99.209

He has , under pretence of introducing inoculation , invited Baylis , an
English physician settled at Dresden , to reside for <P_1,100> some time
at Berlin . HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.210

He is expected to-morrow , HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.211

and I have the best reason for believing that at this present moment his
Prussian Majesty is consulting him at Potzdam in the most private manner
. HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.212

The peevish and even childish anger he expressed this summer against his
successor , was more owing to his being apprehensive of soon making room
for him , than from any real motive of complaint against that Prince ;
whose conduct , not being different from what it always had been , could
not , of course , have furnished any new reasons of disapprobation .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.213

His Prussian Majesty has since felt that he unmasked himself too much ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.214

and affects not only being entirely reconciled , HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.215

but behaves with more attention than before to his nephew .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.216

The precipitancy , however , with which his favourite mistress was
obliged to fly to Hamburgh , although she is now returned ; the
prohibition of masquerades , and the banishment of his merry companions
, are events which dwell so deeply on his mind , as to make him wish the
demise of his uncle with more eagerness than ever .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.217

I have , &c. Jas. Harris . HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.218

{ED:Private_letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.220

Dec. 15th , 1774 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.221

Mr. Porter , a member of the British factory at St. Petersburg ,
affords me the first opportunity which has offered itself of acquainting
your Lordship , by a safe conveyance , with what has passed subsequent
to my arrival , relative to the desire the Crown Prince expressed of
being assisted by his Majesty . HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.222

I had a very early visit from the person the most in his Royal
Highness's confidence , HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.223

and from the eagerness of his questions I found his hopes were much
raised . HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.224

In my answer , I carefully avoided committing either his Majesty or his
Ministers , HARRIS-177X-2,1,100.225

and contented myself with <P_1,101> saying , that the carrying into
execution a transaction of that kind appeared to me to be so very
hazardous , as well from the suspicious vigilance of his Prussian
Majesty , as from the number of persons to whom the secret must
necessarily be entrusted , that on his Royal Highness's account solely I
had taken upon myself to make no mention of the affair , since I should
be very unworthy of the confidence he had placed in me were I to expose
him to the fatal consequences of a discovery . HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.226

His agent appeared greatly disappointed , HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.227

and with a warmth approaching anger condemned , in very harsh terms , my
over_prudence and timidity ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.228

said I had let slip the most favourable opportunity of cementing the
surest future union between the two Courts ; that the Prince had so
firmly relied on my success , and was so pleased with receiving
assistance from a Court unconnected with his uncle , that he had
neglected taking any other precaution , " et qu'il n'auroit pas de quoi
payer sa blanchisseuse ; " that he would , perhaps , now repent the
having repeatedly rejected the insinuations coming from France ; that he
was French only in his manners , not in his principles ; and that ,
disposed as he was already towards us , this supply , coming at a moment
when necessity would have so enhanced the obligation , would have made
him ours for ever . HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.229

As he spoke with a most impetuous vivacity , I have no doubt that he was
in earnest in what he said ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.230

and , as I had no sort of reason to be discomposed with his
disapprobation of my conduct , I thought it a favourable opportunity of
getting some further lights into the Prince of Prussia@ @'s real
character and connexions : HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.231

I therefore , without affecting to justify myself , endeavoured to make
him speak more freely , by suggesting different methods of obtaining the
succours required ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.232

and hinted that Holland , Vienna , and Petersburg were certainly at his
disposition . HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.233

His answer was , " Que le Prince d'Orange n'avoit pas le sou , que
l'Empereur n'avoit pas la Bourse , que l'Impératrice Reine ne donneroit
qu'aux Eglises , et que l'Impératrice de Russie le dénonceroit tout de
suite à son oncle . " HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.234

I then mentioned the rich merchants , as well those of this country as
strangers . HARRIS-177X-2,1,101.235

" Il les a tous épuisés ; <P_1,102> il doit 300,000 écus <paren> 15,000
<font> l. <$$font> <$$paren> ici , et autant dans l'étranger . "
HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.236

I ventured to hint that this sum appeared to me incredible , considering
the very small ostensible expense of his Royal Highness .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.237

" Il a tout mangé chez les filles , il en a une qui lui coûte 30,000
écus par an ; et l'argent qu'il lui faut pour gagner les espions de son
oncle monte encore à autant . Vous ne sauriez croire combien de fois
j'ai pris la liberté de lui représenter combien peu sa façon de vivre
convenoit à un grand Prince , mais son penchant pour le plaisir est trop
décidé , il n'en reviendra jamais ; cela augmente journellement , et la
manière dont son oncle le traite , a tant aigri son esprit , que s'il
vit encore cinq ans , son caractère changera entièrement . ' Par Dieu ,
' dit-il , ' si vous nous aviez procuré vingt mille livres sterlings
comme Prince , nous l'aurions mieux aimé que +L750,000 comme Roi . ' "
HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.238

I told him I most sincerely wished he had it ; that I flattered myself
that , on representing my conduct impartially to the Prince , his Royal
Highness would at least do me the justice to believe my intentions were
good . HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.239

This was our first conference , which happened towards the beginning of
November . HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.240

About a fortnight afterwards , the same gentleman returned , but with a
very different language . HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.241

He thanked me , in the name of the Prince , for my discretion ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.242

said that his Royal Highness's sentiments towards us were still the same
; that he considered himself as personally obliged to me for not having
taken amiss what zeal for his master had made him say ; that he hoped I
had forgotten and forgiven it . HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.243

I assured him , with very great sincerity , that it had not given me the
least uneasiness ; that I was exceedingly happy his Royal Highness saw
my conduct in its true light . HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.244

This , my Lord , is what has passed on this subject , which I
communicate to your Lordship from the conviction I have that I never can
write to you too confidentially ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.245

I have only to add , that I have since heard that the Prince of Prussia
has applied through his Princess to the Grand Duchess of Russia , and
that he expects to be relieved from that quarter .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.246

This accounts for the change of style in our second conference .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,102.247

<P_1,103> P.S. - I send this letter under cover to Mr. Serle , my
agent , who will himself deliver it at your house .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.248

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.250

14th Jan. 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.251

Notwithstanding the critical situation of the affairs in the Empire ,
and the coolness which begins to manifest itself between this Court and
that of Petersburg , I do not conceive that we are likely to see an
early disunion between the three formidable allies , because I am
persuaded his Prussian Majesty is too good a politician not to perceive
that the preponderance this alliance gives him can alone facilitate any
future projects his ambitious genius may suggest , or even maintain him
in the high rank he at present enjoys amongst the European powers .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.252

Prepared as his army and coffers are for war , he feels that his own
bodily strength is inadequate to the fatigues of a campaign ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.253

and I am convinced he never will draw the sword but defensively , or
with a moral certainty of success . HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.254

He considers the situation of the Czarina as very precarious , as well
from the character of her subjects , as from the restless ,
authoritative temper of the present dictator of that Court .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.255

This , perhaps , induces him to be less guarded in his conduct towards
that quarter than usual . HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.256

I am at the same time , however , convinced , that , if he saw a
probability of a defection , he would spare no pains to prevent the
Czarina from emancipating herself from his alliance .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.257

Whether she can venture , or even wishes to emancipate herself , I can@
@not pretend to say . HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.258

It is , indeed , indisputable , that since the peace her councils seem
to be less tainted with Prussian infection than before .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,103.259

<P_1,104>

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_William_Eden,_Esq.}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.262

21st Jan. 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.263

Sir , - Mons. de Borcke , you already know , succeeds the Baron
Kniphausen in the post this gentleman thought proper to fling up with a
good deal of vivacity . HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.264

He expected , I believe , from his talents and connections , that ,
instead of granting him his dismission , his Prussian Majesty would have
endeavoured to appease him by promoting him to the rank of <font>
Ministre d'Etat ; <$$font> HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.265

instead of this , he not only received his <font> congé <$$font> very
readily , HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.266

but was also deprived of a pension of six_hundred crowns his Prussian
Majesty gave him on his return from London . HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.267

Mons. de Borcke is a man of parts . HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.268

His lady was well known at Dresden by the name of Madame Vatel .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.269

She is not of the most illustrious extraction ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.270

and it is somewhat singular , that , after having been forced on the
Court of Saxony , she is not admitted to appear at this .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.271

Her lamentations on this account are very loud , as she brought with her
an immense quantity of rich apparel , and an excellent disposition to
efface our beauties of Berlin . HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.272

These now show the excellence of their hearts , by making her frequent
visits , and condoling with her on her affliction .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.273

Mons. d'Arnhim , successor to Mons. de Borcke at Dresden , has ,
besides the order of Danneberg , received from his Prussian Majesty a
magnificent present . HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.274

The ostensible reason for his soliciting his recall {TEXT:recal} was ,
the humidity and coolness of the climate of Copenhagen .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.275

On his being admitted to an audience here on his return , his Prussian
Majesty , after having questioned him a good deal about the effect the
damp had on his nerves , produced from under his hat a box carefully
packed up , saying , " Je ne veux pas que l'Etat perde un sujet aussi
utile que vous ; vous trouverez là dedans de quoi vous réchauffer . "
HARRIS-177X-2,1,104.276

<P_1,105>

Arnhim , you may guess , was very eager to open his box ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.278

and was not a little disappointed in finding it filled with cotton .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.279

The next day , however , he was somewhat comforted , by an order to
receive an augmentation of a_thousand crowns to his salary .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.280

Mons. de Swieten is not yet set out from Vienna ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.281

I am satisfied , however , this delay is merely occasioned by his
private affairs , and not from any coolness subsisting , or likely to
subsist , between the two Courts . HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.282

They certainly see with a jealous eye their reciprocal aggrandisement ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.283

but they feel too much advantage in being well together to give way to
this sentiment . HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.284

Mons. de Lauzun is still at Berlin . HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.285

The King has been remarkably civil to him ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.286

and I own , should Mons. de Pons not return , I should not be surprised
, however singular it may appear , if he was to be named Minister at
this Court . HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.287

I received very great pleasure from your kind letter of the 6th instant
, HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.288

and set the highest value on your friendship ; not ministerially or
politically , but from that kind of esteem which arises from an
uninterrupted confidential acquaintance , begun in the early period of
our lives . HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.289

{ED:Extract_of_a_letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.291

7th March , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.292

My accounts from Potzdam mention that his Prussian Majesty was never ,
at any one period of his life , known to be so uncommonly out of humour
as at present . HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.293

This appears not only from his conversation , but from his actions .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.294

He broke his flute , a few days ago , on the head of his favourite
hussar , HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.295

and is very liberal in kicking and cuffing those employed about his
person . HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.296

He is peevish at his meals , HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.297

says little in his evening conversations , HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.298

and is affable to nobody . HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.299

His spirits seem likewise dejected ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,105.300

and although he affects to attend to business <P_1,106> with as much
ardour as usual , it is evident to those who see him constantly , that
he sets about it with less alacrity . HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.301

His health , which still continues as I described it to your Lordship ,
has a great influence , undoubtedly , on his temper ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.302

but I am told that the bad state of his <font> Compagnie Maritime
<$$font> contributes not a little to his present ill-humour .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.303

This was a favourite commercial project of his , HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.304

and he was so convinced of its success , that he engaged himself , more
solemnly than he generally does on these occasions , for the payment of
both the interest and capital to the adventurers in this scheme .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.305

Its having now failed , without a probability of redemption , exposes to
the world not only his want of judgment in matters of trade ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.306

but , what will probably affect him more , lays him under a necessity ,
even supposing he puts an end to this association immediately , of
making good a deficiency of near 100,000 <font> l. <$$font> , and which
sum will undoubtedly increase if he listens to the chimerical ideas
given him of continuing it . HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.307

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_William_Eden,_Esq.}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.309

Saturday , 11th March , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.310

Sir , - I hear various strange reasons alleged for the present uncommon
peevishness of his Prussian Majesty's temper . HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.311

Amongst several other incredible foibles in so great a character , he
has that of not entirely disbelieving judicial astrology ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.312

and I am told , from one whose authority is not despicable , that the
apprehension of a prediction pronounced by a Saxon fortune-teller his
Majesty was weak enough some time ago to consult being this year
fulfilled , dwells on his mind , and augments the sourness of a
disposition naturally crabbed . HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.313

It will be unfortunate for his subjects if these kind of fears increase
, as he will necessarily become suspicious and cruel , and be what
hitherto he never has been , a tyrant <font> en detail . <$$font>
HARRIS-177X-2,1,106.314

I should have paid no attention to these reports , which savour so much
of the nursery , had <P_1,107> I not myself observed him displeased at a
mourning coat at his levee , and seen him visibly alter his countenance
on being informed of any man's dying a sudden death .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.315

These sensations so clearly indicate a superstitious turn , that ,
although I do not vouch for the exact truth of my Saxon conjuror , yet
the story appears sufficiently probable , at least , to become a matter
of curiosity . HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.316

He is not the first great man , or first free-thinker , who has been
troubled with these fears , HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.317

and history furnishes several apologies <paren> if examples are such
<$$paren> for his weakness . HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.318

It is impossible to describe to you the pecuniary distress of his nephew
. HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.319

On the death of his late Marshal , there was a debt on the kitchen
establishment of 15,000 <font> l. <$$font> and on the others in
proportion . HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.320

No one would accept of a post in a Court so circumstanced ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.321

and after having been rejected by as many as could be found calculated
for it , it was forced on Monsieur d'Arnstedt , a man of worth and
honour , but who had no other subsistence than a pension of five_hundred
crowns . HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.322

The debts his Royal Highness has contracted for his extraordinary
expenses surpass all imagination . HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.323

His credit is entirely exhausted , HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.324

and this , joined to the state of subjection in which he lives , affects
, in a very sensible manner , his spirits ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.325

and , as if fortune was never tired of persecuting him , his impetuosity
during the carnival has led him into a scrape , the unpleasing effects
of which he still feels , and from which probably he will not be so soon
free , as his uncle , maliciously perhaps , obliges him to attend his
military duties with more severity than usual . HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.326

The Bishop of Warmia was last year in the same situation ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.327

and his Prussian Majesty very nearly vacated the See by forcing him to
partake of the high meats at his table , and dosing him with Hungarian
wine , of which , as a Pole , his Majesty said he was , doubtless , both
a judge , and fond . HARRIS-177X-2,1,107.328

<P_1,108>

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

11th March , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.331

Prince Orlow has been received both here and at Potzdam with peculiar
marks of distinction . HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.332

Sentinels are placed at his door ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.333

and the guard is ordered to turn out , drums beating , every time he
passes . HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.334

He dined with his Prussian Majesty on Thursday , who augmented the
number of dishes in each course from twelve to twenty-four ; and , which
he never did before , ordered to be served a magnificent dessert .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.335

The same attentions have been mimicked at Berlin .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.336

The Queen , who never admits strangers to her table , asked him to
supper , which however he declined ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.337

and the rest of the Royal Family , except Prince Henry , who is at
Rhinesberg , vie with each other in showing him civilities .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.338

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_William_Eden,_Esq.}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.340

27th June , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.341

Sir , - His Prussian Majesty , since his return to Potzdam , has been a
good deal shut up with his Ministers from hence , in examining their
annual accounts and other interior regulations ; with which , if one may
judge from his liberality , he is perfectly satisfied .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.342

He has given to his sister , the Princess Amelia , 6000 crowns ; 6000 to
General Ramin , Governor of Berlin ; 10,000 to the widow and children of
the late General Krusmark ; and made several less considerable presents
. HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.343

Some time back he sent 1000 crowns to the widow of Quintus Icilius ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.344

told her he would purchase her husband's library at her own price ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.345

and promised to provide for her children . HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.346

We have at present here the famous Le Kain , who is considered at Paris
in as high a light as Garrick . HARRIS-177X-2,1,108.347

This <P_1,109> alone is sufficient to insure him approbation here ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.348

and a very considerable share has been bestowed on him whenever he has
made his appearance on the stage . HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.349

I can@ @not give you a better idea of the judgment and taste of our
audience than by telling you , that , the first time Le Kain was
announced in the bills , the whole house throughout a whole act mistook
and applauded very loudly another actor for him ; an actor well known
here , who had been justly condemned , and who , by appearing in a new
character and different dress , obtained an honour to which he had not
the smallest right . HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.350

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_the_Earl_of_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.352

Saturday , 1st July , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.353

My Lord , - The Prince of Prussia has nothing in his figure which
denotes a person of superior talents or genius ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.354

tall and robust , without grace , he has more the air of a stout
foot-soldier than that of a great Prince . HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.355

Constrained and watched to a degree by his uncle , it is difficult to
say whether silence and reserve are natural or acquired habits in him .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.356

It is certain these strongly characterize him , not only at Court , and
before people of high rank , but even when he forgets he is a Prince and
frequents lower company , which , through the pains he takes to be
constantly in it , appears to amuse him ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.357

yet , even there , he never expresses his satisfaction otherwise than by
encouraging his companions to be as loud and clamorous as possible , and
to lay aside every respect due to him as their future Sovereign .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.358

His favourite mistress , formerly a stage dancer , presides at these
revels , HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.359

and takes the lead in all the scenes of indecent mirth which pass there
. HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.360

She is large in her person , spirited in her looks , loose in her attire
, HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.361

and gives a true idea of a perfect bacchanalian .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.362

He is liberal to her to a degree , HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.363

and she alone spends the full income he receives from the King .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.364

She makes , indeed , the best return in her power to such generosity ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,109.365

for , at the same time she assures him <P_1,110> that he has the sole
possession of her affections , she by no means exacts the same fidelity
from him , HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.366

but endeavours , as far as lies in her power , to satisfy his desires ,
whenever from fickleness or satiety they fix themselves on some new
object ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.367

and in this profession she is so dexterous as never to suffer him to
become acquainted with any woman who is likely to be her rival in the
dominion she has over him . HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.368

Her choice , and fortunately for her his , is generally among those of
the lowest kind . HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.369

The pursuit of these pleasures , the only ones for which he has any turn
, employ the greatest part of his leisure ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.370

the rest of his time is spent either at the parade , in attendance on
the King , or in dressing - an article in which , whenever he can
venture to lay aside his uniform , he is refined and delicate to a
degree . HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.371

He is even at the expense of keeping a favourite <font> valet_de_chambre
, <$$font> by name Espère en Dieu , constantly between Potzdam and Paris
, for no other purpose than to give him the earliest information of any
alteration in the fashions ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.372

and as Espère en Dieu collects his intelligence solely from his brethren
<paren> the hairdressers <$$paren> , so those who follow his
instructions may very easily be mistaken for one of this class .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.373

Such , my Lord , are the outlines of his amusements , in which one may
perceive more levity than vice , and even suppose , had he been fairly
dealt with , his debauchery , which is now certainly of the lowest kind
, would at least have taken a better turn , and deserved the name of
gallantry . HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.374

Distressed as he is for money , persecuted by his uncle , deprived
entirely of the conversation of men of parts and probity , and
surrounded by a set of debauched officers , it is not astonishing that
he should have fallen into such a low style of libertinism ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.375

it would be much more so if , when he shall be called to the throne , he
ever gets the better of habits so long contracted , and gives up a way
of life from which he appears to receive so great satisfaction .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.376

I shall by the next post speak to the more serious parts of his
character . HARRIS-177X-2,1,110.377

<P_1,111>

{COM:letter_omitted}

<P_1,112>

{COM:letter_omitted}

{ED:Extract_of_a_letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,112.383

25 July , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,112.384

In these three successive letters I have endeavoured to give your
Lordship a sketch of the Prince of Prussia@ @'s character ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,112.385

and , according to the best of my knowledge , have in no point deviated
from the truth . HARRIS-177X-2,1,112.386

On recapitulating them it appears , that there are in him no seeds of
those great qualities so necessary for one who is to inherit dominions
like these , HARRIS-177X-2,1,112.387

and undoubtedly the mass will be with great difficulty kept together if
such qualities are to be sought for elsewhere than in the Sovereign .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,112.388

Amongst a people formerly as famous for being honest as they are now for
being totally destitute of every principle , and at all times dull to a
proverb , few transcendent geniuses are likely to be found ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,112.389

and even if such a phenomenon should appear , his operations necessarily
must be directed by interest and private views , since no true patriot
can exist <P_1,113> here . HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.390

I have been told that the Prince of Prussia , aware of this , and at the
same time diffident of his own abilities , is resolved , on the death of
his uncle , to put his army entirely into the hands of Prince Ferdinand
of Brunswick , and to turn his own thoughts solely towards the
administration of his finances and other civil occupations ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.391

and these , by observing the same manner now adopted , and by keeping
the same men in place , he hopes to maintain on the same footing they
now are . HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.392

These resolutions are undoubtedly right ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.393

but how far a young Prince , with strong passions , and who has passed
the earliest period of his life under the greatest restraint , will be
able to observe them when he finds himself King , without controul and
with a large treasure , is a matter of doubt . HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.394

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_William_Eden,_Esq.}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.396

29th July , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.397

Sir , - I feel I ought not to let this post go out without writing to
you ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.398

yet I shall find it a very difficult matter to fill my paper .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.399

Besides every branch of the Royal Family resident either here or in the
neighbourhood , we have at present in Berlin the Landgravine of Hesse
Cassel and the Princess of Wirtemberg . HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.400

His Prussian Majesty , after having entertained them royally at Potzdam
during a week , sent part of his kitchen establishment to wait upon them
here . HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.401

He has appointed a Mons. Hoberg , one of his chamberlains , whose name
was scarce known to him , <paren> and who , till now , never turned his
thoughts beyond the purchasing a horse , or ploughing a field ,
<$$paren> as a temporary Comptroller of the Maitres_d'Hotel and cooks
employed on this occasion . HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.402

In his first letter to him , which Mons. de Hoberg was with difficulty
persuaded to be from the King , after an exordium in which he declaims
against the roguery of servants in general , he enters into a very
minute detail of the expenses of a table on such an occasion ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.403

prescribes the number , and even quality of each dish ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,113.404

enumerates the <P_1,114> quantity and size of the wax-candles ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.405

and leaves unnoticed no one single article likely to be wanted at such
entertainments . HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.406

So <font> great <$$font> is his Prussian Majesty both in small and great
affairs ! HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.407

You are not ignorant that the great officers of his Court are merely
titular , and never allowed to have any authority annexed to their
office . HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.408

This is given to some menial servants , who constantly are about his
person ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.409

and his Treasurer was a hussar named Deiss , in whom his Prussian
Majesty placed more confidence than he appears to have deserved ; since
, for mal-administration , or some equally notorious fault , his
Prussian Majesty a few days ago dismissed him from his high post , and
ordered him to be employed as a drummer in a marching regiment .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.410

Deiss affected to submit patiently to his sentence ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.411

and on being arrested begged leave of the officer only to go into his
room , adjoining to the King's writing-closet , to fetch his hat :
HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.412

this being granted , he immediately locked the door ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.413

took a pistol from his pocket , HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.414

and shot himself through the head . HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.415

The King heard , HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.416

and was alarmed by the report of a pistol so near him ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.417

and , being told what had happened , he pitied Deiss ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.418

said he was out of his senses , HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.419

and ordered all he died worth to be distributed equally among his
children . HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.420

Deiss had charged the pistol with small shot and crooked nails , and put
the muzzle of it into his mouth . HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.421

His Prussian Majesty did not bestow on Le Kain the same extravagant
praises that the public here lavish on him . HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.422

He found him , as in fact he is , stiff and <font> outre . <$$font>
HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.423

He made him , however , on his departure , a handsome present ; as also
did Prince Henry , and the Prince of Prussia . HARRIS-177X-2,1,114.424

<P_1,115>

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_William_Eden,_Esq.}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.427

Saturday , 2nd September , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.428

Dear Sir , - Our sister Princesses have at length left us .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.429

They adopted a kind of system of procrastination , under pretence of
family arrangements ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.430

but his Prussian Majesty entirely destroyed it , by fixing the day when
the cooks , whom he had sent from Potzdam to serve their table , should
cease working and return to their usual residence .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.431

He performed this manoeuvre in the midst of the most polite speeches to
their Royal Highnesses , and expressions of the deepest sorrow at their
stay being so short . HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.432

I understand that towards the 15th of this month we may expect him here
, to see whether the garrison is perfect in a new evolution he has
lately taught them . HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.433

I am not , <font> although in the militia , <$$font> sufficiently versed
in military phrases to undertake to explain this evolution accurately .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.434

Count Zierotin , the <font> Directeur des Spectacles , <$$font> is dead
. HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.435

I can@ @not tell under what pretext his executors took it into their
heads to ask of the foreign ministers their livery and equipages to
attend his funeral . HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.436

I took the liberty of refusing mine ; as , besides the Count being a
Roman_Catholic , he was a <font> très mauvais sujet . <$$font>
HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.437

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_William_Eden,_Esq.}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.439

Tuesday , 19th September , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.440

Dear Sir , - His Prussian Majesty appeared perfectly satisfied with the
garrison of this town at the review on Tuesday last .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.441

He gave out , that he intended lodging at his palace of Charlottenbourg
, HARRIS-177X-2,1,115.442

but arrived the evening previous to the manoeuvre at an insignificant
village near the spot where the troops were to exercise , where he
passed the night under a feigned name , and was not a <P_1,116> little
pleased to find the next morning everything in the most exact order ,
notwithstanding he arrived on the plain two hours sooner than he was
expected . HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.443

You have heard of the famous General Zedlitz : HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.444

he owed his fortune to an anecdote which came to my knowledge only a few
days ago . HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.445

When simple Lieutenant , he happened to be near his Prussian Majesty on
a bridge which crossed the Oder . HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.446

The King asked him , if both the avenues of the bridge were possessed by
the enemy , what he would do to disengage himself .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.447

Zedlitz , without making an answer , immediately leaped his horse over
the rails into the river , HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.448

and , notwithstanding its breadth and rapidity , swam safe ashore .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.449

The King , who took it for granted he must be drowned , on seeing him
come towards him said , " Monsieur le <font> Major <$$font> , je vous
prie de ne plus faire de coups pareils . " HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.450

{ED:Extract_of_a_despatch_from_Mr._Harris_to_the_Earl_of_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.452

7th Oct. 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.453

His Prussian Majesty's health is so far from being mended since I last
wrote , that I am now positively assured that he has entreated the
Electress of Saxony to defer her visit till the Carnival .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.454

It is , however , not in my power to enter into the particulars of his
present indisposition , since he not only rejects all advice , but
treated the surgeon who attended him from hence <paren> a man of great
skill and experience <$$paren> in the most injurious manner , and even
threatened him for venturing to differ from him in opinion .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.455

To his officers , and those of a superior class , who attend him in the
routine of business , he is sullen and harsh ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.456

and it is with difficulty he keeps within bounds those bilious humours
which overflow the moment he has to deal with his more menial domestics
. HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.457

He neglects his music and his books ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.458

and , although he has replaced Quintus by the well-known Abbé de Pau ,
he seldom suffers him to come near him . HARRIS-177X-2,1,116.459

In a letter <paren> which <P_1,117> was communicated to me under the
strictest promise of secrecy <$$paren> he wrote to his sister the
Princess Amelia the day previous to his gout , he complains so
pathetically of his being forsaken by all the world , of his being
without a friend , and makes use of such melancholy , not to say ,
unmanly expressions , that , if I was not certain he had not the most
distant idea of its contents ever transpiring , I should suppose him to
have written it with a view of answering some particular end .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.460

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_the_Earl_of_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.462

Tuesday , 17th Oct. 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.463

My Lord , - His Prussian Majesty recovers but slowly ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.464

the humours are now settled in his leg , HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.465

and the surgeon has , by the advice of the physician , endeavoured to
fix them there by a cautery . HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.466

He is not well enough yet to do any kind of business .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.467

The <font> Commandant <$$font> at Potzdam gives out every morning the
<font> parole ; <$$font> HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.468

and what is a singular kind of farce , regularly acquaints the officers
of the garrison that his Prussian Majesty means to be present at the
mounting of the guard , HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.469

and as regularly , a moment before it takes place , informs them that
his Majesty is prevented from coming that day by business of the
greatest importance . HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.470

No one at Potzdam ventures to inquire after his health .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.471

There reigns the most profound silence among every rank of people in
that town ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.472

and no one but the surgeon , and a few menial servants , are allowed to
approach Sans Souci . HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.473

{ED:Extract_of_a_letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_Daniel_de_la_Val,_Esq.}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.475

23rd Oct. 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,117.476

It is with pleasure I embrace an opportunity of renewing our
correspondence , which has flagged on my <P_1,118> side for want of
matter . HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.477

The calm which has made my letters everywhere , for these last eight
months , so very unedifying , seems now to be drawing towards an end ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.478

and I wish in the course of next spring a storm may not arise , whose
effects will be felt in the remotest corners of Europe .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.479

Besides the ill state of health of his Prussian Majesty , which I tell
you confidentially threatens him with a speedy dissolution , he seems to
be losing ground both at Moscow and Vienna . HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.480

The cloud , though perhaps only temporary , which at this moment covers
his creature Count Panin , alarms him exceedingly ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.481

and the steps he supposes , and believes with reason , that other
European Princes are taking to open the Czarina's eyes , give him the
greatest uneasiness ; the more so , as his extravagant conduct , a total
ignorance of commercial affairs , and a wanton persecution of the
unfortunate town of Dantzic , expose him to a reproach , which even his
most zealous partisans can@ @not pretend to palliate ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.482

this , joined to the broken state of his constitution , has so far
ruffled his temper , naturally far from mild , as to make him at moments
little inferior to a madman . HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.483

He is suspicious of everybody , HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.484

and is so unwilling to be thought out of order , that the efforts he
makes to appear in health , very often endanger his life .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.485

On the other side , the Court of Vienna , having little to fear from him
, and having possessed itself of the best share in the division of
Poland , appears no longer anxious to keep up that strict harmony with
Berlin ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.486

and , I believe , would be very ready to form a more natural alliance ,
if any such a one offered itself . HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.487

Domestic events likewise torment him ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.488

his successor feeling that , according to the course of nature , he soon
must become King , begins to anticipate himself ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.489

and treats his uncle with less respect and deference than he did
formerly ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.490

his servants too betray him ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.491

his table companions ask their dismission ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.492

even his soldiers complain : HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.493

in a word , every symptom that announces the end of a reign , which has
been one continual scene of oppression , appears at present .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.494

Adieu ! my dear Sir ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.495

let what I have written remain entirely between ourselves ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,118.496

you will always find me ready to write to you with the greatest
<P_1,119> confidence , and receive what you write me with strict secrecy
. HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.497

{ED:Letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_William_Eden,_Esq.}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.499

November 14th , 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.500

Dear Sir , - The hussar whom his Prussian Majesty had put about his
person in the room of the unfortunate Deiss , was ordered , a few days
ago , into confinement . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.501

He had written the following letter to his mistress :
HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.502

- " My dear Charlotte , it will not be in my power to call upon you
either to-day or so soon as I could wish , being obliged to stay at home
and take care of the old <font> Brumm Bär <$$font> <paren> growling bear
<$$paren> . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.503

I hope , however , towards the end of the week to make good this loss .
" HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.504

This fatal letter fell into the King's hands . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.505

He immediately sent for his hussar , HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.506

and asked him whether he could write . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.507

" A little , " says the hussar . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.508

" Take a pen HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.509

and write . " HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.510

He alleged his being little used to write . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.511

" It does not signify ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.512

write as well as you can what I dictate to you , "
HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.513

and his Prussian Majesty immediately dictated to him his letter to his
mistress . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.514

The hussar fell on his knees HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.515

and attempted to excuse himself . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.516

" Write on , " says the King , HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.517

and add , " My dear Charlotte , it is now probable several weeks will
pass over before I can have the pleasure of seeing you , being obliged
at this very moment to set out for Spandau . " HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.518

The King signed the letter , HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.519

and sent him with it to prison , where , however , he let him stay no
longer than was necessary to frighten him ; his Prussian Majesty
considering the fault in the ludicrous manner it deserved .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.520

{ED:Extract_of_a_letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Stormont}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.522

21st Nov. 1775 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.523

Your nomination , which your Lordship mentions , to the post of <font>
Ministre de Guerre <$$font> , seems to meet with uncommon approbation .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,119.524

<P_1,120> His Prussian Majesty is , however , in too ill a state of
health to pay the same attention he formerly did to every event which
influences the affairs of Europe . HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.525

But half recovered from a long , painful , and complicated sickness ,
his mind sympathises with his body , HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.526

and with difficulty performs the functions indispensably necessary for
keeping together the wonderful fabric he has erected .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.527

Unable to execute new projects of depredation , his sole object seems to
be a wish to be unmolested in the possession he enjoys , and the
maintaining in Europe the preponderance his fortune and conduct have
annexed to his name . HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.528

Conscious , perhaps , of the illegal tenure by which he holds them , and
measuring the temper of other princes by his own , he , at length ,
feels the sentiments he has so often inspired . HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.529

Full of alarms and suspicions , his measures seem all to tend to the
discovery of the projects of other Courts , without having any
determined one of his own . HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.530

He is uneasy at the intimacy between the Court of Versailles and that of
Vienna , but much more so at the advances the French Ministry appear to
be making at Petersburg , and the perfect intelligence which reigns
between them ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.531

and he is fully persuaded that he can@ @not depend on the House of
Austria longer than their alliance is cemented by interested views , and
that , when those cease , the old grudge will return in its full force .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.532

He is conscious , too , that others may employ the same means to destroy
his interest at Petersburg , by which he has formed it ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.533

and as he feels the absolute necessity not only of keeping well with ,
but even of guiding the measures of the Czarina , he is resolved to
spare no pains to counteract the negociations of every power at that
Court . HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.534

It is for this end he has proposed a second journey to his brother ,
Prince Henry ; to whom , besides unlimited promises , he has offered a
very considerable present . HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.535

Spain , Portugal , and Italy seldom occupy him further than a subject of
raillery and table conversation ; HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.536

Denmark and Sweden are below his notice , HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.537

and his dispositions towards us seem in every respect the same as they
have been these last twelve years . HARRIS-177X-2,1,120.538

Your Lordship may infer from this , that , as long as his Prussian
Majesty lives , there is as <P_1,121> little danger of the tranquillity
of Europe being disturbed in this quarter , as in that you inhabit ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.539

but as his health is universally allowed to be very precarious , and ,
if I may speak to your Lordship confidentially , according to my own
opinion so impaired as to threaten even immediate danger , the system of
the North may soon take an entire new turn , and afford a very ample
field for political speculations . HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.540

{ED:Extract_of_a_letter_from_Mr._Harris_to_Lord_Suffolk}

Berlin , HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.542

3rd Feb. 1776 . HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.543

His Prussian Majesty is confined to his bed in consequence of the return
of the gout , of which I acquainted your Lordship in my last .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.544

He has sent for a physician from hence he discarded several years ago ,
on his refusing to prescribe for his greyhound , by name Cuttenius ,
HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.545

and has made ample reparation for his ill-usage of him by the gracious
reception he has given him . HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.546

I can , at the same time , scarce suppose him to have any reliance on
his skill , HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.547

and consider this step merely as that of a drowning person who catches
at every branch . HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.548

In the meanwhile the Prince of Prussia passes four or five nights of the
week here , HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.549

and his German and French mistresses occupy him so exceedingly as to
divert his thoughts from any other object . HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.550

The low scenes that pass between these two heroines are not of a nature
to be communicated to your Lordship . HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.551

The French lady excels in cunning and the art of pleasing ;
HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.552

the other presumes on her long uninterrupted reign , which she maintains
with threats and open force . HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.553

His Prussian Majesty knows all this , HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.554

and would willingly prevent it , HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.555

but he feels that orders respecting one so near the throne are not
likely to be executed with that exactness he could wish .
HARRIS-177X-2,1,121.556

