<BEGIN_haydon-1808-1>

<P_1,3>

{ED:Volume_IIIa_JULY_1808}

<font> July 23 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.4

I left Town for Dover on {TEXT:missing_"on"} the mail
HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.5

and arrived there the next morning . HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.6

I walked about in the Town HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.7

and about evening wandered away to Shakespeare's clift ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.8

here perhaps , I said , Shakespeare has stood , HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.9

here Lear defied the Storm , HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.10

there , as I looked towards the Castle , Cordelia died ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.11

how many Kings of England have embarked from Dover to France ?
HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.12

For the first time in my life I saw the white cliffs of England ,
beating back the murmuring surge , HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.13

and as the Sun shot a last gleam athwart the ocean , I caught a glitter
of the distant coast of France - HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.14

how I felt . HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.15

There , I thought , is France , the proud enemy of England ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.16

what a feeling two_thousand years hence , when England & France shall
have long sunk into silence , like Carthage & Rome ; when those
straights , now covered with shipping , shall then be as silent as the
deserts {TEXT:desarts} of Egypt ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.17

at such a period , for some traveller , who from his infancy has been
feeding his fancy and storing his mind with the history of the wars of
these Nations , at such a moment , for some being after an anxious night
, as the day dawned , the Star glittered , and the Sun rose , the white
cliffs of England , and France , should burst on his sight . Standing
as it were as they always stood , proudly defying each other ,
regardless of Centuries , ages , and events - HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.18

who will not hereafter , as the breeze wafts him between , contemplate
with awe England & France . HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.19

" There@ @'s England - and that@ @'s France , " will be the usual
exclamation , HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.20

- and then till they are lost in air , Silence will ensue , every man
wrapt up in his own feelings & meditations - HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.21

I staid on the clift of Shakespeare till twilight was far advanced ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,3.22

and as I moved down , towards Town , and turned round to take a last
look for that night of the clift that towered in the Sky and was almost
lost in the <font> embruno <$$font> tint of twilight , how grand it
would be , it flashed into my mind , if there were at
{TEXT:missing_"were_at"} the top a Colossal Statue of Britannia , with
her Lion at her feet , surveying France with a lofty <P_1,4> air .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.23

If this remained alone when England becomes a desart , how poetical
would this and its White cliffs be when lighted {TEXT:light} up by the
rising or engoldened by the setting Sun . HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.24

It would be a mark at Sea - HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.25

Some person to whom I mentioned this said , " Why , it must be 20 feet
high . " HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.26

- " 20 feet ! ! HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.27

150 . " HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.28

- " Who would you get to undertake such a thing ? "
HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.29

- Who would I get ? HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.30

is this a question that an Athenian would have asked ?
HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.31

- This shews how little diffusion of taste there is yet in England -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.32

so little are the people acquainted with the great purposes of Art ,
that any mention of any colossal , great , or Public undertaking
{TEXT:missing_"undertaking"} is literally a source of ridicule .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.33

- I recollect once I happened to say a great colossal Statue of Neptune
at the Admiralty , one foot on one side & one foot on the other ,
holding in one hand the telegraph , towering in the air so as to be
visible for miles , would be {TEXT:missing_"be"} an ornament worthy of
such a city . HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.34

" You had better , " said a collector of Dutch Pictures , with a sneer ,
" propose it to Parliament . " HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.35

" That I would , " said I , " were there the least chance of success .
" HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.36

It may be a source of amusement to you , whose ideas of art are
circumscribed within a Dutch pitcher - HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.37

but it@ @'s a melancholy thing for those whose whole ambition is the
advance of the National taste - to see all the faculties of men ,
squeezed into an inside of a tasteless dutch Room , with a woman
clouting a child - HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.38

all the delight English men feel is in cocking their nose close to the
Picture , HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.39

and let its intellectual qualities be what they may , condemn or praise
in proportion to its mechanical excellence . HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.40

They talk of Raphael & the Cartoons , HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.41

but they merely talk - HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.42

for God knows they feel e'en little enough - HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.43

Wherever I dine - what is the conversation - if it turns to art ?
HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.44

Is it on Milton , Homer , Michel Angelo or Raphael ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.45

is it the moral effect of Art , HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.46

is it the source of intellectual delight great efforts afford ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,4.47

is <P_1,5> it where is London deficient in great works , and how can
England rival Greece , do men seem sensible of the respect due to the
higher walks ? HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.48

Wherever I dine , wherever I go , a string of technical phrases that are
for ever on the tongue , without effort or reflection , are perpetually
uttered - HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.49

how that floor is imitated , HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.50

what a colour that turnip is , HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.51

how delightful is that cabbage , HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.52

look at that herring - HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.53

wonderful - HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.54

what could you expect from infants if you talked to them about art - but
that they would be enchanted at the imitation of their doll , or their
bells , HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.55

so with the People of England , HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.56

all their ambition and all their delight , and all their ideas of art go
not beyond their immediate object of their senses ; the exact copy of a
pound of butter , or a capitally touched china cup -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.57

an effort of intellect can certainly be shewn in the arrangement of a
pound of butter or china cup - HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.58

it requires intellect to do any thing with reference to a whole .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.59

I am not ridiculing the Artists , but the people ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.60

they see only the individual likeness to the thing HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.61

and there their delight ends HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.62

and there their notions of art are confined - HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.63

they care nothing - HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.64

uneducated People might be forgiven - HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.65

but Noblemen , refined , educated , classical Noblemen , the ministers
of the Country , the government of England , instead of standing at an
awful distance , and surveying with dread great works , uttering with
admiration " what a conception , what a fancy , what an Idea , " instead
of being ambitious of having their Souls elevated , and their minds
expanded , instead of this , to see them rush , with their heads jammed
as if in a wedge , clap up their glasses before a Picture , " three feet
long , and two feet wide , " and uttering exclamations of ravishment and
rapture , at a smutty crock , or a brass candlestick - even in my friend
Wilkie@ @'s Picture . HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.66

What do they admire in it ? The character or the mind ?
HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.67

No , the dutch part , the touching , the knifes , the pewter plates ,
and tin saucepans - HAYDON-1808-1,1,5.68

this is all they <P_1,6> comprehend - HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.69

this is what they look for , HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.70

and this is what they see - HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.71

The Noblemen of England have not strength of mind to relish grand ,
terrible subjects ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.72

they like to lie on their sofas and indolently admire a Landscape by
Glover ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.73

they like to put down small Pictures on a chair by the window and wonder
at trifles - HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.74

I@ @'ve seen C- , M- , D- , L- , and all the Ministers of England ,
squeeze to a small P- of W- - of a Servant washing a child's face with
her hand , while one eye being only seen is squeezed up in agony -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.75

" look at that eye , " said D- , HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.76

" look at that eye ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.77

good God , how extraordinary that he could express so much in an eye " -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.78

This is a specimen of the government of England , HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.79

these are the People to whom dejected Painting looks for assistance -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.80

Poor Painting , Poor Painting , you may talk till you are Hoarse of the
effect of Public works - HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.81

But the Nobility of England will take more delight in brass saucepans .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.82

I have watched them at Lord Elgin's . HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.83

Was every English Nobleman to put his hand to his heart , and say what
he really thinks of those exquisite remains , he would say he thinks
they are not worth preserving . HAYDON-1808-1,1,6.84

<P_1,7>

I have lately refused every invitation to dine out ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.86

I prefer the delights of Virgil and Homer , to the imbecile , tiresome ,
technical nonsense of dutch connoiseurship , HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.87

" how cleverly that is painted , " &c , &c , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.88

after dinner one takes a candle HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.89

and walks over to an insipid Jan Mieris , of a Woman and a Boy , with
cabbages , Potatoes , & red herrings , a cat , a brass pan , and some
carrots , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.90

then all are in raptures , HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.91

" what an exquisite imitation , HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.92

look at the carrots , HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.93

look at the herrings , HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.94

well we must take that down " - HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.95

down it@ @'s taken - put on a chair ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.96

then My Lord & My Lady , and Master & Miss , all crowd round this
inimitable carrot Picture , lost in rapture & delight .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.97

God , I wish for the spectre of Michel Angelo to frown them into
grandeur , HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.98

but even his spectre , and a vision of the Capella Sistina at his heels
, would stand a poor chance , with such an opponent as Jan Mieris , at
the Table of an English Noble Connoiseur . HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.99

With broken spirits and a harrassed mind , after having all day spent in
dwelling on Homer and Achilles , I kneel down , in torture ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.100

and join in their acclamations ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.101

it cuts me to the soul to be obliged to listen to such applause , on a
Dutchman ; while Poor Raphael , or Michel Angelo , or Phidias are never
mentioned or thought of . HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.102

To hear terms that would be applicable to the highest beauties of Art
applied to a tame , insipid , smooth , flat , mindless imitation of
carrots - Good God , is this the end of Art , HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.103

is this the use of Painting ? mere mechanic deception ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.104

can Painters really excite pity or terror or love or benevolence or lift
your soul above this world by sublime , heavenly fancies , or carry your
mind to Hell by grand furious conceptions ? HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.105

Can Painters really stimulate a Man to Heroism , or urge a Man to
Repentance , or excite a Man to virtue ? HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.106

No , certainly , not in such minds , it never can ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.107

Pictures with such properties would pass unheeded by , if they should
unluckily stand by a Jan Mieris - HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.108

O God , why was I not born to be known to Pericles or Lorenzo di Medici
? HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.109

O God , how would I acknowledge in Gratitude thy kindness , could I but
find such Patrons , such Protectors , could I but find some one of rank
who would relish grand fancies and promote grand art -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.110

In thee I trust still - Amen - HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.111

This fancy of the Statue of Britannia was a source of great delight to
me , HAYDON-1808-1,1,7.112

for when I saw Shakespeare's Clift , my mind instantly <P_1,8> supplied
what was wanting - HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.113

I used to wander about evenings along an extended shore , far from human
habitation , & sometimes disturb the sea birds in their holes , who with
their screaming added grandeur to the scene , of murmuring waves , "
Quum venti posuere , " and contemplate France , as for a moment the "
setting sun " would , against it , " level his evening rays " -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.114

there is the country that overran Europe , I thought ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.115

not 100 miles from that coast is Buonaparte , the wonder and detestation
of the World ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.116

there , as I turned towards Boulogne , he has stood and perhaps with
disappointment and malice surveyed the distant cliffs of England .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.117

I took a boat , HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.118

and went over as near as was prudent , about half-way ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.119

and saw the windmill where Buonaparte had his little Iron house , &
where his troops were encamped for invasion - HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.120

I never saw any coast so exactly answering the feeling excited by
Homer's description & scenery ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.121

here was the Place to read Homer , HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.122

here was the place for the {COM:greek_omitted} . HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.123

What different scenery there is in Homer & Milton ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.124

one has all the rich rural dingle dong or dell of wild woods , and "
twilight meadows , " and the other all the sublime terrors , and
melancholy soothings of a Sea shore - when Achilles <paren> among
a_thousand instances <$$paren> {COM:greek_omitted} ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.125

would it be half so much like a sounding voice , in any other place , as
on {COM:greek_omitted} - HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.126

would any other place give such scope to voice , such room for fancying
echo - HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.127

I almost thought I saw Achilles in naked majesty moving his " mighty
thighs " along the Shore , and with raised hand shouting to the Grecians
as he passed - HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.128

in every battle description of Homer , you always associate the sounding
shore , which makes the uproar more horrible & thundering .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,8.129

From being so compleatly <P_1,9> alone , I began to conceive some new
subjects for Pictures , HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.130

and one night , after reading with eagerness Macbeth , he in terror in
the act of murdering the sleeping Duncan , and his wife listening &
grooms sleeping , darted into my brain - HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.131

I made several other sketches , HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.132

nor did I so compleatly enjoy myself in all the delight of solitude as
at Dover . HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.133

Every body stared on the beach , HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.134

no person knew my name or where I came from , HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.135

I was always wet , alone , on some solitary shore or silent meadow -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.136

at last having enquired of the bathing man for Lodgings , some lady left
directions of whom he enquired , HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.137

and away I sallied ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.138

I was shewn into a Room , where stood an old harpsichord , miserably out
of tune , HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.139

a pair of dirty ladies' gloves lay on it , with a parasol , a torn lace
veil , HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.140

there was an appearance of {TEXT:missing_"of"} profligate poverty ,
struggling to disguise all by an effort at gentility , which I did not
like . HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.141

At last in came the mistress , a flattering , a chattering , polite ,
cunning thing , that wore the look of once being a beauty ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.142

and after making several efforts to get out of me how long I was to stay
, &c , her daughter entered , HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.143

& in bad French told her Mother the room was ready upstairs ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.144

she was a fine , tall , dashing girl , to whom I suppose the dirty
gloves , torn veil , and miserably toned harpsichord belonged , and with
which , I supposed , she had charmed the hearts of half the coxcombs of
the garrison . HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.145

I did not like the appearance of the people ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.146

I could have nothing , I found , to myself . HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.147

I found they thought they would be doing me a favor by intruding
themselves upon me at all hours . HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.148

" You@ @'ll never want Society , Sir ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.149

there is always me or my daughter , " HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.150

and when I was going , she {TEXT:missing_"she"} offered her daughter to
accompany me and shew me to some other friend who might perhaps suit me
- HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.151

I begged to decline the offer , feeling when I got clear , as if for an
hour I had been breathing in a stew , of vice & debauchery -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.152

I could not help observing while here , the respect and awe every person
had for the military , as if they were tinctured by the opposite coast .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.153

" You must@ @n't walk there , or here , or to this place " was in every
body's mouth , HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.154

and I dare@ @say I was charged ten times with the bayonet for doing what
appeared to me perfectly innocent ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.155

by night I was only allowed to walk on the beach from sentry to sentry -
and then not without every time I approached each being always
challenged . HAYDON-1808-1,1,9.156

The windows of the Inns were scribbled <P_1,10> with the feelings of
People leaving England , or returning to it ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.157

every thing in the place was new HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.158

and excited in me new Ideas ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.159

half the People talked some sort of French or other ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.160

they appeared altogether of a different character ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.161

they seemed the <font> half tint <$$font> between England & France ,
hardly Frenchmen and not altogether Englishmen - HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.162

One evening a tremendous thunder storm came on , HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.163

and away I sallied to the heights . HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.164

Nothing could be more awful than the rumbling echo among the heights ,
and the illumined sea at intervals , where for an instant you would see
ships labouring in surge , and then again they would be buried in
darkness . HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.165

" Things that love night , love not such nights as these , " I thought ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.166

" since I was man Such sheets of fire , such bursts of horrid crashing
Thunder , " such groaning of roaring wind and rain , I never remember to
have heard - HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.167

The wind blew as if 't@ @would blow its last , HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.168

the rattling shower rose on the blast , HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.169

the speedy gleams the darkness swallowed , HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.170

loud , deep , & long the thunder bellowed - HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.171

I returned drenched with rain , and exhausted with walking -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.172

I fancied Lear with his White hair , which the impetuous blasts caught
in their fury and made nothing of uttering imprecations on his
fiend-like daughters , and defying the lightening to singe his white
head , HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.173

and spent the whole evening in reading it - HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.174

before the Storm began , I observed a black cloud gathering and sailing
towards the town ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.175

as it approached it encreased , HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.176

and at last rushed over the town , which it enveloped in Darkness ,
followed by a stream of rushing wind which swept up every thing ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.177

all the People & animals darted into the Houses HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.178

& Horses reared with fright in their eyes HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.179

and pawed the ground , HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.180

and a cat I saw that could not get in rose its back ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.181

enlarged its tail , HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.182

and hissed with terror , till the cloud was passed , pregnant with fluid
. HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.183

I met by accident on the beach one morning Mr. Watson , a gentleman of
amiable and affectionate manners who had behaved politely to me in
London - HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.184

being a commissioner of excise he had the Cutter under his orders
HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.185

and gave me many pleasant excursions ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.186

we went to Hythe HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.187

and saw the Martello Towers ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,10.188

the one <P_1,11> we were in they made the passage to go out in the front
, instead of behind , so that instead of presenting the strongest front
to the enemy , they presented the weakest . HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.189

I mentioned this to the engineer whom I met with afterwards
HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.190

and he said it was the only one that was so - HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.191

we saw the castle . HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.192

I could not help laughing at the Artilleryman who to shew the
infallibility of his stink pots assured me he nearly smothered the Duke
of York , and his Royal highness did not recover till carried into the
air - HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.193

there was a place of retreat for the inhabitants &c.
HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.194

Mr. Seguier , another friend {TEXT:missing_"friend"} of Mr. Watson and
mine , came down - HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.195

how compleatly a Londoner is out of his element , when not walking on
flat stones - HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.196

we went to the light of the Goodwin Sands - where Gen. Phipps told me
Mr. Pitt and he had been together and saw Calais Plainly -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.197

We shortly left Mr. Watson HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.198

and returned to London - HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.199

every inch was classical ground - Rochester - Gadshill -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.200

I saw the very place where Falstaff robbed the exchequer -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.201

we came to London in the evening - HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.202

and I was soon again vigourously pursuing my Studies -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,11.203

<P_1,12_blank>

<P_1,13_contains_only_editorial_material>

<P_1,14_contains_only_editorial_material>

<P_1,15>

{ED:Volume_I_SEPTEMBER_1808_-_DECEMBER_1808}

{COM:previous_page_torn_from_the_diary} that I may truly say I have been
purely Idle - HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.209

when shall I be purely industrious ? HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.210

God only knows - HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.211

my conscience is so burthened with vice & irreligion & Idleness that I
am afraid to think , afraid to look into myself ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.212

- O God , that I with a thorough conviction and experience of the
happiness bestowed by virtue , should ever plunge with this conviction
in my mind , into the misery attendant on vice - I never retire to bed
but with a new scheme of life and I arise only to exemplify its futility
- HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.213

I close this day a little happier to think that I have not wholly lost
it - laus Deo - HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.214

Hours 5_1$$2 drawing . HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.215

<font> September 7 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.216

Wednesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.217

Arose at 1$$2 past Six , HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.218

made sketches from the Scull of a Horse , the anatomy of which I learnt
<paren> i.e. the bones <$$paren> , HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.219

Drew at Lord Elgin's again from ten till two , HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.220

and from three till six - walked HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.221

& came home , HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.222

drank tea HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.223

& passed my time laxly in reading Boswell's Johnson , -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.224

I shall certainly draw every day at Lord Elgin's this week and do as
much as I can as when the winter comes , it will be too cold .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.225

Is not this a mere excuse to be Idle & put off painting ?
HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.226

- However I have been more pure and calm to_day than for some time -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.227

O God grant every day of my future life I may encrease in purity , piety
& energetic exertion - HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.228

listen to me , O Merciful Father , thro Jesus Christ my Redeemer , -
Amen , with all my soul - HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.229

Went to bed 1$$2 past ten , HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.230

- 7 hours drawing . HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.231

<font> September 8 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.232

Thursday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.233

Arose at eight - HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.234

washed myself from top to toe with water . HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.235

Drew at Lord Elgin's from ten till 1$$4 past two , and from three till
3$$4 past five , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.236

walked about HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.237

and looked at those matchless productions . HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.238

I consider it truly the greatest blessing that ever happened to this
country , their being brought here ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.239

the principles they are executed on I am truly ignorant of ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.240

yet I begin to relish them with a right feeling , HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.241

and God grant I may be able to do something before I die that may stand
in competition and raise the honor of my Country -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,15.242

I have been more <P_1,16> pure in my thoughts this day , than during the
whole year , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.243

I hope it@ @'s a prelude to the remainder of my life ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.244

could I be always so industrious , so pious & so pure , O Almighty being
, I should have no one thing to wish for - in the intent and hope I may
be daily more worthy of thy mercy and assistance - Amen ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.245

hours 6_3$$4 drawing , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.246

went to bed XI - HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.247

<font> September 9 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.248

Friday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.249

Awoke at Six with my night cap off , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.250

put it on to keep my head warm for a minute or two ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.251

and then I resolved to get up , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.252

but alas during that minute or two , I dozed away into a Sleep ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.253

and never awoke till eight ! ! HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.254

- drew at Lord Elgin's again from ten till two , and from three till
1$$4 past six , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.255

& finished the best drawing I have made yet , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.256

marble fell down HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.257

and cut my leg - HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.258

went to bed at XII - HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.259

am much improved this week in the knowledge of Horses .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.260

How the Greeks attended to every alteration in the body produced by the
slightest movement ! HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.261

The more I study them the more do I feel my own insignificance .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.262

God grant I may rival them yet - HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.263

equally pure to day and free from disturbing thoughts as yesterday -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.264

Thanks to God - Amen - may I encrease in virtue & purity & industry , to
absolute perfection , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.265

let me admit of no degrees of excellence , nothing but indisputable
greatness , on solid scientific principles - the House built on the Rock
- HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.266

read Boswell's Johnson . HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.267

There is no resisting this book - HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.268

Hours 7_1$$4 drawing . HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.269

<font> September 10 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.270

Saturday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.271

Arose at Seven , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.272

washed myself as usual - HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.273

did not begin drawing until 1$$2 past ten , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.274

drew on with some interruption till five o'clock ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.275

then dined , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.276

came home HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.277

and read Boswell - HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.278

What has affected me to_day I can@ @not tell HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.279

but I have drawn with evident weakness HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.280

and on looking at my yesterday's drawing I was truly astonished to see
such vigour and spirit ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.281

I can@ @not tell what has ailed me . HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.282

I have been disturbed in my thoughts HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.283

and have not been able to apply myself so acutely -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.284

it is no use altering my present drawing HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.285

but I will begin a fresh one on Monday , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.286

and I hope to give a better account of myself on Monday night -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.287

I lay abed after I awoke , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.288

and this always weakens me , HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.289

relaxes me HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.290

and shatters me for the day . HAYDON-1808-1,1,16.291

I find the method to preserve my health is to lie on a hard mattress ,
sleep <P_1,17> 6 hours , jump up out of my first sleep , wash myself in
cold water , Study 8 hours , drink nothing but water and weak tea , eat
nothing but simple food , no suppers , no hashes or Stews .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.292

When I do this I always feel braced , healthy , inclined to Study , and
strong enough for great exertion , HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.293

whenever I break in to the slightest degree on this plan I am sure to
suffer , to feel relaxed , incapable of energy , HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.294

and the day is given up , without a struggle - to bed 1$$2 past ten .
Subtracting every time I got up and figetted about & Idled , which as I
work at home by an eight hour glass I have a habit of instinctively
reproaching myself whenever I do it . HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.295

I have worked this day about I think 5_1$$2 hours drawing .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.296

<font> September 11 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.297

Sunday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.298

Arose at 1$$2 past Seven - HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.299

Breakfasted out - HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.300

came home HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.301

and passed the day in calmness , purity , & reading -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.302

my leg has been painful - HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.303

I have been free , totally free , from disturbing thoughts -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.304

O God Almighty grant I may every day encrease in purity ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.305

let me not arise , but to do that which will render me more worthy of
everlasting happiness , HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.306

let me end each day with a silent conviction of having passed it with
thy approbation , HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.307

let me master & control {TEXT:controul} every Idle habit , and every
vicious propensity and have my passions in perfect subordination .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.308

O God in mercy grant my prayer for Jesus Christ's sake , amen .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.309

<font> September 12 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.310

Monday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.311

Passed the day in reading & writing , not able to walk , obliged to put
my leg on a chair , HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.312

could not paint - HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.313

Turlington's Balsam did not agree with me at all -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.314

<font> September 13 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.315

Tuesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.316

My leg still painful - HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.317

read HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.318

& was excessively affected at the account of Johnson's Death ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,17.319

to those who have been used to a sick room , when it says in the morning
he asked the hour , they told him six , he answered , all went on
regularly , he felt he had but a few hours to live , every thing rushed
into mind , all the accompaniments , the expiring rush light , as day
begins to break , the attendants stalking about gently after sitting up
all night , whispering to each other and now & then drawing back the
window curtain to see how near the day , the Stars twinkling like gems ,
as if they were doing their utmost before <P_1,18> they are extinguished
by the Sun - and Johnson with proven energy in his expiring awful voice
begging mercy at intervals of the Almighty . HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.320

This brought my dear Mother's death , with its dreadful circumstances to
my recollection , HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.321

and after fearing my impetuosity in hastening her on to London might
have aggravated her complaint , I was consoled at the reflection that
all the little happiness she enjoyed for the latter part of her anxious
life was occasioned by my success and exertions - HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.322

Thank Thee O God I never gave her one moment's sorrow by any vice -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.323

My dear dear Mother , forgive me for all my unkindness ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.324

forgive me for any inattention , if you are now sensible to my present
feelings - HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.325

I have never felt so pious , so pure , & calm as this day for this last
twelvemonth . HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.326

O could it last , HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.327

but I trust in thee , HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.328

assist me , HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.329

let not Sin conquer me , Almighty Being - O God - HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.330

My Mind has been in a compleat state of suspension between Greek , Latin
& French . HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.331

But after mature reasoning , I am determined to go on again with Greek ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.332

French is fit only to be spoken , HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.333

and Latin is more the language of a Critic than a Poet or a Painter , -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.334

Homer I will read . HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.335

God bless my exertions . HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.336

<font> September 14 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.337

Wednesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.338

Read Homer , in English , to stir up my fancy , that I may conceive and
execute my Hero's head with vigour . HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.339

My leg better . HAYDON-1808-1,1,18.340

<P_1,19>

<font> September 15 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.342

Thursday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.343

Read - 8 hours . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.344

<font> September 16 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.345

Friday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.346

Read - 9 hours . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.347

<font> September 17 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.348

Saturday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.349

Read Virgil ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.350

understand it HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.351

and can make it out pretty well , HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.352

but the Idea of the bird , " Decidit ex-animis , &c. " not so beautiful
and true as Homer's , who makes the feathers fly out and quiver away in
the air . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.353

Got quite into the feeling for Latin & Greek , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.354

I hope it always continues so . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.355

13 hours reading - HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.356

my right eye a little strained . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.357

<font> September 18 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.358

Sunday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.359

Read Homer ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.360

any fine passage I went to the Greek immediately HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.361

and made it out but with great bungling , HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.362

yet I hope by accumulation to do it at last . HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.363

Nothing can exceed the description of Achilles arming for Battle -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.364

how Pope has missed this exquisite sentiment - {COM:greek_omitted}
HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.365

Grief and revenge his furious heart inspire . Pope .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,19.366

<P_1,20>

this gives one an Idea of a furious beast HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.368

but Homer's conception is full of pathos ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.369

he says Achilles was arming , grinding his teeth ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.370

his eyes flashed fire , HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.371

but his heart was full of intolerable grief . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.372

This mention of grief brings the mind back again to his affectionate
Friendship for Patroclus and anguish at his Death HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.373

and gives a pathetic feeling to the bloody scene which you anticipate in
his going to battle . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.374

Nothing can be so refined . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.375

10 hours reading . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.376

<font> September 19 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.377

Monday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.378

Wrote several letters . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.379

Idle day . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.380

My leg very weak . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.381

<font> September 20 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.382

Tuesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.383

Began my Picture once again . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.384

Wilkie Breakfasted with me on his return from Lord Lansdowne , a
portrait of whose Lady he has brought home , which is truly exquisite .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.385

I had no Idea of his being capable of so much , HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.386

it gives me real pleasure . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.387

God Bless our exertions , HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.388

and let Death only put an end to our improvement .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.389

We dined with Lord Mulgrave in Private , quite free from restraint , his
little family all playing about us - HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.390

he talked about the late treaty at Lisbon , &c - HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.391

nothing can exceed his liberal attentions , HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.392

I hope I shall every day be more worthy of them - HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.393

4 hours painting . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.394

{COM:next_page_torn_from_the_diary}

<font> October 9 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.396

Sunday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.397

Was more pious but not recovered from yesterday's shock .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.398

<font> October 10 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.399

Monday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.400

Arose calm & pious but not quite pure ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.401

prayed as sincerely as I was able , HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.402

painted little this day , HAYDON-1808-1,1,20.403

repelled <P_1,21> lascivious fancy that hovered round me ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.404

drew at the Academy , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.405

spent the evening after with Fuzeli who in the course of his
conversation , which is always pointed & instructing , said that a
subject for a Picture should astonish , surprize , or move ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.406

if it did neither it was not fit - HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.407

a long argument about Xtianity ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.408

both agreed that its exquisite morality proved its divinity -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.409

came home , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.410

prayed sincerely , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.411

and am now going to bed , in a pious , resolute , & pure state of mind .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.412

O God may I encrease and go on without one single Deviation to the end
of my life . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.413

Let me recollect how fallible I am , and never trust myself a day
without prayer , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.414

O God forgive me , for Jesus Christ's sake , Amen .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.415

<font> October 11 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.416

Tuesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.417

Arose 1$$2 past Seven , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.418

went to the Institution , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.419

came home , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.420

made a sketch of Brutus seeing his evil Genius - HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.421

did nothing to my Picture , no Academy - HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.422

O God I begin again to breath in virtuous conceptions ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.423

strengthen them ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.424

grant me a clear view of my Indolence & idleness , and resolution to
conquer , and resist them , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.425

O God let every hour & every moment render me more worthy of eternal
happiness . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.426

A day passed negatively , free from vice , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.427

I shall account nothing , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.428

I must be actively exerted , to say this day I deserve more than
yesterday Thy approbation , O Merciful Father - HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.429

a negative day may save me from punishment , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.430

but will never render me worthy of reward - HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.431

O God bless my intentions , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.432

banish lasciviousness from my fancy , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.433

let me daily feel the consequence of virtue and the delights resulting
from it , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.434

O God make me sensible , HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.435

convince me - Amen . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.436

A negative day . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.437

<font> October 12 , 13 , and 14 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.438

Wednesday , Thursday , Friday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.439

Industrious days , pure & virtuous . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.440

Thank God . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.441

<font> October <$$font> 15 . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.442

Saturday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.443

Wilkie breakfasted with me HAYDON-1808-1,1,21.444

& away <P_1,22> we went to Sir William Beechey's to endeavour to get his
vote , for Charles Bell , as Professor of Anatomy to the Academy .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.445

Sir William made Wilkie sit for his head , HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.446

while this was performing I went to call on Smirke
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.447

and left Wilkie to break the matter ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.448

came back HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.449

& found it as hopeless a matter there as at Smirke's .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.450

Carlisle is the man , HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.451

he knows the effect good dinners have on half starved Academicians .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.452

Sir William as well as Smirke gave us no hopes , HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.453

and I went to Bell to tell the truth , HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.454

however he was not to be discouraged HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.455

and set off himself , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.456

there is certainly no man so well adapted as Bell ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.457

what was I writing ? HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.458

- he has given his mind to that part of the Subject we need ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.459

and the Students have attended his three courses of Lectures ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.460

and therefore know his qualifications , HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.461

and have all derived the little knowledge we possess from him .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.462

Carlisle has always ridiculed Anatomy in Painting ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.463

and what can we expect from him ? HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.464

- in the evening I felt idly inclined HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.465

and communicated my inclination to Wilkie , to go to the play ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.466

he , who was as Idly inclined as myself , only was cunning enough to
conceal it , was agreed , HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.467

and away we went - HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.468

Idle day . HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.469

<font> October 16 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.470

Sunday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.471

Let me not reflect how sillily I passed this precious day ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.472

no Greek or reading in the Bible till the evening ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.473

and then I fell asleep HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.474

and did not wake till one o'clock . HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.475

<font> October 17 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.476

Monday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.477

I felt in the evening an inclination to see Macbeth ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.478

Wilkie who has no relish for any thing of this sort , said I wanted
firmness , HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.479

but had it been Mother Goose , or any such stuff I have no doubt he
would have had as little firmness as myself . HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.480

I went , HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.481

but whether it was that their performing in the Opera house gave the
figures less effect , I fancied Mrs. Siddons acted with very little
spirit in the scene where she comes out HAYDON-1808-1,1,22.482

<P_1,23>

when Macbeth is in Duncan's chamber she says , " That which had them
drunk , hath made Me bold , " &c. , she ought to have been in a blaze .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.484

I , who had been accustomed to read Macbeth at home , at the Dead of
night , when every thing was so silent that my hair stood up , could not
at this moment put up with such a laceration of feeling as to be roused
from contemplation by the slamming of a box door , when I almost fancied
Duncan was groaning - HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.485

I grew quite enraged & disgusted HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.486

and left the house before the third act - HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.487

I will not go again to any of Shakespeare's plays ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.488

you always afterwards associate the actors with the characters .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.489

Thank God , Lear I can read with purity as I have never seen it , nor
never will - HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.490

No Academy - HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.491

negative day . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.492

<font> October 18 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.493

Tuesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.494

Determined to obliterate the whole of my Principal Figure as by doing
the parts separately they did not hang together ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.495

what time one loses from inexperience ! HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.496

I made up my mind HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.497

and did it . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.498

I am happy it@ @'s over - at the Academy . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.499

<font> October 19 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.500

Wednesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.501

Had Sam , HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.502

he sat , HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.503

and I sketched in the whole of my figure much better .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.504

I hope in God I shall do it at last - at the Academy -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.505

Willkie and I had some words ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.506

he said I spoke harshly , HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.507

I was insensible to it - HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.508

soon settled . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.509

Greek an hour . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.510

Bell called HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.511

and left me 5 guineas to begin any sketch I liked and when done 5 more .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.512

<font> October 20 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.513

Thursday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.514

Breakfasted with Willde to please him against my own inclination , -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.515

I hate to go out Morning ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.516

it disturbs me - HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.517

improved my figure , - too large I fear - At the Academy .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.518

Greek an hour . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.519

<font> October 21 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.520

Friday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.521

Put in the head of my hero , HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.522

not at all satisfied ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.523

not half so well as my sketch HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.524

, there is always something in a sketch , you can never after get when
your feelings are quiescent . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.525

I look forward to that time , the result of many years' incessant study
when I shall be able to paint a Picture warm from my brain with fire ,
certainty & correctness . HAYDON-1808-1,1,23.526

I must acquire thorough {TEXT:through} <P_1,24> scientific Principles
first , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.527

for facility without science is a knack , acquired by habit .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.528

O God let me not be gratifying my fancy with visions of happiness , that
are not to be realized , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.529

let them be realized , O God , and I shall die happy ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.530

I bless Thee {TEXT:missing_"Thee"} for the purity of this week ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.531

I have never neglected my morning Prayers , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.532

and have had strength to resist temptation , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.533

O God let every hour add strength to my virtuous habits - pious
resolution & energetic plans , through Jesus X. Amen .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.534

Greek an hour , at the Academy - HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.535

<font> October 22 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.536

Saturday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.537

Wilkie breakfasted with me , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.538

he as well as myself was not pleased with my head ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.539

after he was gone I went to Lord Elgin's to stimulate my conception ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.540

and saw some casts from moulds he brought with him .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.541

What productions ! HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.542

I made drawings of several legs , drapery , &c HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.543

and came back with an eye correct , determined to obliterate every thing
in my Picture that would not bear comparison . HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.544

I found enough - HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.545

and dashed out my head , without a moment's hesitation .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.546

I am again clear , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.547

and hope God will bless my exertions for excellence in my next attempt .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.548

O God think me not trifling or presumptuous , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.549

assist me for J. X. , amen , amen - HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.550

At the Academy , 1$$2 hour Greek - HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.551

This week has ended , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.552

and laus Deo I feel myself more inclined for virtue & Industry , more
pure , pious & decided . HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.553

O God let those feelings by this day week have gained strength & vigour
, HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.554

O God let no Sin or Lasciviousness break in , conquer or disturb me ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.555

let me tomorrow attend public Worship , and adore thee in purity & zeal
, - HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.556

have mercy , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.557

let me obliterate my innumerable Sins , by my future virtue .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.558

Amen - HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.559

God bless my exertion HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.560

& grant me health for Jesus X. sake , Amen , Amen .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.561

<font> October 23 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.562

Sunday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.563

Wilkie and I breakfasted with Wilson , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.564

our church was not repaired yet - HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.565

we could not go to another of course ! ! ! HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.566

dined early HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.567

& went to drink tea with one of the Porters , Sam , who is a very
industrious , honest , Prudent man with a large family ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.568

he is the Academy Model , HAYDON-1808-1,1,24.569

and has sat to me for my first <P_1,25> Picture many days without pay
when I could not afford to pay him a farthing , and had no prospect of
being able to do it - HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.570

this I shall never forget , HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.571

and shall be always happy to assist his family in any way possible -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.572

I had long promised that Willkie and I would come down & drink tea with
him & his wife , which seemed to please him mightily ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.573

and this day we kept our promise . HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.574

All his little family were dressed out in their best , a fire in the
parlour , HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.575

but Sam & his Wife were not returned from church ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.576

so we walked in HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.577

and were showed into the Parlour by the eldest Girl , with a smiling
countenance , who seemed to have been instructed how to behave if we
should arrive before they came back - HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.578

at last a rapp was heard , HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.579

and away squeezed all the children out into the passage to let in Father
; HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.580

Sam shooked {COM:sic} hands with us HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.581

and welcomed us to his castle , which was a perfect model of neatness ,
and order ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.582

his wife seemed a bustling managing woman ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.583

we soon had tea , HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.584

and he amused us with stories about the Academy for some years back
<font> and at present ! ! ! <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.585

I do@ @n't know when I spent a more innocent evening ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.586

every body seemed to anticipate all our looks & wishes ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.587

we could not go of course without tasting some beer <font> of their own
brewing , <$$font> - HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.588

as far as I have proceeded in this World I have observed that prudence &
piety are always rewarded by tranquillity & independence , and vice &
dissoluteness by misery & want ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.589

there can@ @not be {TEXT:missing_"be"} a stronger instance of this than
in the two Porters at the Academy . HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.590

They have both the same wages , both the equal advantages ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.591

what 50 +L , a year can do when managed with care , and how little when
entrusted to imprudence . HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.592

The Porter we saw this afternoon has a comfortable little house ,
virtuous little family & an active wife , all of which he keeps clean &
respectable by his prudence & diligence in his office .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.593

The other in drunkeness & vice squanders his money in an ale house ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.594

has married a woman whom he hardly knows where to find , when he wants
her , HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.595

is always in want , always dependent , without a home , a wife or a
family and consequently full of misery , filth & immorality ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.596

this man will die in Gaol , or on a dunghill , without a being to lament
him or a wife assist him - HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.597

the punishment of vice is as certain as the reward of virtue ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.598

read the Bible , HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.599

studied my Greek . HAYDON-1808-1,1,25.600

<P_1,26>

<font> October 24 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.602

Monday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.603

Painted the chest of my dying figure not at all well .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.604

Heard from my Father , with my monthly remittance of eight pounds .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.605

Went into the city HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.606

and got Cevallos pamphlet , of the intrigues of Buonaparte .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.607

Came home to superintend the casting of a Leg and in the same action as
my Hero's , from a very fine model . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.608

The moulder was a bungling fool , as well as impudent & presuming .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.609

He broke the plaister all to pieces , the first as well as second time ,
when I turned him off . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.610

It was my own fault , HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.611

I entrusted the model to get a man , when I should have obtained an
experienced one myself . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.612

The model brought as great a fool as himself , naturally enough ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.613

and this is the result - HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.614

something is to be learnt from every thing - HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.615

I staid away from the Academy to superintend this affair , in hopes of
getting a good cast . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.616

I am quite mad . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.617

Greek 1$$4 an hour . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.618

<font> October 25 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.619

Tuesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.620

Drew at Lord Elgin's ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.621

made a good study enough from one of the figures grappling the Centaurs
, - HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.622

at the Academy gained much as my own Picture looked very , very inferior
when I came home . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.623

The Plaister man anxious to do it well . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.624

Tried another at his own house , HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.625

but very bad . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.626

1$$4 hour Greek . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.627

<font> October 26 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.628

Wednesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.629

The chest of my dying figure looked so miserably that I determined at
once to take it out , HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.630

it is now much better , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.631

not advanced my Picture much this day , HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.632

I shall draw the remainder of the week at Lord Elgin's , and then give
it up till it@ @'s warmer . HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.633

It is so dangerous to stay seven or eight hours on the ground this time
of the year , tho Thank God I have not caught any cold -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.634

Greek 1$$4 a hour . At the Academy - HAYDON-1808-1,1,26.635

<P_1,27>

O God Accept my unfeigned gratitude that I have by thy assistance kept
clear of vice for these last 18 days , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.637

O God I am fallible , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.638

still assist me , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.639

leave me not to myself , or I shall certainly fall ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.640

O God still protect me HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.641

& guide me , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.642

grant every day may add strength to my virtuous habits for Jesus
Christ's sake , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.643

every hour I may get firmness in temptation and industry .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.644

O God in thee I trust , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.645

have mercy for Jesus Christ's sake . HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.646

Amen , Amen . HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.647

<font> October 27 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.648

Thursday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.649

Drew at Lord Elgin's all day - at the Academy in the evening -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.650

<font> October 28 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.651

Friday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.652

Went with Boswell a model to old Grant , a plaister man 80 years old ,
who was tradesman to the first Academy in Pall Mall , to have a mold
made of Boswell's thigh and leg ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.653

he began at eight in the morning , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.654

it being a painful position I did every thing to encourage Boswell to go
through it , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.655

I went out for rolls , as he felt hungry and faint , being accustomed to
take his Breakfast at that time . HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.656

Mr. Grant began with caution HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.657

and went on famously , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.658

made a joint before , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.659

but forgot to do one behind , which I in attempting to make for him
pushed my head against the plaister on his thigh which ...
HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.660

{COM:next_two_pages_cut_from_the_diary}

Spent the evening in reading - HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.662

<font> October 31 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.663

Monday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.664

Drew at Lord Elgin's from 1$$2 past nine to five , without intermission
, HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.665

perhaps I got up twice , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.666

say I lost ten minutes or 15 - HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.667

dined , at the Academy as usual from six to eight -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.668

9 hours and a quarter absolute drawing without interruption ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.669

not at all fatigued , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.670

not at all sore , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.671

rather damp & cold . HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.672

O God , protect me from injury , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.673

enable me to go through this week with firmness & energy , for Jesus
Christ sake . HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.674

This month is now ended , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.675

to-morrow I begin a fresh one ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.676

have mercy O God , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.677

enable me to begin it and end it as I ought , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.678

Almighty Father protect me , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.679

bless my endeavours to be good , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.680

let me by the end of this month to have finished my Hero in the grandest
style , HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.681

O God , think me not trifling & vain . HAYDON-1808-1,1,27.682

<P_1,28>

What discrimination and judgement the ancient Sculptors possessed .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.684

I sketched the back of a Centaur , which has all that heavy , vulgar ,
porter_like form you see in men used to carry burdens , which agrees
with the character of a Centaur , which could not be very intellectual -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.685

<font> November 1 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.686

Thanks O God , HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.687

I am this day free from Sin - HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.688

I have began this new month by rising early , praying sincerely &
Studying industriously , HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.689

let this be the character of this month for Jesus X sake , and the
character of the remainder of my existence . HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.690

- Drew at Lord Elgin's from 1$$4 past nine to 3$$4 past 4 - at the
Academy 1$$2 past 6 to 8 - HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.691

In the early part of the morning my mind was a little distracted , by so
many exquisite things before my eyes . HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.692

I had made sketches of some , which when I saw the originals , I felt a
pain at the comparison , mine being so very inferior ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.693

I first of all resolved to begin new ones and do them correctly ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.694

I then thought I should be losing time . HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.695

I had got the composition HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.696

and that was the essential part - HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.697

so I determined to relieve my mind from this excrutiating state
HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.698

and began correctly to do a fine trunk and legs which soon quieted me
HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.699

and I went on regularly the rest of the day - HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.700

It has been the fault of all artists to put the markings of the antique
into their figures without considering their own attitude , making the
same marking serve for all ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.701

for instance I have seen that marking in the Torso , a slip of the
obliquus abdominis {TEXT:abdom} - put into upright figures exactly as it
is in the Torso , without reflection that the moment the Torso arose ,
that marking would unfold , and scarcely be perceptible ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.702

I should have marked it so myself had I not seen those exquisite things
at Lord Elgin's , where it is shewn in every attitude with all the
variety of nature - HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.703

It is an appendage of the ribs HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.704

and depends upon it for its form . HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.705

7_1$$2 hours drawing this day , 1_1$$2 less than yesterday .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.706

<font> November 2 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.707

Wednesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.708

Drew at Lord Elgin's from ten till 1$$2 past four ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.709

6 hours drawing , 1 hour less than yesterday ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.710

not at the Academy . HAYDON-1808-1,1,28.711

Made casts from Rogers for the chest , and the hand <P_1,29> of my dying
figure ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.712

I was astonished when I took the hand from the mold , at the similarity
to the character of those alto relievo , at the temple of Theseus ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.713

I have no doubt of the Ancients catching all the markings of instant
exertion , by dashing something on that took the impression , then
casting it , and making their own use of it , HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.714

it is the only plan to attain certainty as you then have a momentary
action set for ever , and can draw it at leisure , while if you attempt
drawing from a model , instant action , the rascal gets fatigued and
plagues you by his awkwardness . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.715

You may use {TEXT:missing_"use"} a model to colour by
HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.716

but the cast will direct you to the form - HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.717

These Grecian figures are like Nature HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.718

for you are never satisfied with your own imitation , till the originals
are out_side - HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.719

<font> November 3 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.720

Thursday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.721

Drew at Lord Elgin's from XI till five . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.722

Then Wilkie and I went to see Henry VIII which I do not regret .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.723

I gained many Ideas - HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.724

<font> November 4 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.725

Friday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.726

Drew at Lord Elgin's . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.727

7 hours 1$$2 . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.728

Wilkie and I went in the evening to see Henry VIII , last evening ,
which interested me greatly . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.729

What absurd ambition that is which aims at that greatness the power of a
capricious Prince can destroy . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.730

Went to see The Mourning Bride - HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.731

't@ @wo@ @n't do - after Shakespeare ranting declamation .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.732

<font> November 5 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.733

Saturday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.734

Drew at Lord Elgin's - 6 hours . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.735

My taste thank God is improved wonderfully . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.736

<font> November 15 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.737

{COM:previous_six_pages_cut_from_the_diary} put in the Head of my old
Hero , HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.738

God grant I may make it a fine one - HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.739

no more suffering , HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.740

I am determined I was under an obligation to do it ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.741

but now there is an end of it - HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.742

dined at Lord Mulgrave's , it being Mr. Augustus Phipps's birthday ,
Lord Mulgrave's brother , HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.743

a very elegant evening I passed - HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.744

Missed the Academy , Wilkie also . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.745

<font> November 16 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.746

Wednesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.747

Painted the arm & Shoulders , HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.748

& altered the head - HAYDON-1808-1,1,29.749

You can@ @not be too long about a Picture , provided <P_1,30> you are
applying your faculties during the time to the real difficulties of the
Art , - HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.750

if you suspend your exertions merely because you are not quite certain
about the costume , because you have not ascertained whether the People
you are representing wore a sandal with a heel , or a sandal without one
, then I say you are Idle , under the mask of industry ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.751

if you are slow because you are unequal to execute your conceptions , if
you are staggered at the difficulties of arrangement , and checked by
unexpected obstacles , and desist , till you are more adequate or better
qualified by deeper meditation , how slow soever you may be , if you
proceed on this principle , every step you make will be a firm one ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.752

and you will ultimately execute with that facility , the result of
science , instead of haste . HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.753

Remember this night 1$$2 past ten Nov 16th , 1808 .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.754

A Great Painter should make every thing bend to his art ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.755

if deviating from rule , costume , &c he can improve or produce finer
feelings , <font> let him do it , <$$font> & bid defiance to antiquaries
& connoiseurs ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.756

he does not paint for them but to effect the human heart for human
feeling . HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.757

<font> November 17 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.758

Past this day industriously , as well as friday & Saturday -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.759

& Dined at Lord Mulgrave's Friday again . HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.760

I can@ @not perhaps say in all my life I have passed above 4 or 5 weeks
, that is , weeks without intermission to Study , weeks of regular
determined exertion , HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.761

among them I can number perhaps , on consideration , this last ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.762

for tho I have not studied equally , I have regularly ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.763

I have fagged till I was exhausted and made great progress .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.764

O God Almighty , grant me strength of mind next week not to presume on
the industry of this last week to be idle , but calmly to consider where
I have failed in my duty , and to pray to thee for additional caution &
vigour to avoid those defects , so that I may have less to repent of at
the end of the week ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.765

O God give me strength for Jesus Christ's sake - Amen .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.766

My Hero's head , tho' nearly done , I see is not as it ought .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,30.767

I <P_1,31> have made up my mind HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.768

and out it comes again to-morrow - HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.769

I am determined it shall be such as the greatest Painter that ever
existed could have made it . HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.770

<font> November 21 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.771

Monday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.772

Painted about 3 hours this day , HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.773

expected a model , HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.774

he never came , HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.775

kept me in a distracted state ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.776

however I began the drapery , HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.777

and improved . HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.778

Got a West_Indian I picked up in the Street , a fine head -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.779

took out my Hero's head . HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.780

{COM:previous_page_torn_from_the_diary} life be but an aera in the art ,
let me but add to the stock of human virtue and human improvement and I
shall die happy - HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.781

I pray thee O God I may deserve such happiness , HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.782

but I fear it@ @'s more than such a Sinful wretch as I deserve in thee ,
Christ - HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.783

<font> November 28 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.784

Monday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.785

Arose at Seven - HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.786

prayed - HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.787

walked - HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.788

set my Palette HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.789

& breakfasted - HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.790

as I had promised a very modest unassuming young Artist , at the Academy
, to call yesterday and give him my opinion <paren> as far as
{TEXT:missing_"as"} I am capable <$$paren> of a Picture he is painting ,
and was prevented - I determined as he might be hurt , to go to_day -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.791

I went - to Finsbury Square where he lived - HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.792

and saw I fear a Picture that gives no hopes of future excellence , weak
, tame , dry , hard & gaudy . HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.793

I@ @'ll go no more to any young men , as I always have a higher opinion
of myself . HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.794

Drew at the Academy 1_1$$2 hour ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.795

in other respects idled the day - HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.796

Wilkie changed his Lodgings , HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.797

I & Jackson went to drink tea with him of course ; it being always
customary with us to do this with each other on such an occasion -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.798

I dare@ @say the dog will grow insolent on his new Lodgings -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.799

but I@ @'ll bring him down in a moment if I perceive the slightest
variation . HAYDON-1808-1,1,31.800

<P_1,32>

<font> November 29 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.802

Tuesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.803

Sat to Jackson for my Portrait - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.804

Painted little - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.805

<font> November 30 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.806

Sat again . HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.807

Painted little - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.808

glazed the background of Mr. Lockyer's Portrait with brown lake over
brimstone & white - shadow Vandyke_Brown - waistcoat with common red
lake , over ultramarine & white - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.809

Tried orpiment with varnish on Brutus' shoulder - coat of Mr. L -
Indian lake - over blue black - one of my early things in Devonshire -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.810

Thus ends this month , HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.811

and one of more vice and wickedness - I recollect not .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.812

I have not been wholly Idle - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.813

my picture is advanced - and my mind improved & experienced -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.814

O God I dare not pray to thee - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.815

I humbly hope for every thing virtuous , pure , & energetic - through
Jesus Christ my redeemer . HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.816

Amen - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.817

<font> December 1 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.818

Last month . HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.819

A Student who draws only outlines by parts from an Idea of being correct
, deprives his mind of its only chance , effort in a drawing , which is
in getting the whole together well , and then be as correct as you
please - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.820

<font> December 2 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.821

Painted . HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.822

Advanced my Picture - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.823

<font> December 3 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.824

Saturday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.825

Improved the hand and arm of my Hero , HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.826

put in the head HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.827

but took it out again . HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.828

O God grant I may do it right at last - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.829

Miss Phipps , Lord Mulgrave's eldest daughter , very ill , a sweet girl
. HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.830

Called to know how she was - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.831

in a dangerous state - HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.832

got the whole of my Picture more together . HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.833

Walked at night HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.834

& called on Wilkie - at XI . HAYDON-1808-1,1,32.835

In Fuzeli's first edition of Pilkington there being a prolix absurd life
of that wretch <P_1,33> Moreland , he asked me if I would select the
heads for him , or do as I liked if I gave him a new life -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.836

this was a request I would have refused any other man ; but could not
one from whom I have gained so much . HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.837

I therefore selected one part of the old life - HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.838

and made my own observations on his bringing on his Death by drinking -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.839

Such is the inveteracy of habit , and such our incapability of freedom ,
after having once gratified an abandoned appetite , under the impression
that resistance is attainable when resistance is right -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.840

his pictures of familiar life have great merit in composition ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.841

he had great facility but certainly not power ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.842

it was a knack acquired by habit , independent of science or feeling -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.843

that the Public were so mad after his trash is not to be wondered at ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.844

admiration often proceeds from ignorance of higher excellence -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.845

up till two writing & reading Homer . HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.846

<font> December 4 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.847

Sunday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.848

Breakfasted with Wilkie ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.849

at church Sidney Smith preached - HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.850

he took his stand for Xtianity on St. Paul's conversion -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.851

if his vision & conversion were the effects of a heated brain or
fanaticism ; it was the first time that madness gave a new direction to
a man's feelings - HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.852

fanaticism is a want of fine perception of the different feelings and
habits of mankind &c. HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.853

I never heard a more eloquent man . HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.854

Spent the evening in writing my ideas about art , at Mr. Hoare's
request , who is publishing in the encyclopedia - HAYDON-1808-1,1,33.855

<P_1,34>

<font> December 5 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.857

Sat to Jackson from X till one , HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.858

called at Lord Mulgrave's . HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.859

Miss Phipps still very ill - HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.860

obliged to go into the city as the armour I had from the Tower is
getting rusty - HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.861

and I went to the Armourer to know how to act . HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.862

As I walked along Fleet Street , I felt hungry HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.863

and went into Peele's coffee house to have some soup ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.864

it was such an idle thing in the middle of the day , that I shrunk in ,
blushing , fearful to look up for fear of meeting the eyes of Michel
Angelo's spectre , crying , " Haydon , Haydon , you Idle rascal ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.865

is this the way to eminence ? " HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.866

- in spite of such reflections in I went . HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.867

Appointed to go with Wilkie to a friend of his against my will ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.868

but as he had bothered me to , I consented . HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.869

I was to call for {TEXT:missing_"for"} him at the Academy , not being
able to go myself tonight , HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.870

he was gone before I came and glad to find any excuse to get off ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.871

I returned home , delighted to have escaped the distraction of mind I
should have experienced among a parcel of debating argumenting Scotchmen
- HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.872

Whitfield called ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.873

he seems determined to study drawing fundamentally ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.874

I therefore lent him my drawings of the bones & Bell's bones & joints .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.875

I am glad he has sense & resolution to proceed so .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.876

<font> December 6 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.877

Tuesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.878

Finished the flying Drapery , Thank God at last , HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.879

and I think it not badly arranged ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.880

enlarged the shield , which gives more irresistible weight to the figure
, a more thundering air , HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.881

& got in the head . HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.882

I wish to express a lofty contempt among his other characteristics -
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.883

how happy shall I be can I but finish the head this week - as it ought
to be - HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.884

Went to the Academy , HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.885

came away early , my mind was so uneasy about my Picture ;
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.886

after a long struggle in my mind whether it was not idleness , I
convinced myself it really was not , HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.887

and came home , HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.888

took out my Picture , HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.889

put the candle on the floor , HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.890

and began to think - HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.891

Truth must not always be regarded ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.892

the object of Painting is to abstract the mind from sensual appetites ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.893

therefore the means of attraction must be considered .
HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.894

On this Principle I have acted in not making the assassins perhaps so
assassin-like as they were . HAYDON-1808-1,1,34.895

I have endeavoured to give as much beauty as is not quite <P_1,35>
inconsistent ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.896

if they had all had the faces of murderers it might have been more true
, HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.897

but what human being could have dwelt on it with pleasure ?
HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.898

- It would have been avoided with disgust - HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.899

I observed last night in a sort of Deer brought from the Cape now at the
Tower the characteristics of its extreme swiftness ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.900

the markings of the leg were clear , HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.901

the points of bone , the origins & insertions could be traced , every
thing sharp & braced ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.902

it is a good principle thus to survey nature and mingle the
characteristics of one animal with those of another , to express any
particular excellence , in a stronger degree . HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.903

S- a friend of ours , has a good heart , HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.904

but is perpetually on the stretch for ridicule , HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.905

he never corrects an error , but in association with ridicule ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.906

and tho thus existing on Ridicule himself , is cut to the soul by
ridicule from others ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.907

if he is so far in the wrong , as can@ @not be concealed under some
pointed remark , he will take shelter and endeavour to make another more
ridiculous , HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.908

every thing serious , every thing not absolutely sacred , is to him a
source of amusement . HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.909

<font> December 7 . <$$font> HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.910

Wednesday . HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.911

I knelt down before my Picture last night before going to bed ,
HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.912

and prayed God to give me strength of mind & vigour of body to go
through it with a firm spirit , not to be daunted by difficulties
however great , not to suffer my youth to be an excuse for inadequacy ,
not to think on that a moment but to consider how soon I may die , and
if {COM:greek_omitted} unexpectedly , that I may be taken doing all a
human being can do and if I should be instantly judged after Death , to
be ready for judgement - HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.913

People say to me , you ca@ @n't be expected in your second Picture to
paint like Titian , & draw like Michel Angelo HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.914

but I do expect it , HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.915

and I will try - HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.916

and if I take liberties with Nature , and make her bend to my own
purposes , consider you should not venture to do what Michel Angelo
might , HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.917

but I will venture , HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.918

I@ @'ll dare any thing to accomplish my Purpose ; HAYDON-1808-1,1,35.919

if it@ @'s impudence & presumption without ability , I shall soon find
my rank in the <P_1,36> opinion of the world , HAYDON-1808-1,1,36.920

but if it@ @'s the just confidence of science & genius , I shall soon
find my reward . HAYDON-1808-1,1,36.921

I have heard Nelson used to say " never mind the justice , or impudence
of any thing , HAYDON-1808-1,1,36.922

let me but be {TEXT:missing_"be"} successful . " HAYDON-1808-1,1,36.923

That is what no man , of the common timid feelings of mankind , would
have dared say or feel , HAYDON-1808-1,1,36.924

and what@ @'s the world's opinion of Nelson ? HAYDON-1808-1,1,36.925

