<BEGIN_heber-1815-2>

<P_45>

<heading>

Lecture II . HEBER-1815-2,45.4

John xvi. 7 . HEBER-1815-2,45.5

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

<$$heading>

It was asserted in my former Sermon on these words of Christ , that in
the name and character of a Comforter , Teacher , or Advocate , <paren>
in whichever sense we choose to understand the original word
{COM:greek_omitted} <$$paren> not only an effect but an agent is implied
, by whom the comfort , instruction , or protection , was to be
conferred on those who were its objects . HEBER-1815-2,45.8

It was not consolation which Christ undertook to send to his disciples ,
but a person who should console them ; HEBER-1815-2,45.9

it was not security , but a guardian ; and one who should defend their
cause and his own amid the storms and calumnies of the world .
HEBER-1815-2,45.10

This was the sense , no doubt , in which those impostors understood the
promise , who themselves , as we have already seen , assumed the name
and character of him whom Jesus foretold ; HEBER-1815-2,45.11

<P_46>

and this , as our antagonists are compelled to acknowledge , is the
obvious , at least , and literal meaning of the expression .
HEBER-1815-2,46.13

If the letter , then , of God's word , were to decide our present
question , that question would be thus far decided already .
HEBER-1815-2,46.14

It might , still , indeed , admit of doubt , <paren> for it is a doubt
which belongs to a different period of the inquiry , <$$paren> to what
rank in the scale of spiritual existence the Paraclete is to be referred
. HEBER-1815-2,46.15

The Sabellian who identifies his Person with that of the Almighty Father
, the Arian and Mohammedan who regard him as a created Intelligence ,
might still advance their separate claims on our attention , and each
support his own hypothesis as to the nature of the Person intended .
HEBER-1815-2,46.16

But that the Holy Spirit was , in the language of schools , an ens , not
an accident ; an agent , not an action ; an actual being , not a quality
or mode of existence ; would remain in the number of those truths of
which the application indeed may vary , but of which the reality is
placed by common consent beyond the reach of argument or cavil .
HEBER-1815-2,46.17

Accordingly , those Christian sects who deny the Spirit's Personality
are compelled to understand the Scripture in a manner which I have too
good an opinion of their critical powers to apprehend that they would
employ in the interpretation <P_47> of any other work whatever , and to
resolve those expressions , however simple in themselves , which speak
of him as a real existence , into the airy vehicles of eastern ornament
and allegory . HEBER-1815-2,47.18

And this resource is rendered necessary , not by the present text alone
, but by many other passages in Scripture , in which actions and
properties , are ascribed to the Spirit of God , altogether inapplicable
to a Virtue or Quality . HEBER-1815-2,47.19

For as the only two classes of existence , of which we have any
conception , are those of matter and mind , so whatever is capable of
action or passion must belong to one or other of these grand divisions ,
of Being . HEBER-1815-2,47.20

Qualities , in fact , and influences , and powers , as they are ,
properly , only modes in which one being makes an impression on another
, or itself receives one ; so they have in themselves , no real
existence at all , HEBER-1815-2,47.21

nor can they be asserted either to do or suffer any thing , except by
that common but improper form of expression which speaks of an accident
as if it were itself an essence , and describes the manner in which an
effect is produced by terms which can only , in fact , apply either to
the agent or the recipient . HEBER-1815-2,47.22

Thus , when I say that <font> darkness <$$font> is coming <P_48> on , I
must not be understood as intending that the accident of darkness is
capable of motion in itself , HEBER-1815-2,48.23

but I mean to ascribe motion to some real existence , whose absence or
presence deprives my eyes of the power of discerning objects .
HEBER-1815-2,48.24

If I speak again of power being given , I do not mean that power in
itself can be touched or divided ; HEBER-1815-2,48.25

but I mean that some alteration has taken place in my body or my mind ,
whereby I am enabled to perform what surpassed my previous faculties .
HEBER-1815-2,48.26

And thus , Whatever name the scholars of Socinus think fit to bestow on
the Comforter promised by our Lord , yet if purity , motion , power ,
resistance , if doing or suffering be predicated <paren> and predicated
they doubtless are <$$paren> of the Spirit of God in Scripture , they
must , I repeat ascribe these accidents to some real existence material
or spiritual , HEBER-1815-2,48.27

or else they must maintain that our Saviour and his Apostles have
clothed an abstract idea under the form of an allegorical Personage .
HEBER-1815-2,48.28

That the Holy Ghost is no material substance it may seem , perhaps , a
waste of time to prove , inasmuch as I am not aware that it has been
seriously maintained by any one . HEBER-1815-2,48.29

The wildest Anthropomorphist , the most determined organic Philosopher ,
will allow , I apprehend , that the expressions used in Scripture can
apply , if literally taken , to no other than a <P_49> being sentient
and intelligent , which sense and intelligence , define them in what
manner we please , afford a sufficient distinction from insensible or
merely animal existence for the purpose of our present argument .
HEBER-1815-2,49.30

To prevent , however , any future refinement of the patrons of mechanism
and irritation , I may be allowed to remind my hearers that will ,
moreover , and affection , and choice , and authority are ascribed , in
Scripture , to the Spirit of God , no less than the power of producing
an impression on the bodies or minds of men . HEBER-1815-2,49.31

The Apostles appointed , by their own avowal , such laws as " seemed
good unto the Holy Ghost while our Saviour in the sentence which I have
chosen for my text , and in the general tenour of his other expressions
when speaking of the promised Paraclete , speaks , it will be found , of
Him , not of It , - of a Person , not a Thing or inanimate substance .
HEBER-1815-2,49.32

" I will send , " are his words in the promise which has given occasion
to these Discourses , HEBER-1815-2,49.33

" I will send Him unto you " - {COM:greek_omitted} <paren> does our Lord
proceed with an accuracy of expression of which the slightest knowledge
of Greek is sufficient to make us sensible , <$$paren>
{COM:greek_omitted} HEBER-1815-2,49.34

" When He cometh , He will reprove the world . " HEBER-1815-2,49.35

But , more than all , <P_50> in a sentence almost immediately following
, <paren> as if to exclude all such material or degrading notions as
might be prompted by the material nature of that wind or breath by a
comparison with which the operations of the Holy Ghost are illustrated ,
<$$paren> we find again the masculine pronoun employed , though coupled
with a neuter substantive . HEBER-1815-2,50.36

The words , which are rendered in our translation , {COM:greek_omitted}
HEBER-1815-2,50.37

How can this be explained , unless we admit that , under the name of
Wind , an intelligent person , not a material substance , was shadowed
by the Son of God ? HEBER-1815-2,50.38

After this it may seem , perhaps , superfluous to urge on your attention
, that it would be absurd and unnatural to assert of a bodily and
insensible agent , that as he was <font> to hear , <$$font> so " he
should <font> speak ; <$$font> " that such an agent could with no
propriety be supposed to appoint overseers in the Churches of Asia or
Achaia ; that Ananias could not with reason be accused of attempting to
deceive an afflatus or stimulus ; HEBER-1815-2,50.39

nor could our sins be said to grieve a being incapable alike of pleasure
or pain . HEBER-1815-2,50.40

I believe , indeed , <paren> and my opinion is not shaken by any thing
which has been advanced to shew the uncertain meaning of the word
{COM:hebrew_omitted} in the Old Testament , and of {COM:greek_omitted}
<P_51> in the New , <$$paren> I believe that the instances are very few
indeed which can be found of this supposed uncertainty .
HEBER-1815-2,51.41

It is possible , and barely possible , that the celebrated passage in
the first chapter of Genesis may admit of application to a material
agent . HEBER-1815-2,51.42

But , with this exception , no instance has been shown , either in the
Law or the Prophets , where the context makes it probable that by
{COM:hebrew_omitted} or {COM:hebrew_omitted} a physical motion of the
air is signified . HEBER-1815-2,51.43

Nor , in the writings of the later covenant can we find , as Athanasius
has well observed , any single passage in which {COM:greek_omitted} is
not sufficiently distinguished from any material afflatus whatever .
HEBER-1815-2,51.44

Accordingly , of two hypotheses , either one or the other must
necessarily be adopted ; HEBER-1815-2,51.45

and if we do not acknowledge God's Spirit to be a sensible and
intelligent Person , we must resolve him into a metaphor .
HEBER-1815-2,51.46

But , in all expressions not professedly parabolical , it is , <font> a
priori , <$$font> likely that the literal and obvious , not the
metaphorical meaning is that meaning which the words are intended to
convey . HEBER-1815-2,51.47

Were it otherwise , the use of language would be , in no small degree ,
overthrown , HEBER-1815-2,51.48

and the dictates of departed Wisdom and the revelations of a merciful
God would sink into a <P_52> jargon of unmeaning sounds , or , at least
, be degraded from a rule of morals and of faith into a field for the
perverse and unprofitable ingenuity of the lovers of enigma and allegory
. HEBER-1815-2,52.49

Nor is it possible that our learned adversaries can require , in such a
case , to be reminded , that they have , of all men , least right to
depart from the literal and obvious sense of Scripture , who themselves
profess to strip religion of its mysteries , and to restore or reduce
the Gospel of Christ to its primitive and intelligible simplicity .
HEBER-1815-2,52.50

But , if this projected reformation be only a return to the forgotten
error of <font> an internal sense <$$font> in Scripture , if the
plainness anticipated be the plainness of a riddle , and if we are
called on to acquiesce in an interpretation of the Sacred Volume as
forced , though not so edifying , as the devout refinements of Jerome ,
the splendid dreams of Origen , or the wild but not uninteresting
phrenzy of Emanuel Swedenborg ; but small are the gains which the
multitude have reaped from the translation and dispersion of the Bible ;
HEBER-1815-2,52.51

nor will the tyranny long exercised by the knowledge of the few over the
faith of the many be less extensive or less absolute , whether the words
of life be in an unknown tongue , or in a style which is , to the vulgar
, in every language , unintelligible . HEBER-1815-2,52.52

<P_53>

If it be granted , however , which even a Socinian will not deny , that
the volume from which our hopes of salvation are drawn is something more
than a mere chain of allegories ; that there are some facts , at least ,
in Scripture , simply narrated , and , at least , some few assertions to
be taken literally ; it may be reasonably required that , before we
concede to our antagonists the fact that any particular passage is to be
understood in a , figurative meaning , they shall prove to us first ,
that the circumstances under which the disputed expression occurs are
such as to make a recourse to allegory probable ; and secondly , that
the expression itself has those usual marks by which , in every rational
composition , such figures of speech are distinguishable .
HEBER-1815-2,53.54

The motives are four , and four only , which can induce a reasonable man
to depart from that general propriety of language , to violate which ,
without sufficient reason , is a transgression at once against good
sense and natural feeling ; HEBER-1815-2,53.55

and these motives are as follow : First , if he desires to perplex the
judgment and to tax the ingenuity of his readers or auditors : Secondly
, if a future event is to be dimly shadowed , which it would be
inconvenient to express beforehand with too much precision : Thirdly ,
if a disagreeable truth is to be cloaked <P_54> under a less offensive
form : and , Fourthly , if an apt illustration of the subject implied is
afforded by the outward circumstances of the fable , or allegory , or
metaphor . HEBER-1815-2,54.56

The first of these motives is that harmless love of superiority , which
, from the time of Sampson downwards , has vented itself in hard
questions and enigmas , - but which , however harmless , the gravity of
our Saviour's character , no less than the peculiar solemnity of his
discourse and the mournful occasion on which it was delivered , must
effectually prevent us from expecting to find in his gracious promise of
a Comforter . HEBER-1815-2,54.57

Of the remaining three , the first had been answered on former occasions
by the several figures under which our Lord described , before hand ,
his death and its painful circumstances ; the second by those various
comparisons of the Vineyard , the Fig-Tree , the entrusted Talents ,
which he employed to reprove his countrymen for their impenitence and
spiritual pride : HEBER-1815-2,54.58

and , of the last , an instance may be found in his manner of
instituting the Eucharist , where , by bestowing on the bread and wine
the name of his body and blood , he exemplified in them his own
approaching sufferings . HEBER-1815-2,54.59

But , in the promise now under consideration , if it be still regarded
as allegorical , not one of <P_55> all those ends is answered , for
which only we can suppose that allegory would be employed by the wise
and holy Jesus . HEBER-1815-2,55.60

There was no necessity for concealing , nor did , in fact , our Lord
conceal from his disciples the nature of the comfort which they were to
receive ; HEBER-1815-2,55.61

no reproof was softened , no aptness of illustration obtained by
attributing such celestial favours to the distribution of an imaginary
Agent , HEBER-1815-2,55.62

and we must , therefore , continue slow to believe that the Agent
introduced is imaginary . HEBER-1815-2,55.63

With still more reason , however , we may require our learned
antagonists to point out to our attention in the tenour of our Saviour's
discourse some one or more of those characters and notices , the want of
which must render any figurative expression whatever , <paren>
{COM:amalgam} I will not say enigmatical , for to enigmas themselves
these principles apply , <$$paren> but altogether fallacious or
unmeaning . HEBER-1815-2,55.64

They are notices like these , indeed , which , however conveyed , afford
, in fact , the only difference between fiction and falsehood ; between
a parable and a lie ; between the forged adventures of an impostor and
the imaginary incidents of a romance ; between an incorrect and
unnatural description of objects and events , and the elegant
illustration of those events and objects by the use of metaphor or
allegory . HEBER-1815-2,55.65

<P_56>

I do not mean that it is always necessary that the author or orator
should introduce his illustrations with a definite preface that he is
about to speak in parables ; that he should prefix to his flowers of
language the formal title of enigma or metaphor ; or guard us , with the
fantastic caution of the Enthusiast of Geneva , against believing that
fishes can speak , or that the trees of the wood can assemble to elect
their monarch . HEBER-1815-2,56.67

The same notice is more elegantly and as effectually given , first ,
when the circumstance related would be trifling or out of place in our
present Discourse , unless it had some deeper meaning than our outward
words imply , and , secondly , when the assertion , if literally
understood , would be in itself absurd or impossible .
HEBER-1815-2,56.68

By the first of these marks , when our Lord had shadowed out to his
countrymen their own impenitence and final ruin , the Jews were able to
perceive that the tale of the , Fig-Tree was spoken against themselves .
HEBER-1815-2,56.69

By the guidance of the second , we readily understand that , when Christ
gave the name of his own blood to that fluid which the Apostles well
knew to be ordinary wine , he could only mean that his blood should in
like manner be poured out or <P_57> spilt . HEBER-1815-2,57.70

And it is on the same identical principle of the impossibility of a
literal meaning , that we understand and employ the figure of
personification , whereby abstract qualities are represented under
circumstances which can properly belong to real existence alone ;
whereby Virtue is described as a celestial nymph , and Justice equipped
with her balance , her fillet , and her sword . HEBER-1815-2,57.71

But for these distinctive marks of allegory , we may in the present
instance inquire in vain . HEBER-1815-2,57.72

There is nothing either trifling or impossible in the literal sense of
our Saviour's expression , HEBER-1815-2,57.73

and it is difficult , therefore , to show , on what principles of
criticism or common sense the Apostles could have understood their
Master any otherwise than literally . HEBER-1815-2,57.74

But , further , the personification of an Abstract Quality , <paren>
since it is in this manner that our learned antagonists desire to
understand the term of Holy Ghost or Spirit of God , <$$paren> is only
then either proper or intelligible , when the name assigned to the
imaginary person is the known and constituted representative of the
species which we desire to comprise ; as Justice is the abstract term
for a succession of just actions ; Temperance and Mercy for repeated
conquests over our animal inclinations and continual gentle affections ;
and Virtue , in <P_58> general , for that habit or disposition of mind
which produces all the several actions of justice , temperance , and
mercy . HEBER-1815-2,58.75

When , therefore , we speak of Virtue as a celestial nymph , and when we
dress out Justice in that garb which she wore in the ancient Pantheon ,
our hearers are well aware that neither corporeal beauty nor material
weapons can , any otherwise than figuratively , be possessed by either
the one or the other . HEBER-1815-2,58.76

But , if an abstract idea be personified under any other name than that
which conventionally and usually represents it ; if I speak of the awful
beauty of Arete , or menace my auditors with the sword of Themis , it is
impossible that those , who are not apprised that Arete and Themis imply
in Greek what Virtue and Justice do in our own language , should
understand by my expressions any other than real individuals , of whom
the one is literally stately and fair , and the other so armed as I
describe her . HEBER-1815-2,58.77

No one , therefore , in his right mind , if he did not really desire to
deceive , would make use of similar expressions , <font> or <$$font>
employ a name to represent an abstract idea , of which that name was not
the proper representative . HEBER-1815-2,58.78

But no series of actions , no moral or physical quality can be instanced
which the Holy Ghost can be said to represent . HEBER-1815-2,58.79

He may be <P_59> the Giver of Virtue , HEBER-1815-2,59.80

but he is not Virtue itself ; HEBER-1815-2,59.81

he may dispense either wisdom , or goodness , or power ,
HEBER-1815-2,59.82

but however he may , in himself , be strong , or good , or wise , his
name is not synonymous with any one of these several accidents or habits
. HEBER-1815-2,59.83

If the term of Holy Spirit do not represent a Person , it will be
difficult to say of what idea it is the proper or natural sign ,
HEBER-1815-2,59.84

and it is most natural therefore , and most reasonable to suppose , that
a Person was thereby intended . HEBER-1815-2,59.85

But this probability is still further increased , if the effects
described be attributed to an agent , which , according to the
preconceived opinion of my hearers , and in the conventional meaning of
the word , is a real existence or intelligence , and competent , without
any figure at all , to produce the phenomena ascribed to it .
HEBER-1815-2,59.86

Had Socrates , when speaking of that invisible Monitor by whose dictates
he professed to be guided , described it under the name of his prudence
, his foresight , or his conscience ; <paren> though he still might have
imputed to it the actions of a preceptor or a friend ; <$$paren> it
would have then been clearly understood that his language was
metaphorical , and that by the imaginary personage of Prudence ,
Conscience , or Foresight , he meant only to express a natural process
of his intellectual faculties . HEBER-1815-2,59.87

But , when Socrates declared himself to have <P_60> received advice and
intelligence from a friendly Demon , his countrymen must have understood
, <paren> and he , doubtless , intended that they should so understand
him , <$$paren> that he was attended by one of those beings superior to
man , whom , under the name of Demon , they were accustomed from their
infancy to fear , to propitiate , to adore . HEBER-1815-2,60.88

In like manner , if we had read in the book of Kings that the
disobedient Prophet was overtaken , in his return from Bethel to
Jerusalem , by Destruction sent from God , we might , certainly , have
understood the words <font> send <$$font> and <font> overtake <$$font>
to be poetical ornaments only , and have interpreted the story by the
simple circumstance that the Prophet had died on his journey .
HEBER-1815-2,60.89

But when we are told by the Sacred Historian that a lion was sent to
destroy him , that would be a strange hypothesis indeed which should
maintain , that the whole is an allegorical description of an apoplexy
or a stroke of the sun , and that the animal called a lion was entirely
unconcerned in the slaughter . HEBER-1815-2,60.90

But , in the present instance , and with those Jews and Jewish Greeks to
whom the Gospel was first delivered , the name of Spirit , it is
acknowledged by all , was no less appropriate <P_61> to a particular
class of animals than with us the names of lion , or man , or eagle .
HEBER-1815-2,61.91

It meant , we know , like the Demon of the Greeks , a race of sentient
and intelligent beings , HEBER-1815-2,61.92

and , though it included in its widest range the whole sweep of immortal
and immaterial existence from the Almighty to the human soul , it was
most generally used to designate the inhabitants of the invisible world
. HEBER-1815-2,61.93

It is little to our present purpose to inquire how far the above
application of the word {COM:hebrew_omitted} <paren> of which the
Hellenistic {COM:greek_omitted} is a translation <$$paren> was an
essential or primitive feature of the Jewish theology ; whether its
meaning were originally confined to breath , or air , or acuteness of
intellect ; or whether , as is surely more probable , the suspicion of
invisible was coeval with the knowledge of visible existence , and the
most subtile substance which was obnoxious to sense , was naturally
employed to designate that still purer mode of being which was only
perceptible by their fears . HEBER-1815-2,61.94

But , whether the doctrine of Spirits were primitive or no , or whatever
degree of antiquity we assign to its prevalence ; whether it went up
with Moses from Egypt , or passed with Ezra from Babylon ; in the time
of Christ we know the name was used to express a real or fancied
personage , of power and knowledge excelling those of man ; <P_62> of
wisdom more refined as being unshackled by sensual imperfection ; of
strength not less to be dreaded because the arm which smote was unseen .
HEBER-1815-2,62.95

It was the denial of such a race which divided the Sadducees from the
great majority of their countrymen ; HEBER-1815-2,62.96

it was to their agency that the Jews were accustomed to ascribe every
phenomenon of nature , and every accident which befel the body or the
mind , HEBER-1815-2,62.97

and our Saviour himself , when he returned from the dead , was
apprehended to belong to their number . HEBER-1815-2,62.98

But , to such a Being all the actions which Christ ascribed to his
promised Comforter were strictly and peculiarly appropriate .
HEBER-1815-2,62.99

The guardianship of a Spirit was perfectly intelligible to those who
believed in tutelary Genii : HEBER-1815-2,62.100

that a Person of this kind might dwell with them and be in them was the
universal faith or superstition of the east ; HEBER-1815-2,62.101

and to the actual illapses or inhabitation of such good or evil
intelligences , the ravings of madness , and the lofty strains of
prophecy , were imputed by the common voice of antiquity .
HEBER-1815-2,62.102

The Sibyll was supposed , at the time of inspiration , to labour with a
present Deity . HEBER-1815-2,62.103

It was not the Damsel of Philippi , <P_63> but the Pythonic Demon within
her , who recognized in Paul and his companions the servants of the Most
High God ; HEBER-1815-2,63.104

and when the Fiend was cast out , or the Divinity had retired , the
power of the Prophetess was gone . HEBER-1815-2,63.105

It was not then , by any communicated energy , but by their actual
presence and prompting , that the beings of the invisible world were
supposed to give to man either supernatural knowledge or supernatural
power . HEBER-1815-2,63.106

Had our Saviour menaced his disciples with a visitation of the evil
Spirit , we are sure that they would have understood him literally ;
HEBER-1815-2,63.107

the Spirits of Fear , of Infirmity , of Dumbness , were all , in the
mythology of the Rabbins , supposed to be real personages ;
HEBER-1815-2,63.108

nor has any adequate reason as yet been assigned , why their notion of
the Spirit of Truth should vary from this general analogy .
HEBER-1815-2,63.109

Is it said that the Messiah conformed his expressions to the usual
language of the time , without heeding whether the notions which that
language implied were , in themselves , philosophical or accurate ?
That , as he was content to ascribe , in contradiction to the truth ,
and in compliance with popular superstition , corporeal disease to an
incorporeal agent ; he <P_64> was content , in like manner , to express
supernatural gifts under the name of a visiting or protecting Spirit ?
HEBER-1815-2,64.110

The first of these suppositions , if it be not altogether blasphemous ,
is , at best , of a questionable character ; HEBER-1815-2,64.111

nor will those , who believe the Lord Jesus to have been , himself , all
wisdom and truth , be inclined to allow , that , under any circumstances
whatever , he would have lent his sanction to a false notion of the
manner in which his Father governs the world HEBER-1815-2,64.112

But the conduct ascribed to him in the second part of this hypothesis is
more , far more than a simple acquiescence in error .
HEBER-1815-2,64.113

The wisest and best of men may suffer , under particular circumstances ,
a mistaken opinion to pass unexplained ; HEBER-1815-2,64.114

but that man is neither wise nor good who , in making a promise ,
unnecessarily employs such terms as are likely to deceive his hearers .
HEBER-1815-2,64.115

Jesus might , surely , have engaged to endue his disciples with
supernatural power or celestial knowledge , without the introduction of
any fabulous machinery . HEBER-1815-2,64.116

" My Father , " he might have said , when I am taken away , will bestow
on you such internal comfort and such outward marks of his favour , that
ye shall have little reason to regret my departure from the world .
HEBER-1815-2,64.117

Ye are heirs to my miraculous powers , HEBER-1815-2,64.118

and shall , <P_65> with a commission derived from me and in a field of
utility far more extensive than that in which I have laboured , succeed
me as teachers of righteousness . " HEBER-1815-2,65.119

This he might have told them on Socinian principles ,
HEBER-1815-2,65.120

but how different are such expressions from those of the Father shall
send you another Comforter , " - " the Spirit of Truth , who is with you
and shall be in you . " HEBER-1815-2,65.121

- " If I go not away , the Comforter will not come ; HEBER-1815-2,65.122

but if I depart , I will send him unto you . " HEBER-1815-2,65.123

It has been objected , however , that the Holy Ghost , or Spirit of God
, was understood by the Jews themselves in a different sense from that
which they applied to the , term of Spirit in general ; that it was a
customary and conventional figure to express a particular operation of
God's grace , and was strictly synonymous , in the usage of the ancient
synagogue , with the modern term of inspiration . HEBER-1815-2,65.124

And , in aid of this opinion , two passages have been frequently cited :
the one of St. Jerome , where , after accusing Lactantius of denying
the personality of the Holy Ghost , he calls such denial a Jewish heresy
; the other of Maimonides , who defines that Spirit by which the
Prophets spake , to be " an intellectual power communicated to them by
God . " HEBER-1815-2,65.125

But that these passages are sufficient for the <P_66> purpose of our
antagonists , the following reasons may induce us to do more than doubt
. HEBER-1815-2,66.126

The meaning of Jerome was possibly no other than , under the name of a
Jewish error , to stigmatize the peculiar doctrine of a single sect ,
and to tax his antagonist with Sadducism . HEBER-1815-2,66.127

And it may be also worthy of notice , that , if Jerome had no better
foundation for his charge against the Jews than he had for that which he
has brought against Lactantius , the Synagogue of his time was , in this
instance , but a very little way removed from the kingdom of God .
HEBER-1815-2,66.128

Lactantius , though that particular work be lost to which his accuser
chiefly refers , has left enough behind him to evince the grossness of
the calumny ; HEBER-1815-2,66.129

and , though he ascribe in common , as may be hereafter shewn , with
many others of undoubted orthodoxy , the name of Spirit both to God in
general , and , more particularly , to the Son of God in his
pre-existent majesty ; he distinguishes , nevertheless , in his
description of the Saviour's baptism , the Spirit , peculiarly so called
, both from the Father and the Son . HEBER-1815-2,66.130

Nor have any of the ancient Christians more happily illustrated the
difference between the accidents of material existence , and the eternal
and intelligent <P_67> emanations of an eternal intelligence , than this
pious and eloquent champion of the Faith , whom , on the accusation of
one whose warmth too often rendered him unjust and uncharitable , the
orthodox have , without inquiry , been ready to fling into the hands of
a party at least sufficiently anxious to obtain any illustrious
accession to their number . HEBER-1815-2,67.131

If we should concede , however , to the assertion of Jerome and the
similar testimony of Epiphanius , that the majority of the Jewish nation
did really , in their time , deny not Personality of the Holy Ghost ,
yet will not the prevalence of such an opinion in the fourth century
after Christ , be regarded as a sufficient evidence of the original
doctrines of the synagogue . HEBER-1815-2,67.132

Those doctrines may be naturally supposed , in the course of twelve
generations of mutual bitterness , to have receded considerably from the
ancient confession in every point which favoured or resembled the tenets
of their Christian rivals . HEBER-1815-2,67.133

And the more recent , and therefore less forcible authority of
Maimonides is liable to the further objection , that this ingenious
writer has evinced himself in several instances disposed to depart from
the usual tenour of Rabbinical orthodoxy . HEBER-1815-2,67.134

Disgusted with the legends of his countrymen , and anxious to obviate
the discredit which <P_68> their dreaming commentators had thrown even
on the Law of Moses itself , the system which he has embodied in the
More Nevochim , is , throughout , a sort of freethinking Judaism , as
much at variance with the general confession of those whose cause he
pleads , as the works of Crellius and Socinus with the prevailing tenets
of Christendom . HEBER-1815-2,68.135

And that , in fact , no small number at least of the more learned Jews ,
even so late as the fourth century after Christ , acknowledged the
Spirit of God as a distinct and intelligent being , is shewn by the
positive assertion of Eusebius , <paren> who quotes the Hebrew doctors
as assigning ; him a local habitation in the region of the air ;
<$$paren> by the fact which will be hereafter more minutely proved ,
that the Christians of the circumcision , however in other respects
heretical , in the Personality of the Holy Ghost agreed with the Gentile
Churches and above all , by very numerous passages in the Rabbinical
works themselves , which speak of him in terms altogether inapplicable
to a Virtue or Abstraction only . HEBER-1815-2,68.136

By these writers the Holy Ghost is expressly opposed to him , whom we
know the Jews regarded as a Person , the Spirit or Power of Evil ;
HEBER-1815-2,68.137

He is said to dwell in the hearts of men as another and a better soul ;
HEBER-1815-2,68.138

He is <P_69> called a Holy Guest who honours the Sabbath with his
presence ; HEBER-1815-2,69.139

we find Him described in their usual jargon as the Spirit of the Window
whereby God's glory is revealed , and the Spirit by whom the dead are
raised . HEBER-1815-2,69.140

And , as it can@ @not be said that our souls are enlightened and our
bodies raised by the same or a similar operation ; as the acts described
are distinct , the Spirit by which they are effected must , plainly , be
an Agent , not a process ; a Dispenser of various graces , not any
single grace personified . HEBER-1815-2,69.141

It is needless , therefore , to refer to the {COM:greek_omitted} or
{COM:greek_omitted} of Philo , and the Binah of the Cabbalists , to
ascertain the ancient creed . HEBER-1815-2,69.142

It is true , indeed , that these Hebrew testimonies fall very short of
that standard of knowledge which the Christian Church has attained ; and
that the rank of the Holy Spirit , and his union with the Deity , were
imperfectly , if at all , comprehended , by the Jews of any sect or aera
. HEBER-1815-2,69.143

But , neither can this admission be allowed to militate against the
truth or importance of this Article of the Catholic faith , without
abandoning at the same time the resurrection of the dead , and all those
other features of our Religion , which it was a part , at least , of the
Messiah's office , to reveal , or assert , or explain .
HEBER-1815-2,69.144

The illumination , in fact , of the moral creation <P_70> of God ,
during the course of his dealings with mankind , has , like the advances
of the physical day , been gradually and slowly progressive .
HEBER-1815-2,70.145

The darkness of ignorance has been dispelled by a process almost similar
to that which chases every morning the darkness of night from a part of
the creation ; HEBER-1815-2,70.146

and the leading truths which almighty Wisdom has thought fit to reveal
to mankind have been enveloped , at first , amid the clouds of type and
mystery ; in promises which might sharpen the attention of the soul ,
and in shadows which might soften to her eyes the too sudden glare of
wonder and miracle . HEBER-1815-2,70.147

At first , with the first men and early Patriarchs , we are introduced
to the thin dawn and twilight of Revelation ; the covenant taught by the
mystery of the serpent's head , and by the institution of bloody
sacrifices . HEBER-1815-2,70.148

Then came the dawn of day , but faint and cloudy still with ceremonies
and allegory , HEBER-1815-2,70.149

and Christ appeared afar off and reflected from the face of Moses .
HEBER-1815-2,70.150

Still it grew lighter and more light as , to successive generations ,
successive Prophets announced , with increased precision , the approach
of the destined Messiah ; till , bearing in himself the full brightness
of the Godhead bodily , with healing on his wings , the Sun of
Righteousness arose ! HEBER-1815-2,70.151

<P_71>

True it is , that of the glorious prospect which the Christian
day-spring opened to mankind , the component features were not new ,
though a new splendour encircled them : HEBER-1815-2,71.153

the roses of Sharon and the trees of Paradise were not then first
planted , though their beauties were then first discernible ;
HEBER-1815-2,71.154

and the mountain of God's help had stood for ages , though its form was
indistinct before . HEBER-1815-2,71.155

When the secret of a knot is unravelled in our presence , we wonder that
what is now so plain should have so long escaped discovery ;
HEBER-1815-2,71.156

and thus , we are told , did the hearts of the Disciples burn within
them , when they found that all the mysteries of the New Covenant had
been originally contained in the Old , in those ceremonies which had
occupied their hourly attention , those prophecies which had been read
to them every Sabbath day . HEBER-1815-2,71.157

But , till the knot is untied , its artifice is still an enigma ;
HEBER-1815-2,71.158

till the problem is solved , its component parts appear irreconcileable
; HEBER-1815-2,71.159

the mystery of the Triune Godhead , though it be implied , is not
expressly revealed in the Scriptures of the former Covenant ;
HEBER-1815-2,71.160

nor can we expect from those Jews who so erroneously estimated the
character of their Messiahs any accurate idea of the yet more mysterious
Comforter . HEBER-1815-2,71.161

It is enough for the purpose of our <P_72> present argument to have
shewn that , among the countrymen of Christ , the Holy Ghost was not
considered as a merely abstract notion ; that the Spirit , which God
caused to dwell with his saints , was believed , like other spirits , to
be a real and sentient Existence ; and that no reason , therefore ,
remains , which could induce the Disciples to understand their Master's
simple language in a figurative or parabolical meaning .
HEBER-1815-2,72.162

It is almost needless to add that it is , therefore , highly improbable
, that such a meaning was intended by one whose object was , not to
perplex and deceive , but to confirm , to enlighten , to console .
HEBER-1815-2,72.163

And this probability will be augmented in a tenfold proportion , if it
shall appear on inquiry , <paren> as it will , I apprehend , appear to
all who inquire with sufficient candour and diligence , <$$paren> that ,
of those believers for whose use , in every age of the world , the
promise of our Lord was , apparently , intended , the great majority
have , in every age , adhered to the literal interpretation .
HEBER-1815-2,72.164

If of a numerous assembly , the major part misconceive the purport of an
oration , the mistake will be , in common life , attributed to a wilful
or involuntary defect of clearness in the orator ; HEBER-1815-2,72.165

he will be supposed to have purposely concealed his meaning from the
passions and <P_73> prejudices of the vulgar , or to have failed from
natural infirmity in producing that effect on their understandings which
was the ostensible object of his endeavours . HEBER-1815-2,73.166

But neither mysticism nor weakness can , without the wildest impiety ,
be imputed by any Christian sect to our common Master .
HEBER-1815-2,73.167

He came to give light to mankind , HEBER-1815-2,73.168

and he would employ , we may be sure , in that glorious mission , the
means which were best adapted to his end . HEBER-1815-2,73.169

The manner , then , in which the majority of the Christian Church have ,
in every age , agreed to understand any expression of their Lord ,
<paren> though this agreement will be no absolute proof that their
interpretation is true , <$$paren> yet will it certainly go a
considerable way to persuade a candid man that it is so .
HEBER-1815-2,73.170

And the presumption of its truth will be stronger still , if we find
that , in this majority of believers , those ages are included which
come nearest to the time of the Apostles , - and that in antiquity , no
less than universality , it has the advantage over the opposite opinion
. HEBER-1815-2,73.171

For , though nothing , doubtless , of Divine authority , <paren> and no
authority can be absolutely conclusive which is not Divine , <$$paren>
be ascribed to those remoter periods : yet , as every stream , in
proportion to its length , is exposed to adulteration ; and as every
machine gathers rust by the <P_74> very act of continuance ; so is it
reasonable to , compare , as far as possible , our own opinions with the
opinions of those ages , when the very youth of Christianity exempted
her from some of those corruptions which are the attendant curse on time
. HEBER-1815-2,74.172

But , in the weight of antiquity , no less than of numbers , the
orthodox lay claim to victory . HEBER-1815-2,74.173

To such a claim , however , two leading objections have been made : the
first , that the ancient Christian writers were incompetent judges of
Scripture ; the second , that those writers to whom we appeal were the
favourers of a small , though learned party , who were themselves the
corruptors of that faith which was primitive , and , till their success
, universal ; and who brought from Alexandria , among other Platonic
absurdities , the doctrine for which I now contend .
HEBER-1815-2,74.174

These objections are neither of them new , HEBER-1815-2,74.175

and each has been already answered . HEBER-1815-2,74.176

So old they are , indeed , and have been so often refuted , that the
time might seem but wasted which is spent in their discussion , were it
not needful , that so long as they are urged they should not be urgent
unnoticed ; lest the pertinacity of our antagonists should assume the
garb of victory , and they should pretend , at length , to the
triumphant possession of that field on which <P_75> a superior arm has
long since laid them breathless . HEBER-1815-2,75.177

The accuracy or intelligence of the ancient Fathers as interpreters of
Scripture , I am little concerned to vindicate . HEBER-1815-2,75.178

As divines they were little better , and as critics , too often
considerably worse , than many among the moderns , who must never hope
to be referred to in the schisms of contending nations .
HEBER-1815-2,75.179

But it is not as expounders of the Gospel , but as historians of public
opinion , that the theological writers of former ages are chiefly
entitled to our respectful notice . HEBER-1815-2,75.180

Were their original observations less valuable than they are , <paren>
and it is vain to deny , to many at least , among their number , the
praise of natural acuteness , of extensive learning , and indefatigable
diligence , <$$paren> yet , as contemporary witnesses to the ancient
Faith of the churches of Christ , the dates at which they flourished
must always give importance to their decision ; as in a question of
prescription we are accustomed to refer to the evidence of the oldest
neighbour , though that neighbour have no other quality but age , which
can induce us to pay a deference to his opinions . HEBER-1815-2,75.181

It is proved , then , in answer to the first objection , that , to our
present purpose , the early Christian writers are not incompetent
authority ; <P_76> since they are not adduced to decide whether the
doctrine under examination be absolutely true or false , but only
whether it was really the prevalent opinion in those ages with which
they were best acquainted . HEBER-1815-2,76.182

To the second objection , which refers the introduction of those
opinions which we call orthodox to the commencement of the second
century from Christ , and to the labours of Justin , Irenaeus , and
Tertullian , we may first reply , that this hypothesis is directly
contrary to the witness of such primitive , or , as they are usually
called , Apostolic writers , as have transmitted any portion of their
works to posterity . HEBER-1815-2,76.183

The passages are well known which have been produced from these
venerable relics in affirmation of the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ
. HEBER-1815-2,76.184

It is more to my present purpose to observe , that , on the Personality
of the Holy Ghost , their testimony is equally decisive .
HEBER-1815-2,76.185

Hermas , whom St. Paul salutes by name in his Epistle to the Romans ,
opposes in his " Shepherd " the Spirit of God to the evil Demon , in
terms which can only suit the opposition of one real person to another .
HEBER-1815-2,76.186

The work of Hermas is , indeed , confessedly allegorical ;
HEBER-1815-2,76.187

yet is it , apparently , to an attentive <P_77> reader , no difficult
task to distinguish in what parts he is speaking by a figure , and in
what expressing his own serious conviction ; HEBER-1815-2,77.188

and when the good or evil genius is spoken of , we have no reason to
believe that he is not in earnest , or that any other individuals are
intended than Satan and the Spirit of God . HEBER-1815-2,77.189

But , whatever doubts may exist as to the meaning of Hemas , none can be
entertained as to that of Clement , the fellow-labourer of the same
great Apostle ; who , as quoted by Basil , no less than in that Epistle
which only now exists in the Syriac translation , but of which Wetstein
, no incompetent judge , so strongly urges the authenticity , attributes
life , and anxiety , and active agency to the Holy Ghost , in the same
manner as to the Father and the Son " . HEBER-1815-2,77.190

Ignatius , in like manner , in his Epistle to the Magnesians , <paren> a
work which has stood the severest test of criticism , <$$paren>
describes the Apostles as rendering a like obedience to all the several
Persons of the Trinity . HEBER-1815-2,77.191

And the blessed Polycarp , in his expiring prayer , as preserved by
those brethren of the Church of Smyrna who attended his captivity and
wept around the flames of his martyrdom , gives glory to the <P_78> Holy
Ghost in almost the very words of our present Doxology .
HEBER-1815-2,78.192

This form of praise , indeed , which was recognized by Dionysius of
Alexandria , as the ancient order of Christian invocation ; which
concluded the hymn of the martyr Athenogenes ; and that yet more ancient
Canticle {COM:greek_omitted} , which was in the fifth century of
universal and immemorial usage among the meaner Christians ; is in
itself an illustrious evidence of the ancient opinion of the Church ,
HEBER-1815-2,78.193

and may prove that in the earliest time , as now , the unlearned
majority were orthodox . HEBER-1815-2,78.194

It was , we learn from Basil , a pious and popular custom to return
thanks in this form to the three Persons of the Godhead by name , when
first the lamp was lighted in the evening . HEBER-1815-2,78.195

Now to customs of this sort , when they are universal , and above all ,
perhaps , when they are confined to the uninstructed and the poor , we
can hardly ever err in imputing a very high degree of antiquity .
HEBER-1815-2,78.196

For an unwritten prayer to grow into general usage may require , as it
should seem , the lapse of more than a single century ;
HEBER-1815-2,78.197

and those of our order , whose duty has thrown them among the peasantry
of the remoter provinces , will have had ample occasion to observe their
tenacity of ancient customs . HEBER-1815-2,78.198

In the hymns , the legends , and the artless devotions <P_79> of our
English poor , it is often not impossible to trace the relics of
superstitions long since passed away of Pagan and Roman_Catholic
prejudices ; HEBER-1815-2,79.199

but seldom , indeed , can we find a form of recent introduction among
those habitual ejaculations of prayer or praise , which lull poverty to
rest on her ragged couch , or welcome in the hard and wholesome repast
of labour . HEBER-1815-2,79.200

In a cottage family the religious instruction of the young invariably
devolves on the aged ; HEBER-1815-2,79.201

the child is taught by his grandmother the same words which she herself
had , in like manner , learned during her infancy ; HEBER-1815-2,79.202

and thus , from year to year , the same address goes on , acquiring an
additional sanctity in each successive generation . HEBER-1815-2,79.203

It will not be pretended by our learned antagonists , that the use of
the Doxology can possibly have been of Pagan origin ;
HEBER-1815-2,79.204

and they will be perplexed , I apprehend , to assign to a custom which ,
in the days of Basil , was popular and immemorial , a less than
Apostolic antiquity . HEBER-1815-2,79.205

But , be that as it may , the sentiment which it conveys is the same ,
as we have seen , which , amid the smoke and ashes of martyrdom , could
raise the hopes and inspire the courage of the last surviving disciple
of the last Apostle , the beloved hearer of him who was himself the
beloved of the Lord . HEBER-1815-2,79.206

If Polycarp were mistaken , <P_80> who shall hope in these latter days
to unriddle an Evangelist's meaning ? HEBER-1815-2,80.207

If St. John himself had erroneously expounded the promise of his friend
, we may well close the volume of Scripture in despair , till the lion
of the tribe of Judah shall return to open its seals .
HEBER-1815-2,80.208

Nor are the testimonies of the Apostolic Fathers , whether relating to
the divinity of the Son or the Personality of the Holy Ghost , of a
nature which affords even the slightest internal reason to suspect
interpolation or imposture . HEBER-1815-2,80.209

They are either pious ejaculations under circumstances wherein the soul
of man would naturally revert to prayer ; HEBER-1815-2,80.210

or they are arguments or illustrations connected with the discourse
which contains them , and , therefore , not to be excluded without
injury to its general texture . HEBER-1815-2,80.211

And , above {TEXT:above,} all , the comparative vagueness of their
expression may prove them to have proceeded from devout and simple minds
, while incidentally speaking of truths which it was not their immediate
business to defend . HEBER-1815-2,80.212

The hand of interpolation would have been coarser and more decisive ;
HEBER-1815-2,80.213

and , if the object had been to enforce the Trinitarian opinions , the
expressions employed , we may be sure , would have been far more
technically orthodox . HEBER-1815-2,80.214

The moderate tone and general nature of those passages where the Triune
Godhead is implied , <P_81> may convince us at once that the text is not
in these instances corrupted , HEBER-1815-2,81.215

and may induce us also to believe that those tenets had been hitherto
very little questioned , which are mentioned thus unguardedly .
HEBER-1815-2,81.216

If , then , we should admit the assertion to be accurate , that a
majority of Christians were , in the days of Justin and Tertullian
averse from the orthodox doctrine , we might rather conclude that a
departure from ancient principles had taken place among the more
ignorant believers , than that , in the second century , those doctrines
were new to Christian ears , which had been taught in the Church by
Clement and Ignatius and Polycarp . HEBER-1815-2,81.217

In truth , however , those passages of Justin and Tertullian , which
have been advanced with much parade of learning and no little scorn of
those who have ventured to explain them differently , may be proved , on
a candid inquiry , to apply to purposes far different from that for
which they are ordinarily cited , HEBER-1815-2,81.218

and , instead of convicting the orthodox doctrine of novelty , are , on
the other hand , very strongly in its favour . HEBER-1815-2,81.219

Tertullian complains in his treatise against Praxeas , that certain
Christians whom he grants to be the majority of the Church , though he
at the same time objects to them , that they <P_82> were " simplices ,
imprudentes et idiotae , " having been converted from the worship of
many false Divinities to that of the one true God , and not
understanding how this Unity was to be believed together with the
Trinitarian distinction of Persons , were alarmed at the thoughts of
such distinction . HEBER-1815-2,82.220

And hence it is inferred <paren> to use the words of one , who , if not
the most distinguished , is at least the most forward of the modern
Apostles of Unitarianism , <$$paren> that , " <font> the majority of
Christians , being plain unlearned men , zealous for the Divine unity ,
warmly resisted the Trinitarian doctrine which some Philosophic
Christians were then endeavouring to introduce . <$$font> "
HEBER-1815-2,82.221

It is impossible not to regret that this ingenious person , no less than
several greater names on both sides of the controversy , have referred
to Tertullian for the purposes of controversy only , and have ,
therefore , regarded the present passage as distinct and insulated , not
only from the general purpose of that work to which it belongs , but
from the immediate and necessary context . HEBER-1815-2,82.222

To this we owe those idle verbal criticisms on the insignificant word "
idiotae , " and the application of those rules of language and propriety
to the fiery Presbyter <P_83> of Carthage , which would have been
applicable , perhaps , to a Roman of the Augustan age .
HEBER-1815-2,83.223

But if , instead of tearing in pieces a detached expression , we refer
to the work itself , we shall find that Tertullian was not complaining
of the difficulty which he experienced in introducing a new doctrine
into the Church , but that he was deploring the progress which a recent
<paren> a very recent <$$paren> error was making in the west of
Christianity . HEBER-1815-2,83.224

Far from complaining that those opinions which were adverse to a faith
in the Trinity , were the result of deeply rooted prejudice , he speaks
of them as " a novelty of yesterday , " HEBER-1815-2,83.225

and reminds his fellow-Christians that this , " like every former heresy
, may be confuted on the simple principle , that whatever has been from
the beginning is true . " HEBER-1815-2,83.226

Now , without discussing the truth or falsehood of his principle , it is
evident , that the simple fact of his adducing such a rule of faith is
altogether inconsistent with the conduct of one who was labouring either
to corrupt or reform an ancient opinion , or who had offended the ears
of the Church by the introduction of philosophical novelties .
HEBER-1815-2,83.227

His language is that of the jealous assertor of antiquity , the
strenuous guardian of established doctrines : HEBER-1815-2,83.228

it is <paren> and in their contest with heretics , this is the almost
uniform characteristic <P_84> of the Catholic party <$$paren> the
defender , not the assailant , who addresses us . HEBER-1815-2,84.229

But , if a Protestant in Rome , or a Socinian in England , were
endeavouring to disseminate his tenets among the people , he would not ,
we may be sure , exhort his hearers to stand on their ancient paths ,
and beware of new-fangled teachers ; HEBER-1815-2,84.230

- his arguments would be directed against the folly of inveterate
prejudice , HEBER-1815-2,84.231

and he would urge the necessity and reasonableness of judging for
ourselves , without regard to the canons and precedents of our fallible
predecessors . HEBER-1815-2,84.232

Tertullian has been called by Mr. Belsham a Philosophic Christian :
HEBER-1815-2,84.233

but he must have been an idiot in the strictest modern meaning of the
term , to have spoken as we find him speaking , had not the doctrine of
the Trinity been already in prescriptive possession of the minds of men
. HEBER-1815-2,84.234

What , then , is the meaning of his complaint ? HEBER-1815-2,84.235

Exactly that which every jealous supporter of established doctrines
brings forward , with whatever reason , on the appearance of a new
religion , - the progress which it makes among the vulgar .
HEBER-1815-2,84.236

And this progress , exaggerated , as usual in such cases , by his fears
and jealousies , he ascribes , with sufficient candour , to the inherent
and admitted difficulties of the established creed , and the consequent
eagerness <P_85> with which the lower orders flocked to a preacher who
professed , like Praxeas , to vindicate the Unity of God , and to
reconcile , as he undertook to do , that attribute with the Divinity of
the Lord Jesus . HEBER-1815-2,85.237

For , let not the modern Unitarian expect to find in Praxeas or Noetus a
precursor of Socinus or Priestley ; or anticipate , from the transient
success of the ancient heretics , an abundant harvest of converts to the
modern Reformation ! HEBER-1815-2,85.238

Whatever were the opinions of Sabellius , <paren> of which our accounts
are too contradictory to enable us to form any adequate judgment ,
<$$paren> the doctrines of Praxeas are sufficiently known ,
HEBER-1815-2,85.239

and have no parallel {TEXT:parellel} , perhaps , in modern error ,
except the Visions of Emanuel Swedenborg . HEBER-1815-2,85.240

He taught , indeed , one only Person in the Godhead ;
HEBER-1815-2,85.241

but he taught that this Person was no other than that God who was , at
once , the Creator , the Redeemer , and the Comforter of Mankind ; who
was born of a Virgin , crucified under Pontius Pilate , and afterwards
descended in a shower of fire on the Apostles in the day of Pentecost .
HEBER-1815-2,85.242

In other words , he united the several offices of the Trinity in the
single person of our Lord Jesus Christ . HEBER-1815-2,85.243

To that Unitarianism , which , as described by Mr. Belsham himself ,
would rob us of every rational ground of confidence in the mercy of
<P_86> Heaven ; which casts on us again the burthen of those iniquities
, under which the whole creation hath groaned and travailed ; which
reduces the Messiah to an earthly prophet , of whom we are ignorant
whether he is in Heaven or no , to whom we owe no gratitude for favours
now received , from whom we have nothing to hope or to fear , - to that
Unitarianism the Christians of Rome and Africa were , in the age of
Tertullian , strangers . HEBER-1815-2,86.244

