<BEGIN_herschel-1797-1>

<P_3>

<heading>

On the Discovery , <font> &c Read before the <$$font> Royal Society ,
<font> December 14 , 1797 . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,3.4

<$$heading>

Having been lately much engaged in improving my tables for calculating
the places of the Georgian satellites , I found it necessary to
recompute all my observations of them . HERSCHEL-1797-1,3.6

In looking over the whole series , from the year of the first discovery
of the satellites in 1787 to the present time , I found these
observations so extensive , especially with regard to a miscellaneous
branch of them , that I resolved to make this latter part the subject of
a strict examination . HERSCHEL-1797-1,3.7

The observations I allude to relate to the discovery of four additional
satellites : to surmises of a large and a small ring , at rectangles to
each other : to the light and size of the satellites : and to their
disappearance at certain distances from the planet .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,3.8

In this undertaking , I was much assisted by a set of short and easy
theorems I had laid down for calculating all the particulars respecting
the motions of satellites ; such as , finding the longitude of the
satellite from the angle of position , or the position from the
longitude : the inclination of the orbit from the angle of position and
longitude : the apogee : the greatest <P_4> elongation : and other
particulars . HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.9

Having moreover calculated tables for reduction : for the position of
the point of greatest elongation : and for the distance of the apogee ,
or opening of the ellipsis : and also contrived an expeditious
application of the globe for checking computations of this sort , I
found many former intricacies vanish . HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.10

By the help of these tables and theorems , I could examine the
miscellaneous observations relating to additional satellites , on a
supposition that their orbits were in the same plane with the two
already known , and that the direction of their motion was also the same
with that of the latter . HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.11

And here I take an opportunity to announce , that the motion of the
Georgian satellites is retrograde . HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.12

This seems to be a remarkable instance of the great variety that takes
place among the movements of the heavenly bodies . HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.13

Hitherto , all the planets and satellites of the solar system have been
found to direct their course according to the order of the signs : even
the diurnal or rotatory motions , not only of the primary planets , but
also of the sun , HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.14

and six of their secondaries or satellites , now are known to follow the
same direction ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.15

but here we have two considerable celestial bodies completing their
revolutions in a retrograde order . HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.16

I return to the examination of the miscellaneous observations , the
result of which has been of considerable importance , and will be
contained in this paper . HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.17

The existence of four additional satellites of our new planet will be
proved . HERSCHEL-1797-1,4.18

The observations which tend to ascertain the existence of rings not
appearing to be satisfactorily supported , it will be proper that
surmises of them should either be given up , as ill founded , or at
least reserved till superior instruments can be provided , to <P_5>
throw more light upon the subject . HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.19

A remarkable phenomenon , of the vanishing of the satellites , will be
shewn to take place , and its cause animadverted upon .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.20

I shall now , in the first place , relate the observations on which
these conclusions must rest for support , and afterwards join some short
arguments , to shew that my results are fairly deduced from them .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.21

For the sake of perspicuity , I shall arrange the observations under
three different heads ; and begin with those which relate to the
discovery of additional satellites . HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.22

A great number of observations on supposed satellites , that were
afterwards found to be stars , or of which it could not be ascertained
whether they were stars or satellites , for want of clear weather , will
only be related . HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.23

For , to enter into the particular manner of recording these supposed
satellites , or to give the figures which were delineated to point them
out , would take up too much time , and be of no considerable service to
our present argument . HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.24

It ought however to be mentioned , that nearly the same precaution was
taken with all the related observations as , it will be found , was used
in those that are given in the words of the journals that contain them .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.25

The former will be distinguished under the head <font> Reports <$$font>
, the latter under that of <font> Observations . <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.26

<heading>

<font> Investigation of additional Satellites . HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.28

Reports . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.29

<$$heading>

Feb. 6 , 1782 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.31

A very faint star was pointed out as probably a satellite ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.32

but Feb. 7 and 8 was found remaining in its former situation .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.33

March 4 , 1783 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.34

A satellite was suspected , HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.35

but March 8 was found to be a star . HERSCHEL-1797-1,5.36

<P_6>

April 5 , 1783 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.38

A suspected satellite was delineated , HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.39

but the 6th it was seen remaining in its former place .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.40

Nov. 19 , 1783 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.41

A supposed satellite was marked down , HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.42

but no opportunity could be had to account for it afterwards .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.43

Nov. 16 , 1784 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.44

Supposed 1st and 2d satellites were pointed out , but not accounted for
afterwards . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.45

Many other fruitless endeavours for the discovery of satellites were
made ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.46

but , finding my instrument , in the Newtonian form , not adequate to
the undertaking , the pursuit was partly relinquished .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.47

The additional light however which I gained , by introducing the
Front-view in my telescope , soon after gave me an opportunity of
resuming it with more success . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.48

Jan. 11 , 1787 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.49

Three supposed satellites were observed : a first , a second , and a
third . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.50

Jan. 12 , the 1st and 2d were gone from the places in which I had
marked them , HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.51

but the 3d was remaining , HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.52

and therefore was a fixed star . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.53

Jan. 14 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.54

A supposed 3d satellite was delineated , HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.55

but on the 17th it was found to be a star . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.56

Jan. 17 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.57

Supposed 3d , 4th , and 5th satellites were marked ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.58

but were found remaining in their former places on the 18th .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.59

Jan. 24 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.60

Supposed 3d and 4th satellites were noted , HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.61

but the weather proving bad on the succeeding nights , till February 4 ,
they were lost in uncertainty . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.62

Feb. 4 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.63

A 3d satellite was marked , HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.64

but not being afterwards accounted for remains lost .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.65

Feb. 7 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.66

A supposed 3d satellite was proved to be a star the 9th .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.67

Feb. 10 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.68

Supposed 3d and 4th satellites have not been afterwards accounted for .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,6.69

<P_7>

Feb. 13 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.71

Supposed 3d , 4th , and 5th satellites proved stars the 16th .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.72

Feb. 16 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.73

A 3d satellite proved a star the 17th . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.74

Feb. 19 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.75

Supposed 3d and 4th satellites were proved to be stars the same evening
, by being left in their places , while the planet was moving on .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.76

Feb. 22 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.77

The supposed 3d and 4th of the 19th were seen remaining in their former
places ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.78

and new 3d , 4th , and 5th satellites were marked ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.79

but these were lost through bad weather , which lasted till March 4 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.80

March 5 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.81

A supposed 3d satellite proved to be a star the 7th .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.82

March 7 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.83

The position of a 3d was taken , and a 4th also marked ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.84

but March 8 they were both proved to be fixed stars .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.85

October 20 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.86

A very small star was seen near the planet , but lost , for want of
opportunity to account for it . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.87

March 13 , 1789 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.88

The positions of 3d and 4th satellites were taken , HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.89

but the 14th they were found to be stars . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.90

March 16 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.91

Supposed 3d and 4th satellites were well laid down ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.92

but March 20 were found to be stars . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.93

March 26 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.94

The places of supposed 3d and 4th satellites were ascertained ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.95

but no opportunity could be had of deciding whether they were stars or
satellites . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.96

Dec. 15 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.97

A supposed 3d satellite was accurately delineated , HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.98

but proved to be a star the 16th . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.99

<heading>

<font> Observations . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.101

<$$heading>

" Jan. 18 , 1790 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.103

6@ @=h= 51 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,7.104

A supposed 3d satellite is about <P_8> 2 diameters of the planet
following ; excessively faint , and only seen by glimpses .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.105

7@ @=h= 57 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.106

I can@ @not perceive the 3d . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.107

<heading>

<font> Reports . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.109

<$$heading>

Jan. 18 , 1790 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.111

A supposed 4th satellite was described , HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.112

but was found to be a star the 19th . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.113

Jan. 20 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.114

A 3d satellite was perceived , and its angle of position ascertained ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.115

but was afterwards lost , for want of opportunity to examine its place
again . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.116

<heading>

<font> Observations . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.118

<$$heading>

" Feb. 9 , 1790 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.120

6@ @=h= 28 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.121

There is a supposed 3d satellite , in a line with the planet and the 2d
satellite . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.122

6@ @=h= 40 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.123

Configuration of the Georgian planet and satellites .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.124

See Tab. II. fig. 1 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.125

Clouds prevent further observations . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.126

Feb. 11 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.127

The supposed 3d satellite of the 9th of February I believe is wanting :
HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.128

at least I can@ @not see it , though the weather is very clear , but
windy . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.129

Feb. 12 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.130

The supposed 3d satellite of the 9th is not in the place where I saw it
that night . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.131

<heading>

<font> Reports . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.133

<$$heading>

Feb. 11 , 1790 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.135

Supposed 3d and 4th satellites were laid down , HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.136

but on the 12th they were both found remaining in their former places .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.137

Feb. 16 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.138

A 3d satellite was delineated , HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.139

but on the 17th it proved to be a star . HERSCHEL-1797-1,8.140

<P_9>

March 5 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.142

Supposed 3d and 4th satellites were laid down , HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.143

but on the 8th were seen remaining in their places .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.144

Feb. 4 , 1791 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.145

A 3d satellite was marked , HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.146

but has not been accounted for afterwards . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.147

Feb. 5 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.148

Supposed 3d , 4th , and 5th satellites were delineated ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.149

but no opportunity could afterwards be found to ascertain their
existence . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.150

March 5 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.151

Supposed 3d , 4th , and 5th satellites were put down .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.152

They could not be seen March 6 , HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.153

but were proved to be small stars the 7th . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.154

Feb. 12 , 1792 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.155

A third satellite was delineated , HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.156

but was left behind by the planet the same evening , and also seen in
its former place the next night . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.157

Feb. 13 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.158

A 3d satellite was put down , HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.159

but proved to be a star the 14th . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.160

Feb. 20 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.161

The position of a 3d satellite was taken , HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.162

but 4 hours after was found to be left behind by the planet .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.163

It was also seen in its former place Feb. 21 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.164

Feb. 26 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.165

A 3d satellite , between the planet and 2d , was observed ; which , 3@
@=h= 37 ' afterwards , was thought to be left behind ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.166

but was so faint as hardly to be perceivable . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.167

A fourth was also put down . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.168

Neither of them have been accounted for afterwards .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.169

March 8 , 1793 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.170

The position of a supposed 3d satellite was taken ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.171

but the next day it was found to be a star . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.172

March 9 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.173

A supposed 3d satellite was observed , at 5 or 6 times the distance of
the 1st , HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.174

but was not accounted for afterwards . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.175

March 14 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.176

Supposed 3d and 4th satellites were observed , HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.177

but no opportunity could be had afterwards to see them again .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,9.178

<P_10>

<heading>

<font> Observations . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.181

<$$heading>

" Feb. 25 , 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.183

With 320 , there is a small star <font> a <$$font> , fig. 2 . about 15
degrees north preceding the planet ; and another <font> b <$$font> ,
about 30 degrees north preceding : also one <font> c <$$font> , directly
preceding . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.184

There is a very small fourth star <font> d <$$font> , making a trapezium
with the other three : HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.185

and two more <font> e f <$$font> , preceding this 4th star , are in a
line with it . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.186

Feb. 26 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.187

The stars , in figure 2 , marked <font> f e d a <$$font> , are in a line
. HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.188

There is a star <font> g <$$font> , at rectangles to <font> f e d a :
<$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.189

the perpendicular falls upon <font> d : <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.190

it is towards the south . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.191

There is also a star <font> h <$$font> , north of <font> f e d a :
<$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.192

but it is too faint to admit of a determination of its place :
HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.193

I can only see it now and then by imperfect glimpses .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.194

Feb. 28 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.195

6@ @=h= 40 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.196

The stars <font> f e d a <$$font> of the 26th are in their places .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.197

<font> c <$$font> is in the place where I have marked it .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.198

The star <font> g <$$font> is in the place where I marked it .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.199

I see also the very small star <font> b <$$font> .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.200

6@ @=h= 50 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.201

There is a very small star <font> k <$$font> , but not so small as
<font> b <$$font> , very near to , and north following <font> f <$$font>
, which I did not see on the 26th . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.202

It is not quite half way between <font> f <$$font> and <font> e <$$font>
, but nearer to <font> f <$$font> than to <font> e . <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.203

It makes an obtuse triangle with <font> f <$$font> and <font> e <$$font>
. HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.204

9@ @=h= 43 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.205

The motion of the planet this evening , since the first observation , is
very visible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.206

10@ @=h= 7 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.207

I can@ @not perceive the star <font> k <$$font> .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.208

The weather is not so clear as it was . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.209

10@ @=h= 21 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.210

I can@ @not perceive the star <font> k <$$font> in the place where it
was 6@ @=h= 50 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.211

March 4 , 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.212

Power 320 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.213

6@ @=h= 46 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,10.214

The stars <font> a b c d e f g <$$font> <P_11> of Feb. 28 , fig. 3.
are in their places , HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.215

but I can@ @not see the small star <font> k . <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.216

The evening is not very clear . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.217

9@ @=h= 51 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.218

I can@ @not see the star <font> k <$$font> . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.219

10@ @=h= 25 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.220

I suppose <font> a <$$font> , in figure 4 , to be the star towards which
the planet is moving . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.221

<font> c a b <$$font> are in a crooked line . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.222

<font> c e f <$$font> are nearly in a line ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.223

<font> f <$$font> is a little preceding . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.224

<font> c d e <$$font> form a triangle . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.225

There is a small star <font> h <$$font> , preceding <font> d. <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.226

There is an exceeding small star <font> k <$$font> , in the line <font>
b k g <$$font> , but a little preceding and nearer <font> b . <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.227

<font> a b c <$$font> are large stars . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.228

<font> d e g <$$font> are also pretty large . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.229

<font> f <$$font> and <font> h <$$font> are small .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.230

Power 157 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.231

With 320 , there is also a very small star <font> l <$$font> , near
<font> d <$$font> , forming an isosceles triangle <font> h d l <$$font>
, on the preceding side . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.232

March 5 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.233

7@ @=h= 39 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.234

Power 320 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.235

The stars <font> a b c d e f g h k l <$$font> are in the places where
they were marked last night . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.236

9@ @=h= 37 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.237

There is a very small star <font> n <$$font> , south of <font> g ;
<$$font> another <font> m <$$font> , preceding <font> g ; <$$font> and a
third <font> o <$$font> , south following g . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.238

10@ @=h= 19 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.239

I suspect a very small star , south following the planet , at one-third
of the distance of the 1st satellite ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.240

but can@ @not verify it with 480 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.241

With 600 , the same suspicion continues . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.242

March 7 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.243

9@ @=h= 48 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.244

The stars <font> a b c d e f g h k l <$$font> are in their places .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.245

<font> n m o <$$font> are in their places . HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.246

The planet has passed between the stars <font> e f <$$font> , pretty
near to <font> f . <$$font> " HERSCHEL-1797-1,11.247

<P_12>

<heading>

<font> Reports . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.250

<$$heading>

March 21 . 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.252

Power 320 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.253

A small star was suspected south of the planet , or about 85@ @=o= south
following . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.254

It could not be verified with 480 , nor with 600 :
HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.255

and was even supposed to have been a deception ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.256

but the 22d was found remaining in the place where the planet had left
it . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.257

<font> Observations . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.258

" March 26 , 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.259

9@ @=h= 35 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.260

With 480 , I see the 1st satellite much better than with 320 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.261

I suspected , with 320 , a 3d satellite , directly north of the planet ,
a little farther off than the 1st , HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.262

and this power almost verifies the suspicion . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.263

See figure 5 . <paren> Tab. III . <$$paren> HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.264

9@ @=h= 44 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.265

With 600 , I still suspect the same , HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.266

but can@ @not satisfy myself of the reality . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.267

11@ @=h= 32 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.268

I see the supposed 3d satellite perfectly well now .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.269

It is much smaller than the 1st , and in a line with the planet and the
1st : so that probably it is a fixed star ; since it preceded the 1st ,
when I saw it before , I think more than the quicker motion of the 1st
satellite would account for . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.270

If it be a fixed star , it makes almost a rectangular triangle with
<font> q r <$$font> , the shorter leg being 3d <font> r ; <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.271

or it is almost in a line with <font> q <$$font> and <font> n .
<$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.272

<font> N.B. <$$font> The lines in the description are truer than in the
figure , as the latter is only intended to point out the stars in
question . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.273

March 27 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.274

8@ @=h= 37 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.275

Power 320 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.276

The same small star , observed last night at 11@ @=h= 32 ' , is gone
from the place where I saw it . HERSCHEL-1797-1,12.277

From its light last night , compared to <font> r <$$font> , which <P_13>
to-night is very near the planet , and scarcely visible , I am certain
that it must be bright enough to be perceived immediately , if it were
in the place pointed out by my description . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.278

10@ @=h= 20 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.279

The planet is considerably removed from the star <font> r . <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.280

11@ @=h= 41 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.281

I had many glimpses of small stars or supposed satellites :
HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.282

one of them in a place agreeing with the 3d satellite of last night ,
<paren> supposing it to have moved with the planet ; <$$paren> that is ,
a little farther off , and after the 1st . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.283

Another preceding the 1st , but nearer . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.284

Some others south , at a good distance ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.285

but not one of them could I see for any constancy .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.286

They were only lucid glimpses . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.287

<heading>

<font> Reports . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.289

<$$heading>

March 27 , 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.291

A supposed 4th satellite was delineated , HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.292

but proved to be a star the 28th . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.293

<heading>

<font> Observations . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.295

<$$heading>

" March 4 , 1796 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.297

Configuration of the Georgian planet and fixed stars for 10@ @=h= 3 ' .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.298

See fig. 6 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.299

March 5 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.300

9@ @=h= 50 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.301

I suspected a very small star between <font> c <$$font> and <font> h
<$$font> , which was not there last night . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.302

I had a pretty certain glimpse of it . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.303

It is in a line from the planet towards <font> f: <$$font> power 320 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.304

With 600 , I see the satellite better than before ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.305

but can@ @not perceive the suspected small star .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.306

10@ @=h= 17 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.307

The air is remarkably clear at present , HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.308

but I can@ @not perceive the suspected star . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.309

March 9 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.310

11@ @=h= 23 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,13.311

As the probability of other satellites is , that they revolve in the
same plane with the 1st and 2d , I <P_14> chiefly look for them in the
direction of their orbits , which is now nearly a straight line .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.312

April 5 , 1796 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.313

There is no star in the line of the transverse , that can be taken for a
satellite : HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.314

the evening is very beautiful , HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.315

and I examined that line with 300 , at a distance ; and with 600 ,
within the orbits of the two satellites . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.316

March 23 , 1797 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.317

Three very small stars O P Q , are in the path of the planet ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.318

they form an obtuse triangle . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.319

March 25 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.320

11@ @=h= 4 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.321

A very bright star S , at almost the distance of the field of view , is
a little south of the path of the planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.322

It has a small north preceding star T , which points to two more V W ,
towards the north . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.323

Between the triangle of March 23d and the four last mentioned stars , is
a very small star X . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.324

March 28 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.325

10@ @=h= 52 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.326

I see the stars S T V W X of March 25th . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.327

11@ @=h= 25 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.328

From X towards the triangle O P Q of March 23d , is an exceeding small
star Y , about four times the distance of the 2d satellite , and nearly
in the line of the greatest elongation . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.329

I do not remember to have seen it the 25th . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.330

11@ @=h= 41 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.331

The distance of Y from X is about 1$$4 of the distance of X from the
triangle . HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.332

It requires much attention to see it ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.333

but I have a very complete view of it , by drawing the planet just out
of the field , and the star X almost on the preceding side . "
HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.334

<heading>

<font> Arguments upon the Reports and Observations . <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,14.336

<$$heading>

From the reports of the great number of supposed satellites , compared
with the select observations which are given at length , it must be
evident that the method of looking for difficult <P_15> objects , and of
marking them down by lines and angles , with every other possible
advantage for finding them again , has been completely understood and
put in practice . HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.338

So guarded against deceptions , we can@ @not but allow , that even a
single glimpse of a very small star is a considerable argument in favour
of its existence . HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.339

What I call verifying a suspicion , which is generally done with a
higher power than that which caused the suspicion , is obtaining a
steadier view of the existence of the object in question ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.340

that is , to see it in such a manner as to be able to fix an eye upon it
, and to compare it with other surrounding objects ; and thus to be able
to ascertain its relative situation with those other objects , in a
satisfactory manner . HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.341

<heading>

<font> An interior Satellite . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.343

<$$heading>

The observation of Jan. 18 , 1790 , says , " a supposed 3d satellite is
about two diameters of the planet following . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.345

There is not the least doubt expressed about the existence of the
satellite , or object in question , which therefore must be looked upon
as ascertained . HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.346

Now , the angle of the greatest elongation of the Georgian satellites ,
by my new tables , at the time of observation , was 81@ @=o= 33 ' N. F.
HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.347

Therefore , the angle of the apogee was 8@ @=o= 27 ' S. F. ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.348

and since , by observation , the satellite was " following , " without
any mention of degrees being made , we may admit it to have been not far
from the parallel ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.349

suppose 11 or 12 degrees S. F. HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.350

In this case , the satellite would be in the apogee about the time of
the 2d observation , at 7@ @=h= 57 ' ; which says , " I can@ @not
perceive the satellite . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.351

But it will be shewn hereafter , when I come to treat of the vanishing
of the satellites , that it would become invisible in this situation .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,15.352

Indeed , without the supposition of <P_16> the satellite's coming to the
apogee , it might easily happen that the least change in the clearness
of the air , during a time of 1@ @=h= 5 ' , which elapsed between the
first and second observation , might render an object invisible , which
, as the first observation says , was " excessively faint , and could
only be seen by glimpses . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.353

From the observed distance , which is put at " 2 diameters of the planet
, " we may conclude what would be the distance of its greatest
elongation . HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.354

For , 2 diameters from the disk of the planet give 2_1$$2 from the
centre . HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.355

Now , the distance of the apogee at this time , by my tables , was , 64
, supposing that of the greatest elongation 1 ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.356

therefore we have the radius of its orbit {COM:equation_omitted} .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.357

This calculation is not intended to determine precisely the distance of
the satellite , but only to shew that its orbit is more contracted than
that of the 1st , and that consequently it is an interior satellite .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.358

If any doubt should be entertained about the validity of this
observation , we have a second , and very striking one , of March 5 ,
1794 : where an interior satellite was suspected south following the
planet , at one-third of the distance of the 1st .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.359

March 4 , when a description was made of the stars , as in figure 4 ,
this satellite was not in the place where it was observed the 5th .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.360

And , by an examination of the same stars March 7 , it appears , that
even the smallest stars <font> n m o <$$font> , of the 5th , were seen
in their former places , but not the satellite . HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.361

The observation therefore must be looked upon as decisive with regard to
its existence . HERSCHEL-1797-1,16.362

If any doubt should arise , on account of the suspicion not being
verified with 480 , I must remark , that being used to such imperfect
glimpses , it has generally <P_17> turned out , even when I have given
up as improbable the existence of a supposed satellite seen in that
manner , that it has afterwards nevertheless been discovered that a
small star remained in the place where the satellite had been suspected
to be situated . HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.363

An instance of this may be seen in the report of the observations that
were made March 21 and 22 , 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.364

Besides , in the present case , it is additionally mentioned , that the
same object was examined with a power of 600 , which continued the
suspicion . HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.365

From the assigned place of this satellite , at 1$$3 of the distance of
that of the first , it appears that this observation belongs to the
interior satellite of Jan. 18 , 1790 , which has already been examined
. HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.366

The 1st satellite was this evening at its greatest elongation ,
one-third of which is about 11 " . HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.367

The apogee distance of a satellite whose greatest distance is 16 " , 1
would have been 6 " , 1 on the day of our observation ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.368

but , not being come to the apogee , by many degrees , it could not be
so near the planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.369

For the sake of greater precision , let us admit that the satellite was
exactly south following ; that is , 45 degrees from the parallel , and
45 from the meridian ; then , by calculation , a satellite whose orbit
is at 16 " , 1 from the planet , would , in the situation now admitted ,
have been 7 " , 1 from its centre , which might coarsely be rated at
1$$3 of the distance of the first . HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.370

But the estimation of 11 " is probably more accurate than that in the
1st observation , where 2 diameters are given . HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.371

And , by calculating from this quantity , we find that the greatest
elongation distance of the satellite is 25 " , 5 ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,17.372

now , putting 2_1$$2 diameters in the first observation , instead of 2 ,
the distance deduced from it will come out 19 " , 3 ; which is certainly
an agreement <P_18> sufficiently near to admit both observations to
belong to the same satellite . HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.373

March 27 , 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.374

We find a third observation , which will assist in supporting the two
former ones . HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.375

A glimpse of a satellite is mentioned , which was preceding the 1st ,
but nearer the planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.376

The position of the 1st satellite the same evening was , by measuring ,
found to be 62@ @=o= , 1 N. F. which is still a considerable way from
its greatest elongation ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.377

but our new satellite preceded it , HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.378

and was therefore more advanced in its orbit , or nearer its greatest
distance : HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.379

and yet the observation says , that it was not so far from the planet as
the 1st ; notwithstanding this latter was in a more contracted part of
its orbit . HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.380

It follows therefore that this was also an interior satellite .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.381

Now , since we may allow these three observations to belong to the same
, we ought not to make a distinction ; but admit , as sufficiently
established , the existence of at least one interior satellite of our
new planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.382

<heading>

<font> An intermediate Satellite . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.384

<$$heading>

March 26 , 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.386

A satellite was suspected , directly north of the planet .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.387

At first it could not be verified , HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.388

but was seen perfectly well afterwards . HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.389

It was supposed that probably it might be a star ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.390

but this was left undecided . HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.391

The observation of March 27th however removes all doubt upon the subject
; as it fully affirms that the small star observed the 26th , at 11@
@=h= 32 ' , was gone from the place in which it was the day before .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.392

Such strong circumstances are mentioned in confirmation , that we can@
@not hesitate placing this among the list of existing satellites .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.393

It was not the interior satellite of Jan. 18 , 1790 ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,18.394

for both the <P_19> 1st and 2d known satellites were in full view March
26th ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.395

see figure 5 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.396

and the observation places this new one in a line drawn from the planet
continued through the 1st ; with the remark , that it was a little
farther from the planet than the 1st . HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.397

The 2d was then near its greatest southern elongation ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.398

and we may see from the figure , as well as from the above description ,
that the orbit of this new satellite is situated between the orbits of
the other two . HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.399

We have a second observation of the same satellite March 27 , 1794 ;
where , among the glimpses of additional satellites at 11@ @=h= 41 ' ,
is mentioned " one in a place probably agreeing with the new satellite
of March 26th , " which , by its motion , must have been carried forward
, so as to be where the observation of the 27th says it was , namely , "
a little farther off and after the 1st ; " that is , at a little greater
distance from the planet than the 1st , and not so far advanced in its
orbit as that satellite . HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.400

This amounts not only to an additional proof , HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.401

but even announces the recognition of the satellite , and its motion in
the course of one day . HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.402

<heading>

<font> An exterior Satellite . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.404

<$$heading>

Feb. 9 , 1790 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.406

A new satellite was seen , in a line with the planet and the 2d
satellite . HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.407

See figure 1 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.408

To convince us that this was not a fixed star , we have the observations
of two other nights , the 11th and 12th of February , where the removal
of it , from the place in which it was Feb. 9 , is clearly demonstrated
. HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.409

As it was in a line continued from the planet through the second
satellite , its orbit must evidently be of a greater dimension than that
of the 2d ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.410

I shall therefore put it down as an exterior satellite .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,19.411

<P_20>

Most likely this satellite also was seen among the supposed satellites
south of the planet . March 27 , 1794 ; where we find mention made of "
some others south , at a good distance . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.413

In that case , this will make a second observation .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.414

We have a third observation of the same new satellite March 5 , 1796 :
when a very small star was seen , in a place where the evening before
there had been none : as appears by the configuration of the 5th of
March . HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.415

See figure 6 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.416

At the time of the observation , the planet was come to the longitude of
the place where the star was perceived to be ; which agrees with the
idea of its having been brought to that situation by the planet .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.417

It may be objected , that the star could not be verified with a power of
600 ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.418

but here we have more than a bare suspicion of the satellite ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.419

for the observation says , " I had a pretty <font> certain <$$font>
glimpse of it : " HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.420

and this appears also from the assigned place of the star at the
intersection of two given lines . HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.421

For , such a delineation could not have been made , without having
perceived it with a considerable degree of steady vision .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.422

Its distance , to judge by the description , will agree sufficiently
with the two foregoing observations of this new exterior satellite .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.423

<heading>

<font> The most distant Satellite . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.425

<$$heading>

On Feb. 28 , 1794 , a star was perceived where on the 26th there was
none . HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.427

This star was larger than a very small star which was observed the 26th
, not far from the place of the new supposed satellite :
HERSCHEL-1797-1,20.428

and a configuration having been made expressly , by way of ascertaining
what stars might afterwards come into a situation where they could be
mistaken for satellites , our new star or satellite would not have been
omitted , <P_21> when a smaller one very near it was scrupulously
recorded . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.429

The motion of the planet , in 3 hours and 3 minutes , is mentioned as
very visible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.430

The place of the star , which was a new visitor this evening , was very
particularly delineated , at 6@ @=h= 50 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.431

From its situation , it is evident the motion of the planet must have
carried this star , if it was one of its satellites , towards the large
star <font> f <$$font> , figure 3 ; in the light of which a dim
satellite would be lost . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.432

This accordingly happened ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.433

for at 10@ @=h= 7 ' and 10@ @=h= 21 ' it was no longer visible .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.434

The direction of the planet's motion is plainly pointed out , by the
place of the planet March 2d . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.435

With respect to the orbit of this satellite , it appears , from its
situation near the apogee , where it was seen , that its distance was to
that of the second satellite , which was then near its greatest
elongation , as 8 to 5 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.436

And , since the apogee distance , on the day of observation , was only ,
{COM:sic} 37 , we have its greatest elongation as 8 , 37 {COM:sic} to 5
; HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.437

that is , as 21 , 6 to 5 , or above 4 to 1 . From which we may conclude
, that its orbit must lie considerably without the before mentioned
exterior satellite of Feb. 9 , 1790 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.438

We have a second observation of it March 27 , 1794 ; which , though not
very strong , yet adds confirmation to the former .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.439

For that evening , which was uncommonly fine , other satellites , south
, at a good distance , were perceived . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.440

This must relate principally to our present satellite , which may
certainly be said to be at a good distance from the planet , and which ,
by that time , was probably in the southern part of its orbit , and near
its greatest elongation . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.441

There is a third observation , March 28 , 1797 , which probably also
belongs to this satellite . HERSCHEL-1797-1,21.442

For the exceedingly small star Y , <P_22> which is mentioned as not
having been seen the 25th , when the delineation of the stars was made ,
will agree very well with the two former observations ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.443

and , being near the greatest elongation , the distance of this
satellite is well pointed out , HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.444

and agrees remarkably well with the calculation of the first observation
of it . HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.445

It remains now only to be mentioned , that in such delicate observations
as these of the additional satellites , there may possibly arise some
doubts with those who are very scrupulous ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.446

but , as I have been much in the habit of seeing very small and dim
objects , I have not been detained from publishing these observations
sooner , on account of the least uncertainty about the existence of
these satellites , but merely because I was in hopes of being able soon
to give a better account of them , with regard to their periodical
revolutions . HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.447

It did not appear satisfactory to me to announce a satellite , unless I
could , at the same time , have pointed out more precisely the place
where it might be found by other astronomers . HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.448

But , as more time is now already elapsed than I had allowed myself for
a completion of the theory of these satellites , I thought it better not
to defer the communication any longer . HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.449

The arrangement of the four new and the two old satellites together will
be thus : HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.450

First satellite , the interior one of Jan. 18 , 1790 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.451

Second satellite , the nearest old one of Jan. 11 , 1787 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.452

Third satellite , the intermediate one of March 26 , 1794 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.453

Fourth satellite , the farthest old one of Jan. 11 , 1787 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.454

Fifth satellite , the exterior one of Feb. 9 , 1790 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.455

Sixth satellite , the most distant one of Feb. 28 , 1794 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,22.456

<P_23>

<font> Observations and Reports tending to the Discovery of one or more
Rings of the Georgian Planet , and the flattening of its polar Regions .
<$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.458

" Nov. 13 , 1782 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.459

7-@ @feet reflector , power 460 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.460

I perceive no flattening of the polar regions . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.461

April 8 , 1783 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.462

I surmise a polar flattening . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.463

Feb. 4 , 1787 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.464

20-@ @feet reflector , power 300 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.465

Well defined ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.466

no appearance of any ring ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.467

much daylight . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.468

March 4 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.469

I begin to entertain again a suspicion that the planet is not round .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.470

When I see it most distinctly , it appears to have double , opposite
points . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.471

See figure 7 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.472

Perhaps a double ring ; that is , two rings , at rectangles to each
other . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.473

March 5 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.474

The Georgian Sidus not being round , the telescope was turned to Jupiter
. HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.475

I viewed that planet with 157 , 300 , and 480 , which shewed it
perfectly well defined . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.476

Returning to the Georgian planet , it was again seen affected with
projecting points . Two opposite ones , that were large and blunt ,
from preceding to following ; and two others , that were small and less
blunt , from north to south . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.477

See figure 7 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.478

March 7 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.479

Position of the great ring R , from 70@ @=o= S. P. to 70@ @=o= N. F.
HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.480

Small ring <font> r <$$font> , from 20@ @=o= N. P. to 20@ @=o= N. F.
HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.481

600 shewed R and <font> r . <$$font> 800 R and <font> r . <$$font>
1200 R and <font> r . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.482

March 8 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.483

R and <font> r <$$font> are probably deceptions .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.484

Nov. 9 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.485

The suspicion of a ring returns often when I adjust the focus by one of
the satellites , HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.486

but yet I think it has no foundation . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.487

Feb. 22 , 1789 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.488

A ring was suspected . HERSCHEL-1797-1,23.489

<P_24>

March 16 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.491

7@ @=h= 37 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.492

I have turned my speculum 90@ @=o= round . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.493

A certain appearance , owing to a defect which it has contracted by
exposure to the air since it was made , is gone with it :
HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.494

<paren> see fig. 9 and 10 ; <$$paren> HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.495

but the suspected ring remains in the place where I saw it last .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.496

7@ @=h= 50 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.497

Power 471 shews the same appearance rather stronger .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.498

Power 589 still shews the same . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.499

<font> Memorandum . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.500

The ring is short , not like that of Saturn . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.501

It seems to be as in figure 8 ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.502

and this may account for the great difficulty of verifying it .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.503

It is remarkable that the two <font> ansae <$$font> seem of a colour a
little inclined to red . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.504

The blur occasioned by the fault of the speculum is , to-night , as
represented in figure 9 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.505

The other evening it was as in figure 10 ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.506

and the ring is likewise as it was the same evening .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.507

March 20 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.508

7@ @=h= 53 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.509

When the satellites are best in focus , the suspicion of a ring is the
strongest . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.510

Dec. 15 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.511

The planet is not round , HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.512

and I have not much doubt but that it has a ring .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.513

Feb. 26 , 1792 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.514

6@ @=h= 34 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.515

My telescope is extremely distinct ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.516

and , when I adjust it upon a very minute double star , which is not far
from the planet , I see a very faint ray , like a ring crossing the
planet , over the centre . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.517

This appearance is of an equal length on both sides , so that I strongly
suspect it to be a ring . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.518

There is , however , a possibility of its being an imperfection in the
speculum , owing to some slight scratch : HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.519

I shall take its position , and afterwards turn the speculum on its axis
. HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.520

8@ @=h= 39 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.521

Position of the supposed ring 55@ @=o= , 6 from N. P. to S. F.
HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.522

9@ @=h= 56 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.523

I have turned the speculum one quadrant round ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,24.524

but the appearance of the very faint ray continues where it <P_25> was
before , so that the defect is not in the speculum , nor is it in the
eye-glass . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.525

But still it is now also pretty evident that it arises from some
external cause ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.526

for it is now in the same situation , with regard to the tube , in which
it was 3_1$$2 hours ago : whereas , the parallel is differently situated
, HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.527

and the ring , of course , ought to be so too . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.528

March 5 , 1792 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.529

I viewed the Georgian planet with a newly polished speculum , of an
excellent figure . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.530

It shewed the planet very well defined , and without any suspicion of a
ring . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.531

I viewed it successively with 240 , 300 , 480 , 600 , 800 , 1200 , and
2400 ; all which powers my speculum bore with great distinctness .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.532

I am pretty well convinced that the disk is flattened .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.533

The moon was pretty near the planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.534

Dec. 4 , 1793 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.535

7-@ @feet reflector , power 287 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.536

The Georgian planet is not so well defined as , from the extraordinary
distinctness of my present 7-@ @feet telescope , it ought to be .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.537

There is a suspicion of some apparatus about the planet .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.538

Feb. 26 , 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.539

20-@ @feet reflector , power 480 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.540

The planet seems to be a little lengthened out , in the direction of the
longer axis of the satellites' orbits . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.541

April 21 , 1795 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.542

10-@ @feet reflector , power 400 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.543

The telescope adjusted to a neighbouring star , so as to make it
perfectly round . HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.544

The disk of the planet seems to be a little elliptical .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.545

With 600 , also adjusted upon the neighbouring star , the disk still
seems elliptical . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.546

<heading>

<font> Remarks upon the foregoing Observations . <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,25.548

<$$heading>

With regard to the phenomena which gave rise to the suspicion of one or
more rings , it must be noticed , that few specula or object-glasses are
so very perfect as not to be affected <P_26> with some rays or
inequalities , when high powers are used , and the object to be viewed
is very minute . HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.550

It seems , however , from the observations of March 16 , 1789 , and Feb.
26 , 1792 , that the cause of deception , in this case , must be looked
for elsewhere . HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.551

It has often happened , that the situation of the eye-glass , being on
one side of the tube , which brings the observer close to the mouth of
it , has occasioned a visible defect in the view of a very minute object
, when proper care has not been taken to keep out of the way :
especially when the wind is in such a quarter as to come from the
observer across the telescope . HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.552

The direction of a current of air alone may also affect vision .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.553

Without , however , entering further into the discussion of a subject
that must be attended with uncertainty , I will only add , that the
observation of the 26th seems to be very decisive against the existence
of a ring . HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.554

When the surmises arose at first , I thought it proper to suppose , that
a ring might be in such a situation as to render it almost invisible ;
and that , consequently , observations should not be given up , till a
sufficient time had elapsed to obtain a better view of such a supposed
ring , by a removal of the planet from its node .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.555

This has now sufficiently been obtained in the course of ten years ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.556

for , let the node of the ring have been in any situation whatsoever ,
provided it kept to the same , we must by this time have had a pretty
good view of the ring itself . HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.557

Placing therefore great confidence on the observation of March 5 , 1792
, supported by my late views of the planet , I venture to affirm , that
it has no ring in the least resembling that , or rather those , of
Saturn . HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.558

The flattening of the poles of the planet seems to be sufficiently
ascertained by many observations . HERSCHEL-1797-1,26.559

The 7-@ @feet , the <P_27> 10-@ @feet , and the 20-@ @feet instruments ,
equally confirm it ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.560

and the direction pointed out Feb. 26 , 1794. seems to be conformable
to the analogies that may be drawn from the situation of the equator of
Saturn , and of Jupiter . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.561

This being admitted , we may without hesitation conclude , that the
Georgian planet also has a rotation upon its axis , of a considerable
degree of velocity . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.562

<font> Reports and Observations relating to the Light and Size of the
Georgian Satellites , and to their vanishing at certain Distances from
the Planet . <$$font> HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.563

Jan. 14 , 1787 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.564

A star was put down , as a supposed very faint satellite ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.565

but , on the 17th , the planet being removed , it appeared nearly as
bright as two considerable stars that had also been noted .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.566

" Jan. 17 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.567

The 1st satellite is the smallest in appearance .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.568

Jan. 24 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.569

The 2d satellite is brighter than the first . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.570

Feb. 9 , 1787 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.571

The 1st satellite is larger than the second . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.572

Feb. 10 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.573

The planet was supposed to go to a triangle of pretty bright stars .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.574

The 11th it was between them , HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.575

and the stars of the triangle were so dim , that , had they not been
seen before , they might have been supposed to be satellites .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.576

" Sept. 19 , 1787 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.577

4@ @=h= 24 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.578

I can still see the satellites , though daylight is already very strong
: HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.579

they are fainter than the faintest of Saturn's satellites .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.580

Feb. 22 , 1791 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.581

I can@ @not perceive the 1st satellite , probably owing to its nearness
to the planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.582

March 2 , 1791 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.583

The 1st satellite is hardly to be seen ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,27.584

I <P_28> have however had several perfect glimpses of it .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.585

It seems to be about the most contracted part of its orbit . "
HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.586

March 6 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.587

The supposed 3d and 4th satellites of March 5th were imagined to have
been gone from their former places ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.588

but were seen the 7th , with this memorandum . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.589

I mistook them last night for other stars , they being so large that I
did not know them again . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.590

" March 9 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.591

The 2d satellite is nearer the planet than the first ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.592

and on that account appears smaller . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.593

Dec. 9 , 1791 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.594

I do not perceive the 1st satellite . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.595

Feb. 13 , 1792 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.596

6@ @=h= 16 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.597

The 3d supposed satellite of last night is a considerable star : not
much less than <font> b <$$font> . " HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.598

When the supposed third was pointed out the night before , it is said to
be smaller than the 1st and 2d satellites . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.599

By the figure , it did not exceed the distance of the 2d ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.600

and <font> b <$$font> is called a pretty large star .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.601

Feb. 20 , 1792 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.602

The 2d satellite , being at a great distance , was mistaken for a pretty
large star , till about four hours after , when its motion along with
the planet was perceived . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.603

" Feb. 21 , 1792 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.604

7@ @=h= 36 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.605

I can@ @not see the 2d satellite . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.606

By calculation , it should be about 8@ @=o= , 6 S. F.
HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.607

and I suspect it to be there , HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.608

but can@ @not get the least assurance . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.609

March 15 , 1792 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.610

I can@ @not see the 1st satellite with 300 ; nor with 480 ; nor with 600
. HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.611

March 19 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.612

8@ @=h= 35 ' . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.613

I can@ @not see the 2d satellite with 300 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.614

With 480 I see it very well . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.615

I see it also with 800 ; and very well with 1200 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.616

With 2400 and 4800 the satellite can@ @not be seen ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.617

but there seems to be a whitish haziness coming on . "
HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.618

March 4 , 1794 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.619

The 1st satellite could not be seen . HERSCHEL-1797-1,28.620

<P_29>

March 7 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.622

The 1st was invisible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.623

March 17 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.624

Both 1st and 2d were invisible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.625

March 21 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.626

The 1st was invisible , though looked for with all the powers of the
instrument . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.627

March 22 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.628

The 2d was hardly visible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.629

March 23 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.630

The 2d was not to be seen . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.631

March 26 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.632

The 1st was but just visible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.633

March 5 , 1796 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.634

The 2d was invisible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.635

April 4 , 1796 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.636

The 1st was invisible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.637

" March 17 , 1797 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.638

Power 600 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.639

Neither of the satellites are visible to-night ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.640

with 300 I can@ @not see them . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.641

The night is very beautiful , HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.642

and I have a field bar to hide the planet ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.643

but , notwithstanding this , I can@ @not see either of the satellites .
" HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.644

March 21 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.645

The 1st satellite was invisible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.646

March 23 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.647

The 2d was invisible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.648

The 1st could not be seen immediately , HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.649

but , having been informed where exactly to look for it , according to
my calculation of its place , it was perceived ; and with 600 seen very
well . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.650

March 25 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.651

Both satellites were invisible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.652

<heading>

<font> Remarks on the foregoing Observations . <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.654

<$$heading>

From the observations of Jan. 14 , Feb. 10 , March 6 , 1787 , and Feb.
13 , 1792 , it appears , that all very small stars , when they come near
the planet , lose much of their lustre . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.656

Indeed , every observation that has been recorded before , of supposed
satellites that have been proved to be stars afterwards , has fully
confirmed this circumstance ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.657

for they were always found to be considerable stars ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.658

and their being mistaken for satellites was owing to their loss of light
when near the planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,29.659

This would hardly deserve notice , as it is well known that a superior
light <P_30> will obstruct an inferior one : HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.660

but some circumstances which attend the operation of the affections of
light upon the eye , when objects are very faint , are so remarkable ,
that they must not be passed over in silence . HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.661

After having been used to follow up the satellites of Saturn and Jupiter
, to the very margin of their planets , so as even to measure the
apparent diameter of one of Jupiter's satellites by its entrance on the
disk , I was in hopes that a similar opportunity would soon have offered
with the Georgian satellites : not indeed to measure the satellites ,
but to measure the planet itself , by means of the passage of the
satellite over its disk . HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.662

I expected also to have settled the epochs of the satellites , from
their conjunctions and oppositions , with more accuracy than I have yet
been able to do , from their various positions in other parts of their
orbits . HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.663

A disappointment of obtaining these capital advantages deserves to have
its cause investigated ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.664

but , first of all , let us cast a look upon the observations .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.665

The satellites , we may remark , become regularly invisible , when ,
after their elongation , they arrive to certain distances from the
planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.666

In order to find what these distances are , we will take the first
observation of this kind , as an example . HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.667

Feb. 22 , 1791 , the first satellite could not be seen .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.668

Now , by my lately constructed tables , its longitude from the apogee ,
at the time of observation , was 204 , 5 degrees ; that is , 24 , 5
degrees from the most contracted part of its orbit , on the side that is
turned to us , which , as its opposite is called the apogee , I shall
call the perigee . HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.669

By my tables also for the same day , we have the distance of the apogee
from the planet , which is , 60 ; supposing the greatest elongation
distance to be 1 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,30.670

This <P_31> being given , we may find an easy method of ascertaining the
distance of the satellite , when it is near the apogee or perigee :
HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.671

for it will be sufficiently true for our purpose to use the following
analogy . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.672

Cosine of the distance of the satellite from the apogee or perigee is to
the apogee distance from the planet , as the greatest elongation is to
the distance of the satellite from the planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.673

When the ellipsis is very open , this theorem will only hold good in
moderate distances from the apogee or perigee ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.674

but , when it is a good deal flattened , it will not be considerably out
in more distant situations : HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.675

and it will also be sufficiently accurate to take the natural cosine
from the tables to two places of decimals only . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.676

When this is applied to our present instance , we have , 91 for the
natural cosine of 24 , 5 degrees ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.677

and the distance of the satellite from the planet will come out
{COM:equation_omitted} . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.678

By this method , it appears that the satellite , when it could not be
seen , was nearly 22 " from the planet . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.679

We must not however conclude , that this is the given distance at which
it will always vanish . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.680

For instance , the same satellite , though hardly to be seen , was
however not quite invisible March 2 , 1791 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.681

Its distance from the planet , computed as before , was then only
{COM:equation_omitted} . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.682

The clearness of the atmosphere , and other favourable circumstances ,
must certainly have great influence in observations of very faint
objects ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.683

therefore , a computation of all the observations where the satellites
were not seen , as well as a few others where they were seen , when
pretty near the apogee or perigee , will be the surest way of settling
the fact . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.684

The result of these computations is thus . HERSCHEL-1797-1,31.685

<P_32>

{COM:table_omitted}

Thus , having the observations and calculated distances under our
inspection , we find that both the satellites became always invisible
when they were near the planet : that the 1st was generally lost when it
came within 18 " of the planet , and the 2d at the distance of about 20
" . HERSCHEL-1797-1,32.688

In very uncommon and beautiful nights , the 1st has once been seen at 13
" , 8 , and the 2d at 17 " , 3 ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,32.689

but at no time have they been visible when nearer the planet .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,32.690

I shall now endeavour to investigate the cause which can <P_33> render
small stars and satellites invisible at so great a distance as 18 or 20
" . HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.691

A dense atmosphere of the planet would account for the defalcation of
light sufficiently , were it not proved that the satellites are equally
lost , whether they are in the nearest half of their orbits , or in that
which is farthest from us . HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.692

But , as a satellite can@ @not be eclipsed by an atmosphere that is
behind it , a surmise of this kind can@ @not be entertained .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.693

Let us then turn our view to light itself , and see whether certain
affections between bright and very bright objects , contrasted with
others that take place between faint and very faint ones , will not
explain the phenomena of vanishing satellites . HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.694

The light of Jupiter or Saturn , for instance , on account of its
brilliancy , is diffused , almost equally , over a space of several
minutes all around these planets . HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.695

Their satellites also , having a great share of brightness , and moving
in a sphere that is strongly illuminated , can@ @not be much affected by
their various distances from the planets . HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.696

The case then is , that they have much light to lose , and comparatively
lose but little . HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.697

The Georgian planet , on the contrary , is very faint ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.698

and the influence of its feeble light can@ @not extend far , with any
degree of equality . HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.699

This enables us to see the faintest objects , even when they are only a
minute or two removed from it . HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.700

The satellites of this planet are very nearly the dimmest objects that
can be seen in the heavens ; so that they can@ @not bear any
considerable diminution of their light , by a contrast with a more
luminous object , without becoming invisible . HERSCHEL-1797-1,33.701

If then the sphere of illumination of our new planet be limited to 18 or
20 " , we may fully account for the loss of the satellites when they
come <P_34> within its reach ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.702

for they have very little light to lose , HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.703

and lose it pretty suddenly . HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.704

This contrast , therefore , between the condition of the Georgian
satellites and those of the brighter planets , seems to be sufficient to
account for the phenomenon of their becoming invisible .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.705

We may avail ourselves of the observations that relate to the distances
at which the satellites vanish , to determine their relative brightness
. HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.706

The 2d satellite appears generally brighter than the 1st ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.707

but , as the former is usually lost farther from the planet than the
latter , we may admit the 1st satellite to be rather brighter than the
2d . HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.708

This seems to be confirmed by the observation of March 9 , 1791 ; where
the 2d appeared to be smaller than the 1st , though the latter was only
25 " from the planet , while the other was 30 " , 8 .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.709

The first of the new satellites will hardly ever be seen otherwise than
about its greatest elongations , HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.710

but can@ @not be much inferior in brightness to the other two ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.711

and , if any more interior satellites should exist , we shall probably
not obtain a sight of them : for the same reason that the inhabitants of
the Georgian planet perhaps never can discover the existence of our
earth , Venus , and Mercury . HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.712

The 2d new or intermediate satellite is considerably smaller than the
1st and 2d old satellites . HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.713

The two exterior , or 5th and 6th satellites , are the smallest of all ,
HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.714

and must chiefly be looked for in their greatest elongations .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.715

<heading>

<font> Periodical Revolutions of the new Satellites . <$$font>
HERSCHEL-1797-1,34.717

<$$heading>

It may be some satisfaction to know what time the four <P_35> additional
satellites probably employ in revolving round their planet .
HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.719

Now , as this can only be ascertained with accuracy by many observations
, we must of course remain in suspense , till a series of them can be
properly instituted . HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.720

But , in the mean time , we may admit the distance of the interior
satellite to be 25 " , 5 , as our calculation of the estimation of March
5 , 1794 , gives it ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.721

and from this we compute that its periodical revolution will be 5 days ,
21 hours , 25 minutes . HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.722

If we place the intermediate satellite at an equal distance between the
two old ones , or at 38 " , 57 , its period will be 10 days , 23 hours ,
4 minutes . HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.723

By the figure of Feb. 9 , 1790 , it seems that the nearest exterior
satellite is about double the distance of the farthest old one ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.724

hence , its periodical time is found to be 38 days , 1 hour , 49 minutes
. HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.725

The most distant satellite , according to the calculation of the
observation of Feb. 28 , 1794 , is full four times as far from the
planet as the old 2d satellite ; HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.726

it will therefore take at least 107 days , 16 hours , 40 minutes , to
complete one revolution . HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.727

It will hardly be necessary to add , that the accuracy of these periods
depends entirely upon the truth of the assumed distances ;
HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.728

some considerable difference , therefore , may be expected , when
observations shall furnish us with proper <font> data <$$font> for more
accurate determinations . HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.729

<font> Slough <$$font> , near Windsor , HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.730

September 1 , 1797 . HERSCHEL-1797-1,35.731

