<BEGIN_hind-1707-1>

<P_297>

<heading>

<font> The History of Greece . <$$font> HIND-1707-1,297.4

<$$heading>

Book III . HIND-1707-1,297.6

<font> From the Battle of <$$font> Marathon <font> to the <$$font>
Peloponnesian <font> War ; containing the Space of about <$$font> 60
<font> Years . <$$font> HIND-1707-1,297.7

<font> Miltiades <$$font> , by his late Victory at <font> Marathon
<$$font> , having very much rais'd his Reputation amongst his
Fellow-citizens , obtain'd of the <font> Athenians <$$font> a Fleet
consisting of 70 Sail . HIND-1707-1,297.8

He conceal'd , as <font> Herodotus <$$font> affirms , his Enterprise
from the <font> Athenians <$$font> , HIND-1707-1,297.9

and only promis'd them in general , that he would greatly enrich the
City thereby . HIND-1707-1,297.10

Another Account says , that the <font> Athenians <$$font> sent him with
this Fleet to reduce the Islands , which assisted the <font> Persians
<$$font> . HIND-1707-1,297.11

Amongst the rest was the Island <font> Paros <$$font> , the Inhabitants
whereof attended the <font> Persians <$$font> with one Galley , and
fought against the <font> Athenians <$$font> in the Plains of <font>
Marathon . HIND-1707-1,297.12

Miltiades <$$font> , to be reveng'd on them for this , and having
likewise a personal Quarrel against them , upon the account of one
<font> Lysagoras <$$font> of <font> Paros <$$font> , who accus'd him to
<font> Hydarnes <$$font> a <font> Persian <$$font> , invested their City
, HIND-1707-1,297.13

and cut off all Communication from them , demanding an 100 Talents ,
<P_298> which if they refus'd to give , he threaten'd to destroy them .
HIND-1707-1,298.14

The Besieg'd , lightly regarding his Threats , fortified their City ,
HIND-1707-1,298.15

and by Night labour'd so hard at their Works , that they made their Wall
twice as strong as it was before . HIND-1707-1,298.16

<font> Miltiades <$$font> , after he had laid close Siege to the City
about 26 Days , leaping off from a Wall broke his Thigh ,
HIND-1707-1,298.17

and was forc'd to return home ; HIND-1707-1,298.18

Upon his Arrival at <font> Athens <$$font> , <font> Xanthippus <$$font>
, who had always been his Rival in the State , impeach'd him ;
HIND-1707-1,298.19

<font> Miltiades <$$font> , being at that time laid up of his broken
Thigh , was not able to appear in his own Defence ; HIND-1707-1,298.20

however , his Friends against this single Miscarriage objected all his
former Success in reducing the Island <font> Lemnos <$$font> , and
especially the late glorious Battle of <font> Marathon : <$$font>
HIND-1707-1,298.21

The People therefore would not pronounce his Crime Capital ,
HIND-1707-1,298.22

but fin'd him fifty Talents , the Sum that was expended in equipping the
Fleet , which he Commanded at <font> Paros <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,298.23

<font> Miltiades <$$font> , being unable to pay the Sum , was cast into
Prison , where he had not laid long , before his Thigh mortified ,
HIND-1707-1,298.24

and died very miserably , leaving behind him a Son and a Daughter ,
<font> Cimon <$$font> and <font> Elpinice <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,298.25

So soon were all the Services <font> Miltiades <$$font> had done for
them forgotten by his ungrateful Country-men ! who suffer'd this Great
Man to lie neglected in a Gaol , like a common Malefactor , only upon
the bare Accusation of a sworn Enemy to all his Glory , without the
least Colour of Proof . HIND-1707-1,298.26

Therefore , however his ill Success at <font> Paros <$$font> might be
pretended , the real Cause of his Prosecution seem'd to have deeper Root
; HIND-1707-1,298.27

for the <font> Athenians <$$font> , who still retain'd fresh in their
Memories the Tyranny of the <font> Pisistratidae <$$font> , under which
they had not long before labour'd , were extremely apprehensive of the
growing Power of any Fellow-citizen ; HIND-1707-1,298.28

and they imagin'd that <font> Miltiades <$$font> , who had born
{COM:sic} so great Offices and Commands , would hardly be content to
move in a more narrow and private Sphere : the Force of mere {TEXT:meer}
Custom inclining Men , who have been us'd to Govern , to aspire after
Power <P_299> and Sovereignty <$$paren>
{COM:missing_matching_open_paren} Wherefore the People thought it more
secure to take him out of the way , though undeservedly , than to live
under continual Apprehensions of Danger from so Great a Man .
HIND-1707-1,299.29

Thus was <font> Miltiades <$$font> sacrific'd to the Humour and Jealousy
of the inconstant Multitude , and the Rage of a prevailing Faction .
HIND-1707-1,299.30

He was descended from one of the best and most ancient Families in
<font> Athens <$$font> , his Father <font> Cimon <$$font> , who , in the
Tyranny of <font> Pisistratus <$$font> , left the City , having thrice
obtain'd a Crown in the <font> Olympick_Games <paren> his Grandfather
<font> Miltiades <$$font> being the Founder of an <font> Athenian
<$$font> Colony in the <font> Thracian Chersonesus <$$font> <$$paren>
{COM:missing_period} HIND-1707-1,299.31

And , although <font> Militiades <$$font> , through the whole Course of
his Life , seem'd to be a Man of too great Modesty to entertain the
least Thoughts of any Design upon the People's Liberty , yet 't@ @is not
to be wonder'd that he should be suspected of it , when to be Vertuous
was thought highly Criminal , and to deserve well of the Common-wealth
was the ready way to incur the Displeasure of it ; when there never
wanted a Party to traduce and vilify the {TEXT:the_the} best Actions of
the best Men , and , though never so much intended for the Service of
their Country , to represent them as proceeding from Ambition , and the
Hopes of raising themselves , and enslaving the Citizens :
HIND-1707-1,299.32

While he was Governour of the <font> Thracian Chersonesus <$$font> ,
though he acted as King amongst them , and had the Title of Tyrant , a
Name given to those , who held the supreme Government during Life , in a
free Common-wealth ; yet he govern'd according to the Laws of the Place
, HIND-1707-1,299.33

and ow'd not his Power so much to his Conquest and the Absoluteness of
his Command , as to the Justice of his Actions and the good Will of his
Subjects , which he always maintain'd by his great Prudence and
Moderation : HIND-1707-1,299.34

He was so exceedingly Affable , that the meanest of his Subjects had
free and easy Access to him ; HIND-1707-1,299.35

In the height of his Prosperity he always bore a particular Love to his
native City , HIND-1707-1,299.36

and was ready to do any <P_300> Acts of Kindness to the <font> Athenians
; <$$font> by which means he establish'd his Authority , not only in the
Hearts and Affections of the <font> Athenians <$$font> , who gave him
the Government of the <font> Chersonesus <$$font> , but of those too
over whom he was to exercise it . HIND-1707-1,300.37

He was a Friend to the whole Nation of the <font> Greeks <$$font> , as
sufficiently appears by his Advice of demolishing the Bridge , and
abandoning <font> Darius ; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,300.38

and , though the Majority of the Commanders thought not fit to concur
with him , yet the Proposal was generous in him , in that he consulted
the Liberty of all <font> Greece <$$font> , rather than his own private
Interest ; HIND-1707-1,300.39

And , if his Advice had been taken , it might , in all Probability ,
have prevented those Calamities which afterwards befell {TEXT:befel}
<font> Greece <$$font> , HIND-1707-1,300.40

but it would have robb'd him of the Glory of the famous Battle of <font>
Marathon <$$font> , wherein he shew'd himself the greatest Soldier
{TEXT:Souldier} of the Age , and prepar'd the way to the future
Greatness of the <font> Athenian <$$font> Common-wealth .
HIND-1707-1,300.41

The <font> Grecians <$$font> now enjoy'd some Repose and Respite from
the <font> Persian <$$font> Arms , HIND-1707-1,300.42

only the War between <font> Athens <$$font> and <font> Aegina <$$font>
was still depending , till the common Danger made them unite for their
own Defence and Security : HIND-1707-1,300.43

For <font> Darius <$$font> , who was more concern'd how to retrieve his
Honour , than from the Loss which he had sustain'd in <font> Greece
<$$font> , gave Orders for new Levies of Men , and other necessary
Preparations , twice as great as the former , as if his late Enterprise
had miscarry'd rather for want of Numbers , than of true Courage and
Conduct . HIND-1707-1,300.44

Whilst his Thoughts were thus employ'd , the <font> Aegyptians <$$font>
, formerly subdued by his Predecessor <font> Cambyses <$$font> ,
revolted , which very much distracted his Resolution of invading <font>
Greece : <$$font> HIND-1707-1,300.45

Another great Obstruction to his Measure was the Dissention amongst his
Sons , who contended for the Kingdom : HIND-1707-1,300.46

It was the Custom of the <font> Persian <$$font> Kings to nominate their
Successor before they undertook any Expedition : HIND-1707-1,300.47

Now <font> Darius <$$font> , having three Sons , before he was King , by
<font> Gobryas <$$font> 's <P_301> Daughter , and four more by <font>
Atossa <$$font> the Daughter of <font> Cyrus <$$font> , and Relict of
his Predecessor <font> Cambyses ; Artobazanes <$$font> , otherwise
call'd <font> Artemenes <$$font> or <font> Ariamenes <$$font> , the
Eldest by the first Wife , claim'd the Kingdom by Vertue of his
Birth-right , HIND-1707-1,301.48

but , he being born , whilst <font> Darius <$$font> was a private Man ,
<font> Xerxes <$$font> , the eldest , by his second Wife <font> Atossa
<$$font> , who was born after he was King , was adjudg'd Heir to the
Crown by their Uncle <font> Artaphernes <$$font> , to whom the two
Candidates referr'd the Decision of their Dispute . HIND-1707-1,301.49

<font> Darius <$$font> , having declar'd <font> Xerxes <$$font> his
Successor , died , in the midst of all his great Designs , after he head
reign'd 36 Years . So that <font> Xerxes <$$font> succeeded to a Crown
, engag'd in two dangerous Wars , one against <font> Egypt <$$font> ,
the other against <font> Greece ; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,301.50

the former was so soon finish'd , that we have no other account of it ,
than that he impos'd harder Conditions upon them , than what they
refus'd to submit to in his Father's Reign , and constituted his Brother
<font> Achaemenes <$$font> Governour of <font> Egypt <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,301.51

But the Expedition against <font> Greece <$$font> was of greater
Consequence ; HIND-1707-1,301.52

and in their Consultation about the Prosecution of this War the <font>
Persian <$$font> Nobles were divided in their Opinions .
HIND-1707-1,301.53

<font> Mardonius <$$font> , who had formerly commanded in <font> Thrace
<$$font> and <font> Macedon <$$font> under <font> Darius <$$font> ,
having receiv'd private Encouragement from the <font> Alenadae <$$font>
, who were the Kings of <font> Thessaly <$$font> , press'd the King to
undertake the War , HIND-1707-1,301.54

and the <font> Pisistratidae <$$font> , who continu'd at the <font>
Persian <$$font> Court , were not wanting to promote this Design ,
imposing upon the King with the vain and deluding Oracles of one <font>
Onomacritus <$$font> , who industriously conceal'd whatsoever portended
any Danger to the <font> Persians <$$font> , and utter'd nothing but
Victory and Success . HIND-1707-1,301.55

But <font> Artabanus <$$font> , Brother to <font> Darius <$$font> , and
Uncle to <font> Xerxes <$$font> , a Man of great Wisdom and Experience ,
us'd his utmost Endeavours to dissuade the King from his Enterprise
against <font> Greece <$$font> , laying before him the shameful and
lamentable Success <P_302> of two Expeditions , which <font> Darius
<$$font> had made contrary to his Advice ; one in Person against the
<font> Scythians <$$font> , the other by his Generals against <font>
Greece ; <$$font> in both which , he had not only lost very numerous
Forces , but , what was much dearer , his Honour and Reputation .
HIND-1707-1,302.56

<font> Xerxes <$$font> , being fully bent upon the Conquest of <font>
Greece <$$font> , was very much incens'd at his Uncle's Advice ,
HIND-1707-1,302.57

but , being afterwards affrighted with Visions by Night , he continued
for some time very doubtful and uncertain what Course to take :
HIND-1707-1,302.58

At length he advis'd again with his Uncle , who , being likewise
terrify'd by a Vision , or out of Fear of incurring the King's
Displeasure , chang'd his former Opinions , and advis'd the King to
carry on the War . HIND-1707-1,302.59

Four Years were spent in raising an Army to invade <font> Greece ;
<$$font> which , being compos'd of all Nations subject to the <font>
Persian <$$font> Empire , consisted of 1700000 Foot , and 80000 Horse ,
besides Chariots , Camels , and other Beasts of Carriage .
HIND-1707-1,302.60

The Commanders of the several Nations were the Princes of the Blood of
<font> Persia <$$font> , either by Birth , or Marriage into the Royal
Family ; HIND-1707-1,302.61

for to those were all Commands of this Nature given , except to some few
People , who had Leaders of their own Nations . HIND-1707-1,302.62

The Command in chief of the whole Army was committed to <font> Mardonius
<$$font> , to whom were join'd some others of <font> Xerxes <$$font> 's
nearest Relations , as Lieutenant Generals of all the Forces , except
10000 select <font> Persians <$$font> , call'd the <font> Immortal
Regiment <$$font> , because , if any one of the whole Number dy'd or was
kill'd , his Place was presently fill'd up by another ;
HIND-1707-1,302.63

the Command of this was given to <font> Hydarnes ; <$$font>
HIND-1707-1,302.64

the 80000 Horse were led by the Sons of <font> Datis <$$font> , General
of <font> Darius <$$font> 's Army in the last War : HIND-1707-1,302.65

Besides these Preparations by Land , he equipp'd a Navy of 2207 Sail ,
consisting of <font> Phoenicians , Cyprians , Cilicians , Pamphylians ,
Lycians , Dorians , Carians , Ionians , Aeolians <$$font> , and the
<font> Hellespontines <$$font> , commanded by <font> Artabignes <$$font>
and <font> Achaemenes <$$font> , Brothers to <font> Xerxes <$$font> ,
and other Princes of <font> Persia ; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,302.66

the transport Ships and other Vessels amounted <P_303> to 3000 .
HIND-1707-1,303.67

<font> Artemisia <$$font> , the Daughter of <font> Lygdamis <$$font> ,
Queen of <font> Halicarnassus <$$font> and the Islands adjoining ,
fitted out five Galleys , HIND-1707-1,303.68

and Commanded them her self , being the first in all the Fleet , except
those of <font> Zidon <$$font> , in which <font> Xerxes <$$font> himself
was embark'd . HIND-1707-1,303.69

When these prodigious Forces were thoroughly {TEXT:throughly} furnish'd
, they look'd as if all the Inhabitants of the East , assembl'd together
, had been going to people another Continent , rather than an Army
rais'd to take one single City ; HIND-1707-1,303.70

for against <font> Athens <$$font> was the main Quarrel , and all these
mighty Preparations chiefly design'd . HIND-1707-1,303.71

All things being in a readiness , the whole Army was order'd to march to
<font> Sardis <$$font> , where they made their Rendezvous .
HIND-1707-1,303.72

All his land Forces met at <font> Critala <$$font> , with which having
pass'd the River <font> Halys <$$font> , he came to <font> Celanae
<$$font> , a City of <font> Phrygia <$$font> , where one <font> Pythius
<$$font> a <font> Lydian <$$font> entertain'd him and his whole Army ,
and presented <font> Xerxes <$$font> himself with 2000 Talents of Silver
, and 4000000 in Gold , wanting 7000 of the <font> Persian Darici
<$$font> . HIND-1707-1,303.73

The King , being overcome with the extraordinary Generosity of <font>
Pythius <$$font> , not only refus'd his Treasure , HIND-1707-1,303.74

but order'd that 7000 <font> Darici <$$font> should be given him , which
would make up his four Millions in Gold . HIND-1707-1,303.75

From <font> Celanae <$$font> he march'd to <font> Sardis <$$font> ,
where he winter'd , HIND-1707-1,303.76

and from thence sent into <font> Greece <$$font> to demand Earth and
Water . HIND-1707-1,303.77

By this time his Navy was arriv'd at the <font> Chersonesus <$$font> ,
HIND-1707-1,303.78

and , to avoid the Danger which <font> Mardonius <$$font> had run by
sailing upon the Coast of <font> Athos <$$font> , he order'd a Passage
to be cut behind the Mountain , which made it an entire Island , which
was a Work of more Ostentation than real Service ; for the Channel was
but just wide enough for two Ships to sail a-breast , HIND-1707-1,303.79

and through this pass'd his whole Navy . HIND-1707-1,303.80

After this he gave Orders , that a Bridge should be made over the <font>
Hellespont <$$font> , between <font> Sestus <$$font> and <font> Abydus
<$$font> , which was no sooner finish'd than it was torn in pieces in
one <P_304> Night by a violent Storm ; whereat <font> Xerxes <$$font>
was so enrag'd , that he commanded 300 Stripes to be given to the Sea ,
and a Pair of Fetters to be cast into it in token of Servitude :
HIND-1707-1,304.81

he order'd the Workmen , who made the Bridge , to be kill'd , and 674
Ships to be link'd together instead of a Bridge , which by the Art and
Industry of the <font> Phoenicians <$$font> were so firmly Anchor'd on
both sides , that they withstood the Force of both Winds blowing from
the <font> Euxine {TEXT:Euxin} <$$font> and <font> Aegean <$$font> Seas
. HIND-1707-1,304.82

In the beginning of Spring <font> Xerxes <$$font> mov'd from <font>
Sardis <$$font> with his whole Army , HIND-1707-1,304.83

and came to <font> Abydus <$$font> , when on a sudden the Day was so
clouded that it was dark as Night ; HIND-1707-1,304.84

this , being no true Eclipse , was look'd upon as a very bad Omen ,
HIND-1707-1,304.85

and <font> Pythius <$$font> , who had formerly entertain'd him with so
much Civility , was so affrighted at it , that he sent to the King to
desire him , the Eldest of his five Sons , who were in his Army , might
be excus'd from serving to be the comfort of his old Age ; at which
<font> Xerxes <$$font> was so enrag'd , that he commanded the young Man
to be kill'd , and his Body to be cut into two parts , one of them to be
laid on the Right-hand , and the other on the Left of the high Way , by
which the Army was to march . HIND-1707-1,304.86

The Bridge being finished {TEXT:finisht} , and the Army having march'd
to the Sea-side , <font> Xerxes <$$font> had a mind to take a view of
all his Forces assembled in the Plains of <font> Abydus <$$font> ,
before they pass'd over ; HIND-1707-1,304.87

To this end going up to an Ascent , from whence he could take a full
Prospect of them all together , a mock Sea-fight was perform'd to please
the Vanity of the fond Prince , who upon the sight of so many Thousands
by Land , and such a prodigious Fleet riding in Triumph by Sea , was
transported to an excess of Joy , which was soon overcast by as sudden a
turn of Sorrow and Despair , which forc'd him to break out into Tears at
the melancholy thought , That in 100 Years not one of that prodigious
Multitude would be alive . HIND-1707-1,304.88

His Uncle <font> Artabanus <$$font> , who was then with him , upon this
<P_305> took an occasion to lay before him , the ungrateful Scene of the
Vanity and Miseries of human Life , HIND-1707-1,305.89

and being again importun'd to tell his opinion concerning this
Expedition , after he had done it with the same faithfulness and freedom
as he had formerly us'd , he was sent back to <font> Susa <$$font> , to
govern as Deputy during the absence of the King . HIND-1707-1,305.90

<font> Xerxes <$$font> , after he had paid his solemn Devotions to the
Sun , the <font> Persian <$$font> Deity , by one Bridge , bending
towards the <font> Euxine <$$font> , pass'd over his Horse and Foot ,
HIND-1707-1,305.91

and by another inclining towards the <font> Aegean <$$font> Sea , his
Slaves and Beasts were transported . HIND-1707-1,305.92

The Fleet sail'd Westward to the Promontory of <font> Sarpedon <$$font>
, HIND-1707-1,305.93

and the land Forces , marching through the <font> Thracian Chersonesus
<$$font> to <font> Agora <$$font> , from thence bore down towards the
Bay of <font> Melana <$$font> , where they drank Dry a River of that
Name , as they had before done <font> Scamander <$$font> , and several
others in <font> Asia <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,305.94

From hence marching still Westward , they at length came to <font>
Doriscus <$$font> , a spacious plain in <font> Thrace <$$font> , water'd
with the great River <font> Hebrus <$$font> , where <font> Xerxes
<$$font> encamp'd , and muster'd his whole Army both by Sea and Land .
HIND-1707-1,305.95

<font> Herodotos <$$font> by assigning 200 Men to every Ship , together
with those who were in the other Vessels , conjectures that 517510 Men
man'd the whole Fleet ; so that according to this muster the Land and
Sea Forces , being put together with the 20000 <font> Arabians <$$font>
who drove the Camels , and the <font> Libyan {TEXT:Libyans} <$$font>
Charioteers , amount to 2317610 , besides Slaves and others who follow'd
the Camp . HIND-1707-1,305.96

Notwithstanding all this number , he compel'd all the Nations which lay
in his passage to <font> Doriscus <$$font> , towards <font> Greece
<$$font> to march along with him , so that hereby came an accession of
120 Ships to his Fleet , to which allowing 300 Men apiece , the number
will amount to 2400 ; and to his Land Army another of 300000 according
to <font> Herodotus <$$font> <paren> tho <font> Diodorus <$$font> thinks
something less than 200000 <$$paren> HIND-1707-1,305.97

and so the whole number <P_306> of his <font> Asian <$$font> and <font>
European <$$font> Souldiers amounts to 2641610 ; HIND-1707-1,306.98

and yet he thinks the number of Slaves and Attendants to have rather
exceeded this , so that if it only be doubled , the number of those who
came by Land to <font> Thermopylae <$$font> , and by Sea to <font>
Sepias <$$font> amounted to 5283220 . HIND-1707-1,306.99

And for the number of Women that bak'd Meat , and of Concubines ,
Eunuchs , Carriage Beasts , Waggons , and <font> Indian <$$font> Dogs ,
it was infinite ; so that 't@ @is not so much to be wonder'd that Rivers
should be exhausted dry by so vast a multitude , as that no plague rag'd
amongst them , or that any order could be preserv'd , amongst , or
sufficient provision found for them . HIND-1707-1,306.100

The <font> Grecians <$$font> , who all this while had notice of all the
Motions and Designs of the <font> Persians <$$font> , from <font>
Demaratus <$$font> the <font> Spartan <$$font> Exile , were according to
their several interests variously affected . HIND-1707-1,306.101

The <font> Thebans <$$font> , and the rest of the <font> Boeotians
<$$font> , except the Inhabitants of <font> Thespia <$$font> and <font>
Plataea <$$font> , and many of the <font> Thessalians <$$font> through
the persuasion {TEXT:perswasion} of the <font> Alenadae <$$font> , and
several others out of fear , had underhand sent Earth and Water as
tokens of subjection : HIND-1707-1,306.102

many also were in doubt which side to take . HIND-1707-1,306.103

The rest , meeting at the <font> Isthmus <$$font> to consult for their
common safety , mutually swore to join Force against the <font> Persians
<$$font> , and with united power to defend the Liberty of <font> Greece
<$$font> ; at the present to waive {TEXT:wave} all private differences ,
that they might provide for the publick security , to remit the Monies
owing to each other ; and to devote to <font> Apollo <$$font> the tenth
Man of all those , who had already without manifest Necessity submitted
to the Enemy . HIND-1707-1,306.104

The War which had often been made up , and still brake out again between
the <font> Athenians <$$font> and the <font> Aeginetae <$$font> , was
now compos'd . HIND-1707-1,306.105

<font> Athens <$$font> had for a long time labour'd with intestine Jars
, and Commotions , of two powerful Factions , one Headed by <font>
Aristides <$$font> , the other by <font> Themistocles <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,306.106

These two , being bred up together from their Youth , had always shewn
such a mutual Disagreement to each other's Temper , as <P_307> could
never be wholy reconcil'd , the One being quick , bold , crafty , and
easily changeable according to the Juncture of Affairs : The other
constant and grave , only intent upon Justice , neither in Jest nor
Earnest giving way to Lying , Scurrility or Deceit .
HIND-1707-1,307.107

On this account he had the Sir-name of <font> Just <$$font> , which at
first gain'd him the Love and Esteem of the Citizens , but afterwards
procur'd him their Envy ; HIND-1707-1,307.108

For <font> Themistocles <$$font> , who had the art of insinuating
himself into the credulous Multitude , persuaded {COM:sic} them , that
<font> Aristides <$$font> , whilst he took upon him to censure all
things , design'd to subvert all their Courts of Judicature , and to
erect a Tyranny . HIND-1707-1,307.109

The People , who were flushed {TEXT:flusht} with their late success at
<font> Marathon <$$font> and had their Eye upon greater Designs , could
not bear any that seem'd too great in the Commonwealth ,
HIND-1707-1,307.110

and therefore flocking into the Market-place they banish'd him by <font>
Ostracism <$$font> , disguising their Envy at his Glory under the
specious Pretence of defending their Liberty : HIND-1707-1,307.111

when they were come together to give their suffrages , a Country-man
gave a Shell to <font> Aristides <$$font> , whom he took for one of the
common People , HIND-1707-1,307.112

and desired him to write <font> Aristides <$$font> 's Name :
HIND-1707-1,307.113

he ask'd him if he had received any Injury at his Hands ,
HIND-1707-1,307.114

the Man answer'd , No , but that he was troubled to hear him call'd
<font> Just <$$font> , above the rest of the Citizens .
HIND-1707-1,307.115

<font> Aristides <$$font> made him no Answer , HIND-1707-1,307.116

but wrote his own Name , HIND-1707-1,307.117

and gave it to the Man ; HIND-1707-1,307.118

when he departed out of the City , with his Hands lifted up to Heaven ,
he pray'd , that <font> Athens <$$font> might never have Occasion to
think of <font> Aristides <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,307.119

The <font> Athenians <$$font> , who by reason of their continual War
with the <font> Aeginetae <$$font> , had increased {TEXT:encreas'd}
their Strength at Sea , were farther persuaded {TEXT:perswaded} by
<font> Themistocles <$$font> to lay out the Money which issued from the
Golden Mines of <font> Lauria <$$font> , and us'd to be divided among
the People , upon their Shipping , whereby the Fleet was encreas'd to
almost 200 Sail , which afterwards prov'd the main <P_308> Bulwark and
Defence of <font> Greece <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,308.120

After this the <font> Grecian <$$font> Confederates sent into <font>
Sicily <$$font> , <font> Corcyra <$$font> and <font> Crete <$$font> , to
desire Assistance of the <font> Greek <$$font> Colonies against the
common Enemy ; and to <font> Argos <$$font> , to encourage them to join
against him , with the rest of the Confederates . HIND-1707-1,308.121

<font> Gelon <$$font> , who at that time had all <font> Sicily <$$font>
in his Power , and was thought to have more Ships than all the
Confederates put together , refus'd to send any Succours , unless he
commanded the whole Fleet : HIND-1707-1,308.122

the <font> Corcyreans <$$font> made great Promises , confessing their
own Safety to be included in that of <font> Greece ; <$$font>
HIND-1707-1,308.123

but resolving to make use of the Success of either Party , they sent
sixty Ships , under shew of a Supply to the Confederate Fleet ,
HIND-1707-1,308.124

but gave private Orders to hover about <font> Laconia <$$font> , that so
they might fly to the strongest side . HIND-1707-1,308.125

The <font> Cretans <$$font> , who were very powerful at Sea put them off
, under Pretence of expecting an Answer from the Oracle at <font> Delphi
: <$$font> HIND-1707-1,308.126

And the <font> Argivi <$$font> , out of the Hatred to the <font>
Laecedaemonians <$$font> , refus'd to come in to them , but upon such
Conditions as could not be admitted , which prov'd a great
Discouragement to the whole Confederacy . HIND-1707-1,308.127

The <font> Athenians <$$font> and <font> Laecaemonians <$$font> ,
against whom this War was chiefly design'd , were resolv'd to make the
utmost Resistance . HIND-1707-1,308.128

The <font> Thessalians <$$font> , as soon as <font> Xerxes <$$font> had
pass'd over his Army into <font> Europe <$$font> , sent to demand
Assistance , HIND-1707-1,308.129

or else they must be forc'd to submit : HIND-1707-1,308.130

The General Council at that time being assembled at the <font> Isthmus
<$$font> , thinking it more adviseable to withstand the Enemy at his
first Entrance into <font> Greece <$$font> , than to defend it
afterwards in broken Parts , immediately sent away 10000 Men into <font>
Thessaly <$$font> , under the Conduct of <font> Enaenetus <$$font> a
<font> Spartan <$$font> , and <font> Themistocles <$$font> , who in
Conjunction with the <font> Thessalian <$$font> Horse , at the River
<font> Peneus <$$font> , flowing between the Streights of <font> Ossa
<$$font> and <font> Olympus <$$font> , might hinder the Passage of the
<font> Persians <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,308.131

They continued here not many Days , when <font> Alexander <$$font> King
of <font> Macedon <$$font> sent to advise them to make a Retreat ,
HIND-1707-1,308.132

for it would be impoosible to withstand the numerous Forces <P_309> of
the <font> Persians <$$font> , which were ready to pour in upon them ,
or to prevent the Enemy's entering {COM:entring} into <font> Greece
<$$font> , there being so many other Passages , through the upper Parts
of <font> Macedonia <$$font> . Whereupon they return'd back to the
<font> Isthmus <$$font> , and the <font> Thessalians <$$font> being thus
forsaken , submitted to the <font> Persians <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,309.133

The Council , upon a second Declaration what was to be done , resolv'd ,
that the <font> Grecians <$$font> should possess themselves of the
Streights of <font> Thermopylae <$$font> , which were the only Passage
out of <font> Thessaly <$$font> into <font> Greece <$$font> , and more
easy to be maintain'd by their small Numbers , than any other ;
wherefore <font> Leonidas <$$font> , King of <font> Sparta <$$font> ,
was sent hither with 5000 Foot . HIND-1707-1,309.134

As for the Command by Sea , that was principally committed to the <font>
Athenians <$$font> and the <font> Aeginetae <$$font> ,
HIND-1707-1,309.135

and it was resolv'd that the Fleet should sail to the <font> Artemisian
<$$font> Shore , towards the North Part of the Island <font> Euboea
<$$font> , and not far from the Streights . HIND-1707-1,309.136

The <font> Grecians <$$font> , being inform'd of the Enemy's advancing
with his whole Army , immediately repair'd to <font> Thermopylae
<$$font> and <font> Artemisium <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,309.137

The <font> Persian <$$font> Navy loosing from <font> Therma <$$font> ,
sent ten of their swiftest Sailers to <font> Sciathus <$$font> , where
they surpris'd three of the <font> Grecian <$$font> Ships , which lay to
watch the Motion of the Enemy . HIND-1707-1,309.138

The <font> Grecian <$$font> Navy , being alarm'd at the taking of three
of their Ships , loos'd from <font> Artemisium <$$font> ,
HIND-1707-1,309.139

and sail'd back into the Straits between <font> Euboea <$$font> and
<font> Boeotia <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,309.140

Not many Days after the <font> Persian <$$font> Fleet , cruising about
the Promontory <font> Sepias <$$font> , upon the Coasts of <font>
Magnesia <$$font> , was surpriz'd with a violent Storm , wherein they
lost 400 Men of War , and many other Vessels , besides a great Number of
Men , and vast Summs of Money ; whereupon the <font> Grecians <$$font>
return'd to <font> Artemisium . HIND-1707-1,309.141

Xerxes <$$font> , in the mean time , with his land Army advanc'd towards
<font> Thermopylae <$$font> , HIND-1707-1,309.142

and sent out his Scouts to discover the Posture of the Enemy .
HIND-1707-1,309.143

<font> Leonidas <$$font> and his <font> Spartans <$$font> were at that
time exercising themselves <P_310> in <font> Gymnick <$$font> Games ,
and adorning their Heads , as upon some Festival ; wherefore , upon the
Return of the Scouts , <font> Xerxes <$$font> enquir'd of <font>
Demaratus <$$font> the Reason of it . HIND-1707-1,310.144

He told him they were fully resolv'd to die {COM:dye} for their Country
, and ready to fight it out to the last Man , if Occasion requir'd , at
which <font> Xerxes <$$font> derided him , as he did before when he
spake of the Valour of his Country-men ; HIND-1707-1,310.145

for he imagin'd they would be so scar'd at his Numbers , as not to dare
to give him Battle . HIND-1707-1,310.146

But he was soon convinc'd of his Mistake by dear Experience .
HIND-1707-1,310.147

For about five Days after , he sent a strong Party of <font> Persians
<$$font> to attack the <font> Grecians <$$font> , who lay in the
Streights of <font> Thermopylae ; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,310.148

they defended the Passage two whole Days , HIND-1707-1,310.149

and repuls'd the <font> Persians <$$font> with great loss ;
HIND-1707-1,310.150

after this he detach'd the Band of <font> Persians <$$font> called the
<font> Immortal Regiment <$$font> , which meeting with the same Success
, <font> Xerxes <$$font> is said to have leapt three times out of his
Throne , fearing the Destruction of his whole Army , by an Handful of
those Men whom he had not long before despis'd . HIND-1707-1,310.151

The Day following the Fight was renew'd with the same Fortune on both
Sides ; HIND-1707-1,310.152

for of the <font> Persians <$$font> so many were kill'd , that the
Passage was block'd up with Carcasses , insomuch that the vast Numbers
of the <font> Persians <$$font> had not Room to fight , but being driven
upon one another were repuls'd with greater Slaughter and Confusion .
HIND-1707-1,310.153

And this repeated ill Success had like to have put an End to this mighty
Expedition : HIND-1707-1,310.154

But whilst <font> Xerxes <$$font> was distracted between Shame and
Despair , and in doubt what Measures to take , whether he should proceed
in his Enterprize and trust to Fortune , or recede from it with Safety
and Disgrace , a <font> Grecian <$$font> Deserter of <font> Trachin
<$$font> , named <font> Epialtes <$$font> , discover'd to him a secret
Way by which part of his Army might climb the Ledge of the Mountains ,
and fall upon the Backs of the <font> Grecians <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,310.155

Hereupon <font> Hydarnes <$$font> was immediately detach'd with a strong
Party , HIND-1707-1,310.156

and having pass'd the River <font> Asopus <$$font> , in the Dead of
Night got up into the Mountain , HIND-1707-1,310.157

and after he had beaten the Guard of <P_311> <font> Phocians <$$font>
which kept Watch , came into the more plain and easy Way .
HIND-1707-1,311.158

This sudden and unexpected Approach of the Enemy , struck the <font>
Grecians <$$font> with the utmost Consternation ; HIND-1707-1,311.159

however <font> Leonidas <$$font> , and his <font> Spartans <$$font> ,
having been forwarn'd by the Oracle that they must either lose their
City , or one of their Kings , were prepar'd to receive the Enemy .
HIND-1707-1,311.160

<font> Leonidas <$$font> therefore gave leave to the rest of the
Confederates to go off , and reserve themselves for the better Fortune
of their Country , who all immediately deserted him , except 700 <font>
Thespians <$$font> , and some <font> Thebans <$$font> , whom the rest of
the <font> Grecians <$$font> had forc'd thither , not so much for their
Assistance , as to keep them as hostages , and prevent their joining
with the <font> Persians <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,311.161

About Sun-rising <font> Leonidas <$$font> with his resolute Companions ,
pass'd the Streights in order to give the Enemy Battle , who were not
yet come down from the Mountain . HIND-1707-1,311.162

Upon the first On-set they were immediately surrounded by the vast
Numbers of the <font> Persians <$$font> ; HIND-1707-1,311.163

but the <font> Grecians <$$font> made so brave a Resistance , that 20000
of the Enemy fell , so that they may justly be stil'd Conquerors ,
though all of them were cut off upon the Spot : <font> Xerxes <$$font>
in this Battle , besides 20000 of the Flower of his Army , and many
brave Officers , having lost two of his own Brethren .
HIND-1707-1,311.164

On the <font> Grecian <$$font> side , the <font> Thebans <$$font> were
the only Men who lifted up their Targets and begg'd Quarter , crying out
they were brought thither against their Wills , and that they were the
King's Subjects ; HIND-1707-1,311.165

however they were all kill'd or stigmatiz'd for Disgrace , the just
Reward of their cowardly Desertion of the common Cause , and betraying
their Country . HIND-1707-1,311.166

<font> Leonidas <$$font> 's Body being found was nail'd to a Cross .
HIND-1707-1,311.167

This Battle was fought in the middle of Summer , while some of the
<font> Grecians <$$font> in <font> Peloponnesus <$$font> were
celebrating the Games of the 75=th= <font> Olympiad <$$font> , in the
Beginning of the first Year , in which <font> Calliades <$$font> was
<font> Archon <$$font> at <font> Athens <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,311.168

At the <P_312> same time also Philosophy was translated out of <font>
Ionia <$$font> to <font> Athens <$$font> by <font> Anaxagoras <$$font>
of <font> Clazomenae <$$font> , Scholar to <font> Anaximenes <$$font> of
<font> Miletus <font> , who being now about 20 Years old began to teach
it publickly in that City , in a way being made for Learning there , by
the Library erected by <font> Pisistratus <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,312.169

<font> Xerxes <$$font> , by the Loss he sustain'd in the Battle at
<font> Thermopylae <$$font> , having had dear Experience of what <font>
Demaratus <$$font> had said to him began now to be in greater Fear than
ever . HIND-1707-1,312.170

But of all the <font> Grecians <$$font> he most dreaded the <font>
Spartans <$$font> , whose Valour appear'd so remarkable in this Action ,
that he made strict Enquiry what Numbers they were able to bring into
the Field . HIND-1707-1,312.171

<font> Demaratus <$$font> having inform'd him that the City of <font>
Sparta <$$font> could arm well nigh 8000 Men of equal Valour with those
who dy'd at <font> Thermopylae <$$font> , and that the other <font>
Lacedaemonians <$$font> , though inferiour to those , were Men of
excellent Courage , he ask'd his Advice , how he might with the least
Difficulty reduce them . HIND-1707-1,312.172

<font> Demaratus <$$font> advis'd him to send 300 Ships well mann'd , to
surprize the Island <font> Cythera <$$font> , lying upon the Coasts of
<font> Laconia <$$font> , which <font> Chilon <$$font> the Lacedaemonian
<$$font> , fearing some such Attempt as this , formerly wish'd to be
drown'd in the Sea , rather than lie so near <font> Sparta <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,312.173

This Island , by reason of its Situation , would be a good Garrison ,
from whence he might annoy the <font> Spartans <$$font> , who , by this
means being engag'd in a War at their own Doors , would be destitute of
all other Succour , the rest of the <font> Grecians <$$font> having
Employment enough to make head against his Land Forces .
HIND-1707-1,312.174

And unless he did thus , all the <font> Pelopennesians <$$font> ,
possessing themselves of the <font> Isthmus <$$font> , would create him
much greater Difficulties , than any he had hitherto met with : whereas
the <font> Spartans <$$font> being reduc'd , not only the <font> Isthmus
<$$font> , but all the other Cities in <font> Peloponnesus <$$font>
would readily come in@ @to him . HIND-1707-1,312.175

<font> Achaemenes <$$font> , the King's Brother {COM:missing_comma}
oppos'd his Advice , HIND-1707-1,312.176

and persuaded {TEXT:perswaded} the King not to disperse <P_313> his
Fleet , HIND-1707-1,313.177

for if , after the Loss of 400 Ships , which he had sustain'd in the
late Storm , at <font> Sepias <$$font> , he should send away 300 more ,
the <font> Grecians <$$font> would be strong enough by Sea to engage the
rest of the Navy , which holding together would be invincible :
HIND-1707-1,313.178

and his Sea and Land Army would be mutually assisting to each other ,
whilst both of them held the same Course , and lay not far asunder from
one another . HIND-1707-1,313.179

The <font> Grecian <$$font> Fleet which consisted of 271 Sail , lay all
this while at <font> Artemisium <$$font> , as a Bulwark to <font> Euboea
<$$font> , under the Command of <font> Eurybiades <$$font> the <font>
Laecedaemonian <$$font> , to whom the <font> Athenians <$$font> , to
prevent any Quarrel which might divide tne Confederates , yielded the
Command . HIND-1707-1,313.180

<font> Eurybiades <$$font> , at the Importunity of the other <font>
Grecians <$$font> , would have hoisted Sail , and retir'd into the
inward parts of <font> Greece <$$font> , had not <font> Themistocles
<$$font> prevail'd upon him to stay till the Inhabitants of <font>
Euboea <$$font> could dispose of their Wives and Children and Effects in
some Place of Security . HIND-1707-1,313.181

In the mean time , the <font> Persian <$$font> Fleet arriv'd at <font>
Aphetae <$$font> , where discovering the Smallness of the <font> Grecian
<$$font> Fleet , which lay at <font> Artemisium <$$font> , the <font>
Persian <$$font> Admirals resolv'd to engage them ; wherefore imagining
, that the <font> Grecians <$$font> would immediately fly at the first
Motion of their Fleet , they sent 200 Sail , ordering them to leave the
Island <font> Sciathus <$$font> on their right , and launch into the
open Sea , lest , if they cruis'd too near <font> Euboea <$$font> , they
should be seen by the Enemy : And as soon as they pass'd <font>
Geraestus <$$font> and <font> Caphareus <$$font> , lying upon the
extreme parts of <font> Euboea <$$font> , near the Mouth of the Straits
, to sail up the River <font> Euripus <$$font> , and fall upon the
<font> Grecians <$$font> behind , while the rest of the Fleet , which
lay at <font> Aphetae <$$font> , attack'd them before , by which means
they hop'd to destroy the whole <font> Grecian <$$font> Fleet .
HIND-1707-1,313.182

Whilst these Matters were concerted , the <font> Grecians <$$font> being
inform'd by one <font> Scyllias <$$font> a Deserter , of all their
Designs , and of the great Wreck they had lately sustain'd at <font>
Sepias <$$font> , set sail at <P_314> Midnight , in order to meet the
200 Sail , which were coming upon them behind : HIND-1707-1,314.183

but , at Break of Day , discovering no <font> Persian <$$font> Sail ,
they return'd to <font> Artemisium <$$font> with a Resolution to give
the <font> Persian <$$font> Fleet Battle , which lay at <font> Aphetae
<$$font> , although vastly superior {TEXT:superiour} to them in Number .
HIND-1707-1,314.184

After they had fought with uncertain Victory , they were parted by the
Night ; when the <font> Grecians <$$font> return'd to <font> Artemisium
<$$font> , and the <font> Persians <$$font> to <font> Aphetae <$$font> ,
having met with a much braver Resistance than they expected .
HIND-1707-1,314.185

The same Night a great Storm , arising from the Mountain <font> Pelius
<$$font> , drove down the Planks of the Ships , that were shatter'd in
the Storm at <font> Sepias <$$font> , to <font> Aphetae : <$$font>
HIND-1707-1,314.186

this Storm , together with the dreadful Thunder , and Rain , and vast
Quantities of Water , which came rolling {TEXT:rowling} upon them from
the Rivers , struck the <font> Persians <$$font> with the utmost
Consternation , who were fatigu'd with their Day's Labour in the Battle
, and were now afraid that they should all be lost .
HIND-1707-1,314.187

As for the 200 Sail , which were sent to surprize the <font> Grecians
<$$font> behind , they were the same Night overtaken by the Storm in the
Streights of <font> Euboea <$$font> , where they were driven upon the
Rocks , and every one of them lost . HIND-1707-1,314.188

This was another great Blow to the <font> Persian <$$font> Fleet ,
whereupon they thought it more adviseable , for the present , to lie
still and repair their Losses , than to venture upon Action .
HIND-1707-1,314.189

On the other hand , the <font> Grecian <$$font> Fleet being encreas'd by
the Arrival of 53 <font> Athenian <$$font> Ships , the next Day fell
upon some <font> Cilician <$$font> Ships , which were separated from the
rest of the Fleet , HIND-1707-1,314.190

and , having very much shatter'd them , return'd to <font> Artemisium
<$$font> . HIND-1707-1,314.191

The <font> Persians <$$font> , being enrag'd at the continual Insults of
the <font> Grecians <$$font> , and fearing the Anger of <font> Xerxes
<$$font> , resolv'd to redeem their Credit by some notable Exploit :
wherefore the next Day , drawing themselves out in Form of a Crescent ,
they thought to have surrounded the <font> Grecians <$$font> , who were
ready to give them Battle at <font> Artemisium <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,314.192

The Battle lasted from Noon to Night , HIND-1707-1,314.193

and ended with equal Loss on <P_315> both sides ; HIND-1707-1,315.194

for though more of the <font> Persian <$$font> Ships were sunk and taken
, yet the lesser Loss fell altogether as heavy upon the <font> Grecians
<$$font> , who , being few in Comparison with the <font> Persians
<$$font> , were less able to bear it . HIND-1707-1,315.195

In this however , the <font> Barbarians <$$font> may seem to have had
the worst , that they left the Sea , HIND-1707-1,315.196

and the Wreck and Spoils fell to the Enemy . HIND-1707-1,315.197

Amongst the <font> Grecians <$$font> , the <font> Athenians <$$font>
behav'd themselves most manfully , and amongst them <font> Clinias
<$$font> , Father to <font> Alcibiades ; <$$font> On the <font> Persian
<$$font> side , the <font> Egyptians <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,315.198

These things happen'd at Sea on the same three Days in which the Land
Action was at <font> Thermopylae ; <$$font> in both Straits the <font>
Grecians <$$font> fighting most valiantly for their Lives and Liberties
. HIND-1707-1,315.199

But , they soon after quitted the Passage they had undertaken to defend
, both because many of their Ships were batter'd , in this and the
former Engagement , and more especially , because , upon <font> Leonidas
<$$font> 's Death , they thought it more safe to retire nearer home .
HIND-1707-1,315.200

<font> Themistocles <$$font> perceiving their Resolution , before they
weighed Anchor , persuaded {TEXT:perswaded} them to kill the Cattle of
the <font> Euboeans <$$font> , and bring the Meat on board rather than
leave them a Prey to the Enemy ; HIND-1707-1,315.201

and engrav'd in Stones , upon the Shore , and at the watering Places ,
where he knew the <font> Ionians <$$font> would come , an Exhortation to
revolt to the <font> Grecians <$$font> , and side with their Mother
Country , or else to stand neuter , or fight but coldly .
HIND-1707-1,315.202

This he hop'd would either prevail with them to come over , or at least
render them suspected by the <font> Persians <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,315.203

The <font> Grecians <$$font> having loos'd from <font> Artemisium
<$$font> , towards the Coasts of <font> Attica <$$font> , the <font>
Persian <$$font> Fleet remov'd to <font> Artemisium <$$font> , and the
Coasts adjoining {TEXT:adjoyning} to <font> Histaeotis .
HIND-1707-1,315.204

Xerxes <$$font> , having now pass'd the Streights of <font> Thermopylae
<$$font> , with his Land Forces , march'd through <font> Doris <$$font>
into <font> Phocis ; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,315.205

as for the Inhabitants , they chose rather to fly , and reserve
themselves for a Day of Battle , than to venture their Lives in his
Hands , in Hopes of saving <P_316> their Riches , by their Submission .
HIND-1707-1,316.206

<font> Xerxes <$$font> march'd on , laying all waste before him ;
HIND-1707-1,316.207

and being arriv'd at <font> Panopaea <$$font> , a Town in <font> Phocis
<$$font> , he divided his Army in two parts , HIND-1707-1,316.208

with the one he invaded <font> Greece <$$font> , HIND-1707-1,316.209

the other he sent to plunder and burn the famous Temple at <font> Delphi
; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,316.210

this Party was almost wholly destroy'd by Thunder and Ligntning , and
the sudden Fall of two Rocks , which broke off from the Mountain <font>
Parnassus ; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,316.211

those who surviv'd fell into the Hands of the <font> Phocians <$$font> ,
who , having fled into the Mountain for fear of <font> Xerxes <$$font> ,
fell upon them ; so that few escap'd to their Friends in <font> Boeotia
. HIND-1707-1,316.212

Xerxes <$$font> now march'd through <font> Boeotia <$$font> , the
Country of his Allies , into <font> Attica <$$font> , with a Design to
do his utmost against the City of <font> Athens <$$font> it self .
HIND-1707-1,316.213

In the mean time the <font> Grecian <$$font> Fleet , which , at the
Request of the <font> Athenians <$$font> , lay in Harbour at <font>
Salamis <$$font> , though strengthen'd with a new Accession of Ships
upon the Coast of <font> Troezen <$$font> , could hardly be kept
together ; HIND-1707-1,316.214

for every one being concern'd for his own Country , and despairing of
<font> Attica <$$font> , and the rest of <font> Greece <$$font> , except
<font> Peloponnesus <$$font> , as indefensible , it was debated whether
they should fortify the <font> Isthmus <$$font> , and bring the whole
Navy thither , from whence there might be a safe Retreat into <font>
Peloponnesus <$$font> , if they were beaten by the <font> Persians
<$$font> . HIND-1707-1,316.215

The <font> Peloponnesian <$$font> Commanders unanimously agreed to these
Proposals , whereat the <font> Athenians <$$font> were highly incens'd ,
having just reason to expect that the <font> Peloponnesians <$$font>
would join with them , and the rest of the Confederates in defending
<font> Attica <$$font> , as they had fought for them at <font>
Artemisium <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,316.216

But now , having no Hopes of their Assistance , they only desir'd them
to stay there , till they could provide some way for themselves .
Whereupon they publish'd an Edict , by the Procurement of <font>
Themistocles <$$font> , whereby all that were of a fit Age were oblig'd
to come on board , and transport their Wives and Children , with <P_317>
their Slaves , and what else they could , to <font> Salamis <$$font> and
<font> Troezen <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,317.217

At the same time another Edict was publish'd , whereby all that were in
Banishment were recall'd ; HIND-1707-1,317.218

this was made particularly for fear that <font> Aristides <$$font> , who
had some time since been expell'd by Ostracism , should join with the
Enemy , and many of the Citizens , by his Example , be tempted to revolt
. HIND-1707-1,317.219

But , before the Decree for his Return , he had not been wanting to stir
up the <font> Grecians <$$font> , as much as he could , to defend their
Liberty . HIND-1707-1,317.220

The <font> Grecian <$$font> Fleet , which lay at <font> Salamis <$$font>
, consisted of about 358 Sail , of which 180 were furnish'd by the
<font> Athenians <$$font> , 161 by the <font> Lacedaemonians <$$font>
{COM:sic} , 40 by the <font> Corinthians <$$font> , 30 swift Sailers by
the <font> Aeginetae <$$font> , 20 by the <font> Megarenses <$$font> ,
and 20 by the Inhabitants of <font> Chalcis ; <$$font>
HIND-1707-1,317.221

the rest were supply'd in less Numbers by the Islanders of <font> Chios
, Naxos , Melos <$$font> , and <font> Seriphus <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,317.222

Whilst the Commanders were in debate about the Place of Battle , News
came that <font> Xerxes <$$font> had enter'd <font> Attica <$$font> ,
laying all waste before him with Fire and Sword . HIND-1707-1,317.223

For , having burnt <font> Thespia <$$font> and <font> Plataea <$$font>
in <font> Boeotia <$$font> , which were abandon'd by the Inhabitants ,
he enter'd <font> Athens <$$font> three Months after he had pass'd over
his Forces into <font> Europe : <$$font> HIND-1707-1,317.224

The City , being abandon'd , he took without any Opposition ;
HIND-1707-1,317.225

but the Citadel was for some time obstinately defended by a small Party
of <font> Athenians <$$font> , till the <font> Persians <$$font> having
discover'd a secret Passage into it , where no Watch was kept , because
they did not expect any Attempts on that side , some of them threw
themselves off from the Walls , others fled into the Temple of <font>
Aglaurus <$$font> , Daughter of <font> Cecrops <$$font> , which stood in
the Citadel . After which the <font> Persians <$$font> , having made a
great Slaughter of the <font> Athenians <$$font> , and plunder'd the
Temple , burnt the Citadel . HIND-1707-1,317.226

The News of <font> Athens <$$font> being taken struck fresh Terror into
the <font> Grecians <$$font> , so that some of the Commanders return'd
to their Ships before the Council came to any Conclusion , <P_318> and
the rest resolv'd to sail to the <font> Isthmus ; <$$font> by which
means the Islands of <font> Salamis <$$font> and <font> Aegina <$$font>
would have been abandon'd , and the Families of the <font> Athenians
<$$font> <paren> which were there bestow'd , as in Places of Security
<$$paren> left to the Mercy of the Conqueror . HIND-1707-1,318.227

This Resolution might have prov'd fatal to all <font> Greece <$$font> ,
had it not been prevented from taking effect by the Wisdom of <font>
Themistocles <$$font> , who , at the Instigation of <font> Mnesiphilus
<$$font> an <font> Athenian <$$font> , follow'd <font> Eurybiades
<$$font> the Admiral into his Ship , and prevail'd with him to call the
Council again . HIND-1707-1,318.228

<font> Themistocles <$$font> made many Remonstrances against this
Resolution , first in private to <font> Eurybiades <$$font> , telling
him that the same Fear which made them forsake the Coasts of <font>
Greece <$$font> , upon which they then lay at Anchor , would afterwards
also make them divide the Fleet , and every one of the Confederates
withdraw themselves to the Defence of their own City .
HIND-1707-1,318.229

Again , in the Council he urg'd him so home , that <font> Eurybiades
<$$font> , in a great Passion , lifted up his Staff to strike him ;
HIND-1707-1,318.230

<font> Themistocles <$$font> bid him strike , if he would but hear him .
HIND-1707-1,318.231

He farther added , that the Fight at the <font> Isthmus <$$font> would
be in an open Sea , whereas it was a manifest Advantage to them , who
had the fewer Ships , to determine the Matter in the Straits ; and that
if they sail'd from thence , they should inevitably loose <font> Aegina
, Megara <$$font> , and <font> Salamis <$$font> , whereas by staying
where they then were , they should not only save those Places , but
sufficiently defend the <font> Isthmus <$$font> , which the <font>
Barbarians <$$font> should not so much as once look upon , if the <font>
Grecians <$$font> got the Victory at Sea . HIND-1707-1,318.232

Whilst <font> Themistocles <$$font> was speaking to this effect , and
endeavouring to persuade {TEXT:perswade} the <font> Peloponnesians
<$$font> to stay at <font> Salamis <$$font> , one <font> Adimantus
<$$font> upbraided <font> Themistocles <$$font> with the Loss of <font>
Athens <$$font> , HIND-1707-1,318.233

and blam'd <font> Eurybiades <$$font> for suffering one to speak in the
Council , that had no Country of his own to inhabit .
HIND-1707-1,318.234

This Indignity very much exasperated <font> Themistocles <$$font> ,
HIND-1707-1,318.235

however , by the sharp Reply which he made to him , he prevail'd with
them more , than by all his former Perswasions . HIND-1707-1,318.236

He told them plainly , that the <font> Athenians <$$font> <P_319> wanted
not a fairer City than any in <font> Greece <$$font> could boast of ;
having well near 200 Men of War , the better part of the <font> Grecian
<$$font> Fleet , in which they could easily transport their Families and
Substance into any other Part of the World , and settle themselves in a
more secure Habitation , leaving them to provide for themselves as they
could , who in their Extremity had refus'd to assist them .
HIND-1707-1,319.237

Withal he mention'd <font> Siris <$$font> , a Town in <font> Italy
<$$font> , belonging to the State of <font> Athens <$$font> , of which
an Oracle had foretold that the <font> Athenians <$$font> , in Process
of time should rebuild it ; HIND-1707-1,319.238

and there , says he , will we plant our selves , leaving you a sorrowful
Remembrance of my Words . HIND-1707-1,319.239

<font> Eurybiades <$$font> , when he heard this , being afraid
{TEXT:affraid} , that if he drew off the Fleet to the <font> Isthmus
<$$font> , he should be abandon'd by the <font> Athenians <$$font> , and
by that means be unable to withstand the Enemy , resolv'd to stay at
<font> Salamis <$$font> , and engage the <font> Persians <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,319.240

In the mean time the <font> Persian <$$font> Fleet , by fresh Supplies
they receiv'd from all the Coasts by which they pass'd , being encreas'd
as big as it was before the Storm at <font> Sepias <$$font> , arriv'd at
the <font> Phalerian <$$font> Port at <font> Athens : <$$font> Where the
King meeting them , a Council was immediately call'd , wherein it was
debated , whether they should give the <font> Grecians <$$font> Battle ,
or not . HIND-1707-1,319.241

All the other Commanders gave such Advice as they thought would best
please the King , HIND-1707-1,319.242

and therefore resolv'd to fight : HIND-1707-1,319.243

only <font> Artemisia <$$font> , Queen of <font> Halicarnassus <$$font>
, was of a contrary Opinion , that the King himself should march
directly towards <font> Peloponnesus <$$font> , whereupon the <font>
Grecian <$$font> Navy which , for want of Provision , could not continue
long at <font> Salamis <$$font> , would presently be divided , and by
that means become unable to make any Resistance . HIND-1707-1,319.244

And as the Advantage will be great in forbearing to give them Battle ,
so , on the other side , the Danger will be more <paren> said she
<$$paren> than we need venture , and the Loss , in case it fall upon us
, greater than the Advantage of the Victory , if we should obtain it .
HIND-1707-1,319.245

For if we compel the Enemy to fly , it is no more than they would have
done , though we had lain still ; HIND-1707-1,319.246

but <P_320> if they , being better Seamen than ours , should beat us ,
the Expedition against <font> Peloponnesus <$$font> is utterly spoil'd ,
HIND-1707-1,320.247

and many that now declare for us , will soon revolt to the <font>
Grecians . HIND-1707-1,320.248

Mardonius <$$font> related to his Master the common Consent of the other
Captains , and withal this disagreeing Opinion of <font> Artemisia
<$$font> . HIND-1707-1,320.249

The King though he approv'd of her Advice , yet resolv'd to follow the
more general , but far worse Counsel ; whereupon the <font> Persians
<$$font> being order'd to loose from the <font> Phalerian <$$font> Port
, made for <font> Salamis ; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,320.250

but , it being too late to engage that Night , they made all the
necessary Preparations to give the <font> Grecians <$$font> Battle the
next Day . HIND-1707-1,320.251

The News of the <font> Persian <$$font> Fleet coming against them struck
all the <font> Grecians <$$font> with fresh Terror {TEXT:Terrour} :
HIND-1707-1,320.252

but the <font> Peloponnesians <$$font> were more especially concern'd
that they should lie at <font> Salamis <$$font> to fight for <font>
Attica <$$font> , which was already lost , and expose themselves to the
Hazard of being besieg'd in the Island <font> Salamis <$$font> , which
was the best they could expect , in case the confederate Fleet was
defeated , and in the mean time leave their own Country open and
defenceless . HIND-1707-1,320.253

The same Night that the <font> Persian <$$font> Fleet loos'd from the
<font> Phalerian <$$font> Port , their land Army march'd towards <font>
Peloponnesus <$$font> , notwithstanding the <font> Peloponnesians
<$$font> had us'd their utmost Endeavours to prevent their Entrance
through the Continent {COM:missing_period} HIND-1707-1,320.254

For , upon the News of <font> Leonidas <$$font> 's Death , at <font>
Thermopylae <$$font> , the <font> Peloponnesians <$$font> , under the
Conduct of <font> Cleombrotus , Leonidas <$$font> 's Brother , guarded
the Passage at the <font> Isthmus ; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,320.255

and , now having no Hopes of Relief , from the <font> Grecian <$$font>
Navy at <font> Salamis <$$font> , were employ'd in building a Wall cross
the <font> Isthmus <$$font> , to block out the Enemy .
HIND-1707-1,320.256

The <font> Peloponnesians <$$font> , who lay at <font> Salamis <$$font>
, hearing this , privately sollicited <font> Eurybiades <$$font> to draw
off the Fleet to the <font> Isthmus : <$$font> HIND-1707-1,320.257

The Matter being again brought before a Council , it was resolv'd to
sail to the <font> Isthmus <$$font> , and leave the <font> Athenians
<$$font> , with the <font> Aeginetae <$$font> , and <font> Megarenses
<$$font> , to engage the Enemy at <font> Salamis <$$font> .
HIND-1707-1,320.258

Thus again the <font> Grecians <$$font> had like to have been utterly
ruin'd , by <P_321> breaking their united Strength , had not <font>
Themistocles <$$font> in time prevented it . HIND-1707-1,321.259

There was at that time with him one <font> Sicinus <$$font> , a <font>
Persian <$$font> Prisoner , in great Favour with <font> Themistocles
<$$font> , insomuch that he taught his Children . HIND-1707-1,321.260

Him he sent privately to the King , to give him a true Information of
the intended Flight , advising him to send part of his Navy about the
Island , which encompassing the <font> Grecians <$$font> , would prevent
their Escape , HIND-1707-1,321.261

otherwise he might expect a long and difficult War HIND-1707-1,321.262

for then he would be forc'd to pursue them singly : HIND-1707-1,321.263

but if he would fall upon them now , whilst they were together , he
might cut them all off at one Blow . HIND-1707-1,321.264

Besides this , he promis'd him his Assistance . HIND-1707-1,321.265

The <font> Persian <$$font> being well assur'd of the Victory , if the
<font> Athenian <$$font> Fleet join'd with him , order'd his Fleet to
sail , though in so narrow a Sea , that his whole Navy could not engage
; which was disadvantageous to him , but on the contrary , most
convenient for the Enemy . HIND-1707-1,321.266

The <font> Persians <$$font> labour'd hard all Night to come up to them
, HIND-1707-1,321.267

and sent many of their Ships round <font> Salamis <$$font> , to charge
them in the Rear , HIND-1707-1,321.268

and landed a Party of Men in the Island <font> Psytallia <$$font> ,
which lies against <font> Salamis <$$font> , to save such of their own
Men , or kill such of the <font> Grecians <$$font> as should be cast
upon the Shore . HIND-1707-1,321.269

The same Night <font> Aristides , <$$font> out of a deep Sense of the
common Danger , sail'd from <font> Aegina <$$font> to <font> Salamis
<$$font> , through the midst of the Enemy's Fleet , to give the <font>
Grecians <$$font> Notice of their being surrounded by the <font> Persian
<$$font> Navy . HIND-1707-1,321.270

He immediately apply'd himself to <font> Themistocles <$$font> ,
HIND-1707-1,321.271

and desir'd , that , all private Differences being now laid aside , he
would consult with him about proper Measures of providing for their
common Safety . HIND-1707-1,321.272

<font> Themistocles <$$font> then told him , that , having no other way
left of holding the Confederates together , he had procur'd them to be
surrounded . HIND-1707-1,321.273

He moreover advis'd him to lay the Matter before the Council , which was
then sitting ; HIND-1707-1,321.274

and , in all Probability , they would believe themselves to be in Danger
, when they heard it from <P_322> <font> Aristides <$$font> 's Mouth ,
whereas , if he himself should relate it , they would only look upon it
as a mere Fiction , intended to hinder them from sailing to the <font>
Isthmus . HIND-1707-1,322.275

Aristides <$$font> , having related the Matter , the Council was divided
, the greatest part of them not believing him ; when one <font>
Panaetius <$$font> , who commanded a Galley belonging to the Island
<font> Tenedos <$$font> , revolting from the <font> Persians <$$font> ,
and confirming what <font> Aristides <$$font> had said , the <font>
Grecians <$$font> , finding themselves under a Necessity of fighting or
being destroy'd , unanimously prepar'd themselves for the Battle .
HIND-1707-1,322.276

<font> Xerxes <$$font> , having plac'd himself on a high Throne over
against <font> Salamis <$$font> , from whence he might take a View of
the Fight , gave Orders to his Secretaries , whom he took with him , to
write down the Particulars of the Battle . HIND-1707-1,322.277

The Fight was fought with great Fury on both sides , the Particulars
whereof are not very remarkable ; HIND-1707-1,322.278

but certainly <font> Xerxes <$$font> 's Scribes had a very unpleasant
Task , to write down the many Disasters that befell {TEXT:befel} the
<font> Persian <$$font> Navy , which did no piece of Service , worthy
the Presence of the King , or the registering {TEXT:registring} of his
Notaries . HIND-1707-1,322.279

The <font> Grecians <$$font> , fighting for their Lives and Liberties ,
and whatever else was dear to them , behav'd themselves with great
Bravery : HIND-1707-1,322.280

and in this seem to have had the Advantage of the Enemy , though vastly
superiour to them in Number , that being better Sea-men , and engaging
in a narrow Sea , they fought in much greater Order , than the Enemy
could possibly do : who , being compos'd of many Nations , and fighting
in a Place very disadvantageous to their vast Fleet , neither concerted
Matters , nor engag'd with that Order , which was remarkable in the
<font> Grecian <$$font> Navy ; and by reason of the vast Numbers of
their Ships , often hinder'd one another . HIND-1707-1,322.281

After an obstinate Fight , wherein many were kill'd on both sides , but
especially on the <font> Persian <$$font> , the <font> Grecians <$$font>
, when their Ships were sunk saving themselves by <P_323> Swimming , the
<font> Persians <$$font> , who were but fresh Sea-men , sinking with
their Ships , the <font> Persian <$$font> Fleet began to fly .
Whereupon the <font> Athenians <$$font> press'd hard upon them , and
destroy'd many of their Ships ; HIND-1707-1,323.282

those that escap'd the <font> Athenians <$$font> , made the best of
their way towards the <font> Phalerian <$$font> Port ,
HIND-1707-1,323.283

but being intercepted by the <font> Aeginetae <$$font> , were most of
them either sunk or taken . HIND-1707-1,323.284

Such of them as escap'd , arriv'd at the <font> Phalerian <$$font> Port
, where the Men going ashore , fled to the Land-Army .
HIND-1707-1,323.285

Many of the <font> Persian <$$font> Nobility fell in this Battle , and
amongst the rest <font> Ariabignes <$$font> , the King's Brother , and
<font> Ariamenes <$$font> another of the King's Brothers , and Admiral
of the <font> Persian <$$font> Fleet . HIND-1707-1,323.286

Very few were kill'd on the <font> Grecian <$$font> side :
HIND-1707-1,323.287

The principal Honour of the Victory was ascrib'd to the <font> Aeginetae
<$$font> and the <font> Athenians ; <$$font> HIND-1707-1,323.288

and , of all the Commanders , <font> Themistocles <$$font> did the
greatest Service . HIND-1707-1,323.289

Amongst the <font> Persians <$$font> , the Valour of Queen <font>
Artemisia <$$font> appear'd most remarkable , HIND-1707-1,323.290

and was acknowledg'd by <font> Xerxes <$$font> himself , who there_upon
said that <font> His Men were turn'd into Women , and his Women into Men
<$$font> . HIND-1707-1,323.291

She narrowly escap'd to the <font> Phalerian <$$font> Port , being
closely pursued by one <font> Aminias <$$font> , the <font> Athenian
<$$font> Commanders having propos'd 10000 <font> Drachmae <$$font> for a
Reward to any one that should take her ; HIND-1707-1,323.292

for they thought it a very great Disgrace to them , that a Woman should
fight against <font> Athens <$$font> . HIND-1707-1,323.293

In this Action <font> Aristides <$$font> did very considerable Service ;
HIND-1707-1,323.294

for , whilst the two Fleets were engaging , he , with a Party of Men ,
pass'd over into the Island <font> Psyttalea <$$font> ,
HIND-1707-1,323.295

and kill'd a great Number of the Enemy who had possess'd themselves of
the Island : HIND-1707-1,323.296

Amongst several other Prisoners of great Quality , he took three of the
Sons of <font> Sandauce <$$font> , the King's Sister ;
HIND-1707-1,323.297

these he sent to <font> Themistocles , who was then sacrificing to the
Gods , in the Admiral's Ship , where <font> Euphrantides <$$font> , a
Soothsayer , order'd them to be sacrific'd to <font> Bacchus Omestes
<$$font> , so call'd , either from the human <P_324> Sacrifices , which
were offer'd to him , or from the raw Flesh , which the Priests
pretended to eat . HIND-1707-1,324.298

