<BEGIN_hodgkin-1880-2>

<P_2,573>

<heading>

3 . <font> Slavery . <$$font> HODGKIN-1880-2,2,573.4

<$$heading>

{COM:quotation_omitted}

The men of our generation , who have read the story of General Sherman's
march through Georgia , are in a better position than their ancestors
for estimating the part played by slavery in bringing about the ruin of
Rome . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,573.7

The short-lived Southern Confederacy in America had many points of
resemblance to the Roman republic . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,573.8

It was administered by wealthy cultivators of the soil , born warriors ,
born orators , a proud and courageous people . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,573.9

All that mere fighting could do to preserve its existence was ably and ,
at first , successfully done ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,573.10

but Slavery , that rock of offence which the Planters had made the
corner-stone of their new edifice , proved its ruin .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,573.11

The truth had been suspected for some little time before ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,573.12

but was fully proved when Sherman's scarcely-@ @resisted march through
three_hundred miles of the enemy's country showed the <P_2,574>
hollowness of a political organisation which had been massing its armies
, by hundreds of thousands at a time , on the banks of the Potomac , but
which could not reckon on its own inhabitants to resist or seriously to
harass an invader who had once broken through the wall of steel on the
frontier . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,574.13

It could not reckon upon them because the majority of them were
themselves a hostile nation , made so by the institution of slavery .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,574.14

True , in America as in Italy , the oppressed class waited long before
they dared to show on which side their sympathies lay .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,574.15

This is , for a time , that which turns the scale in favour of the
slave-holder , that his chattels are too debased to be capable of
self-organisation , too ignorant to understand the great movements in
the world of politics and war , too servile-hearted to dare to embrace
what may not prove the winning side . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,574.16

But if there comes at length such a time as came in Georgia lately , and
in Etruria long ago , when the slave sees with his own eyes a man ,
mightier than his master , come to overthrow all that existing order
which has weighed on him so heavily , and saying , ' Help me , and I
will give you freedom , ' then is seen the strange magic which lies in
that word Freedom for even the heaviest clods of humanity ;
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,574.17

then the comfortable persuasion of the self-deceived slave-owner , that
his chattel will fight for the luxury of continuing to be a chattel ,
vanishes like snow in summer . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,574.18

We have had to record one instance - many more have probably been left
unrecorded - of the readiness <P_2,575> of the Roman slaves to turn
against their masters . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,575.19

In the interval between the first and second sieges of Rome by Alaric ,
the slaves , to the number of 40,000 , fled to the barbarian camp .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,575.20

In his usual tantalising way Zosimus forgets to tell us the <font>
d√©nouement <$$font> of the story , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,575.21

but it may be conjectured that the greater part of these slaves , if
they ever returned to Rome , returned with the army of Alaric through
the blazing Salarian Gate to guide their new friends to the plunder of
their old oppressors . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,575.22

It would have been interesting to know what was the total number of
slaves in existence at any particular period of the Empire ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,575.23

but a complete census of the whole population of the Roman world , free
and servile , if it ever existed , has not survived to our day .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,575.24

Gibbon guesses the number of the slaves all over the Empire at the time
of Claudius at sixty millions ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,575.25

and it seems to be impossible either to prove or disprove his conjecture
. HODGKIN-1880-2,2,575.26

We are told , in round numbers , that some citizens possessed 10,000 or
20,000 slaves apiece , and with more apparent accuracy that a certain
freedman under Augustus , although he had been impoverished by the civil
wars , left at his death 4,116 slaves . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,575.27

From other sources we learn that in the days of <P_2,576> Augustus , 200
slaves were not considered at all an exorbitantly large establishment ,
and that he who had only five or ten was looked upon as either very poor
or very mean . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,576.28

In view of these facts , 40,000 seems a very small number for even the
mere house-slaves in Rome at the time of its siege by Alaric .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,576.29

Possibly the removal of the Court to Ravenna , and the troublous
character of the times , had led to the withdrawal of most of the
wealthy slave-owners from Rome ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,576.30

or the crowds of freedmen and paupers supported by the public
distribution of wheat may , in Rome itself , have thinned , by a kind of
competition , the number of actual bondsmen . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,576.31

Or , which is perhaps the most likely supposition of all , Zosimus , the
writer from whom the story of the fugitive slaves is extracted , is
speaking in his usual somewhat inaccurate style when he says , that '
nearly all ' the slaves in Rome deserted to the camp of Alaric .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,576.32

As mention has been made of slavery as it existed down to our own days
in the United States of North America , and as this is that type of the
' peculiar institution ' which most readily suggests itself to our minds
, it may be well to remind the reader of a few obvious points of
dissimilarity between the two forms of servitude , the Roman and the
American . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,576.33

I. It seems probable that the condition of a slave under a Roman master
was harder than that of the negro in the Southern States of America .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,576.34

Cruel men of course abused their dangerous power <P_2,577> in both
countries , while , under men of exceptional gentleness , in both the
lot of the slave may have lost almost all that made it to differ from
that of a hired labourer . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,577.35

But the great mass of masters , the men of average character , had in
the United States a conception of duty towards their fellowmen which was
, at least in some degree , influenced by the spirit of Christianity ,
while the Roman derived his notions of duty from such teachers as Cato
the Censor , who , in a well-known passage , uttered his opinion that
whenever a slave was not asleep he ought to be at work , and that a
master should always sell off his aged slaves as well as his broken-down
horses . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,577.36

Certainly this can@ @not have been either the theory or the practice in
Virginia or Tennessee , hardly even , one would hope , in Mississippi or
Alabama . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,577.37

It is true that the tendency of legislation under the Emperors had been
towards greater mildness in the treatment of slaves .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,577.38

The master's absolute power of life and death was taken away ;
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,577.39

in cases where he had practised extreme cruelty it was provided that he
might be compelled to sell the victim of it ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,577.40

and the huge gloomy <font> ergastula <$$font> , the prisons in which the
slaves had been locked up at night after their labour in the fields
<paren> sometimes subterraneous , always lighted by windows high up in
the walls , from which there was no chance of escape <$$paren> , were
legally abolished , and perhaps practically disused .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,577.41

Still , the life of the Roman's slave , especially of him who was
engaged in agriculture , seems to have been <P_2,578> hard and dismal
beyond even the hardness and dismalness of ordinary negro slavery .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,578.42

II. Yet in two aspects , more important perhaps than all beside , the
condition of the Italian bondsman was better than that of the American .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,578.43

Love and hope were left to him . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,578.44

The breeding of slaves for sale was an unusual though not unknown
practice ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,578.45

and consequently though families must sometimes have been separated ,
even as they are now by the ordinary economic laws of supply and demand
, that great blot on the American system , the systematic tearing away
of the wife from her husband and the mother from her child , did not
disgrace the Roman slave-owners . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,578.46

Manumission also must have been a far more frequent incident of servile
life among the ancients , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,578.47

and when it came it opened up a far happier and more unhindered career .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,578.48

This difference between the two systems is chiefly due to the obvious
and fundamental distinction , that in Rome there did not , as in America
, yawn the wide chasm of absolute diversity of race between bond and
free . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,578.49

All nations , even the noblest of antiquity , were represented in the
slave market at Rome . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,578.50

The Greek doctor , or pedagogue , <P_2,579> or scribe , the lusty
Cappadocian who bore the litter , the Hebrew of whose nation Titus sold
97,000 into bondage , the Syrian , the Celt , the Dacian , the German ,
were all in their various ways ministering to the luxury or providing
for the wants of the Roman master . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,579.51

From such a motley throng combination was little to be dreaded ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,579.52

and on the other hand there was in them no great inferiority of race to
prevent the slave , once liberated , from standing side by side with his
old master . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,579.53

Hence , and from motives of pride and profit which made the freedman
often a more desirable appendage to the family of the Roman noble than
the slave himself , arose the great frequency of manumission , which was
indeed slightly checked in the time of Augustus , on account of the
number of debased citizens with whom it was flooding the Commonwealth ,
but which remained a sufficiently common practice sensibly to ameliorate
the condition of the Roman slave by introducing into it the vast
medicament of Hope . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,579.54

We turn to American slavery , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,579.55

and we see at once a mighty contrast . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,579.56

There every member of the servile caste belonged to one race , and that
race one separated by wide ethnological interspaces from the dominant
one , and far below it in intellectual energy . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,579.57

It is said that a proposition once made in the Roman Senate , to order
all the slaves to wear a distinctive dress was rejected , on the ground
that it would be dangerous thus to reveal <P_2,580> to them their
superiority in numbers . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,580.58

What the Senate had denied in that case , Nature had done ineffaceably
in the case of ' persons held to bondage ' under the American laws , by
clothing them all with one sable livery . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,580.59

Hence arose , on the one hand , the <font> pride <$$font> of race which
placed the meanest of ' the mean whites ' above the most honest and
capable man of African descent , and which denied to the latter ,
however large his share of European blood , <font> ex parte patern√¢
<$$font> , any share in the duties and rewards of civil life .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,580.60

Hence , on the other hand , arose the <font> fear <$$font> of race ,
causing the State to throw the whole weight of its influence into the
scale against manumission , and imposing upon every man , whose skin
bore witness to the servile condition of his ancestors , the burden of
proof that he was not himself a slave . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,580.61

This state of the law and of public feeling was of course utterly absent
in old Rome . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,580.62

III. And , yet again , there was a difference which probably made the
position of the negro when he began to reason and to reflect more
intolerable than that of the Dacian or the Syrian in a Roman villa or on
an Italian farm . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,580.63

In the fifth century the conscience of the whole civilised world
acquiesced in the fact of slavery ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,580.64

in the nineteenth it protested against it . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,580.65

The Roman legislator said that <P_2,581> this abrogation of the natural
rights of man was an institution of the universal law of nations ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.66

and his saying was confirmed by the fact that there was in all
probability not one nation then existing , civilised or barbarian ,
wherein Slavery , in one form or another , did not exist .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.67

And so the bondsman of those days submitted to his servile condition as
men now submit to poverty or disease , grumbling indeed that they have
drawn a bad number in the lottery of life , but without any intolerable
feeling of injustice , without any indignant questioning , ' Why was
this horrible fate ever placed for me or for any one among the possible
conditions of existence . ' HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.68

In America we all know what far different thoughts rankled in the breast
of a high-spirited and intelligent slave . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.69

Great nations were living and flourishing without this institution which
made his life hateful to him . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.70

Wide sections of the Christian Church condemned it as a crime against
God and man . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.71

A week perhaps , or two weeks of nightly journeying towards the North
Star , would take him to a land where no slaves toiled ;
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.72

a few weeks more would set him beyond the possibility of recapture .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.73

Assuredly this ever_present thought that Liberty was in the world , was
near , but was not for him , must have made the chains of many an
American slave more galling , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.74

must have raised , sometimes almost to madness , his exasperation
against the social system which was his foe . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,581.75

IV. Upon a review therefore of the main points <P_2,582> of likeness
and unlikeness between these two conditions of society , it seems
reasonable to conjecture that the men who were owned by Roman masters
were less dissatisfied with their lot than those who belonged to the
American planters , and that Slavery as a diripient force was more fatal
to the Southern Confederacy than to the Western Empire .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,582.76

But in Rome it had been working through twelve centuries , in the United
States for less than three , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,582.77

and therefore its evil effects were more lasting , one may venture to
hope , in the former instance than in the latter .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,582.78

Slavery had aided in the massing together of those ' wide farms ' which
were the ruin of Italy . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,582.79

Slavery had emptied the fields and villages of the hardy rustics who had
once been the backbone of Roman power . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,582.80

Slavery had filled the cities with idle and profligate babblers .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,582.81

Slavery had indoctrinated these men , themselves often freedmen or the
sons of freedmen , with the pestilent notion that manual labour was
beneath the dignity of a citizen . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,582.82

And lastly , Slavery had surrounded the thrones of the Emperors with men
like Eutropius and Chrysaphius , who , by the favour of a fatuous master
, crept from the position of a menial to that of a Prime Minister , and
who , when their turn came , bitterly revenged upon Society the wrongs
which they had suffered at its hands . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,582.83

A new and happier world was to arise out of the ruins of the old .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,582.84

Slavery was to be softened <P_2,583> into Serfdom ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,583.85

and Serfdom was slowly to disappear , both changes being largely
attributable to the benign influence of the Christian Church .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,583.86

The fine old mediaeval motto , ' By hammer and hand All arts do stand ,
' was to drive out , at any rate from the cities , the old , irrational
, scorn of handicraft ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,583.87

and the <font> ergastulum <$$font> and the scourge were to vanish like
an evil dream . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,583.88

And so if Slavery was a cause , the Abolition of Slavery was to be a
result , though by no means an immediate result , of the Fall of the
Empire . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,583.89

<heading>

4. <font> ' Panem et Circenses , ' or the Pauperisation of the Roman
Proletariat . <$$font> HODGKIN-1880-2,2,583.91

<$$heading>

The Roman State at the beginning and the end of its career pursued
towards its poorer classes two opposite lines of policy , both unjust ,
one of which might reasonably have been expected to strangle the rising
nationality in its childhood , while the other certainly hastened the
ruin of its old age . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,583.93

In the first ages of the Republic the plebeian soldier was expected to
leave his farm or his business to serve for a short campaign against the
Aequians or Volscians , and to return to a home which had in many
instances suffered from the depredations of the enemy , enriched only by
a precarious portion of the booty , which , by the fortune of war or the
unfairness of the dividing <P_2,584> general , might turn out to be
worth little or nothing . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,584.94

The real gain of the most successful wars , the public land , was farmed
out often at little more than a nominal rent to the senators or a few
wealthy plebeians . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,584.95

Thus the whole tendency of the incessant wars of the Republic was to
make the rich richer and the poor poorer , a tendency aggravated by the
high rates charged for interest and by the stern attitude of the Roman
law towards the defaulting debtor . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,584.96

The well-known picture drawn in the Second Book of Livy of the brave old
centurion , whose farm had been plundered during his absence with the
army , and who , under the crushing load of debt and taxation , had been
obliged first to part with the inheritance of his ancestors and then to
surrender his person into the hands of his cruel creditor , and who at
length escaped from his place of torment into the Forum , where his
squalid garb , his long unkempt hair , his old and honourable scars
received in battle with the enemy , and the new and shameful scourge
marks upon his back inflicted by the slave of a Roman senator , stirred
the people to fury . This picture may not be precisely and historically
true of the 259th year of the city , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,584.97

yet doubtless it is a type of many a similar occurrence in those early
days of the tyranny of wealth . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,584.98

The characteristic of Roman Legislation at this period is its contempt
for the rights of the individual , its frightfully unfair notion of the
partnership between him and the State - a partnership in <P_2,585> which
he gave his time , his blood , his heroism , to promote the glory of
Rome , and received in return nothing , not even permission to live on
the land of his fathers . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,585.99

In the later phases of the Roman Commonwealth the opposite error was
committed . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,585.100

After the Second Punic War the State really asked nothing of the poor
citizen of Rome , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,585.101

and gave him everything that was necessary for life ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,585.102

and , in so giving , deprived him of ' Man's first , noblest ,
birthright , Toil . ' HODGKIN-1880-2,2,585.103

The pauperising legislation of Rome first wore the insidious form of a
gentle intervention to lower the price of corn .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,585.104

When Spain , Sicily , and Africa were pouring in their tributes of corn
or money to the exchequer of the Republic , it was not an unnatural
suggestion that the wealth thus acquired might fairly be expended in
easing the material condition of the Roman citizens , of the men on whom
had fallen the heaviest weight of all the blows from Regillus to Cannae
, by which the Roman State had been fashioned into greatness .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,585.105

Not an unnatural thought ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,585.106

and yet if the remembrance of the scourged veteran in the Forum , and of
all the cruel wrongs of the early plebeians , had anything to do with
ripening it into action , we have here an instance of that strange
Nemesis of Unrighteousness , which sometimes leads statesmen in the very
excess of their penitence for an injustice in the past to prepare a new
and greater <P_2,586> injustice for the future .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.107

It had been a cruel wrong to send forth the Roman Plebeian to fight the
Volscian or Aequian , and not even to keep his homestead free from the
exactions of the creditor , who would not have been a creditor but for
the military service of the bread-winner . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.108

It was not less a wrong to make the Spaniard or the Sicilian toil in
order to enable the descendants of those same Plebeians to prolong a
life of idleness and dissipation in the Roman Forum .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.109

And , indirectly , this interference with true economic laws injured
Italy no less than the Provinces . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.110

How was the Etrurian or Sabine farmer to grow his corn to a profit when
the whole machinery of the administration of the Republic was being
employed to sell corn from beyond the seas at far less than cost price
in the Roman capital ? HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.111

This was not Free Trade ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.112

it was , if we may use the expression , Protection turned inside out ;
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.113

it was a systematic exclusion of the Italian corn-grower from his own
natural market . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.114

Of course the Italian farmer , already sorely harassed by the necessity
of competition with slave-labour , succumbed , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.115

and virtually disappeared from the scene . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.116

The <font> latifundia <$$font> , the vast domains worked by celibate
slaves , took the place of the small yeomen's holdings ;
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.117

the horrible <font> ergastulum <$$font> replaced the free and happy
homestead ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.118

sheep-walks , vine-yards , and olive-yards occupied the ground once
employed in the growth of corn , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,586.119

and , more important by far than even the disappearance of her <P_2,587>
waving corn-fields , Italy ceased to produce men as she had once done ,
just when the need of men to bear the world-wide burden of her Empire
was the greatest . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,587.120

There were great fluctuations in the market price of corn under the
Republic . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,587.121

In the Second Punic War it rose as high as 51 shillings the quarter ; in
the wars between Marius and Sulla as high as 102 shillings , during a
great famine under Augustus to 115 shillings . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,587.122

But these were simply famine prices . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,587.123

On the other hand , during a year of great plenty near the close of the
Second Punic War , the price was as low as two shillings and eightpence
a quarter . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,587.124

A little later , according to Polybius , it was frequently sold in the
valley of the Po for two shillings and elevenpence a quarter .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,587.125

As between these wide fluctuations it appears to be admitted that about
21 shillings a quarter was the ordinary market price .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,587.126

Now , by the legislation of Caius Gracchus each citizen had the right to
claim every month a bushel and a quarter of corn from the public stores
for seventeen pence , that is to say at the rate of nine shillings a
quarter , or less than half the average market price .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,587.127

The rest of the younger Gracchus's legislation died with <P_2,588> him ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.128

but this , its worst {TEXT:worse} feature , remained .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.129

When supreme power passed from the Senate and the Assembly of the People
to the Caesars , these latter rulers , though in many respects the
champions of the Provincials against Rome , did not dare to withdraw the
supplies of cheap corn from the citizens , though they did limit -
eventually to 200,000 - the number of persons who were entitled thus to
purchase it . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.130

Gradually the form of sale and purchase was done away with ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.131

and the distribution became simply gratuitous .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.132

By the middle of the second century of our era , the monthly supplies of
corn had been changed for the far more convenient and yet even more
pauperising distribution of wheaten loaves , baked perhaps two or three
times a week . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.133

When Aurelian ascended the throne , the loaf which the Roman citizen was
thus entitled to receive <paren> we know not for how many days'
consumption <$$paren> , weighed one <font> uncia <$$font> , <paren> that
is 1$$12 <$$paren> less than two pounds . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.134

As he went forth from the gates of the city on his expedition against
the Queen of Palmyra , he announced to the people that if he should
return victorious he would present each one of them with a crown of two
pounds' weight . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.135

The citizens expected that these crowns would be of gold <paren> worth
more than 80 +L {TEXT:+L80} apiece <$$paren> , a donative which was
beyond the power and the inclination of Aurelian .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.136

Yet were they not altogether disappointed , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,588.137

<P_2,589>

for when he had been drawn in triumph up the Sacred Hill , followed by
the weeping Zenobia , he commanded that wheaten loaves , shaped like
{TEXT:liked} crowns and weighing each two pounds , should be distributed
to the people . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,589.139

Through the remainder of his life and apparently during the reigns of
his successors these larger loaves were given to those who possessed the
needful <font> tessera <$$font> or out-door relief ticket ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,589.140

and this <font> uncia <$$font> added to the civic rations seems to have
been seriously regarded by the patriotic but ill-advised Emperor as one
of his chief titles to greatness . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,589.141

In writing to Arabianus the Public Commissary_General <paren> Praefectus
Annonae <$$paren> , he says , ' Of all the good deeds which by the
favour of the Immortal Gods I have wrought for the Commonwealth none is
more splendid than this , that I have increased the distribution of corn
to every citizen by one <font> uncia . <$$font>
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,589.142

To ensure the perpetuity of this benefit I have appointed more
ship-masters for the Nile and for the river-traffic of Rome .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,589.143

I have raised the banks of the Tiber and deepened the channel of its
head-strong current . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,589.144

I have paid my vows to Perennity and the other Gods ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,589.145

I have consecrated a statue of the gracious Ceres .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,589.146

Now be it thy task , my dearest Arabianus , to see that these
arrangements of mine be not unfruitful . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,589.147

For there is nothing in the world more cheerful than the Roman people
when they have well <P_2,590> eaten . ' HODGKIN-1880-2,2,590.148

This same Emperor , though fond of repressing what he considered
inordinate luxury , forbidding his wife to wear a silken dress because
silk was then worth its weight in gold , and proscribing the use of gold
threads and gilded ceilings , whereby he considered that a metal which
ought to be as plentiful as silver was unnecessarily wasted ,
nevertheless added to the rations of the Roman people articles which can
hardly be considered as of prime necessity . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,590.149

He gave them pork and oil and wine ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,590.150

at least as to the last gift he had taken measures for planting
extensive vineyards in Etruria , and cultivating them with slave-labour
for the sake of a gratuitous distribution of wine to the citizens ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,590.151

but according to one story the scheme was frustrated by the intervention
of the Praetorian Prefect who told the generous Emperor that if he gave
them wine he would have to supplement his gifts with roast ducks and
chickens . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,590.152

He also gave them white tunics with long sleeves imported from various
provinces of the Empire , and linen garments from Africa and Egypt .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,590.153

A generous and popular Emperor doubtless , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,590.154

but Communism thus robed in the purple is an excellent destroyer of
Commonwealths . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,590.155

Let us now traverse an interval of a_hundred years , and see what shape
this system of out-door relief had assumed under the dynasty of the
Valentinians . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,590.156

A long Title of the Theodosian <P_2,591> code is devoted to the subject
. HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.157

It contains fifteen laws , chiefly the handiwork of the Emperors
Valentinian and Valens , partly of Theodosius I and his sons .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.158

The first point which strikes us is , that Rome no longer enjoys a
monopoly of the often lauded ' Imperial Munificence . '
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.159

Constantine in founding his new capital by the Bosporus has conferred
upon it also the doubtful boon of the <font> Annona <$$font> or free
largess of corn ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.160

and in order to meet the requirements of this largess the corn-ships of
Alexandria - as was remarked on a previous occasion - are now diverted
from Rome to Byzantium . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.161

The city by the Tiber has now practically only the corn-fields of that
province of which her ancient rival , Carthage , is the capital , to
look to for her supplies . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.162

Antioch and Alexandria seem also to have shared in the public
distributions , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.163

but the edicts relating to these cities do not appear in the code ,
possibly because their largesses were left to be regulated by the local
authorities . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.164

In Rome and Constantinople the Theodosian code presents us with a lively
but strange picture of this organisation of pauperism .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.165

Three great classes are the recipients of that which is called by a
courtly fiction the bounty of the Emperors . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.166

These classes are the <font> Palatini <$$font> , the <font> Militares
<$$font> , and the <font> Populares <$$font> , that is to say , the
servants of the palace , the soldiers , and the mass of the people .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.167

The last class receive their rations strictly <font> as householders .
<$$font> HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.168

The law is very decided on this point , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,591.169

<P_2,592>

' Aedes sequantur annonae ' <paren> the rations must follow the houses
<$$paren> ; that is to say , if a citizen who has been receiving the
ration alienates his house , he loses the right to his daily loaf .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.171

At Constantinople great stress is laid on the Blessed Constantine's
desire to encourage house-building in his new city ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.172

and an attempt is made <paren> apparently not a successful one <$$paren>
to limit even the soldiers' share in the <font> annona <$$font> to those
who possess houses in the capital . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.173

The three classes seem to have received their rations seated on some of
the great public staircases in which the City of the Seven Hills
abounded , and yet abounds . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.174

Some have thought that they were all collected for this purpose in the
Colosseum , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.175

but it seems more probable that each of the fourteen Regions of the City
had its own flight of steps on which the applicants seated themselves ,
as well as its own bakery , from which they were supplied .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.176

Each class of recipients is mustered apart - HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.177

the Palatini , the Militares , the Populares , have each their own tiers
of seats . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.178

The bread which is distributed to them is called ' the Step-Bread '
<font> <paren> Panis Gradilis <$$paren> <$$font> ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.179

and the separate classes are known as ' Steps . '
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.180

Stringent laws forbid the transference of the <font> panis gradilis
<$$font> from one ' Step ' to another , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.181

and the Public Commissary-General <paren> Praefectus Annonae <$$paren>
is warned that the severest penalties hang over him if he suffers this
regulation to be infringed . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,592.182

The prohibition can hardly relate to the mere physical transportation of
a loaf of bread <P_2,593> from one stone stair to another .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.183

It probably means that each class of recipients was to be considered as
complete in itself , and that in case of death or removal the lapsed
ration of a Palatinus was to be transferred only to another Palatinus ,
that of a Popularis to another Popularis . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.184

But from such an inversion of the great industrial laws upon which
Society is founded , abuse was inseparable . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.185

The holders of the <font> Tessera <$$font> , or relief-ticket , eager to
accept the alms of the State , but anxious to escape from the ignominy
of asking for them , used to present themselves at the great public
bakeries , and there , probably by bribery , obtain the loaves to which
they were entitled . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.186

This practice was forbidden , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.187

and it was ordained ' that all men should receive their step-bread from
the steps , and that none should be handed out by the shop-keepers ,
lest thereby any fraud should arise concerning the <font> Panis Gradilis
. ' <$$font> HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.188

A brazen tablet was to be affixed to the wall , near to the steps of
distribution , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.189

and on it the name of the receiver and the measure of bread due to him
were to be engraved . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.190

' And if any one's impertinence should carry him so far that he shall
usurp for himself or his family the right of that bread , and get his
name wrongfully inserted in the brazen tablet , he shall receive
chastisement according to his condition . ' HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.191

The meaning of these last words is made more clear by a savage decree of
the Emperor Valentinian <paren> 370 <$$paren> .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,593.192

It seems that some of the Senators <P_2,594> and great men of Rome were
guilty of the meanness of sending members of their households to receive
this public bread , which was of course intended only for the poorer
class of free citizens . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,594.193

Thereupon the edict runs : ' Should the steward or slave of any Senator
wrongfully obtain the <font> Panis Gradilis <$$font> by direct purchase
from the clerk of distribution , or by bribery , or even by his mere
connivance , let such steward or slave be subjected to the torture of
the <font> equuleus . <$$font> HODGKIN-1880-2,2,594.194

If it appears that he was prompted to this illegality by his own
impudence , without the knowledge of his master , let him serve in
chains in that bakery which he has been defrauding .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,594.195

Should , however , complicity in the offence be traced to his master ,
let the house of that Senator be confiscated for the use of the treasury
. HODGKIN-1880-2,2,594.196

In other ranks of life , if any one who is possessed of private
resources shall confess the aforesaid crime , let him and all that he
has be bound over to the service of the bakery .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,594.197

If he shall be of the very poorest classes ' - a provision which shows
that this demoralising largess did not even answer the purpose of a
Poor-law since even ' the very poorest ' were not all entitled to it - '
he shall be forced to labour as if he were a slave .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,594.198

As for the clerks of distribution who shall be proved to have
perpetrated this forbidden wickedness , the sword which is the
vindicator of the laws shall be drawn against them . '
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,594.199

<P_2,595>

It would weary the reader were we to trace in further detail the
intricacies of the legislation concerning the <font> annonae . <$$font>
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,595.201

There are arrangements for changing stale bread <font> <paren> sordidi
panes <$$paren> <$$font> for new , edicts granting a certain supply of
oil to persons designated by the Prefect of the City ' for the
refreshment of their frames , ' edicts forbidding the soldiers of the
Imperial Guard to transmit their right to the ration as a hereditary
claim to their children , and again , other edicts repealing these .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,595.202

It is a labyrinth of Imperial legislation , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,595.203

and all leading to what end ? HODGKIN-1880-2,2,595.204

To the maintenance in idleness of the worthless population of four great
cities , a population which every wise legislator would have sought by
every means in his power to divert from the cities , to lead back into
the country , to marry to the land , to raise to something of the
dignity of manhood by that wrestling with Nature for her blessings which
makes up the daily life of Agriculture . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,595.205

But no : the old legal fiction of the sovereignty of the Roman people
still survived , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,595.206

and therefore the so-called citizen of Rome - the descendant in all
probability of a Syrian or Cappadocian slave - must be allowed to spend
his days in lordly idleness , seeing the charioteers drive , and the
gladiators die , and then presenting himself at the appointed time at
the steps of his <font> ' regio ' <$$font> to receive his <font> panis
gradilis <$$font> from the bounty of the Emperor .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,595.207

And , to accomplish this desirable end , <P_2,596> the administrative
energies of the declining Empire must be weighted with the duties of a
vast and complicated commissariat alike in peace and in war .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,596.208

<heading>

5. <font> Destruction of the Middle Class by the fiscal Oppression of
the Curiales . <$$font> HODGKIN-1880-2,2,596.210

<$$heading>

We have seen how the social and political system of Rome tended to
destroy the free labourers in the country , and to degrade them in the
great cities . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,596.212

We have now to consider that system of fiscal oppression by which the
Empire crushed out the life of the middle classes in the provincial
towns . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,596.213

A great French statesman , who has treated of this subject with a
fulness of knowledge drawn both from books and from practical politics ,
considers that this cause was more powerful than all others in bringing
about the ruin of Rome . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,596.214

The civilisation of the great Republic was essentially a municipal
civilisation . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,596.215

An urban community herself , she naturally associated herself with other
urban communities , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,596.216

and wherever her influence has profoundly and permanently modified
<P_2,597> the life of any modern people , it will be found that that
people is , by choice and not from the mere force of economic laws ,
urban in its tastes and its habits . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.217

The towns of Italy and of the provinces possessed , during the ages of
the Republic , very various privileges , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.218

and stood in very various relations to the sovereign City .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.219

Some were <font> coloniae <$$font> , own children of Rome ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.220

some were <font> municipia <$$font> , stranger towns , gathered within
the circle of ' the Roman friendship or subjection . '
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.221

But as the power of the Emperors grew , and as the forms of popular
government by assemblies of the citizens at Rome faded into
insignificance , the diversities of privilege between the various cities
of the Empire faded also . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.222

Political power was now all gathered up into one centre , and lodged in
the hands of one single man , the Augustus at Rome , who might delegate
it to prefect or vicar , as he chose . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.223

But municipal freedom still existed - that is to say , during the first
three centuries after the Christian era - HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.224

and municipal power was lodged in the hands of magistrates freely chosen
by the persons who owned as much as fifteen acres <paren> twenty-five
<font> jugera <$$font> <$$paren> in the borough or district round it .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.225

The affairs of the little republic were managed by an assembly modelled
upon the Senate of Rome itself . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.226

It was called sometimes the Senate , sometimes the <font> Curia <$$font>
, HODGKIN-1880-2,2,597.227

and its members , who obtained a seat as the Roman Senators did , by
filling some office in the State , were called <font> Decuriones
<$$font> , possibly because there were originally ten minor <font>
curies <$$font> of ten members <P_2,598> each , thus furnishing a total
of one_hundred members to the Senate . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,598.228

In the large towns , however , this number was often exceeded .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,598.229

Marquardt points out that at Antioch the number of <font> Decuriones
<$$font> varied from 1200 at its best estate to sixty at its worst .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,598.230

The sepulchral inscriptions , which we now see in such numbers in the
Italian museums , recording that the dead man was a <font> Decurio
<$$font> of his native town , show that the title was , for several
centuries , one which conferred a certain amount of social distinction
on the holder , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,598.231

and we may perhaps say that the DEC of these Latin epigraphs corresponds
to the Esq. of an English churchyard . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,598.232

Thus , during these early centuries of the Empire , the local government
of the towns was both in name and in fact republican .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,598.233

We need only recur to some familiar examples in the Acts of the Apostles
, to understand how these municipal liberties existed side by side with
the great machine of the Imperial Administration , independent in their
own sphere , yet trembling lest by any unauthorised proceeding they
should be brought within its far-reaching and heavy stroke .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,598.234

The Praetors of Philippi are afraid when their lictors bring them word
that the men whom they have scourged and thrust into prison are Roman
citizens . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,598.235

The seven <font> politarchs <$$font> of Thessalonica are troubled when
the mob of lewd fellows of the baser sort come surging round them ,
accusing the inmates of Jason's house of acting contrary to the decrees
of Caesar , and teaching that <P_2,599> there is another king , one
Jesus . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.236

The Recorder of Ephesus is anxious that the dispute between Paul and the
silversmiths should be determined in a legal manner before the tribunal
of the Proconsul of Asia , and that the authorities of the city should
not have to answer difficult interrogatories as to the cause of the
tumultuary assembly in the theatre . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.237

Continually we find ourselves in presence of real and living , though
somewhat precarious , forms of local self-government .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.238

The first two centuries and a half of the Empire may be perhaps
considered as the golden age of the <font> municipia <$$font>
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.239

and the large amount of prosperity and happiness thus secured to the
middle classes of society was probably the chief cause of the admitted
success of the Imperial administration during the greater part of that
period . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.240

Numerous laws were passed in favour of the municipalities .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.241

They were permitted to receive , and probably did receive , large gifts
and bequests of property from their members . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.242

Fraud practised upon them by one of their officials was made equivalent
not to simple theft , but to the heavier offence of peculation .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.243

The decurions were exempted from capital punishment for every crime but
that of parricide . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.244

Finally , the municipal treasury , devoted to the construction and
maintenance of great public works , roads , bridges , temples and
theatres , and to the celebration of the solemn public sacrifices , was
easily kept full , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,599.245

and had not as yet attracted the avaricious regards of the Emperors ,
<P_2,600> who ' found the treasures of Rome and the ordinary
contributions of the provinces suffice for the needs , and even for the
follies , of the central power . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,600.246

' From the brightness of this picture some abatement must doubtless be
made as regards the seventy years of anarchy and confusion which
intervened between the death of Caracalla and the accession of
Diocletian <paren> 217 - 284 <$$paren> . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,600.247

It is not possible that when mutiny , rebellion , and civil war were the
chronic condition of the Empire , the municipalities can have enjoyed
the full measure of their former prosperity . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,600.248

But whatever they may have suffered in this way was probably irregular
and exceptional . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,600.249

It could scarcely yet be said , as far as the <font> curiales <$$font>
were concerned , that the throne of the Emperors was ' a throne of
iniquity framing mischief by a law . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,600.250

' This last and fatal phase in the history of the municipalities was
probably , in great measure , the result of the remodelling of the
Empire by Diocletian . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,600.251

That great statesman saw that some <P_2,601> change was needed if the
Empire was not to be rent asunder by the hands of its own children .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,601.252

The changes which he accordingly introduced have been already briefly
described <paren> vol. i , pp. 15 - 17 <$$paren> .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,601.253

These changes answered their immediate purpose .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,601.254

The Roman Empire was held together for another century and a half ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,601.255

but it gained life at the cost of the means of living .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,601.256

According to the old fable , Phaethon , when entrusted with the chariot
of the Sun-god , drove it too near to the earth HODGKIN-1880-2,2,601.257

and began rapidly to dry up all the pools and fountains of waters .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,601.258

Even so now , the Imperial Majesty , of which flatterers had made a kind
of god upon earth , appearing in all the vigour of its new
administrative powers close to every portion of the Empire , began at
once to dry up many a reservoir of wealth which had escaped the rapacity
of former Emperors . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,601.259

Especially was this true of the funds hitherto devoted to the purposes
of local self-government . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,601.260

These , which the <font> curiae <$$font> had hitherto not only raised ,
but administered , were now diverted to the Imperial Exchequer to
provide for <P_2,602> the pomp of the palace , the salaries of the
swarms of new officials , and the donatives to the legions , while the
strictly useful and reproductive expenditure on roads and bridges , and
other local needs , fell day by day into abeyance .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,602.261

In the happier days of the municipalities , plenty of citizens had
generally been found ready and anxious to discharge , even at some cost
to themselves , the civic functions of their little republics .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,602.262

The example of England , and still more that of America , prove that
where there exists a large and flourishing middle class , endowed with
local self-government , money is for the most part freely forthcoming
for the wants of the community . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,602.263

When the State is at peace , that healthy emulation which exists between
citizens , and that desire to emerge from the ranks , which is natural
to men , leads one to build a bridge , another to establish a library ,
a third to endow a school , a fourth to spend lavishly on the duties of
his mayoralty , and so on . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,602.264

The same disposition had , no doubt , existed in the <font> curiae
<$$font> throughout the Roman Empire . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,602.265

But now a new competitor for the generosity of the citizens appeared in
the shape of the Christian Church , perpetually increasing the
sumptuousness of her worship , perpetually widening the sphere of her
duties as public almoner , and , for both objects , claiming and
receiving large oblations from the wealthy . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,602.266

The parish now competed with the <P_2,603> <font> curia <$$font> ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.267

and the benevolent citizen who would have built an aqueduct in the
second century , founded a church in the third .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.268

And simultaneously with , this new diversion of the funds of the
charitable , the great Imperial mendicant drew nigh to the impoverished
<font> curia <$$font> , but speaking now with an altered tone , and
saying no longer ' If you like , ' but ' You must . '
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.269

We see the results of the pressure which now began to be put upon the
municipalities , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.270

but the exact manner of its working does not seem to be disclosed to us
. HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.271

An impost called the <font> ' Aurum Coronarium , ' <$$font> which had
once been purely a free-will offering occasionally given by the cities
to the Roman generals , was now a regular tax paid by the decurions as
such , and by them only . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.272

The other taxes , which were assessed afresh every fifteen years
throughout the whole Empire , were levied upon the <font> curia <$$font>
in its collective capacity , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.273

and if any member made default , his fellow-decurions must make good the
deficiency . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.274

Under the pressure of this continually-@ @increasing taxation , some
lands went out of cultivation altogether , since there was no profit
left for the proprietor after the claims of the State were satisfied .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.275

So much the more taxes must the surrounding proprietors pay , to make up
for the loss to the treasury from those unsown acres .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,603.276

It is <P_2,604> evident that when once this process had reached a
certain stage , the load of taxation on the proprietors who still
endeavoured to bear it would increase , not in arithmetical , but in
geometrical proportion , and life would become nothing but a cruel race
between the tax-collector and his victim . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,604.277

The inevitable result followed . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,604.278

The <font> Curiae <$$font> , which had once been honoured and envied
communities , easily bearing the weight of their public duties , and
dispensing comfort and happiness to the district round them , were now
mere gaols in which the middle classes were shut up from birth till
death , to toil for the Imperial Treasury . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,604.279

The dignity of decurion , or <font> curialis <$$font> as he was now
often called , was no longer bestowed on the most worthy by the
suffrages of his fellow-citizens . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,604.280

It was a charge descending from the father to the son , and which the
son , however anxious to be freed from it , could not renounce .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,604.281

The longest ' title ' <paren> as it is called <$$paren> in the
Theodosian Code , is that which contains the 188 laws , passed during
150 years , <P_2,605> concerning the rights and duties of the Decurions
. HODGKIN-1880-2,2,605.282

Of their rights perhaps eight laws speak , of their duties the remaining
180 , and that in tones of inflexible severity .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,605.283

The perpetually recurring expression , ' the son of a Curial must be
<font> bound <$$font> to the Curia , ' formulated as it is with the word
<font> mancipetur <$$font> , which we know so well by its opposite ,
emancipation , shows sufficiently how grievous a burden the service of
the municipalities was considered . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,605.284

It is true that more than once we meet with a proviso that no one is to
be condemned to enter the ranks of the Decurions as a punishment .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,605.285

' The splendour of the curiae ' is said to be dear to the Imperial heart
, HODGKIN-1880-2,2,605.286

and ' a criminal should be visited with punishment , not with an
accession of dignity ; ' HODGKIN-1880-2,2,605.287

but this hypocritical pretence can deceive no one who reads the laws by
which this enactment is preceded and followed , and who sees therein the
perpetual struggle of the middle classes to escape from their connection
with the curiae , and the ruthless determination with which Emperors and
Prefects force them back into that hateful prison-house .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,605.288

No provincial governor on his own authority might excuse a Decurion from
his municipal obligations on the score of poverty .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,605.289

The Emperor reserved to himself alone the exercise of this prerogative .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,605.290

Small , certainly , was the probability that a citizen , too poor to pay
his curial cues , would be able to defray the expense of a journey to
<P_2,606> Rome in order to obtain this exemption .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.291

And yet their chronic misery may have urged many to undertake this
painful pilgrimage , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.292

for we find another edict whereby they were forbidden to visit the
Emperor on public or private business without the leave of the Governor
of the Province in which they dwelt . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.293

The prohibition went further : HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.294

they were forbidden to take any kind of journey , lest they should
defraud the Curia of their service , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.295

and for the same reason they were forbidden to leave the cities and take
up their residence in the country . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.296

That free circulation of the citizens , which makes the life of modern
states , was a crime in the eyes of the Imperial legislator , because it
interfered with his machinery of fiscal extortion .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.297

Nothing gives us a more convincing proof of the utterly unbearable
condition of the Curiales than the continual efforts which they made to
divest themselves of their status , and the storm of Imperial edicts by
which they are constantly met and driven back into their Curia .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.298

In truth , the whole series of this legislation seems like an attempt to
compress an incompressible fluid , or in some similar way to violate the
fundamental laws of physics . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.299

The Decurion was not to be allowed to rise into the profession of an
advocate , lest he should thereby obtain exemption from his curial
obligations ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,606.300

for the same reason he was not to be allowed to <P_2,607> descend into
the guild of the rag-collectors ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,607.301

nor should he be permitted to farm the taxes of the province , lest in
case of his default , the Emperor and the Curia might find themselves
opposing creditors of a bankrupt estate . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,607.302

If a decurion married a female slave , as the result of such a marriage
would have been incapable of representing him in the Curia , he himself
was to be banished to a distant island , his slave-wife to be sent to
work in the mines , and his property to pass to his next of kin , upon
whom would devolve his obligations to the Curia .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,607.303

It might have been thought that when every Teutonic and Scythian
nationality from the Caspian to the Scheldt was pouring down upon the
Empire , when the Romans were ' Ringed around with barking dogs of war ,
' the mustering of men for the battle-field would have been an object of
primary importance with their rulers , and that if an oppressive
conscription were not resorted to , at least every volunteer would be
eagerly welcomed . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,607.304

By no means : HODGKIN-1880-2,2,607.305

the maintenance of the Curia , as a taxing-machine , in a state of
efficiency was the first consideration , HODGKIN-1880-2,2,607.306

for upon this depended the splendour of the Imperial household , and the
rapid fortunes of Prefects and Counts . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,607.307

<P_2,608>

To escape from the misery of their lot as bond-slaves of a bankrupt
municipality , the decurions , who were legally bound to serve in a kind
of local force , the <font> militia cohortalis <$$font> , thronged in
multitudes into the regular army , the <font> militia armata . <$$font>
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,608.309

Law after law was passed with tedious reiteration , forbidding the
officers to enlist any man who is under curial obligations , prescribing
the form in which each recruit is to declare his freedom from such
liability , and insisting on the dragging back into the curia of such
decurions as might after all have crept through all this mesh-work of
opposing edict into the army . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,608.310

True , if he had already served for fifteen years in the army , he was
to be safe from further pursuit ; HODGKIN-1880-2,2,608.311

but then , on the other hand , look at this provision ,
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,608.312

' If any man of military descent shall enlist in the <font> militia
cohortalis <$$font> , and if , with strength yet unbroken , he shall put
forward the plea of advanced age , or by reason of weakness shall be
judged unfit for the work of war , he shall be drawn forth from the
lurking-place of his cowardice , and bound over to the duties of the
Curiae . ' HODGKIN-1880-2,2,608.313

The bondage of the Curia - that was the Chelsea Hospital which Rome
provided from her broken-down soldiers in the year 380 under the
auspices of Theodosius . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,608.314

The Church as well as the Army offered a door of escape from Curial
obligations . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,608.315

We are not surprised at finding the Pagan Emperor Julian <P_2,609>
closing this door and decreeing that ' Decurions , who as Christians '
<bracket> whereby clergyman are probably intended <$$bracket> ' decline
the offices of their township , are to be recalled . '
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,609.316

But if any different strain of legislation was hoped for from a pious
Emperor like Theodosius , the Convener of the Second Council , the glory
and defence of the Catholic Church , such hopes were doomed to
disappointment . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,609.317

' Those Curiales , ' says he , who prefer to serve the Churches rather
than their Curiae , if they wish to <font> be <$$font> that which they
simulate , let them scorn to withdraw their property from the service of
their country . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,609.318

For we will certainly not liberate them on any other condition than this
, that they renounce their patrimonies . Since it is not becoming that
souls which are devoted to the contemplation of God should feel any
regret at the loss of their ancestral property ' <paren> 383 <$$paren> .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,609.319

It is true that some years later <paren> 390 <$$paren> an exemption is
made on behalf of those who have already entered the ranks of the clergy
. HODGKIN-1880-2,2,609.320

' He who before the second Consulship of my Mildness ; <bracket> the
mildness of him who in that very year ordered the massacre at
Thessalonica <$$bracket> ' has reached the eminence of Presbyter , or
undertaken the ministry of Deacon , or the office of Exorcist , may keep
all his patrimony safe and free from Curial bonds .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,609.321

But he who , under whatever name , shall have betaken himself to the
religious ministrations of divine worship after the date of my aforesaid
Consulship , <P_2,610> let him know that he must give up the whole of
his patrimony . ' HODGKIN-1880-2,2,610.322

Other laws , of an earlier as well of a later date than those which have
been quoted , enacted that the Curial Cleric should be withdrawn from
his sacred profession and restored to the civic duties from which he had
absconded . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,610.323

Such a provision , which shows that the ecclesiastical hierarchy ,
however powerful , was still far from occupying the position which she
held in the days of Hildebrand , must surely have clashed against even
the then existing Canons of the Church . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,610.324

No instances however seem to be forthcoming to shew in what way this
conflict of laws was settled . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,610.325

The monks , if Curiales , were handled by the State even more roughly
than the clergy . HODGKIN-1880-2,2,610.326

It should be stated however , that the decree which is next to follow
was issued by the Emperor Valens , who , as an Arian , had special
reasons for hating the enthusiastically Athanasian monks of Egypt at
whom it is principally aimed <paren> 365 <$$paren> .
HODGKIN-1880-2,2,610.327

