<BEGIN_holcroft-1794-2>

<P_4,122>

<heading>

Chap. X . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.4

<$$heading>

The departure . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.6

Ejaculations . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.7

Present pleasure and future hopes . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.8

A strange dialogue in the dark ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.9

and a generous and beautiful defender . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.10

The pleasure I this day received in the company of Mr. Evelyn was
uncommon , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.11

the friendship with which he had inspired me was pure ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.12

and the respect that my heart paid to his virtues was profound .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.13

But eagerness of pursuit was my characteristic .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.14

My plan being formed , every moment of delay would have been torment ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.15

and he , entering into all my thoughts and sympathising with all my
wishes , prompted me to follow my bent . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,122.16

<P_4,123>

It was therefore agreed that I and my companion should depart by one of
the coaches which would pass an inn at some distance in the morning .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.18

A messenger was accordingly dispatched to take places in the first
vacant coach , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.19

arrangements for money-matters were made with every possible delicacy by
my friend , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.20

the night passed away , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.21

day returned , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.22

and we departed . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.23

I will leave the reader to image to himself the crowding sensations that
pressed upon my heart on this occasion , the tumult of thought which
incidents so sudden and unexpected produced , and the feelings which
mutually passed between me and my noble benefactor .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.24

I shall live , said I , to acknowledge this in my old age .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.25

I shall have a story to tell , a man to describe , and a friend to
revere , that will astonish and render common hearers incredulous .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.26

But this was the language of my heart : not of my tongue .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,123.27

<P_4,124>

That was dumb . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.29

A pressure of the hand , with eyes averted , was all the utterance I had
. HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.30

A child and its mother were the only passengers beside ourselves .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.31

The coach , which was to be in London at ten that night , rolled along ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.32

they were asleep , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.33

I was silent , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.34

and poor Clarke was full of ejaculation . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.35

" If there be a good man on God's earth that gentleman is one !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.36

He will find his road to heaven safe enough ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.37

He will be among the sheep , and sit on the right hand of God !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.38

I hope I shall be in his company ! Though that ca@ @n't be .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.39

I am unworthy . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.40

I may think myself happy to sit far enough lower down . Not that I can
say ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.41

for I find the best people have the least pride .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.42

Perhaps as it is in earth so it may be in heaven .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.43

God send us all safe there together ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.44

For my part , I think that within these few weeks I am a different kind
of a creature . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,124.45

But what can <P_4,125> a poor carpenter do ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,125.46

He must not speak to gentlefolk , unless in the way of his work :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,125.47

so he can have no sociability , but with his poor neighbours .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,125.48

And though some of them to be sure be as good-meaning people as any on
earth , they are no better learned than himself :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,125.49

so they can teach him nothing . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,125.50

But I have happened on good luck , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,125.51

so I have no right to complain . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,125.52

And I am very sure , in my own mind , that there is good luck in store
for us all : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,125.53

for providence else would not have brought us and guided us where it did
, by such marvellous means ; so that , while we thought we were breaking
our necks and falling into the hands of murderers , and being frightened
out of our senses by the most shocking fights I must say that ever were
seen , we were all the while going straight on as fast as we could to
good fortune ! So that it is true enough that man is blind , but that
God can see . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,125.54

<P_4,126>

What pleasure does the mind of man take in solving all its difficulties
! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,126.56

How impatient is it that any thing should remain unexplained ; and how
ready to elevate its own ignorance into mystery and miracle !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,126.57

To have remained longer silent , while the honest heart of my companion
was thus overflowing with kindness , would have been no proof of the
same excellent , and winning quality in myself .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,126.58

I encouraged his hopes , in which I was very ready to participate .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,126.59

My own pleasing dreams revived in full force ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,126.60

and I presently ranged my cloud-constructed castles , which I built ,
pulled down and rebuilt with admirable facility ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,126.61

and lorded it over my airy domains at will . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,126.62

'T@ @is a folly to rail at these domains ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,126.63

for there are no earthly abodes that are half so captivating .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,126.64

Nothing worth mentioning happened on the road till we came to the last
stage <P_4,127> but one , where we changed horses ; at which time it was
quite dark . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.65

Our female companion and her child had been set down at Hungerford ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.66

and two new passengers , both ladies , as soon as the horses were put to
, were shewn to the carriage . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.67

They had a footman , who mounted the box ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.68

and we soon learned from their discourse that they had been waiting for
the nephew of the elder lady , who was to have taken them in his phaeton
, but that they had been disappointed . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.69

They had been on a visit HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.70

and had been brought to Salt-hill in a gentleman's carriage ; which they
had sent back . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.71

While the coach had stopped , I had fallen into a doze ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.72

but awoke when it began to move again , and when I heard the voices of
females conversing . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.73

The old lady spoke most HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,127.74

and complained of the rudeness of her nephew in subjecting them to the
inconvenience of <P_4,128> a stage-coach , or of waiting they knew not
how long till post-horses should come in , which as they were informed
would be tired and unfit for more work : it happening that there was a
great run at that time on the Bath road . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,128.75

The reader will presently understand that they were people of real
fashion ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,128.76

and the eldest lady spoke of persons and things which denoted that high
life was familiar to her . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,128.77

This gave Clarke a new opportunity of wondering how he , a poor
carpenter , came into such company : which he directly expressed to me ,
with the simplicity and undisguise that are common to such characters .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,128.78

The old lady , who had before signified her chagrin at the expedient to
which her nephew had reduced her , did not find her pride soothed when
she learned that she was in company with carpenters :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,128.79

for it soon appeared that she considered <P_4,129> me and my companion
as familiar acquaintances of the same rank . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,129.80

Her young friend was likewise led into this error ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,129.81

and , when the former began to express her disgust too freely to accord
with the feelings of the latter , she interrupted her with saying "
<font> Ayez la bonté , madame , de parler François . " <$$font> " Be
kind enough , madam , to speak French . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,129.82

The old lady complied ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,129.83

and a conversation ensued which certainly will neither surprise nor move
the reader so much as it did me . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,129.84

Should he ask how I , as a man of honor , could suffer them to remain in
the deception of imagining I did not understand them , let him wait till
he knows enough to surmise what the emotions were that were in a moment
kindled in my bosom . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,129.85

At first , indeed , they were but dark and improbable conjectures :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,129.86

but , dark as they were , they shook my whole frame .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,129.87

<P_4,130>

The dialogue that ensued soon testified that the old lady was in no very
complacent temper of mind . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.89

Her beginning sentences expressed dissatisfaction ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.90

were sarcastic , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.91

and evidently glanced at her young companion , whose replies were mild
and conciliating . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.92

But , not satisfied with indirect reproach , her assailant still
speaking French , continued her interrogatories to the following effect
. HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.93

" And are you still determined , Miss , to persist in your obstinate
refusal of his lordship ? " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.94

" Let me intreat you , dear madam , not to enter on that subject again .
" HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.95

" Oh , to be sure ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.96

You very kindly intreat me to torment myself as much as I please , so
that I do not trouble you ! " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.97

" How can you , madam , accuse me of such cruelty ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.98

Is it just ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.99

Am I indeed of such a nature ? " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,130.100

" Yes , indeed are you , Miss : however <P_4,131> you may flatter
yourself . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.101

It is nothing but perversity that can make you trifle with the honor and
happiness of your family - HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.102

Now you are silent ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.103

Your fine spirit no doubt disdains to reply ! "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.104

" What can I say ? " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.105

" Say that you are a headstrong girl ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.106

acknowledge your fault , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.107

and consent to be the wife of a peer - HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.108

Silent again ! " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.109

" I could wish , madam , not to make you more angry . "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.110

" No , indeed ; there is no occasion for that !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.111

You have been doing nothing else for many weeks past .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.112

For my part , I can@ @not conceive what your objection can be !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.113

Had that desperado been living , for whom since his death you have
acknowledged what you call your weak prepossession , I should have known
very well to what cause to attribute your stubbornness :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.114

but , as it is , I can@ @not conceive either your motives or your
meaning . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,131.115

Nothing however is to be wondered at , <P_4,132> in a young lady of your
character . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,132.116

No prudent person would have dared to indulge a thought in favour of a
mad adventurer , whose actions were as rash as they were insolent ,
whose family was mean yet had dared to oppose and even make ridiculous
attempts to rival that from which you are descended , and who yet was
himself an outcast of that family . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,132.117

" It is cruel , madam , to disturb the ashes of the dead ! "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,132.118

This was the first word of retort that had escaped the hidden sufferer ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,132.119

and this was uttered in a voice half suffocated with passion .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,132.120

" Cruel , indeed ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,132.121

Every thing is cruel that contradicts the wishes of young ladies , whose
melting tenderness is ruinous to themselves and to every body that ought
to be most dear to them . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,132.122

" You must pardon me , madam , for again and again repeating , in my own
defence , that there is no part of my conduct <P_4,133> which can
justify such an accusation . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.123

" How , Miss ! Is an avowed partiality for a fortune-hunter no proof ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.124

Is it no stain on the character of a modern young lady ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.125

Is it no insult to her family ? " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.126

" It was a partiality which had never been avowed , till death had put
an end to hope . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.127

It was produced and counteracted by very extraordinary circumstances :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.128

but , however strong it might be at some moments , which I acknowledge
it was , for I disdain falsehood , it was not indulged .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.129

I needed no monitor to shew me there were too many reasons why it ought
not to be . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.130

" I have not patience . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.131

A runagate ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.132

A vagabond ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.133

A gambler ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.134

A prize fighter ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,133.135

One of the lowest and most contemptible of adventurers ! who had
betrayed his patrons , who had flown in the face of his benefactors ,
who was capable <P_4,134> of every kind of malice and mischief , and who
had not a single virtue ! " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,134.136

" Madam , I can@ @not listen to such an assertion as that , however I
may offend you , without continually protesting it is unfounded ; and
that you have been greatly misinformed . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,134.137

I scorn to apologise for his mistakes : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,134.138

but I know that he had virtues which those who have given you this
character of him are never likely to possess .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,134.139

How he could be guilty of the crimes of which he has been accused I can@
@not conceive . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,134.140

Even when a boy , I have heard him express sentiments which I shall
never forget ; and which have since been confirmed by his actions .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,134.141

You were acquainted with none of them . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,134.142

You speak from report ; and from report which I am sure was false , and
wicked . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,134.143

His heart I know to have been compassionate , his principles such as no
mean mind could have conceived , <P_4,135> and his courage blameably
great ; though it saved my life . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.144

<bracket> Tears half choaked her utterance . <$$bracket>
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.145

But for him I should have been where he now is :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.146

a different train of events might have taken place ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.147

and he perhaps might have been living . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.148

I owe him my life , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.149

and you must forgive me if I can@ @not sit patiently and hear his memory
traduced without the least occasion : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.150

for , <bracket> Her sobbing could not be stifled . <$$bracket> since he
is dead , you can no longer think him dangerous . "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.151

Oh Olivia ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.152

Gracious God ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.153

What were the throbs , the throbs the thrillings , the love , the
indignation , the transports , of my soul ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.154

How did a few moments raise and allay in me the whirlwind of the
passions ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.155

How did my frame tremble , and madden , and shiver , and burn !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.156

How were my lips at once bursting with frenzy and locked in silence !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,135.157

It was my guardian angel that protected me , that pleaded for , that
awed me <P_4,136> to patience , and that repaid by her seraphic praise
the virtue she had inspired ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,136.158

Oh , yes , it was Olivia ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,136.159

It was she herself that had the justice , the fortitude , and the
affection , to assert the dignity of truth , to controvert an
overbearing aunt whom she revered , for this aunt had her virtues , and
to speak in defiance of that hypocrisy which inculcates the silence that
intends to deceive , and which teaches females that sincerity is an
unpardonable vice . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,136.160

<heading>

Chap. XI . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,136.162

<$$heading>

False conclusions rectified . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,136.164

A lover's reveries . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,136.165

The dangers of a stage-coach , in a dark night and a fog .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,136.166

The discovery of more old acquaintances , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,136.167

and the journey pursued . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,136.168

It has been truly remarked that the most serious and even the most
dignified , <P_4,137> emotions are sometimes mingled with the most
ludicrous . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.169

When the divine Olivia had ended , there was a momentary pause ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.170

and Clarke , meditating no doubt on the advantages of which he had been
deprived , and to the enjoyment of which every man feels he has a right
, directing his remark to me , suddenly exclaimed - " What would I give
now if I understood all that these ladies were saying as well as you do
! " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.171

" <font> Est-ce donc que Monsieur scait parler Francois ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.172

- <$$font> What , sir ! Can you speak French ? " said the aunt with a
burst of surprise . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.173

" Yes , madam , " answered I in a low and tremulous voice .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.174

" <font> Gesù Maria ! Chi l'avrebbe pensato !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.175

Parliamo Italiano , Signora <$$font> . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.176

Good God ! who could have thought it ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.177

Let us speak Italian , Miss , " continued she :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.178

but , suddenly recollecting herself , added - " Perhaps , sir , you
speak that language , too ? " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,137.179

<P_4,138>

" Yes , madam . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,138.181

A dead silence ensued ; which was only once or twice interrupted by an
exclamation of discontent from the aunt . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,138.182

Each became busied with their own thoughts ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,138.183

mine were distracted by doubts and apprehensions , concerning the manner
in which I ought to act . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,138.184

I could come to no determination . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,138.185

To be seen by the aunt would not only have wounded her pride , and if
possible have rendered her more implacably my mortal enemy than she had
been , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,138.186

but it would have subjected Olivia , toward whom my heart was bursting
with affection to a series of new assaults and perfections .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,138.187

Nay the sudden sight of me might overpower her , and even have dangerous
effects . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,138.188

Such at least were the whisperings either of my tenderness or my vanity
. HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,138.189

And yet to miss this opportunity , to acquaint her with none of those
overwhelming sensations that were all thankfulness , love , and
<P_4,139> adoration , and not so much as to inform her that I was still
living , still perhaps capable of all the good that she had ever
supposed of me , was in every view of it tormenting .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.190

How had she struggled to conceal her emotions when she mentioned my
death , and that I had saved her life ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.191

Should I deserve this tenderness , if I could leave her to grieve a
moment longer ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.192

Such unkindness were not only unworthy of me , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.193

but might be dangerous : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.194

it might even risk her compliance to the proposed match .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.195

And here a torrent of painful anxieties and surmises rushed upon me .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.196

The hateful subject was brought fully to my recollection .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.197

Andrews was no longer the rival I had to dread .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.198

A lord had entered the lists ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.199

a peer of the realm had sued for Olivia . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.200

Who could he be ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,139.201

Was it likely that she should long withstand the solicitations of her
aunt , endure her bitter upbraidings , and suffer the rude <P_4,140>
taunts of her brother , while rank and splendor were courting her
acceptance , while coronets were crouching at her feet and supplicating
her compassion ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.202

Which of our ancient Barons could he be ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.203

How should I learn ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.204

Was he young , handsome , courteous , engaging ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.205

Had he the virtues and the high qualities which imagination is so apt to
attach to the word noble ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.206

Another train of conjecture seized upon my thoughts .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.207

How did it happen that they should believe me dead ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.208

Who were the authors of this false report ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.209

It must surely be intentional deceit ; perhaps of the aunt , perhaps of
Hector ; invented to induce her to comply with their wishes , and ally
them to the peerage . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.210

I must not suffer it to continue . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.211

The aunt appeared to believe it ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.212

and that Olivia had no doubt of it was certain .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.213

My fears confirmed me in the suspicion that it was a family artifice .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,140.214

<P_4,141>

I was at length awakened from these reveries by the aunt ; who expressed
her surprise and impatience at the slow driving of the coachman .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.216

It seems it had continued for some time , though not remarked by me ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.217

and it was not long before the coach stopped , when I perceived that we
were in an uncommonly thick fog . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.218

Olivia was still silent , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.219

but the aunt was alarmed by the voices of men ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.220

and as the darkness and mist prevented all danger of my being known , I
opened the coach-door HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.221

and jumped out ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.222

and Clarke followed my example . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.223

I found on enquiry we were passing Cranford-bridge at the beginning of
Hounslow-heath , that a broad-wheeled waggon had approached , and that
the coachman unable to distinguish the road had alighted to lead his
horses , lest we should be overturned . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.224

He had trusted the reins to the footman who remained on the box .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,141.225

<P_4,142>

By the caution of the coachman , the waggon was safely passed ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.227

and he thought proper to mount his box again : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.228

but he durst not venture to drive fast ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.229

and , as I was alarmed for the safety of Olivia , I and Clarke continued
beside the horses . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.230

We had not gone fifty yards before we were again entangled with a timber
carriage ; the driver of which , embarrassed by the fog , had turned it
across the road . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.231

The waters , which lie in the hollows on the Hounslow-side of the bridge
, had been greatly increased by the late tempests , and heavy rains .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.232

The coach horses began to snort with more vehemence ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.233

for they had for some time been disturbed with fright ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.234

and one of them , running against the projecting timber , plunged ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.235

and terrified the rest : so that the two fore-horses , quitting the road
, dashed into the water , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,142.236

dragged the coach after <P_4,143> them in despite of the driver ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.237

and the near-wheels were hurried down the bank .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.238

It fortunately happened that the declivity was not steep enough
immediately to overturn the coach ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.239

otherwise Olivia and her aunt would probably have lost their lives .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.240

Bewildered by the fog , neither I nor Clarke could act with that
promptitude which we desired . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.241

I however got to the horses heads , my self above the knees in water ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.242

and stopped them just in time . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.243

I called to Clarke to come to me ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.244

and , as I knew him to be both strong and determined , I committed the
horses to him HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.245

and ran to support the carriage , lest it should overturn .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.246

The coachman sensible of his danger , took care to alight on the
off-side . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.247

The footman did the same ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,143.248

and I , with an air of authority which the circumstances inspired ,
ordered them to come to me <P_4,144> and support the coach .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.249

They obeyed . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.250

I hastened round to the other side , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.251

opened the door , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.252

first took out the aunt , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.253

and then accomplished the wish of my heart : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.254

I held the lovely Olivia once more in my arms ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.255

and once more pressed her to my bosom , without the least alarm to her
delicacy . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.256

For how many rapturous moments are lovers indebted to accident !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.257

Mine indeed would have been a single bliss , and therefore unworthy the
name , had not the tenderness and the truth of Olivia so lately been
manifested . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.258

But this addition made the transport undescribable !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.259

To be in my arms yet not to know me , but to suppose me dead , to feel
my embrace and to have no suspicion that it was the embrace of love , to
be once more safe and I myself once more her protector , oh Imagination
! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,144.260

Strong as thou art , thy power is insufficient for the repetition of
<P_4,145> such a scene , for the complete revival of such ecstacy !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.261

I was unwilling to part with my precious burthen , which I had no longer
any pretence to retain . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.262

" Pray , sir , put me down , " said the angel ; with a sweet , a gentle
, and a thankful voice . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.263

" We are very safe now : for which both I and my aunt are infinitely
indebted to you . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.264

I could make no reply : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.265

but I pressed her hand with something of that too ardent rashness of
which the aunt had accused me . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.266

The old lady too did not forget her acknowledgments .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.267

She had no doubt now that I was a gentleman . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.268

My behaviour proved it . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.269

She should be very proud to thank me , in a more proper place , for my
civilities ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.270

and would endeavour to repay the obligation if I would do her the favour
to call in Hertfordstrect . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,145.271

Olivia was not one of those who think <P_4,146> only of themselves .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.272

" Having been so good , sir , " said she , " as to take us out of danger
, perhaps you could be serviceable to the poor coachman . "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.273

" Let me first see you back to the inn , ladies . "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.274

" Some accident may happen in the mean time . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.275

The horses are unruly . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.276

We will stay here till all is safe . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.277

The advice was just , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.278

and it came from Olivia . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.279

I obeyed HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.280

and hastened to the coachman ; who was busied in loosing the traces ,
and relieving the horses from the carriage . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.281

This was presently done ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.282

and the coach was left , till proper aid and more light could be
obtained . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.283

I then returned to Olivia ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.284

and , when the coachman came up , the aunt enquired if their danger had
been great ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.285

" I do@ @n't know , madam , what you may call great , " answered he ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,146.286

" but , if that gentleman had not stopped the cattle , and if the near
wheels had gone one yard <P_4,147> nay two feet farther I should have
had an Overturn ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.287

and then how either you or I could have got out of that gravel pit is
more than I can tell . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.288

For my own part , I know , I thank him with all my heart ; and the other
gentleman too : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.289

for it is not often that your gentlemen are so handy .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.290

Instead of helping , they generally want somebody to help them .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.291

I hope they@ @'ll be civil enough to take a glass with me .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.292

By G- they shall go to the depth of my pocket , and welcome . "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.293

" If that be the case , " replied the aunt , " we are all very much
obliged to them indeed ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.294

But I will take care never to travel in a fog again . "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.295

Just as this was passing , we heard at a distance , and as if coming
from the inn , a shouting of Hollo ! Hoix ! Coachee ! Coach ! where
are you all ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.296

" I declare , " said the aunt , " that is my nephew's voice !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.297

This is very lucky ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.298

He will now take us in his phaeton . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,147.299

<P_4,148>

" Surely , madam , " exclaimed I , " you would not trust yourself and
this young lady in a phaeton such a night as this ; when you see the
most experienced drivers are liable to such accidents ? "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,148.301

" If the lady does , " continued the coachman as he was going , " why I
shall suppose she does not value a broken neck of a farthing . "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,148.302

We then proceeded back to the inn , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,148.303

and were presently joined by Hector ; whom the aunt immediately began to
rate . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,148.304

While she was thus employed , I , endeavouring to disguise my voice as I
had before done in the few sentences I had uttered , and addressing
myself to Olivia , said , " I should be exceedingly concerned , madam ,
if I thought you would suffer Mr. Mowbray to drive you home till day
light shall appear . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,148.305

" I certainly shall not , sir ; " answered she .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,148.306

" But do you know my brother ? " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,148.307

<P_4,149>

" Madam ! " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.309

" You are acquainted with his name ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.310

and I do@ @n't recollect that it has been mentioned . "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.311

I hesitated , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.312

Hector turned upon us , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.313

we were approaching the light , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.314

and , with a suddenness which fear and passion inspired , knowing that
Mowbray did not understand Italian , I said in an undervoice - " <font>
Il Signor Hugo Trevor non è morto , bellissima Signora ; <$$font> Mr.
Trevor is not dead , dearest lady " - HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.315

At the same instant I snatched her hand , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.316

pressed it , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.317

was about to raise it to my lips , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.318

but recollecting myself , turned short round , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.319

and added , <font> Addio ! <$$font> " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.320

Clarke was at my back ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.321

and I plucked him by the coat , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.322

and whispered - " Come with me . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.323

But what of Olivia ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.324

Was she dead to feeling at this strange mysterious moment ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.325

Did no rushing torrent of ideas suddenly overwhelm her ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,149.326

The man <P_4,150> whose loss she had lamented not in his grave ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,150.327

that man again her saviour , her guardian genius in the dark hour of
dread and danger ; acquainted in a way the most extraordinary with her
thoughts , and favourable wishes ; or , as she was too severely inclined
to term it , her passion and its folly ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,150.328

a witness that she did not credit all which malice could urge against
him , nor listen in base silence when her perhaps too partial heart
pleaded in his behalf ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,150.329

nay more , that man the protector of her aunt , by whom he had been so
often and so bitterly reviled ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,150.330

that man travelling in obscurity ; in familiar society with a carpenter
; yet braving peril in her behalf , and shunning the thanks which the
uncommon services she had rendered might boldly make him claim ;
avoiding them most certainly because of the mean condition to which he
was reduced ; faithful in his affection ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,150.331

for such his behaviour spoke him ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,150.332

but <P_4,151> unfortunate , depressed , despised ; sinking under poverty
; languishing away his youth ; or , crushed by accumulating disasters !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.333

- Did no such fears , no such tender recollections , assail her bosom ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.334

- I have described her ill indeed if that could be supposed .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.335

I must pursue my narrative : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.336

for how can I picture what most indubitably must have passed in her
heart , since I feel myself so very incapable of delineating my own !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.337

This adventure did not entirely end here . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.338

I wished to have gone forward on foot to Hounslow without delay :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.339

but Clarke interceded for a glass of brandy . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.340

He said the water had chilled him ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.341

and he was still more importunate with me to take the same preventative
. HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.342

I had no fear for myself ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.343

for I had no such feeling : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.344

but , as I did not think I had any right to trifle with his health , I
returned with him ; taking the precaution to go through the passage to
the kitchen door . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,151.345

<P_4,152>

Here just as we came to the threshold , who should be coming in face of
us , carrying a pair of candles but my quondam servant , Philip !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.347

The instant he beheld me ; he turned pale , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.348

trembled , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.349

set down the lights , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.350

stood aghast for a moment , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.351

and then took to his heels . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.352

Though not so terrified , I was almost as much surprised as he ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.353

and suffered him to escape before I had the presence of mind to know how
to act . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.354

As however it was my plan to avoid being known myself for the present ,
I thought proper to make no other enquiry than to ask whose servant he
was ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.355

and was answered that he came with the ladies , who had just returned
from the coach . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,152.356

Various conjectures instantly crossed my imagination ; all of which ,
were associated with the sudden flight from Bath , the robbery he had
committed , the seeming honesty and even affection of his <P_4,153>
character previous to that event , his now being in the service of
Olivia , for I understood him to be her own valet , and the story of my
death . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,153.357

But , though my curiosity was greatly excited , the present was not the
time in which these mysteries could be unravelled .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,153.358

We therefore took Clarke's prescription against cold ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,153.359

and , leaving Cranford bridge , pursued our road to Hounslow : where we
arrived about eleven o'clock , and put up at an inferior inn ; lest any
accident should bring us again in company with the aunt and the nephew .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,153.360

<P_4,154>

<heading>

Chap. XII . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,154.363

<$$heading>

Meditations of what had passed . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,154.365

The condolence of Clarke . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,154.366

Arrival at London . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,154.367

The meeting of former friends . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,154.368

Law arrangements . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,154.369

It may be well supposed that the incidents of this night were not easily
driven from my imagination . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,154.370

While we were walking , the care we were obliged to take , and the gloom
around us , prevented any thing from escaping me sufficiently marked to
attract the notice of my companion . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,154.371

But , when we were seated in a room with lights , and my mind was no
longer diverted by other objects , the reveries into which I fell , the
interjections that broke from me , the hasty and interrupted manner in
which I ate and drank , the expressions of extreme joy which altered my
countenance at one moment , and the solemn seriousness <P_4,155> which
it assumed the next , with my eyes fixed , while the tears rolled down
my cheeks , at last so agitated poor Clarke that he exclaimed - " For
God's sake , Mr. Trevor , what is the matter with you ? "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.372

My silence , for I was unable to speak , did but increase his alarm -
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.373

" Are you taken ill ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.374

What has befallen you ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.375

Wo@ @n't you open your mind to me ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.376

If I could do you any good , I hope you do@ @n't think I should be
backward ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.377

Are you unhappy ? " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.378

" No , no . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.379

" I am very glad of that . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.380

But something uncommon I am sure has happened to you : though it may not
be fit perhaps that I should hear what . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.381

And I do@ @n't want to be a busy body ; though I must say I should be
more at ease , if I was quite sure that all was right .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.382

That@ @'s all . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.383

I have no other curiosity . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.384

" All is not right : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,155.385

but yet I hope it will <P_4,156> be . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.386

I know not by what means . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.387

It seems indeed impossible ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.388

And perhaps it is ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.389

and yet I hope ! I hope ! I hope ! " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.390

" Well , well : I am glad of that . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.391

We should all hope . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.392

We are bid to hope . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.393

God help us if we did not . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.394

Perhaps I ca@ @n't give you any help ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.395

I suppose that is beyond me . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.396

I am sorry for it . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.397

But what can a poor carpenter do , in the way of befriending a gentleman
? " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.398

" A poor carpenter can have a kind heart ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.399

and I do not know whether that is not the most blessed thing on earth !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.400

Did you ever hear me repeat the name of Olivia ? "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.401

" Yes ; when you were light-headed , I heard the name many a time and
often . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.402

And the nurse said you raved of nobody else . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.403

But we could none of us find out who she was . Though , I must say , I
have often enough wished to ask : but that I did not think it became me
to seem to be at all prying . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,156.404

<P_4,157>

" That is the lady you have been in company with to-night .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.406

It is she whom you have helped me to save . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.407

I was sufficiently indebted to you before : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.408

but what am I then at present ? " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.409

" Well , that to be sure is accidental enough !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.410

I could not have thought it ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.411

How oddly things do fall out ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.412

But I am glad of it with all my heart ! " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.413

" I could not see much of her , to be sure ; though I looked with all
the eyes I had HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.414

but I thought somehow she seemed as fine a young creature as I had ever
beheld since the hour I was born ; which the mildness of her voice did
but make the more likely . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.415

I thought to myself , I never in my days heard any living soul so
sweet-spoken . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.416

So that I must say things have fallen out very strangely .
{COM:missing_close_quote} HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,157.417

" I always said to my Sally there must be something between you and the
gentlewoman the name of <font> which <$$font> was on your tongue's end
so often , while you <P_4,158> were down in the fever ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,158.418

and I am glad to the heart that you have happened on her again so
unexpectedly : though I can see no good reason , now you have found her
, why you should be in such a hurry to get away , "
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,158.419

The unaffected participation of Clarke in all my joys and sorrows , the
questions which his feelings impelled him to put , and the fidelity of
his nature , as well as the impulse which passion gave me to disburthen
my mind , were all of them inducements to speak ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,158.420

and I informed him of many of those particulars which have already been
recited . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,158.421

The more intimately he became acquainted with my history , the more
powerfully he seemed imbued with my hopes and fears ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,158.422

and the better satisfied I was with the confidence I had reposed in him
. HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,158.423

I am unable to paint the honest indignation of his feelings and
phraseology at the injustice which he as well as <P_4,159> I supposed
had been done me , the depression of his countenance when I dwelt on the
despair and wretchedness which the almost impossibility of my obtaining
Olivia inspired , and the animation with which he seemed as it were to
set his shoulders to the wheel , when my returning fervor led me to the
opposite extreme , and gave me confidence in my own powers and the
strenuous exertions on which I was resolved . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,159.424

The conversation continued long after we retired to rest ; so that our
sleep was short : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,159.425

for we were up again very early , before it was light ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,159.426

and continued our journey to London ; where we arrived a little after
nine in the morning . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,159.427

I immediately proceeded to the lodging of Miss Wilmot ; whom I found
where I had left her , and who was truly rejoiced to see me .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,159.428

Clarke had never been in London ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,159.429

I therefore took him <P_4,160> with me , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,160.430

gave a proper account of him to Miss Wilmot , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,160.431

and we all breakfasted together , while Mary waited ; whose features as
well as her words sufficiently testified the unexpected pleasure of the
meeting , and who artlessly related the apprehensions of herself and my
few friends , at not hearing from me . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,160.432

My first enquiries were concerning Wilmot and Turl ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,160.433

and I was delighted to learn that Wilmot , whom I left in a sickly state
of mind that was seriously alarming , had been awakened by Turl to a
more just sense of human affairs ; and had recovered much of the former
vigour and elasticity of his talents . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,160.434

His sister told me that he was at present engaged in a periodical
publication ; and had beside composed a considerable part of a comedy :
of which Turl , as well as herself , conceived the greatest hopes .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,160.435

The reader scarcely need be told that this intelligence gave me great
pleasure . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,160.436

<P_4,161>

It led me to revolve mighty matters in my own mind ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.438

created emulation , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.439

and inspired me with increasing confidence and alacrity .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.440

Yes , said I , exultingly , genius may safely encounter and dare
difficulties . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.441

Let it but confide in itself and it will conquer them all .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.442

While we were conversing Wilmot came in . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.443

I must leave the imagination to paint the welcome we gave each other .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.444

I was surprised at the change which had taken place in his form and
physiognomy ; and at the different aspect they had assumed .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.445

Not that the marks of melancholy were quite eradicated : but , when I
considered his whole appearance , he was scarcely the same person .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.446

I produced surprise in him of a contrary kind .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,161.447

There was neither the wonted freshness of my complexion nor the
fashionable ease of my air and dress , which he had remarked but a few
months <P_4,162> before ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,162.448

and he took the first private opportunity that offered to enquire , with
great earnestness , if there were any means by which he could be of
service ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,162.449

Under the general selfishness which our present institutions inspire ,
such questions are wonderfully endearing , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,162.450

I answered him that I had found a friend , whose principles were as
liberal and enlarged as they were uncommon ; and that I would take an
early occasion to give him an account of my present designs , and the
posture of my affairs . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,162.451

He informed me that the severe application of Turl had enfeebled his
health , and had induced him to reside for a few weeks at a small place
by the sea-side , that he might enjoy the benefits of bathing and the
fresh breezes ; for which purpose he had left London the week before :
that neither Wilmot nor Turl himself considered his case at present as
the least dangerous , but that they had <P_4,163> both agreed this was a
prudent step ; and that he had received a letter from Turl , informing
him of his safe arrival ; and that he thought he had already derived
benefit and animation from the journey . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,163.452

Turl was not a man to be known and to be thought of with apathy .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,163.453

The intelligence Wilmot gave me , softened as it was by the
circumstances attending it , produced a very unpleasant feeling .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,163.454

The possibility of the loss of such a man , so wise , so benevolent ,
and so undaunted in the cause of truth , was a sensation for which I
have no epithet . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,163.455

Wilmot perceived what passed in my mind , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,163.456

and again assured me of his thorough persuasion that there was not any
danger . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,163.457

We passed as much of the morning together as Wilmot could spare from his
occupations ; after which we parted , and each proceeded on his own
concerns : I to enquire after a dwelling-place ; and <P_4,164> he to his
literary engagements : while Clarke , instructed by Mary , went in
search of a lodging for himself through those streets that were most
likely to afford him one at a reasonable rate .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,164.458

Mr. Evelyn had a relation of a younger branch of the family in the law
, whose name was Hilary , to whom I was recommended ; and from whom I
received the utmost attention , in consequence of the letters I brought
. HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,164.459

This gentleman was an attorney of repute , a practitioner of uncommon
honesty , assiduous and capable as a professional man , a firm defender
of freedom even to his own risk and detriment , a sincere speaker , a
valuable friend , and in every sense a man of worth and principle .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,164.460

Happy at all times to oblige , he willingly undertook the task assigned
to him by Mr. Evelyn's recommendation ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,164.461

and , in pursuance of his advice , I hired an apartment in the
neighbourhood of <P_4,165> Queen's-square Bloomsbury : that I might be
within a convenient distance of the inns of Court , yet not entirely
buried in the noise and smoke of the disagreeable part of the town .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,165.462

I likewise informed Mr. Hilary of my determination not to be a dumb
barrister ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,165.463

and having , from my appearance and mode of enunciation as well as from
the letters of Mr. Evelyn , conceived rather a high opinion of my
talents , he applauded my plan : in pursuance of which he recommended me
to place myself with Counsellor Ventilate ; a man of high situation in
the law . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,165.464

I readily consented ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,165.465

and it was agreed that he should speak to that gentleman immediately on
the subject , and appoint a meeting . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,165.466

<P_4,166>

<heading>

Chap. XIII . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,166.469

<$$heading>

More meditations relating to Olivia ; concluding with a love-letter .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,166.471

Doubts concerning its conveyance . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,166.472

It can@ @not be supposed that Olivia was out of my thoughts .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,166.473

Knowing her kindness toward Miss Wilmot , I carefully took the first
opportunity to inform the latter of the chief incidents that had passed
; and to concert with her some means , if possible , of obtaining an
interview . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,166.474

Miss Wilmot no longer received any pecuniary aid from Olivia .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,166.475

Wilmot considered it as a duty to provide for his sister ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,166.476

and had too lofty a sense of independence {TEXT:independance} to admit
the repetition of these favours . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,166.477

Yet how far that pride of heart , which teaches us , not only that we
should not submit to receive pecuniary assistance from any human being
except from our relations , but that these relations can accept of no
relief , however much they <P_4,167> may be in need of it , without
tarnishing our honor , is a question which deserves to be seriously
examined . Not but , at that time , it squared very aptly with my
opinions . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,167.478

It may be further remarked of relations that , as they sometimes think
they ought only to receive aid from each other , so , they most of them
imagine that , from each other , they may unblushingly extort all they
can . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,167.479

The generous Wilmot indeed was in no danger of this last mistake .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,167.480

But though money was no longer a motive for intercourse , between the
gentle Olivia and Miss Wilmot , there was no danger that either of the
friends would forget the other ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,167.481

and the latter was too sincerely interested in the happiness both of me
and Olivia not to be willing to promote that happiness , by every means
in her power . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,167.482

What these means should be was the difficulty we had to solve .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,167.483

To use any <P_4,168> kind of stratagem would offend the delicate and
justly-@ @feeling Olivia . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,168.484

To come upon her by surprise , even if the opportunity should offer
itself , would not be a manly and dignified proceeding .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,168.485

I had always thought highly of that courage which , mild as her manners
were , she never failed to exert on trying occasions .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,168.486

Her defence of me in the coach was a proof that I had not overestimated
her fortitude . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,168.487

It likewise shewed that she was under mistakes concerning me that were
dangerous , should they remain unexplained ; and that , whenever I
thought of them , which was but too often , excited my utmost
indignation . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,168.488

Bold however as she was in my defence when she supposed me dead , very
different sensations might assail her when she should be convinced
<paren> if she still doubted <$$paren> that I was living .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,168.489

Her submission to her aunt seemed to be unlimited , as long as she
supposed that to comply would be <P_4,169> less productive of harm than
to resist : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.490

but I had witnessed that she would not consent to actions of great
moment , which her heart disapproved . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.491

These facts made it improbable that she would grant me an interview ,
without her aunt's knowledge . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.492

What then was to be done ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.493

A letter , that should fully explain my thoughts , my plans , my
determination , and my hopes and fears , appeared to be the most
eligible mode . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.494

Were I to prompt her to a clandestine correspondence , I was well aware
that I should highly and justly offend her . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.495

She would consider it as little less than an insult .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.496

Her conduct was open , her mind superior to deceit ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.497

and to be ignorant of this would be to shew myself unworthy of her .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.498

The lover should disdain to excite his mistress to any action which he
would disapprove in a wife ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.499

and this was a rule not to be infringed , by him who should aspire to
the noble-minded Olivia , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,169.500

<P_4,170>

To write then I resolved ; and in such a manner as to open my whole soul
to her , awaken her affections , call forth her admiration , agitate her
with pity and love , and ensure her perseverance .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.502

Alas ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.503

I took the pen in hand ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.504

but was miserably deceived . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.505

I had undertaken an impossible task . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.506

Thought was too rapid , too multifarious , too complicate {COM:sic} ;
and the tracing of letters and words infinitely too slow , and frigid .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.507

At last however , after repeated attempts , I determined on sending the
following : with which when written I was very far from satisfied ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.508

but of that I despaired . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.509

" To the woman whom my soul adores how shall I address myself ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.510

Tumultuous thoughts , hopes that vanish , and fears that distract , are
ill fitted for such a task . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,170.511

Governed by feelings which will admit of no control {TEXT:controul} , I
can only claim your pardon on the plea of inability to preserve that
silence which it is temerity , or <P_4,171> something worse , to break .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,171.512

My thoughts will have passage , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,171.513

will rush into your presence , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,171.514

will expose themselves to the worst of calamities , your reproof and
anger . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,171.515

Distracted as I am by a dread of the dangers that may result from my
silence , I persuade myself that these dangers are more immediate and
threatening , though fearcely more painful , than your disapprobation .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,171.516

You have supposed me dead ; though by what strange accident I can@ @not
divine . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,171.517

Under that supposition , it was my miraculous fortune , my ecstatic
bliss , to hear you , with a purity of heart and a dignity of sentiment
such as none but a heart like yours could conceive or express , avow a
former partiality in favour of one who , whatever may be his other
faults , would gladly resign his life to secure your happiness : of one
who , in his overweening affection has fondly and foolishly <P_4,172>
cherished the persuasion that this happiness is inseparable from his own
: nay who partly hopes and partly believes , so blind is his egotism ,
that he is the only man on earth who fully comprehends your wonderful
worth and matchless virtues ; and who is pursuing the fixed purpose of
his soul , that of finally deserving you , from the conviction that he
through life will be invariable in that admiration , that tenderness ,
and that unceasing love without which the life of Olivia might perhaps
be miserable . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,172.518

These may be the dreams of vanity , and folly :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,172.519

yet , if I do not mistake , they are the dreams of all lovers .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,172.520

They are indeed the aliment or rather the very essence of love .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,172.521

What delight can equal that of revelling , in imagination , on the
happiness we can bestow on those who have bliss so ineffable to bestow
upon us ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,172.522

What then if I were to see this Olivia <P_4,173> mated with a man so
dull of faculty as soon to lose all sense of the wondrous treasure in
his possession : who never perhaps had any discriminating knowledge of
its worth ; and who shall be willing to barter it for any vile and
contemptible gewgaw that may allure his depraved taste , or sickly
appetite ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.523

Is there no such man ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.524

Are these fears wholly groundless ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.525

At what an immeasurable distance do I seem cast from the enjoyment of
that supreme bliss to which , perhaps , the frenzy only of imagination
could make me aspire ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.526

There is but one means by which I can be happy .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.527

Either I am to be the most favoured of mankind ,
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.528

or I am nothing . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.529

Either I rise into godlike existence , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.530

or I sink unknown and never to be remembered .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.531

Either we are made for each other , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.532

or - HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.533

I dare not think on the reverse . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.534

It is too distracting , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.535

Yet I have no hope ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,173.536

What I now <P_4,174> write is presumption , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.537

is madness ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.538

And why ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.539

It is not your beauty , your virtues , or the supreme qualities of your
mind that would raise this gulph of misery between us .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.540

No . Avarice , vanity , and prejudice are my enemies .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.541

It is they that would sacrifice you at their altars .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.542

That you will persevere in your refusal is my only hope .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.543

How shall I palliate , what I can@ @not defend , my behaviour while I
overheard you and your aunt ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.544

In vain do I plead that I was asleep , when you came into the coach ;
and that I first discovered you by the sound of your voice and the turn
of the conversation ; that I dreaded exciting any sudden alarm in you :
perhaps it was a vain dread : and that , when I ought most to have
spoken , when I became the subject of the discourse , I was then chained
in silence by unconquerable emotions . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.545

Yet to be a listener ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.546

Indeed , indeed , it is a thing that my soul disdains !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,174.547

<P_4,175>

But I have done many such things ; not knowing , while they passed ,
what it was that I did . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.549

My destiny now is to study the law : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.550

and to this my days and nights shall be devoted :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.551

but the distance at which I see myself from the goal is a thought which
I am obliged , by every possible effort , to shut out of my memory .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.552

I am in want of consolation ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.553

but since your society is denied me , I know not where it may be found .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.554

I own , there are moments in which I am fearfully agitated .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.555

Yet I do not solicit an answer . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.556

Let me rather perish than prompt you to an action of the propriety of
which even I am obliged to doubt ; since it can@ @not I suppose be done
without concealment . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.557

Oh that you knew every thought of my heart ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.558

You would then perceive the burning desire I have to make myself every
way worthy of that unutterable bliss to which I aspire .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,175.559

<P_4,176>

Madman ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.561

I aspire ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.562

With what contempt would such daring be treated , by those whom custom
and ties of blood have taught you to revere ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.563

I confess this is a thought which I can@ @not endure .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.564

Yet I can less endure to relinquish my impossible hopes .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.565

Could you conceive what these contradictory and tormenting sensations
are , you would perhaps be induced to pardon some of the extravagant
acts which I heard you so mildly , yet so justly , censure .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.566

To be yours then is the end for which I live ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.567

and yet my pride and every other feeling revolts , to think I should
entreat you to accept a pauper , either in wealth or principle .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.568

Well , then , I will not waste my time , in complaint .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.569

Let me become worthy of you , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.570

or let me perish ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.571

Fool ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.572

That is impossible . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.573

But if fall I must , I will endeavour to make my ruin respectable .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,176.574

Suffer me to inform you that I have <P_4,177> lately acquired a friend
whose virtues are beyond my praise , and who has urged me to accept his
aid , in forwarding my studies and pursuits , as an act of duty
incumbent on us both . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.575

Our acquaintance has been short ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.576

and so , considering the serious nature of the subject , was the debate
that led to this conclusion : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.577

yet his arguments seemed unanswerable , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.578

and I hope I have not yielded too lightly . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.579

Oh that it was allowed me to consult your exquisite sense of right and
wrong ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.580

But wishes are vain . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.581

Thus far I have intruded , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.582

yet know not how to end . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.583

My only hope that you will take no offence at what I have written is in
the conscious respect that my heart feels for you ; which I think can@
@not have misguided my pen ; and the knowledge that you are too just
lightly to attribute mean or ill motives to me .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.584

How languid is all that I have written ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,177.585

Am I so impotent that I can present <P_4,178> none of the images that so
eternally haunt me , that wing me into your presence , furnish me with
innumerable arguments which seem so all-persuasive , melt me in
tenderness at one moment , supply me with the most irresistible
elocution the next , and convince you while they inspire me with
raptures inexpressible ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,178.586

Are they all flown , all faded , all extinct ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,178.587

Where is the fervor that devours me ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,178.588

I would pray for your happiness ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,178.589

I would supplicate heaven that no moment of your bliss should be
abridged ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,178.590

Shall it then be disturbed by me ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,178.591

Oh no . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,178.592

Unless authorised by hopes , as different as they are wild and
improbable , pardon but this , and you shall never more be subject to
the like importunity from Hugh Trevor . " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,178.593

Having written my letter , I had to devise the means of having it
delivered . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,178.594

<P_4,179>

If it were addressed directly to her , what certainty had I that it
would not be opened by the aunt ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.596

Nay was not that indeed the most probable ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.597

And would it in that case ever be seen by Olivia ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.598

In my apprehension certainly not . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.599

I had then to chuse whether I would send a messenger , who should wait
about the house and take some opportunity to deliver it clandestinely ;
or commit it to the care either of Mary or Miss Wilmot .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.600

The messenger was a very objectionable expedient :
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.601

it was mean and liable to detection , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.602

The medium of Mary was something of the same kind ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.603

and the friendship and intelligence of Miss Wilmot rendered her
intervention much the most desirable . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.604

It was a delicate office to require of her . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.605

But she could speak the truth : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,179.606

she could say that it was to relate some facts which Olivia might even
desire to <P_4,180> know , that it contained nothing which I myself
should wish her to conceal , if she thought fit to shew it ; that it did
not invite her to any improper correspondence ; and that it was the only
one which , under the present circumstances , I meant to obtrude upon
her . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,180.607

That Miss Wilmot might be convinced I had neither deceived myself nor
her in this account , which I should instruct her to give of it , I
hastened with it to her lodgings , HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,180.608

and requested her to read it before it was sealed .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,180.609

Having ended , she was so well satisfied with the propriety both of
writing and delivering it that she readily undertook the latter office ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,180.610

and with her I left it , hoping that Olivia would soon call , would read
it in her presence , and that I should quickly learn what might be the
sensations it should produce . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,180.611

<P_4,181>

<heading>

Chap. XIV . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,181.614

<$$heading>

Counsellor Ventilate and the law . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,181.616

Raptures excited by the panegyric of Blackstone .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,181.617

Dialogues legal and political , with characteristic traits .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,181.618

Meantime the appointed interview between me and Counsellor Ventilate
took place . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,181.619

This gentleman was characterized by those manners , and opinions , which
the profession of the law is so eminently calculated to produce .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,181.620

He had a broad brazen stare , a curl of contempt on his upper-lip , and
a somewhat short supercilious nose . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,181.621

His head was habitually turned upward , his eye in the contrary
direction , as if on the watch in expectation to detect something which
his cunning might turn to advantage ; HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,181.622

and his half-opened mouth and dropping jaw seemed to say , " What an
immense fool is every man I meet ! " HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,181.623

<P_4,182>

His whole manner and aspect appeared to denote that he was in a
continual revery ; and that he imagined himself in a court of law ;
brow-beating a witness , interrogating an idiot , or detailing cases and
precedents , to shew the subtlety with which he could mislead and
confound his hearers . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,182.625

A split-hair distinction without a difference gave him rapture ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,182.626

and whenever it happened to puzzle , which was but too often , he raised
his left shoulder HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,182.627

and gave a hem of congratulation to himself : denoting his conviction
that he was indisputably the greatest lawyer in the world !
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,182.628

And , if the greatest lawyer , he was as certainly , according to his
own creed , the greatest man ! HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,182.629

For the rest of mankind , if put in competition with lawyers , what were
they ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,182.630

What but poor , silly , imbecile creatures ? HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,182.631

One standard , by which he delighted to measure his own talents , was
the length to which he could drawl out a reply .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,182.632

<P_4,183>

Was there a man to be found who could speak eight hours unceasingly ?
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,183.634

He would surpass him . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,183.635

When his turn came , nine should not suffice .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,183.636

He would be more dull , contradictory , and intolerable , than his rival
by an hour , at least . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,183.637

He would repeat precedents , twist sentences , misconstrue maxims , and
so perplex and entangle his own intellect that his hearers had no way of
getting rid of the pain he excited ; except by falling a-sleep or
determining not to listen . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,183.638

It must be owned however he had some charity for them ;
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,183.639

for to sleep he gave them a very sufficient provocative .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,183.640

Being one of the retainers of government , he had a seat in the House of
Commons : where he used to rise in his place and address the Speaker ,
with no less logic , love of justice , and legislative wisdom , than he
was wont to display when pleading in the courts .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,183.641

<P_4,184>

It was in vain that he exposed himself to the ridicule of this most
discerning body , not less witty than virtuous .
HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,184.643

Of shame he was incapable . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,184.644

He would again and again rise in his place , totally forgetful of past
flagellation , and again and again convince Mr. Speaker and the
honorable members : persisting to labour , in the hope of making them
all as profound reasoners as himself . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,184.645

No matter that the thing was impracticable : HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,184.646

he would get up and do his duty , and sit down and receive his own
applause . HOLCROFT-1794-2,4,184.647

