<BEGIN_holmes-letters-1749-1>

<P_32>

<font> Sir <$$font> , The Court having heard Rear-Admiral <font>
Knowles's <$$font> Charge against me , supported by such Proofs as he
could bring , I think it incumbent on me , with due Deference to this
Court , to offer a few Words by way of Introduction , before I proceed
to the Examination of Witnesses . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,32.3

The Blow that the Rear-Admiral endeavours to strike at me <paren> which
I thank God I am conscious can never take Effect <$$paren> would be
dreadful even to a Man who hath been of shorter standing in his
Majesty's Service than myself . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,32.4

It is nothing less , Sir , than a Charge of Cowardice and Disobedience ;
two Crimes that in an Officer , <P_33> draw after them Infamy , as well
as Incapacity of serving his King and Country ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,33.5

and these Crimes are still heightened , as they come from my commanding
Officer , and are addressed to Persons from whom only I can hope for
Advancement , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,33.6

But amidst all the Rear-Admiral's Efforts , I flatter myself I shall
fully vindicate my Reputation , not only by the positive Evidence I have
to lay before you , but from several Actions and Circumstances which
will even strengthen and corroborate them . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,33.7

I think one very strong Instance of this Sort , as well as of my
unfeigned Zeal for his Majesty's Service , I gave just before the Day of
our Engagement with the <font> Spanish <$$font> Squadron .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,33.8

I was then homeward bound in his Majesty's Ship the <font> Lenox
<$$font> <paren> with a Convoy of Merchant Ships <$$paren> having on
Board her Effects to the value of one_hundred_and_thirty_thousand Pounds
, ten_thousand Pounds whereof was my own Money ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,33.9

but falling in with the <font> Spanish <$$font> Squadron of seven Men of
War , by my particular Conduct I preserved the whole Convoy , except one
Vessel , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,33.10

and instead of pursuing my Voyage Home , which I might have done without
any Imputation upon my Character , I returned back , not only to give
Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> Intelligence of the Enemy , and
advice about the likeliest Means of engaging them , but also with a view
of strengthening his small Squadron with the Ship under my Command .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,33.11

I appeal to your Judgment , Sir , whether my Behaviour on this Occasion
was not a convincing Proof of my extraordinary Attachment to the Service
of my Country , since I chose to join our Squadron to enable them to
fight the Enemy , at the Risque of a very large Property of my own ,
when I might have shunned <P_34> it with perfect Security to my publick
Character : HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.12

But I speak it with very great Affliction , that the only Return I have
had for my Fidelity , is this unjust Accusation laid at my Door by the
Rear-Admiral . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.13

Upon the third of <font> October <$$font> , being the second Day after
the Engagement off {COM:sic} the <font> Havannah <$$font> , the
Rear-Admiral thought proper to give me the Command of a small Squadron ,
consisting of the <font> Oxford , Warwick , Canterbury <$$font> and
<font> Lenox <$$font> , immediately to go upon Action ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.14

therefore it can@ @not , with the least Colour of reason , be supposed
he would have entrusted me with the Command of four Ships , out of the
seven which his Squadron consisted of , if he had disapproved of my
Behaviour in a Battle but two Days before . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.15

How can it be imagined that a Commander in Chief , of the least Honour ,
Sagacity , or Judgment , should think that Officer fit for a higher
Sphere of Action , who had fallen short of his Duty in a lower , or
esteem him equal to the Command of four Ships who had betrayed his
Unfitness to manage one . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.16

Sure then either the Rear-Admiral subjects himself to the severest
Reproaches , in having enlarged the Command of an Officer he had so
lately found guilty of Misbehaviour ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.17

or he most effectually overthrows his own Charge against me .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.18

It would be Presumption in me to say I may not have erred , or that
another might not have filled my Station better
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.19

but I can with the utmost Truth say , I did my best , and meant well .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.20

Would to God the whole Ship's Crew stood at this instant round us , and
they were asked this plain and honest Question .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.21

Did your Captain do his best ? HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.22

did he act like an Officer of Courage and a Seaman ?
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.23

I would venture my Life , my Honour , and my Fortune upon their Decision
. HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,34.24

<P_35>

And I have too much reason to bewail , that the Rear-Admiral did not
take it into his Head to bring this Accusation against me upon the Spot
, whilst all things were recent , and before Truth had been impeded by
Delays and Accidents . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,35.26

Sir , This Reflection leads me into the most melancholy Part of my
Defence : The Testimony of two Gentlemen of unexceptionable Reputation ,
who , by their Credit , and Knowledge of that Day's Transactions , as
they were both of them then on board the <font> Lenox <$$font> , might
have been most singularly useful to me , is {TEXT:are} now lost .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,35.27

The one of them , I mean the Marshal of <font> Jamaica <$$font> , is
dead , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,35.28

and the other Captain <font> Moore <$$font> , an experienced Sea-Officer
in the Merchants Service , is absent . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,35.29

The first of them <paren> Mr. <font> Innes <$$font> <$$paren> before
his Decease has frequently declared his Sentiments in my Favour , as far
as regarded my Honour , and the Vigilance I used to annoy the Enemy in
my Station , which I could prove by Men of Honour , Fortune and Figure ,
such as even Mr. <font> Knowles <$$font> himself would allow to be so .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,35.30

And the other Gentleman , Captain <font> Moore <$$font> , a Person of
approved Character , both as an Officer and a Seaman , could have turned
this Part of my Case much more to my Advantage , if he were present to
declare what he knows . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,35.31

But I have the Pleasure to hope , that the Rectitude of my own
Intentions will have some Influence upon the Minds of my Judges ; and
that as I am unacquainted with the Arts how to enforce my own Evidence ,
and of invalidating the ill-grounded insinuations of my Enemy's , this
honourable Court by their Candour and Justice , will give me all the
benevolent Assistance that the Rules of the Court do allow of .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,35.32

In the mean Time I can@ @not help remarking how unhappy a Situation an
Officer must be in , <P_36> who serves under a Superior that considers
the smallest Error in his Judgment , or even an accidental Circumstance
in the Course of his Command , as a Mortal Offence . A Superior , who ,
altho' he is but a Man , and exposed to equal Frailties with others ,
yet , is inflexible in pursuing to Destruction any little Oversights and
Omissions he can discover in those under his Authority :
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,36.33

For I am fully perswaded no wilful or gross Misconduct can be fixed upon
me , notwithstanding the extraordinary sort of Evidence , which my
Accuser produces before you . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,36.34

I shall now proceed to call my Witnesses in order to make out my own
Justification , which I hope to manifest to the Court , without
depreciating the Characters of other Men , any further than they
necessarily fall into the Train of my Evidence .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,36.35

<font> Cornwal , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,36.36

October <$$font> 3 , 1748 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,36.37

<font> Sir <$$font> , I Desire you@ @'ll take the <font> Oxford ,
Warwick <$$font> , and <font> Canterbury <$$font> , and chase those two
Ships we see to the Eastward in Shore , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,36.38

and I will make their Signals to chase with you , and follow you with
the rest of the Squadron as fast as possible .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,36.39

If you see more than two Sail , hoist a blue Ensign upon your Main or
Foretop-Gallant-Mast Head , and I@ @'ll answer you with the same ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,36.40

and then lower and hoist it as often as you see Sails .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,36.41

If you <P_37> find you ca@ @n't come up with them before Night , be sure
to join me again , that we may get between the <font> Havannah <$$font>
and them , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,37.42

and I would have you get down your Top-Gallant , Studding-sail-Booms ,
as it will be both an Ease to your Yards and Topmasts , and not carry
them aloft any more . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,37.43

If you want a Maintop-Gallant Sail , take your Spritsail , Topsail , or
Foretop-Gallant_Sail , as you have got your Mizen forward , and make
Sail as fast as you can , and they shall follow you , as they must put
out some Prisoners first belonging to the <font> Polacre . <$$font>
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,37.44

I am going to send to the <font> Havannah . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,37.45

I am , Sir , your most humble Servant <$$font> , Charles Knowles .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,37.46

<font> P.S. <$$font> Pray fish your Topmast with hatch Bars for the
present , that you may carry Sail ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,37.47

and let your Top-Gallant Yards go with a flying Parrels ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,37.48

or slack the Parrel-Rope , so that it may go easily over the Wooldings .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,37.49

<P_84>

<font> Sir <$$font> , The Rear-Admiral's Charge against me , together
with the Evidence he supports it withal , being both alike , lame and
faulty , I think in Point of Honour and Conscience , a slighter kind of
Evidence than what I have produced , might have been sufficient to have
confuted it ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,84.51

but in regard the Matter became very serious ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,84.52

and in a legal Course of Justice , I found myself under a Necessity of
giving the Court the Trouble of hearing many Witnesses , that my
Innocence might appear as clearly as the Accusation was solemn and
publick . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,84.53

I apprehend the whole Contents of the Charge may come under several
Heads , which I shall state to the Court , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,84.54

and afterwards I hope to shew to your Satisfaction the Weakness and
Injustice of them . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,84.55

<P_85>

1. That I fell upon the <font> Cornwal's <$$font> Weather-Quarter
during the Time of Action , and from thence the Rear-Admiral would infer
, the losing of his Maintop-Mast as a Consequence . 2. That so soon as
I had got clear of the <font> Cornwal's <$$font> Weather-Quarter I
luffed up , and fell upon the <font> Cornwal's <$$font> Weather-Bow .
3. That I luffed up a second Time , when the <font> Warwick <$$font>
was coming up . 4. That I was ordered to bear down upon the Enemy just
after the <font> Cornwal <$$font> withdrew ; but that I did not do so as
I ought to have done , notwithstanding those Orders . 5. That I fired
upon the <font> Strafford <$$font> so long and so obstinately , that I
did her great Mischief ; Altho' I had been several Times hailed by her .
6. And in general that my Behaviour had been very bad during the Course
of the Action , except only at the Beginning .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,85.57

The first Head would be a very wicked Act , if the Rear-Admiral could
have given one good Proof of Guilt in me . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,85.58

When the Court considers that the <font> Lenox <$$font> lay close
a-stern of the <font> Cornwal <$$font> , whilst she continued in Action
, so that when the <font> Cornwal <$$font> quitted the Line by reason of
her shortening and backening Sail , and the <font> Lenox <$$font>
keeping her Course , and busily employed in hot Action , it was morally
impossible to avoid falling foul of her one way or other . If any Blame
lies on this Occasion , when the Court takes into Consideration , that
Part of my Weather Maintopsail Yard-Arm , and the Head of my
Foretop-Mast Staysail were shot away , with the other Damage in my
Rigging , whereby it became impracticable to manage the Ship so readily
as otherwise <P_86> might be ; and that the <font> Cornwal's <$$font>
Maintop-Mast being shot away , together with her shortening and
backening Sail , I leave it to your Judgment to determine on whom the
Blame lies ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.59

however , I did all that possibly could be done to clear myself directly
of the <font> Cornwal <$$font> , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.60

and within a short Time recovered my Station ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.61

bore down , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.62

and again engaged the Enemy , with express Orders to my Men , not to
fire a Gun until close to them . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.63

Therefore , until the Rear-Admiral can find some certain Expedient
against Accidents , he should be contented with Men that do all in their
Power to prevent them , or when they do happen to rectify them .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.64

But to this Court , who judge candidly of Events , several of the Rear
Admiral's own Witnesses have overthrown this Part of his Charge .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.65

Even the Rear-Admiral himself has <paren> I think <$$paren> in a
particular Manner done it ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.66

for he admits the <font> Lenox <$$font> 's coming on the <font>
Cornwal's <$$font> Weather-Quarter was accidental .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.67

The second , third , and fourth Heads , being somewhat connected
together by Circumstances , I shall speak to them altogether .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.68

That the <font> Lenox <$$font> got upon the <font> Cornwal's <$$font>
Weather-Bow , I hope by a Chain of Evidence I have convinced this Court
she never did ; or even that she ever sprung a Luff until the Time of
the <font> Warwick's <$$font> coming up . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.69

In Regard to the Complaint concerning the <font> Warwick <$$font> and me
, it is of a Piece with the other . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.70

I was then running down large on the Enemy , and the <font> Warwick
<$$font> , a fresh Ship , coming up with all her Sail , so that unless I
had hawled my Wind she had run aboard me . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,86.71

The whole Compass of Time lost by this Mischance amounted only to a very
few Minutes , which I soon recovered , and in some sort repaired , by
instantly bearing down <P_87> upon the Enemy ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.72

and without stopping left the Enemy's Sternmost Ship to be picked up by
the <font> Warwick <$$font> , who was behind me ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.73

and pushing onwards I engaged the Ship a-head , which happened to be the
<font> Dragon <$$font> , as afterwards I did the <font> Spanish <$$font>
Vice-Admiral , and several others in their Turn , as they fell in my way
; most of them so near as within Pistol-shot .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.74

Had I been willing to make use of Excuses for keeping myself out of
Danger , here had been a fit Opportunity , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.75

but on the contrary I endeavoured to encounter the Enemy in the most
effectual Manner , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.76

and it is in Evidence before you , that after this Occurrence I
continued chasing their Ships , and by raking them fore and aft brought
three of them into close Action . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.77

As to so much of the Charge which concerns the Orders delivered me by
Capt. <font> Taylor <$$font> , from Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles
<$$font> , they were totally needless , because I was fulfilling them to
the utmost of my Power when they were delivered ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.78

and the Messenger himself confirms this by his own Evidence , in
omitting to deliver that Part of it which was most necessary , being the
Reproof in case he had found me any way faulty .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.79

That Head of the Charge accusing me of firing into the <font> Strafford
<$$font> being a most amazing Thing , demands my particular Notice .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.80

The Captain of her , Mr. <font> Brodie <$$font> , however severe he may
have been upon me , has not been overbashful in blazoning his own
Commendations ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.81

but as both the Charge and the Evidence are very extraordinary , I will
beg leave to shew the Master to the Court in two Views .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,87.82

I think the Purport of this Gentleman's Testimony is , that the <font>
Lenox <$$font> both before it was dark , and afterwards , kept firing
into the <font> Strafford . <$$font> in so unaccountable a Manner , as
obliged the Soldiers <P_88> and Marines on board her to go off the Poop
. Nay , that I was so obstinately bent on the Destruction of that Ship
, that I continued firing into her at Night , altho' the <font>
Strafford <$$font> had hoisted her distinguishing Lights .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.83

Certainly if all this had been true , and if it had , I make no doubt
but the Rear-Admiral would have strengthened so black a Part of his
Charge with a sufficient Number of Witnesses ; no Punishment could have
been equal to the Crime : HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.84

But it happens in this Case , as in all others of this extraordinary
Kind , that the Thing itself is not only inconsistent with Reason , but
attended with Circumstances that contradict one another .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.85

Captain <font> Brodie <$$font> at first says , in Regard to the Time of
this strange Attack , that it was before dark and afterwards ; from
whence we may conclude it was of a long Duration .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.86

Then he insinuates that the Fire on him was violent , as it forced his
Soldiers and Marines from the Poop ; and wilful , because I did it after
the <font> Strafford <$$font> had shewed her distinguishing Lights .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.87

Indeed this murderous Behaviour of mine had been most Criminal , but
that this same Captain <font> Brodie <$$font> <paren> a little after
<$$paren> happens to drop an Expression which seems to invalidate the
whole Account ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.88

for he says , the first Time the <font> Lenox <$$font> fired into the
<font> Strafford <$$font> was betwixt six and seven at Night .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.89

The Engagement was on the first of <font> October <$$font> , when Sun
sets about three Quarters after five in the Evening , and there is so
little Twilight in that Part of the World , that it is Night soon after
Sun-set . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.90

My Evidence proves the Night was dark , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.91

and I think the Moon did not appear till late .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.92

The aforesaid Captain says about ten or fifteen Minutes after the
Rear-Admiral's Signal to chase , the <font> Strafford <$$font> came to
Action with the <font> Spanish <$$font> Vice-admiral .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,88.93

I apprehend the Court <P_89> knows by the Evidence taken on the
Rear-Admiral's own Trial , that the Rear-Admiral gave that Signal when
he quitted the Line , which his own Witnesses say was about a quarter
after five in the Afternoon . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.94

Captain <font> Brodie <$$font> a little further says , he believes the
<font> Lenox <$$font> was engaged at Sun-set , at a great Distance wide
of his Larboard Quarter . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.95

Now , if the Court will permit me to put all these Points of Evidence
together , they will appear incredible . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.96

How can it be possible for this same Captain to begin fighting the
<font> Spanish <$$font> Vice-Admiral at a quarter after five ; for the
<font> Lenox <$$font> to be engaged with the Enemy at a great Distance
at Sun-set ; for the <font> Lenox <$$font> to make her first Fire into
the <font> Strafford <$$font> at half an Hour after six , and be
Daylight , when it must have been quite dark long before that Point of
Time . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.97

How can it be possible for all those strange Things to be reconciled
together . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.98

But without the Assistance of Mr. <font> Brodie's <$$font> Oversights ,
I can@ @not help thinking the Court may be of Opinion , that such a
monstrous Absurdity could not have been executed , had my Inclinations
been wicked enough to have attempted it , since no Ship's Crew would be
prevailed on to have assaulted a Ship of their own Nation and Squadron ,
wilfully and openly for such a long Period of Time , and in so
mischievous a Manner . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.99

The Conclusions to be made upon this Part of the Rear-Admiral's Evidence
, I submit to the Wisdom of the Court . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.100

Now , Sir , with your Permission , I will take up this Attack upon the
<font> Strafford <$$font> from the Matter of my own Evidence .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.101

It was dark when I fell in with a Ship , to whom I shewed my Lights ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.102

but she made no Return , as any People on board the <font> Lenox
<$$font> saw , whereupon I fired some Guns at her .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.103

How could I do otherwise , and do my Duty ?
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,89.104

How could I <P_90> know whether she was a Friend or an Enemy , but by
her answering or not answering my Signals ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.105

and as we saw no Answer from her , it was my Duty to treat her as an
Enemy , having no reason to the contrary . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.106

However , in a short Time the Mistake being found out , by hailing , I
instantly stopt my Fire , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.107

and pursuing my Chase , I came up with , and again engaged the Enemy .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.108

I flatter myself the Court will see this Part of the Rear-Admiral's
Charge in a true Light , altho' it be very different from what he
intends ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.109

for certainly as it was incumbent on me to attack the <font> Strafford
<$$font> , or any other Ship under these Circumstances , so it proves my
Readiness to do my Duty , more especially as this Ship did not attack me
; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.110

and in regard it was Night , I might have skulked away in great Secrecy
, without the least Danger of being detected of Cowardice , altho' I had
really been guilty of it . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.111

The sixth Head I apprehend is overthrown throughout the whole Course of
my Evidence . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.112

One Proof of my good Conduct I gave in preserving my Convoy except one
Vessel , for a whole Day against seven <font> Spanish <$$font> Men of
War ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.113

and a Proof of my disinterested Zeal for the Service of my Country
appears in returning from my Voyage homeward bound , to the <font>
British <$$font> Squadron with the <font> Lenox <$$font> , to enable us
to fight the Enemy , at the Hazard of a very large Fortune of my own ,
when I might have avoided it with equal Security to my Reputation .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.114

When the Rear-Admiral formed his Line , and began to engage , I came
into the Line , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.115

and engaged so early , properly , and vigorously , as that my Accuser
hath oftentimes commended my Behaviour . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.116

However , besides his Approbation , I hope the same appears clearly in
Evidence before you . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,90.117

<P_91>

My Witnesses occasionally have also shewn , for the short Time the
Rear-Admiral kept himself in Action , I was as near the Enemy as he ,
and that after he quitted the Line I fought closer to the Enemy than
before , even within Pistol-Shot , for great Part of the Time .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,91.119

I have likewise shewn clearly that the Ship I commanded was greatly
damaged , and that my Men before the Fight began were very weak , sickly
, and short of Compliment , and had suffered proportionally from the
Enemy : That I did in a particular Manner contribute to defeat the
<font> Spanish <$$font> Vice-Admiral in the <font> Africa <$$font> , by
disabling her . That I had fought four different Ships at several Times
, and even very late at Night had one Gun dismounted on the Quarter-Deck
, several Men dangerously wounded , and myself knocked down ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,91.120

and almost all these Occurrences happened after the Rear-Admiral had
placed himself by the <font> Conquistador <$$font> ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,91.121

and are diametrically in Contradiction to what the Rear-Admiral's
principal Witnesses have deposed . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,91.122

After nine o'Clock at Night , in pursuing the Enemy , the <font> Lenox
<$$font> came so close to Shore that the Man at the Lead <paren> I
having no Pilot on board me <$$paren> cried out aloud , <font> it was
seven Fathom Water <$$font> ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,91.123

the Men on the Forecastle at the same Time calling out , <font> we are
close to the Breakers of the Shore <$$font> , my Foretopsail being then
shot all to Pieces , my Yards and Maintop-Mast wounded , with my Rigging
very much cut , I persuade myself the Court will be of Opinion , this
was a sound Reason for quitting my Pursuit , more especially when it is
consider'd that I was upon an unknown Coast , without a Pilot , the
Night dark , my Crew weakly ; and under these Circumstances , in a more
extraordinary Manner , exposed to the Danger of losing both Men and Ship
. HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,91.124

<P_92>

With the utmost Deference to the Court , I apprehend I have fully and
clearly acquitted myself of every material Point laid to my Charge ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,92.126

nevertheless , the Argument I draw from the Rear-Admiral's having only
two Days after the Battle , appointed me to command four Ships , out of
the seven his Squadron consisted of , to go into immediate Action , is
either a full Approbation of my Conduct , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,92.127

or , is , in my humble Opinion , the strongest Conviction of the
Rear-Admiral's <font> Unfitness <$$font> to be entrusted with a superior
Command , that can possibly be given . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,92.128

Besides , I apprehend the Rear-Admiral not having accused me of any
Misbehaviour for so long a Time ; nor even then until I had complained
of his ill Conduct , it is a corroborating Proof of the Weakness of his
Charge , and goes so far towards my Vindication .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,92.129

Therefore , as my Character has been proved , and without that Proof was
of some Consequence to me : That my Honour , my long Services to my King
and Country , and all that is dear to an honest Man , is brought into
Question , and put to Risque by the Ill-grounded and private Revenge of
one Man , I rest satisfied that the Court , out of their Humanity ,
Wisdom and Equity , will do me that Justice , which they shall find my
Case deserves . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,92.130

<P_95>

Sir , <font> Cornwal <$$font> off the <font> Havanna ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,95.132

October <$$font> the 2d , 1748 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,95.133

Since my last , Copies of which accompany this , I met with Capt.
<font> Holmes <$$font> of the <font> Lenox <$$font> , who not being able
to get to Windward with his Convoy from <font> Jamaica <$$font> , bore
away to get a Passage through the Gulph , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,95.134

and the Day before he joined me he had been met by seven Sail of <font>
Spanish <$$font> Men of War , who took one of his Convoy , and might
have taken him and all the rest , had they acted with any Spirit ; upon
which Intelligence I ordered him to join me , and <P_96> stood over
immediately to the <font> Cuba <$$font> Shore , in hopes of meeting them
, HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.135

and accordingly the next Morning at Break of Day I fell in with them ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.136

and about three o'Clock began the Engagement ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.137

and by five I drove Admiral <font> Reggio <$$font> out of the Line ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.138

and made him put away before the Wind , and the <font> Conquistador
<$$font> , his Second , strike to me , having set her on Fire three
times with Cohorn Shells ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.139

the Squadron soon followed their Admiral , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.140

but unluckily at the very instant she began to run away , my
Maintop-Mast was shot by the Board , and my Foretopsail-Yard shot down ,
that I could not make Sail after them ; upon which I hawled down the
Signal for the Line , and made a Signal for the whole Squadron to Chase
, HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.141

and they continued in Action till near eleven o'Clock at Night , when
the Enemy ran so near the Breakers of the Shore , that our Ship's Pilots
being unacquainted , they could follow them no longer ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.142

the <font> Canterbury <$$font> and <font> Strafford <$$font> stuck close
to Admiral <font> Reggio <$$font> , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.143

and just as they were obliged to leave him , they saw his Main and
Mizen_Masts tumble over the Side . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.144

Upon the Beginning of the Action , I saw the Enemy's Scheme was to
cannonade , and not come to a close Engagement , which I was resolv'd
for , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.145

and therefore bore down within half Musket-shot of the Admiral , having
received several Broadsides from the four Sternmost Ships , before I
returned one Gun , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.146

and had some of the rest of the Ships done the same , or Daylight
continued , I am confident we should have been in Possession of them all
before Night , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.147

<font> but at the first of the Action there appeared too much
Bashfulness <paren> to give it no harsher Term . <$$paren> <$$font>
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,96.148

<P_97>

The Action was about four Leagues off the Shore , between the <font>
Havanna <$$font> , and the <font> Matanças <$$font> ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,97.150

and as I am certain the Enemy's disabled Ships can@ @not be got in yet ,
I am now running off that Port , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,97.151

and shall repair most of the Damages we have received by Night ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,97.152

and I hope to be able in my next <paren> by the <font> Lenox <$$font>
<$$paren> to send you the good News of my having picked up most of them
; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,97.153

this I can assure their Lordships , they are heartily thrashed , and
their Scheme of escorting up the Galleons and Treasure from <font> La
Vera Cruz <$$font> , quite overset <paren> should they even escape and
get into Port <$$paren> so that I have a fair Prospect of accomplishing
my Design of intercepting them , there being only five Men of War with
them ; the <font> Grande Leon <$$font> of 74 Guns , the <font> Galga
<$$font> of 50 , and the St. <font> Francis Xavier <$$font> of 50 ,
with the <font> Assogues <$$font> , and the <font> Bizarre <$$font> ,
and <font> Tuerta <$$font> of 54 , or 60 Guns each , with the Treasure ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,97.154

and the second Captain of the <font> Conquistadore <$$font> informs me ,
they have upwards of 16_Million Pieces of Eight in , the first Captain
Don <font> Manuel de Paz <$$font> being killed .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,97.155

I have not been able to collect yet the Number of the slain and wounded
in the Action , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,97.156

but believe it not to be very great , the Enemy's chief Aim being at our
Masts . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,97.157

<font> I am , Sir , Your most obedient , humble Servant <$$font> , Cha.
Knowles . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,97.158

<P_103>

<heading>

Number I . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.161

<$$heading>

<font> Lenox <$$font> at <font> Spithead , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.163

Nov. <$$font> 23 , 1748 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.164

<font> Sir <$$font> , Be pleased to acquaint their Lordships , that I
arrived this Day at <font> Spithead <$$font> , with his Majesty's Ship
<font> Lenox <$$font> , under my Command .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.165

I sailed from <font> Jamaica <$$font> with sixteen Sail of Merchant
Ships , on the 25th of <font> August <$$font> last ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.166

and did my Endeavour to gain the Windward Passage ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.167

but meeting with a strong Leeward Current , was obliged to bear away ,
on the 6th of <font> Sept. <$$font> for the Gulph of <font> Florida
<$$font> , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.168

and on the 7th stopt at <font> Bluefields <$$font> to compleat our
Watering , which being finish'd , on the 10th I weighed and made Sail .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.169

On the 29th in the Morning I was chased by seven Sail of <font> Spanish
<$$font> Men of War HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.170

<paren> and on my discovering what they were <$$paren> I made the Signal
for the Convoy to make the best of their way ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.171

but all my Endeavours could not prevent the Ship <font> Mary <$$font> ,
of <font> London <$$font> , from falling into the Enemy's Hands , which
is the only one that was taken . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.172

As I knew Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> was cruising near the
<font> Tortugas <$$font> , I took the Opportunity of the Night ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.173

and bore away , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.174

and on the 30th about Noon I join'd him in the <font> Cornwal <$$font> ,
with the <font> Tilbury , Canterbury , Oxford , Warwick , Strafford
<$$font> , and a Sloop and Schooner ; when we all made Sail to meet the
Enemy , whom we came up with on the 1st of <font> Oct. <$$font> and
between two and three o'Clock that Afternoon , began to engage them .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,103.175

<P_104>

In a short time the <font> Conquistadore <$$font> was beat out of the
Line , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.177

and then struck her Colours ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.178

and on standing in Shore , on the 4th we saw the <font> Affrica <$$font>
without Masts , which for fear of her falling into our Hands , the
<font> Spaniards <$$font> set on Fire , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.179

and she blew up in a short Time after . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.180

The Rest made a Shift to get into the <font> Havanna <$$font> in a very
shatter'd Condition ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.181

after having repair'd our Damages as well as we could , I parted Company
from Mr. <font> Knowles <$$font> on the 6th ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.182

and now lie here waiting their Lordship's Orders .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.183

Be pleased also to acquaint their Lordships , that we have not spare
Sails to bring to the Yards , and them that are now they are Bad ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.184

neither have I spare Yard , or Top-Mast on board ; my Mizen-Yard and
Maintopsail-Yard both fished ; and the Foretop-Mast Reefed ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.185

but shall make no Demand for Stores , till their Lordship's Pleasure be
known . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.186

The Gentleman , Mr. <font> James Wilkie <$$font> , who brings the
enclosed Express , I have given an Order to Act as my fourth Lieutenant
<paren> in the room of Mr. <font> Robert Troughear <$$font> , my former
one , who lost a Leg in the Engagement , and since my parting with Mr.
<font> Knowles <$$font> has died of his Wounds . <$$paren>
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.187

This young Gentleman has sailed with me these seven Years ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.188

and has always behaved well , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.189

therefore recommend him to their Lordship's Favour .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.190

Inclosed is my Weekly Account , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.191

and am , <font> Sir , Your most obedient , humble Servant , <$$font>
Cha. Holmes . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,104.192

<P_105>

<heading>

Number II . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,105.195

<$$heading>

<font> London , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,105.197

January <$$font> the 13th , 1748 <slash> 9 .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,105.198

<font> Sir <$$font> , Be pleased to inform their Lordships , that his
Majesty's Ship <font> Lenox <$$font> is paid off , and that I attend in
Town if their Lordships have any Commands for me .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,105.199

I have since my Arrival in <font> England <$$font> been made to believe
, that Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> has cast general Reflections on
the Captains of his Squadron that were with him in the Action off the
<font> Havanna <$$font> , in a Letter to their Lordships ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,105.200

and as I@ @'m conscious to myself of having ever done my Duty , and
particularly in that Action , I humbly beg that their Lordships will
order me to be furnished with a Copy of the Admiral's Letter , that I
may make proper Application to their Lordships to grant me such Means of
justifying my Conduct and Character , as they shall see fit .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,105.201

<font> I am , Sir , Your most humble Servant , <$$font> Cha. Holmes .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,105.202

To <font> J. Clevland , <$$font> Esq. HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,105.203

<P_106>

<heading>

Number III . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,106.206

<$$heading>

Admiralty-Office <$$font> , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,106.208

13 <font> Jan. <$$font> 1748 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,106.209

<font> Sir <$$font> , I have laid before the Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty , your Letter of this Day's Date , acquainting them that since
your Arrival in <font> England <$$font> , you have been frequently told
, That Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> has wrote general
Reflections on the Captains of his Squadron , that were with him in the
Action off the <font> Havanna <$$font> , and desiring a Copy of his
Letter to their Lordships , in order to justify your Character . In
return to which I am commanded by their Lordships to send you the
enclosed Extract , of so much of the said Rear-Admiral's Letter , as
relates to the Behaviour of the Commanders of any of his Majesty's Ships
in the said Action . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,106.210

<font> I am , Sir , Your very humble Servant ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,106.211

Sign'd <$$font> , John Clevland . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,106.212

<font> Capt. <$$font> Holmes <font> Town . <$$font>
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,106.213

{COM:extract_omitted;_see_end_of_p_96_above}

<P_107>

<heading>

Number IV . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,107.217

<$$heading>

<font> Sir , <$$font> I have received your Letter of <font> January
<$$font> 13th , inclosing a short Extract of Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles
<$$font> 's Letter , dated <font> Oct. <$$font> 2 , 1748 , which I have
consider'd , together with two other Extracts of his Letters as they are
publish'd in the <font> Gazette <$$font> of <font> Tuesday , Nov.
<$$font> 29 , 1748 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,107.219

These last Extracts I@ @'m satisfy'd contain a very Unjust and Partial
Account of that Action , which I think I@ @'m not unqualified to relate
, as I was his Second a-stern near him , and continued so till he went
out of the Line , and then passed between him and the Enemy .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,107.220

The Rear Admiral's Reflections , in the Extract their Lordships has
favour'd me with , are so very general and indiscriminate , as to except
no Commander under him . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,107.221

I have little doubt however , that upon the Arrival of the Admiral and
those Commanders , the latter will be able to demonstrate that their
Conduct has been as fully justifiable , as that Officer's , who has so
ungenerously endeavour'd to dishonour them .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,107.222

For my own Part , as I@ @'m truly Conscious of having fully discharged
my Duty on that Occasion , I desire , Sir , you will acquaint their
Lordships , that I shall consider a thorough and impartial Inquiry into
the Affair of real Importance <P_108> to myself , who am very unjustly
involved in Mr. <font> Knowles <$$font> 's indiscriminate and
unjustifiable Assertions : HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.223

If he has asserted any thing particularly of my Behaviour in that Action
, or throughout the Term of my commanding under him to my Disadvantage ,
I intreat their Lordships will be so good , as to indulge me with an
Account of it , that I may have an Opportunity of asserting that Honour
, which it has ever been my Study and Ambition to exert in the Service .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.224

<font> I am , Sir , Your most humble Servant , <$$font> C. Holmes .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.225

J. Clevland , <font> Esq. <$$font> HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.226

<font> 24th <$$font> Jan. 1748 - 9 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.227

<heading>

Number V . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.229

<$$heading>

<font> Admiralty-Office , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.231

Jan. <$$font> 30 , 1748 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.232

<font> Sir <$$font> , I have receiv'd , and laid before my Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty , your Letter of the 24th Instant ,
desiring if Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> has asserted any thing
particular of your Behaviour , in the late Action off the <font> Havanna
<$$font> , or throughout the Term of your Commanding under him to your
Disadvantage , that you may have an Account thereof . In return to
which I am commanded to acquaint you , that you have receiv'd all that
their Lordships know , in the Extract already transmitted to you .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.233

<font> I am , Sir , Your very humble Servant , <$$font> Tho. Corbett .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.234

<font> Capt. <$$font> Holmes , <font> Town . <$$font>
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,108.235

<P_109>

<heading>

Number VI . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,109.238

<$$heading>

<font> Admiralty-Office , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,109.240

March <$$font> 31 , 1749 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,109.241

<font> Sir <$$font> , We humbly conceive it is our Duty to represent to
the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty , that in the Action between
his Majesty's Squadron , and that of <font> Spain <$$font> , which
happened on the first of <font> Octob. <$$font> 1748 , near the <font>
Havanna <$$font> , that by Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles's <$$font> bad
Conduct , mistaken Signals , and Un-Officer_like Attack , he gave great
Advantage to the Enemy ; by engaging in a straggling Line a superior
Squadron drawn up in a close Line of Battle , late in the Day , when he
might have attacked them much earlier , and to greater Advantage . That
his Majesty's Ship <font> Cornwal <$$font> was not in the Action an Hour
. That to the great Dishonour of the <font> British <$$font> Flag ,
Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> , not only unnecessarily carried ,
but kept his Majesty's Flag out of Action . That he has endeavoured to
deceive his Majesty , their Lordships , and the Publick , by having
transmitted a false and injurious Account of the said Action , to Mr.
<font> Corbet <$$font> , by Letter of the 2d of <font> October <$$font>
1748 ; all which we are ready to prove , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,109.242

and humbly beg their Lordships will be pleas'd to direct a Court-Martial
to be held , in order to enquire into the Conduct and Behaviour of
Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> , on his Arrival in <font> England
; <$$font> HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,109.243

we are , <font> Sir , Your most obedient , and most humble Servants ,
<$$font> Cha. Holmes . Cha. Powlet . E. Toll . Thomas Innes .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,109.244

<P_110>

<heading>

Number VII . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,110.247

<$$heading>

<font> Admiralty-Office , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,110.249

April <$$font> 4 , 1749 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,110.250

<font> Gentlemen <$$font> , I have read to my Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty , your Letter of the 31st past , setting forth the bad Conduct
, and dishonourable Behaviour of Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> in
the Action between his Majesty's Squadron under his Command , and that
of <font> Spain <$$font> , which happened on the first of <font> October
<$$font> , 1748 , near the <font> Havanna <$$font> ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,110.251

and in answer thereto , I am commanded to acquaint you , that the said
Rear-Admiral , in his Account of that Action , uses these general Words
, applied to the Captains then under his Command , " That at the first
of the Action there appeared too much Bashfulness , to give it no
harsher Term . " HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,110.252

Their Lordships have ordered a Copy of your Letter to be sent to Mr.
<font> Knowles <$$font> , by Mr. <font> Townshend <$$font> in the
<font> Gloucester <$$font> , who is to Command at <font> Jamaica
<$$font> , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,110.253

and they direct me to let you know , that when Rear-Admiral <font>
Knowles <$$font> arrives in <font> England <$$font> , the Facts you
Charge him with , shall be enquired into at a Court-Martial .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,110.254

<font> Gentlemen , Your very humble Servant , <$$font> Tho. Corbet .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,110.255

Capt. <font> Holmes , Powlet , Toll , <$$font> and <font> Innes .
<$$font> HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,110.256

<P_111>

<heading>

Number VIII . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,111.259

<$$heading>

<font> Richmond , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,111.261

Oct. <$$font> 13 , 1749 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,111.262

<font> Sir <$$font> , Be pleased to acquaint their Lordships , that I
have been informed by several Gentlemen , that I have made Submission in
Regard to my Behaviour in the Engagement off the <font> Havanna <$$font>
, to Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> ;
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,111.263

and judging their Lordships have heard the said Reports , as I@ @'m
Conscious of having acquitted myself with Honour in that Action , so I
never did by Word or Letter , make any sort of Concessions to the
Rear-Admiral about it . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,111.264

I am the more Confident there could be no Reason for my doing so ,
because on the second Day after the Action , <font> viz. <$$font> on
the third of <font> Oct. <$$font> 1748 , the Rear-Admiral order'd me ,
by Letter , to take with the <font> Lenox <$$font> , the <font> Oxford ,
Warwick <$$font> and <font> Canterbury <$$font> , and chase the Ships in
Sight , but if I could not come up with them before Night , be sure to
join him again , that we might get between the <font> Havanna <$$font>
and them . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,111.265

If Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> intends any Charge against me ,
I Request their Lordships , that it may be ready when they shall be
pleased to order the Witnesses to be collected , in doing of which there
will be very little extraordinary Trouble or Expence .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,111.266

I am , <font> Sir , Your most humble Servant , <$$font> Cha. Holmes .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,111.267

<P_112>

<heading>

Number IX . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.270

Extract of a Letter from Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles <$$font> , To Mr.
<font> Clevland <$$font> , dated <font> Oct. <$$font> 28 , 1749 .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.271

<$$heading>

I do Charge Captains <font> Holmes , Pawlet , Toll <$$font> and <font>
Innes <$$font> , with bad Conduct , Breach of Orders , Disobedience to
Signals , and not doing their utmost to take and endamage the <font>
Spanish <$$font> Squadron , in the Action off the <font> Havanna
<$$font> , on <font> Saturday the <$$font> 1st of <font> Oct. <$$font>
1748 , and which I will be ready to make good , as soon as my own Trial
is over . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.273

<font> Attested <$$font> , J. Clevland . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.274

<font> A Copy . <$$font> HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.275

<heading>

Number X . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.277

<$$heading>

<font> London , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.279

Jan. <$$font> 19 , 1749 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.280

<font> Sir <$$font> , I pray the Favour you will move their Lordships
will be pleased to grant me the Favour to have an authentick Copy of my
Sentence from the Judge Advocate . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.281

And as I have the good Fortune to have been acquitted with Honour , I
hope their Lordships will think me worthy to be employ'd whenever his
Majesty's Service may call for me ; HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.282

I am with all imaginable Respect , <font> Sir , Your most obedient
humble Servant , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.283

Sign'd , <$$font> Charles Holmes . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.284

To <font> T. Corbet <$$font> , Esq. HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,112.285

<P_113>

<heading>

Number XI . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,113.288

<$$heading>

<font> Admiralty-Office , HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,113.290

Jan. <$$font> 26 , 1749 . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,113.291

<font> Sir <$$font> , I have received and read to the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty , your Letter of Yesterday's Date ,
desiring an attested Copy of the Sentence of the Court-Martial , lately
held for trying you on a Complaint of Rear-Admiral <font> Knowles
<$$font> , which the Judge Advocate is ordered to let you have .
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,113.292

As to the latter Part of your Letter , wherein you desire to be employ'd
whenever his Majesty's Service may call for you , their Lordships
command me to acquaint you , that no Ships are now order'd to be fitted
out , but when any are they will have Regard to your Request , as they
think no Officer more Deserving . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,113.293

I am , <font> Sir , Your very humble Servant ,
HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,113.294

Sign'd <$$font> Tho. Corbet . HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,113.295

<font> Capt. <$$font> Holmes HOLMES-LETTERS-1749-1,113.296

