<BEGIN_hume-1776-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

The life of David Hume , Esq. Written by himself . To which is added ,
a letter from Adam Smith , LL._D. to William Strahan , Esq.
HUME-1776-2,1.4

<$$heading>

{COM:editorial_material_omitted}

<heading>

My own life . HUME-1776-2,1.8

<$$heading>

It is difficult for a man to speak long of himself without vanity ;
HUME-1776-2,1.10

therefore , I shall be short . HUME-1776-2,1.11

It may be thought an instance of vanity that I pretend at all to write
my life ; HUME-1776-2,1.12

but this Narrative shall contain little more than the History of my
Writings ; as , indeed , almost all my life has been spent in literary
pursuits and occupations . HUME-1776-2,1.13

The first success of most of my writings was not such as to be an object
of vanity . HUME-1776-2,1.14

I was born the 26th of April 1711 , old style , at Edinburgh .
HUME-1776-2,1.15

I was of a good family , both by father and mother : HUME-1776-2,1.16

my father's family is a branch of the Earl of <P_2> Home@ @'s , or Hume@
@'s ; HUME-1776-2,2.17

and my ancestors had been proprietors of the estate , which my brother
possesses , for several generations . HUME-1776-2,2.18

My mother was daughter of Sir David Falconer , President of the College
of Justice ; HUME-1776-2,2.19

the title of Lord Halkerton came by succession to her brother .
HUME-1776-2,2.20

My family , however , was not rich ; HUME-1776-2,2.21

and being myself a younger brother , my patrimony , according to the
mode of my country , was of course very slender . HUME-1776-2,2.22

My father , who passed for a man of parts , died when I was an infant ,
leaving me , with an elder brother and a sister , under the care of our
mother , a woman of singular merit , who , though young and handsome ,
devoted herself entirely to the rearing and educating of her children .
HUME-1776-2,2.23

I passed through the ordinary course of education with success ,
HUME-1776-2,2.24

and was seized very early with a passion for literature , which has been
the ruling passion of my life , and the great source of my enjoyments .
HUME-1776-2,2.25

My studious disposition , my sobriety , and my industry , gave my family
a notion that the law was a proper profession for me ; HUME-1776-2,2.26

but I found an unsurmountable aversion to every thing but the pursuits
of philosophy and general learning ; HUME-1776-2,2.27

and while they fancied I was poring upon Voet and Vinnius , Cicero and
Virgil were the authors which I was secretly devouring .
HUME-1776-2,2.28

<P_3>

My very slender fortune , however , being unsuitable to this plan of
life , and my health being a little broken by my ardent application , I
was tempted , or rather forced , to make a very feeble trial for
entering into a more active scene of life . HUME-1776-2,3.30

In 1734 , I went to Bristol , with some recommendations to eminent
merchants , HUME-1776-2,3.31

but in a few months found that scene totally unsuitable to me .
HUME-1776-2,3.32

I went over to France , with a view of prosecuting my studies in a
country retreat ; HUME-1776-2,3.33

and I there laid that plan of life , which I have steadily and
successfully pursued . HUME-1776-2,3.34

I resolved to make a very rigid frugality supply my deficiency of
fortune , to maintain unimpaired my independency , and to regard every
object as contemptible , except the improvement of my talents in
literature . HUME-1776-2,3.35

During my retreat in France , first at Reims , but chiefly at La Fleche
, in Anjou , I composed my <font> Treatise of Human Nature <$$font> .
HUME-1776-2,3.36

After passing three years very agreeably in that country , I came over
to London in 1737 . HUME-1776-2,3.37

In the end of 1738 , I published my Treatise , HUME-1776-2,3.38

and immediately went down to my mother and my brother , who lived at his
country-house , and was employing himself very judiciously and
successfully in the improvement of this fortune . HUME-1776-2,3.39

<P_4>

Never literary attempt was more unfortunate than my Treatise of Human
Nature . HUME-1776-2,4.41

It fell <font> dead born from the press <$$font> , without reaching such
distinction , as even to excite a murmur among the zealots .
HUME-1776-2,4.42

But being naturally of a cheerful and sanguine temper , I very soon
recovered the blow , HUME-1776-2,4.43

and prosecuted with great ardour my studies in the country .
HUME-1776-2,4.44

In 1742 , I printed at Edinburgh the first part of my Essays :
HUME-1776-2,4.45

the work was favorably received , HUME-1776-2,4.46

and soon made me entirely forget my former disappointment .
HUME-1776-2,4.47

I continued with my mother and brother in the country , HUME-1776-2,4.48

and in that time recovered the knowledge of the Greek language , which I
had too much neglected in my early youth . HUME-1776-2,4.49

In 1745 , I received a letter from the Marquis of Annandale , inviting
me to come and live with him in England ; HUME-1776-2,4.50

I found also , that the friends and family of that young nobleman were
desirous of putting him under my care and direction , HUME-1776-2,4.51

for the state of his mind and health required it . HUME-1776-2,4.52

- I lived with him a twelvemonth . HUME-1776-2,4.53

My appointments during that time made a considerable accession to my
small fortune . HUME-1776-2,4.54

I then received an invitation from General St. Clair to attend him as a
secretary to his expedition , which was at first meant against Canada ,
but ended in an incursion on the coast of France . HUME-1776-2,4.55

Next year , to wit , 1747 , <P_5> I received an invitation from the
General to attend him in the same station in his military embassy to the
courts of Vienna and Turin . HUME-1776-2,5.56

I then wore the uniform of an officer , HUME-1776-2,5.57

and was introduced at these courts as aide-de-camp {TEXT:aid-de-camp} to
the General , along with Sir Harry Erskine and Captain Grant , now
General Grant . HUME-1776-2,5.58

These two years were almost the only interruptions which my studies have
received during the course of my life : HUME-1776-2,5.59

I passed them agreeably , and in good company ; HUME-1776-2,5.60

and my appointments , with my frugality , had made me reach a fortune ,
which I called independent , though most of my friends were inclined to
smile when I said so ; HUME-1776-2,5.61

in short I was now master of near a_thousand pounds . HUME-1776-2,5.62

I had always entertained a notion , that my want of success in
publishing the Treatise of Human Nature , had proceeded more from the
manner than the matter , and that I had been guilty of a very usual
indiscretion , in going to the press too early . HUME-1776-2,5.63

I , therefore , cast the first part of that work anew in the Enquiry
concerning Human Understanding , which was published while I was at
Turin . HUME-1776-2,5.64

But this piece was at first little more successful than the Treatise of
Human Nature . HUME-1776-2,5.65

On my return from Italy , I had the mortification to find all England in
a ferment , on account of Dr. Middleton's Free Enquiry , while my
performance <P_6> was entirely overlooked and neglected .
HUME-1776-2,6.66

A new edition , which had been published at London of my Essays , moral
and political , met not with a much better reception . HUME-1776-2,6.67

Such is the force of natural temper , that these disappointments made
little or no impression on me . HUME-1776-2,6.68

I went down in 1749 , HUME-1776-2,6.69

and lived two years with my brother at his country house ;
HUME-1776-2,6.70

for my mother was now dead . HUME-1776-2,6.71

I there composed the second part of my Essays , which I called Political
Discourses , and also my Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals ,
which is another part of my Treatise that I cast anew .
HUME-1776-2,6.72

Meanwhile , my bookseller , A. Millar , informed me , that my former
publications <paren> all but the unfortunate Treatise <$$paren> were
beginning to be the subject of conversation ; that the sale of them was
gradually increasing , and that new editions were demanded .
HUME-1776-2,6.73

Answers by Reverends , and Right Reverends , came out two or three in a
year ; HUME-1776-2,6.74

and I found , by Dr. Warburton's railing , that the books were
beginning to be esteemed in good company . HUME-1776-2,6.75

However , I had fixed a resolution , which I inflexibly maintained ,
never to reply to any body ; HUME-1776-2,6.76

and not being very irascible in my temper , I have easily kept myself
clear of all literary squabbles . HUME-1776-2,6.77

These symptoms of a rising reputation gave me encouragement , as I was
ever more disposed to see the favourable than unfavourable side of <P_7>
things ; a turn of mind which it is more happy to possess , than to be
born to an estate of ten_thousand a year . HUME-1776-2,7.78

In 1751 , I removed from the country to the town , the true scene of a
man of letters . HUME-1776-2,7.79

In 1752 , were published at Edinburgh , where I then lived , my
Political Discourses , the only work of mine that was successful on the
first publication . HUME-1776-2,7.80

It was well received abroad and at home . HUME-1776-2,7.81

In the same year was published at London , my Enquiry concerning the
Principles of Morals ; which , in my own opinion <paren> who ought not
to judge on that subject <$$paren> , is of all my writings , historical
, philosophical , or literary , incomparably the best .
HUME-1776-2,7.82

It came unnoticed and unobserved into the world . HUME-1776-2,7.83

In 1752 , the Faculty of Advocates chose me their Librarian , an office
from which I received little or no emolument , but which gave me the
command of a large library . HUME-1776-2,7.84

I then formed the plan of writing the History of England ;
HUME-1776-2,7.85

but being frightened with the notion of continuing a narrative through a
period of 1700 years , I commenced with the accession of the House of
Stuart , an epoch when , I thought , the misrepresentations of faction
began chiefly to take place . HUME-1776-2,7.86

I was , I own , sanguine in my expectations of the success of this work
. HUME-1776-2,7.87

I thought that I was the only historian , that <P_8> had at once
neglected present power , interest , and authority , and the cry of
popular prejudices ; HUME-1776-2,8.88

and as the subject was suited to every capacity , I expected
proportional applause . HUME-1776-2,8.89

But miserable was my disappointment : HUME-1776-2,8.90

I was assailed by one cry of reproach , disapprobation , and even
detestation ; HUME-1776-2,8.91

English , Scotch , and Irish , Whig , and Tory , churchman and sectary ,
freethinker and religionist , patriot and courtier , united in their
rage against the man , who had presumed to shed a generous tear for the
fate of Charles I. and the Earl of Strafford ; HUME-1776-2,8.92

and after the first ebullitions of their fury were over , what was still
more mortifying , the book seemed to sink into oblivion .
HUME-1776-2,8.93

Mr. Millar told me , that in a twelvemonth he sold only forty-five
copies of it . HUME-1776-2,8.94

I scarcely , indeed , heard of one man in the three kingdoms ,
considerable for rank or letters , that could indure the book .
HUME-1776-2,8.95

I must only except the primate of England , Dr. Herring , and the
primate of Ireland , Dr. Stone , which seem two odd exceptions .
HUME-1776-2,8.96

These dignified prelates seprately sent me message not to be discouraged
. HUME-1776-2,8.97

I was , however , I confess , discouraged ; HUME-1776-2,8.98

and had not the war been at that time breaking out between France and
England , I had certainly retired to some provincial town of the former
kingdom , have {COM:sic} changed my name , and never more have {COM:sic}
returned <P_9> to my native country . HUME-1776-2,9.99

But as this scheme was not now practicable , and the subsequent volume
was considerably advanced , I resolved to pick up courage and to
persevere . HUME-1776-2,9.100

In this interval , I published at London my Natural History of Religion
, along with some other small pieces : HUME-1776-2,9.101

its public entry was rather obscure , except only that Dr. Hurd wrote a
pamphlet against it , with the illiberal petulance , arrogance , and
scurrility , which distinguish the Warburtonian school .
HUME-1776-2,9.102

This pamphlet gave me some consolation for the otherwise indifferent
reception of my performance . HUME-1776-2,9.103

In 1756 , two years , after the fall of the first volume , was published
the second volume of my History , containing the period from the death
of Charles I. till the Revolution . HUME-1776-2,9.104

This performance happened to give less displeasure to the Whigs ,
HUME-1776-2,9.105

and was better received . HUME-1776-2,9.106

It not only rose itself , HUME-1776-2,9.107

but helped to buoy up its unfortunate brother . HUME-1776-2,9.108

But though I had been taught by experience that the Whig party were in
possession of bestowing all places , both in the state and in literature
, I was so little inclined to yield to their senseless clamour , that in
above a_hundred alterations , which farther <P_10> study , reading , or
reflection engaged me to make in the reigns of the two first Stuarts , I
have made all of them invariably to the Tory side . HUME-1776-2,10.109

It is ridiculous to consider the English constitution before that period
as a regular plan of liberty . HUME-1776-2,10.110

In 1759 , I published my History of the House of Tudor .
HUME-1776-2,10.111

The clamour against this performance was almost equal to that against
the History of the two first Stuarts . HUME-1776-2,10.112

The reign of Elizabeth was particularly obnoxious . HUME-1776-2,10.113

But I was now callous against the impressions of public folly ,
HUME-1776-2,10.114

and continued very peaceably and contentedly in my retreat at Edinburgh
, to finish , in two volumes , the more early part of the English
History , which I gave to the public in 1761 , with tolerable , and but
tolerable success . HUME-1776-2,10.115

But , notwithstanding this variety of winds and seasons , to which my
writings had been exposed , they had still been making such advances ,
that the copy-money given me by the booksellers , much exceeded any
thing formerly known in England ; HUME-1776-2,10.116

I was become not only independent , but opulent . HUME-1776-2,10.117

I retired to my native country of Scotland , determined never more to
set my foot out of it ; and retaining the satisfaction of never having
preferred a request to one great man , or even <P_11> making advances of
friendship to any of them . HUME-1776-2,11.118

As I was now turned of fifty , I thought of passing all the rest of my
life in this philosophical manner , when I received , in 1763 , an
invitation from the Earl of Hertford , with whom I was not in the least
acquainted , to attend him on his embassy to Paris , with a near
prospect of being appointed secretary to the embassy , and , in the
meanwhile , of performing the functions of that office .
HUME-1776-2,11.119

This offer , however inviting , I at first declined , both because I was
reluctant to begin connexions with the great , and because I was afraid
that the civilities and gay company of Paris , would prove disagreeable
to a person of my age and humour : HUME-1776-2,11.120

but on his lordship's repeating the invitation , I accepted of it .
HUME-1776-2,11.121

I have every reason , both of pleasure and interest , to think myself
happy in my connexions with that nobleman , as well as afterwards with
his brother , General Conway . HUME-1776-2,11.122

Those who have not seen the strange effects of modes , will never
imagine the reception I met with at Paris , from men and women of all
ranks and stations . HUME-1776-2,11.123

The more I resiled from their excessive civilities , the more I was
loaded with them . HUME-1776-2,11.124

There is , however , a real satisfaction in living at Paris , from the
great number of sensible , knowing , and polite company with which
<P_12> that city abounds above all places in the universe .
HUME-1776-2,12.125

I thought once of settling there for life . HUME-1776-2,12.126

I was appointed secretary to the embassy ; HUME-1776-2,12.127

and in summer 1765 , Lord Hertford left me , being appointed Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland . HUME-1776-2,12.128

I was <font> chargé_d'affaires {TEXT:chargé_d'_affaires} <$$font> till
the arrival of the Duke of Richmond , towards the end of the year .
HUME-1776-2,12.129

In the beginning of 1766 {TEXT:1776} , I left Paris , HUME-1776-2,12.130

and next summer went to Edinburgh , with the same view as formerly , of
burying myself in a philosophical retreat . HUME-1776-2,12.131

I returned to that place , not richer , but with much more money , and a
much larger income , by means of Lord Hertford's friendship , than I
left it ; HUME-1776-2,12.132

and I was desirous of trying what superfluity could produce , as I had
formerly made an experiment of a competency . HUME-1776-2,12.133

But in 1767 , I received from Mr. Conway an invitation to be
Under-secretary ; HUME-1776-2,12.134

and this invitation , both the character of the person , and my
connexions with Lord Hertford , prevented me from declining .
HUME-1776-2,12.135

I returned to Edinburgh in 1769 , very opulent <paren> for I possessed a
revenue of 1000 l. a year <$$paren> , healthy , and , though somewhat
stricken in years , with the prospect of enjoying long my ease , and of
seeing the increase of my reputation . HUME-1776-2,12.136

In spring 1775 , I was struck with a disorder in my bowels , which at
first gave me <P_13> no alarm , but has since , as I apprehend it ,
become mortal and incurable . HUME-1776-2,13.137

I now reckon upon a speedy dissolution . HUME-1776-2,13.138

I have suffered very little pain from my disorder ; HUME-1776-2,13.139

and what is more strange , have , notwithstanding the great decline of
my person , never suffered a moment's abatement of my spirits ; insomuch
, that were I to name the period of my life , which I should most choose
to pass over again , I might be tempted to point to this later period .
HUME-1776-2,13.140

I possess the same ardour as ever in study , and the same gaiety in
company . HUME-1776-2,13.141

I consider , besides , that a man of sixty-five , by dying , cuts off
only a few years of infirmities ; HUME-1776-2,13.142

and though I see many symptoms of my literary reputation's breaking out
at last with additional luster , I knew that I could have but few years
to enjoy it . HUME-1776-2,13.143

It is difficult to be more detached from life than I am at present .
HUME-1776-2,13.144

To conclude historically with my character , I am , or rather was
<paren> for that is the style I must now use in speaking of myself ,
which emboldens me the more to speak my sentiments <$$paren> ; I was , I
say , a man of mild dispositions , of command of temper , of an open ,
social , and cheerful humour , capable of attachment , but little
susceptible of enmity , and of great moderation in all my passions .
HUME-1776-2,13.145

Even my love of literary fame , my ruling passion , never <P_14> soured
my temper , notwithstanding my frequent disappointments .
HUME-1776-2,14.146

My company was not unacceptable to the young and careless , as well as
to the studious and literary ; HUME-1776-2,14.147

and as I took a particular pleasure in the company of modest women , I
had no reason to be displeased with the reception I met with from them .
HUME-1776-2,14.148

In a word , though most men any wise eminent , have found reason to
complain of calumny , I never was touched , or even attacked by her
baleful tooth : HUME-1776-2,14.149

and though I wantonly exposed myself to the rage of both civil and
religious factions , they seemed to be disarmed in my behalf of their
wonted fury . HUME-1776-2,14.150

My friends never had occasion to vindicate any one circumstance of my
character and conduct : not but that the zealots , we may well suppose ,
would have been glad to invent and propagate any story to my
disadvantage , HUME-1776-2,14.151

but they could never find any which they thought would wear the face of
probability . HUME-1776-2,14.152

I can@ @not say there is no vanity in making this funeral oration of
myself , HUME-1776-2,14.153

but I hope it is not a misplaced one ; HUME-1776-2,14.154

and this is a matter of fact which is easily cleared and ascertained .
HUME-1776-2,14.155

April 18 , 1776 . HUME-1776-2,14.156

