<BEGIN_hume-1757-2>

<P_2,1>

<heading>

The History of Great Britain . HUME-1757-2,2,1.4

The Commonwealth . HUME-1757-2,2,1.5

Chap. I . HUME-1757-2,2,1.6

<$$heading>

<font> State of England . - Of Scotland . - Of Ireland .
HUME-1757-2,2,1.8

- Levellers suppressed . HUME-1757-2,2,1.9

Siege of Dublin raised . HUME-1757-2,2,1.10

- Tredah stormed . HUME-1757-2,2,1.11

- Covenanters . HUME-1757-2,2,1.12

- Montrose taken prisoner . - Executed . HUME-1757-2,2,1.13

- Covenanters . HUME-1757-2,2,1.14

- Battle of Dunbar . HUME-1757-2,2,1.15

- Of Worcester . HUME-1757-2,2,1.16

- King's escape . HUME-1757-2,2,1.17

- The Commonwealth . HUME-1757-2,2,1.18

- Dutch war . HUME-1757-2,2,1.19

- Dissolution of the Parliament . <$$font> HUME-1757-2,2,1.20

The confusion , which overspread {TEXT:overspred} England after the
murder of the King , proceeded , as well from the spirit of refinement
and innovation , which agitated the ruling party , as from the
dissolution of all that authority , both civil and ecclesiastical , by
which the nation had ever been accustomed to be governed .
HUME-1757-2,2,1.21

Every man had framed the model of a republic ; HUME-1757-2,2,1.22

and , however new or fantastical , he was eager of recommending it to
his fellow citizens , or even of imposing it by force upon them .
HUME-1757-2,2,1.23

Every man had adjusted a system of religion , which , being derived from
no traditional authority , was peculiar to himself ; and being founded
on supposed inspiration , not on any principles of human reasoning , had
no means , besides cant and low rhetoric , by which it could recommend
itself to others . HUME-1757-2,2,1.24

The Levellers insisted on an equal distribution of property <P_2,2> and
power , HUME-1757-2,2,2.25

and disclaimed all dependence {TEXT:dependance} and subordination .
HUME-1757-2,2,2.26

The Millenarians or Fifth-Monarchy-men required , that government itself
should be abolished , and all human powers be laid in the dust , in
order to pave the way for the dominion of Christ , whose second coming
on earth they suddenly expected . HUME-1757-2,2,2.27

The Antinomians even insisted , that the obligations of morality and
natural law were suspended , and that the elect , guided by an internal
principle , more perfect and divine , were superior to the <font>
beggarly elements <$$font> of justice and humanity . HUME-1757-2,2,2.28

A considerable party declaimed against tythes and a hireling priesthood
, HUME-1757-2,2,2.29

and were resolved , that the magistrate should not support by power or
revenue any ecclesiastical establishment . HUME-1757-2,2,2.30

Another party inveighed against the law and its professors ;
HUME-1757-2,2,2.31

and under pretext of rendering more simple the distribution of justice ,
were desirous of abolishing the whole system of English jurisprudence ,
which seemed interwoven with monarchical government .
HUME-1757-2,2,2.32

Even those among the Republicans , who adopted not such extravagancies ,
were so intoxicated with their saintly character , that they supposed
themselves possessed of peculiar privileges ; HUME-1757-2,2,2.33

and all professions , oaths , laws , and engagements had , in a great
measure , lost their influence over them . HUME-1757-2,2,2.34

The bands of society were every where loosened ; HUME-1757-2,2,2.35

and the irregular passions of men were encouraged by speculative
principles , still more unsocial and irregular . HUME-1757-2,2,2.36

The Royalists , consisting of the nobles and more considerable gentry ,
being degraded from their authority and plundered of their property ,
were inflamed with the highest resentment and indignation against those
ignoble adversaries , who had reduced them to subjection .
HUME-1757-2,2,2.37

The Presbyterians , whose credit had first supported the arms of the
Parliament , were enraged to find , that , by the treachery or superior
cunning of their associates , the fruits of all their successful labors
were ravished from them . HUME-1757-2,2,2.38

The former party , from inclination and principle , zealously attached
themselves to the son of their unfortunate Monarch , whose memory they
respected , and whose tragical death they deplored . HUME-1757-2,2,2.39

The latter cast their eyes towards the same object ; HUME-1757-2,2,2.40

but they had still many prejudices to overcome , many fears and
jealousies to be allayed , 'ere they could cordially entertain thoughts
of restoring that family , whom they had so grievously offended , and
whose principles they regarded with such violent abhorrence .
HUME-1757-2,2,2.41

The only solid support of the republican independent {TEXT:independant}
faction , which , tho' it formed so small a part of the nation , had
violently usurped the government of the whole , was a numerous army of
about fifty_thousand men . HUME-1757-2,2,2.42

But this army , formidable from its discipline and courage , as well as
its numbers , was actuated by a spirit , that rendered it extremely
dangerous to the assembly , which had assumed the command over it .
HUME-1757-2,2,2.43

Accustomed to indulge every chimera in politics , every <P_2,3> frenzy
in religion , the soldiers knew little of the subordination of citizens
, HUME-1757-2,2,3.44

and had only learned , from apparent necessity , some maxims of military
obedience . HUME-1757-2,2,3.45

And while they still maintained , that all those enormous violations of
law and equity , of which they had been guilty , were justified by the
success , with which providence had blessed them ; they were ready to
break out into any new disorder , where-ever {COM:sic} they had the
prospect of a like sanction and authority . HUME-1757-2,2,3.46

What alone gave some poise {TEXT:poize} and stability to all these
unsettled humors , was the great influence , both civil and military ,
acquired by Oliver Cromwell {TEXT:Cromwel} . HUME-1757-2,2,3.47

This man , suited to the age , in which he lived , and to that alone ,
was equally qualified to gain the affection and confidence of men , by
what was mean , vulgar , and ridiculous in his character ; as to command
their obedience by what was great , daring , and enterprising
{TEXT:enterprizing} . HUME-1757-2,2,3.48

Familiar even to buffoonery with the meanest sentinel , he never lost
his authority : HUME-1757-2,2,3.49

Transported to a degree of madness with religious ecstasies
{TEXT:extasies} , he never forgot the political purposes , to which they
might serve . HUME-1757-2,2,3.50

Hating monarchy , while a subject ; despising liberty , while a citizen
; tho' he retained for a time all orders of men under a seeming
obedience to the Parliament ; he was secretly paving the way , by
artifice and courage , to his own unlimited authority .
HUME-1757-2,2,3.51

The Parliament , for so we must henceforth call a small and
inconsiderable part of the house of Commons , having murdered their
Sovereign with so many appearing circumstances of solemnity and justice
, and so much real violence and even fury , began to assume more the air
of a civil , legal power , and to enlarge a little the narrow bottom ,
upon which they stood . HUME-1757-2,2,3.52

A few of the excluded and absent members , such as were liable to least
exception , they admitted ; but on condition , that they should sign an
approbation , of whatever had been done in their absence with regard to
the King's trial : HUME-1757-2,2,3.53

And some of them were willing to acquire a share of power on such terms
: HUME-1757-2,2,3.54

The greatest part disdained to lend their authority to such apparent
usurpations . HUME-1757-2,2,3.55

Some writs they issued for new elections , where they hoped to have
interest enough to bring in their own friends and dependants .
HUME-1757-2,2,3.56

They named a council of state to the number of thirty_eight , to whom
all addresses were made , who gave orders to all generals and admirals ,
who executed the laws , and who digested all business before it was
introduced into Parliament . HUME-1757-2,2,3.57

They pretended to employ themselves entirely in adjusting the laws ,
forms , and methods of a new representative ; HUME-1757-2,2,3.58

and as soon as they should have settled the nation , <P_2,4> they
professed their intention of restoring the power to the people , from
whom , they acknowleged , they had entirely derived it .
HUME-1757-2,2,4.59

The Commonwealth found every thing in England composed into a seeming
tranquillity by the terror of their arms . HUME-1757-2,2,4.60

Foreign powers , occupied in wars among themselves , had no leizure nor
inclination to interpose in the domestic dissensions of this island .
HUME-1757-2,2,4.61

The young King , poor and neglected , living sometimes in Holland ,
sometimes in France , sometimes in Jersey , comforted himself , amidst
his present distresses , with the prospect of better fortune .
HUME-1757-2,2,4.62

The situation alone of Scotland and Ireland gave any immediate
inquietude to the new Republic . HUME-1757-2,2,4.63

After the successive defeats of Montrose and Hamilton , and the ruin of
their parties , the whole authority in Scotland fell into the hands of
Argyle and the rigid churchmen , that party which was most averse to the
interests of the royal family . HUME-1757-2,2,4.64

Their enmity , however , against the independants , who had prevented
the long_wished_for settlement of Presbyterian discipline in England ,
carried them to embrace opposite maxims in their political conduct .
HUME-1757-2,2,4.65

Tho' invited by the English Parliament to model their government into a
republican form , they resolved still to adhere to Monarchy , which had
ever prevailed in their country , and which , by the express terms of
their Covenant , they were obliged to defend . HUME-1757-2,2,4.66

They considered besides , that as the property of the kingdom lay
chiefly in the hands of great families , it would be difficult to
establish a Commonwealth , or , without some chief magistrate , invested
with royal authority , to preserve peace or justice in the community .
HUME-1757-2,2,4.67

The execution , therefore , of the King , against which they had always
protested , having occasioned a vacancy of the throne , they immediately
proclaimed his son and successor , Charles the second ; but upon
condition " of his good behavior and strict observance of the Covenant ,
and his entertaining no other persons about him but such as were godly
men and faithful to that obligation . " HUME-1757-2,2,4.68

These unusual clauses , inserted in the very first acknowledgment
{TEXT:acknowlegement} of their Prince , sufficiently shewed their
intention of limiting extremely his authority . HUME-1757-2,2,4.69

And the English Commonwealth , having no pretext to interpose in the
affairs of that kingdom , allowed the Scotch , for the present , to take
their own measures in settling their government . HUME-1757-2,2,4.70

The dominion , which England claimed over Ireland , demanded more
immediately their efforts for subduing that country .
HUME-1757-2,2,4.71

In order to convey a just notion of Irish affairs , it will be necessary
to look backwards some years , and to relate briefly those transactions
, which had past during the memorable revolutions in England .
HUME-1757-2,2,4.72

When the late King agreed to that cessation of arms with the Popish
rebels , which was become so requisite , as well for the security of the
Irish Protestants <P_2,5> as for promoting his interests in England ,
the Parliament , in order to blacken his conduct , reproached him with
favoring that odious rebellion , HUME-1757-2,2,5.73

and exclaimed loudly against the terms of the cessation .
HUME-1757-2,2,5.74

They even went so far as to declare it entirely null and invalid ,
because finished without their consent ; HUME-1757-2,2,5.75

and to this declaration the Scotch in Ulster , and the Earl of Inchiquin
, a nobleman of great authority in Munster , professed to adhere .
HUME-1757-2,2,5.76

By their means , the war was still kept alive ; HUME-1757-2,2,5.77

but as the dangerous distractions in England hindered the Parliament
from sending any considerable assistance to their allies in Ireland ,
Inchiquin entered into an accommodation with Ormond , whom the King had
created Lord Lieutenant , of that kingdom . HUME-1757-2,2,5.78

This latter nobleman , being a native of Ireland and a person endowed
with great prudence and virtue , formed a scheme for composing the
disorders of his country , and for engaging the rebel Irish to support
the cause of his royal master . HUME-1757-2,2,5.79

There were many circumstances , which strongly invited the Irish to
embrace the King's party . HUME-1757-2,2,5.80

The maxims of that Prince had always led him to give a reasonable
indulgence to the Catholics thro'out all his dominions ;
HUME-1757-2,2,5.81

and one chief ground of that enmity , which the Puritans professed
against him , was this tacit {TEXT:tacite} toleration .
HUME-1757-2,2,5.82

The Parliament , even when unprovoked , had ever menaced the Papists
with the most rigid restraint , if not a total extirpation ;
HUME-1757-2,2,5.83

and immediately after the commencement of the Irish rebellion , they put
to sale the whole estates of the rebels , HUME-1757-2,2,5.84

and had engaged the public faith for transferring them to the
adventurers , who had already advanced money upon that condition .
HUME-1757-2,2,5.85

The success , therefore , which the arms of the Parliament met with at
Naseby , struck a just terror into the Irish ; HUME-1757-2,2,5.86

and engaged the council of Kilkenny , composed of deputies from all the
Catholic counties and cities , to conclude a peace with the Marquess of
Ormond . HUME-1757-2,2,5.87

They professed to return to their duty and allegiance ,
HUME-1757-2,2,5.88

engaged to furnish ten_thousand men for the support of the King's
authority in England , HUME-1757-2,2,5.89

and were contented with stipulating , in return , indemnity for their
rebellion and toleration of their religion . HUME-1757-2,2,5.90

Ormond not doubting but a peace , so advantageous and even necessary to
the Irish , would be strictly observed , advanced with a small body of
troops to Kilkenny , in order to concert measures for common defence
with his new allies . HUME-1757-2,2,5.91

The Pope had sent over to Ireland a nuncio , Rinuccini , an Italian ;
HUME-1757-2,2,5.92

and this man , whose commission empowered him to direct the spiritual
concerns of the Irish , was emboldened , by their ignorance and bigotry
, to assume the chief authority in the civil government .
HUME-1757-2,2,5.93

Foreseeing that a general submission to the Lord Lieutenant would put an
end to his own influence , he conspired with Owen Oneal , who commanded
the native Irish in Ulster , and who bore a great jealousy to Preston ;
<P_2,6> the General chiefly trusted by the Council of Kilkenny .
HUME-1757-2,2,6.94

By concert , these two malcontents secretly drew forces together ,
HUME-1757-2,2,6.95

and were ready to fall on Ormond , who remained in security , trusting
to the pacification so lately concluded with the rebels .
HUME-1757-2,2,6.96

He received intelligence of their treachery , HUME-1757-2,2,6.97

made his retreat with great celerity and conduct HUME-1757-2,2,6.98

and sheltered his small army in Dublin and the other fortified towns ,
which still remained in the hands of the Protestants .
HUME-1757-2,2,6.99

The nuncio , full of arrogance , levity , and ambition , was not
contented with this violation of treaty . HUME-1757-2,2,6.100

He summoned an assembly of the clergy at Waterford , HUME-1757-2,2,6.101

and engaged them to declare against that pacification , which the civil
council had concluded with their lawful sovereign . HUME-1757-2,2,6.102

He even thundered out a sentence of excommunication against all those
who should adhere to a peace , so prejudicial , as he pretended , to the
Catholic religion ; HUME-1757-2,2,6.103

and the deluded Irish , terrified with his spiritual menaces , ranged
themselves every where on his side , HUME-1757-2,2,6.104

and submitted to his authority . HUME-1757-2,2,6.105

Without scruple , he carried on war against the Lieutenant ,
HUME-1757-2,2,6.106

and threatened with a siege the Protestant garrisons , which were , all
of them , very ill provided for defence . HUME-1757-2,2,6.107

Meanwhile , the unfortunate King was necessitated to take shelter in the
Scotch army ; HUME-1757-2,2,6.108

and being there reduced to close confinement , and secluded from all
commerce with his friends , despaired , that his authority , or even his
liberty , would be restored to him . HUME-1757-2,2,6.109

He sent orders to Ormond , if he could not defend himself , rather to
submit to the English than the Irish rebels , HUME-1757-2,2,6.110

and accordingly the Lord Lieutenant , being reduced to the last
extremity , delivered up Dublin , Tredah , Dundalk , and other garrisons
to Colonel Michael Jones , who took possession of them in the name of
the English Parliament . HUME-1757-2,2,6.111

Ormond himself went over to England , HUME-1757-2,2,6.112

was admitted to the King's presence , HUME-1757-2,2,6.113

received a grateful acknowlegement for all his past services ,
HUME-1757-2,2,6.114

and during some time lived in tranquillity near London .
HUME-1757-2,2,6.115

But being banished , along with the other Royalists , to a distance from
that city , and seeing every event turn out unfortunately for his royal
master , and threaten him with a catastrophe still more direful , he
thought proper to retire into France , where he joined the Queen and the
Prince of Wales . HUME-1757-2,2,6.116

In Ireland , during these transactions , the authority of the nuncio
prevailed without control among all the Catholics , HUME-1757-2,2,6.117

and by his indiscretion and insolence he soon made them repent of the
power , with which they had entrusted him . HUME-1757-2,2,6.118

Prudent men likewise were sensible of the total destruction , which was
hanging over the nation from the English Parliament ,
HUME-1757-2,2,6.119

and saw no ressource nor safety but in giving support to the declining
authority of the King . HUME-1757-2,2,6.120

The Earl of Clanricarde , a nobleman of a very ancient family , a person
too of great merit , who had ever preserved his loyalty , was sensible
of the ruin which threatened his countrymen , HUME-1757-2,2,6.121

<P_2,7>

and was resolved , if possible , to prevent it . HUME-1757-2,2,7.123

He secretly formed a combination among the Catholics ;
HUME-1757-2,2,7.124

he entered into a correspondence with Inchiquin , who preserved great
authority over the Protestants in Munster ; HUME-1757-2,2,7.125

he attacked the nuncio , whom he chased {TEXT:chaced} out of the island
; HUME-1757-2,2,7.126

and he sent to Paris a deputation , who invited the Lord Lieutenant to
return and take possession of his government . HUME-1757-2,2,7.127

Ormond on his arrival in Ireland found the kingdom divided into many
factions , among whom either open war or secret enmity prevailed .
HUME-1757-2,2,7.128

The authority of the English Parliament was established in Dublin , and
the other towns , which he himself had delivered into their hands .
HUME-1757-2,2,7.129

Oneale maintained his credit in Ulster ; HUME-1757-2,2,7.130

and having entered into a secret correspondence with the parliamentary
generals , was more intent on schemes for his own personal safety than
anxious for the preservation of his country or religion .
HUME-1757-2,2,7.131

The other Irish , divided betwixt their clergy , who were averse to
Ormond , and their nobility , who were attached to him , were very
uncertain in their motions and feeble in their measures .
HUME-1757-2,2,7.132

The Scotch in the North , enraged , as well as their other countrymen ,
against the usurpations of the Sectarian army , professed their
adherence to the King ; HUME-1757-2,2,7.133

but were still hindered by many prejudices from entering into a cordial
union with his Lieutenant . HUME-1757-2,2,7.134

All these distracted councils and contrary humors checked the progress
of Ormond , HUME-1757-2,2,7.135

and enabled the parliamentary forces in Ireland to maintain their ground
against him . HUME-1757-2,2,7.136

The English army , while employed in subduing the revolted Royalists ,
in reducing the Parliament to subjection , in the trial , condemnation
and execution of their sovereign , totally neglected the supply of
Ireland , HUME-1757-2,2,7.137

and allowed Jones and the forces in Dublin to remain in the utmost
weakness and necessity . HUME-1757-2,2,7.138

But the lieutenant , having at last , with much difficulty , assembled
an army of 16000 men , advanced upon the English garrisons .
HUME-1757-2,2,7.139

Dundalk , where Monk commanded , was delivered up by the garrison , who
mutinied against their governor . HUME-1757-2,2,7.140

Tredah , Neury , and other forts were taken . HUME-1757-2,2,7.141

Dublin was threatened with a siege ; HUME-1757-2,2,7.142

and the affairs of the lieutenant appeared in so prosperous a condition
, that the young King entertained thoughts of coming in person into
Ireland . HUME-1757-2,2,7.143

The English state being brought to some tolerable appearance of
settlement , men began to cast their eyes towards the neighbouring
island . HUME-1757-2,2,7.144

During the contest of the two parties , the government of Ireland had
remained a great object of intrigue , HUME-1757-2,2,7.145

and the Presbyterians endeavoured to obtain the lieutenancy for Waller ,
the Independants for Lambert . HUME-1757-2,2,7.146

After the execution of the King , Cromwel himself began to aspire to a
command , where so much glory , he saw , might be won , and so much
authority acquired . HUME-1757-2,2,7.147

In his absence , he took care to have his name proposed to the council
of state ; HUME-1757-2,2,7.148

and both friends and enemies concurred immediately to vote <P_2,8> him
into that important office : HUME-1757-2,2,8.149

The former suspected , that the matter had not been proposed merely by
chance , without his own concurrence ; HUME-1757-2,2,8.150

the latter desired to remove him to a distance , HUME-1757-2,2,8.151

and hoped , during his absence , to gain the ascendant over Fairfax ,
whom he had so long blinded by his hypocritical professions .
HUME-1757-2,2,8.152

Cromwel himself , when informed of his election , feigned surprize ,
HUME-1757-2,2,8.153

and pretended at first to hesitate with regard to the acceptance of the
command . HUME-1757-2,2,8.154

And Lambert , either deceived by his dissimulation , or , in his turn ,
feigning to be deceived , still continued , notwithstanding this
disappointment , his friendship and connexions with Cromwel .
HUME-1757-2,2,8.155

The new Lieutenant immediately applied himself with his wonted vigilance
to make preparations for his expedition . HUME-1757-2,2,8.156

Many disorders in England it behoved him previously to compose .
HUME-1757-2,2,8.157

All places were full of danger and inquietude . HUME-1757-2,2,8.158

Tho' men astonished with the success of the army , remained in seeming
tranquillity , symptoms of the highest discontent everywhere appeared .
HUME-1757-2,2,8.159

The English , long accustomed to a mild government , and unacquainted
with dissimulation , could not conform their speech and countenance to
the present necessity , or pretend attachment to a form of government ,
which they regarded with such violent abhorrence . HUME-1757-2,2,8.160

It was requisite to change the magistracy of London , and degrade , as
well as punish , the mayor and some of the aldermen , before the
proclamation for the abolition of Monarchy could be published in the
city . HUME-1757-2,2,8.161

An engagement being framed to support the Commonwealth without King or
House of Peers , the army were with some difficulty brought to subscribe
it ; HUME-1757-2,2,8.162

but tho' it was imposed upon the rest of the nation under severe
penalties , no less than the putting all refusers out of the protection
of law ; such obstinate reluctance was observed in the people , that
even the imperious Parliament were obliged to desist from it .
HUME-1757-2,2,8.163

The spirit of Fanaticism , by which that assembly had at first been
strongly supported , was now turned , in a great measure , against them
. HUME-1757-2,2,8.164

The pulpits , being chiefly filled with Presbyterians , or disguised
Royalists , and having been long the scene of news and politics , could
by no penalties be restrained from declarations , unfavorable to the
established government . HUME-1757-2,2,8.165

Numberless were the extravagances , which broke out among the people .
HUME-1757-2,2,8.166

Everard , a disbanded soldier , having preached that the time was now
come when the community of goods would be renewed among Christians , led
out his followers to take possession of the land ; HUME-1757-2,2,8.167

and being carried before the General , he refused to salute him ;
because he was but his fellow creature . HUME-1757-2,2,8.168

What seemed more dangerous : The army itself was infected with like
humors . HUME-1757-2,2,8.169

Tho' the Levellers had for a <P_2,9> time been suppressed by the
audacious spirit of Cromwel , they still continued to propagate their
doctrines among the private men and inferior officers , who pretended a
right to be consulted , as before , in the administration of the
Commonwealth . HUME-1757-2,2,9.170

They now practised against their officers the same lesson , which they
had been taught against the Parliament . HUME-1757-2,2,9.171

They framed a remonstrance , HUME-1757-2,2,9.172

and sent five agitators to present it to the General and council of war
: HUME-1757-2,2,9.173

These were cashiered with ignominy by sentence of a court-martial .
HUME-1757-2,2,9.174

One Lockier , having carried his sedition farther , was sentenced to
death ; HUME-1757-2,2,9.175

but this punishment was so far from quelling the mutinous spirit , that
above a_thousand of his companions showed their adherence to him , by
attending his funeral , and wearing in their hats black and sea-green
ribbons by way of favors . HUME-1757-2,2,9.176

About four_thousand assembled at Burford under the command of Thomson ,
a man formerly condemned for sedition by a court-martial , but pardoned
by the General . HUME-1757-2,2,9.177

Colonel Reynolds , and afterwards Fairfax and Cromwel , fell upon them
while unprepared for defence , and seduced by the appearance of a treaty
. HUME-1757-2,2,9.178

Four_hundred were taken prisoners : Some of them capitally punished :
The rest pardoned : HUME-1757-2,2,9.179

And this tumultuous Spirit , tho' it <P_2,10> still lurked secretly in
the army , and broke out from time to time , seemed for the present to
be suppressed . HUME-1757-2,2,10.180

Petitions framed in the same spirit of opposition were presented to the
Parliament by lieutenant-colonel Lilburn , the person who , for
dispersing seditious pamphlets , had formerly been treated with such
severity by the Star Chamber . HUME-1757-2,2,10.181

His liberty was at this time as ill relished by the Parliament ,
HUME-1757-2,2,10.182

and he was thrown into prison , as a promoter of sedition and disorder
in the Commonwealth . HUME-1757-2,2,10.183

The women applied by petition for his release ; HUME-1757-2,2,10.184

but were now desired to mind their household affairs , and leave the
government of the state to the men . HUME-1757-2,2,10.185

From all quarters , the Parliament were harrassed with petitions of a
very free nature , which strongly spoke the sense of the nation , and
proved how ardently all men longed for the restoration of their laws and
liberties . HUME-1757-2,2,10.186

Even in a feast , which the city gave to the Parliament and Council of
state , it was esteemed a requisite precaution , if we may credit Walker
and Dugdale , to swear all the cooks , that they would serve nothing but
wholesome food to them . HUME-1757-2,2,10.187

Such perpetual terrors hang over tyranny and injustice .
HUME-1757-2,2,10.188

The laws of high-treason the Parliament judged it necessary to enlarge
beyond those narrow bounds , within which they had been confined during
the monarchy . HUME-1757-2,2,10.189

They even comprehended verbal offences , nay intentions , tho'
frustrated ; crimes , which few civilized states ever punished with such
severity . HUME-1757-2,2,10.190

To affirm the present government to be an usurpation , to assert that
the Parliament or council of state were tyrannical or illegal , to
endeavor the subverting their authority or stirring up sedition against
them ; these offences were declared to be high-treason .
HUME-1757-2,2,10.191

The power of imprisonment , of which the petition of right had bereaved
the King , it was now found requisite to restore to the Council of State
; HUME-1757-2,2,10.192

and all the jails of England were filled with men whom the jealousies
and fears of the ruling party had represented as dangerous .
HUME-1757-2,2,10.193

The taxes , continued by the new government , and which , being unusual
, were esteemed heavy , encreased the general ill will under which it
labored . HUME-1757-2,2,10.194

Besides the customs and excise , ninety_thousand pounds a month were
levied on land for the subsistence of the army . HUME-1757-2,2,10.195

The sequestrations and compositions of the Royalists , the sale of the
crown lands , and of the dean and chapter lands , tho' they yielded
immense sums , were not sufficient to supply the vast expences , and ,
as was suspected , the great depredations , of the Parliament and of
their creatures . HUME-1757-2,2,10.196

Amidst all these difficulties and disturbances , the steady
{TEXT:steddy} mind of Cromwel , without confusion or embarrassment ,
still pursued its purpose . HUME-1757-2,2,10.197

While he was collecting an army of twelve_thousand men in the west of
England , he sent to Ireland , under Reynolds and Venables , a
reinforcement of four_thousand horse and foot , <P_2,11> in order to
strengthen Jones , and enable him to defend himself against the marquess
of Ormond , who lay at Finglass , and began to threaten Dublin .
HUME-1757-2,2,11.198

Inchiquin , with a separate body , having taken Tredah and Dundalk ,
gave a defeat to Offarrell who served under Oneale , and to young Coot
who commanded some parliamentary forces . HUME-1757-2,2,11.199

After he had joined his troops to the main army , with whom , for some
time , he remained united , Ormond passed the river Liffy ,
HUME-1757-2,2,11.200

and took post at Rathmines two miles from Dublin , with a view of
commencing the siege of that city . HUME-1757-2,2,11.201

In order to cut off all farther supply from Jones , he had begun the
reparation of an old fort , which lay at the gates of Dublin ;
HUME-1757-2,2,11.202

and being exhausted with continual fatigue for some days , he had
retired to rest , after leaving orders to keep his forces under arms .
HUME-1757-2,2,11.203

He was suddenly awaked with the noise of firing ; HUME-1757-2,2,11.204

and starting from his bed , saw every thing already in tumult and
confusion . HUME-1757-2,2,11.205

Jones , an excellent officer , formerly a lawyer , had sallied out with
the reinforcement newly arrived ; HUME-1757-2,2,11.206

and attacking the party employed in repairing the fort , he totally
routed them , HUME-1757-2,2,11.207

pursued the advantage , HUME-1757-2,2,11.208

and fell in with the army , which had neglected Ormond's orders .
HUME-1757-2,2,11.209

These he soon threw into disorder ; HUME-1757-2,2,11.210

put them to flight , in spite of all the efforts of the Lord-Lieutenant
; HUME-1757-2,2,11.211

chaced them off the field ; HUME-1757-2,2,11.212

seized all their tents , baggage , ammunition ; HUME-1757-2,2,11.213

and returned victorious to Dublin , after killing three_thousand men ,
and taking above two_thousand prisoners . HUME-1757-2,2,11.214

This loss , which threw some blemish on the military character of Ormond
, was irreparable to the royal cause . HUME-1757-2,2,11.215

That numerous army , which , with so much pains and difficulty , the
Lieutenant had been collecting for more than a year , was dissipated in
a moment . HUME-1757-2,2,11.216

Cromwel soon after arrived in Dublin , where he was welcomed with mighty
shouts and rejoicings . HUME-1757-2,2,11.217

He hastened immediately to Tredah . HUME-1757-2,2,11.218

That town was well fortified ; HUME-1757-2,2,11.219

and Ormond had thrown into it a good garrison of three_thousand men ,
under Sir Arthur Aston , an officer of reputation .
HUME-1757-2,2,11.220

He expected that Tredah lying in the neighbourhood of Dublin , would
first be attempted by Cromwel , HUME-1757-2,2,11.221

and he was willing to employ the enemy some time in that siege , while
he himself should repair his broken forces . HUME-1757-2,2,11.222

But Cromwel knew the importance of dispatch . HUME-1757-2,2,11.223

Having made a breach , he ordered a general assault .
HUME-1757-2,2,11.224

Tho' twice repulsed with great loss he renewed the attack ,
HUME-1757-2,2,11.225

and himself , along with Ireton , led on his men . HUME-1757-2,2,11.226

All opposition was overborne by the furious valor of the troops .
HUME-1757-2,2,11.227

The town was taken sword in hand ; HUME-1757-2,2,11.228

and orders being issued to give no quarter , a cruel slaughter was made
of the garrison . HUME-1757-2,2,11.229

Even a few , who were saved by the soldiers , satiated with blood , were
next day miserably butchered by orders from the General .
HUME-1757-2,2,11.230

One person alone of the whole garrison escaped to be a messenger of this
universal havoc and destruction . HUME-1757-2,2,11.231

About thirty were sold slaves to Barbadoes . HUME-1757-2,2,11.232

<P_2,12> Cromwel pretended by this severe execution to retaliate the
cruelty of the Irish massacre : HUME-1757-2,2,12.233

But he well knew , that almost the whole garrison was English ;
HUME-1757-2,2,12.234

and his justice was only a barbarous policy , in order to terrify all
other garrisons from resistance . HUME-1757-2,2,12.235

His policy , however , had the desired effect . HUME-1757-2,2,12.236

Having led the army without delay to Wexford , he began to batter the
town . HUME-1757-2,2,12.237

The garrison after a slight defence offered to capitulate ;
HUME-1757-2,2,12.238

but before they obtained a cessation , they imprudently neglected their
guards ; HUME-1757-2,2,12.239

and the English army rushed in upon them . HUME-1757-2,2,12.240

The same severity was exercised as at Tredah . HUME-1757-2,2,12.241

Every town , before which Cromwel presented himself , now opened its
gates without resistance . HUME-1757-2,2,12.242

Ross , tho' strongly garrisoned , was surrendered by lord Taffe .
HUME-1757-2,2,12.243

Having taken Estionage ; Cromwel threw a bridge over the Barrow ,
HUME-1757-2,2,12.244

and made himself master of Passage and Carric . HUME-1757-2,2,12.245

Owen Oneale submitted at discretion , HUME-1757-2,2,12.246

and soon afterwards died . HUME-1757-2,2,12.247

The English had no difficulties to encounter but what arose from fatigue
and the advanced season . HUME-1757-2,2,12.248

Fluxes and contagious distempers crept in among the soldiers , who
perished in great numbers . HUME-1757-2,2,12.249

Jones himself , the brave governor of Dublin , died at Wexford .
HUME-1757-2,2,12.250

And Cromwel had so far advanced with his decayed army , that he began to
find it difficult , either to subsist in the enemies country , or
retreat to his own garrisons . HUME-1757-2,2,12.251

But while he was in these straits , Corke Kinsale , and all the English
garrisons in Munster deserted to him , HUME-1757-2,2,12.252

and opening their gates resolved to share the fortunes of their
victorious countrymen . HUME-1757-2,2,12.253

This desertion of the English put an end entirely to Ormond's authority
, which was already much diminished by the misfortunes at Dublin ,
Tredah and Wexford : HUME-1757-2,2,12.254

The Irish , actuated by national and religious prejudices , could no
longer be kept in obedience by a protestant governor , who was so
unsuccessful in all his enterprizes . HUME-1757-2,2,12.255

The clergy renewed their excommunications against him and his adherents
, HUME-1757-2,2,12.256

and added the terrors of superstition to those arising from a victorious
enemy . HUME-1757-2,2,12.257

Cromwel , having received a reinforcement from England , again took the
field early in the spring . HUME-1757-2,2,12.258

After a siege , he made himself master of Kilkenny , the only place
where he met with any vigorous resistance . HUME-1757-2,2,12.259

The whole frame of the Irish union being in a manner dissolved , Ormond
, soon after , left the island ; HUME-1757-2,2,12.260

and delegated his authority to Clanricarde , who found affairs so
desperate as to admit of no remedy . HUME-1757-2,2,12.261

The Irish were glad to embrace banishment as a refuge .
HUME-1757-2,2,12.262

Above 40,000 men passed into foreign service ; HUME-1757-2,2,12.263

and Cromwel , pleased to free the island from enemies , who never could
be cordially reconciled to the English , gave them full liberty and
leisure for their embarkation . HUME-1757-2,2,12.264

<P_2,13> While Cromwel proceeded with such uninterrupted success in
Ireland , which in the space of nine months he had almost entirely
subdued , fortune was preparing for him a new scene of victory and
triumph in Scotland . HUME-1757-2,2,13.265

Charles was at the Hague , when Sir Joseph Douglas brought him
intelligence , that he was proclaimed King by the Scotch parliament .
HUME-1757-2,2,13.266

At the same time , Douglas informed him of the hard conditions annexed
to the proclamation , HUME-1757-2,2,13.267

and damped extremely that joy , which might arise from his being
recognized sovereign in one of his kingdoms . HUME-1757-2,2,13.268

Charles too considered , that those who pretended to acknowlege his
title , were at that very time in actual rebellion against his family ,
and would be careful to intrust very little authority into his hands ,
and scarcely would afford him personal liberty and security .
HUME-1757-2,2,13.269

As the prospect of affairs in Ireland was at that time very promising ,
he intended rather to try his fortune in that kingdom , from which he
expected more dutiful submission and obedience . HUME-1757-2,2,13.270

Mean_while he found it expedient to depart from Holland .
HUME-1757-2,2,13.271

The people in the United Provinces were much attached to his interest .
HUME-1757-2,2,13.272

Besides his connexion with the family of Orange , which was extremely
beloved by the populace , all men regarded with compassion his helpless
condition , HUME-1757-2,2,13.273

and expressed the utmost abhorrence against the murder of his father ; a
deed , to which nothing , they thought , but the utmost rage of
fanaticism and faction could have impelled the Parliament .
HUME-1757-2,2,13.274

But tho' the public in general bore a great favor to the King , the
States were uneasy at his presence . HUME-1757-2,2,13.275

They dreaded the Parliament , so formidable by their power , and so
prosperous in all their enterprizes . HUME-1757-2,2,13.276

They apprehended the most precipitant resolutions from men of such
violent and haughty dispositions . HUME-1757-2,2,13.277

And after the murder of Dorislaus , they found it still more requisite
to satisfy the English Commonwealth , by removing the King at a distance
from them . HUME-1757-2,2,13.278

Dorislaus , tho' a native of Holland , had lived long in England ;
HUME-1757-2,2,13.279

and being employed as assistant to the high court of justice , which
condemned the King , he had risen to great credit and favor with the
ruling party . HUME-1757-2,2,13.280

They sent him envoy into Holland ; HUME-1757-2,2,13.281

but no sooner had he arrived at the Hague , than he was set upon by some
royalists , chiefly retainers to Montrose . HUME-1757-2,2,13.282

They rushed into the room , where he was sitting with some company ;
HUME-1757-2,2,13.283

dragg'd him from the table ; HUME-1757-2,2,13.284

put him to death as the first victim to their murder'd sovereign ;
HUME-1757-2,2,13.285

very leisurely and peaceably separated ; HUME-1757-2,2,13.286

and tho' orders were issued by the magistrates to arrest them , these
were executed with such slowness and reluctance , that the criminals had
, all of them , opportunity to make their escape . HUME-1757-2,2,13.287

Charles , having pass'd some time at Paris , where no assistance was
given him , and even few civilities were paid him , made his retreat
into Jersey , where his authority <P_2,14> was still acknowleged .
HUME-1757-2,2,14.288

Winram , laird of Liberton , came to him as deputy from the committee of
estates in Scotland , HUME-1757-2,2,14.289

and informed him of the conditions , to which he must necessarily submit
before he could be admitted to the exercise of his authority .
HUME-1757-2,2,14.290

Conditions , more severe , were never imposed by subjects upon their
sovereign ; HUME-1757-2,2,14.291

but as the affairs of Ireland began extremely to decline , and the King
found it no longer safe to venture himself in that island , he gave a
civil answer to Winram , HUME-1757-2,2,14.292

and desired commissioners to meet him at Breda , in order to enter into
a treaty with regard to these conditions . HUME-1757-2,2,14.293

The earls of Cassilis and Lothian , the lord Burley , the laird of
Liberton and other commissioners arrived at Breda ; but without any
power of treating : HUME-1757-2,2,14.294

The King must submit without reserve to the terms imposed upon him .
HUME-1757-2,2,14.295

The terms were , That he should issue a proclamation , banishing from
court all excommunicated persons , that is , all those , who either
under Hamilton or Montrose , had ventured their lives for his family ;
that no English subject , who had served against the Parliament should
be allowed to approach him ; that he should bind himself by his royal
promise to take the covenant ; that he should ratify all acts of
Parliament , by which Presbyterian government , the directory of worship
, confession of faith and catechism are enjoined ; and that in civil
affairs he should govern himself entirely according to the direction of
Parliament , and in ecclesiastical according to that of the assembly .
HUME-1757-2,2,14.296

These proposals , the commissioners , after passing some time in sermons
and prayers , in order to mark the more determined resolution , very
solemnly delivered to the King . HUME-1757-2,2,14.297

The King's friends were extremely divided with regard to the part ,
which he should act in this critical conjuncture . HUME-1757-2,2,14.298

Most of his English counsellors dissuaded him from accepting conditions
, so disadvantageous and dishonorable . HUME-1757-2,2,14.299

They said , that the men , who now governed Scotland , were the most
furious and bigotted of that party , which , notwithstanding his gentle
government , had first excited a rebellion against the late King ; after
the most unlimited concessions , had renewed their rebellion , and stopt
the progress of his victories ; and after he had entrusted his person
with them in his uttermost distress , had basely sold him , along with
their own honor , to his barbarous enemies : That they had as yet shown
no marks of repentance , and even in the terms , which they now proposed
, displayed the same antimonarchical principles , and the same jealousy
of their Sovereign , by which they had ever been actuated : That nothing
could be more dishonorable , than that the King , in his first
enterprize , should sacrifice , merely for the empty name of royalty ,
those principles , for which his father had died a martyr , and in which
he himself had been strictly educated : That by this hypocrisy he might
lose the Royalists , who alone <P_2,15> were sincerely attached to him ,
but never would gain the presbyterians , who were averse from his family
and his cause , and would ascribe his compliance merely to politics and
necessity : That the Scots had refused to give him any assurances of
their intending to restore him to the throne of England ; and could they
even be engaged to make such an attempt , it had sufficiently appeared ,
by the event of Hamilton's engagement , how unequal their force was to
so great an enterprize : That on the first check , which they should
receive , Argyle and his partizans would lay hold of the quickest
expedient for reconciling themselves to the English parliament , and
would betray the King , as they had done his father , into the hands of
his enemies : And that , however desperate the royal cause , no maxims
of prudence could justify him in sacrificing his honor for no other
purchase than to endanger his life or liberty . HUME-1757-2,2,15.300

The Earl of Laneric , now Duke of Hamilton , the Earl of Lauderdale ,
and others of that party , who had been banished their country for the
late engagement , were then with the King ; HUME-1757-2,2,15.301

and being desirous of returning home in his retinue , they joined the
opinion of the young Duke of Buckingham , HUME-1757-2,2,15.302

and very earnestly pressed him to accept the conditions , required of
him . HUME-1757-2,2,15.303

It was urged , that nothing would more gratify the King's enemies than
to see him fall into the snare laid for him , and by so scrupulous a
nicety leave the possession of his dominions to those who desired but a
pretext for excluding him : That Argyle , not daring so far to oppose
the bent of the nation as to throw off all allegiance to his sovereign ,
had embraced this expedient , by which he hoped to make Charles dethrone
himself and refuse a kingdom , which was offered him : That it was not
to be doubted but the same national spirit , assisted by Hamilton and
his party , would still rise higher in favor of their Prince after he
had intrusted himself to their fidelity , and would much relax the rigor
of those conditions , now imposed upon him : That whatever might be the
present intentions of the ruling party , they must unavoidably be
engaged in a war with England , and must accept the assistance of the
King's friends of all parties , in order to support themselves against a
power , so much superior : That however a steddy , uniform conduct might
have been suitable to the advanced age and strict engagements of the
late King , no one would throw any blame on a young Prince for complying
with conditions , which necessity had extorted from him : That even the
rigor of those principles , professed by his father , tho' with some it
had exalted his character , had been extremely prejudicial to his
interest ; nor could any thing be more serviceable to the royal cause
than to give all parties room to hope for more equal and more indulgent
maxims of government : And that where affairs were reduced to so
desperate a condition , dangers ought little to be regarded ; and the
King's honor lay rather in showing some <P_2,16> early symptoms of
courage and activity than in determining strictly among theological
controversies , with which , it might be supposed , he was , as yet ,
very little acquainted . HUME-1757-2,2,16.304

These arguments , seconded by the advice of the Queen and the Prince of
Orange the King's brother in law , who both of them esteemed it
ridiculous to refuse a kingdom , merely from regard to episcopacy , had
great influence on Charles . HUME-1757-2,2,16.305

But what chiefly determined him to comply was the account brought him of
the fate of Montrose , who with all the circumstances of rage and
contumely , had been put to death by his zealous countrymen .
HUME-1757-2,2,16.306

Tho' in this instance the King saw more evidently the furious spirit ,
by which the Scotch were actuated , he had now no farther resource ,
HUME-1757-2,2,16.307

and was obliged to grant whatever was demanded of him .
HUME-1757-2,2,16.308

Montrose , having laid down his arms at the command of the late King ,
had retired into France , HUME-1757-2,2,16.309

and contrary to his natural disposition , lived for some time inactive
at Paris . HUME-1757-2,2,16.310

He there became acquainted with the famous Cardinal de Retz ;
HUME-1757-2,2,16.311

and that penetrating judge celebrates him in his memoirs as one of those
heroes , of whom there are no longer any remains in the world , and who
, are only to be met with in Plutarch . HUME-1757-2,2,16.312

Desirous of improving his martial genius , he took a journey to Germany
, HUME-1757-2,2,16.313

was extremely caressed by the Emperor , HUME-1757-2,2,16.314

received the rank of Mareschal , HUME-1757-2,2,16.315

and proposed to levy a regiment for the Imperial service .
HUME-1757-2,2,16.316

While employed for that purpose in the Low_Countries , he heard of the
tragical death of the King ; HUME-1757-2,2,16.317

and at the same time received from his young master a renewal of his
commission of Captain General in Scotland . HUME-1757-2,2,16.318

His ardent and daring spirit needed but this authority to put him in
action . HUME-1757-2,2,16.319

In Holland and the north of Germany he gathered followers , whom his
great reputation allured to him . HUME-1757-2,2,16.320

The King of Denmark and Duke of Holstein sent him some small supplies of
money : HUME-1757-2,2,16.321

The Queen of Sweden furnished him with arms : The Prince of Orange with
ships : HUME-1757-2,2,16.322

And Montrose , hastening his enterprize , lest the King's agreement with
the Scotch should make him revoke his commission , set out for the
Orkneys with about 500 men , most of them Germans .
HUME-1757-2,2,16.323

These were all the preparations , which he could make against a kingdom
, settled in domestic peace , supported by a disciplined army , fully
apprized of his enterprize , and prepared against him .
HUME-1757-2,2,16.324

Some of his retainers having told him of a prophesy that <font> to him
and him alone it was reserved to restore the King's authority in all his
dominions <$$font> ; he lent a willing ear to suggestions , which ,
however ill_grounded or improbable , were so conformable to his own
magnanimous disposition . HUME-1757-2,2,16.325

<P_2,17>

Several of the inhabitants of the Orkneys , tho' an unwarlike people ,
he armed and carried over with him to Caithness ; hoping , that the
general affection to the King's service and the fame of his former
exploits , would make the mountaniers flock to his standard .
HUME-1757-2,2,17.327

But all men were now harrassed and fatigued with wars and disorders :
HUME-1757-2,2,17.328

Many of those , who formerly adhered to him , had been severely punished
by the covenanters : HUME-1757-2,2,17.329

And no prospect of success was entertained in opposition to so great a
force as was drawn together against him . HUME-1757-2,2,17.330

But however weak Montrose's army , the memory of past events struck a
great terror into the committee of estates . HUME-1757-2,2,17.331

They immediately ordered Lesley and Holborne to march against him with
an army of 4000 men . HUME-1757-2,2,17.332

Strahan was sent before with a body of cavalry to check his progress .
HUME-1757-2,2,17.333

He fell unexpectedly on Montrose , who had no horse to bring him
intelligence . HUME-1757-2,2,17.334

The royalists were put to flight ; all of them either killed or taken
prisoners ; HUME-1757-2,2,17.335

and Montrose himself , having put on the disguise of a peasant , was
discovered , and treacherously delivered into the hands of his enemies .
HUME-1757-2,2,17.336

All the insolence , which success can produce in ungenerous minds , was
exercised by the covenanters against Montrose , whom they so much hated
and so much dreaded . HUME-1757-2,2,17.337

Theological antipathy farther encreased their indignities towards a
person , whom they regarded as execrable on account of the
excommunication , which had been pronounced against him .
HUME-1757-2,2,17.338

Lesley led him about for several days in the same low habit , under
which he had disguised himself . HUME-1757-2,2,17.339

The vulgar , wherever he passed , were instigated , tho' sometimes with
reluctance , to reproach and vilify him . HUME-1757-2,2,17.340

When he came to Edinburgh , every circumstance of elaborate rage and
insult was put in practice by order of the Parliament .
HUME-1757-2,2,17.341

At the eastern gate of the city , he was met by the magistrates , and
put into a new cart , purposely made with a high chair or bench , where
he was placed , that the people might have a full view of him .
HUME-1757-2,2,17.342

He was bound with a cord , drawn over his breast and shoulders , and
fastened thro' holes made in the cart . HUME-1757-2,2,17.343

When in this posture , the hangman took off the hat of the noble
prisoner , HUME-1757-2,2,17.344

and rode himself before the cart in his livery and with his bonnet on ;
the other officers , who were taken prisoners along with the Marquess ,
walking two and two before them . HUME-1757-2,2,17.345

The populace , more generous and humane , when they saw so mighty a
change of fortune in this great man , so lately their dread and terror ,
into whose hands the magistrates , a few years before , had on their
knees delivered the keys of the city , were struck with compassion ,
HUME-1757-2,2,17.346

and viewed him with silent tears and admiration . HUME-1757-2,2,17.347

The preachers , next Sunday , exclaimed against these movements of rebel
nature , as they expressed it ; HUME-1757-2,2,17.348

and reproached the people with their profane tenderness towards this
capital enemy of all piety and religion . HUME-1757-2,2,17.349

<P_2,18> Montrose himself , tho' passionately fond of true glory , knew
to despise unmerited ignominy , HUME-1757-2,2,18.350

and , wherever he was carried , received with manly scorn and
indifference the insults of his enemies . HUME-1757-2,2,18.351

Their ignoble behavior he considered as sufficient vengeance for all
their injuries . HUME-1757-2,2,18.352

In the road , he had passed by the Earl of Southesk@ @'s house , his
father in law , HUME-1757-2,2,18.353

and was allowed to see his children , who lived there :
HUME-1757-2,2,18.354

Not even the tenderness of this last adieu could disturb the even tenor
of his heroic mind , or extort a complaint against the injustice of men
or the cruelty of fortune . HUME-1757-2,2,18.355

When he was carried before the Parliament , which was then sitting ,
Loudon , the chancellor , in a violent declamation reproached him with
the breach of the national covenant , which he had subscribed ; his
rebellion against God , the King , and the Kingdom ; and the many
horrible murders , treasons , and impieties , for which he was now
brought to condign punishment . HUME-1757-2,2,18.356

Montrose in his answer maintained the same superiority above his enemies
, to which , by his fame and great actions , as well as by the
conscience of a good cause , he was justly entitled .
HUME-1757-2,2,18.357

He told the Parliament , that since the King , as he was informed , had
so far avowed their authority as to enter into treaty with them , he now
appeared uncovered before their tribunal ; a respect , which , while
they stood in open defiance to their sovereign , they would in vain have
required of him . That he acknowleged with infinite shame and remorse
the errors of his early conduct , when their plausible pretexts had
seduced him to tread with them the paths of rebellion , and bear arms
against his Prince and Country . That his following services , he hoped
, had sufficiently testified his repentance , and his death would now
atone {TEXT:attone} for that guilt , the only one with which he could
justly reproach himself . That in all his warlike enterprizes he was
warranted by that commission , which he had received from his and their
master , against whose lawful authority they had erected their standard
. That to venture his life for his sovereign was the least part of his
merit : He had even thrown down his arms in obedience to the sacred
commands of the King ; and had resigned to them the victory , which , in
defiance of all their efforts , he was still enabled to dispute with
them . That no blood had ever been shed by him but in the field of
battle ; and many persons were now in his eye , many now dared to
pronounce the sentence of death upon him , whose life , forfeited by the
laws of war , he had formerly saved from the fury of the soldiers .
That he was sorry to find no better testimony of their return to
allegiance than the murder of so faithful a subject , in whose death the
King's commission must be at once so highly injured and affronted .
That as to himself they had in vain endeavoured to vilify and degrade
him by all their studied indignities : The justice of his cause , he
knew , <P_2,19> would ennoble any fortune ; nor had he other affliction
than to see the authority of his Prince , with which he was invested ,
treated with so much ignominy . And that he now joyfully followed , by
a like unjust sentence , his late sovereign ; and should be happy , if ,
in his future destiny , he could follow him to the same blissful
mansions , where his piety and humane virtues had already , without
doubt , secured him an eternal recompence . HUME-1757-2,2,19.358

Montrose's sentence was next pronounced against him , " That he , James
Graham " <paren> for this was the only name they vouchsafed him
<$$paren> " should next day be carried to Edinburgh Cross , and there be
hanged on a gibbet , thirty foot high , for the space of three hours :
Then be taken down , his head be cut off upon a scaffold , and affixed
to the prison : His legs and arms be stuck up on the four chief towns of
the kingdom : His body be buried in the place appropriated for common
malefactors ; except the church , upon his repentance , should take off
his excommunication . " HUME-1757-2,2,19.359

The clergy , hoping that the terrors of immediate death had now given
them an advantage over their enemy , flocked about him ,
HUME-1757-2,2,19.360

and insulted over his fallen fortunes . HUME-1757-2,2,19.361

They pronounced his damnation , HUME-1757-2,2,19.362

and assured him , that the judgement , which he was so soon to suffer ,
would prove but an easy prologue to that which he must undergo hereafter
. HUME-1757-2,2,19.363

They next offered to pray with him : HUME-1757-2,2,19.364

But he was too well acquainted with those forms of imprecation , which
they called prayers . HUME-1757-2,2,19.365

" Lord vouchsafe yet to touch the obdurate heart of this proud
incorrigible sinner ; this wicked , perjured , traiterous , and profane
person , who refuses to hearken to the voice of thy church . "
HUME-1757-2,2,19.366

Such were the petitions , which , he expected , they would , according
to custom , offer up for him . HUME-1757-2,2,19.367

He told them , that they were a miserable , deluded and deluding people
; and would shortly bring their country under the most insupportable
servitude , to which any nation had ever been reduced .
HUME-1757-2,2,19.368

" For my part , " added he , " I am much prouder to have my head affixed
to the place , where it is sentenced to stand , than to have my picture
hang in the King's bed-chamber . HUME-1757-2,2,19.369

So far from being sorry , that my legs and arms are to be sent to four
cities of the kingdom ; I wish I had limbs enough to be dispersed into
all the cities of Christendom , there to remain as testimonies in favor
of the cause , for which I suffer . " HUME-1757-2,2,19.370

This sentiment , that very evening , while in prison , he threw into
verse . HUME-1757-2,2,19.371

The poem remains ; a signal monument of his heroic spirit , and no
despicable proof of his poetical genius . HUME-1757-2,2,19.372

Now was led forth , amidst the insults of his enemies and the tears of
the people , the man of the most illustrious birth and greatest renown
of the nation , to suffer , for his adherence to the laws of his country
and the rights of his sovereign , the <P_2,20> ignominious death
destined to the meanest malefactor . HUME-1757-2,2,20.373

Every attempt , which the insolence of the governing party had made to
subdue his gallant spirit , had hitherto proved fruitless :
HUME-1757-2,2,20.374

They made yet one effort more , in this last and melancholy scene , when
all enmity , arising from motives merely human , is commonly softened
and disarmed . HUME-1757-2,2,20.375

The executioner brought that book , which had been published in elegant
Latin of his truly heroic actions , HUME-1757-2,2,20.376

and tied it by a cord about his neck . HUME-1757-2,2,20.377

Montrose smiled at this new instance of their malice .
HUME-1757-2,2,20.378

He thanked them , however , for their officious zeal ;
HUME-1757-2,2,20.379

and said , that he bore this testimony of his bravery and loyalty with
more pride than he had ever worne the garter . HUME-1757-2,2,20.380

Having asked , whether they had any more indignities to put upon him ,
and renewing some devout ejaculations , he patiently endured the last
act of the executioner . HUME-1757-2,2,20.381

Thus perished in the thirty_eighth year of his age , the gallant
Marquess of Montrose ; the man whose military genius , both by valor and
conduct , had shone forth beyond any , which , during these civil
disorders , had appeared in the three kingdoms . HUME-1757-2,2,20.382

The finer arts too , in his youth , he had successfully cultivated ;
HUME-1757-2,2,20.383

and whatever was sublime , elegant , or noble touched his great soul .
HUME-1757-2,2,20.384

Nor was he insensible to the pleasures either of society or of love .
HUME-1757-2,2,20.385

Something , however , of the <font> vast <$$font> and <font> unbounded
<$$font> characterized his whole actions and deportment ;
HUME-1757-2,2,20.386

and it was merely by an heroic effort of duty , that he brought his mind
, impatient of superiority and even of equality , to pay such unlimited
submission to the will of his sovereign . HUME-1757-2,2,20.387

The vengeance of the covenanters was not satisfied with Montrose's
execution . HUME-1757-2,2,20.388

Urrey , whose inconstancy now led him to take part with the King ,
suffered about the same time : HUME-1757-2,2,20.389

Spotiswood of Daersie , a youth of eighteen , Sir Francis Hay of
Dalgetie , and collonel Sibbald , all of them men of birth and character
, underwent a like fate . HUME-1757-2,2,20.390

These were taken prisoners along with Montrose . HUME-1757-2,2,20.391

The Marquess of Huntley , about a year before , had fallen a victim to
the severity of the covenanters . HUME-1757-2,2,20.392

The past scene displays in a full light the barbarity of this
theological faction : HUME-1757-2,2,20.393

The sequel will sufficiently discover their absurdities .
HUME-1757-2,2,20.394

The corruptions of the best things produce the worst ;
HUME-1757-2,2,20.395

and no wonder that the abuses of religion should of all others be the
most odious and ridiculous . HUME-1757-2,2,20.396

In order to mark the genius of the age , we are obliged sometimes in our
narration to make use of the same cant and expression , which was then
so prevalent . HUME-1757-2,2,20.397

