<BEGIN_hunt-1844-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

Tic_Douloureux . HUNT-1844-2,1.4

Chapter I . HUNT-1844-2,1.5

Description of Tic_Douloureux . HUNT-1844-2,1.6

<$$heading>

The agonising pain , commonly called Tic_Douloureux , has its seat in
the branches of those nerves that are distributed over the cheek , the
fifth and the seventh , but most frequently in the branches of the fifth
nerve . HUNT-1844-2,1.8

No nerve , however , in any part of the body is exempt from its attack .
HUNT-1844-2,1.9

The manner in which it affects different individuals is very various .
HUNT-1844-2,1.10

In some , the paroxysm commences with a dull , obtuse pain , not unlike
an incipient toothache , exciting , perhaps , at first , little
attention or alarm ; HUNT-1844-2,1.11

gradually , however , it becomes more severe , and of more frequent
recurrence . HUNT-1844-2,1.12

The pain , at first dull , is , at uncertain intervals , accompanied by
acute darting , plunging pains , not unlike electric shocks , shooting
through the nerve affected <P_2> and the different branches of that
nerve with inconceivable rapidity , occasionally ceasing for a few
minutes , to be renewed with equal , if not greater violence , by which
the unfortunate sufferer is thrown , as it were , into a kind of frenzy
. HUNT-1844-2,2.13

After having continued for an indefinite length of time , the pain
gradually subsides , the violent flashes having previously ceased .
HUNT-1844-2,2.14

The pain attacks other persons suddenly and without warning , with an
intensity of suffering which it is difficult to describe .
HUNT-1844-2,2.15

Some patients describe the pain , as being characterized by a sensation
of clawing and gnawing in the part affected , or as if redhot iron was
forcibly driven through the nerve , and accompanied by a repetition of
agonizing shocks , or flashes darting through it . HUNT-1844-2,2.16

The termination of the paroxysm is often as abrupt as the attack ,
whilst it leaves the patient either in a state of violent nervous
excitement , or completely exhausted by the agony . HUNT-1844-2,2.17

The paroxysms , in some cases , return irregularly several times in a
day . HUNT-1844-2,2.18

Sometimes they intermit for the space of three or four days or a week ,
or even a longer period , HUNT-1844-2,2.19

and then return with equal severity , <font> appearing <$$font> not to
obey any regular law . HUNT-1844-2,2.20

Those that come on suddenly and violently from the first are frequently
the most severe , irregular and obstinate . HUNT-1844-2,2.21

<P_3> When the disease in its irregular form is fully established , or
rather in proportion to the length of time it has existed , the
paroxsyms become more acute , HUNT-1844-2,3.22

and occur more frequently . HUNT-1844-2,3.23

They are then more easily excited by trifling local or accidental causes
of irritation ; by the slightest touch or movement of the affected part
, so that the effort of speaking , masticating , or swallowing is as
much as possible avoided . HUNT-1844-2,3.24

Sudden exposure of the part to heat or cold will also be sufficient to
provoke a paroxysm . HUNT-1844-2,3.25

When the neuralgic pain originates in , or depends on disorder of any
viscus , the pain will generally vary in proportion as that disorder
increases or diminishes . HUNT-1844-2,3.26

The paroxysms , in numerous cases , recur with the regularity of an ague
, returning daily at the same hour ; HUNT-1844-2,3.27

in cases of this nature the pain , at first trifling , gradually
increases in severity for a given time , until it has attained its acme
; when , perhaps , after continuing very violently , it gradually
subsides and leaves the patient perfectly easy , until the same hour on
the following day . HUNT-1844-2,3.28

During the violence of the paroxysms , the same shocks and darting pains
are not unfrequently {COM:sic} felt , as in the more irregular form of
the disease . HUNT-1844-2,3.29

Cases are occasionally met with , in which the paroxysms return three or
four times every day in <P_4> quite as regular order , as to the time ,
as they do in cases partaking of a more common or quotidian type .
HUNT-1844-2,4.30

In others again , one , two , three , or even four weeks may intervene
between the paroxysms , HUNT-1844-2,4.31

yet the recurrence of them is so regular , that the exact day in which
they will return can be generally foretold . HUNT-1844-2,4.32

In many cases , although a certain degree of pain is constantly felt ,
yet the exacerbations of greater intensity are quite as regular as in
those which have intervals of perfect ease . HUNT-1844-2,4.33

There is also a marked tendency in this disease to return annually about
the same period , the time of its return varying in different
individuals . HUNT-1844-2,4.34

This is equally true of both forms , the regular and irregular .
HUNT-1844-2,4.35

Some individuals are <font> quite free <$$font> from pain , except
during one , two , or three months in the year ; HUNT-1844-2,4.36

others have their sufferings <font> much increased <$$font> in
particular months ; some asserting that they suffer most in October and
November , and others in April and May . HUNT-1844-2,4.37

Tic_douloureux , in many of its phenomena , is very analogous to
epilepsy , hysteria , and other nervous diseases . HUNT-1844-2,4.38

In neuralgia , as in epilepsy , the parts are sometimes quiet , as
indeed the whole system may be ; HUNT-1844-2,4.39

yet there is so great a tendency to tic , that the slightest cause is
sufficient to provoke an attack . HUNT-1844-2,4.40

Again in neuralgia , as in epilepsy , the <P_5> patient is occasionally
forewarned of the approaching paroxysm by a feeling somewhat similar to
the epileptic aura . HUNT-1844-2,5.41

A case will be detailed in which the disease apparently depended on
disordered stomach and liver . HUNT-1844-2,5.42

In this case the paroxysm was invariably preceded by a sensation , as if
a fine thread passed from about the region of the pylorus through the
chest and neck to the seat of the pain in the cheek , HUNT-1844-2,5.43

and as soon as it reached that spot , the pain in the cheek began .
HUNT-1844-2,5.44

Others have been able to foretell the approach of a paroxysm by
experiencing a sensation , as if a stream of cool air was gently passing
over the part affected for a short time before the pain came on .
HUNT-1844-2,5.45

One gentleman likened it to the electric aura ; HUNT-1844-2,5.46

but this sensation only occurred in cases in which the paroxysm was
periodic . HUNT-1844-2,5.47

Others have remarked , that a few hours previous to an attack of pain
they almost invariably perceived an excessive degree of nervous
restlessness and irritability of temper , HUNT-1844-2,5.48

or , to use their own expression , they have been in such a state of "
fidgets " that they could neither settle themselves to any occupation ,
either of business or of pleasure ; neither could they endure the
society even of their friends . HUNT-1844-2,5.49

This feeling entirely wears off in some when the pain begins ; in others
, when it ceases . HUNT-1844-2,5.50

I have remarked <P_6> this state of feeling to prevail in cases
depending on a disordered stomach . HUNT-1844-2,6.51

Some patients also have told me , that if the pain for some days has
been less severe than usual , the severity of the succeeding paroxysms
has generally been in a considerable degree increased .
HUNT-1844-2,6.52

A great increase of the temperature of the part affected is perceived
during a paroxysm ; HUNT-1844-2,6.53

but this is not invariable . HUNT-1844-2,6.54

In one instance I witnessed a complete wasting of the cellular tissue
and fat of the cheek in which the pain was felt ; HUNT-1844-2,6.55

but in the course of twelve months after the pain had been relieved ,
the wasted cheek had recovered its natural size and fulness .
HUNT-1844-2,6.56

It should be remarked that the symptoms of the disease have been
detailed without reference to any particular cause of it ,
HUNT-1844-2,6.57

for the phenomena differed in some individuals whose disease arose from
the same cause , HUNT-1844-2,6.58

and agreed in others in whom the cause of the disease was different .
HUNT-1844-2,6.59

Sir Charles Bell , a gentleman of great authority in everything relating
to the nervous system , considered that " in true tic_douloureux , there
is no disease of the nerve , nor of the surrounding parts ; that those
cases arising either from disease in the nerve , or from local
irritation of it , or from dead or preternatural growth of bone , the
pains differ from those characteristic of true tic , and for a very
<P_7> obvious reason , HUNT-1844-2,7.60

the cause is continual , and the remission of pain imperfect . "
HUNT-1844-2,7.61

If this was invariably correct , this peculiarity would in some degree
be our guide in tracing the pain to its true cause , HUNT-1844-2,7.62

and would afford some assistance in our diagnosis and in our treatment
of it . HUNT-1844-2,7.63

But neither does the opinion of gentlemen of equal authority coincide
with this view , HUNT-1844-2,7.64

nor is it confirmed by the experience of others . HUNT-1844-2,7.65

The opinion of Sir H. Halford , as expressed in his ' Essay on
Tic_Douloureux , ' is , " that in its severer forms it is often
connected with some preternatural growth of bone , or with a deposition
of bone in a part of the animal economy , where it is not usually found
in a sound and healthy condition of it , or with diseased bone . "
HUNT-1844-2,7.66

Alluding to this opinion of Sir H. Halford , Sir B. Brodie says , " I
have no doubt that it is so in some instances ; HUNT-1844-2,7.67

I have seen one , if not two cases , which confirm Sir H. Halford's
opinion . " HUNT-1844-2,7.68

With regard to the <font> remission <$$font> of the pain being imperfect
whilst the cause is continual , Mr. Swan states , " The periodical form
of neuralgia is by no means indicative of its not depending on organic
disease , as there are numerous cases on record where it has been
clearly ascertained to originate in organic disease within the cranium :
HUNT-1844-2,7.69

also a nerve in the extremities has been irritated by tumours and <P_8>
aneurisms , HUNT-1844-2,8.70

yet the pain has returned with all the regularity of an ague ,
HUNT-1844-2,8.71

and has altogether ceased on the removal of the irritating cause . "
HUNT-1844-2,8.72

A case has been related by Mr. Swan of a man who had paroxysms of pain
in the nerve of his leg every night at the same hour with perfect
freedom in the interval , which was caused by an aneurismal tumour
irritating the nerve in its course , HUNT-1844-2,8.73

and it was permanently relieved by the cure of the aneurism .
HUNT-1844-2,8.74

The converse of this will be shown in the case of the very Reverend Dean
of - , in which , without doubt , the pain was caused by debility and
disorder of the stomach ; HUNT-1844-2,8.75

he never was quite easy , HUNT-1844-2,8.76

yet at particular hours his pain was much aggravated ; HUNT-1844-2,8.77

he could not bear at any time the least touch on the part affected ,
HUNT-1844-2,8.78

and was relieved from the pain when his stomach was set right .
HUNT-1844-2,8.79

With regard to the severity of the pain these two authorities again
differ . HUNT-1844-2,8.80

Sir C. Bell writes , that in true tic_douloureux " the nerve is not
morbidly affected ; HUNT-1844-2,8.81

when it is influenced by remote irritation the pain is infinitely more
severe , while it lasts , than that produced by the morbid condition of
the nerve itself , or of the surrounding parts involving it . "
HUNT-1844-2,8.82

On this subject Sir H. Halford says , " Mild forms of it depend upon
some derangement of the digestive organs , HUNT-1844-2,8.83

and is cured by treatment that will bring on a better action of the
several abdominal viscera , <P_9> and will restore the system to its
healthy tone . " HUNT-1844-2,9.84

In those cases which have fallen under my own observation , it has
appeared that the intensity of the suffering has not depended , in the
least degree , on the particular cause ; HUNT-1844-2,9.85

for I have observed pain of equal severity in those in whom the cause
originated in disordered functions as in those in whom it depended on
some local organic source of irritation . HUNT-1844-2,9.86

<P_10>

<heading>

Chapter II . HUNT-1844-2,10.89

Tic_Douloureux , arising from some peculiarity of Constitution , or
Neuralgic Habit . HUNT-1844-2,10.90

<$$heading>

Before entering on the consideration of the local causes of
tic_douloureux , it is necessary to allude to a class of persons ,
particularly to females , in whom the natural sensibility of the nervous
system is so increased as to render them peculiarly liable to neuralgic
pains . HUNT-1844-2,10.92

In some these pains apparently arise not from any local source of
irritation of particular nerves , but spontaneously , as it were ,
whenever the system is reduced to a state of general debility ;
HUNT-1844-2,10.93

in others , in whom this morbid state is not so highly developed , yet
it is to an extent sufficient to predispose them to these pains , so
that it requires only a very trifling source of irritation , or a
temporary or slight derangement of the general health to produce them .
HUNT-1844-2,10.94

That this morbid state may be owing to some defect or peculiarity in the
original organization , which has hitherto eluded inquiry , is not
improbable ; HUNT-1844-2,10.95

<P_11> however , such is the obscurity in which the minute structure and
functions of the brain and nervous system are enveloped , that it is
impossible , in the present state of our knowledge , to demonstrate or
explain the different peculiarities in the pathological condition of
that system which either gives origin or predisposes it to the various
disorders to which it is liable . HUNT-1844-2,11.96

It is clear such do exist in hysteria , epilepsy , chorea , and other
nervous diseases , HUNT-1844-2,11.97

and it is not unreasonable to conclude that there may be a somewhat
analogous condition giving rise to neuralgia . HUNT-1844-2,11.98

Individuals , who are of this nervous and irritable habit , are morbidly
sensible to every impression both moral and physical , HUNT-1844-2,11.99

and on them impressions produce more than ordinary corresponding effects
. HUNT-1844-2,11.100

If at any time their general health become disordered , or the feeble
powers of their constitution be further weakened , an attack of pain ,
having all the characters of tic_douloureux , is the consequence , which
does not readily subside until the morbid irritation is allayed and
their strength restored . HUNT-1844-2,11.101

An example of this peculiar habit will be found in the case of Mrs. H-
, a lady of very delicate constitution , with feelings most sensitively
alive to every impression , either of pain or pleasure , whose health
has never been robust , yet has not been subject to any particular
derangement of it which <P_12> can be described by name .
HUNT-1844-2,12.102

She has for many years suffered from neuralgic pains in various parts of
the body , but more particularly in the second division of the fifth
nerve of the left cheek , when , from any cause , she is more than
commonly weak , or suffering from any mental anxiety .
HUNT-1844-2,12.103

The sudden and unexpected receipt of news of a painful nature , for
instance , will , almost always , bring on neuralgic pain in some part ;
sometimes in the under part of the last phalanx of the fourth toe of the
left foot so severely as to prevent her walking or standing .
HUNT-1844-2,12.104

This after a time will quite as suddenly leave the toe and attack the
nerve in the cheek , having all the characters and severity of
tic_douloureux . HUNT-1844-2,12.105

If the first paroxysm continue long , it will commonly return daily for
some weeks , unless arrested by medicine , or until the constitution has
overcome the effects of the shock , and has recovered its tone .
HUNT-1844-2,12.106

She is also very sensitive to the influence of climate ;
HUNT-1844-2,12.107

she resided at Clifton for several years , during which time she was
comparatively exempt from pain ; HUNT-1844-2,12.108

but on removing to the damp and relaxing climate of the south of Devon ,
she soon became languid , weak , and incapable of much exertion ;
HUNT-1844-2,12.109

and after some months' residence there , without any other apparent
cause than debility , these neuralgic pains returned ,
HUNT-1844-2,12.110

and after a time fixed on the nerve in the cheek , HUNT-1844-2,12.111

and assumed the quotidian type . HUNT-1844-2,12.112

<P_13> It yielded at length to arsenic ; a medicine which not only
relieved the pain , but greatly improved and strengthened the general
health . HUNT-1844-2,13.113

The benefit of a temporary removal to a high , dry , and warm situation
was invariably and almost immediately perceptible . HUNT-1844-2,13.114

In the course of a few days , the feelings of languor and debility gave
place to that of comparative briskness ; HUNT-1844-2,13.115

the heavy weight which she had usually over her brow passed away ,
HUNT-1844-2,13.116

the complexion became clear , HUNT-1844-2,13.117

the appetite and digestion improved , HUNT-1844-2,13.118

the neuralgic pains entirely subsided , HUNT-1844-2,13.119

and she was soon enabled to take an amount of exercise to which she had
been quite incapable whilst residing in the low , relaxing air
surrounding her own abode . HUNT-1844-2,13.120

An improvement of this nature invariably occurred whenever she has
removed to this kind of bracing air , and the reverse on her return to a
humid one . HUNT-1844-2,13.121

Among many causes by which an attack of pain was provoked , none were
more certain than over-exertion ; HUNT-1844-2,13.122

the consequent exhaustion appeared to interrupt all the vital processes
; HUNT-1844-2,13.123

the stomach was rendered incapable of digestion , HUNT-1844-2,13.124

the bowels became irregular , HUNT-1844-2,13.125

and if this exhaustion happened immediately preceding the menstrual
period , the monthly relief was interrupted , or the discharge only
scantily secreted . HUNT-1844-2,13.126

Either of these derangements of function produced a return of pain ,
which did not subside until <P_14> the disordered action had been
corrected and the general strength cautiously restored ;
HUNT-1844-2,14.127

for when weak she had always a return of the pain in the cheek for three
or four days previous to the appearance of the catamenia .
HUNT-1844-2,14.128

This lady , in common with many others of this habit , is unable to take
tonics , HUNT-1844-2,14.129

for they , with the exception of arsenic , invariably disagree ;
producing a dry , brown tongue , loss of appetite , and feelings of
general discomfort . HUNT-1844-2,14.130

Arsenic has not this effect , HUNT-1844-2,14.131

and appears also to possess other valuable qualities besides that of a
tonic , which adapts it peculiarly well to these cases .
HUNT-1844-2,14.132

Mr. Swan and others have made an observation which my experience quite
confirms , that " Debility is the state most fitted for keeping up
excitement in the nervous system , HUNT-1844-2,14.133

and when once produced a habit is formed which continues the irritation
, HUNT-1844-2,14.134

and generally becomes stronger the longer it is unopposed by such
remedies as have the power of breaking through it . "
HUNT-1844-2,14.135

Although this weak and irritable state may be overcome , it is
surprising what trifling circumstances and slight deviations from health
are sufficient to reproduce it , none more so than causes of a moral
nature , HUNT-1844-2,14.136

and to these we may look as the greatest obstacles which we have to
encounter in the treatment . HUNT-1844-2,14.137

<P_15> Though we may have little or no power in preventing the numerous
causes of anxiety to which all are subjected , yet , by avoiding as much
as possible the <font> physical <$$font> causes which act so injuriously
on these delicate frames ; by attending to the improvement of the
general health ; and by adopting every method of giving tone to the
system , much may be done to avert the evil consequences which those of
a moral nature might otherwise produce . HUNT-1844-2,15.138

It is to be expected that the general health of females of this delicate
organization would be easily deranged ; HUNT-1844-2,15.139

but as the deviations from the healthy state are so diversified , any
attempt to describe them in an essay of this kind would be quite
superfluous . HUNT-1844-2,15.140

Each case must be studied and treated according to its own nature and
peculiarity : remembering that females of such habits can@ @not bear
harsh or violent remedies with impunity ; but that require a steady and
patient perseverance with mild ones , until a more healthy action is
induced ; HUNT-1844-2,15.141

afterwards , by a cautious use of tonics , combined with sedatives , and
attention to a proper plan of living , the general strength may be so
increased that the neuralgic habit will at length , to a certain extent
, be overcome . HUNT-1844-2,15.142

When the neuralgic pain is very violent and is produced by derangement
of the general health , caution is required on the part of the medical
attendant , lest his attention <P_16> be diverted by it from the real
cause of the pain , and he be thereby induced to have recourse to
empirical remedies , such as the more powerful tonics and narcotics ,
which often lead to incalculable mischief if resorted to before the
cause has been removed . HUNT-1844-2,16.143

There is much reason for believing that this mistake has frequently
confirmed the neuralgic habit , HUNT-1844-2,16.144

and has rendered it difficult if not almost impossible to cure .
HUNT-1844-2,16.145

In detailing the case of Mrs. H.- , it was remarked how very
susceptible she was to the injurious influence of a humid , relaxing
climate . HUNT-1844-2,16.146

This remark applies with equal strength to the whole of this class of
delicate females ; HUNT-1844-2,16.147

and few things , I believe , operate more detrimentally on their general
health , or have greater power of inducing that peculiar kind of
constitutional disorder of which neuralgia is the frequent consequence .
HUNT-1844-2,16.148

To produce this does not require what is strictly called a malarious
district , although that would be more detrimental . HUNT-1844-2,16.149

A climate of this nature is so pernicious that , although the effects of
it may be from time to time overcome by regimen and medicine , the
patient soon relapses into her former condition , unless she is removed
entirely from its influence . HUNT-1844-2,16.150

Each relapse renders the individual more and more susceptible of its
effects , HUNT-1844-2,16.151

and increases the difficulty of affording even temporary relief ; so
that <P_17> not only are the powers of the constitution impaired , but
at length the health is permanently destroyed . HUNT-1844-2,17.152

When the health of persons of this delicate habit has been , by a
lengthened residence in such a climate , much injured , although not
irretrievably so , it requires a very protracted abode in one more
suited to them , with the addition of very judicious medical treatment ,
to repair their shattered constitutions . HUNT-1844-2,17.153

When that has been happily effected , they can@ @not , even then ,
return to the former without incurring much risk of speedily losing all
the advantage they had previously gained by their absence from it .
HUNT-1844-2,17.154

I have occasionally met with persons who had so far recovered , and who
appeared so well and strong , and whose nerves were so firm , that it
was considered safe for them to make the experiment ; HUNT-1844-2,17.155

but a very short trial convinced them that their constitution had not
been sufficiently hardened to resist the debilitating action of such a
climate . HUNT-1844-2,17.156

This effect of climate is so clearly marked in the following case , that
it may be briefly related : HUNT-1844-2,17.157

Miss C- , about the age of twenty , became weak , HUNT-1844-2,17.158

lost her health , HUNT-1844-2,17.159

and was suddenly seized with a pain in the nerves of the fore-arm ,
accompanied with a loss of power in using it . HUNT-1844-2,17.160

She was residing in a low , damp situation , at the foot of a hill , in
the south of Devon . HUNT-1844-2,17.161

Every means that I could suggest <P_18> were ineffectually tried .
HUNT-1844-2,18.162

She therefore went to a celebrated physician for advice , who lived in a
town comparatively high and dry . HUNT-1844-2,18.163

She soon improved in every respect , HUNT-1844-2,18.164

and naturally attributed her recovery to his greater skill .
HUNT-1844-2,18.165

She had not , however , long returned to her former abode before she was
attacked by the same feelings of languor , HUNT-1844-2,18.166

and the pain and weakness of the arm soon followed . HUNT-1844-2,18.167

This induced her to consult him again , which she did , with the same
result ; HUNT-1844-2,18.168

but all her improvement , as was the case before , was gradually lost
soon after her return home . HUNT-1844-2,18.169

She then took lodgings in a house situated on the top of a hill , very
high , open , and bracing . HUNT-1844-2,18.170

In this place of residence she so quickly regained her strength and was
relieved from the pain , as to afford me every reason to conclude that
the benefit she had attributed to the physician was mainly owing to the
change of situation . HUNT-1844-2,18.171

My experience has convinced me that the climate best adapted for such
individuals is one that is high , dry , and open . HUNT-1844-2,18.172

But care should be taken that , for the most sensitive amongst them , it
is not too bleak . HUNT-1844-2,18.173

The patient's residence need not be strictly in mountain air ;
HUNT-1844-2,18.174

provided it is in an elevated situation , on a dry soil , and with a dry
, clear air around it , it will be generally found sufficient .
HUNT-1844-2,18.175

A residence , however , of a few months in a <P_19> mountainous region -
such , for instance , as in North Wales - gives tone and strength in so
much greater a degree , that , where it is feasible , it is certainly to
be preferred and recommended . HUNT-1844-2,19.176

The bracing and exhilarating effects of such an air is so great , that
the invalid should be cautioned against an error , which is not
unfrequently {COM:sic} fallen into , by which much of the benefit that
would otherwise have been gained is often lost . HUNT-1844-2,19.177

The invalid , finding herself capable of taking an amount of exercise to
which she had hitherto been unequal , is tempted by the enjoyment of it
to outstep the bounds of prudence , HUNT-1844-2,19.178

and thus a degree of exhaustion is produced , which is always injurious
. HUNT-1844-2,19.179

The effect of over-fatigue appears to vary in different persons , the
difference perhaps depending on the degree of strength possessed by each
individual , or on the amount of fatigue incurred . HUNT-1844-2,19.180

This difference is perhaps best shown by the effect of restoratives .
HUNT-1844-2,19.181

Some patients will find themselves assisted in their recovery by wine ,
porter , or other stimulants , HUNT-1844-2,19.182

and others are made worse by them . HUNT-1844-2,19.183

The fatigue of the latter may not be inaptly termed feverish fatigue ,
HUNT-1844-2,19.184

and they are refreshed and renovated by a saline draught with ammonia or
a few grains of the nitrate of potash {TEXT:potass} and sal volatile .
HUNT-1844-2,19.185

Persons of this description are by far the most difficult to manage with
success . HUNT-1844-2,19.186

Therefore , they <P_20> should be particularly enjoined to attend to a
few rules in regard to exercise , which may be gradually relaxed as
their strength improves . HUNT-1844-2,20.187

First , then , they should not at any time allow themselves to be so
tired , that moderate rest will not recover and refresh them .
HUNT-1844-2,20.188

Secondly , that they must never permit exercise to interfere with
digestion , by carefully avoiding exercise for some time previous to
their meals ; HUNT-1844-2,20.189

for if , owing to the weakness of their vital powers , they take so much
exercise as to induce fatigue immediately before their meals , they will
, to their cost , find their stomach quite unequal to its duty .
HUNT-1844-2,20.190

In these feeble persons , more particularly , all their nervous energy
is required by the stomach for the due performance of its functions ;
HUNT-1844-2,20.191

and if the nervous energy be expended just previous to digestion , that
function will be proportionally ill performed . HUNT-1844-2,20.192

The indigestion , by giving rise to a variety of acid products ,
produces fresh causes of irritation , which alone , independent of other
injuries resulting from it , will be sufficient to bring on attack of
tic . HUNT-1844-2,20.193

This remark applies to all persons , both strong and weak ,
HUNT-1844-2,20.194

but it is applicable more particularly to the latter .
HUNT-1844-2,20.195

The following is a remarkable instance of the necessity of attending to
it by persons who are subject to tic_douloureux . HUNT-1844-2,20.196

Mr. C- , who had suffered <P_21> for many years most acutely from this
disorder , and who was capable of taking extraordinary exercise in
shooting , hunting , deer-stalking , &c. , could never venture to dine
before he had rested quietly nearly two hours , HUNT-1844-2,21.197

for if he did , a violent paroxysm of tic was the certain consequence .
HUNT-1844-2,21.198

And what is singular , the tic in him was clearly attributable to an
organic cause , apparently quite independent of digestion .
HUNT-1844-2,21.199

Rest until digestion is quite finished must also always be allowed .
HUNT-1844-2,21.200

This , however , is so much more commonly attended to than rest before
meals , that it need not be further dwelt on . HUNT-1844-2,21.201

There is another point deserving the attention of these feeble persons ,
HUNT-1844-2,21.202

for , trivial as it may appear , it is in reality of some moment to them
. HUNT-1844-2,21.203

The necessity of taking some little nourishment , perhaps a cup of
coffee with a little bread , before they leave their bed in the morning
, HUNT-1844-2,21.204

otherwise the fatigue of dressing will so exhaust them , that their
appetite for breakfast and the power of digesting it will be impaired ;
HUNT-1844-2,21.205

and if they begin their day in this unpromising manner , they will
remain through the whole of it tired and weary . HUNT-1844-2,21.206

Attention to this easy and simple rule will prevent this ,
HUNT-1844-2,21.207

and will also enable them to bear the additional fatigue of sponging
their persons with cold water , or , what is far preferable , <P_22> the
use of the shower-bath : HUNT-1844-2,22.208

for this , sea water is to be preferred ; HUNT-1844-2,22.209

but if it can@ @not be procured , some bay salt dissolved in fresh water
will form a good substitute . HUNT-1844-2,22.210

After either of these remedies they should be briskly rubbed .
HUNT-1844-2,22.211

<P_23>

<heading>

Chapter III . HUNT-1844-2,23.214

Tic_Douloureux arising from Dyspepsia . HUNT-1844-2,23.215

<$$heading>

A question of great interest in the investigation of the pathology of
neuralgia also arises , which may be inquired into with advantage .
HUNT-1844-2,23.217

It is , whether a morbid condition of the system , somewhat similar to
the one just alluded to , may not be produced by the effect of previous
disease . HUNT-1844-2,23.218

That other disorders of the nervous system are the consequence of
previous diseases , is sufficiently proved by experience .
HUNT-1844-2,23.219

This Dr. Pritchard has well expressed in his work on ' Nervous Diseases
' in the following sentence : HUNT-1844-2,23.220

" I allude to the fact long ago noticed and now fully ascertained , that
diseases of the nervous system are often found , on inquiring into their
previous history , to have been preceded by chronic disorders of various
kinds affecting other structures , and more especially by disordered
conditions of some of the natural functions and occasionally of the
organs allotted to them . " HUNT-1844-2,23.221

These remarks are equally applicable to the painful diseases of the
nerves as to those of a spasmodic <P_24> nature , to which Dr.
Pritchard more particularly referred . HUNT-1844-2,24.222

From carefully attending to the history of numerous cases of
tic_douloureux , and endeavouring to ascertain the cause of their
occurrence , it has appeared to me that diseases which have preceded the
complaint , and to which it may be pretty correctly traced , have been
those of a class which either suddenly debilitate the body , as it were
by a peculiar poison , or those which undermine the powers of the
constitution by a slower but equally effective process .
HUNT-1844-2,24.223

Of the former the influenza is an example . One of the most
characteristic features of that complaint being the early and sudden
prostration of the vital powers , of which neuralgic pains are not the
unfrequent {COM:sic} consequence . HUNT-1844-2,24.224

Dr. Holland , I believe , was the first if not the only physician who
remarked this connexion between them . HUNT-1844-2,24.225

In his ' Essay on the Influenza ' his allusion to it is so very clear ,
that I shall take advantage of it and insert it : HUNT-1844-2,24.226

" Of the diseases consequent upon influenza , if not indeed to be
regarded as an integral part of the malady , one of the most frequent
and remarkable is the tendency to neuralgic intermittent pains and
morbid actions in different parts of the body , with periods as regular
as those of a common ague , sometimes taking the tertian as well as the
quotidian type ; HUNT-1844-2,24.227

little connexion save <P_25> priority and sequence can be traced between
the early and more familiar symptoms of influenza and such partial and
intermittent affections . HUNT-1844-2,25.228

Whether they depend on idiosyncrasy of the patient , or on some peculiar
application of the virus , or simply a liability given to be affected in
this way , are points equally obscure . " HUNT-1844-2,25.229

The cases are given of two persons who were soon cured by the aid of
quinine . HUNT-1844-2,25.230

But in one which fell under my own notice , the case of a lady between
eighty and ninety years of age , this intermittent neuralgic attack
continued unmitigated by all the various plans suggested for her relief
, HUNT-1844-2,25.231

and she continued to suffer under it until her death .
HUNT-1844-2,25.232

I know no other disease which possesses the power of producing so
suddenly neuralgic pains , as influenza ; HUNT-1844-2,25.233

I will , therefore , pass on to the consideration of those of a more
chronic kind , to which they are more commonly referrible .
HUNT-1844-2,25.234

Among the most prominent of these , disorders of the digestive organs
may be correctly numbered ; HUNT-1844-2,25.235

nor is this surprising , when we remember the very extended surface the
mucous membrane of the stomach and bowels present , the abundant supply
of nerves , ramifying over every part of it , exposed as they are , from
their situation , to such a variety of causes of irritation , which are
so well known to produce nervous affections in distant parts , under
different forms . HUNT-1844-2,25.236

<P_26> But it is yet to be explained , of what nature is the disorder of
these organs , to which neuralgia may be attributed ; HUNT-1844-2,26.237

for " pathologists do not seem to agree to what {TEXT:what_the} disorder
of the system the association belongs . " - <paren> Sir H. Halford .
<$$paren> HUNT-1844-2,26.238

As a great variety of diseases of the nervous system are correctly
attributed to disorders of the digestive organs - such , for example ,
as a diminution of the functions of the brain ; local or partial palsy ;
diminished sensibility , and the opposite but equally perverted state of
the functions of the nerves ; morbidly increased sensibility and pain ;
spasms and convulsions , and others , - may it not be asked , do all
these different effects arise from one and the same kind of disorder of
those viscera ? HUNT-1844-2,26.239

Or does each kind of secondary disease depend on a different and
peculiar condition of them ? HUNT-1844-2,26.240

Or are they modified by some idiosyncrasy of the patient ?
HUNT-1844-2,26.241

Could these questions be answered satisfactorily , some at least of the
difficulty and obscurity which at present surround these diseases would
be removed . HUNT-1844-2,26.242

It has been stated that neuralgia chiefly occurs <paren> when there is
no immediate local cause of irritation <$$paren> either in persons
naturally of a weak or irritable habit , or in those who have been
reduced to this state by long-continued illness , by mental anxiety , or
by other debilitating causes . HUNT-1844-2,26.243

It occasionally happens that one of the viscera <P_27> alone has been
reduced to a state of weakness and irritability , accompanied with
extreme sensibility of its nerves , by causes acting particularly on it
, whilst the whole system , at least to any great extent , does not
participate in the weakness . HUNT-1844-2,27.244

These observations will be generally found to apply to cases of
neuralgia arising from dyspepsia , equally as to those which arise from
a deranged function of the other viscera , - the dyspepsia being almost
always of an atonic or nervous character , rather than of a gastritic or
inflammatory one . HUNT-1844-2,27.245

When an inquiry is made into the remote causes of the disorders of the
stomach , and into the previous habits of persons subject to them , they
will generally be found to be of a nature most likely to produce this
kind of dyspepsia . HUNT-1844-2,27.246

As many of the causes said to excite neuralgia in the nerves of the
cheek are identical with those that are well known as the most common
causes of disorders of the digestive organs , it is not unfair to
conclude that it is produced by them through the medium of such
derangement . HUNT-1844-2,27.247

This conclusion receives strong confirmation both from the history of
cases , as well as by the effect of remedies directed to the restoration
of those organs to a healthy tone . HUNT-1844-2,27.248

Indeed , it would be difficult otherwise to give anything like a
satisfactory explanation <P_28> of the manner in which they act on the
system , so as to produce this painful disease . HUNT-1844-2,28.249

From the account which I have often received from persons who have
applied to me for the relief of tic_douloureux , however various the
causes of the disease may have been in many instances , the stomach has
generally been the first part that has suffered . HUNT-1844-2,28.250

The time also has varied in different individuals before the
tic_douloureux has followed . HUNT-1844-2,28.251

In some , who were of an irritable and nervous temperament , the pain in
the cheek has very soon succeeded ; HUNT-1844-2,28.252

in others , of a more robust frame , longer time has elapsed before the
nerves have been secondarily affected . HUNT-1844-2,28.253

It does not indeed necessarily follow that pain or uneasiness should be
felt in the stomach or bowels , although the disorder , on which the
neuralgia of the cheek depends , is situated in them ;
HUNT-1844-2,28.254

for it is a well-known fact , that pain is often referred to a part
distant from the seat of the disease . HUNT-1844-2,28.255

This is exemplified by the case of Dr. Wollaston , who was suddenly
seized with pain in his ankle , immediately on eating an ice , and was
relieved as soon as it was rejected from his stomach by vomiting ; also
by the more common occurrence of pain <P_29> being referred to the knee
, when the hip-joint is the seat of disease . HUNT-1844-2,29.256

Patients often confidently assert that , with the exception of pain in
the cheek , they are in perfect health , their appetite and digestion
good , whilst it has been evident that the sole cause of their misery
has been seated in the digestive organs , and the immediate provocative
of the pain in the cheek has been some irritating matter in the stomach
, arising from indigestion . HUNT-1844-2,29.257

Of the various causes that may produce disorders of the stomach , none
are more common than errors in diet , HUNT-1844-2,29.258

and the two following cases very strongly show the risk that even the
most robust persons incur of seriously injuring and weakening the powers
of their stomach by injudicious regimen . HUNT-1844-2,29.259

The very Rev. Dean of - , a gentleman who had enjoyed unusually good
health , finding himself inclined to grow rather too stout , although he
was arrived at a period of life when such a tendency not unusually shows
itself , imprudently altered his plan of living : HUNT-1844-2,29.260

after having lived generously , and having taken little exercise , he
adopted suddenly a very spare and abstemious diet , accompanied at the
same time by excessive walking exercise , by which he was reduced to a
state of great general weakness . HUNT-1844-2,29.261

The tone of his stomach <P_30> was very seriously injured ,
HUNT-1844-2,30.262

and unequivocal symptoms of indigestion , and among them the presence of
acid , were the result . HUNT-1844-2,30.263

After a few weeks he perceived an uneasiness in the cheek ;
HUNT-1844-2,30.264

this increased in severity , HUNT-1844-2,30.265

and he was seldom free from pain , HUNT-1844-2,30.266

but it was much aggravated every night about eleven or twelve o'clock ,
then almost amounting to a distinct paroxysm . HUNT-1844-2,30.267

He applied to me in August , 1837 ; HUNT-1844-2,30.268

his general strength at this time had been much improved ,
HUNT-1844-2,30.269

for he walked eight miles to see me , HUNT-1844-2,30.270

and had the same distance to return home . HUNT-1844-2,30.271

The stomach also was somewhat improved , but still weak .
HUNT-1844-2,30.272

He had constant pain in the cheek , which was much increased on pressure
, making the operation of shaving a very painful one .
HUNT-1844-2,30.273

The imperfect paroxysm of pain continued every night four or five hours
, accompanied by severe shocks and plunges . HUNT-1844-2,30.274

There was no indication of the disorder of the stomach having extended
to any other viscera , HUNT-1844-2,30.275

his tongue was slightly furred , HUNT-1844-2,30.276

and was a little swelled , the bowels very regular , and the evacuations
healthy , HUNT-1844-2,30.277

the appetite was good , HUNT-1844-2,30.278

but the digestion was still imperfect . HUNT-1844-2,30.279

After an emetic and aperient draught of rhubarb and sulphate of potash ,
warmed with sal volatile , I gave him the following draught three times
a day , an hour before his meals : <P_31> Rx. Liq. Arsenicalis
{COM:symbol_for_minim} iv . Tr. Camph. comp . {COM:symbol_for_minim}
xii . Aquae cinnam. {COM:symbol_for_dram} x . M. ft. haustus :
increasing the quantity of the liquor arsenicalis daily , until he felt
its action on the stomach , which he did , when each dose amounted to
twelve minims : HUNT-1844-2,31.280

it was then discontinued . HUNT-1844-2,31.281

As soon as he perceived the effect of the medicine , the violent plunges
of pain diminished , slowly but regularly , until at the expiration of a
fortnight they had altogether ceased . HUNT-1844-2,31.282

By this time , the action of the arsenic had also subsided ;
HUNT-1844-2,31.283

he again took it in doses of five minims , HUNT-1844-2,31.284

and continued it until all tenderness and pain of the cheek was entirely
overcome . HUNT-1844-2,31.285

This was effected at the expiration of a month from the time of my first
seeing him . HUNT-1844-2,31.286

He then left my neighbourhood , with directions to take the medicine for
some months , occasionally omitting it for a fortnight or three weeks ,
increasing gradually the interval , and decreasing the period , in which
he took it . HUNT-1844-2,31.287

In January following I received the following account from him :
HUNT-1844-2,31.288

" Since I left your neighbourhood , I have had only two returns of tic ,
and those very slight ; HUNT-1844-2,31.289

I think I continued to take your prescription in small doses for about a
month , after my return to - , HUNT-1844-2,31.290

and having discontinued it about a fortnight , <P_32> I had a slight
return of the spasmodic pain , which yielded immediately to the arsenic
. HUNT-1844-2,32.291

On this occasion , I took it in still smaller doses , only twice a day ,
and not exceeding three drops at each dose . HUNT-1844-2,32.292

After about three weeks , I again discontinued it , HUNT-1844-2,32.293

and at the end of another fortnight , had a slight attack of tic , which
yielded instantly to your prescription , which I took in the same small
doses for a fortnight , HUNT-1844-2,32.294

and for the last month I have been quite free from pain , though I
suspect that the nerve is not quite sound , from a feeling of numbness
and tingling , which I used to regard as a precursor of an attack . "
HUNT-1844-2,32.295

After this time , the pain seldom troubled him , and only when his
stomach became disordered . HUNT-1844-2,32.296

In 1841 he wrote me that by strict attention to diet , and above all ,
by abstaining from acids , and from the use of wine , and other
fermented liquors , he kept the tic from annoying him .
HUNT-1844-2,32.297

In this case many remedies had been taken without any mitigation of the
pain , but with rather an aggravation of it . HUNT-1844-2,32.298

Mr. - , aetat. {TEXT:aetat} forty , a strong athletic person , applied
to me in September , 1839 ; HUNT-1844-2,32.299

he had been suffering intensely from neuralgia in the left cheek ; the
paroxysms returning at all hours , both of the day and night .
HUNT-1844-2,32.300

It was very difficult to get from him anything but a very rambling
unsatisfactory <P_33> account of himself , his whole thoughts being
absorbed by the acuteness of his suffering , which he described over and
over again . HUNT-1844-2,33.301

I , however , ascertained that his stomach was out of order , that his
tongue was coated with a yellowish creamy fur ; his pulse was strong and
full ; his appetite good , but the process of digestion was accompanied
by very uneasy feelings . HUNT-1844-2,33.302

His diet for many years had been almost wholly of animal food and wine ,
that is , a beefsteak for breakfast , with a cup of coffee ; a full
allowance of animal food , with two thirds of a bottle of port for
dinner ; and the remaining third with meat for supper .
HUNT-1844-2,33.303

He used very violent exercise , HUNT-1844-2,33.304

he perspired very freely , HUNT-1844-2,33.305

and that secretion was exceedingly strong and offensive .
HUNT-1844-2,33.306

Soon after my first interview , he had a most violent paroxysm of tic ,
in the midst of which , I gave him an emetic of twenty grains of
ipecacuanha , with one of tartar emetic , which operated most
effectually , and gave him immediate and most complete relief ;
HUNT-1844-2,33.307

so different were all his feelings afterwards , that he believed himself
cured ; HUNT-1844-2,33.308

nothing was ejected from the stomach but a large quantity of thick
tenacious mucus , not at all acid . HUNT-1844-2,33.309

After some warm aperients , he commenced taking the arsenic in the same
combination as was prescribed in the last case , HUNT-1844-2,33.310

and continued it in the same manner , with an occasional alterative and
aperient . HUNT-1844-2,33.311

<P_34> I also put him on a more rational diet . HUNT-1844-2,34.312

For a few weeks , he had some slight returns of pain ,
HUNT-1844-2,34.313

but has since remained entirely well . HUNT-1844-2,34.314

I have selected these two cases from among several others , as being
remarkably good examples of tic_douloureux arising from a disordered
stomach ; of the stomach becoming disordered by causes quite opposite in
their nature ; and of simple stomach disorder , without any other
complication . HUNT-1844-2,34.315

It is to this simplicity in the cause of the pain , that I attribute the
quickness with which these gentlemen were relieved . HUNT-1844-2,34.316

Cases of this simple nature are far more rarely met with than those
which are complicated with derangements of some of the neighbouring
viscera . HUNT-1844-2,34.317

It may not generally be advisable to administer emetics , when the
stomach is unnaturally weak , and its nerves unusually sensible ;
HUNT-1844-2,34.318

yet in cases of this nature , having repeatedly failed in obtaining
relief from other medicine {TEXT:medicinee} , until an emetic had been
administered , I have for many years made it a regular practice to do so
, unless there existed some good reason to forbid it .
HUNT-1844-2,34.319

The matter ejected has generally been a quantity of very glairy ,
tenacious mucus , which is for the most part acid ; HUNT-1844-2,34.320

and the removal of it facilitated the operation of other medicines ,
especially of arsenic . HUNT-1844-2,34.321

I have not the slightest doubt of this fact , HUNT-1844-2,34.322

<P_35> and in the last mentioned case , arsenic , among many other
medicines , was the last the patient had taken , before he consulted me
, without any apparent effect , HUNT-1844-2,35.323

but upon resuming it after the emetic , the beneficial effect of it was
soon felt . HUNT-1844-2,35.324

Should the paroxysm of tic be regularly intermittent , the exhibition of
an emetic , an hour previous to the time of its return interrupts and
often prevents the paroxysm , HUNT-1844-2,35.325

and not unfrequently {COM:sic} causes the subsequent one to be milder .
HUNT-1844-2,35.326

After an emetic , it is also a good practice to give a warm aperient ,
for which purpose , a draught of twenty grains of rhubarb and sulphate
of potash , with thirty drops of sal_volatile , in some aromatic water ,
answers very satisfactorily . HUNT-1844-2,35.327

After this preparation I have found arsenic to be the best and most
efficacious remedy , combining it with a sedative , <paren> and where
there is evidence of the presence of acid in the stomach , with a few
grains of the bicarbonate of potash , <$$paren> commencing with small
doses , on the average of four minims , and gradually increasing the
dose daily , until some decided symptom of its action is perceptible ,
which is commonly evinced , when the dose has amounted to ten .
HUNT-1844-2,35.328

As soon as this is felt , the pain in the cheek sensibly abates ,
HUNT-1844-2,35.329

but after it has considerably decreased , it is desirable to discontinue
the medicine for a few days ; HUNT-1844-2,35.330

for in these <P_36> simple cases , it is seldom requisite to induce a
very powerful effect from the medicine on the stomach .
HUNT-1844-2,36.331

After waiting until all symptoms of its action have ceased , the arsenic
must be recommenced in the original small doses . HUNT-1844-2,36.332

There is seldom any necessity of augmenting these doses a second time ,
HUNT-1844-2,36.333

for the action of this powerful medicine is soon renewed .
HUNT-1844-2,36.334

In this manner , it is to be continued for several weeks , if not for
months , after the patient has been quite relieved from the pain .
HUNT-1844-2,36.335

It is of consequence , too , to remember that the arsenic is to be taken
on an empty stomach , HUNT-1844-2,36.336

for the effect being then more powerful , less quantity becomes
necessary . HUNT-1844-2,36.337

There are some cases , however , in which this plan can@ @not be
followed , HUNT-1844-2,36.338

and in them , it should be given with the food , or soon afterwards .
HUNT-1844-2,36.339

The susceptibility of the stomach , with respect to this remedy , varies
a good deal in different persons ; HUNT-1844-2,36.340

the dose and the time for its being taken must therefore be varied
accordingly . HUNT-1844-2,36.341

Should the pain at any time appear to increase , it will be right to
repeat the aperient , and afterwards to increase the quantity of arsenic
, until its action is again sensibly felt , HUNT-1844-2,36.342

indeed , during the treatment , an occasional aperient will often be of
service . HUNT-1844-2,36.343

When the pain has been relieved and the stomach improved , as it will
frequently be under this plan of <P_37> treatment , the substitution of
a grain of the sulphate of quinine , given two or three times a day ,
has often appeared to give additional tone , although it would have
disagreed at first . HUNT-1844-2,37.344

One great error , against which patients must be strictly guarded , is
the belief of their being cured as soon as the pain is relieved ;
HUNT-1844-2,37.345

for unless they patiently persist in taking these remedies , and in
following a proper plan of diet until their stomach is quite restored ,
they will have the mortification and misery of finding , sooner or later
, that the pain will return . HUNT-1844-2,37.346

