<BEGIN_huxley-186x-2>

<P_3,66>

<heading>

III Emancipation - black and white HUXLEY-186X-2,3,66.4

<bracket> 1865 <$$bracket> HUXLEY-186X-2,3,66.5

<$$heading>

Quashie's plaintive inquiry , " Am I not a man and a brother ? " seems
at last to have received its final reply - the recent decision of the
fierce trial by battle on the other side of the Atlantic fully
concurring with that long since delivered here in a more peaceful way .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,66.7

The question is settled ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,66.8

but even those who are most thoroughly convinced that the doom is just ,
must see good grounds for repudiating half the arguments which have been
employed by the winning side ; and for doubting whether its ultimate
results will embody the hopes of the victors , though they may more than
realise the fears of the vanquished . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,66.9

It may be quite true that some negroes are better than some white man ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,66.10

but no rational man , cognisant of the facts , believes that the average
negro is the equal , still <P_3,67> less the superior , of the average
white man . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.11

And , if this be true , it is simply incredible that , when all his
disablities are removed , and our prognathous relative has a fair field
and no favour , as well as no oppressor , he will be able to compete
successfully with his bigger-brained and smaller-jawed rival , in a
contest which is to be carried on by thoughts and not by bites .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.12

The highest places in the hierarchy of civilisation will assuredly not
be within the reach of our dusky cousins , though it is by no means
necessary that they should be restricted to the lowest .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.13

But whatever the position of stable equilibrium into which the laws of
social gravitation may bring the negro , all responsibility for the
result will henceforward lie between Nature and him .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.14

The white man may wash his hands of it , and the Caucasian conscience be
void of reproach for evermore . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.15

And this , if we look to the bottom of the matter , is the real
justification for the abolition policy . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.16

The doctrine of equal natural rights may be an illogical delusion ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.17

emancipation may convert the slave from a well-fed animal into a
pauperised man ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.18

mankind may even have to do without cotton shirts ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.19

but all these evils must be faced if the moral law , that no human being
can arbitrarily dominate over another without grievous damage to his own
nature , be , as many think , as readily demonstrable by experiment as
any physical truth . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,67.20

If this be true , no slavery can <P_3,68> be abolished without a double
emancipation , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,68.21

and the master will benefit by freedom more than the freed-man .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,68.22

The like considerations apply to all the other questions of emancipation
which are at present stirring the world - the multifarious demands that
classes of mankind shall be relieved from restrictions imposed by the
artifice of man , and not by the necessities of Nature .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,68.23

One of the most important , if not the most important , of all these ,
is that which daily threatens to become the " irrepressible " woman
question . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,68.24

What social and political rights have women ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,68.25

What ought they to be allowed , or not allowed , to do , be , and suffer
? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,68.26

And , as involved in , and underlying all these questions , how ought
they to be educated ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,68.27

There are philogynists as fanatical as any " misogynists " who ,
reversing our antiquated notions , bid the man look upon the woman as
the higher type of humanity ; who ask us to regard the female intellect
as the clearer and the quicker , if not the stronger ; who desire us to
look up to the feminine moral sense as the purer and the nobler ; and
bid man abdicate his usurped sovereignty over Nature in favour of the
female line . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,68.28

On the other hand , there are persons not to be outdone in all loyalty
and just respect for womankind , but by nature hard of head and haters
of delusion , however charming , who not only repudiate the new
woman-worship <P_3,69> which so many sentimentalists and some
philosophers are desirous of setting up , but , carrying their audacity
further , deny even the natural equality of the sexes .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,69.29

They assert , on the contrary , that in every excellent character ,
whether mental or physical , the average woman is inferior to the
average man , in the sense of having that character less in quantity and
lower in quality . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,69.30

<P_3,76>

<heading>

IV

A liberal education ; and where to find it HUXLEY-186X-2,3,76.34

<bracket> 1868 <$$bracket> HUXLEY-186X-2,3,76.35

<$$heading>

The business which the South London Working Men's College has undertaken
is a great work ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,76.37

indeed , I might say , that Education , with which that college proposes
to grapple , is the greatest work of all those which lie ready to a
man's hand just at present . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,76.38

And , at length , this fact is becoming generally recognised .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,76.39

You can@ @not go anywhere without hearing a buzz of more or less
confused and contradictory talk on this subject - HUXLEY-186X-2,3,76.40

nor can you fail to notice that , in one point at any rate , there is a
very decided advance upon like discussions in former days .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,76.41

Nobody outside the agricultural interest now dares to say that education
is a bad thing . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,76.42

If any representative of the once large and powerful party , which , in
former days , proclaimed this opinion , still exists in a semi-fossil
<P_3,77> state , he keeps his thoughts to himself .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,77.43

In fact , there is a chorus of voices , almost distressing in their
harmony , raised in favour of the doctrine that education is the great
panacea for human troubles , and that , if the country is not shortly to
go to the dogs , everybody must be educated . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,77.44

The politicians tells us , " You must educate the masses because they
are going to be masters . " HUXLEY-186X-2,3,77.45

The clergy join in the cry for education , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,77.46

for they affirm that the people are drifting away from church and chapel
into the broadest infidelity . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,77.47

The manufacturers and the capitalists swell the chorus lustily .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,77.48

They declare that ignorance makes bad workmen ; that England will soon
be unable to turn out cotton goods , or steam engines , cheaper than
other people ; and then , Ichabod ! Ichabod ! the glory will be
departed from us . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,77.49

And a few voices are lifted up in favour of the doctrine that the masses
should be educated because they are men and women with unlimited
capacities of being , doing , and suffering , and that it is as true now
, as ever it was , that the people perish for lack of knowledge .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,77.50

These members of the minority , with whom I confess I have a good deal
of sympathy , are doubtful whether any of the other reasons urged in
favour of the education of the people are of much value - whether ,
indeed , some of them are based upon either wise or noble grounds of
action . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,77.51

They question if it be wise to tell people that you <P_3,78> will do for
them , out of fear of their power , what you have left undone , so long
as your only motive was compassion for their weakness and their sorrows
. HUXLEY-186X-2,3,78.52

And , if ignorance of everything which it is needful a ruler should know
is likely to do so much harm in the governing classes of the future ,
why is it , they ask reasonably enough , that such ignorance in the
governing classes of the past has not been viewed with equal horror ?
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,78.53

Compare the average artisan and the average country squire , and it may
be doubted if you will find a pin to choose between the two in point of
ignorance , class feeling , or prejudice . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,78.54

It is true that the ignorance is of a different sort - that the class
feeling is in favour of a different class - and that the prejudice has a
distinct savour of wrong-headedness in each case - HUXLEY-186X-2,3,78.55

but it is questionable if the one is either a bit better , or a bit
worse , than the other . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,78.56

The old protectionist theory is the doctrine of trades unions as applied
by the squires , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,78.57

and the modern trades unionism is the doctrine of the squires applied by
the artisans . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,78.58

Why should we be worse off under one <font> r√©gime <$$font> than under
the other ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,78.59

Again , this sceptical minority asks the clergy to think whether it is
really want of education which keeps the masses away from their
ministrations - whether the most completely educated men are not as open
to reproach on this score as the workmen ; and whether , perchance ,
this may not indicate <P_3,79> that it is not education which lies at
the bottom of the matter ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,79.60

Once more , these people , whom there is no pleasing , venture to doubt
whether the glory , which rests upon being able to undersell all the
rest of the world , is a very safe kind of glory - whether we may not
purchase it too dear ; especially if we allow education , which ought to
be directed to the making of men , to be diverted into a process of
manufacturing human tools , wonderfully adroit in the exercise of some
technical industry , but good for nothing else . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,79.61

And , finally , these people inquire whether it is the masses alone who
need a reformed and improved education . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,79.62

They ask whether the richest of our public schools might not well be
made to supply knowledge , as well as gentlemanly habits , a strong
class feeling , and eminent proficiency in cricket .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,79.63

They seem to think that the noble foundations of our old universities
are hardly fulfilling their functions in their present posture of
half-clerical seminaries , half racecourses , where men are trained to
win a senior wranglership , or a double-first , as horses are trained to
win a cup , with as little reference to the needs of after-life in the
case of the man as in that of the racer . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,79.64

And , while as zealous for education as the rest , they affirm that , if
the education of the richer classes were such as to fit them to be the
leaders and the governors of the poorer ; and , if the education of the
<P_3,80> poorer classes were such as to enable them to appreciate really
wise guidance and good governance , the politicians need not fear
mob-law , nor the clergy lament their want of flocks , nor the
capitalists prognosticate the annihilation of the prosperity of the
country . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.65

Such is the diversity of opinion upon the why and the wherefore of
education . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.66

And my hearers will be prepared to expect that the practical
recommendations which are put forward are not less discordant .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.67

There is a loud cry for compulsory education . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.68

We English , in spite of constant experience to the contrary , preserve
a touching faith in the efficacy of acts of Parliament ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.69

and I believe we should have compulsory education in the course of next
session , if there were the least probability that half_a_dozen leading
statesmen of different parties would agree what that education should be
. HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.70

Some hold that education without theology is worse than none .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.71

Others maintain , quite as strongly , that education with theology is in
the same predicament . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.72

But this is certain , that those who hold the first opinion can by no
means agree what theology should be taught ; and that those who maintain
the second are in a small minority . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.73

At any rate " make people learn to read , write , and cipher , " say a
great many ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.74

and the advice is undoubtedly sensible as far as it goes .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,80.75

But , as has happened to me in former days , those who , in despair of
getting anything better , advocate this <P_3,81> measure , are met with
the objection that it is very like making a child practise the use of a
knife , fork , and spoon , without giving it a particle of meat .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.76

I really do@ @n't know what reply is to be made to such an objection .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.77

But it would be unprofitable to spend more time in disentangling , or
rather in showing up the knots in , the ravelled skeins of our
neighbours . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.78

Much more to the purpose is it to ask if we possess any clue of our own
which may guide us among these entanglements . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.79

And by way of a beginning , let us ask ourselves - What is education ?
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.80

Above all things , what is our ideal of a thoroughly liberal education ?
- of that education which , if we could begin life again , we would give
ourselves - of that education which , if we could mould the fates to our
own will , we would give our children ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.81

Well , I know not what may be your conceptions upon this matter ,
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.82

but I will tell you mine , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.83

and I hope I shall find that our views are not very discrepant .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.84

Suppose it were perfectly certain that the life and fortune of every one
of us would , one day or other , depend upon his winning or losing a
game at chess . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.85

Do@ @n't you think that we should all consider it to be a primary duty
to learn at least the names and the moves of the pieces ; to have a
notion of a gambit , and a keen eye for all the means of giving and
getting out of check ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,81.86

Do <P_3,82> you not think that we should look with a disapprobation
amounting to scorn , upon the father who allowed his son , or the state
which allowed its members , to grow up without knowing a pawn from a
knight ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.87

Yet it is a very plain and elementary truth , that the life , the
fortune , and the happiness of every one of us , and , more or less , of
those who are connected with us , do depend upon our knowing something
of the rules of a game infinitely more difficult and complicated than
chess . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.88

It is a game which has been played for untold ages , every man and woman
of us being one of the two players in a game of his or her own .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.89

The chess-board is the world , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.90

the pieces are the phenomena of the universe , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.91

the rules of the game are what we call the laws of Nature .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.92

The player on the other side is hidden from us . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.93

We know that his play is always fair , just and patient .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.94

But also we know , to our cost , that he never overlooks a mistake , or
makes the smallest allowance for ignorance . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.95

To the man who plays well , the highest stakes are paid , with that sort
of overflowing generosity with which the strong shows delight in
strength . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.96

And one who plays ill is checkmated - without haste , but without
remorse . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.97

My metaphor will remind some of you of the famous picture in which
Retzsch has depicted Satan playing at chess with man for his soul .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,82.98

Substitute for the mocking fiend in that <P_3,83> picture a calm ,
strong angel who is playing for love , as we say , and would rather lose
than win - and I should accept it as an image of human life .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.99

Well , what I mean by Education is learning the rules of this mighty
game . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.100

In other words , education is the instruction of the intellect in the
laws of Nature , under which name I include not merely things and their
forces , but men and their ways ; and the fashioning of the affections
and of the will into an earnest and loving desire to move in harmony
with those laws . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.101

For me , education means neither more nor less than this .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.102

Anything which professes to call itself education must be tried by this
standard , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.103

and if it fails to stand the test , I will not call it education ,
whatever may be the force of authority , or of numbers , upon the other
side . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.104

It is important to remember that , in strictness , there is no such
thing as an uneducated man . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.105

Take an extreme case . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.106

Suppose that an adult man , in the full vigour of his faculties , could
be suddenly placed in the world , as Adam is said to have been , and
then left to do as he best might . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.107

How long would he be left uneducated ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.108

Not five minutes . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.109

Nature would begin to teach him , through the eye , the ear , the touch
, the properties of objects . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.110

Pain and pleasure would be at his elbow telling him to do this and avoid
that ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,83.111

and by slow degrees the man would receive an education which , if narrow
, would be thorough , real , <P_3,84> and adequate to his circumstances
, though there would be no extras and very few accomplishments .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.112

And if to this solitary man entered a second Adam , or , better still ,
an Eve , a new and greater world , that of social and moral phenomena ,
would be revealed . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.113

Joys and woes , compared with which all others might seem but faint
shadows , would spring from the new relations . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.114

Happiness and sorrow would take the place of the coarser monitors ,
pleasure and pain ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.115

but conduct would still be shaped by the observation of the natural
consequences of actions ; or , in other words , by the laws of the
nature of man . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.116

To every one of us the world was once as fresh and new as to Adam .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.117

And then , long before we were susceptible of any other mode of
instruction , Nature took us in hand , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.118

and every minute of waking life brought its educational influence ,
shaping our actions into rough accordance with Nature's laws , so that
we might not be ended untimely by too gross disobedience .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.119

Nor should I speak of this process of education as past for any one , be
he as old as he may . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.120

For every man the world is as fresh as it was at the first day , and as
full of untold novelties for him who has the eyes to see them .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.121

And Nature is still continuing her patient education of us in that great
university , the universe , of which we are all members - Nature having
no Test-Acts . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,84.122

<P_3,85>

Those who take honours in Nature's university , who learn the laws which
govern men and things and obey them , are the really great and
successful men in this world . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.124

The great mass of mankind are the " Poll , " who pick up just enough to
get through without much discredit . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.125

Those who wo@ @n't learn at all are plucked ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.126

and then you ca@ @n't come up again . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.127

Nature's pluck means extermination . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.128

Thus the question of compulsory education is settled so far as Nature is
concerned . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.129

Her bill on that question was framed and passed long ago .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.130

But , like all compulsory legislation , that of Nature is harsh and
wasteful in its operation . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.131

Ignorance is visited as sharply as wilful disobedience -
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.132

incapacity meets with the same punishment as crime .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.133

Nature's discipline is not even a word and a blow , and the blow first ;
but the blow without the word . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.134

It is left to you to find out why your ears are boxed .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.135

The object of what we commonly call education - that education in which
man intervenes and which I shall distinguish as artificial education -
is to make good these defects in Nature's methods ; to prepare the child
to receive Nature's education , neither incapably nor ignorantly , nor
with wilful disobedience ; and to understand the preliminary symptoms of
her pleasure , without waiting for the box on the ear .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.136

In short , all artificial education ought to be an anticipation of
natural education . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,85.137

And a liberal education is an artificial education <P_3,86> which has
not only prepared a man to escape the great evils of disobedience to
natural laws , but has trained him to appreciate and to seize upon the
rewards , which Nature scatters with as free a hand as her penalties .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,86.138

That man , I think , has had a liberal education who has been so trained
in youth that his body is the ready servant of his will , and does with
ease and pleasure all the work that , as a mechanism , it is capable of
; whose intellect is a clear , cold , logic engine , with all its parts
of equal strength , and in smooth working order ; ready , like a steam
engine , to be turned to any kind of work , and spin the gossamers as
well as forge the anchors of the mind ; whose mind is stored with a
knowledge of the great and fundamental truths of Nature and of the laws
of her operations ; one who , no stunted ascetic , is full of life and
fire , but whose passions are trained to come to heel by a vigorous will
, the servant of a tender conscience ; who has learned to love all
beauty , whether of Nature or of art , to hate all vileness , and to
respect others as himself . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,86.139

Such an one and no other , I conceive , has had a liberal education ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,86.140

for he is , as completely as a man can be , in harmony with Nature .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,86.141

He will make the best of her , and she of him . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,86.142

They will get on together rarely : she as his ever beneficent mother ;
he as her mouthpiece , her conscious self , her minister and interpreter
. HUXLEY-186X-2,3,86.143

Where is such an education as this to be had ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,86.144

<P_3,87>

Where is there any approximation to it ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,87.146

Has any one tried to found such an education ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,87.147

Looking over the length and breadth of these islands , I am afraid that
all these questions must receive a negative answer .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,87.148

Consider our primary schools and what is taught in them .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,87.149

A child learns : - 1. To read , write , and cipher , more or less well
; but in a very large proportion of cases not so well as to take
pleasure in reading , or to be able to write the commonest letter
properly . 2. A quantity of dogmatic theology , of which the child ,
nine times out of ten , understands next to nothing . 3. Mixed up with
this , so as to seem to stand or fall with it , a few of the broadest
and simplest principles of morality . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,87.150

This , to my mind , is much as if a man of science should make the story
of the fall of the apple in Newton's garden an integral part of the
doctrine of gravitation , and teach it as of equal authority with the
law of the inverse squares . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,87.151

4. A good deal of Jewish history and Syrian geography , and perhaps a
little something about English history and the geography of the child's
own country . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,87.152

But I doubt if there is a primary school in England in which hangs a map
of the hundred in which the village lies , so that the children may be
practically taught by it what a map means {COM:missing_period}
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,87.153

<P_3,88>

5. A certain amount of regularity , attentive obedience , respect for
others : obtained by fear , if the master be incompetent or foolish ; by
love and reverence , if he be wise . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,88.155

So far as this school course embraces a training in the theory and
practice of obedience to the moral laws of Nature , I gladly admit , not
only that it contains a valuable educational element , but that , so far
, it deals with the most valuable and important part of all education .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,88.156

Yet , contrast what is done in this direction with what might be done ;
with the time given to matters of comparatively no importance ; with the
absence of any attention to things of the highest moment ; and one is
tempted to think of Falstaff's bill and " the halfpenny worth of bread
to all that quantity of sack . " HUXLEY-186X-2,3,88.157

Let us consider what a child thus " educated " knows , and what it does
not know . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,88.158

Begin with the most important topic of all - morality , as the guide of
conduct . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,88.159

The child knows well enough that some acts meet with approbation and
some with disapprobation . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,88.160

But it has never heard that there lies in the nature of things a reason
for every moral law , as cogent and as well defined as that which
underlies every physical law ; that stealing and lying are just as
certain to be followed by evil consequences , as putting your hand in
the fire , or jumping out of a garret window . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,88.161

Again , though the scholar may have been made acquainted , in <P_3,89>
dogmatic fashion , with the broad laws of morality , he has had no
training in the application of those laws to the difficult problems
which result from the complex conditions of modern civilisation .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,89.162

Would it not be very hard to expect any one to solve a problem in conic
sections who had merely been taught the axioms and definitions of
mathematical science ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,89.163

A workman has to bear hard labour , and perhaps privation , while he
sees others rolling in wealth , and feeding their dogs with what would
keep his children from starvation . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,89.164

Would it not be well to have helped that man to calm the natural
promptings of discontent by showing him , in his youth , the necessary
connection of the moral law which prohibits stealing with the stability
of society - by proving to him , once for all , that it is better for
his own people , better for himself , better for future generations ,
that he should starve than steal ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,89.165

If you have no foundation of knowledge , or habit of thought , to work
upon , what chance have you of persuading a hungry man that a capitalist
is not a thief " with a circumbendibus ? " HUXLEY-186X-2,3,89.166

And if he honestly believes that , of what avail is it to quote the
commandment against stealing , when he proposes to make the capitalist
disgorge ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,89.167

Again , the child learns absolutely nothing of the history or the
political organisation of his own country . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,89.168

His general impression is , that every thing of much importance happened
a very long <P_3,90> while ago ; and that the Queen and the gentlefolks
govern the country much after the fashion of King David and the elders
and nobles of Israel - his sole models . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.169

Will you give a man with this much information a vote ?
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.170

In easy times he sells it for a pot of beer . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.171

Why should he not ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.172

It is of about as much use to him as a chignon , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.173

and he knows as much what to do with it , for any other purpose .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.174

In bad times , on the contrary , he applies his simple theory of
government , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.175

and believes that his rulers are the cause of his sufferings - a belief
which sometimes bears remarkable practical fruits .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.176

Least of all , does the child gather from this primary " education " of
ours a conception of the laws of the physical world , or of the
relations of cause and effect therein . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.177

And this is the more to be lamented , as the poor are especially exposed
to physical evils , and are more interested in removing them than any
other class of the community . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.178

If any one is concerned in knowing the ordinary laws of mechanics one
would think it is the hand-labourer , whose daily toil lies among levers
and pulleys ; or among the other implements of artisan work .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.179

And if any one is interested in the laws of health , it is the poor
workman , whose strength is wasted by ill-prepared food , whose health
is sapped by bad ventilation and bad drainage , and half whose children
are massacred by disorders which might be prevented .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,90.180

Not only does our present <P_3,91> primary education carefully abstain
from hinting to the workman that some of his greatest evils are
traceable to mere physical agencies , which could be removed by energy ,
patience , and frugality ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.181

but it does worse - HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.182

it renders him , so far as it can , deaf to those who could help him ,
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.183

and tries to substitute an Oriental submission to what is falsely
declared to be the will of God , for his natural tendency to strive
after a better condition . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.184

What wonder , then , if very recently an appeal has been made to
statistics for the profoundly foolish purpose of showing that education
is of no good - that it diminishes neither misery nor crime among the
masses of mankind ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.185

I reply , why should the thing which has been called education do either
the one or the other ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.186

If I am a knave or a fool , teaching me to read and write wo@ @n't make
me less of either one or the other - unless somebody shows me how to put
my reading and writing to wise and good purposes .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.187

Suppose any one were to argue that medicine is of no use , because it
could be proved statistically , that the percentage of deaths was just
the same among people who had been taught how to open a medicine chest ,
and among those who did not so much as know the key by sight .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.188

The argument is absurd ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.189

but it is not more preposterous than that against which I am contending
. HUXLEY-186X-2,3,91.190

The only medicine for suffering , crime , and all <P_3,92> the other
woes of mankind , is wisdom . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.191

Teach a man to read and write , and you have put into his hands the
great keys of the wisdom box . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.192

But it is quite another matter whether he ever opens the box or not .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.193

And he is as likely to poison as to cure himself , if , without guidance
, he swallows the first drug that comes to hand .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.194

In these times a man may as well be purblind , as unable to read - lame
, as unable to write . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.195

But I protest that , if I thought the alternative were a necessary one ,
I would rather that the children of the poor should grow up ignorant of
both these mighty arts , than that they should remain ignorant of that
knowledge to which these arts are means . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.196

It may be said that all these animadversions may apply to primary
schools , but that the higher schools , at any rate , must be allowed to
give a liberal education . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.197

In fact they professedly sacrifice everything else to this object .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.198

Let us inquire into this matter . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.199

What do the higher schools , those to which the great middle class of
the country sends its children , teach , over and above the instruction
given in the primary schools ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.200

There is a little more reading and writing of English .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.201

But , for all that , every one knows that it is a rare thing to find a
boy of the middle or upper classes who can read aloud decently , or who
can put his thoughts on paper in clear and grammatical <paren> to say
nothing of good or elegant <$$paren> language . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,92.202

<P_3,93>

The " ciphering " of the lower schools expands into elementary
mathematics in the higher ; into arithmetic , with a little algebra , a
little Euclid . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,93.204

But I doubt if one boy in five_hundred has ever heard the explanation of
a rule of arithmetic , or knows his Euclid otherwise than by rote .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,93.205

Of theology , the middle class schoolboy gets rather less than poorer
children , less absolutely and less relatively , because there are so
many other claims upon his attention . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,93.206

I venture to say that , in the great majority of cases , his ideas on
this subject when he leaves school are of the most shadowy and vague
description , and associated with painful impressions of the weary hours
spent in learning collects and catechism by heart .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,93.207

Modern geography , modern history , modern literature ; the English
language as a language ; the whole circle of the sciences , physical ,
moral and social , are even more completely ignored in the higher than
in the lower schools . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,93.208

Up till within a few years back , a boy might have passed through any
one of the great public schools with the greatest distinction and credit
, HUXLEY-186X-2,3,93.209

and might never so much as have heard of one of the subjects I have just
mentioned . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,93.210

He might never have heard that the earth goes round the sun ; that
England underwent a great revolution in 1688 , and France another in
1789 ; that there once lived certain notable men called Chaucer ,
Shakespeare , Milton , Voltaire , Goethe , Schiller .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,93.211

The first might <P_3,94> be a German and the last an Englishman for
anything he could tell you to the contrary . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,94.212

And as for Science , the only idea the word would suggest to his mind
would be dexterity in boxing . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,94.213

I have said that this was the state of things a few years back , for the
sake of the few righteous who are to be found among the educational
cities of the plain . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,94.214

But I would not have you too sanguine about the result , if you sound
the minds of the existing generation of public schoolboys , on such
topics as those I have mentioned . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,94.215

Now let us pause to consider this wonderful state of affairs ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,94.216

for the time will come when Englishmen will quote it as the stock
example of the stolid stupidity of their ancestors in the nineteenth
century . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,94.217

The most thoroughly commercial people , the greatest voluntary wanderers
and colonists the world has ever seen , are precisely the middle classes
of this country . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,94.218

If there be a people which has been busy making history on the great
scale for the last three_hundred years - and the most profoundly
interesting history - history which , if it happened to be that of
Greece or Rome , we should study with avidity - it is the English .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,94.219

If there be a people which , during the same period , has developed a
remarkable literature , it is our own . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,94.220

If there be a nation whose prosperity depends absolutely and wholly upon
their mastery over the forces of Nature , upon their intelligent
<P_3,95> apprehension of , and obedience to the laws of the creation and
distribution of wealth , and of the stable equilibrium of the forces of
society , it is precisely this nation . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.221

And yet this is what these wonderful people tell their sons :
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.222

- " At the cost of from one to two_thousand pounds of our hard-earned
money , we devote twelve of the most precious years of your lives to
school . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.223

There you shall toil , or be supposed to toil ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.224

but there you shall not learn one single thing of all those you will
most want to know directly you leave school and enter upon the practical
business of life . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.225

You will in all probability go into business , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.226

but you shall not know where , or how , any article of commerce is
produced , or the difference between an export or an import , or the
meaning of the word " capital . " HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.227

You will very likely settle in a colony , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.228

but you shall not know whether Tasmania is part of New South Wales , or
<font> vice_vers√¢ . <$$font> HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.229

Very probably you may become a manufacturer , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.230

but you shall not be provided with the means of understanding the
working of one of your own steam-engines , or the nature of the raw
products you employ ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.231

and , when you are asked to buy a patent , you shall not have the
slightest means of judging whether the inventor is an impostor who is
contravening the elementary principles of science , or a man who will
make you as rich as Croesus . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,95.232

You will very likely get into the House of <P_3,96> Commons .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.233

You will have to take your share in making laws which may prove a
blessing or a curse to millions of men . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.234

But you shall not hear one word respecting the political organisation of
your country ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.235

the meaning of the controversy between free-traders and protectionists
shall never have been mentioned to you ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.236

you shall not so much as know that there are such things as economical
laws . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.237

The mental power which will be of most importance in your daily life
will be the power of seeing things as they are without regard to
authority ; and of drawing accurate general conclusions from particular
facts . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.238

But at school and at college you shall know of no source of truth but
authority ; nor exercise your reasoning faculty upon anything but
deduction from that which is laid down by authority .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.239

You will have to weary your soul with work , and many a time eat your
bread in sorrow and in bitterness , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.240

and you shall not have learned to take refuge in the great source of
pleasure without alloy , the serene resting-place for worn human nature
, - the world of art . " HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.241

Said I not rightly that we are a wonderful people ?
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.242

I am quite prepared to allow , that education entirely devoted to these
omitted subjects might not be a completely liberal education .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.243

But is an education which ignores them all a liberal education ?
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,96.244

Nay , is it too much to say <P_3,97> that the education which should
embrace these subjects and no others would be a real education , though
an incomplete one ; while an education which omits them is really not an
education at all , but a more or less useful course of intellectual
gymnastics ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,97.245

For what does the middle-class school put in the place of all these
things which are left out ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,97.246

It substitutes what is usually comprised under the compendious title of
the " classics " - that is to say , the languages , the literature , and
the history of the ancient Greeks and Romans , and the geography of so
much of the world as was known to these two great nations of antiquity .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,97.247

Now , do not expect me to depreciate the earnest and enlightened pursuit
of classical learning . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,97.248

I have not the least desire to speak ill of such occupations , nor any
sympathy with those who run them down . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,97.249

On the contrary , if my opportunities had lain in that direction , there
is no investigation into which I could have thrown myself with greater
delight than that of antiquity . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,97.250

What science can present greater attractions than philology ?
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,97.251

How can a lover of literary excellence fail to rejoice in the ancient
masterpieces ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,97.252

And with what consistency could I , whose business lies so much in the
attempt to decipher the past , and to build up intelligible forms out of
the scattered fragments of long-extinct beings , fail to take a
sympathetic , though an <P_3,98> unlearned , interest in the labours of
a Niebuhr , a Gibbon , or a Grote ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,98.253

Classical history is a great section of the palaeontology of man ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,98.254

and I have the same double respect for it as for other kinds of
palaeontology - that is to say , a respect for the facts which it
establishes as for all facts , and a still greater respect for it as a
preparation for the discovery of a law of progress .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,98.255

But if the classics were taught as they might be taught - if boys and
girls were instructed in Greek and Latin , not merely as languages , but
as illustrations of philological science ; if a vivid picture of life on
the shores of the Mediterranean two_thousand years ago were imprinted on
the minds of scholars ; if ancient history were taught , not as a weary
series of feuds and fights , but traced to its causes in such men placed
under such conditions ; if , lastly , the study of the classical books
were followed in such a manner as to impress boys with their beauties ,
and with the grand simplicity of their statement of the everlasting
problems of human life , instead of with their verbal and grammatical
peculiarities ; I still think it as little proper that they should form
the basis of a liberal education for our contemporaries , as I should
think it fitting to make that sort of palaeontology with which I am
familiar the back-bone of modern education . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,98.256

It is wonderful how close a parallel to classical training could be made
out of that palaeontology <P_3,99> to which I refer .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.257

In the first place I could get up an osteological primer so arid , so
pedantic in its terminology , so altogether distasteful to the youthful
mind , as to beat the recent famous production of the head-masters out
of the field in all these excellences . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.258

Next , I could exercise my boys upon easy fossils , and bring out all
their powers of memory and all their ingenuity in the application of my
osteo-grammatical rules to the interpretation , or construing , of those
fragments . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.259

To those who had reached the higher classes , I might supply odd bones
to be built up into animals , giving great honour and reward to him who
succeeded in fabricating monsters most entirely in accordance with the
rules . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.260

That would answer to verse-making and essay-writing in the dead
languages . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.261

To be sure , if a great comparative anatomist were to look at these
fabrications he might shake his head , or laugh .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.262

But what then ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.263

Would such a catastrophe destroy the parallel ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.264

What , think you , would Cicero , or Horace , say to the production of
the best sixth form going ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.265

And would not Terence stop his ears and run out if he could be present
at an English performance of his own plays ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.266

Would <font> Hamlet <$$font> , in the mouths of a set of French actors ,
who should insist on pronouncing English after the fashion of their own
tongue , be more hideously ridiculous ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,99.267

But it will be said that I am forgetting the beauty , and the human
interest , which appertain <P_3,100> to classical studies .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.268

To this I reply that it is only a very strong man who can appreciate the
charms of , a landscape as he is toiling up a steep hill , along a bad
road . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.269

What with short-windedness , stones , ruts , and a pervading sense of
the wisdom of rest and be thankful , most of us have little enough sense
of the beautiful under these circumstances . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.270

The ordinary schoolboy is precisely in this case .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.271

He finds Parnassus uncommonly steep , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.272

and there is no chance of his having much time or inclination to look
about him till he gets to the top . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.273

And nine times out of ten he does not get to the top .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.274

But if this be a fair picture of the results of classical teaching at
its best - and I gather from those who have authority to speak on such
matters that it is so - what is to be said of classical teaching at its
worst , or in other words , of the classics of our ordinary middle-class
schools ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.275

I will tell you . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.276

It means getting up endless forms and rules by heart .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.277

It means turning Latin and Greek into English , for the mere sake of
being able to do it , and without the smallest regard to the worth , or
worthlessness , of the author read . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,100.278

It means the learning of innumerable , not always decent , fables in
such a shape that the meaning they once had is dried up into utter trash
; and the only impression left upon a boy's mind is , that the people
who believed such <P_3,101> things must have been the greatest idiots
the world ever saw . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,101.279

And it means , finally , that after a_dozen years spent at this kind of
work , the sufferer shall be incompetent to interpret a passage in an
author he has not already got up ; that he shall loathe the sight of a
Greek or Latin book ; and that he shall never open , or think of , a
classical writer again , until , wonderful to relate , he insists upon
submitting his sons to the same process . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,101.280

These be your gods , O Israel ! HUXLEY-186X-2,3,101.281

For the sake of this net result <paren> and respectability <$$paren> the
British father denies his children all the knowledge they might turn to
account in life , not merely for the achievement of vulgar success , but
for guidance in the great crises of human existence .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,101.282

This is the stone he offers to those whom he is bound by the strongest
and tenderest ties to feed with bread . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,101.283

If primary and secondary education are in this unsatisfactory state ,
what is to be said to the universities ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,101.284

This is an awful subject , and one I almost fear to touch with my
unhallowed hands ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,101.285

but I can tell you what those say who have authority to speak .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,101.286

The Rector of Lincoln College , in his lately published valuable "
Suggestions for Academical Organisation with especial reference to
Oxford , " tells us <paren> p. 127 <$$paren> : - " The colleges were ,
in their origin , endowments , <P_3,102> not for the elements of a
general liberal education , but for the prolonged study of special and
professional faculties by men of riper age . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.287

The universities embraced both these objects . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.288

The colleges , while they incidentally aided in elementary education ,
were specially devoted to the highest learning .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.289

... This was the theory of the middle-age university and the design of
collegiate foundations in their origin . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.290

Time and circumstances have brought about a total change .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.291

The colleges no longer promote the researches of science ,
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.292

or direct professional study . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.293

Here and there college walls may shelter an occasional student , but not
in larger proportions than may be found in private life .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.294

Elementary teaching of youths under twenty is now the only function
performed by the university , and almost the only object of college
endowments . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.295

Colleges were homes for the life-study of the highest and most abstruse
parts of knowledge . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.296

They have become boarding schools in which the elements of the learned
languages are taught to youths . " HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.297

If Mr. Pattison's high position , and his obvious love and respect for
his university , be insufficient to convince the outside world that
language so severe is yet no more than just , the authority of the
Commissioners who reported on the University of Oxford in 1850 is open
to no challenge . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,102.298

Yet they write : - <P_3,103> " It is generally acknowledged that both
Oxford and the country at large suffer greatly from the absence of a
body of learned men devoting their lives to the cultivation of science ,
and to the direction of academical education . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,103.299

The fact that so few books of profound research emanate from the
University of Oxford , materially impairs its character as a seat of
learning , and consequently its hold on the respect of the nation . "
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,103.300

Cambridge can claim no exemption from the reproaches addressed to Oxford
. HUXLEY-186X-2,3,103.301

And thus there seems no escape from the admission that what we fondly
call our great seats of learning are simply " boarding schools " for
bigger boys ; that learned men are not more numerous in them than out of
them ; that the advancement of knowledge is not the object of fellows of
colleges ; that , in the philosophic calm and meditative stillness of
their greenswarded courts , philosophy does not thrive , and meditation
bears few fruits . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,103.302

It is my great good fortune to reckon amongst my friends resident
members of both universities , who are men of learning and research ,
zealous cultivators of science , keeping before their minds a noble
ideal of a university , and doing their best to make that ideal a
reality ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,103.303

and , to me , they would necessarily typify the universities , did not
the authoritative statements I have quoted compel me to believe that
they are exceptional , <P_3,104> and not representative men .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,104.304

Indeed , upon calm consideration , several circumstances lead me to
think that the Rector of Lincoln College and the Commissioners can@ @not
be far wrong . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,104.305

I believe there can be no doubt that the foreigner who should wish to
become acquainted with the scientific , or the literary , activity of
modern England , would simply lose his time and his pains if he visited
our universities with that object . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,104.306

And , as for works of profound research on any subject , and , above all
, in that classical lore for which the universities profess to sacrifice
almost everything else , why , a third-rate , poverty-stricken German
university turns out more produce of that kind in one year , than our
vast and wealthy foundations elaborate in ten . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,104.307

Ask the man who is investigating any question , profoundly and
thoroughly - be it historical , philosophical , philological , physical
, literary , or theological ; who is trying to make himself master of
any abstract subject <paren> except , perhaps , political economy and
geology , both of which are intensely Anglican sciences <$$paren> ,
whether he is not compelled to read half_a_dozen times as many German as
English books ? And whether , of these English books , more than one in
ten is the work of a fellow of a college , or a professor of an English
university ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,104.308

Is this from any lack of power in the English <P_3,105> as compared with
the German mind ? HUXLEY-186X-2,3,105.309

The countrymen of Grote and of Mill , of Faraday , of Robert Brown , of
Lyell , and of Darwin , to go no further back than the contemporaries of
men of middle age , can afford to smile at such a suggestion .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,105.310

England can show now , as she has been able to show in every generation
since civilisation spread over the West , individual men who hold their
own against the world , and keep alive the old tradition of her
intellectual eminence . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,105.311

But , in the majority of cases , these men are what they are in virtue
of their native intellectual force , and of a strength of character
which will not recognise impediments . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,105.312

They are not trained in the courts of the Temple of Science ,
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,105.313

but storm the walls of that edifice in all sorts of irregular ways , and
with much loss of time and power , in order to obtain their legitimate
positions . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,105.314

Our universities not only do not encourage such men ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,105.315

do not offer them positions , in which it should be their highest duty
to do , thoroughly , that which they are most capable of doing ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,105.316

but , as far as possible , university training shuts out of the minds of
those among them , who are subjected to it , the prospect that there is
anything in the world for which they are specially fitted .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,105.317

Imagine the success of the attempt to still the intellectual hunger of
any of the men I have mentioned , by putting before him , as the object
of existence , the successful mimicry of the measure of a Greek
<P_3,106> song , or the roll of Ciceronian prose !
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.318

Imagine how much success would be likely to attend the attempt to
persuade such men that the education which leads to perfection in such
elegances is alone to be called culture ; while the facts of history ,
the process of thought , the conditions of moral and social existence ,
and the laws of physical nature are left to be dealt with as they may by
outside barbarians ! HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.319

It is not thus that the German universities , from being beneath notice
a century ago , have become what they are now - the most intensely
cultivated and the most productive intellectual corporations the world
has ever seen . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.320

The student who repairs to them sees in the list of classes and of
professors a fair picture of the world of knowledge .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.321

Whatever he needs to know there is some one ready to teach him , some
one competent to discipline him in the way of learning ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.322

whatever his special bent , let him but be able and diligent , and in
due time he shall find distinction and a career .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.323

Among his professors , he sees men whose names are known and revered
throughout the civilised world ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.324

and their living example infects him with a noble ambition , and a love
for the spirit of work . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.325

The Germans dominate the intellectual world by virtue of the same simple
secret as that which made Napoleon the master of old Europe .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.326

They have declared <font> la carri√®re ouverte aux talents . <$$font>
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,106.327

and <P_3,107> every Bursch marches with a professor's gown in his
knapsack . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,107.328

Let him become a great scholar , or man of science , and ministers will
compete for his services . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,107.329

In Germany , they do not leave the chance of his holding the office he
would render illustrious to the tender mercies of a hot canvass , and
the final wisdom of a mob of country parsons . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,107.330

In short , in Germany , the universities are exactly what the Rector of
Lincoln and the Commissioners tell us the English universities are not ;
that is to say , corporations " of learned men devoting their lives to
the cultivation of science , and the direction of academical education .
" HUXLEY-186X-2,3,107.331

They are not " boarding schools for youths , " nor clerical seminaries ;
but institutions for the higher culture of men , in which the
theological faculty is of no more importance , or prominence , than the
rest ; and which are truly " universities , " since they strive to
represent and embody the totality of human knowledge , and to find room
for all forms of intellectual activity . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,107.332

May zealous and clear-headed reformers like Mr. Pattison succeed in
their noble endeavours to shape our universities towards some such ideal
as this , without losing what is valuable and distinctive in their
social tone ! HUXLEY-186X-2,3,107.333

But until they have succeeded , a liberal education will be no more
obtainable in our Oxford and Cambridge Universities than in our public
schools . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,107.334

<P_3,108>

If I am justified in my conception of the ideal of a liberal education ;
and if what I have said about the existing educational institutions of
the country is also true , it is clear that the two have no sort of
relation to one another ; that the best of our schools and the most
complete of our university trainings give but a narrow , one-sided , and
essentially illiberal education - while the worst give what is really
next to no education at all . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.336

The South London Working-Men's College could not copy any of these
institutions if it would ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.337

I am bold enough to express the conviction that it ought not if it could
. HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.338

For what is wanted is the reality and not the mere name of a liberal
education ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.339

and this College must steadily set before itself the ambition to be able
to give that education sooner or later . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.340

At present we are but beginning , sharpening our educational tools , as
it were , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.341

and , except a modicum of physical science , we are not able to offer
much more than is to be found in an ordinary school .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.342

Moral and social science - one of the greatest and most fruitful of our
future classes , I hope - at present lacks only one thing in our
programme , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.343

and that is a teacher . A considerable want , no doubt ;
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.344

but it must be recollected that it is much better to want a teacher than
to want the desire to learn . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,108.345

Further , we need what , for want of a better <P_3,109> name , I must
call Physical Geography . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.346

What I mean is that which the Germans call <font> " Erdkunde . "
<$$font> HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.347

It is a description of the earth , of its place and relation to other
bodies ; of its general structure , and of its great features - winds ,
tides , mountains , plains : of the chief forms of the vegetable and
animal worlds , of the varieties of man . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.348

It is the peg upon which the greatest quantity of useful and
entertaining scientific information can be suspended .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.349

Literature is not upon the College programme ; HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.350

but I hope some day to see it there . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.351

For literature is the greatest of all sources of refined pleasure ,
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.352

and one of the great uses of a liberal education is to enable us to
enjoy that pleasure . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.353

There is scope enough for the purposes of liberal education in the study
of the rich treasures of our own language alone .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.354

All that is needed is direction , and the cultivation of a refined taste
by attention to sound criticism . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.355

But there is no reason why French and German should not be mastered
sufficiently to read what is worth reading in those languages with
pleasure and with profit . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.356

And finally , by_and_by , we must have History ; treated not as a
succession of battles and dynasties ; not as a series of biographies ;
not as evidence that Providence has always been on the side of either
Whigs or Tories ; but as the development of man in times past , and in
other conditions than our own . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,109.357

<P_3,110>

But , as it is one of the principles of our College to be
self-supporting , the public must lead , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,110.359

and we must follow , in these matters . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,110.360

If my hearers take to heart what I have said about liberal education ,
they will desire these things , HUXLEY-186X-2,3,110.361

and I doubt not we shall be able to supply them .
HUXLEY-186X-2,3,110.362

But we must wait till the demand is made . HUXLEY-186X-2,3,110.363

