<BEGIN_huxley-1889-2>

<P_25>

<heading>

I AUTOBIOGRAPHY HUXLEY-1889-2,25.4

<$$heading>

The " many things " to which the Duchess's correspondent here refers are
the repairs and improvements of the episcopal seat at Auckland .
HUXLEY-1889-2,25.6

I doubt if the great apologist , greater in nothing than in the simple
dignity of his character , would have considered the writing an account
of himself as a thing which could be put upon him to do whatever
circumstances might be taken in . HUXLEY-1889-2,25.7

But the good bishop lived in an age when a man might write books and yet
be permitted to keep his private existence to himself ; in the
pre-Boswellian epoch , when the germ of the photographer lay in the womb
of the distant future , and the interviewer who pervades our <P_26> age
was an unforeseen , indeed unimaginable , birth of time .
HUXLEY-1889-2,26.8

At present , the most convinced believer in the aphorism " Bene qui
latuit , bene vixit , " is not always able to act up to it .
HUXLEY-1889-2,26.9

An importunate person informs him that his portrait is about to be
published and will be accompanied by a biography which the importunate
person proposes to write . HUXLEY-1889-2,26.10

The sufferer knows what that means ; HUXLEY-1889-2,26.11

either he undertakes to revise the " biography " HUXLEY-1889-2,26.12

or he does not . HUXLEY-1889-2,26.13

In the former case , he makes himself responsible ; HUXLEY-1889-2,26.14

in the latter , he allows the publication of a mass of more or less
fulsome inaccuracies for which he will be held responsible by those who
are familiar with the prevalent art of self-advertisement .
HUXLEY-1889-2,26.15

On the whole , it may be better to get over the " burlesque of being
employed in this manner " and do the thing himself .
HUXLEY-1889-2,26.16

It was by reflections of this kind that , some years ago , I was led to
write and permit the publication of the subjoined sketch .
HUXLEY-1889-2,26.17

I was born about eight o'clock in the morning on the 4th of May , 1825 ,
at Ealing , which was , at that time , as quiet a little country village
as could be found within half-a-dozen miles of Hyde Park Corner .
HUXLEY-1889-2,26.18

Now it is a suburb of London with , I believe , 30,000 inhabitants .
HUXLEY-1889-2,26.19

My father was one of the masters in a large semi-public school which at
one time had a high reputation . HUXLEY-1889-2,26.20

I am not aware that any portents preceded my arrival in this world ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,26.21

but , in my childhood , I remember hearing a traditional account of the
manner in which I lost the chance of an endowment of great practical
value . HUXLEY-1889-2,26.22

The windows of my mother's room were open , in consequence of the
unusual warmth of the weather . HUXLEY-1889-2,26.23

For the same reason , <P_27> probably , a neighboring beehive had
swarmed , HUXLEY-1889-2,27.24

and the new colony , pitching on the window-sill , was making its way
into the room when the horrified nurse shut down the sash .
HUXLEY-1889-2,27.25

If that well-meaning woman had only abstained from her ill-timed
interference , the swarm might have settled on my lips ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,27.26

and I should have been endowed with that mellifluous eloquence which ,
in this country , leads far more surely than worth , capacity , or
honest work , to the highest places in Church and State .
HUXLEY-1889-2,27.27

But the opportunity was lost , HUXLEY-1889-2,27.28

and I have been obliged to content myself through life with saying what
I mean in the plainest of plain language , than which , I suppose ,
there is no habit more ruinous to a man's prospects of advancement .
HUXLEY-1889-2,27.29

Why I was christened Thomas Henry I do not know ; HUXLEY-1889-2,27.30

but it is a curious chance that my parents should have fixed for my
usual denomination upon the name of that particular Apostle with whom I
have always felt most sympathy . HUXLEY-1889-2,27.31

Physically and mentally I am the son of my mother so completely - even
down to peculiar movements of the hands , which made their appearance in
me as I reached the age she had when I noticed them - that I can hardly
find any trace of my father in myself , except an inborn faculty for
drawing , which unfortunately , in my case , has never been cultivated ,
a hot temper , and that amount of tenacity of purpose which unfriendly
observers sometimes call obstinacy . HUXLEY-1889-2,27.32

My mother was a slender brunette , of an emotional and energetic
temperament , and possessed of the most piercing black eyes I ever saw
in a woman's head . HUXLEY-1889-2,27.33

With no more education than other women of the middle classes in her day
, she had an excellent mental capacity . HUXLEY-1889-2,27.34

Her <P_28> most distinguishing characteristic , however , was rapidity
of thought . HUXLEY-1889-2,28.35

If one ventured to suggest she had not taken much time to arrive at any
conclusion , she would say , " I can@ @not help it , HUXLEY-1889-2,28.36

things flash across me . " HUXLEY-1889-2,28.37

That peculiarity has been passed on to me in full strength ;
HUXLEY-1889-2,28.38

it has often stood me in good stead ; HUXLEY-1889-2,28.39

it has sometimes played me sad tricks , HUXLEY-1889-2,28.40

and it has always been a danger . HUXLEY-1889-2,28.41

But , after all , if my time were to come over again , there is nothing
I would less willingly part with than my inheritance of mother wit .
HUXLEY-1889-2,28.42

I have next to nothing to say about my childhood . HUXLEY-1889-2,28.43

In later years my mother , looking at me almost reproachfully , would
sometimes say , " Ah ! you were such a pretty boy ! " whence I had no
difficulty in concluding that I had not fulfilled my early promise in
the matter of looks . HUXLEY-1889-2,28.44

In fact , I have a distinct recollection of certain curls of which I was
vain , and of a conviction that I closely resembled that handsome ,
courtly gentleman , Sir Herbert Oakley , who was vicar of our parish ,
and who was as a god to us country folk , because he was occasionally
visited by the then Prince George of Cambridge . HUXLEY-1889-2,28.45

I remember turning my pinafore wrong side forwards in order to represent
a surplice , and preaching to my mother's maids in the kitchen as nearly
as possible in Sir Herbert's manner one Sunday morning when the rest of
the family were at church . HUXLEY-1889-2,28.46

That is the earliest indication I can call to mind of the strong
clerical affinities which my friend Mr. Herbert Spencer has always
ascribed to me , though I fancy they have for the most part remained in
a latent state . HUXLEY-1889-2,28.47

My regular school training was of the briefest , perhaps <P_29>
fortunately , HUXLEY-1889-2,29.48

for though my way of life has made me acquainted with all sorts and
conditions of men , from the highest to the lowest , I deliberately
affirm that the society I fell into at school was the worst I have ever
known . HUXLEY-1889-2,29.49

We boys were average lads , with much the same inherent capacity for
good and evil as any others ; HUXLEY-1889-2,29.50

but the people who were set over us cared about as much for our
intellectual and moral welfare as if they were baby-farmers .
HUXLEY-1889-2,29.51

We were left to the operation of the struggle for existence among
ourselves , HUXLEY-1889-2,29.52

and bullying was the least of the ill practices current among us .
HUXLEY-1889-2,29.53

Almost the only cheerful reminiscence in connection with the place which
arises in my mind is that of a battle I had with one of my classmates ,
who had bullied me until I could stand it no longer .
HUXLEY-1889-2,29.54

I was a very slight lad , HUXLEY-1889-2,29.55

but there was a wild-cat element in me which , when roused , made up for
lack of weight , HUXLEY-1889-2,29.56

and I licked my adversary effectually . HUXLEY-1889-2,29.57

However , one of my first experiences of the extremely rough-and-ready
nature of justice , as exhibited by the course of things in general ,
arose out of the fact that I - the victor - had a black eye , while he -
the vanquished - had none , so that I got into disgrace and he did not .
HUXLEY-1889-2,29.58

We made it up , HUXLEY-1889-2,29.59

and thereafter I was unmolested . HUXLEY-1889-2,29.60

One of the greatest shocks I ever received in my life was to be told
a_dozen years afterwards by the groom who brought me my horse in a
stable-yard in Sydney that he was my quondam antagonist .
HUXLEY-1889-2,29.61

He had a long story of family misfortune to account for his position ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,29.62

but at that time it was necessary to deal very cautiously with
mysterious strangers in New South Wales , HUXLEY-1889-2,29.63

and on inquiry I found that the unfortunate <P_30> young man had not
only been " sent out , " but had undergone more than one colonial
conviction . HUXLEY-1889-2,30.64

As I grew older , my great desire was to be a mechanical engineer ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,30.65

but the fates were against this HUXLEY-1889-2,30.66

and , while very young , I commenced the study of medicine under a
medical brother-in-law . HUXLEY-1889-2,30.67

But , though the Institute of Mechanical Engineers would certainly not
own me , I am not sure that I have not all along been a sort of
mechanical engineer <font> in partibus infidelium . <$$font>
HUXLEY-1889-2,30.68

I am now occasionally horrified to think how very little I ever knew or
cared about medicine as the art of healing . HUXLEY-1889-2,30.69

The only part of my professional course which really and deeply
interested me was physiology , which is the mechanical engineering of
living machines ; HUXLEY-1889-2,30.70

and , notwithstanding that natural science has been my proper business ,
I am afraid there is very little of the genuine naturalist in me .
HUXLEY-1889-2,30.71

I never collected anything , HUXLEY-1889-2,30.72

and species work was always a burden to me ; HUXLEY-1889-2,30.73

what I cared for was the architectural and engineering part of the
business , the working out the wonderful unity of plan in the thousands
and thousands of diverse living constructions , and the modifications of
similar apparatuses to serve diverse ends . HUXLEY-1889-2,30.74

The extraordinary attraction I felt towards the study of the intricacies
of living structure nearly proved fatal to me at the outset .
HUXLEY-1889-2,30.75

I was a mere boy - I think between thirteen and fourteen years of age -
when I was taken by some older student friends of mine to the first
<font> post-mortem <$$font> examination I ever attended .
HUXLEY-1889-2,30.76

All my life I have been most unfortunately sensitive to the
disagreeables which attend anatomical pursuits , HUXLEY-1889-2,30.77

but on this occasion my curiosity overpowered all other feelings ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,30.78

and I spent two <P_31> or three hours in gratifying it .
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.79

I did not cut myself , HUXLEY-1889-2,31.80

and none of the ordinary symptoms of dissection-poison supervened ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.81

but poisoned I was somehow , HUXLEY-1889-2,31.82

and I remember sinking into a strange state of apathy .
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.83

By way of a last chance , I was sent to the care of some good , kind
people , friends of my father's , who lived in a farmhouse in the heart
of Warwickshire . HUXLEY-1889-2,31.84

I remember staggering from my bed to the window on the bright spring
morning after my arrival , and throwing open the casement .
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.85

Life seemed to come back on the wings of the breeze ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.86

and to this day the faint odor , of wood-smoke , like that which floated
across the farm-yard in the early morning , is as good to me as the "
sweet south upon a bed of violets . " HUXLEY-1889-2,31.87

I soon recovered , HUXLEY-1889-2,31.88

but for years I suffered from occasional paroxysms of internal pain ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.89

and from that time my constant friend , hypochondriacal dyspepsia ,
commenced his half century of cotenancy of my fleshly tabernacle .
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.90

Looking back on my " Lehrjahre , " I am sorry to say that I do not think
that any account of my doings as a student would tend to edification .
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.91

In fact , I should distinctly warn ingenuous youth to avoid imitating my
example . HUXLEY-1889-2,31.92

I worked extremely hard when it pleased me , HUXLEY-1889-2,31.93

and when it did not - which was a very frequent case - I was extremely
idle <paren> unless making caricatures of one's pastors and masters is
to be called a branch of industry <$$paren> , HUXLEY-1889-2,31.94

or else wasted my energies in wrong directions . HUXLEY-1889-2,31.95

I read everything I could lay hands upon , including novels ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.96

and took up all sorts of pursuits to drop them again quite as speedily .
HUXLEY-1889-2,31.97

No doubt it was very largely my own fault , HUXLEY-1889-2,31.98

but the only instruction from which I ever obtained the proper effect of
education was that which I received from <P_32> Mr. Wharton Jones , who
was the lecturer on physiology at the Charing Cross School of Medicine .
HUXLEY-1889-2,32.99

The extent and precision of his knowledge impressed me greatly ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,32.100

and the severe exactness of his method of lecturing was quite to my
taste . HUXLEY-1889-2,32.101

I do not know that I have ever felt so much respect for anybody as a
teacher before or since . HUXLEY-1889-2,32.102

I worked hard to obtain his approbation , HUXLEY-1889-2,32.103

and he was extremely kind and helpful to the youngster who , I am afraid
, took up more of his time than he had any right to do .
HUXLEY-1889-2,32.104

It was he who suggested the publication of my first scientific paper - a
very little one - in the <font> Medical Gazette <$$font> of 1845 , and
most kindly corrected the literary faults which abounded in it , short
as it was ; HUXLEY-1889-2,32.105

for at that time , and for many years afterwards , I detested the
trouble of writing , HUXLEY-1889-2,32.106

and would take no pains over it . HUXLEY-1889-2,32.107

It was in the early spring of 1846 , that , having finished my
obligatory medical studies and passed the first M. B. examination at
the London University - though I was still too young to qualify at the
College of Surgeons - I was talking to a fellow-student <paren> the
present eminent physician , Sir Joseph Fayrer <$$paren> , and wondering
what I should do to meet the imperative necessity for earning my own
bread , when my friend suggested that I should write to Sir William
Burnett , at that time Director-General for the Medical Service of the
Navy , for an appointment . HUXLEY-1889-2,32.108

I thought this rather a strong thing to do , as Sir William was
personally unknown to me , HUXLEY-1889-2,32.109

but my cheery friend would not listen to my scruples ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,32.110

so I went to my lodgings HUXLEY-1889-2,32.111

and wrote the best letter I could devise . HUXLEY-1889-2,32.112

A few days afterwards I received the usual official circular of
acknowledgment , HUXLEY-1889-2,32.113

but at the bottom there was <P_33> written an instruction to call at
Somerset House on such a day . HUXLEY-1889-2,33.114

I thought that looked like business , HUXLEY-1889-2,33.115

so at the appointed time I called HUXLEY-1889-2,33.116

and sent in my card , while I waited in Sir William's ante-room .
HUXLEY-1889-2,33.117

He was a tall , shrewd-looking old gentleman , with a broad Scotch
accent - HUXLEY-1889-2,33.118

and I think I see him now as he entered with my card in his hand .
HUXLEY-1889-2,33.119

The first thing he did was to return it , with the frugal reminder that
I should probably find it useful on some other occasion .
HUXLEY-1889-2,33.120

The second was to ask whether I was an Irishman . HUXLEY-1889-2,33.121

I suppose the air of modesty about my appeal must have struck him .
HUXLEY-1889-2,33.122

I satisfied the Director-General that I was English to the backbone ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,33.123

and he made some inquiries as to my student career , finally desiring me
to hold myself ready for examination . HUXLEY-1889-2,33.124

Having passed this , I was in Her Majesty's Service , and entered on the
books of Nelson's old ship , the <font> Victory , <$$font> for duty at
Haslar Hospital , about a couple of months after I made my application .
HUXLEY-1889-2,33.125

My official chief at Haslar was a very remarkable person , the late Sir
John Richardson , an excellent naturalist , and far-famed as an
indomitable Arctic traveler . HUXLEY-1889-2,33.126

He was a silent , reserved man , outside the circle of his family and
intimates ; HUXLEY-1889-2,33.127

and , having a full share of youthful vanity , I was extremely disgusted
to find that " Old John , " as we irreverent youngsters called him ,
took not the slightest notice of my worshipful self either the first
time I attended him , as it was my duty to do , or for some weeks
afterwards . HUXLEY-1889-2,33.128

I am afraid to think of the lengths to which my tongue may have run on
the subject of the churlishness of the chief , who was , in truth , one
of the kindest-hearted and most considerate of men .
HUXLEY-1889-2,33.129

<P_34>

But one day , as I was crossing the hospital square , Sir John stopped
me , HUXLEY-1889-2,34.131

and heaped coals of fire on my head by telling me that he had tried to
get me one of the resident appointments , much coveted by the assistant
surgeons , but that the Admiralty had put in another man .
HUXLEY-1889-2,34.132

" However , " said he , " I mean to keep you here till I can get you
something you will like , " HUXLEY-1889-2,34.133

and turned upon his heel without waiting for the thanks I stammered out
. HUXLEY-1889-2,34.134

That explained how it was I had not been packed off to the West Coast of
Africa like some of my juniors , and why , eventually , I remained
altogether seven months at Haslar . HUXLEY-1889-2,34.135

After a long interval , during which " Old John " ignored my existence
almost as completely as before , he stopped me again as we met in a
casual way , HUXLEY-1889-2,34.136

and describing the service on which the <font> Rattlesnake <$$font> was
likely to be employed , said that Captain Owen Stanley , who was to
command the ship , had asked him to recommend an assistant surgeon who
knew something of science ; HUXLEY-1889-2,34.137

would I like that ? HUXLEY-1889-2,34.138

Of course I jumped at the offer . HUXLEY-1889-2,34.139

" Very well , I give you leave ; HUXLEY-1889-2,34.140

go to London at once HUXLEY-1889-2,34.141

and see Captain Stanley . " HUXLEY-1889-2,34.142

I went , HUXLEY-1889-2,34.143

saw my future commander , who was very civil to me , and promised to ask
that I should be appointed to his ship , as in due time I was .
HUXLEY-1889-2,34.144

It is a singular thing that , during the few months of my stay at Haslar
, I had among my messmates two future Directors-General of the Medical
Service of the Navy <paren> Sir Alexander Armstrong and Sir John
Watt-Reid <$$paren> , with the present President of the College of
Physicians and my kindest of doctors , Sir Andrew Clark .
HUXLEY-1889-2,34.145

Life on board Her Majesty's ships in those days was <P_35> a very
different affair from what it is now , HUXLEY-1889-2,35.146

and ours was exceptionally rough , as we were often many months without
receiving letters or seeing any civilized people but ourselves .
HUXLEY-1889-2,35.147

In exchange , we had the interest of being about the last voyagers , I
suppose , to whom it could be possible to meet with people who knew
nothing of firearms - as we did on the south Coast of New Guinea - and
of making acquaintance with a variety of interesting savage and
semi-civilized people . HUXLEY-1889-2,35.148

But , apart from experience of this kind and the opportunities offered
for scientific work , to me , personally , the cruise was extremely
valuable . HUXLEY-1889-2,35.149

It was good for me to live under sharp discipline ; to be down on the
realities of existence by living on bare necessaries ; to find out how
extremely well worth living life seemed to be when one woke up from a
night's rest on a soft plank , with the sky for canopy and coco and
weevilly biscuit the sole prospect for breakfast ; and , more especially
, to learn to work for the sake of what I got for myself out of it ,
even if it all went to the bottom and I along with it .
HUXLEY-1889-2,35.150

My brother officers were as good fellows as sailors ought to be and
generally are , HUXLEY-1889-2,35.151

but , naturally , they neither knew nor cared anything about my pursuits
, HUXLEY-1889-2,35.152

nor understood why I should be so zealous in pursuit of the objects
which my friends , the middies , christened " Buffons , " after the
title conspicuous on a volume of the " Suits à Buffon , " which stood on
my shelf in the chart room . HUXLEY-1889-2,35.153

During the four years of our absence , I sent home communication after
communication to the " Linnean Society , " with the same result as that
obtained by Noah when he sent the raven out of his ark .
HUXLEY-1889-2,35.154

Tired at last of hearing <P_36> nothing about them , I determined to do
or die , HUXLEY-1889-2,36.155

and in 1849 I drew up a more elaborate paper HUXLEY-1889-2,36.156

and forwarded it to the Royal Society . HUXLEY-1889-2,36.157

This was my dove , if I had only known it . HUXLEY-1889-2,36.158

But owing to the movements of the ship , I heard nothing of that either
until my return to England in the latter end of the year 1850 , when I
found that it was printed and published , and that a huge packet of
separate copies awaited me . HUXLEY-1889-2,36.159

When I hear some of my young friends complain of want of sympathy and
encouragement , I am inclined to think that my naval life was not the
least valuable part of my education . HUXLEY-1889-2,36.160

Three years after my return were occupied by a battle between my
scientific friends on the one hand and the Admiralty on the other , as
to whether the latter ought , or ought not , to act up to the spirit of
a pledge they had given to encourage officers who had done scientific
work by contributing to the expense of publishing mine .
HUXLEY-1889-2,36.161

At last the Admiralty , getting tired , I suppose , cut short the
discussion by ordering me to join a ship , which thing I declined to do
, HUXLEY-1889-2,36.162

and as Rastignac , in the Père Goriot , says to Paris , I said to London
<font> " à nous deux . " <$$font> HUXLEY-1889-2,36.163

I desired to obtain a Professorship of either Physiology or Comparative
Anatomy , HUXLEY-1889-2,36.164

and as vacancies occurred I applied , but in vain .
HUXLEY-1889-2,36.165

My friend , Professor Tyndall , and I were candidates at the same time ,
he for the Chair of Physics and I for that of Natural History in the
University of Toronto , which , fortunately , as it turned out , would
not look at either of us . HUXLEY-1889-2,36.166

I say fortunately , not from any lack of respect for Toronto , but
because I soon made up my mind that London was the place for me ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,36.167

and hence I have steadily declined the inducements to leave it , which
have at <P_37> various times been offered . HUXLEY-1889-2,37.168

At last , in 1854 , on the translation of my warm friend Edward Forbes ,
to Edinburgh , Sir Henry de la Beche , the Director-General of the
Geological Survey , offered me the post Forbes vacated of Paleontologist
and Lecturer on Natural History . HUXLEY-1889-2,37.169

I refused the former point blank , HUXLEY-1889-2,37.170

and accepted the latter only provisionally , telling Sir Henry that I
did not care for fossils , and that I should give up Natural History as
soon as I could get a physiological post . HUXLEY-1889-2,37.171

But I held the office for thirty-one years , HUXLEY-1889-2,37.172

and a large part of my work has been paleontological .
HUXLEY-1889-2,37.173

At that time I disliked public speaking , HUXLEY-1889-2,37.174

and had a firm conviction that I should break down every time I opened
my mouth . HUXLEY-1889-2,37.175

I believe I had every fault a speaker could have <paren> except talking
at random or indulging in rhetoric <$$paren> , when I spoke to the first
important audience I ever addressed , on a Friday evening at the Royal
Institution , in 1852 . HUXLEY-1889-2,37.176

Yet , I must confess to having been guilty , <font> malgré moi ,
<$$font> of as much public speaking as most of my contemporaries ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,37.177

and for the last ten years it ceased to be so much of a bugbear to me .
HUXLEY-1889-2,37.178

I used to pity myself for having to go through this training ,
HUXLEY-1889-2,37.179

but I am now more disposed to compassionate the unfortunate audiences ,
especially my ever-@ @friendly hearers at the Royal Institution , who
were the subjects of my oratorical experiments . HUXLEY-1889-2,37.180

The last thing that it would be proper for me to do would be to speak of
the work of my life , or to say at the end of the day whether I think I
have earned my wages or not . HUXLEY-1889-2,37.181

Men are said to be partial judges of themselves . HUXLEY-1889-2,37.182

Young men may be , HUXLEY-1889-2,37.183

I doubt if old men are . HUXLEY-1889-2,37.184

Life seems terribly foreshortened as they look back , and <P_38> the
mountain they set themselves to climb in youth turns out to be a mere
spur of immeasurably higher ranges when , with failing breath , they
reach the top . HUXLEY-1889-2,38.185

But if I may speak of the objects I have had more or less definitely in
view since I began the ascent of my hillock , they are briefly these :
To promote the increase of natural knowledge and to forward the
application of scientific methods of investigation to all the problems
of life to the best of my ability , in the conviction which has grown
with my growth and stengthened with my strength , that there is no
alleviation for the sufferings of mankind except veracity of thought and
of action , and the resolute facing of the world as it is when the
garment of make-believe by which pious hands have hidden its uglier
features is stripped off . HUXLEY-1889-2,38.186

It is with this intent that I have subordinated any reasonable , or
unreasonable , ambition for scientific fame which I may have permitted
myself to entertain to other ends ; to the popularization of science ;
to the development and organization of scientific education ; to the
endless series of battles and skirmishes over evolution ; and to
untiring opposition to that ecclesiastical spirit , that clericalism ,
which in England , as everywhere else , and to whatever denomination it
may belong , is the deadly enemy of science . HUXLEY-1889-2,38.187

In striving for the attainment of these objects , I have been but one
among many , HUXLEY-1889-2,38.188

and I shall be well content to be remembered , or even not remembered ,
as such . HUXLEY-1889-2,38.189

Circumstances , among which I am proud to reckon the devoted kindness of
many friends , have led to my occupation of various prominent positions
, among which the <P_39> Presidency of the Royal Society is the highest
. HUXLEY-1889-2,39.190

It would be mock modesty on my part , with these and other scientific
honors which have been bestowed upon me , to pretend that I have not
succeeded in the career which I have followed , rather because I was
driven into it than of my own free will ; HUXLEY-1889-2,39.191

but I am afraid I should not count even these things as marks of success
if I could not hope that I had somewhat helped that movement of opinion
which has been called the New Reformation . HUXLEY-1889-2,39.192

