<BEGIN_innes-1902-2>

<P_61>

<heading>

Chapter VI INNES-1902-2,61.4

The Struggle between French and British INNES-1902-2,61.5

<paren> <font> Map III . <$$font> <$$paren> INNES-1902-2,61.6

<$$heading>

About the time when Nadir Shah was sacking Delhi , Robert Walpole in
England was lamenting the violent outburst of public feeling which
plunged the country into a struggle with Spain . INNES-1902-2,61.8

That Spanish war was in a way the beginning of the fierce contest for
dominion beyond the seas , which terminated after a complete triumph of
the British in the Peace of 1763 . INNES-1902-2,61.9

Commercial rivalry with Spain in the South Seas , colonial rivalry with
the French in North America , and commercial rivalry with the French in
India , induced wars which by sea , or on the American continent , or in
India , continued practically without an interval for twenty-four years
and ended by giving Britain the complete dominion of the ocean , and
expelling the French as a Power from America and India alike .
INNES-1902-2,61.10

When Walpole went to war with Spain very much against his own will , the
presumption was strong that sooner or later France would throw her
weight into the scale along with the sister Bourbon Monarchy .
INNES-1902-2,61.11

A secret treaty for the aggrandisement of the Bourbon houses was in
existence ; INNES-1902-2,61.12

and it was the English minister's firm conviction that the combined
fleets of France and Spain would prove too strong for that of England .
INNES-1902-2,61.13

But war , declared against Spain in 1739 , was not formally declared
with France until 1744 ; INNES-1902-2,61.14

in 1746 Great Britain was finally freed from the haunting spectre of
civil strife which had vexed her statesmen ever since the expulsion of
James II. , by the collapse of the last Jacobite rising ;
INNES-1902-2,61.15

and when a <P_62> general peace was concluded in 1748 , she had
definitely succeeded in holding her own , though no settlement was
reached of the questions which had been the ostensible causes of the
conflagration . INNES-1902-2,62.16

The struggle was renewed in 1756 , when the British under the guiding
genius of the elder Pitt developed an overwhelming naval supremacy which
paralysed the resistance of the French in lands which could only receive
reinforcements by sea . INNES-1902-2,62.17

Had Britons and French in India been left to fight their quarrels out
between themselves , it is at least possible that French , not British ,
would have become the arbiters of India . INNES-1902-2,62.18

But they were not left to themselves ; INNES-1902-2,62.19

their battles were fought at Quiberon and Quebec as well as at
Trichinopoli and Wandewash ; INNES-1902-2,62.20

and afterwards France was never able to place a rival armament in India
. INNES-1902-2,62.21

At the time , however , when the challenge was planned , the chances of
the issue were extremely doubtful . INNES-1902-2,62.22

Had France pursued in the first war , or had Pitt failed to pursue in
the second , a vigorous naval policy , the position of affairs might
very possibly have been reversed . INNES-1902-2,62.23

As it turned out it is hardly too much to say that the British entered
upon the inheritance which Dupleix prepared . INNES-1902-2,62.24

Dupleix had been for some years at Chandernagar on the Hugli when he was
appointed to the leading post of Governor of Pondichery in succession to
Dumas . INNES-1902-2,62.25

There he arrived in 1741 . INNES-1902-2,62.26

About the time when he was leaving Bengal , Ali Vardi Khan , previously
Governor of Behar , had intrigued himself into the position of Nawab of
Behar and Bengal . INNES-1902-2,62.27

In the Carnatic Dupleix found a new Nawab , Anwar-ud-din , only just
appointed by the Nizam , to the exclusion of a family which had held the
office for thirty years . INNES-1902-2,62.28

A year or two earlier , Nadir Shah had sacked the home of the Padishah
himself . INNES-1902-2,62.29

The instability of Oriental dynasties , in short , had only just been
emphatically and variously illustrated , INNES-1902-2,62.30

and the already immense age of the Nizam pointed to a prospect of its
further illustration in the immediate future . INNES-1902-2,62.31

Hence two ideas presented themselves to the mind of Dupleix in close
association . INNES-1902-2,62.32

If the Europeans gave their <P_63> minds to doing it they could make
themselves the determining factor in the rivalries of natives ;
INNES-1902-2,63.33

if the French got rid of the English they could secure that position for
themselves , INNES-1902-2,63.34

and if they worked skilfully for that position they would be able to get
rid of the English . INNES-1902-2,63.35

Further , although in the field Dupleix was not adapted for soldiering ,
he had an intelligent perception of sundry military principles whereby
he formulated the law that the kind of discipline prevailing in the
levies of native princes was of very little value against the kind of
discipline which prevails among the most inadequate European troops ,
while the European discipline could be imparted to native troops by
European officers . INNES-1902-2,63.36

In 1744 France and Great Britain went to war ; INNES-1902-2,63.37

but the French and British East India Companies' Directors at home were
thinking about dividends , not politics , INNES-1902-2,63.38

and instructed their officials in India to maintain friendly relations .
INNES-1902-2,63.39

Their officials in India saw matters in a different light .
INNES-1902-2,63.40

Governor Morse at Madras , and Governor Dupleix at Pondichery , each
meant to use the opportunity for a blow at his commercial rivals .
INNES-1902-2,63.41

Dupleix , however , had laid his plans : INNES-1902-2,63.42

Morse had not . INNES-1902-2,63.43

The British at the outset found their intention of marching on
Pondichery frustrated by a warning from the Nawab that they would move
at their peril : INNES-1902-2,63.44

nor had it occurred to any one that such a threat could possibly be
defied . INNES-1902-2,63.45

Dupleix had taken time by the forelock , and secured the condescending
protection of Amwar-ud-din till he himself should be ready to strike .
INNES-1902-2,63.46

This , however , was a merely precautionary move . INNES-1902-2,63.47

At that time , the islands of the Mauritius were a French Naval station
. INNES-1902-2,63.48

The Commander there was La Bourdonnais , a man of great ability and
energy . INNES-1902-2,63.49

Dupleix had been for some time in communication with him , when an
English squadron under Peyton appeared before Pondichery , prepared to
ignore - from the sea - the Nawab's prohibition of hostilities .
INNES-1902-2,63.50

But Peyton had hardly arrived when La Bourdonnais also came on the scene
of action with ships and troops . INNES-1902-2,63.51

Peyton found himself obliged to withdraw . INNES-1902-2,63.52

La Bourdonnais sailed for Madras ; INNES-1902-2,63.53

the Governor made a vain appeal to the Nawab for the protection
previously extended to the French ; INNES-1902-2,63.54

there <P_64> was no force in the place to resist La Bourdonnais ,
INNES-1902-2,64.55

and in September 1746 , after a short bombardment , Madras surrendered .
INNES-1902-2,64.56

The Admiral had promised that the town should be restored on payment of
a ransom ; INNES-1902-2,64.57

but Dupleix repudiated the terms , declaring that La Bourdonnais had
acted without authority . INNES-1902-2,64.58

There was a hot altercation , INNES-1902-2,64.59

but Dupleix was in the stronger position : INNES-1902-2,64.60

and La Bourdonnais's ships were not in a condition to await the
approaching monsoon . INNES-1902-2,64.61

He had to withdraw , leaving some troops , to the Mauritius - whence he
was almost immediately recalled , to be thrown into prison by way of
encouragement - INNES-1902-2,64.62

and Dupleix took possession of Madras , explaining to the Nawab that
this was merely a preliminary to handing it over to him .
INNES-1902-2,64.63

It was not long , however , before Anwar-ud-din came to the conclusion
that the presumptuous Frenchman meant to keep Madras himself ; whereupon
he sent his son at the head of some ten_thousand men to compel obedience
. INNES-1902-2,64.64

Then Dupleix put his theory to the test . INNES-1902-2,64.65

The garrison , numbering not more than five_hundred men , sallied out
against the Nawab's troops , INNES-1902-2,64.66

and routed them . INNES-1902-2,64.67

Reinforcements , consisting of two_hundred_and_thirty Europeans , and
seven_hundred sepoys - natives drilled on the European model , and under
European officers - were on their way to Madras , INNES-1902-2,64.68

and again scattered the native levies . INNES-1902-2,64.69

Quite suddenly it was revealed that odds of twenty to one were by no
means sufficient to ensure victory against Europeans and sepoys in
combination . INNES-1902-2,64.70

Madras had fallen , INNES-1902-2,64.71

and its English occupants had been paraded through Pondichery as
prisoners of war , INNES-1902-2,64.72

but Fort St David , a_hundred miles to the south , was standing .
INNES-1902-2,64.73

Two attempts to capture it were , however , repelled ,
INNES-1902-2,64.74

and the appearance of a small British squadron under Griffin sufficed to
check active hostilities without enabling the British to assume the
offensive . INNES-1902-2,64.75

In June of the following year <paren> 1748 <$$paren> the attack on Fort
St David was vigorously renewed , but triumphantly repelled by Major
Stringer Lawrence who had recently taken over the command .
INNES-1902-2,64.76

In August a considerable fleet from England commanded by Boscawen
appeared off Pondichery , INNES-1902-2,64.77

and the French port was besieged . INNES-1902-2,64.78

The siege <P_65> was very ill managed , and the defence brilliantly
conducted . INNES-1902-2,65.79

After fifty days , Boscawen was obliged to withdraw by the approach of
the monsoon - INNES-1902-2,65.80

for the harbourage on the Coromandel coast was quite inadequate under
these conditions . INNES-1902-2,65.81

The raising of the siege was a triumph for the French , whose military
prestige was now incomparably higher than that of their rivals and their
interest at the Nawab's court proportionately stronger :
INNES-1902-2,65.82

and the news of the Peace of Aix-la-Chapelle prevented the return of
Boscawen when the monsoons should be over . INNES-1902-2,65.83

One result of the treaty however , was not to Dupleix's taste .
INNES-1902-2,65.84

In the course of the war , the British in America had taken Louisburg on
the St Lawrence from the French : INNES-1902-2,65.85

and Dupleix had to give up Madras in India in return for the restoration
of Louisburg in Canada . INNES-1902-2,65.86

There was peace between France and England , INNES-1902-2,65.87

and the two Companies were no longer at liberty to make war on each
other ; INNES-1902-2,65.88

both however , were bent on carrying on the struggle ,
INNES-1902-2,65.89

and a means of doing so was promptly discovered . INNES-1902-2,65.90

But while the British waited upon fortune , Dupleix created his own
opportunity . INNES-1902-2,65.91

Anwar-ud-din had been , as we have observed , appointed Nawab of the
Carnatic by the Nizam in 1740 : displacing a family which , in the
person of Sadutulla , had begun to rule in 1710 . INNES-1902-2,65.92

Sadutulla had been succeeded in 1732 by his nephew Dost Ali ;
INNES-1902-2,65.93

both had been good and popular governors INNES-1902-2,65.94

and the Nizam had not found it convenient to interfere .
INNES-1902-2,65.95

A few years later , the Marathas raided the Carnatic in force :
INNES-1902-2,65.96

Dost Ali was killed . INNES-1902-2,65.97

His son , Safdar Ali , in turn was proclaimed Nawab .
INNES-1902-2,65.98

He had two brothers-in-law : one Chanda Sahib , who was able , popular ,
and bore a very high character . INNES-1902-2,65.99

With the connivance of Safdar Ali , who feared Chanda Sahib as a
possible rival , the Marathas attacked and captured the latter
INNES-1902-2,65.100

and carried him off to Satara , where they held him to ransom .
INNES-1902-2,65.101

He however , in anticipation of disturbed times , had already placed his
family in charge of Dumas at Pondichery ; a confidence of which , as we
have seen , the Governor had shown himself thoroughly worthy .
INNES-1902-2,65.102

Then Safdar Ali had been assassinated by the other brother-in-law ;
INNES-1902-2,65.103

<P_66>

the Nizam had considered it time to interfere with a strong hand ;
INNES-1902-2,66.105

Anwar-ud-din was appointed Governor , and Guardian of Safdar Ali's young
son , INNES-1902-2,66.106

and on the boy's death shortly after was formally made Nawab .
INNES-1902-2,66.107

Thus , when the war between French and English formally terminated in
1748 , Chanda Sahib represented the family of Sadutulla , which had
during its power endeared itself to the population .
INNES-1902-2,66.108

He himself was deservedly a favourite with them : INNES-1902-2,66.109

but he was a prisoner at Satara . INNES-1902-2,66.110

Anwar-ud-din was an old and fairly capable soldier , INNES-1902-2,66.111

but was disliked both personally and as a supplanter of the popular
house . INNES-1902-2,66.112

Chanda Sahib was bound by strong ties to the French .
INNES-1902-2,66.113

Dupleix conceived the idea of obtaining the release of Chanda Sahib and
establishing him on the throne of the Carnatic : INNES-1902-2,66.114

and as the first step , provided a ransom sufficient to satisfy the
Marathas . INNES-1902-2,66.115

King-making in the Carnatic was the scheme by which Dupleix intended to
accomplish his purposes ; INNES-1902-2,66.116

but circumstances enlarged the scope of his operations .
INNES-1902-2,66.117

Just at this time the old Nizam Asaf Jah himself died ; whereupon the
succession was immediately seized by his son Nadir Jang , and claimed by
a grandson Muzaffar Jang ; who affirmed that the Mogul himself had made
the appointment . INNES-1902-2,66.118

It was natural that the two claimants , Muzaffar Jang , and Chanda Sahib
, should make common cause against the <font> de facto <$$font> Nizam ,
and Nawab , while Dupleix could support them under colour of loyalty to
the Imperial Power . INNES-1902-2,66.119

Muzaffar Jang and Chanda Sahib marched into the Carnatic , accompanied
by a contingent of French and Sepoys under the able French general Bussy
. INNES-1902-2,66.120

Anwar-ud-din was defeated and slain at Ambur <paren> July 1749 <$$paren>
, while his son Mohammed Ali escaped to Trichinopoli : Bussy and his
contingent having rendered invaluable service in the fight .
INNES-1902-2,66.121

Meantime the British had been wasting their energies in a futile and
aimless attempt to restore the incompetent ex-Raja of the little Maratha
principality of Tanjur , in the place of his brother the reigning Raja .
INNES-1902-2,66.122

The attempt failed , INNES-1902-2,66.123

and the Company gained nothing but the cession of the fort of Devikôta
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} . INNES-1902-2,66.124

Nor could they rise to the occasion when <P_67> the successful move of
Dupleix ought to have opened their eyes to the necessity for prompt and
energetic action . INNES-1902-2,67.125

They allowed the fleet and most of the land forces to depart for England
; INNES-1902-2,67.126

and , in response to Mohammed Ali's appeal for their assistance sent him
a_hundred_and_twenty men . INNES-1902-2,67.127

Dupleix saw that the course for his candidates for office to follow was
the immediate and complete suppression of Mohammed Ali ; which would
then enable them to concentrate against Nadir Jang .
INNES-1902-2,67.128

But Chanda Sahib wasted time in a prolonged attack on Tanjur : so that
before he could move on Trichinopoli , Nadir Jang had himself appeared
in the Carnatic with a vast army , joined by a British contingent from
Madras under Major Lawrence . INNES-1902-2,67.129

As the result of an engagement , Muzaffar Jang fell into his uncle's
hands INNES-1902-2,67.130

and Chanda Sahib had to fall back on Pondichery . INNES-1902-2,67.131

The resourceful Frenchman however , at once opened negotiations with
Nadir Jang , in the course of which he discovered that several of the
chiefs were ill-affected towards him . INNES-1902-2,67.132

With them he immediately began to intrigue ; INNES-1902-2,67.133

and while Nadir Jang lay idle at Arcot , made a dash at Masulipatam
which was captured , INNES-1902-2,67.134

attacked Mohammed Ali INNES-1902-2,67.135

and put him to flight , INNES-1902-2,67.136

and seized the strong fort of Jinji . INNES-1902-2,67.137

Nadir Jang was now disposed to revert to Dupleix's terms , which
involved the liberation of Muzaffar Jang and the recognition of Chanda
Sahib as Nawab of the Carnatic : INNES-1902-2,67.138

but an engagement was brought on by the French force marching from Jinji
, which was unaware that the treaty had been actually ratified :
INNES-1902-2,67.139

Nadir Jang was assassinated on the field of battle : INNES-1902-2,67.140

and Muzaffar Jang was again hailed as Nizam . INNES-1902-2,67.141

This took place in December 1749 . INNES-1902-2,67.142

The result was that Dupleix's candidates now appeared to be completely
masters of the Dekhan and the Carnatic , INNES-1902-2,67.143

and he himself received the official Nawabship from the Mogul .
INNES-1902-2,67.144

Nor was the position materially affected by the death of Muzaffar Jang
in Jan. 1750 in a skirmish with rebels on his way back to Haidarabad :
INNES-1902-2,67.145

for Bussy , who was with him , secured the succession to his own nominee
, Salâbat {COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} Jang , whom he
accompanied to the capital . INNES-1902-2,67.146

With his instinctive appreciation of the effects of display <P_68> on
Oriental minds , Dupleix set up a pillar near the spot where Nadir Jang
fell recording his own glories , INNES-1902-2,68.147

and named the place Dupleix-Fatehabad
{TEXT:first_two_vowels_marked_with_breve} - the city of the Victory of
Dupleix . INNES-1902-2,68.148

Mohammed Ali however , was again holding Trichinopoli ,
INNES-1902-2,68.149

and Chanda Sahib marched against him early in 1751 .
INNES-1902-2,68.150

But the tide of Dupleix's success had now reached its highest point .
INNES-1902-2,68.151

A new Governor , Mr Saunders , had recently arrived at Madras , who was
alive to the immense need of vigorous counteraction to the French .
INNES-1902-2,68.152

He dispatched reinforcements to the force at Trichinopoli ;
INNES-1902-2,68.153

but , what was of more importance , he gave an independent command to
Robert Clive . INNES-1902-2,68.154

The founder of our Indian Empire was now in his twenty-sixth year .
INNES-1902-2,68.155

He had arrived at Madras in the capacity of a " writer " - <font> i.e.
<$$font> a junior clerk in the employ of the East India Company - at the
age of nineteen . INNES-1902-2,68.156

At the first outbreak of hostilities , he had volunteered ;
INNES-1902-2,68.157

when Madras fell , he escaped to Fort St David , in the defence of which
, as well as in the operations against Tanjur , he had shown conspicuous
bravery and coolness ; INNES-1902-2,68.158

and was allowed to exchange his writership for a commission in the
Company's service . INNES-1902-2,68.159

Now his opportunity had come . INNES-1902-2,68.160

He pointed out to Saunders that a direct relief of Trichinopoli would be
vain , but that a diversion might be effected by a blow at Arcot , the
Nawab's capital . INNES-1902-2,68.161

Desperately audacious as the scheme was , Saunders resolved to take the
risk . INNES-1902-2,68.162

With eight officers , only two of whom had been in action before ,
two_hundred British soldiers , and three_hundred Sepoys , Clive started
on his perilous expedition . INNES-1902-2,68.163

So suddenly was the blow conceived , so swiftly executed , that on his
arrival at Arcot the garrison was seized with panic and evacuated the
fort without a blow . INNES-1902-2,68.164

The young commander made instant preparations to stand a siege .
INNES-1902-2,68.165

The fugitive garrison , far more numerous than his own little force ,
rallied and encamped close by . INNES-1902-2,68.166

Clive again surprised them in a night attack , INNES-1902-2,68.167

slew large numbers of them , INNES-1902-2,68.168

and withdrew without loss . INNES-1902-2,68.169

<P_69>

His specific object was perfectly attained . INNES-1902-2,69.171

Chanda Sahib at Trichinopoli immediately divided his forces , <paren>
thereby affording considerable relief to the beleaguered troops
<$$paren> , in order to send four_thousand of them to recover Arcot .
INNES-1902-2,69.172

These with other detachments collected by the way - including a small
body of French from Pondichery - formed an investing army of
ten_thousand men : with Chanda Sahib's son Raja Sahib in command .
INNES-1902-2,69.173

For fifty days , Clive with his little force , already much reduced ,
held the feeble fortifications of Arcot . INNES-1902-2,69.174

The fame of the bold defence spread : INNES-1902-2,69.175

the native chiefs began to revise their estimates of British enterprise
and valour , hitherto painfully low . INNES-1902-2,69.176

The sepoys in the little garrison shewed their devotion by offering to
live on the water used for boiling the rice in order that the grain
might be reserved for the Europeans . INNES-1902-2,69.177

Raja Sahib , fearing that relief might come , resolved to storm the
place : INNES-1902-2,69.178

but Clive was ready . INNES-1902-2,69.179

The desperate valour and activity of the besieged completely foiled the
besiegers after a hot contest . INNES-1902-2,69.180

The siege was raised INNES-1902-2,69.181

and Raja Sahib retired . INNES-1902-2,69.182

Clive sallied forth INNES-1902-2,69.183

and again defeated him at Arni , and yet again , having been at last
joined by considerable reinforcements and by a band of Marathas , at
Kaveripak : presently thereafter razing Dupleix-Fatehabad to the ground
. INNES-1902-2,69.184

The defence of Arcot <paren> 1751 <$$paren> was the turn of the tide .
INNES-1902-2,69.185

The prestige which had hitherto accompanied the French arms was now
matched if not excelled by that of the British . INNES-1902-2,69.186

A new and brilliant leader had suddenly come to the front ,
INNES-1902-2,69.187

and Stringer Lawrence was just returned to the scene of action .
INNES-1902-2,69.188

The very able French commander , Bussy , was at Haidaradad ;
INNES-1902-2,69.189

in the Carnatic , Law of Laureston <paren> of an exiled Scottish house
<$$paren> - an admirable subordinate but an incapable chief - was with
Chanda Sahib's forces . INNES-1902-2,69.190

Lawrence and Clive proceeded against the investing army before
Trichinopoli , where Mohammed Ali had purchased by promises a very
unsubstantial assistance from Morari Rao , the Maratha chief of Gûti
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} , and from the Raja - or
rather the regent - of Mysore . INNES-1902-2,69.191

Trichinopoli was relieved : INNES-1902-2,69.192

Law with his army and Chanda Sahib's were manoeuvered into an impossible
<P_70> position , and compelled to surrender ; INNES-1902-2,70.193

and Chanda Sahib himself was murdered . INNES-1902-2,70.194

If Bussy had secured the Nizam , Mohammed Ali , the British protégé ,
was at any rate Nawab of the Carnatic <paren> June 1752 <$$paren> .
INNES-1902-2,70.195

Dupleix however , continued to display an astonishingly resourceful
activity in carrying on the contest : INNES-1902-2,70.196

nor was it finally the British , but they of his own household , that
destroyed him . INNES-1902-2,70.197

His imperial schemes awakened no responsive ardour in the breasts of
directors at home ; INNES-1902-2,70.198

but for his enormous personal outlay in giving them effect , they would
have broken down long before for want of financial support .
INNES-1902-2,70.199

The French East India Company resolved to supersede the too enterprising
Governor , who returned home in 1754 to meet with nothing but insult and
spoliation ; leaving a safe commercial gentleman in charge at Pondichery
. INNES-1902-2,70.200

Both Clive and Lawrence returned to England . INNES-1902-2,70.201

The two Companies agreed to interfere no more with native politics .
INNES-1902-2,70.202

Despite these amicable arrangements , the declaration of war between
Britain and France in 1756 caused the renewal of active hostilities in
India in 1758 : INNES-1902-2,70.203

and in the meantime various events had taken place which were not
without influence on the course of the last struggle .
INNES-1902-2,70.204

Salabat Jang , the last Nizam placed on the throne by the turn of
fortune's wheel , had retired to Haidarabad in the spring of 1751 ,
INNES-1902-2,70.205

and Bussy had gone with him . INNES-1902-2,70.206

The succession was of course disputed by a brother , who bribed the
Peshwa <paren> now definitely supreme in the Maratha confederacy
<$$paren> and the Bhonsla to attack the Nizam ; INNES-1902-2,70.207

but Bussy's military skill , his troops , and his artillery , played
havoc with the invaders , who were finally conciliated by a cession of
territory . INNES-1902-2,70.208

Shortly afterwards , a similar cession - that of the Northern Sarkars or
Circars , a large and rich district - was made to Bussy himself for the
maintenance of his forces . INNES-1902-2,70.209

In 1755 , the Nizam made an expedition to the south against Morari Rao
and the Mysore Raja , in which Bussy again illustrated the invincible
superiority of European methods in the field . INNES-1902-2,70.210

Attempts were made to upset his influence , INNES-1902-2,70.211

but they were foiled , INNES-1902-2,70.212

and in 1757 he was still supreme at Haidarabad . INNES-1902-2,70.213

But in 1757 , Clive also was back in India ; not in Madras , but <P_71>
occupied with the conquest of Bengal , which placed new and immense
resources in the hands of the British Company . INNES-1902-2,71.214

It was generally understood in 1756 that war was soon to be expected in
Europe , INNES-1902-2,71.215

and the attitude the Companies would adopt towards each other in India
was uncertain . INNES-1902-2,71.216

Clive , returning to India after a visit to England where he had been
very warmly received , intended himself and was intended by the
Directors in London , to take active measures for counteracting Bussy at
Haidarabad ; INNES-1902-2,71.217

but found himself precluded from so doing by the convention between the
Governors in the Carnatic . INNES-1902-2,71.218

Having first , with the aid of Admiral Watson , suppressed a piratical
chief named Angria , at Geriah on the west coast , he was at the end of
the year dispatched to Bengal on account of the proceedings of the Nawab
of that province . INNES-1902-2,71.219

During previous disturbances , Calcutta and Chandernagar had abstained
from hostilities , INNES-1902-2,71.220

but on the news arriving <paren> 1757 <$$paren> that war had been
declared , Clive at once seized the French settlement .
INNES-1902-2,71.221

Bussy was not disposed to weaken his grip on Haidarabad in order to
contest the position in Bengal : INNES-1902-2,71.222

and hostilities in the south only reached an acute stage with the
arrival of Lally . INNES-1902-2,71.223

The chances of the French in India depended on two things - persistence
in the policy of Dupleix , and support from France on a scale equal to
that given to the British by the home authorities . INNES-1902-2,71.224

But Lally was ordered to leave the native courts alone , confining
himself to direct contest with the British ; while the inauguration of
Pitt's aggressive naval policy very soon ensured full occupation in the
West , for any ships that could make their way out of French ports ;
INNES-1902-2,71.225

France was not willing , and lacked the power if she had been willing ,
to do more than let the forces actually in India win if they could .
INNES-1902-2,71.226

The opposed forces on the spot at the beginning of 1758 were not unequal
; INNES-1902-2,71.227

but the French were fighting in isolation , the British with almost
unlimited reserves from England to bring up if required ;
INNES-1902-2,71.228

and time after time the French operations were baffled by the appearance
of an unopposed British squadron . INNES-1902-2,71.229

Lally arrived in India at the end of April 1758 . INNES-1902-2,71.230

An <P_72> Irishman , born in exile , the son of one of the valiant
defenders of Limerick , he had served brilliantly in the armies of
France . INNES-1902-2,72.231

But his valour in the field was counterbalanced by a disposition so
overbearing and tactless that his officers could hardly keep on terms
with him . INNES-1902-2,72.232

Many of them were in a habitual state of practical if not technical
mutiny , INNES-1902-2,72.233

and the Natives were enraged by his total disregard for the sentiments
{COM:missing_comma} prejudices and principles which were a part of their
being . INNES-1902-2,72.234

The labour and the supplies readily provided for the diplomatic Dupleix
were grudgingly and with every possible evasion and delay extracted by
Lally . INNES-1902-2,72.235

Yet he began successfully enough with an attack on Fort St David ; which
should have been able to hold out indefinitely , but surrendered within
a month . INNES-1902-2,72.236

He could not however , get money from the civil authorities at
Pondichery ; INNES-1902-2,72.237

so attempted to acquire the sinews of war by compelling the Raja of
Tanjur to pay moneys due . INNES-1902-2,72.238

The Raja resisted ; INNES-1902-2,72.239

Lally was on the verge of capturing the town and burning his last
cartridge in doing so , when a British squadron appeared off Karikal ,
at the time Lally's military base . INNES-1902-2,72.240

He had to leave Tanjur , and hurry back to Pondichery , while D'Aché ,
in command of the French squadron with which he had arrived , declined
to do battle with the British and withdrew to the Mauritius .
INNES-1902-2,72.241

Lally now summoned Bussy and the troops from Haidarabad and the Sarkars
to his assistance . INNES-1902-2,72.242

Bussy obeyed the order , INNES-1902-2,72.243

and his obedience destroyed the last chance of carrying out the Dupleix
policy . INNES-1902-2,72.244

Lally laid siege {TEXT:seige} to Madras in December ;
INNES-1902-2,72.245

but there was a sufficient garrison , with Lawrence in command .
INNES-1902-2,72.246

After two months siege , Lally was about to storm ; when once more a
British squadron appeared on the scenes , a panic seized Lally's troops
, and he was obliged to retire precipitately to Pondichery , leaving
many of his guns behind . INNES-1902-2,72.247

<paren> Feb. 1759 <$$paren> . INNES-1902-2,72.248

In this year , Lally paid the penalty for withdrawing Bussy from
Haidarabad , and the officers and troops from the Sarkars .
INNES-1902-2,72.249

To them he might have looked for the supplies and the money which were
not forthcoming in the Carnatic . INNES-1902-2,72.250

Bussy's influence with the Nizam amounted to very little <P_73> when the
great soldier and his forces were at a distance and in a subordinate
position : INNES-1902-2,73.251

the Sarkars , instead of feeding the French , fell a prey to their
opponents . INNES-1902-2,73.252

The immense value of that district was apparent to Clive at Calcutta ;
INNES-1902-2,73.253

and in spite of his seemingly precarious position there , he dispatched
Colonel Forde , in the autumn of 1758 , with every available soldier ,
on an expedition against Masulipatam ; trusting to his own prestige ,
and his own unmatched audacity and resourcefulness , to maintain his
position in Bengal . INNES-1902-2,73.254

Forde conducted his operations with brilliant success ,
INNES-1902-2,73.255

and though the Nizam at last moved in support of the French ,
Masulipatam was taken in April before he arrived . INNES-1902-2,73.256

Consequently the Nizam , instead of attempting force , transferred his
alliance to the British INNES-1902-2,73.257

and made over formally to them the territories previously granted to
Bussy . INNES-1902-2,73.258

Meantime Lally , with troops ragged , half-starved , and more than
half-mutinous , was quite unable to operate effectively in the Carnatic
. INNES-1902-2,73.259

Here towards the close of the year , the command of the British was
taken up by Colonel Eyre Coote , a brilliant officer sent down from
Bengal by Clive , who had recognised his abilities at Plassey .
INNES-1902-2,73.260

Coote recovered Wandewash , which had been occupied by the French .
INNES-1902-2,73.261

Lally's attempt to recapture it resulted in the battle of Wandewash
<paren> Jan. 21 , 1760 <$$paren> which was practically decisive .
INNES-1902-2,73.262

Coote had under his command rather less , Lally rather more , than 2000
Europeans . INNES-1902-2,73.263

There was also a much larger body of Sepoys and Marathas present ,
INNES-1902-2,73.264

but these took practically no part in the engagement .
INNES-1902-2,73.265

The fight was well contested INNES-1902-2,73.266

but the British victory was complete . INNES-1902-2,73.267

Bussy himself was among the prisoners . INNES-1902-2,73.268

One after the other , the French posts fell into the hands of their
rivals . INNES-1902-2,73.269

Pondichery itself was invested in October , INNES-1902-2,73.270

and surrendered in January <paren> 1761 <$$paren> ; INNES-1902-2,73.271

and although the trading stations were restored to the French as trading
stations when the Peace of Paris was concluded in 1763 , they were
dismantled and made permanently useless for military purposes .
INNES-1902-2,73.272

Twenty years later , in the hour of Britain's worst peril , it seemed
for a moment possible that a blow might be struck for France ;
INNES-1902-2,73.273

twenty years after that again the shadow of Napoleon vexed the souls of
Indian <P_74> statesmen ; INNES-1902-2,74.274

but the question whether France or Britain should dominate India ceased
in actual fact to be a question from the hour of Lally's final failure .
INNES-1902-2,74.275

For Lally himself , with his valour , his arrogance , and his great
talents , France reserved a fate appropriate to the successor of La
Bourdonnais and Dupleix . INNES-1902-2,74.276

Slandered by his own countrymen , he returned to Paris , to be flung
into the Bastille , and later executed with extreme ignominy : a doom
more shameful to France than even that of Admiral Byng to England , ten
years before . INNES-1902-2,74.277

<P_75>

<heading>

Chapter VII INNES-1902-2,75.280

The Conquest of Bengal INNES-1902-2,75.281

<paren> <font> Map IV . <$$font> <$$paren> INNES-1902-2,75.282

<$$heading>

The wars in which the British were engaged in Southern India for fifteen
years , from 1746 to 1761 , were directly or indirectly waged against a
rival European Power . INNES-1902-2,75.284

Neither British nor French had levied war directly upon any Native State
; INNES-1902-2,75.285

in form they had only lent their help to one or another of rival
factions within a State , where the legitimate sovereignty was in
dispute . INNES-1902-2,75.286

The primary purpose was the suppression of a commercial rival : the
secondary purpose , influence at Native Courts . INNES-1902-2,75.287

In Bengal , however , the situation from the outset was quite different
. INNES-1902-2,75.288

The commercial rivalry of French and British settlements was but an
accident in a greater conflict . INNES-1902-2,75.289

The British as a grievously insulted Power attacked the Power which had
insulted them , INNES-1902-2,75.290

overthrew it in the field , INNES-1902-2,75.291

and found themselves with no alternative - even had they desired one -
to the substitution of their own effective dominion for that which they
had demolished . INNES-1902-2,75.292

We have noted already how substantially their conquest aided them in the
last phase of the struggle in the Carnatic : INNES-1902-2,75.293

yet in itself it was not part of that struggle , INNES-1902-2,75.294

but was the first positive step in the direction not of influence but of
dominion . INNES-1902-2,75.295

Between the time of Nadir Shah's invasion and the collision between the
Bengal Court and the British , the position of affairs in Hindostan had
not materially altered except for an increased definiteness in the
independence of the provinces . INNES-1902-2,75.296

The Maratha chiefs who supported the Peshwa had marched up to the banks
of the Jamna . INNES-1902-2,75.297

The Berar Raja , otherwise known as the Bhonsla , had penetrated <P_76>
Oudh and Bengal and threatened Calcutta . INNES-1902-2,76.298

The assassination of Nadir Shah had enabled Ahmed Khan , chief of the
Abdali tribe of Afghans , to become Ahmed Shah the king of Kabul , and ,
in virtue of incursions which led to another sacking of Delhi , more or
less the acknowledged lord of the Panjab and Sirhind .
INNES-1902-2,76.299

Safdat Ali , Wazir and Nawab of Oudh , had dropped the functions of
Wazir and confined his energies to securing the practical independence
of his province . INNES-1902-2,76.300

Ali Vardi Khan had made himself Nawab of Bengal and Behar , and come to
terms with his dangerous neighbour of Berar . INNES-1902-2,76.301

No one in Hindostan attached political significance to the British and
French factories at Calcutta and Chandernagar ; INNES-1902-2,76.302

even the startling developments of 1747 - 1751 , amounting in the Dekhan
to a revelation and a revolution , had hardly been recognised in their
full importance when Ali Vardi Khan died in 1756 , and was succeeded by
his youthful grandson , the incapable and unspeakable Suraj-ud-daulah .
INNES-1902-2,76.303

Fort William , the British settlement in Calcutta , was in singularly
incompetent hands . INNES-1902-2,76.304

In spite of repeated and pressing advices from the Directors in London ,
the Governor , Drake , had completely neglected the defences of the fort
, and even in immediate anticipation of a Franco-British War made only
the most elementary provision for contingencies ; doubtless reckoning
that Fort William and Chandernagar would keep the peace between
themselves as they had done before . INNES-1902-2,76.305

Suraj-ud-daulah had a singularly keen scent for treasure .
INNES-1902-2,76.306

The breath was hardly out of his grandfather's body when he sent from
Mûrshidabad {COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} to Calcutta to
demand the person and the property of a wealthy Hindu recently arrived
there ; following this up by an order to demolish the fortifications .
INNES-1902-2,76.307

By way of reply to a remonstrance , the Nawab commanded his army to
march on Calcutta . INNES-1902-2,76.308

Drake and the military commandant stole out in boats to the British
ships on the Hugli ; INNES-1902-2,76.309

the ships dropped down the river INNES-1902-2,76.310

and left the factory to its fate ; INNES-1902-2,76.311

after a brief but hopeless resistance , Fort William was captured on
July 21 , 1756 . INNES-1902-2,76.312

Then ensued the ghastly tragedy of the Black Hole . INNES-1902-2,76.313

The prisoners - a_hundred_and_forty-six of them - were thrust into a
room where they had about two square feet apiece for standing room , and
nothing <P_77> but a small grating to let in air . INNES-1902-2,77.314

It was in Calcutta INNES-1902-2,77.315

and it was midsummer . INNES-1902-2,77.316

When the survivors were allowed to stagger out in the morning there were
one_hundred_and_twenty-three corpses in the chamber .
INNES-1902-2,77.317

Early in August the hideous story reached Madras . INNES-1902-2,77.318

Two months later Clive and Admiral Watson , fresh from destroying the
pirate Angria , sailed for Bengal to exact restitution and reparation
from the Nawab ; INNES-1902-2,77.319

on December 15 they came with their ten ships to Fulta on the Hugli ,
where Drake was lying . INNES-1902-2,77.320

The fort of Baj-Baj was promptly captured ; INNES-1902-2,77.321

on Jan. 2 the avengers were in Fort William . INNES-1902-2,77.322

A week later the fort of Hugli was taken . INNES-1902-2,77.323

The Nawab's troops scattered before them . INNES-1902-2,77.324

Within a month the Nawab had collected his forces , marched on Calcutta
, suffered considerably from an assault conducted by Clive <paren> which
was deprived of its full effect and almost converted into a disaster by
the rising of a fog <$$paren> , fled back to Murshidabad , and concluded
a treaty of restitution and compensation . INNES-1902-2,77.325

Now Suraj-ud-daulah had been possessed with a conviction that the
Europeans were to be utterly despised ; INNES-1902-2,77.326

in the course of these two months that opinion had been rudely shattered
; INNES-1902-2,77.327

consequently , while he publicly cringed to Clive , privately he began
to entreat for assistance from the French at Chandernagar and in the
Sarkars . INNES-1902-2,77.328

A combined movement against the British in Bengal might have very
serious results ; INNES-1902-2,77.329

and the official news that war had broken out between France and Britain
decided Clive and Watson to strike at Chandernagar forthwith .
INNES-1902-2,77.330

In spite of the remonstrances of the Nawab , they proceeded against the
French settlement , capturing it after a gallant resistance , and
securing some five_hundred prisoners <paren> March 23 <$$paren> .
INNES-1902-2,77.331

If Bussy in the Sarkars had been doubtful before whether to listen to
Suraj-ud-daulah , this success settled the question .
INNES-1902-2,77.332

There could be no co-operation from Chandernagar , INNES-1902-2,77.333

and his troops would be of more use in the Dekhan . INNES-1902-2,77.334

To decide on the course next to be followed was no easy matter .
INNES-1902-2,77.335

There were urgent reasons for withdrawing from Bengal and concentrating
troops in the Dekhan for the coming struggle . INNES-1902-2,77.336

But to do so would involve leaving the <P_78> British settlement again
in the hands of the incapable Drake , and at the mercy of the Nawab ,
whose promises depended for their value entirely on the presence of fear
, while he was very indignant at the disregard of his authority shewn in
the attack on Chandernagar . INNES-1902-2,78.337

How was he to be muzzled , so as to make the desired withdrawal of
troops possible ? INNES-1902-2,78.338

The practical answer was given by the Nawab's own ministers .
INNES-1902-2,78.339

A monarch so bloodthirsty , so capricious , and so greedy , made every
man's life uncertain . INNES-1902-2,78.340

His commander-in-chief Mir Jafar , and his chief financial advisers ,
conceived the idea of deposing him and placing Mir Jafar on the throne
with British assistance . INNES-1902-2,78.341

Communications were opened between the conspirators and the British
through the agency of the Hindu Amin Chand , popularly known as Omichund
. INNES-1902-2,78.342

It is commonly believed that European diplomacy consists largely of
skilful lying ; INNES-1902-2,78.343

Oriental diplomacy may be said to discard truth altogether .
INNES-1902-2,78.344

The general principle which has guided the British in dealing with
Orientals is that of being absolutely straightforward , standing fast by
every pledge , and securing confidence by force of frankness .
INNES-1902-2,78.345

The only alternative course is to accept not the European but the
Oriental standard , and act down to it . INNES-1902-2,78.346

On this one occasion Clive adopted the latter course .
INNES-1902-2,78.347

It is not impossible to find excuse for the theory of meeting guile with
guile and treachery with falsehood ; INNES-1902-2,78.348

but morally it can@ @not be justified , INNES-1902-2,78.349

and its expediency is more than doubtful in the long run .
INNES-1902-2,78.350

Sometimes , however , it is a policy which succeeds .
INNES-1902-2,78.351

It succeeded now . INNES-1902-2,78.352

In the early stages of the intrigue , it was only so far called into
play that the British maintained in their correspondence with the Nawab
an air of unsuspecting friendliness , while they were as a matter of
fact arranging with his courtiers for his overthrow .
INNES-1902-2,78.353

The huge act of deception was perpetrated in dealing with Omichund .
INNES-1902-2,78.354

When the crafty Hindu had all the threads of the plot in his hands -
when it was in his power to shatter the whole scheme by a word to
Suraj-ud-daulah - he suddenly put forward the most extravagant demands
as the price of silence , requiring their embodiment in the treaty to be
drawn up <P_79> between the British and Mir Jafar . INNES-1902-2,79.355

To refuse meant ruin : INNES-1902-2,79.356

to submit to so vast a levy of blackmail - considerably over a quarter
of a_million sterling - seemed preposterous . INNES-1902-2,79.357

The Calcutta Council accepted Clive's method of solution .
INNES-1902-2,79.358

Two copies of the treaty were made , one of which , written on red paper
, contained Omichund's clauses ; INNES-1902-2,79.359

the other copy omitted them . INNES-1902-2,79.360

The red treaty only , signed by the members of Council , was shown to
the Bengali who did not know that one signature , that of Admiral Watson
, had been deliberately forged on his refusal to set his hand to the
fraud . INNES-1902-2,79.361

The other parties to the contract signed the White Treaty <paren> May 19
<$$paren> , the Mussulmans swearing on the Koran to be faithful .
INNES-1902-2,79.362

Omichund was satisfied {TEXT:satified} . INNES-1902-2,79.363

Then Clive's tone to the Nawab changed . INNES-1902-2,79.364

He wrote , setting forth the British complaints , INNES-1902-2,79.365

and announced that he was coming with his men to Murshidabad to take the
opinion of the Nawab's council or Durbar thereon . After which virtual
declaration of war , the Nawab with his army moved downwards and Clive
with his army upwards towards Plassey . INNES-1902-2,79.366

Clive's letter was despatched on June 13 , INNES-1902-2,79.367

and he commenced his march the same day with his whole force - 1,100
Europeans , double that number of sepoys , and ten guns .
INNES-1902-2,79.368

On the 18th , Katwa , with a fort and granary , was reached and seized .
INNES-1902-2,79.369

Then came a pause . INNES-1902-2,79.370

There were rumours of Mir Jafar's defection . INNES-1902-2,79.371

The monsoon set in stormily . INNES-1902-2,79.372

Advance meant triumph or annihilation . INNES-1902-2,79.373

Retreat meant collapse . INNES-1902-2,79.374

There remained the alternative of entrenching at Katwa , and negotiating
with the Marathas - with a risk of Bussy intervening .
INNES-1902-2,79.375

Clive hesitated for long . INNES-1902-2,79.376

On the 21st he called a Council of War , INNES-1902-2,79.377

and announced that his own vote was against advancing .
INNES-1902-2,79.378

Eleven of the council supported him : INNES-1902-2,79.379

seven , headed by Eyre Coote , voted against him . INNES-1902-2,79.380

Clive retired , INNES-1902-2,79.381

and spent an hour by himself debating in solitude . INNES-1902-2,79.382

The promptings of audacity gained the day . INNES-1902-2,79.383

He returned to camp , INNES-1902-2,79.384

and simply announced that the advance would be renewed next morning .
INNES-1902-2,79.385

A stream lay on the British front which was crossed at an early hour .
INNES-1902-2,79.386

Messages , reassuring but not convincing , came from Mir Jafar .
INNES-1902-2,79.387

The army went forward , reaching Plassey <P_80> after midnight ; when
the presence in the immediate neighbourhood of the enemy , supposed to
be some miles off , was discovered . INNES-1902-2,80.388

The British , who had had a drenching and fatiguing march , bivouacked
as best they might in a grove . INNES-1902-2,80.389

With the early dawn Clive drew up his men ; Europeans in the centre ,
sepoys on the wings . INNES-1902-2,80.390

Facing these were fifty_thousand men ; INNES-1902-2,80.391

of these fifty_thousand , how many were going to fight , how many to
desert , how many to stand by and wait on events , no one knew .
INNES-1902-2,80.392

There were fifty French with the Nawab ; INNES-1902-2,80.393

at 8 o'clock on the morning of June 23 , 1757 , their cannon began the
fight on which the destinies of Bengal depended . INNES-1902-2,80.394

A cannonading duel was kept up for three hours , INNES-1902-2,80.395

and still Mir Jafar made no sign . INNES-1902-2,80.396

Clive prepared to maintain a defence throughout the day , and trust to
darkness and relaxation of discipline in the enemy's camp to enable him
to make a successful night attack . INNES-1902-2,80.397

But early in the afternoon , some movement was evidently on foot in the
Nawab's army . INNES-1902-2,80.398

Then the French were seen to withdraw from their position ;
INNES-1902-2,80.399

it was promptly seized by a British officer , a move which made a
general engagement inevitable : INNES-1902-2,80.400

Clive turned a heavy fire on the enemy's guns , throwing them completely
out of action : INNES-1902-2,80.401

then his whole line advanced . INNES-1902-2,80.402

The rout of the Nawab was immediate and complete ; INNES-1902-2,80.403

so prompt was the flight , that only five or six_hundred of his army
fell , the victors losing but seventy men . INNES-1902-2,80.404

The Nawab escaped at speed to Murshidabad : INNES-1902-2,80.405

not feeling safe there , he attempted further flight in disguise ,
INNES-1902-2,80.406

but was recognised , brought back to his capital secretly , and then
flung into prison and murdered by the son of Mir Jafar .
INNES-1902-2,80.407

A body of French troops had been on their way from Patna to join the
Nawab , INNES-1902-2,80.408

but in the light of recent developments they turned INNES-1902-2,80.409

and were chased over the frontier by Eyre Coote . INNES-1902-2,80.410

To the general astonishment , the revolution was not succeeded by a
massacre ; INNES-1902-2,80.411

and Mir Jafar must have been immensely relieved to find that Clive was
carrying out the bargain as if he had fulfilled his own part to
perfection . INNES-1902-2,80.412

On June 27th he was proclaimed Nawab in Murshidabad ,
INNES-1902-2,80.413

and the British were virtually lords of Bengal . INNES-1902-2,80.414

The hapless Omichund was calmly thrown over . INNES-1902-2,80.415

The shock , when he <P_81> found that he had been tricked and was to
receive nothing , turned his brain . INNES-1902-2,81.416

Although Mir Jafar was Nawab , all power was in the hands of Clive .
INNES-1902-2,81.417

In the eyes of every native he was incomparable , invincible ;
INNES-1902-2,81.418

his personal prestige was without parallel . INNES-1902-2,81.419

With a word he might have doubled or trebled the immense sum allotted to
him from the royal treasury ; INNES-1902-2,81.420

others of the English received vast gifts ; INNES-1902-2,81.421

the compensation awarded to the Company was ample . INNES-1902-2,81.422

For the next two years and a half Clive found his hands full .
INNES-1902-2,81.423

Mir Jafar expected to reap the benefits of royalty in the ordinary
Oriental fashion , INNES-1902-2,81.424

but the natives found in Clive a protector not to be trifled with .
INNES-1902-2,81.425

He restrained the Nawab ; INNES-1902-2,81.426

he quelled revolts almost with a word . INNES-1902-2,81.427

He never played any man false except Omichund , INNES-1902-2,81.428

and that single lapse from rectitude appeared to the native mind so
entirely normal that it in no way injured his repute .
INNES-1902-2,81.429

About the end of the year , an invasion was threatened by the Nawab of
Oudh ; INNES-1902-2,81.430

but the danger was quelled by the mere approach of Clive .
INNES-1902-2,81.431

The task of at once controlling and conciliating the natives was
singularly difficult ; INNES-1902-2,81.432

happily the British officers at Calcutta were so far from being jealous
of him that when a singularly clumsy scheme of government omitting him
entirely was propounded from London , they practically combined to
subordinate themselves to their great chief ; the Directors shortly
afterwards making the <font> amende <$$font> for their blunder and
appointing him Governor with many compliments . INNES-1902-2,81.433

In 1758 , Clive despatched to the Sarkars the expedition under Forde ,
whose successful course has already been narrated . INNES-1902-2,81.434

The risk he ran thereby was illustrated early in the following year by
the reported advance of the Nawab of Oudh in conjunction with the
Shahzada , the heir of the Mogul <paren> afterwards Shah Alam <$$paren>
, upon Patna . INNES-1902-2,81.435

Mir Jafar wanted to buy them off . INNES-1902-2,81.436

Clive would have none of it . INNES-1902-2,81.437

The Shahzada promised the Englishmen unlimited territory for his support
: INNES-1902-2,81.438

Clive declined . INNES-1902-2,81.439

With four_hundred Europeans , two_thousand_five_hundred sepoys , and
some troops of the Nawab's , he marched four_hundred miles in
twenty-three days to the relief of Patna which was holding out stoutly .
INNES-1902-2,81.440

<P_82>

The Shahzada's army scattered , INNES-1902-2,82.442

and he himself fled . INNES-1902-2,82.443

Clive accepted as a reward what is known as his jaghir , the quit-rents
of the districts granted to the Company on Mir Jafar's accession .
INNES-1902-2,82.444

This took place about the time when Forde was capturing Masulipatam .
INNES-1902-2,82.445

Later in the year there was to be still another episode of conflict with
a European power - the Dutch this time . INNES-1902-2,82.446

The story illustrates the idea hitherto prevalent that the Commercial
Companies were quite entitled to wage war with each other irrespective
of the amicable relations of their respective governments .
INNES-1902-2,82.447

The Dutch at Chinsura were not profiting by the British ascendancy .
INNES-1902-2,82.448

Mir Jafar , who was very ill pleased at his practical subordination ,
entered on an intrigue with them : in consequence of which , a fleet of
seven Dutch ships from Batavia appeared in the Hugli in October .
INNES-1902-2,82.449

They required a free passage up the river to Chinsura :
INNES-1902-2,82.450

Clive , suspecting their purpose and the good faith of Mir Jafar , was
still uncertain how to treat the ships of a professedly friendly nation
, when they gave him his cue by seizing some English vessels .
INNES-1902-2,82.451

Forde , back from the Sarkars , attacked the Chinsura garrison ;
INNES-1902-2,82.452

on the river , Captain Wilson with three ships attacked the seven
Dutchmen . INNES-1902-2,82.453

Both actions were brilliantly successful . INNES-1902-2,82.454

The Dutch had to sue for Clive's protection against the Nawab's son who
was possessed with a natural desire to trample on the unsuccessful ,
whom he had previously intended to help : INNES-1902-2,82.455

and the Dutch opposition was terminated by a treaty under which they
acknowledged their aggression , made due compensation , and agreed to
maintain no more than one_hundred_and_twenty_five soldiers in Bengal .
INNES-1902-2,82.456

This for the time concluded Clive's sojourn in India .
INNES-1902-2,82.457

In February <paren> 1760 <$$paren> he sailed for England , though he was
still to return once more for a salutary if brief visit .
INNES-1902-2,82.458

<P_83>

<heading>

Chapter VIII INNES-1902-2,83.461

Transition INNES-1902-2,83.462

<paren> <font> Maps I. and II . <$$font> <$$paren> INNES-1902-2,83.463

<$$heading>

When Clive left Bengal , and the struggle between French and English on
Indian soil was virtually over , the Company had not yet acquired
Sovereign rights . INNES-1902-2,83.465

The rulers of Bengal and of the Carnatic were both in effect the
servants of the Company's Servants ; INNES-1902-2,83.466

the British had suddenly taken undeniable rank as a military power ;
INNES-1902-2,83.467

but technically their lands were held by them as <font> zemindars , i.e.
<$$font> landholders paying rent to the crown ; INNES-1902-2,83.468

and their dominion was the ascendancy of advisers who can compel
obedience . INNES-1902-2,83.469

Both Bengal and the Carnatic remained in form Native States .
INNES-1902-2,83.470

The exercise of the avowed dominion begins with the Governor-Generalship
of Warren Hasting ; INNES-1902-2,83.471

the interval is a transition period , to a large extent chaotic , but
with the elements of order emerging . INNES-1902-2,83.472

In the two preceding chapters , we have followed the first steps by
which the British Power was established in India between 1745 and 1761 .
INNES-1902-2,83.473

Before proceeding to its further stages , we have to observe the
developments which took place among the Native Powers during the same
period ; culminating , in 1761 , in the crushing blow dealt to the
Marathas by Ahmed Shah Durani , at Panipat in Hindostan , and the
seizure of the throne of Mysore by Haidar Ali , creating a new and
aggressive military Power in the South . INNES-1902-2,83.474

Nadir Shah , the Persian , after his sack of Delhi , developed the worst
characteristics of Oriental Tyranny . INNES-1902-2,83.475

A few years later , he was assassinated ; INNES-1902-2,83.476

and in the resulting confusion Ahmed Khan , chief of the Abdâli
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} tribe of Afghans <P_84> made
himself master of Kabul , INNES-1902-2,84.477

and re-established an independent monarchy there . INNES-1902-2,84.478

For some superstitious reason , he re-named his tribe <font> Durâni
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} <$$font> instead of Abdali ;
in consequence of which he became known indifferently as Ahmed Shah
Abdali or Durani . INNES-1902-2,84.479

He led a series of invasions into the Panjab and Sirhind between 1749
and 1759 with by no means uniform success , but with the result that the
Panjab became practically a province of the Kabul Monarchy , instead of
the Mogul Empire . INNES-1902-2,84.480

In the meantime the Maratha dominion was increasing .
INNES-1902-2,84.481

The Berar Raja had obtained the cession of Orissa and levied chauth from
Bengal and Behar . INNES-1902-2,84.482

The Peshwa , Balaji Rao , secured recognition as the head of the whole
confederacy , with Sivaji's descendant at Satara for a figure_head .
INNES-1902-2,84.483

His armies pushed up to the banks of the Jamna ; INNES-1902-2,84.484

his brother Ragonath Rao , commonly known as Ragoba , marched into the
Panjab , INNES-1902-2,84.485

and for a time expelled the Durani Governor . INNES-1902-2,84.486

In the South , while Bussy remained with the Nizam , neither the Peshwa
nor the Bhonsla could operate effectively against that monarch ;
INNES-1902-2,84.487

but the withdrawal of the Frenchman at Lally's call increased Maratha
activities , INNES-1902-2,84.488

and produced the cession to them of further territories ; though when
they invaded the Mysore district , they found their match in Haidar Naik
- afterwards known as Haidar Ali - the Mussulman adventurer who had
become chief of the Mysore army . INNES-1902-2,84.489

Nevertheless , the Marathas' domain was now so vast , the dread they
inspired so great , that they had begun to count upon establishing a
Hindu Empire on the ruins of the Mogul dominion . INNES-1902-2,84.490

Fortunately , their challenge was taken up by the Durani :
INNES-1902-2,84.491

the Mohammedan and Hindu Powers met in the tremendous shock of Panipat .
INNES-1902-2,84.492

The Marathas were shattered : INNES-1902-2,84.493

the campaign cost them 200,000 men : INNES-1902-2,84.494

and though they remained collectively the greatest Power in the
Peninsula , the danger of their overwhelming predominance was
indefinitely postponed , INNES-1902-2,84.495

and rivalry among the great chiefs for supremacy within the confederacy
was renewed . INNES-1902-2,84.496

The Peshwa , Balaji Rao , died shortly , INNES-1902-2,84.497

and was succeeded by his energetic and capable son , Madhu Rao ; whose
supremacy however , was less assured than his father's had been .
INNES-1902-2,84.498

<P_85>

On the other hand , the victorious Durani made no attempt to organise a
State in the North-West , INNES-1902-2,85.500

but retired across the mountains , carrying away loot and leaving behind
Governors to exact tribute . INNES-1902-2,85.501

It may here be remarked that a colony of tribesmen from the Afghan
borders had a few years before established themselves under the name of
Rohillas in the district west of Oudh known as Rohilkhand as masters of
the Hindu population . INNES-1902-2,85.502

The services rendered by them to Ahmed Shah at Panipat confirmed their
position in Rohilkhand , while establishing a hostile tradition between
them and the Marathas . INNES-1902-2,85.503

The Mogul himself - now that same Shah Alam whom Clive had dealt with as
Shahzada - while his authority continued to be recognised as Padishah
and titular head of the whole Empire , was practically without
territories of his own , or means of enforcing his decrees .
INNES-1902-2,85.504

About the same time Haidar Naik compelled the Raja of Mysore - a Hindu
State which had never hitherto played more than a very minor part - to
abdicate in his favour ; INNES-1902-2,85.505

and assumed under the name of Haidar Ali a Sultanate which his genius
rapidly transformed into a great military Power . INNES-1902-2,85.506

In 1765 Clive , returning to Bengal , obtained from the Mogul , then
residing at Allahabad , two decrees : one of them constituting the Nawab
of the Carnatic independent of the Nizam , to whom he had hitherto been
technically subordinate ; the other bestowing on the English as from the
Imperial authority the Sarkars which had been held since 1759 as from
the Nizam . INNES-1902-2,85.507

Thus in the south there existed four military Powers ; the British of
the Madras Presidency with the Carnatic virtually under their control ;
the Puna branch of the Maratha confederacy ; the Nizam : and Haidar Ali
. INNES-1902-2,85.508

The conduct of affairs by the Madras authorities was consistently
incompetent . INNES-1902-2,85.509

The Nizam , the Peshwa , and Haidar were in a perpetual condition of
forming and dissolving various combinations against each other ; the
British making treaties with one or the other , of which the intention
was to avoid military operations and the practical outcome was to drag
them into war in support of one or other ally . INNES-1902-2,85.510

Nor had <P_86> they the firmness to make an independent stand ,
INNES-1902-2,86.511

but habitually found themselves making concessions which were repaid by
desertion as soon as the tug of war commenced ; even agreeing to pay the
Nizam a heavy rent for the Sarkars in spite of the Mogul's decree .
INNES-1902-2,86.512

Although the military skill of the British commander , Colonel Smith
{COM:missing_comma} enabled him to win victories in the field , he was
so hampered by the civil authorities that those victories could never be
turned to account ; INNES-1902-2,86.513

and in 1769 mismanagement had reached such a point that Haidar dictated
the terms of an accommodation under the walls of Madras , at a time when
Smith , if he had been allowed to act , was in a position to inflict
certain defeat upon him . INNES-1902-2,86.514

By this treaty the British bound themselves to assist Haidar in case he
should be attacked by the Marathas or the Nizam ; INNES-1902-2,86.515

but when in the following year the Marathas did attack him , they
refused assistance on the ground that the provocation had been Haidar's
. INNES-1902-2,86.516

The Mysore Sultan had much the worse of the encounter ,
INNES-1902-2,86.517

and he never forgave the British for what he regarded as a treacherous
desertion . INNES-1902-2,86.518

The Marathas , who had somewhat recovered from the blow at Panipat ,
again began to assert their dominion in upper Hindostan about 1769 ,
INNES-1902-2,86.519

and two years later restored Shah Alam to the throne at Delhi .
INNES-1902-2,86.520

They then proceeded to attack Rohilkhand , retiring presently on the
promise of a payment by the Rohillas of forty lacs of rupees <paren>
400,000 +L {TEXT:+L400,000} <$$paren> , guaranteed by the Nawab of Oudh
, who felt himself very seriously menaced by the proximity of the
Marathas . INNES-1902-2,86.521

Out of this transaction a little later arose the Rohila war of which we
shall hear in the time of Warren Hastings . INNES-1902-2,86.522

