<BEGIN_johnson-1759-2>

<P_1,79>

<heading>

Chap. XV . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,79.4

The prince and princess leave the valley , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,79.5

and see many wonders . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,79.6

<$$heading>

The prince and princess had jewels sufficient to make them rich whenever
<P_1,80> they came into a place of commerce , which , by Imlac's
direction , they hid in their cloaths , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.8

and , on the night of the next full moon , all left the valley .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.9

The princess was followed only by a single favourite , who did not know
whither she was going . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.10

They clambered through the cavity , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.11

and began to go down on the other side . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.12

The princess and her maid turned their eyes towards every part ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.13

and , seeing nothing to bound their prospect , considered themselves in
danger of being lost in a dreary vacuity . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.14

They stopped and trembled . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.15

" I am almost afraid , said the princess , to begin a journey of which I
can@ @not perceive an end , and to venture into this immense plain where
I may be approached on every side by men whom I never saw . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.16

The prince felt nearly the same emotions , though he thought it more
manly to conceal them . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,80.17

<P_1,81>

Imlac smiled at their terrors , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,81.19

and encouraged them to proceed ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,81.20

but the princess continued irresolute , till she had been imperceptibly
drawn forward too far to return . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,81.21

In the morning they found some shepherds in the field , who set some
milk and fruits before them . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,81.22

The princess wondered that she did not see a palace ready for her
reception , and a table spread with delicacies ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,81.23

but , being faint and hungry , she drank the milk JOHNSON-1759-2,1,81.24

and eat the fruits , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,81.25

and thought them of a higher flavour than the products of the valley .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,81.26

They travelled forward by easy journeys , being all unaccustomed to toil
and difficulty , and knowing that , though they might be missed , they
could not be pursued . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,81.27

In a few days they came into a more populous region , where Imlac was
diverted with the admiration which his companions expressed at the
<P_1,82> diversity of manners , stations , and employments .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,82.28

Their dress was such as might not bring upon them the suspicion of
having anything to conceal , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,82.29

yet the prince , wherever he came , expected to be obeyed ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,82.30

and the princess was frighted , because those who came into her presence
did not prostrate themselves . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,82.31

Imlac was forced to observe them with great vigilance , lest they should
betray their rank by their unusual behaviour , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,82.32

and detained them several weeks in the first village to accustom them to
the sight of common mortals . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,82.33

By degrees the royal wanderers were taught to understand that they had
for a time laid aside their dignity , and were to expect only such
regard as liberality and courtesy could procure .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,82.34

And Imlac having , by many admonitions , prepared them to endure the
tumults of a port and the ruggedness <P_1,83> of the commercial race ,
brought them down to the sea-coast . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.35

The prince and his sister , to whom everything was new , were gratified
equally at all places , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.36

and therefore remained for some months at the port without any
inclination to pass further . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.37

Imlac was content with their stay , because he did not think it safe to
expose them , unpractised in the world , to the hazards of a foreign
country . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.38

At last he began to fear lest they should be discovered ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.39

and proposed to fix a day for their departure . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.40

They had no pretensions to judge for themselves , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.41

and referred the whole scheme to his direction . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.42

He therefore took passage in a ship to Suez ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.43

and , when the time came , with great difficulty prevailed on the
princess to enter the vessel . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.44

They had a quick and prosperous voyage , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.45

and from Suez travelled by land to Cairo . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,83.46

<P_1,84>

<heading>

Chap. XVI . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.49

They enter Cairo , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.50

and find every man happy . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.51

<$$heading>

As they approached the city , which filled the strangers with
astonishment , " This , said Imlac to the prince , is the place where
travellers and merchants assemble from all corners of the earth .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.53

You will here find men of every character , and every occupation .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.54

Commerce is here honourable : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.55

I will act as a merchant , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.56

and you shall live as strangers , who have no other end of travel than
curiosity ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.57

it will soon be observed that we are rich ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.58

our reputation will procure us access to all whom we shall desire to
know ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.59

you shall see all the conditions of humanity , and enable yourselves at
leisure to make your <font> choice of life . " <$$font>
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.60

They now entered the town , stunned by the noise , and offended by the
crowds . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,84.61

Instruction <P_1,85> had not yet so prevailed over habit , but that they
wondered to see themselves pass undistinguished along the street , and
met by the lowest of the people without reverence or notice .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.62

The princess could not at first bear the thought of being levelled with
the vulgar , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.63

and , for some days , continued in her chamber , where she was served by
her favourite as in the palace of the valley . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.64

Imlac , who understood traffick , sold part of the jewels the next day ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.65

and hired a house , which he adorned with such magnificence , that he
was immediately considered as a merchant of great wealth .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.66

His politeness attracted many acquaintances {TEXT:acquaintance} ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.67

and his generosity made him courted by many dependants .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.68

His table was crowded by men of every nation , who all admired his
knowledge and solicited his favour . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.69

His companions , not being able to mix in the conversation , could make
no discovery of their ignorance or surprise , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.70

and were gradually initiated in the world as they gained knowledge of
the language . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,85.71

<P_1,86>

The prince had , by frequent lectures , been taught the use and nature
of money ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,86.73

but the ladies could not , for a long time , comprehend what the
merchants did with small pieces of gold and silver , or why things of so
little use should be received as an equivalent to the necessaries of
life . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,86.74

They studied the language two years , while Imlac was preparing to set
before them the various ranks and conditions of mankind .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,86.75

He grew acquainted with all who had anything uncommon in their fortune
or conduct . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,86.76

He frequented the voluptuous and the frugal , the idle and the busy ,
the merchants and the men of learning . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,86.77

The prince now being able to converse with fluency , and having learned
the caution necessary to be observed in his intercourse with strangers ,
began to accompany Imlac to <P_1,87> places of resort , and to enter
into all assemblies , that he might make his <font> choice of life .
<$$font> JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.78

For some time he thought choice needless , because all appeared to him
equally happy . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.79

Wherever he went he met gaiety and kindness , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.80

and heard the song of joy or the laugh of carelessness .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.81

He began to believe that the world overflowed with universal plenty ,
and that nothing was with-held either from want or merit ; that every
hand showered liberality , and every heart melted with benevolence :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.82

" and who then , says he , will be suffered to be wretched ? "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.83

Imlac permitted the pleasing delusion , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.84

and was unwilling to crush the hope of inexperience , till one day ,
having sat awhile silent , " I know not , said the prince , what can be
the reason that I am more unhappy than any of our friends .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.85

I see them perpetually and unalterably cheerful , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.86

but feel my own mind restless and uneasy . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,87.87

I am unsatisfied <P_1,88> with those pleasures which I seem most to
court ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,88.88

I live in the crowds of jollity , not so much to enjoy company as to
shun myself , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,88.89

and am only loud and merry to conceal my sadness . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,88.90

" Every man , said Imlac , may by examining his own mind guess what
passes in the minds of others : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,88.91

when you feel that your own gaiety is counterfeit , it may justly lead
you to suspect that of your companions not to be sincere .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,88.92

Envy is commonly reciprocal . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,88.93

We are long before we are convinced that happiness is never to be found
, JOHNSON-1759-2,1,88.94

and each believes it possessed by others , to keep alive the hope of
obtaining it for himself . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,88.95

In the assembly where you passed the last night there appeared such
sprightliness of air , and volatility of fancy , as might have suited
beings of a higher order , formed to inhabit serener regions
inaccessible to care or sorrow : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,88.96

yet , believe me , prince , was there not one who did <P_1,89> not dread
the moment when solitude should deliver him to the tyranny of reflection
. " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,89.97

" This , said the prince , may be true of others since it is true of me
; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,89.98

yet , whatever be the general infelicity of man , one condition is more
happy than another , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,89.99

and wisdom surely directs us to take the least evil in the <font> choice
of life . " <$$font> JOHNSON-1759-2,1,89.100

" The causes of good and evil , answered Imlac , are so various and
uncertain , so often entangled with each other , so diversified by
various relations , and so much subject to accidents which can@ @not be
foreseen , that he who would fix his condition upon incontestable
reasons of preference , must live and die inquiring and deliberating .
" JOHNSON-1759-2,1,89.101

" But surely , said Rasselas , the wise men , to whom we listen with
reverence and wonder , chose that mode of life for themselves <P_1,90>
which they thought most likely to make them happy . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,90.102

" Very few , said the poet , live by choice . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,90.103

Every man is placed in the present condition by causes which acted
without his foresight , and with which he did not always willingly
co-operate ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,90.104

and therefore you will rarely meet one who does not think the lot of his
neighbour better than his own . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,90.105

" I am pleased to think , said the prince , that my birth has given me
at least one advantage over others by enabling me to determine for
myself . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,90.106

I have here the world before me ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,90.107

I will review it at leisure : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,90.108

surely happiness is somewhere to be found . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,90.109

<P_1,91>

<heading>

Chap. XVII . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.112

The prince associates with young men of spirit and gaiety .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.113

<$$heading>

Rasselas rose next day , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.115

and resolved to begin his experiments upon life .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.116

" Youth , cried he , is the time of gladness : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.117

I will join myself to the young men whose only business is to gratify
their desires , and whose time is all spent in a succession of
enjoyments . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.118

To such societies he was readily admitted , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.119

but a few days brought him back weary and disgusted .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.120

Their mirth was without images , their laughter without motive ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.121

their pleasures were gross and sensual , in which the mind had no part ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.122

their conduct was at once wild and mean ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.123

they laughed at order and at law , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.124

but the frown of power dejected , and the eye of wisdom abashed them .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,91.125

<P_1,92>

The prince soon concluded , that he should never be happy in a course of
life of which he was ashamed . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.127

He thought it unsuitable to a reasonable being to act without a plan ,
and to be sad or cheerful only by chance . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.128

" Happiness , said he , must be something solid and permanent , without
fear and without uncertainty . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.129

But his young companions had gained so much of his regard by their
frankness and courtesy , that he could not leave them without warning
and remonstrance . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.130

" My friends , said he , I have seriously considered our manners and our
prospects , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.131

and find that we have mistaken our own interest .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.132

The first years of man must make provision for the last .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.133

He that never thinks , never can be wise . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.134

Perpetual levity must end in ignorance ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.135

and intemperance , though it may fire the spirits for an hour , will
make life short or miserable . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,92.136

Let us consider that youth is of no long <P_1,93> duration , and that in
mature age , when the enchantments of fancy shall cease , and phantoms
of delight dance no more about us , we shall have no comforts but the
esteem of wise men , and the means of doing good .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,93.137

Let us , therefore , stop , while to stop is in our power :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,93.138

let us live as men who are some time to grow old , and to whom it will
be the most dreadful of all evils not to count their past years but by
follies , and to be reminded of their former luxuriance of health only
by the maladies which riot has produced . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,93.139

They stared awhile in silence one upon another , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,93.140

and at last drove him away by a general chorus of continued laughter .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,93.141

The consciousness that his sentiments were just , and his intentions
kind , was scarcely sufficient to support him against the horror of
derision . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,93.142

But he recovered his tranquillity , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,93.143

and pursued his search . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,93.144

<heading>

<P_1,94>

Chap. XVIII . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,94.147

The prince finds a wise and happy man . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,94.148

<$$heading>

As he was one day walking in the street , he saw a spacious building
which all were , by the open doors , invited to enter :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,94.150

he followed the stream of people , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,94.151

and found it a hall or school of declamation , in which professors read
lectures to their auditory . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,94.152

He fixed his eye upon a sage raised above the rest , who discoursed with
great energy on the government of the passions .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,94.153

His look was venerable , his action graceful , his pronunciation clear ,
and his diction elegant . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,94.154

He shewed , with great strength of sentiment and variety of illustration
, that human nature is degraded and debased , when the lower faculties
predominate over the higher ; that when fancy , the parent of passion ,
usurps the dominion of the mind , nothing ensues but <P_1,95> the
natural effect of unlawful government , perturbation and confusion ;
that she betrays the fortresses of the intellect to rebels , and excites
her children to sedition against their lawful sovereign .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,95.155

He compared reason to the sun , of which the light is constant , uniform
, and lasting ; and fancy to a meteor , of bright but transitory lustre
, irregular in its motion and delusive in its direction .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,95.156

He then communicated the various precepts given from time to time for
the conquest of passion , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,95.157

and displayed the happiness of those who had obtained the important
victory , after which man is no longer the slave of fear , nor the fool
of hope ; is no more emaciated by envy , inflamed by anger , emasculated
by tenderness , or depressed by grief ; but walks on calmly through the
tumults or the privacies , of life , as the sun pursues alike his course
through the calm or the stormy sky . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,95.158

<P_1,96>

He enumerated many examples of heroes immovable by pain or pleasure ,
who looked with indifference on those modes or accidents to which the
vulgar give the names of good and evil . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,96.160

He exhorted his hearers to lay aside their prejudices , and arm
themselves against the shafts of malice or misfortune , by invulnerable
patience ; concluding , that this state only was happiness , and that
this happiness was in every one's power . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,96.161

Rasselas listened to him with the veneration due to the instructions of
a superior being , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,96.162

and , waiting for him at the door , humbly implored the liberty of
visiting so great a master of true wisdom . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,96.163

The lecturer hesitated a moment , when Rasselas put a purse of gold into
his hand , which he received with a mixture of joy and wonder .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,96.164

" I have found , said the prince at his return to Imlac , a man who can
teach all that is <P_1,97> necessary to be known , who , from the
unshaken throne of rational fortitude , looks down on the scenes of life
changing beneath him . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.165

He speaks , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.166

and attention watches his lips . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.167

He reasons , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.168

and conviction closes his periods . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.169

This man shall be my future guide : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.170

I will learn his doctrines and imitate his life . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.171

" Be not too hasty , said Imlac , to trust or to admire the teachers of
morality : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.172

they discourse like angels , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.173

but they live like men . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.174

Rasselas , who could not conceive how any man could reason so forcibly
without feeling the cogency of his own arguments , paid his visit in a
few days , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.175

and was denied admission . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.176

He had now learned the power of money , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.177

and made his way by a piece of gold to the inner apartment , where he
found the philosopher in a room half darkened , with his eyes misty and
his face pale . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,97.178

" Sir , said <P_1,98> he , you are come at a time when all human
friendship is useless ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.179

what I suffer can@ @not be remedied : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.180

what I have lost can@ @not be supplied . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.181

My daughter , my only daughter , from whose tenderness I expected all
the comforts of my age , died last night of a fever .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.182

My views , my purposes , my hopes , are at an end :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.183

I am now a lonely being , disunited from society . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.184

" Sir , said the prince , mortality is an event by which a wise man can
never be surprised : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.185

we know that death is always near , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.186

and it should therefore always be expected . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.187

" Young man , answered the philosopher , you speak like one that has
never felt the pangs of separation . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.188

" Have you then forgot the precepts , said Rasselas , which you so
powerfully enforced ? JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.189

Has wisdom no strength to arm the heart against calamity ?
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.190

Consider that external things are naturally variable , but truth and
reason are always the same . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,98.191

" What comfort , said the mourner , can <P_1,99> truth and reason afford
me ? JOHNSON-1759-2,1,99.192

of what effect are they now , but to tell me , that my daughter will not
be restored ? " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,99.193

The prince , whose humanity would not suffer him to insult misery with
reproof , went away , convinced of the emptiness of rhetorical sound ,
and the inefficacy of polished periods and studied sentences .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,99.194

<heading>

Chap. XIX . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,99.196

A Glimpse of pastoral life . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,99.197

<$$heading>

He was still eager upon the same inquiry ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,99.199

and , having heard of a hermit , that lived near the lowest cataract of
the Nile , and filled the whole country with the fame of his sanctity ,
resolved to visit his retreat , and inquire whether that felicity ,
which publick life could not afford , was to be found in solitude ; and
whether a man , whose age and virtue made him venerable , could teach
<P_1,100> any peculiar art of shunning evils , or enduring them .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,100.200

Imlac and the princess agreed to accompany him ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,100.201

and after the necessary preparations , they began their journey .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,100.202

Their way lay through the fields , where shepherds tended their flocks ,
and the lambs were playing upon the pasture . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,100.203

" This , said the poet , is the life which has been often celebrated for
its innocence and quiet : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,100.204

let us pass the heat of the day among the shepherds tents , and know
whether all our searches are not to terminate in pastoral simplicity .
" JOHNSON-1759-2,1,100.205

The proposal pleased them , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,100.206

and they induced the shepherds , by small presents and familiar
questions , to tell the opinion of their own state :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,100.207

they were so rude and ignorant , so little able to compare the good with
the evil of the occupation , and so indistinct in their narratives and
descriptions , that very little could be learned from them .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,100.208

But it was <P_1,101> evident that their hearts were cankered with
discontent ; that they considered themselves as condemned to labour for
the luxury of the rich , and looked up with stupid malevolence towards
those that were placed above them . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,101.209

The princess pronounced with vehemence , that she would never suffer
these envious savages to be her companions , and that she should not
soon be desirous of seeing any more specimens of rustick happiness ; but
could not believe that all the accounts of primeval pleasures were
fabulous , and was yet in doubt whether life had anything that could be
justly preferred to the placid gratification of fields and woods .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,101.210

She hoped that the time would come when , with a few virtuous and
elegant companions , she should gather flowers planted by her own hands
, fondle the lambs of her own ewe , and listen , without care , among
brooks and breezes , to one of her maidens reading in the shade .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,101.211

<P_1,102>

<heading>

Chap. XX . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,102.214

The danger of prosperity . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,102.215

<$$heading>

On the next day they continued their journey , till the heat compelled
them to look round for shelter . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,102.217

At a small distance they saw a thick wood , which they no sooner entered
than they perceived that they were approaching the habitations of men .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,102.218

The shrubs were diligently cut away to open walks where the shades were
darkest ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,102.219

the boughs of opposite trees were artificially interwoven ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,102.220

seats of flowery turf were raised in vacant spaces ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,102.221

and a rivulet that wantoned along the side of a winding path , had its
banks sometimes opened into small basons , and its stream sometimes
obstructed by little mounds of stone heaped together to increase its
murmurs . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,102.222

<P_1,103>

They passed slowly through the wood , delighted with such unexpected
accommodations , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.224

and entertained each other with conjecturing what , or , who he could be
, that in those rude and unfrequented regions , had leisure and art for
such harmless luxury . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.225

As they advanced , they heard the sound of music ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.226

and saw youths and virgins dancing in the grove ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.227

and going still farther , beheld a stately palace built upon a hill
surrounded by woods . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.228

The laws of eastern hospitality allowed them to enter ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.229

and the master welcomed them like a man liberal and wealthy .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.230

He was skilful enough in appearances soon to discern that they were no
common guests , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.231

and spread his table with magnificence . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.232

The eloquence of Imlac caught his attention , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.233

and the lofty courtesy of the princess excited his respect .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,103.234

When they offered to depart , he <P_1,104> entreated their stay ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.235

and was the next day more unwilling to dismiss them than before .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.236

They were easily persuaded to stop , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.237

and civility grew up in time to freedom and confidence .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.238

The prince now saw all the domesticks cheerful and all the face of
nature smiling round the place , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.239

and could not forbear to hope that he should find here what he was
seeking ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.240

but when he was congratulating the master upon his possessions , he
answered with a sigh , " My condition has indeed the appearance of
happiness , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.241

but appearances are delusive . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.242

My prosperity puts my life in danger ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.243

the Bassa of Egypt is my enemy , incensed only by my wealth and
popularity . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.244

I have been hitherto protected against him by the princes of the country
; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.245

but as the favour of the great is uncertain , I know not how soon my
defenders may be persuaded to share the plunder with the Bassa .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.246

I have sent my treasures into a distant country ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,104.247

and , <P_1,105> upon the first alarm , am prepared to follow them .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.248

Then will my enemies riot in my mansion , and enjoy the gardens which I
have planted . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.249

They all joined in lamenting his danger , and deprecating his exile ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.250

and the princess was so much disturbed with the tumult of grief and
indignation , that she retired to her apartment .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.251

They continued with their kind inviter a few days longer ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.252

and then went to find the hermit . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.253

<heading>

Chap. XXI . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.255

The happiness of solitude . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.256

The hermit's history . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.257

<$$heading>

They came on the third day , by the direction of the peasants , to the
hermit's cell : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,105.259

it was a cavern in the side of a mountain , over-shadow'd with
palm-trees ; at such a distance from the cataract , <P_1,106> that
nothing more was heard than a gentle uniform murmur , such as composed
the mind to pensive meditation , especially when it was assisted by the
wind whistling among the branches . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,106.260

The first rude essay of nature had been so much improved by human labour
, that the cave contained several apartments , appropriated to different
uses , and often afforded lodging to travellers , whom darkness or
tempests happened to overtake . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,106.261

The hermit sat on a bench at the door , to enjoy the coolness of the
evening . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,106.262

On one side lay a book with pens and paper ; on the other mechanical
instruments of various kinds . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,106.263

As they approached him unregarded , the princess observed that he had
not the countenance of a man that had found , or could teach , the way
to happiness . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,106.264

They saluted him with great respect , which he repaid like a man not
unaccustomed to the forms of courts . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,106.265

" My children , <P_1,107> said he , if you have lost your way , you
shall be willingly supplied with such conveniencies for the night as
this cavern will afford . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.266

I have all that Nature requires , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.267

and you will not expect delicacies in a hermit's cell . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.268

They thanked him , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.269

and , entering , were pleased with the neatness and regularity of the
place . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.270

The hermit set flesh and wine before them , though he fed only upon
fruits and water . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.271

His discourse was cheerful without levity , and pious without enthusiasm
. JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.272

He soon gained the esteem of his guests , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.273

and the princess repented of her hasty censure .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.274

At last Imlac began thus : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.275

" I do not now wonder that your reputation is so far extended ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.276

we have heard at Cairo of your wisdom , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.277

and came hither to implore your direction for this young man and maiden
in the <font> choice of life . " <$$font> JOHNSON-1759-2,1,107.278

<P_1,108>

" To him that lives well , answered the hermit , every form of life is
good ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,108.280

nor can I give any other rule for choice , than to remove from all
apparent evil . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,108.281

" He will remove most certainly from evil , said the prince , who shall
devote himself to that solitude which you have recommended by your
example . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,108.282

" I have indeed lived fifteen years in solitude , said the hermit ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,108.283

but have no desire that my example should gain any imitators .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,108.284

In my youth I professed arms , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,108.285

and was raised by degrees to the highest military rank .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,108.286

I have traversed wide countries at the head of my troops , and seen many
battles and sieges . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,108.287

At last , being disgusted by the preferment of a younger officer , and
feeling my vigour beginning to decay , I resolved to close my life in
peace , having found the world full of snares , discord , and misery .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,108.288

I had once escaped from the pursuit of the enemy by the <P_1,109>
shelter of this cavern , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.289

and therefore chose it for my final residence .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.290

I employed artificers to form it into chambers ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.291

and stored it with all that I was likely to want .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.292

" For some time after my retreat I rejoiced like a tempest-beaten sailor
at his entrance into the harbour , being delighted with the sudden
change of the noise and hurry of war , to stillness and repose .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.293

When the pleasure of novelty went away , I employed my hours in
examining the plants which grow in the valley , and the minerals which I
collected from the rocks . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.294

But that inquiry is now grown tasteless and irksome .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.295

I have been for some time unsettled and distracted :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.296

my mind is disturbed with a_thousand perplexities of doubt , and
vanities of imagination , which hourly prevail upon me , because I have
no opportunities of relaxation or diversion . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.297

I am sometimes ashamed to think that I could not secure myself from vice
, but by retiring from the exercise of virtue , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,109.298

and begin <P_1,110> to suspect that I was rather impelled by resentment
, than led by devotion , into solitude . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.299

My fancy riots in scenes of folly , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.300

and I lament that I have lost so much , and have gained so little .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.301

In solitude , if I escape the example of bad men , I want likewise the
counsel and conversation of the good . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.302

I have been long comparing the evils with the advantages of society ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.303

and resolve to return into the world to-morrow .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.304

The life of a solitary man will be certainly miserable , but not
certainly devout . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.305

They heard his resolution with surprise , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.306

but , after a short pause , offered to conduct him to Cairo .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.307

He dug up a considerable treasure which he had hid among the rocks ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.308

and accompanied them to the city , on which , as he approached it , he
gazed with rapture . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,110.309

<P_1,111>

<heading>

Chap. XXII . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,111.312

The happiness of a life led according to nature .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,111.313

<$$heading>

Rasselas went often to an assembly of learned men , who met at stated
times to unbend their minds , and compare their opinions .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,111.315

Their manners were somewhat coarse , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,111.316

but their conversation was instructive , and their disputations acute ,
though sometimes too violent , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,111.317

and often continued till neither controvertist remembered upon what
question they began . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,111.318

Some faults were almost general among them : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,111.319

every one was desirous to dictate to the rest , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,111.320

and every one was pleased to hear the genius or knowledge of another
depreciated . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,111.321

In this assembly Rasselas was relating his interview with the hermit ,
and the wonder <P_1,112> with which he heard him censure a course of
life which he had so deliberately chosen , and so laudably followed .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,112.322

The sentiments of the hearers were various . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,112.323

Some were of opinion , that the folly of his choice had been justly
punished by condemnation to perpetual perseverance .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,112.324

One of the youngest among them , with great vehemence , pronounced him a
hypocrite . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,112.325

Some talked of the right of society to the labour of individuals ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,112.326

and considered retirement as a desertion of duty .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,112.327

Others readily allowed , that there was a time when the claims of the
publick were satisfied , and when a man might properly sequester himself
, to review his life , and purify his heart . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,112.328

One , who appeared more affected with the narrative than the rest ,
thought it likely that the hermit would , in a few years , go back to
his retreat , and , perhaps , if shame did not restrain , or death
intercept him , return once more from his retreat into the <P_1,113>
world : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,113.329

" For the hope of happiness , said he , is so strongly impressed that
the longest experience is not able to efface it .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,113.330

Of the present state , whatever it be , we feel , and are forced to
confess , the misery , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,113.331

yet , when the same state is again at a distance , imagination paints it
as desirable . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,113.332

But the time will surely come , when desire will no longer be our
torment , and no man shall be wretched but by his own fault . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,113.333

" This , said a philosopher who had heard him with tokens of great
impatience , is the present condition of a wise man .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,113.334

The time is already come when none are wretched but by their own fault .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,113.335

Nothing is more idle , than to inquire after happiness , which nature
has kindly placed within our reach . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,113.336

The way to be happy is to live according to nature , in obedience to
that universal and unalterable law with which every heart is originally
impressed ; which is not written on it by precept , but engraven by
destiny , not <P_1,114> instilled by education , but infused at our
nativity . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.337

He that lives according to nature , will suffer nothing from the
delusions of hope , or importunities of desire :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.338

he will receive and reject with equability of temper ; and act or suffer
as the reason of things shall alternately prescribe .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.339

Other men may amuse themselves with subtle definitions or intricate
raciocination . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.340

Let them learn to be wise by easier means : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.341

let them observe the hind of the forest , and the linnet of the grove :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.342

let them consider the life of animals , whose motions are regulated by
instinct ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.343

they obey their guide JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.344

and are happy . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.345

Let us therefore , at length , cease to dispute , and learn to live ;
throw away the encumbrance of precepts , which they who utter them with
so much pride and pomp do not understand , and carry with us this simple
and intelligible maxim , That deviation from nature is deviation from
happiness . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,114.346

<P_1,115>

When he had spoken , he looked round him with a placid air ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,115.348

and enjoyed the consciousness of his own beneficence .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,115.349

" Sir , said the prince with great modesty , as I , like all the rest of
mankind , am desirous of felicity , my closest attention has been fixed
upon your discourse : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,115.350

I doubt not the truth of a position which a man so learned has so
confidently advanced . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,115.351

Let me only know what it is to live according to Nature . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,115.352

" When I find young men so humble and so docile , said the philosopher ,
I can deny them no information which my studies have enabled me to
afford . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,115.353

To live according to nature , is to act always with due regard to the
fitness arising from the relations and qualities of causes and effects ;
to concur with the great and unchangeable scheme of universal felicity ;
to co-operate with the general disposition and tendency of the present
system of things . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,115.354

<P_1,116>

The prince soon found that this was one of the sages whom he should
understand less as he heard him longer . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.356

He therefore bowed JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.357

and was silent , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.358

and the philosopher , supposing him satisfied , and the rest vanquished
, rose up JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.359

and departed with the air of a man that had co-operated with the present
system . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.360

<heading>

Chap. XXIII . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.362

The prince and his sister divide between them the work of observation .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.363

<$$heading>

Rasselas returned home full of reflexions , doubting how to direct his
future steps . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.365

Of the way to happiness he found the learned and simple equally ignorant
; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.366

but , as he was yet young , he flattered himself that he had time
remaining for more experiments , and further inquiries .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,116.367

He <P_1,117> communicated to Imlac his observations and his doubts ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.368

but was answered by him with new doubts , and remarks that gave him no
comfort . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.369

He therefore discoursed more frequently and freely with his sister , who
had yet the same hope with himself , and always assisted him to give
some reason why , though he had been hitherto frustrated , he might
succeed at last . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.370

" We have hitherto , said she , known but little of the world :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.371

we have never yet been either great or mean . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.372

In our own country , though we had royalty , we had no power ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.373

and in this we have not yet seen the private recesses of domestic peace
. JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.374

Imlac favours not our search , lest we should in time find him mistaken
. JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.375

We will divide the task between us : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.376

you shall try what is to be found in the splendour of courts ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.377

and I will range the shades of humbler life . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,117.378

Perhaps command and authority may be the supreme blessings , as they
afford the most opportunities <P_1,118> of doing good :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,118.379

or , perhaps , what this world can give may be found in the modest
habitations of middle fortune ; too low for great designs , and too high
for penury and distress . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,118.380

<heading>

Chap. XXIV . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,118.382

The prince examines the happiness of high stations .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,118.383

<$$heading>

Rasselas applauded the design , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,118.385

and appeared next day with a splendid retinue at the court of the Bassa
. JOHNSON-1759-2,1,118.386

He was soon distinguished for his magnificence , and admitted , as a
prince whose curiosity had brought him from distant countries , to an
intimacy with the great officers and frequent conversation with the
Bassa himself . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,118.387

He was at first inclined to believe that the man must be pleased with
his own condition , whom all approached with reverence , and heard with
obedience , and who had the <P_1,119> power to extend his edicts to a
whole kingdom . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,119.388

" There can be no pleasure , said he , equal to that of feeling at once
the joy of thousands all made happy by wise administration .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,119.389

Yet , since , by the law of subordination , this sublime delight can be
in one nation but the lot of one , it is surely reasonable to think that
there is some satisfaction more popular and accessible , and that
millions can hardly be subjected to the will of a single man , only to
fill his particular breast with incommunicable content . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,119.390

These thoughts were often in his mind , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,119.391

and he found no solution of the difficulty . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,119.392

But as presents and civilities gained him more familiarity , he found
that almost every man who stood high in his employment hated all the
rest , and was hated by them , and that their lives were a continual
succession of plots and detections , stratagems and escapes , faction
and treachery . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,119.393

Many of those who surrounded the Bassa , were sent only to watch and
<P_1,120> report his conduct ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.394

every tongue was muttering censure , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.395

and every eye was searching for a fault . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.396

At last the letters of revocation arrived , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.397

the Bassa was carried in chains to Constantinople ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.398

and his name was mentioned no more . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.399

" What are we now to think of the prerogatives of power ? said Rasselas
to his sister ; JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.400

is it without efficacy to good ? JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.401

or , is the subordinate degree only dangerous , and the supreme safe and
glorious ? JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.402

Is the Sultan the only happy man in his dominions ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.403

or is the Sultan himself subject to the torments of suspicion and the
dread of enemies ? " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.404

In a short time the second Bassa was deposed . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.405

The Sultan , that had advanced him , was murdered by the Janisaries ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.406

and his successor had other views and different favourites .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,120.407

<P_1,121>

<heading>

Chap. XXV . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,121.410

The princess pursues her inquiry with more diligence than success .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,121.411

<$$heading>

The princess , in the meantime , insinuated herself into many families ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,121.413

for there are few doors through which liberality , joined with good
humour , can@ @not find its way . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,121.414

The daughters of many houses were airy and chearful ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,121.415

but Nekayah had been too long accustomed to the conversation of Imlac
and her brother to be much pleased with childish levity and prattle
which had no meaning . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,121.416

She found their thoughts narrow , their wishes low , and their merriment
often artificial . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,121.417

Their pleasures , poor as they were , could not be preserved pure ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,121.418

but were embittered by petty competitions and worthless emulation .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,121.419

They were always jealous of the beauty of each other ; of a quality to
which solicitude can add nothing , and from which <P_1,122> detraction
can take nothing away . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.420

Many were in love with triflers like themselves ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.421

and many fancied that they were in love when in truth they were only
idle . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.422

Their affection was seldom fixed on sense or virtue ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.423

and therefore seldom ended but in vexation . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.424

Their grief , however , like their joy , was transient ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.425

every thing floated in their mind unconnected with the past or future ,
so that one desire easily gave way to another , as a second stone cast
into the water effaces and confounds the circles of the first .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.426

With these girls she played as with inoffensive animals ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.427

and found them proud of her countenance , and weary of her company .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.428

But her purpose was to examine more deeply , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.429

and her affability easily persuaded the hearts that were swelling with
sorrow to discharge their secrets in her ear : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,122.430

and those whom hope flattered , or prosperity delighted , <P_1,123>
often courted her to partake their pleasure . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,123.431

The princess and her brother commonly met in the evening in a private
summerhouse on the banks of the Nile , JOHNSON-1759-2,1,123.432

and related to each other the occurrences of the day .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,123.433

As they were sitting together , the princess cast her eyes upon the
river that flowed before her . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,123.434

" Answer , said she , great father of waters , thou that rollest thy
goods through eighty nations , to the invocations of the daughter of thy
native king . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,123.435

Tell me if thou waterest , through all thy course , a single habitation
from which thou dost not hear the murmurs of complaint . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,123.436

" You are then , said Rasselas , not more successful in private houses
than I have been in courts . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,123.437

" I have , since the last partition of our provinces , said the princess
, enabled myself to enter familiarly into many families , where there
was the fairest show of <P_1,124> prosperity and peace ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.438

and know not one house that is not haunted by some fury that destroys
their quiet . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.439

" I did not seek ease among the poor , because I concluded that there it
could not be found . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.440

But I saw many poor whom I had supposed to live in affluence .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.441

Poverty has , in large cities , very different appearances :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.442

it is often concealed in splendour , and often in extravagance .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.443

It is the care of a very great part of mankind to conceal their
indigence from the rest : JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.444

they support themselves by temporary expedients ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.445

and every day is lost in contriving for the morrow .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.446

" This , however , was an evil which , though frequent , I saw with less
pain , because I could relieve it . JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.447

Yet some have refused my bounties ; more offended with my quickness to
detect their wants , than pleased with my readiness to succour them :
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,124.448

and others , whose exigencies compelled them to <P_1,125> admit my
kindness , have never been able to forgive their benefactress .
JOHNSON-1759-2,1,125.449

Many , however , have been sincerely grateful without the ostentation of
gratitude , or the hope of other favours . " JOHNSON-1759-2,1,125.450

<P_2,129>

<heading>

Chap. XXVI . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,129.453

The princess continues her remarks upon private life .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,129.454

<$$heading>

Nekayah perceiving her brother's attention fixed , proceeded in her
narrative . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,129.456

" In families , where there is or is not poverty , there is commonly
discord : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,129.457

if a kingdom be , as Imlac tells us , a great family , a family likewise
is a little kingdom , torn with <P_2,130> factions and exposed to
revolutions . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.458

An unpractised observer expects the love of parents and children to be
constant and equal ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.459

but this kindness seldom continues beyond the years of infancy :
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.460

in a short time the children become rivals to their parents .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.461

Benefits are allowed by reproaches , and gratitude debased by envy .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.462

" Parents and children seldom act in concert : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.463

each child endeavours to appropriate the esteem or the fondness of the
parents , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.464

and the parents , with yet less temptation , betray each other to their
children ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.465

thus some place their confidence in the father , and some in the mother
, JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.466

and by degrees the house is filled with artifices and feuds .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.467

" The opinions of children and parents , of the young and the old , are
naturally opposite , by the contrary effects of hope and despondency ,
of expectation and experience , without crime or folly on either side .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,130.468

The <P_2,131> colours of life in youth and age appear different , as the
face of nature in spring and winter . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.469

And how can children credit the assertions of parents , which their own
eyes show them to be false ? JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.470

" Few parents act in such a manner as much to enforce their maxims by
the credit of their lives . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.471

The old man trusts wholly to slow contrivance and gradual progression :
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.472

the youth expects to force his way by genius , vigour , and precipitance
. JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.473

The old man pays regard to riches , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.474

and the youth reverences virtue . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.475

The old man deifies prudence : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.476

the youth commits himself to magnanimity and chance .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.477

The young man , who intends no ill , believes that none is intended ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.478

and therefore acts with openness and candour : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.479

but his father , having suffered the injuries of fraud , is impelled to
suspect , and too often allured to practise it .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.480

Age looks with anger on the temerity of youth , and youth with contempt
on the scrupulosity of age . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,131.481

Thus parents and children , for <P_2,132> the greatest part , live on to
love less and less : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.482

and if those whom nature has thus closely united are the torments of
each other , where shall we look for tenderness and consolations ? "
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.483

" Surely , said the prince , you must have been unfortunate in your
choice of acquaintance : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.484

I am unwilling to believe , that the most tender of all relations is
thus impeded in its effects by natural necessity . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.485

" Domestic discord , answered she , is not inevitably and fatally
necessary ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.486

but yet is not easily avoided . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.487

We seldom see that a whole family is virtuous : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.488

the good and the evil can@ @not well agree , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.489

and the evil can yet less agree with one another :
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.490

even the virtuous fall sometimes to variance , when their virtues are of
different kinds , and tending to extremes . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.491

In general , those parents have most reverence who most deserve it :
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.492

for he that lives well can@ @not be despised . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,132.493

<P_2,133>

Many other evils infest private life . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,133.495

Some are the slaves of servants whom they have trusted with their
affairs . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,133.496

Some are kept in continual anxiety by the caprice of rich relations ,
whom they can@ @not please , and dare not offend .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,133.497

Some husbands are imperious , and some wives perverse :
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,133.498

and , as it is always more easy to do evil than good , though the wisdom
or virtue of one can very rarely make many happy , the folly or vice of
one makes many miserable . " JOHNSON-1759-2,2,133.499

" If such be the general effect of marriage , said the prince , I shall
for the future think it dangerous to connect my interest with that of
another , lest I should be unhappy by my partner's fault . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,133.500

" I have met , said the princess , with many who live single for that
reason ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,133.501

but I never found that their prudence ought to raise envy .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,133.502

They dream away their time without friendship , <P_2,134> without
fondness , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.503

and are driven to rid themselves of the day , for which they have no use
, by childish amusements , or vicious delights .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.504

They act as beings under the constant sense of some known inferiority ,
that fills their minds with rancour , and their tongues with censure .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.505

They are peevish at home , and malevolent abroad ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.506

and , as the out-laws of human nature , make it their business and their
pleasure to disturb that society which debars them from its privileges .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.507

To live without feeling or exciting sympathy , to be fortunate without
adding to the felicity of others , or afflicted without tasting the balm
of pity , is a state more gloomy than solitude :
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.508

it is not retreat but exclusion from mankind . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.509

Marriage has many pains , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.510

but celibacy has no pleasures . " JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.511

" What then is to be done ? said Rasselas : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.512

the more we enquire , the less we can resolve .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.513

Surely he is most likely to please himself that has no other inclination
to regard . " JOHNSON-1759-2,2,134.514

<P_2,135>

<heading>

Chap. XXVII . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,135.517

Disquisition upon greatness . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,135.518

<$$heading>

The conversation had a short pause . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,135.520

The prince , having considered his sister's observation , told her ,
that she had surveyed life with prejudice , and supposed misery where
she did not find it . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,135.521

" Your narrative , says he , throws yet a darker gloom upon the
prospects of futurity : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,135.522

the predictions of Imlac were but faint sketches of the evils painted by
Nekayah . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,135.523

I have been lately convinced that quiet is not the daughter of grandeur
, or of power ; that her presence is not to be bought by wealth , nor
enforced by conquest . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,135.524

It is evident , that as any man acts in a wider compass , he must be
more exposed to opposition from enmity , or miscarriage from chance ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,135.525

whoever has many to please or to govern , must use the ministry of many
agents , some of whom <P_2,136> will be wicked , and some ignorant ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.526

by some he will be misled , and by others betrayed .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.527

If he gratifies one he will offend another : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.528

those that are not favoured will think themselves injured ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.529

and , since favours can be conferred but upon few , the greater number
will be always discontented . " JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.530

" The discontent , said the princess , which is thus unreasonable , I
hope that I shall always have spirit to despise , and you , power to
repress . " JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.531

" Discontent , answered Rasselas , will not always be without reason
under the most just and vigilant administration of publick affairs .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.532

None , however attentive , can always discover that merit which
indigence or faction may happen to obscure ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.533

and none however powerful can always reward it .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.534

Yet , he that sees inferior desert advanced above him will naturally
impute that preference to partiality or caprice ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,136.535

and , indeed , <P_2,137> it can scarcely be hoped that any man , however
magnanimous by nature , or exalted by condition , will be able to
persist for ever in fixed and inexorable justice of distribution :
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,137.536

he will sometimes indulge his own affections , and sometimes those of
his favourites ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,137.537

he will permit some to please him , who can never serve him ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,137.538

he will discover in those whom he loves , qualities which in reality
they do not possess ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,137.539

and to those , from whom he receives pleasure , he will in his turn
endeavour to give it . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,137.540

Thus will recommendations sometimes prevail which were purchased by
money , or by the more destructive bribery of flattery and servility .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,137.541

" He that hath much to do will do something wrong ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,137.542

and of that wrong must suffer the consequences ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,137.543

and if it were possible that he should always act rightly , yet when
such numbers are to judge of his conduct , the bad will censure and
obstruct him by malevolence <P_2,138> and the good sometimes by mistake
. JOHNSON-1759-2,2,138.544

" The highest stations can@ @not therefore hope to be the abodes of
happiness , which I would willingly believe to have fled from thrones
and palaces to seats of humble privacy and placid obscurity .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,138.545

For what can hinder the satisfaction , or intercept the expectations ,
of him whose abilities are adequate to his employments , who sees with
his own eyes the whole circuit of his influence , who chooses by his own
knowledge all whom he trusts , and whom none are tempted to deceive by
hope or fear ? JOHNSON-1759-2,2,138.546

Surely he has nothing to do but to love and to be loved , to be virtuous
and to be happy . " JOHNSON-1759-2,2,138.547

" Whether perfect happiness would be procured by perfect goodness , said
Nekayah , this world will never afford an opportunity of deciding .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,138.548

But this , at least , may be maintained , that we do not always find
<P_2,139> visible happiness in proportion to visible virtue .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.549

All natural and almost all political evils , are incident alike to the
bad and good : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.550

they are confounded in the misery of a famine , and not much
distinguished in the fury of a faction ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.551

they sink together in a tempest , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.552

and are driven together from their country by invaders .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.553

All that virtue can afford is quietness of conscience , a steady
prospect of a happier state ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.554

this may enable us to endure calamity with patience ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.555

but remember that patience must suppose pain . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.556

<heading>

Chap. XXVIII . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.558

Rasselas and Nekayah continue their conversation .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,139.559

<$$heading>

" Dear princess , said Rasselas , you fall into the common errors of
exaggeratory declamation , by producing , in a familiar disquisition ,
examples of national calamities and scenes of extensive <P_2,140> misery
, which are found in books rather than in the world , and which , as
they are horrid , are ordained to be rare . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,140.561

Let us not imagine evils which we do not feel , nor injure life by
misrepresentations . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,140.562

I can@ @not bear that querulous eloquence which threatens every city
with a siege like that of Jerusalem , that makes famine attend on every
flight of locusts , and suspends pestilence on the wing of every blast
that issues from the south . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,140.563

" On necessary and inevitable evils which overwhelm kingdoms at once ,
all disputation is vain : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,140.564

when they happen they must be endured . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,140.565

But it is evident , that these bursts of universal distress are more
dreaded than felt ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,140.566

thousands and tens of thousands flourish in youth ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,140.567

and wither in age , without the knowledge of any other than domestick
evils , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,140.568

and share the same pleasures and vexations whether their kings are mild
or cruel , whether the armies of their country pursue their <P_2,141>
enemies or retreat before them . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,141.569

While courts are disturbed with intestine competitions , and embassadors
are negotiating in foreign countries , the smith still plies his anvil ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,141.570

and the husbandman drives his plough forward ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,141.571

the necessaries of life are required and obtained ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,141.572

and the successive business of the season continues to make its wonted
revolutions . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,141.573

" Let us cease to consider what perhaps , may never happen , and what ,
when it shall happen , will laugh at human speculation .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,141.574

We will not endeavour to modify the motions of the elements , or to fix
the destiny of kingdoms . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,141.575

It is our business to consider what beings like us may perform ; each
labouring for his own happiness by promoting within his circle , however
narrow , the happiness of others . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,141.576

" Marriage is evidently the dictate of nature ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,141.577

men and women were made to be the companions <P_2,142> of each other ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,142.578

and therefore I can@ @not be persuaded but that marriage is one of the
means of happiness . " JOHNSON-1759-2,2,142.579

" I know not , said the princess , whether marriage be more than one of
the innumerable modes of human misery . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,142.580

When I see and reckon the various forms of connubial infelicity , the
unexpected causes of lasting discord , the diversities of temper , the
oppositions of opinion , the rude collisions of contrary desire where
both are urged by violent impulses , the obstinate contest of
disagreeing virtues , where both are supported by consciousness of good
intention , I am sometimes disposed to think with the severer casuists
of most nations , that marriage is rather permitted than approved , and
that none , but by the instigation of a passion too much indulged ,
entangle themselves with indissoluble compact . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,142.581

<P_2,143>

" You seem to forget , replied Rasselas , that you have , even now ,
represented celibacy as less happy than marriage .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,143.583

Both conditions may be bad , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,143.584

but they can@ @not both be worst . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,143.585

Thus it happens when wrong opinions are entertained , that they mutually
destroy each other , and leave the mind open to truth . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,143.586

" I did not expect , answered the princess , to hear that imputed to
falsehood which is the consequence only of frailty .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,143.587

To the mind , as to the eye , it is difficult to compare with exactness
objects vast in their extent , and various in their parts .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,143.588

When we see or conceive the whole at once , we readily note the
discriminations JOHNSON-1759-2,2,143.589

and decide the preference : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,143.590

but of two systems , of which neither can be surveyed by any human being
in its full compass of magnitude and multiplicity of complication ,
where is the wonder , that judging of the whole by parts , I am
alternately affected by one or <P_2,144> the other as either presses on
my memory or fancy ? JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.591

We differ from ourselves just as we differ from each other , when we see
only part of the question , as in the multifarious relations of
politicks and morality : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.592

but when we perceive the whole at once , as in numerical computations ,
all agree in one judgment , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.593

and none ever varies in his opinion . " JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.594

" Let us not add , said the prince , to the other evils of life , the
bitterness of controversy , nor endeavour to vie with each other in
subtilties of argument . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.595

We are employed in a search , of {TEXT:missing_"of"} which both are
equally to enjoy the success or suffer by the miscarriage .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.596

It is therefore fit that we assist each other .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.597

You surely conclude too hastily from the infelicity of marriage against
its institution . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.598

Will not the misery of life prove equally that life can@ @not be the
gift of heaven ? JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.599

The world must be peopled by marriage , or peopled without it . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,144.600

<P_2,145>

" How the world is to be peopled , returned Nekayah , is not my care
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.602

and need not be yours . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.603

I see no danger that the present generation should omit to leave
successors behind them : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.604

we are not now inquiring for the world , but for ourselves . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.605

<heading>

Chap. XXIX . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.607

The debate on marriage continued . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.608

<$$heading>

" The good of the whole , says Rasselas , is the same with the good of
all its parts . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.610

If marriage be best for mankind it must be evidently best for
individuals , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.611

or a permanent and necessary duty must be the cause of evil ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.612

and some must be inevitably sacrificed to the convenience of others .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,145.613

In the estimate which you have made of the two states , it appears that
the incommodities of a single life are , in a great measure <P_2,146>
necessary and certain , but those of the conjugal state accidental and
avoidable . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.614

" I can@ @not forbear to flatter myself that prudence and benevolence
will make marriage happy . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.615

The general folly of mankind is the cause of general complaint .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.616

What can be expected but disappointment and repentance from a choice
made in the immaturity of youth , in the ardour of desire , without
judgment , without foresight , without inquiry after conformity of
opinions , similarity of manners , rectitude of judgment , or purity of
sentiment ? JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.617

" Such is the common process of marriage . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.618

A youth and maiden , meeting by chance or brought together by artifice ,
exchange glances , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.619

reciprocate civilities , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.620

go home , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.621

and dream of one another . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.622

Having little to divert attention , or diversify thought , they find
themselves uneasy when they are apart , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,146.623

and therefore conclude that they shall be <P_2,147> happy together .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.624

They marry , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.625

and discover what nothing but voluntary blindness before had concealed ;
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.626

they wear out life in altercations , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.627

and charge nature with cruelty . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.628

" From those early marriages proceeds likewise the rivalry of parents
and children : JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.629

the son is eager to enjoy the world before the father is willing to
forsake it , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.630

and there is hardly room at once for two generations .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.631

The daughter begins to bloom before the mother can be content to fade ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.632

and neither can forbear to wish for the absence of the other .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.633

" Surely all these evils may be avoided by that deliberation and delay
which prudence prescribes to irrevocable choice .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.634

In the variety and jollity of youthful pleasures , life may be well
enough supported without the help of a partner .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.635

Longer time will increase experience , JOHNSON-1759-2,2,147.636

and wider views will allow <P_2,148> better opportunities of inquiry and
selection ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,148.637

one advantage at least , will be certain ; JOHNSON-1759-2,2,148.638

the parents will be visibly older than their children . "
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,148.639

" What reason can@ @not collect , said Nekayah , and what experiment has
not yet taught , can be known only from the report of others .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,148.640

I have been told that late marriages are not eminently happy .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,148.641

This is a question too important to be neglected ,
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,148.642

and I have often proposed it to those , whose accuracy of remark , and
comprehensiveness of knowledge , made their suffrages worthy of regard .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,148.643

They have generally determined , that it is dangerous for a man and
woman to suspend their fate upon each other , at a time when opinions
are fixed , and habits are established ; when friendships have been
contracted on both sides , when life has been planned into method , and
the mind has long enjoyed the contemplation of its own prospects .
JOHNSON-1759-2,2,148.644

<P_2,149>

" It is scarcely possible that two travelling through the world under
the conduct of chance , should have been both directed to the same path
, JOHNSON-1759-2,2,149.646

and it will not often happen that either will quit the track which
custom has made pleasing . JOHNSON-1759-2,2,149.647

