<BEGIN_johnson-176x-2>

<P_1,172>

{ED:169._25_May._David_Garrick}

Dear Sir You have many requests , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,172.4

and many of them must be denied , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,172.5

but I hope this will not be of the number , by which <P_1,173> you are
desired to order your Boxkeeper , to reserve four places for Dr Bell of
Westminster , any night on which You intend to appear , before Friday .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.6

I am , Sir , Your most humble servant , Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.7

May 25 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.8

{ED:170._Sa._25_May_'65._George_Strahan_<paren>_Oxford_<$$paren>}

25 May , 1765 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.10

Dear Sir That I have answered neither of your letters you must not
impute to any declension of good will , but merely to the want of
something to say . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.11

I suppose you pursue your studies diligently , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.12

and diligence will seldom fail of success . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.13

Do not tire yourself so much with Greek one day as to be afraid of
looking on it the next ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.14

but give it a certain portion of time , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.15

suppose four hours , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.16

and pass the rest of the day in Latin or English .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.17

I would have you learn French , and take in a literary journal once a
month , which will accustom you to various subjects , and inform you
what learning is going forward in the world . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.18

Do not omit to mingle some lighter books with those of more importance ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.19

that which is read <font> remisso animo <$$font> is often of great use ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.20

and takes great hold of the remembrance . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.21

However , take what course you will , if you be diligent you will be a
scholar . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.22

I am , dear Sir , Yours affectionately , Sam: Johnson .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.23

{ED:171._M._15_July_'65._John_Taylor_<paren>_Ashbourne_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir It is so long since I heard from you that I know not well
whither to write . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.25

With all your building and feasting you might have found an hour in some
wet day for the remembrance of your old friend .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,173.26

I should have thought that since you have led a life so festive and gay
, you would have <P_1,174> invited {COM:editor_conjectures_"invited"} me
to partake of your hospitality . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.27

I do not know {TEXT:missing_"know"} but I may come invited or uninvited
, and pass a few days with you in august or september , unless you send
me a prohibition , or let me know that I shall be insupportably
burthensome . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.28

Let me know your thoughts on this matter , because I design to go to
some place or other , and would be loth {TEXT:missing_"loth"} to produce
any inconvenience for my own gratification . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.29

Let me know how you go on in the world , and what entertainment may be
expected in your new room by , Dear Sir Your most affectionate Servant
Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.30

Temple JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.31

July 15 . 1765 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.32

{ED:172._Tu._13_Aug._'65._Mrs_Thrale_<paren>_Brighthelmston_<$$paren>}

Madam If you have really so good an opinion of me as you express , it
will not be necessary to inform you how unwillingly I miss the
opportunity of coming to Brighthelmston in Mr. Thrale's company , or
since I can@ @not do what I wish first , how eagerly I shall catch the
second degree of pleasure by coming to you and Him , as soon as I can
dismiss my work from my hands . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.34

I am afraid to make promises even to myself , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.35

but I hope that the week after the next , will be the end of my present
business . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.36

When business is done what remains but pleasure ?
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.37

and where should pleasure be sought but under Mrs Thrale's influence ?
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.38

Do not blame me for a delay by which I must suffer so much , and by
which I suffer alone . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.39

If you can@ @not think I am good , pray think I am mending , and that in
time I may deserve to be , Dear Madam , Your most obedient and most
humble servant Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.40

London . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.41

Aug. 13 . 1765 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,174.42

<P_1,175>

{COM:no_letter_173}

{ED:174._Sa._17_Aug._'65._<Edward_Lye>}

Dear Sir I think you may be encouraged by the liberality of the
Archbishop to hope for more Patrons of your undertaking ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.46

and therefore advise you to open your Subscription .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.47

The method may perhaps be not at first to advertise but to send your
proposal with a letter to such of the Bishops and others as you hope to
find favourers of literature , sending at the same time to all your
inferiour <paren> ? <$$paren> friends , particularly to our Club .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.48

When you see how far your personal interest will carry you , an estimate
may be easily made of the probability of success ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.49

and the measures will be easily adjusted . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.50

I would have the whole price paid at once , which all will readily
comply with JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.51

, and much trouble will be saved . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.52

In contracting with your printer , oblige him to a certain number of
Sheets weekly . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.53

If you print at London , you will like Mr. Allen the printer better
than most others . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.54

He is a Northamptonshire Man . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.55

Go on boldly , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.56

I doubt not your success . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.57

Please to make Mrs. Calvert the compliments of Mrs. Williams , and of
Dear Sir , Your most humble Servant , Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.58

We have Gothick types at London . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.59

Aug. 17 . 1765 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,175.60

<P_1,176>

{ED:174.1._Th._26_Sept._'65._Edward_Lye_<paren>_Yardley_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir I see little to change in your proposals ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.63

only for <font> writing demy <$$font> I would read as more generally
intelligible , <font> writing paper <$$font> JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.64

and I would stop at <font> a sufficient number of subscribers .
<$$font> What is added being , in my opinion , rather deficient in
dignity . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.65

The success of your subscription I do not doubt ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.66

and wish you were closely engaged at the press .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.67

Two sheets of Saxon letters will not be sufficient .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.68

There ought always to be one sheet printing , another in your hands for
correction , and a third composing . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.69

There ought to be more , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.70

but this is the least JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.71

and if at Oxford they will not do this , you must not print at Oxford ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.72

for your Edition will be retarded beyond measure .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.73

They must get four sheets of letter at least , which will cost very
little , there being few peculiar characters . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.74

Stipulate with the printer to give you a certain number of sheets weekly
, JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.75

you ought not to have less than three , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.76

and you will not easily have more . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.77

Mrs Williams sends her best compliments to you and to Mrs Calvert ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.78

and begs that you will return her thanks to Mrs Percy for her letter ,
in the contents of which she takes great interest .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.79

The Hare will come safe if it be directed to Sir Your most humble
Servant Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.80

Johnson's Court , Fleetstreet JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.81

Sept. 26 . 1765 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.82

{ED:175._Tu._1_Oct_<paren>_misdated_2_Oct._<$$paren>_'65._John_Taylor_<paren>_Ashbourne_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir You need be no longer in pain , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.84

for I received your letter , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,176.85

<P_1,177>

but though when I wrote to you I expected to have had it soon in my
power to come to you , yet , as it often happens , one thing or other
{TEXT:editor_conjectures_"or_other"_from_"o"} has obstructed my purpose
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.87

My Shakespeare is {TEXT:Shakesp} now out of my hands ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.88

and I do not see what can hinder me any longer .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.89

When I find that I can come I will write to you ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.90

for I suppose you will meet me at Derby . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.91

I think it time that we should see one another , and spend a little of
our short life together . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.92

I am , Dear Sir , Yours affectionately , Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.93

Oct. 2 . 1765 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.94

Johnson's Court , Fleetstreet . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.95

{ED:176._W._9_Oct._'65._Joseph_Warton_<paren>_Winchester_<$$paren>}

Oct. 9th , 1765 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.97

Dear Sir , Mrs. Warton uses me hardly in supposing that I could forget
so much kindness and civility as she showed me at Winchester .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.98

I remember likewise our conversation about St. Cross .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.99

The desire of seeing her again will be one of the motives that will
bring me into Hampshire . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.100

I have taken care of your book ; being so far from doubting your
subscription , that I think you have subscrib'd twice :
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.101

you once paid your guinea into my own hand in the garret in Gough Square
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.102

When you light on your receipt , throw it on the fire ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.103

if you find a second receipt , you may have a second book .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.104

To tell the truth , as I felt no solicitude about this work , I receive
no great comfort from its conclusion ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.105

but yet am well enough pleased that the public has no further claim upon
me . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.106

I wish you would write more frequently to , Dear Sir , Your affectionate
humble servant , Sam. Johnson . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,177.107

<P_1,178>

{ED:176.1._W._9_Oct._'65._<Jacob_Tonson>}

Sir Among those that will call for Shakespeare there are a few <paren>
perhaps twenty <$$paren> that have receipts for two Guineas , and have
therefore nothing to pay . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.110

The Guinea which you should receive must therefore be charged to my
account . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.111

I hope to meet you tonight at Mr Steevens's , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.112

but we shall not there perhaps talk of business .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.113

I therefore write now to remove what might be otherwise a little
difficulty , and to assure you that your civility during this
transaction is very sincerely acknowledged by , Sir , Your most humble
servant Sam: Johnson . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.114

Johnson's Court , Fleet-street , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.115

Oct. 9th . 1765 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.116

{ED:177._W._16_Oct._'65._Charles_Burney}

Sir I am sorry that your kindness to me has brought upon you so much
trouble , though you have taken care to abate that sorrow , by the
pleasure which I receive from your approbation .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.118

I defend my criticism in the same manner with you .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.119

We must confess the faults of our favourite , to gain credit to our
praise of his excellencies . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.120

He that claims either for himself or for another the honours of
perfection , will surely injure the reputation which he designs to
assist . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.121

Be pleased to make my compliments to your family .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.122

I am , Sir , Your most obliged and most humble Servant , Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.123

Oct. 16 {TEXT:missing_"Oct._16"} 1765 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,178.124

<P_1,179>

{ED:178._Th._17_Oct._'65._Thomas_Leland}

Sir , Among the names subscribed to the degree which I have had the
honour of receiving from the University of Dublin , I find none of which
I have any personal knowledge but those of Doct=r= Andrews & yourself .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.127

Men are to be estimated by those who know them not , only as they are
represented by those who know them , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.128

& therefore I flatter myself that I owe much of the pleasure which this
distinction gives me , to your concurrence with Dr. Andrews in
recommending me to the learned Society . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.129

Having desired the Provost to return my general thanks to the University
, I beg that you , Sir , will accept my particular and immediate
acknowledgements . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.130

I am , Sir , Your most obedient and most humble Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.131

Octr. 17 . 1765 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.132

London , Johnsons court , Fleet-street JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.133

{ED:178.1._Sa._19_Oct._'65._Jacob_Tonson}

Sir I have lately heard , and heard so often that I can hardly any
longer refuse credit , that my Edition is sold stiched by the
Booksellers <paren> I am afraid at your own Shop <$$paren> for Forty
Shillings that is for four shillings under the Subscription .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.135

The Subscription was settled with your consent ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.136

and your consent alone implied a promise that you would not undersell
{TEXT:undersel} me . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,179.137

This promise was likewise verbally made by you in my <P_1,180> room in
Gough Square , when we treated about the Edition .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.138

This is the worse , as the demand for the Book has been such , as left
yet no temptation to lower the price . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.139

If your Servants have acted without orders , it is time that some
direction should be given . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.140

If it be done with your knowledge , it is an action which I have a right
to resent . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.141

But I would willingly think it negligence or mistake .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.142

I am Sir your most humble Servant Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.143

Johnson's Court . Fleetstreet . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.144

Oct. 19 1765 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.145

{ED:178.2._Sa._26_Oct._'65._Charles_Jenkinson}

Sir You will find all your papers carefully preserved , and
uncommunicated to any human Being . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.147

I once hoped to have made better use of them , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.148

but shall be much delighted to see them employed for the same purpose by
a Man so much more versed in publick affairs . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.149

I intended , Sir , to have applied to you for the intelligence which
your kindness has given me without application .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.150

If my Edition pleases you , and such as you it will really produce that
additional reputation on which you are pleased to congratulate me .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.151

To gain and to preserve the esteem of such men will always be the
ambition of , Sir , Your most obliged most obedient and most humble
Servant Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.152

Oct. 26 . 1765 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,180.153

<P_1,181>

{ED:179._Su._8_Dec._'65._Edmund_Hector_<paren>_Birmingham_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir I am very glad of a letter from you upon any occasion ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.156

but could wish that when you had despatched business , you would give a
little more to friendship , and tell me something of your self .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.157

The Books must be had by sending to Mr. Tonson the receipts and second
payment which belongs to him . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.158

Any bookseller will do it , or any Correspondent here .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.159

It would be extremely inconvenient , and uncustomary for me to charge
myself with the distribution . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.160

I never refuse any subscriber a new receipt when he has lost that which
he had . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.161

You have three by which you may supply the three deficiencies .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.162

When the former receipts are found they must be destroyed .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.163

If Mr. Taylor be my old friend , make my kindest compliments .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.164

My heart is much set upon seeing you all again ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.165

and I hope to visit you in the spring or summer ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.166

but many of my hopes have been disappointed . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.167

I have no correspondence in the country , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.168

and know not what is doing . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.169

What is become of Mr Warren ? JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.170

His friend Paul has been long dead . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.171

And to go backwarder , what was the fate of poor George Boylston ?
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.172

A few years ago I just saluted Birmingham , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.173

but had no time to see any friend , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.174

for I came in after midnight with a friend , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.175

and went away in the morning . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.176

When I come again I shall surely make a longer stay ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.177

but in the mean time should think it an act of kindness in you to let me
know something of the present state of things , and to revive the
pleasure which your company has formerly given to , Dear Sir , Your
affectionate and most humble servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.178

Decr. 8 . 1765 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,181.179

<P_1,182>

{ED:179.1_?_Sept._or_Oct._'65._Robert_Dodsley}

I have as you see written my letter , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.182

and am yet in doubt whether I shall send it . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.183

I can@ @not see what good it can do you , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.184

however if you think differently from me I do not love the reputation of
obstinacy or perverseness . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.185

I have dated the letter for Monday . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.186

You may think on it , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.187

whatever you do it will please me if you can please yourself .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.188

If you have a Shakespeare pray send it , though in sheets ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.189

I will return it in two or three days . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.190

{ED:180._Tu._14_Jan._'66._Lucy_Porter_<paren>_Lichfield_<$$paren>}

Johnson's Court Fleet Street JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.192

Dear Madam , The reason why I did not answer your letters was that I can
please myself with no answer . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.193

I was loath that Kitty should leave the house , till I had seen it once
more , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.194

and yet for some reasons I can@ @not well come during the Session of
Parliament . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.195

I am unwilling to sell it , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.196

yet hardly know why . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.197

If it can be let , it should be repaired , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.198

and I purpose to let Kitty have part of the rent while we both live ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.199

and wish that you would get it surveyed , and let me know how much money
will be necessary to fit it for a Tenant . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.200

I would not have you stay longer than is convenient ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.201

and I thank you for your care of Kitty . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,182.202

<P_1,183>

Do not take my omission amiss . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.204

I am sorry for it , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.205

but know not what to say . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.206

You must act by your own prudence , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.207

and I shall be pleased . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.208

Write to me again JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.209

I do not design to neglect you any more . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.210

It is great pleasure to me to hear from you , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.211

but this whole affair is painful to me . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.212

I wish you , my Dear , many happy years . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.213

Give my respects to Kitty . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.214

I am , Dear Madam , Your most affectionate humble Servant , Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.215

Jan. 14 . 1766 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.216

{ED:181._Tu._14_Jan._'66._James_Boswell_<paren>_Paris_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir Apologies are seldom of any use . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.218

We will delay till your arrival the reasons , good or bad , which have
made me such a sparing and ungrateful correspondent .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.219

Be assured , for the present , that nothing has lessened either the
esteem or love with which I dismissed you at Harwich .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.220

Both have been increased by all that I have been told of you by yourself
or others ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.221

and when you return , you will return to an unaltered , and , I hope ,
unalterable friend . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.222

All that you have to fear from me is the vexation of disappointing me .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.223

No man loves to frustrate expectations which have been formed in his
favour ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.224

and the pleasure which I promise myself from your journals and remarks
is so great , that perhaps no degree of attention or discernment will be
sufficient to afford it . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.225

Come home , however , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.226

and take your chance . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.227

I long to see you , and to hear you ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.228

and hope that we shall not be so long separated again .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.229

Come home , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.230

and expect such a welcome as is due to him , whom a wise and noble
curiosity has led , where perhaps no native of this country ever was
before . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.231

I have no news to tell you that can deserve your notice ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,183.232

<P_1,184>

nor would I willingly lessen the pleasure that any novelty may give you
at your return . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.234

I am afraid we shall find it difficult to keep among us a mind which has
been so long feasted with variety . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.235

But let us try what esteem and kindness can effect .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.236

As your father's liberality has indulged you with so long a ramble , I
doubt not but you will think his sickness , or even his desire to see
you , a sufficient reason for hastening your return .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.237

The longer we live , and the more we think , the higher value we learn
to put on the friendship and tenderness of parents and of friends .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.238

Parents we can have but once ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.239

and he promises himself too much , who enters life with the expectation
of finding many friends . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.240

Upon some motive , I hope , that you will be here soon ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.241

and am willing to think that it will be an inducement to your return ,
that it is sincerely desired by , dear Sir , Your affectionate humble
servant , Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.242

Johnson's Court , Fleet-street , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.243

January 14 , 1766 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.244

{ED:182._Sa._8_misdated_9_Mar._'66._Bennet_Langton_<paren>_Langton_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir , What your friends have done , that from your departure till
now , nothing has been heard of you , none of us are able to inform the
rest , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.246

but as we are all neglected alike , no one thinks himself entitled to
the privilege of complaint . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.247

I should have known nothing of you or of Langton , from the time that
dear Miss Langton left us , had not I met Mr. Simpson of Lincoln one
day in the street , by whom I was informed that Mr. Langton , your
Mamma , and yourself had been all ill , but that you were all recovered
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.248

That sickness should suspend your correspondence I did not wonder ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.249

but hoped that it would be renewed at your recovery .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,184.250

<P_1,185>

Since you will not inform us where you are , or how you live , I know
not {TEXT:missing_"not"} whether you desire to know any thing of us .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.252

However I will tell you that the Club subsists , but we have less of
Burke's company since he has been engaged in publick business , in which
he has gained more reputation than perhaps any man at his first
{TEXT:missing_"first"} appearance ever gained before .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.253

He made two speeches in the house for repealing the Stamp-act , which
were publickly commended by Mr. Pitt {TEXT:Pit} , and have filled the
town with wonder . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.254

Burke is a great man by Nature , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.255

and is expected soon to attain civil greatness .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.256

I am grown greater too , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.257

for I have maintained the newspapers these many weeks ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.258

and what is greater still , I have risen every morning since Newyears
day at about eight , when I was up , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.259

I have indeed done but little , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.260

yet it is no slight advancement to obtain for so many hours more the
consciousness of being . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.261

I wish you were in my new study , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.262

I am now writing the first letter in it . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.263

I think it looks very pretty about me . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.264

Dyer is constant at the Club , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.265

Hawkins is remiss . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.266

I am not over diligent . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.267

Dr. Nugent , Dr. Goldsmith , and Mr. Reynolds are very constant .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.268

Mr. Lye is {TEXT:missing_"is"} printing his Saxon and Gothick
dictionary {TEXT:diction} ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.269

all the Club subscribes . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.270

You will pay my compliments to all my Lincolnshire {TEXT:m_colnshire}
friends . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.271

I am , dear Sir , Most affectionately your's , Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.272

Johnson's-court , Fleet-street JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.273

March 9 , 1766 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,185.274

<P_1,186>

{ED:183._Sa._10_May_'66._Bennet_Langton_<paren>_Langton_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir In supposing that I should be more than commonly affected by
the death {TEXT:missing_"death"} of Peregrine Langton you were not
mistaken ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.277

he was one of those whom I loved at once by instinct and by reason .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.278

I have seldom indulged more hope of any thing than of being able to
improve our acquaintance to friendship . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.279

Many a time have I placed myself again at Langton , and imagined the
pleasure with which I should walk to Partney in a Summer morning .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.280

But this is no longer possible . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.281

We must now endeavour to preserve what is left us , his example of Piety
, and economy . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.282

I hope you make what enquiries you can , and write down what is told you
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.283

The little things which distinguish domestick characters are soon
forgotten , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.284

if you delay to enquire you will have no information ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.285

if you neglect to write , information will be vain .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.286

His art of life certainly deserves to be known and studied .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.287

He lived in plenty and elegance upon an income which to many would
appear indigent and to most , scanty . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.288

How he lived therefore every man has an interest in knowing .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.289

His death , I hope , was peaceful , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.290

it was surely happy . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.291

I wish I had written sooner , lest writing now I should renew your grief
; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.292

but I would not forbear saying what I have now said .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.293

This loss is , I hope , the only misfortune of a family to whom no
misfortune at all should happen , if my wishes could avert it .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.294

Let me know how you all go on . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.295

Has Mr. Langton got him the little horse that I recommended ?
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.296

It would do him good to ride about his estate in fine weather .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.297

Be pleased to make my compliments to Mrs. Langton , and to dear Miss
Langton , and Miss Di , and Miss Juliet , and to everybody else .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.298

The Club holds very well together . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.299

Monday is my night . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,186.300

<P_1,187>

I continue to rise tolerably well , and read more than I did .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.302

I hope something will yet come on it . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.303

I am Sir Your most affectionate servant , Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.304

Johnson's-court , Fleet-street JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.305

May 10 . 1766 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.306

{ED:183.1._Sa._28_June_'66._William_Jessop_<paren>_Lismore_<$$paren>}

Sir If your letter had been less ceremonious it would not have pleased
me less . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.308

I read poor Grierson's paper with a very tender remembrance both of his
learning and his humour . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.309

What you propose to offer to the world is really wanting in our language
, JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.310

and as I have no reason to doubt your ability to supply the deficiency ,
I shall be willing to do any thing that can be reasonably required .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.311

You will therefore , if you do not change your mind , contrive to
transmit your book to , Sir , Your most obedient Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.312

Johnson's-Court in Fleetstreet JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.313

June . 28th 1766 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.314

{ED:184._W._13_Aug._'66._William_Drummond_<paren>_Edinburgh_<$$paren>}

Sir I did not expect to hear that it could be , in an assembly convened
for the propagation of Christian knowledge , a question whether any
nation uninstructed in religion should receive instruction ; or whether
that instruction should be imparted to them by a translation of the holy
books into their own language . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,187.316

If obedience to the will of God be necessary <P_1,188> to happiness ,
and knowledge of his will be necessary to obedience , I know not how he
that withholds {TEXT:with-holds} this knowledge , or delays it , can be
said to love his neighbour as himself . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.317

He , that voluntarily continues ignorance , is guilty of all the crimes
which ignorance produces ; as to him , that should extinguish the tapers
of a light-house , might justly be imputed the calamities of shipwrecks
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.318

Christianity is the highest perfection of humanity ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.319

and as no man is good but as he wishes the good of others , no man can
be good in the highest degree , who wishes not to others the largest
measures of the greatest good . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.320

To omit for a year , or for a day , the most efficacious method of
advancing Christianity , in compliance with any purposes that terminate
on this side of the grave , is a crime of which I know not that the
world has yet had an example , except in the practice of the planters of
America , a race of mortals whom , I suppose , no other man wishes to
resemble . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.321

The Papists have , indeed , denied to the laity the use of the bible ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.322

but this prohibition , in few places now very rigorously enforced , is
defended by arguments , which have for their foundation the care of
souls . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.323

To obscure , upon motives merely political , the light of revelation ,
is a practice reserved for the reformed ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.324

and , surely , the blackest midnight of popery is meridian sunshine to
such a reformation . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.325

I am not very willing that any language should be totally extinguished .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.326

The similitude and derivation of languages afford the most indubitable
proof of the traduction of nations , and the genealogy of mankind .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.327

They add often physical certainty to historical evidence ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.328

and often supply the only evidence of ancient migrations , and of the
revolutions of ages which left no written monuments behind them .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.329

Every man's opinions , at least his desires , are a little influenced by
his favourite studies . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.330

My zeal for languages may seem , perhaps , rather over-heated , even to
those by whom I desire to be well esteemed . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.331

To those who have nothing in their thoughts but trade or policy ,
present power , or present money , I should not think it necessary to
defend my opinions ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,188.332

but with men of letters I would not unwillingly compound , by wishing
the continuance of every language , however <P_1,189> narrow in its
extent , or however in_commodious for common purposes , till it is
reposited in some version of a known book , that it may be always
hereafter examined and compared with other languages , and then
permitting its disuse . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.333

For this purpose , the translation of the bible is most to be desired .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.334

It is not certain that the same method will not preserve the Highland
language , for the purposes of learning , and abolish it from daily use
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.335

When the Highlanders read the Bible , they will naturally wish to have
its obscurities cleared , and to know the history , collateral or
appendant . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.336

Knowledge always desires increase : JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.337

it is like fire , which must first be kindled by some external agent ,
but which will afterwards propagate itself . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.338

When they once desire to learn , they will naturally have recourse to
the nearest language by which that desire can be gratified ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.339

and one will tell another that if he would attain knowledge , he must
learn English . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.340

This speculation may , perhaps , be thought more subtle than the
grossness of real life will easily admit . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.341

Let it , however , be remembered , that the efficacy of ignorance has
been long tried , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.342

and has not produced the consequence expected .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.343

Let knowledge , therefore , take its turn ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.344

and let the patrons of privation stand awhile aside , and admit the
operation of positive principles . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.345

You will be pleased , Sir , to assure the worthy man who is employed in
the new translation , that he has my wishes for his success ; and if
here or at Oxford I can be of any use , that I shall think it more than
honour to promote his undertaking . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.346

I am sorry that I delayed so long to write . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.347

I am , Sir , Your most humble servant , Sam. Johnson .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.348

Johnson's-court , Fleet-street , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.349

Aug. 13 , 1766 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.350

{ED:185._Th._21_Aug._'66._James_Boswell_<paren>_Edinburgh_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir , The reception of your Thesis put me in mind of my debt to you
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.352

Why did you dedicate it to a man whom I know you do not much love .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,189.353

I will punish you for it , by telling <P_1,190> you that your Latin
wants correction . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.354

In the beginning , <font> Spei alterae , <$$font> not to urge that it
should be <font> primae <$$font> , is not grammatical :
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.355

<font> alterae <$$font> should be <font> alteri . <$$font>
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.356

In the next line you seem to use <font> genus <$$font> absolutely , for
what we call <font> family <$$font> , that is , for <font> illustrious
extraction <$$font> , I doubt without authority .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.357

<font> Homines nullius originis <$$font> , for <font> Nullis orti
majoribus <$$font> , or , <font> Nullo loco nati <$$font> , is , I am
afraid , barbarous . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.358

- Ruddiman is dead . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.359

I have now vexed you enough , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.360

and will try to please you . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.361

Your resolution to obey your father I sincerely approve ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.362

but do not accustom yourself to enchain your volatility by vows :
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.363

they will sometime leave a thorn in your mind , which you will , perhaps
, never be able to extract or eject . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.364

Take this warning , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.365

it is of great importance . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.366

The study of the law is what you very justly term it , copious and
generous ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.367

and in adding your name to its professors , you have done exactly what I
always wished , when I wished you best . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.368

I hope that you will continue to pursue it vigorously and constantly .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.369

You gain , at least , what is no small advantage , security from those
troublesome and wearisome discontents , which are always obtruding
themselves upon a mind vacant , unemployed , and undetermined .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.370

You ought to think it no small inducement to diligence and perseverance
, that they will please your father . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.371

We all live upon the hope of pleasing somebody ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.372

and the pleasure of pleasing ought to be greatest , and at last always
will be greatest , when our endeavours are exerted in consequence of our
duty . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.373

Life is not long , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.374

and too much of it must not pass in idle deliberation how it shall be
spent ; deliberation , which those who begin it by prudence , and
continue it with subtilty , must , after long expence of thought ,
conclude by chance . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.375

To prefer one future mode of life to another , upon just reasons ,
requires faculties which it has not pleased our Creator to give us .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,190.376

If , therefore , the profession you have chosen has some unexpected
inconveniencies , console yourself by reflecting <P_1,191> that no
profession is without them ; and that all the importunities and
perplexities of business are softness and luxury , compared with the
incessant cravings of vacancy , and the unsatisfactory expedients of
idleness . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.377

{COM:latin_verse_omitted} As to your History of Corsica , you have no
materials which others have not , or may not have .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.378

You have , somehow or other , warmed your imagination .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.379

I wish there were some cure , like the lover's leap , for all heads of
which some single idea has obtained an unreasonable and irregular
possession . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.380

Mind your own affairs , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.381

and leave the Corsicans to theirs . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.382

I am , dear Sir , Your most humble servant , Sam: Johnson .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.383

London , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.384

Aug. 21 , 1766 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.385

{ED:186._F._10_Oct._'66._David_Garrick}

Dear Sir I return you thanks for the present of the Dictionary ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.387

and will take care {TEXT:missing_"care"} to return your other books .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.388

I have had it long in my mind to tell you that there is an_hundred
pounds of yours in Mr. Tonson's hands , if you have not yet received it
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.389

I know not whether any other paper than what I gave you be necessary .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.390

If there is any thing more to be done , I am ready to do it .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.391

Please to make my compliments to Mrs. Garrick .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.392

I am , Sir Your obliged &c. Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.393

Oct. 10 . 1766 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,191.394

<P_1,192>

{ED:187._Th._13_Nov._'66._Lucy_Porter_<paren>_Lichfield_<$$paren>}

Dear Madam Soon after I had received your letter I went to Oxford ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.397

and did not return till last Saturday . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.398

I do not very clearly understand what need there is of my coming to
Lichfield . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.399

It is now too late in the year to repair the poor old house , if the
reparation can be delayed . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.400

Nor can I very easily discover what I can do towards it when I come more
than pay the money which it shall cost . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.401

The days are now grown short , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.402

and a long Journey will be uncomfortable , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.403

and I think it better to delay doing whatever is to be done till Spring
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.404

I will come down , however , if you desire it .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.405

I am sorry to have no better account of poor Kitty's health .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.406

I hope she will be better . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.407

Pray give my love to her , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.408

and desire her not to forget my request . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.409

I should take it kindly if you would now and then write to me , and give
me an account of your own health , and let me know how you go on in your
new house . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.410

I am , dear Madam Your most affectionate humble Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.411

Nov. 13 , 1766 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.412

{ED:187.1._W._19_Nov._'66._Robert_Chambers}

Dear Sir I have been twice to see you and missed you .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.414

I have now a little favour to ask . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.415

I beg to be informed , if you know or can enquire what are the reasons
for which Dr Blackstone thinks the late embargo to be not legal , as I
hear he does , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,192.416

it always <P_1,193> seemed legal to me . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.417

But I judge upon mere principles without much knowledge of laws or facts
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.418

Absurdum est cui plus licet , ei minus non licere .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.419

I am Sir &c Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.420

Nov 19 . 1766 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.421

Wednesday Morning JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.422

{ED:187.2._Th._11_Dec._'66._Robert_Chambers_<paren>_Oxford_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir I suppose you are dining and supping , and lying in bed .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.424

Come up to town , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.425

and lock yourself up from all but me , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.426

and I doubt not but Lectures will be produced .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.427

You must not miss another term . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.428

If you could get me any information about the East_Indian affairs , you
may promise that if it is used at all , it shall be used in favour of
the Company . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.429

Come up and work , and I will try to help you .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.430

You asked me what amends you could make me . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.431

You shall always be my friend . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.432

I am Dear Sir Your affectionate humble servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.433

Decr 11 . 1766 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.434

{ED:187.3._Th._22_Jan._'67._Robert_Chambers_Oxford}

Dear Sir The affairs of the East_Indies are to come at last before the
parliament , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,193.436

and therefore we shall be glad of any information <P_1,194> about them .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.437

We are likewise desirous of the papers which have been laid before the
House , which can be no longer secret , and therefore , I suppose may be
easily granted us . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.438

We will pay for transcribing if that be any difficulty .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.439

What other papers shall be put into our hands , shall be used if they
are used at all , in defence of the company . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.440

Help us , dear Sir , if you can . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.441

I hope you are soon to come again , and go to the old business , for
which I shall expect great {TEXT:gt} abundance of materials and to sit
very close , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.442

and then there will be no danger , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.443

and needs to be no fear . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.444

I am Dear Sir , Your most humble servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.445

London . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.446

Jan. 22 . 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.447

{ED:188._Sa._14_Feb._'67._Mrs_Salusbury}

Madam I hope it will not be considered as one of the mere formalities of
life , when I declare that to have heard nothing of Mrs Thrale for so
long a time has given me pain . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.449

My uneasiness is sincere , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.450

and therefore deserves to be relieved . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.451

I do not write to Mrs Thrale lest it should give her trouble at an
inconvenient time . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.452

I beg , dear Madam , to know how she does , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.453

and shall honestly partake of your grief if she is ill , and of your
pleasure if she is well . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.454

I am , Madam , Your most obliged and most humble servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.455

February the 14th . 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.456

{ED:189._Tu._21_Apr._'67._William_Drummond}

Dear Sir That my letter should have had such effects as you mention ,
gives me great pleasure . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,194.458

I hope you do not flatter <P_1,195> me by imputing to me more good than
I have really done . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.459

Those whom my arguments have persuaded to change their opinion , show
such modesty and candour as deserve great praise .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.460

I hope the worthy translator goes diligently forward .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.461

He has a higher reward in prospect , than any honours which this world
can bestow . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.462

I wish I could be useful to him . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.463

The publication of my letter , if it could be of use in a cause to which
all other causes are nothing , I should not prohibit .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.464

But first , I would have you consider whether the publication will
really do any good ; next , whether by printing and distributing a very
small number , you may not attain all that you propose ; and , what
perhaps I should have said first , whether the letter , which I do not
now perfectly remember , be fit to be printed .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.465

If you can consult Dr. Robertson , to whom I am a little known , I
shall be satisfied about the propriety of whatever he shall direct .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.466

If he thinks that it should be printed , I entreat him to revise it ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.467

there may , perhaps , be some negligent lines written ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.468

and whatever is amiss , he knows very well how to rectify .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.469

Be pleased to let me know , from time to time , how this excellent
design goes forward . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.470

Make my compliments to young Mr. Drummond , whom I hope you will live
to see such as you desire him . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.471

I have not lately seen Mr. Elphinston , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.472

but believe him to be prosperous . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.473

I shall be glad to hear the same of you , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.474

for I am , Sir , Your affectionate humble servant , Sam: Johnson .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.475

Johnson's-court , Fleet-street JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.476

April 21 , 1767 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,195.477

<P_1,196>

{ED:189.1._Oxford._M._11_May_'67._Mrs._Thrale}

Madam I am very sorry to have been out of the way when I could have been
of any use . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.480

I could not help going , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.481

and can@ @not help staying two days longer , without defeating the
purpose for which I went . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.482

I will come as soon as I can . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.483

Of the continuance of my dear little Girl's bathing I can determine
nothing , having no principles upon which I can reason .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.484

Mr Sutton's art is wholly in his own custody , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.485

but in observing his directions you have all the security that his
success and his interest can give , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.486

and I think you must trust him . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.487

I sincerely wish that the event may be happy . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.488

I am , Madam , Your most humble Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.489

Oxford . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.490

May . 11 . 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.491

{ED:189.2._Lichfield._W._17_June_'67._Thomas_Lawrence}

Lichfield . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.493

June 17 . 1767 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.494

Dear Sir I must beg the favour of your advice for an old friend whom I
am extremely desirous to keep alive whether her disease does or does not
admit of cure . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.495

The Case , as the Apothecary could relate it I have enclosed .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.496

The Disease is , if I have not read your book without profit , a Dropsy
in the Flesh . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.497

She is extremely heavy , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.498

and between the soreness and cumbrousness of her legs , and the weight
of her body , is not able to cross the room . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.499

In this state of total inactivity she has remained eight months .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.500

She has had a slight fever for about a month , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.501

and was not before that , more thirsty than others ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,196.502

nor drinks much even with this new cause <P_1,197> of thirst .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.503

She has now and then a fit of coughing , but not often ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.504

and is sometimes short_breathed . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.505

Her Urine is thick and in a very small quantity .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.506

On one leg she has several small ulcers , and one large ulcer on the
other . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.507

The sores run little . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.508

The large ulcer is about the Shin , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.509

and that leg a little below the calf distils thin water through cracks
of the Skin . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.510

This likewise is in small quantities . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.511

She has sometimes a pain in the side , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.512

and sometimes fetches involuntary sighs . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.513

If You can pick out the case from these two imperfect accounts , I hope
some good may yet be done . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.514

I shall wait for your directions with hope that art is not yet vain .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.515

I have great solicitude about it . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.516

I am , Dear Sir , Your most affectionate and most humble Servant , Sam:
Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.517

{ED:189.3._Lichfield._Sa._20_June_'67._Thomas_Lawrence}

Dear Sir I have made what further enquiries I could about Mrs Chambers ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.519

but neither she nor her attendants are very good relators of a Case .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.520

I do not know very well what questions to ask , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.521

and hope you will in your letter make such enquiries as are necessary to
your information . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.522

She is not commonly costive , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.523

and when she is , a very gentle purgative relieves her .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.524

She has now sat totally inactive for more than eight months ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.525

yet her distemper has not gained very fast upon her .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.526

When by passing from her chair to her bed and helping to undress herself
she is more weary than common she has , like those that are well , a
gentle sweat . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.527

Her cough has been for some days troublesome JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.528

but she has no other symptom that seems immediately formidable .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.529

She drinks about four pints in the day and night .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.530

She is very weak and helpless , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.531

but has been in nearly the same state for a long time .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.532

I am Sir , Your most obedient and most humble servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.533

Lichfield JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.534

June 20 . 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,197.535

<P_1,198>

{ED:190._Lichfield._M._20_July_'67._Mrs._Thrale}

Madam Though I have been away so much longer than I purposed or expected
, I have found nothing that withdraws my affections from the friends
whom I left behind , or which makes me less desirous of reposing in that
place which your kindness and Mr Thrale's allows me to call my <font>
home . <$$font> JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.538

Miss Lucy is more kind and civil than I expected ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.539

and has raised my esteem by many excellencies very noble and resplendent
, though a little discoloured by hoary virginity .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.540

Every thing else recals to my remembrance years in which I purposed what
, I am afraid , I have not done , and promised myself pleasures which I
have not found . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.541

But complaint can be of no use , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.542

and why then should I depress your hopes by my lamentations ?
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.543

I suppose it is the condition of humanity to design what never will be
done , and to hope what never will be obtained .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.544

But among the vain hopes let me not number the hope which I have , of
being long Dear Madam Your most obedient and most humble Servant Sam:
Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.545

Lichfield JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.546

July 20 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,198.547

{ED:190.1._Lichfield._W._19_Aug._'67._George_Colman}

Sir The omission of answering your Letter proceeded neither from
inattention nor disrespect , but from fearfulness to <P_1,199> promise ,
and unwillingness to refuse . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.549

During this contest of my doubts and wishes which ill health made me
less able to compose , I intended every week to return to London , and
make a letter unnecessary by telling you my purpose .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.550

But ill health which has crusted me into inactivity , has by not
permitting me to do my business , hitherto precluded my return .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.551

I will not deny that I am glad to find my poetical civilities superseded
, by a voluntary performance , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.552

for I knew not how to set about that which the desire of preserving your
regard and of increasing your kindness would have made it very painful
to decline . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.553

I am Sir Your most humble servant Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.554

Litchfield . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.555

Augt. 19 . 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.556

My compliments to dear Mr. Davies . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.557

{ED:191._Lichfield._Sa._3_Oct._'67._Mrs._Thrale}

Lichfield , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.559

Oct. 3 , 1767 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.560

Dear Madam You are returned , I suppose , from Brighthelmstone ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.561

and this letter will be read at Streatham . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.562

- Sine me , liber , ibis in urbem . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.563

I have felt in this place something like the shackles of destiny .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.564

There has not been one day of pleasure , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.565

and yet I can@ @not get away . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.566

But when I do come , I perhaps shall not be easily persuaded to pass
again to the other side of Styx , to venture myself on the irremeable
road . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.567

I long to see you , and all those of whom the sight is included in
seeing you . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.568

Nil mihi rescribas ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.569

for though I have no right to say Ispa veni , I hope that ipse veniam .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.570

Be pleased to make my compliments . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.571

I am , Madam , Your most humble Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,199.572

<P_1,200>

{ED:191.1_Lichfield._$'67._Robert_Chambers}

Dear Sir I was much delighted both with the poetry and prose of your
affectionate letter . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.575

The company of the Ladies will add much to the pleasure of our
cohabitation at Oxford , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.576

but you must put up a Bed for me in another Chamber .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.577

I have passed this summer very uneasily . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.578

My old melancholy has laid hold upon me to a degree sometimes not easily
supportable . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.579

God has been pleased to grant me some remission for a few days past .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.580

... that visit to be long , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.581

but there are some who will expect to see me . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.582

I do not design that it shall be longer than may consist with our
necessary operations . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.583

Let me therefore know immediately how soon it will be necessary for us
to be together . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.584

If I can@ @not immediately go with you to Oxford , you must be content
to stay a little while in London . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.585

The great enquiry which you make I am not {TEXT:not_not} qualified to
satisfy at present , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.586

but we will endeavour to discuss it at leisure , and much ...
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.587

{ED:192._Lichfield._Sa._10_Oct._'67._Bennet_Langton_<paren>_London_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir That you have been all summer in London is one more reason for
which I regret my long stay in the country . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.589

I hope that you will {TEXT:missing_"will"} not leave the town before my
return . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,200.590

We <P_1,201> have here only the chance of vacancies in the passing
Carriages , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.591

and I have bespoken one that may if it happens , bring me to town on the
fourteenth of this month , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.592

but this is not certain . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.593

It will be a favour if you communicate this to Mrs. Williams .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.594

I long to see all my Friends . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.595

I am Dear Sir , Your most humble Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.596

Lichfield JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.597

Oct. 10 . 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.598

{ED:192.1._Lichfield._Sa._10_Oct._'67._Mrs._Thrale}

Madam I hope soon to return from exile , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.600

for I have this evening bespoke a place in the first vehicle that shall
have a vacancy . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.601

We have no regular Carriage from this place . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.602

I shall see Streatham with great delight , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.603

but am afraid that I must for a time visit Oxford ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.604

but of this I am not certain . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.605

Few things can please me more than that Mr Thrale and You desire the
return of , Madam , Your obliged Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.606

Lichfield . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.607

Oct. 10 . 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.608

{ED:193._Sa._24_Oct._'67._William_Drummond}

Sir I returned this week from the country , after an absence of near six
months , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.610

and found your letter , with many others , which I should have answered
sooner , if I had sooner seen them . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.611

Dr. Robertson's opinion was surely right . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.612

Men should not be told of the faults which they have mended .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.613

I am glad the old language is taught , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.614

and honour the translator as a man whom God has distinguished by the
high office of propagating his word . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.615

I must take the liberty of engaging you in an office of charity .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,201.616

Mrs. Heely , the wife of Mr. Heely , who had lately <P_1,202> some
office in your theatre , is my near relation , and now in great distress
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.617

They wrote me word of their situation some time ago , to which I
returned them an answer which raised hopes of more than it is proper for
me to give them . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.618

Their representation of their affairs I have discovered to be such as
can@ @not be trusted ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.619

and at this distance , though their case requires haste , I know not how
to act . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.620

She , or her daughters , may be heard of at Canongate Head .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.621

I must beg , Sir , that you will enquire after them , and let me know
what is to be done . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.622

I am willing to go to ten pounds , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.623

and will transmit you such a sum , if upon examination you find it
likely to be of use . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.624

If they are in immediate want , advance them what you think proper .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.625

What I could do , I would do for the women , having no great reason to
pay much regard to Heely himself . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.626

I believe you may receive some intelligence from Mrs. Baker , of the
theatre , whose letter I received at the same time with yours ; and to
whom , if you see her , you will make my excuse for the seeming neglect
of answering her . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.627

Whatever you advance within ten pounds shall be immediately returned to
you , or paid as you shall order . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.628

I trust wholly to your judgement . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.629

I am , Sir , &c. Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.630

London , Johnson's-court , Fleet-street , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.631

Oct. 24 , 1767 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.632

{ED:193.1._Tu.3_Nov._'67._Edmund_Hector_<paren>_Birmingham_<$$paren>}

Dear Sir Though on Oct. 17 I passed through Birmingham yet having not
left Lichfield early , and thinking it fit to reach Oxford that night ,
I stopped only to change the Chaise , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.634

and could not without more delay call upon you to thank you for the
Teaboard , which is commended by those that have considered such things
more than myself , and which I shall always value as the present of an
old Friend whom I love with great affection . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,202.635

I wished much that we had been permitted to pass a short <P_1,203> time
together , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.636

a few serious and a few jocund hours would have brought back a little of
our former lives . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.637

Surely we shall meet some time again . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.638

Harry Jackson visited me several times . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.639

He seems to be in great indigence . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.640

I should think that in a place like Birmingham rich and busy , some
station might be found for him in which he might be out of want .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.641

Be pleased to make my most respectful compliments to Mrs. Hector ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.642

and tell her that I freely forgive you your absence , because you were
detained by attendance upon her , and hope that the necessity of such
attendance is now removed by her recovery . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.643

I am , Dear Sir , your most affectionate humble Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.644

Nov. 3 . 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.645

Johnson's Court , Fleet Street JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.646

{ED:194._Tu._17_Nov._'67._Elizabeth_Aston_<paren>_Lichfield_<$$paren>}

Madam If you impute it to disrespect or inattention that I took no leave
when I left Lichfield , you will do me great injustice .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.648

I know you too well not to value your friendship .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.649

When I came to Oxford I enquired after the product of our Walnut-tree ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.650

but it had like others borne {TEXT:born} this year but very few nuts ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.651

and for those few I came too late . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.652

The tree , as I told you , Madam , we can@ @not find to be more than
thirty years old , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.653

and upon measuring it , I found it , at about one foot from the ground
seven feet in circumference , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.654

and at the height of about seven feet the circumference is five feet and
an half . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.655

It would have been , I believe , still bigger , but that it has been
lopped . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.656

The nuts are small , such as they call single nuts ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.657

whether this nut is of quicker growth than better , I have not yet
enquired . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.658

Such as they are , I hope to send them next year .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.659

You know , dear Madam , the liberty that I took of hinting that I did
not think your present mode of life very pregnant with happiness .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.660

Reflection has not changed my opinion . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.661

Solitude excludes pleasure , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,203.662

and does not always secure <P_1,204> peace . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.663

Some communication of sentiments is commonly necessary , to give vent to
the imagination , and discharge the mind of its own flatulencies .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.664

Some Lady surely might be found in whose conversation you might delight
, and in whose fidelity you might repose . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.665

<font> The World <$$font> , says Locke , <font> has people of all sorts
. <$$font> JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.666

You will forgive me this obtrusion of opinion .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.667

I am sure , I wish you well . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.668

Poor Kitty has done what we have all to do , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.669

and Lucy has the world to begin anew . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.670

I hope she will find some way to more content than I left her possessing
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.671

Be pleased to make my complements to Mrs. Hinkley , and Miss Turton .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.672

I am , Madam , Your most obliged and most humble servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.673

Nov. 17 . 1767 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.674

{ED:194.1_Oxford._M._29_Feb._'68._Mrs._Thrale}

Madam Though I do not perceive that there is any need of help , I shall
yet write another advertisement , lest you might suspect that my
complaisance had more of idleness than sincerity .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.676

I am , Madam , Your most obliged and most humble Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.677

New Inn Hall . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.678

Febr. 29 . 1768 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,204.679

{COM:advertisement_omitted}

<P_1,205>

{ED:195._Oxford._Th._3_Mar._'68._Mrs._Thrale}

Dear Madam I thought Mr Wesley had been secured ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.683

since what I have done is ineffectual , I doubt the power of my
solicitation , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.684

but to leave nothing undone , I have written to him .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.685

Mr. Pennick I have seen , but with so little approach to intimacy that
I could not have recollected his name , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.686

yet to him I have inclosed a letter which after this information you may
use as you think is best . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.687

I suppose it can do no harm . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.688

Do You think there is any danger that you are thus anxious for a single
vote ? JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.689

Pray let me know as often as You can find a little time ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.690

for I love to see a Letter . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.691

Be pleased to make my Compliments to Mr. Thrale , and Mrs Salusbury ,
and Miss Hetty , and every Body . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.692

How does the poor little Maid ? JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.693

I am , Madam , Your most obliged and most humble Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.694

March 3 . 1768 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.695

{ED:196._Oxford._Th._3_Mar._'68._Richard_Pennick}

Sir I am flattered by others with an honour with which I dare not
presume to flatter myself , that of having gained so much of your
kindness or regard , as that my recommendation of a Candidate for
Southwark , may have some influence in determining your vote at the
approaching election . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,205.697

As a Man is willing to believe well of himself I now indulge my Vanity
by soliciting your Vote and Interest for Mr <P_1,206> Thrale , whose
encomium I shall make very compendiously by telling you , that you would
most certainly vote for him if you knew him . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.698

I ought to have waited on you with this request , even though my right
to make it , had been greater . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.699

But as the Election approaches , and I know not how long I shall be
detained here , I hope you will not impute this unceremonious treatment
, to any want of respect in Sir Your most obedient and most humble
Servant Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.700

New Inn Hall , Oxford . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.701

March 3 . 1768 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.702

{ED:197._Oxford._M._14_Mar._'68._Mrs._Thrale}

March 14 , 1768 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.704

Madam My last letter came a day after its time , by being carried too
late to the post . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.705

This I mention , that you may not suspect me of negligence .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.706

I wrote at the same time to Mr. W. in more forcible terms than perhaps
he thinks I had a right to : JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.707

he has not answered me . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.708

He and his wife are on such terms , that I know not whether his
inclination can be inferred from hers {TEXT:her's} .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.709

If I can be of any use , I will come directly to London ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.710

but if Mr. Thrale thinks himself certain , I have no doubt .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.711

That they all express the same certainty , has very little effect on
those who know how many men are confident without certainty , and
positive without confidence . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.712

We have not any reason to suspect Mr. Thrale of deceiving us or himself
. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.713

I hope all our friends at Streatham are well ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.714

and am glad to hope that the poor maid will recover .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.715

When the mind is drawn toward a dying bed , how small a thing is an
election ? JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.716

But on death we can@ @not always be thinking , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.717

and , I suppose , we need not . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.718

The thought is very dreadful ! JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.719

This little Dog does nothing , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.720

but I hope he will mend ; JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.721

he is now reading Jack the Giant Killer . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.722

Perhaps so noble a narrative may rouse in him the soul of enterprise .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.723

I am , &c. JOHNSON-176X-2,1,206.724

<P_1,207>

{ED:198._Oxford._Th._17_Mar._'68._<Thomas>_Apperley}

Sir , I do not think that you can live anywhere without gaining
influence , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.727

and therefore believing that you can@ @not be without it in Oriel
College , I take the liberty of entreating you to employ it at the
approaching election of a Fellow , in favour of Mr. Crofts , a
gentleman of great merit both literary and social , and one on whom some
such benefaction is necessary in the prosecution of his studies .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.728

This address to you I make merely from zeal to serve him , without any
solicitation , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.729

and as he is a man whom I have a desire to forward , you will , by doing
what you can for him , and doing it speedily , bestow a very great
favour upon , Sir , Your most obedient and most humble servant , Sam:
Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.730

Oxford . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.731

March 17 . 1768 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.732

{ED:199._Oxford._F._18_Mar._'68._Mrs._Thrale}

Madam No part of Mr Thrale's troubles would have been troublesome to me
, if any endeavours of mine could have made them less .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.734

But I know not that I could have done more for him , than in your
approaching danger I can do for you . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.735

I wish you both well , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.736

and have little doubt of seeing you both emerge from your difficulties .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.737

When the Election is decided I entreat to be immediately informed ;
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.738

and when you retreat to Streatham if I shall not have returned to town ,
I hope that Mrs Salusbury will favour me now and then with an account of
you when you can less conveniently give it of yourself .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.739

To be able to do nothing in the exigence of a friend is an uneasy state
, JOHNSON-176X-2,1,207.740

but in <P_1,208> the most pressing exigencies it is the natural state of
Humanity , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.741

and in all has been commmonly that of Dear Madam Your most obedient and
most humble Servant Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.742

March 18 . 1768 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.743

{ED:200._Oxford._W._23_Mar._68._James_Boswell_<paren>_London,_redirected_from_Scotland_<$$paren>}

My dear Boswell , I have omitted a long time to write to you , without
knowing very well why . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.745

I could now tell why I should not write , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.746

for who would write to men who publish the letters of their friends
without their leave ? JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.747

Yet I write to you in spite of my caution , to tell you that I shall be
glad to see you , and that I wish you would empty your head of Corsica ,
which I think has filled it rather too long . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.748

But , at all events , I shall be glad , very glad , to see you .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.749

I am , Sir , Yours affectionately Sam: Johnson JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.750

Oxford , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.751

March 23 , 1768 . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.752

{ED:201._Oxford._Th._24_Mar._68._Mrs._Thrale._<paren>_Southwark_<$$paren>}

Dear Madam You serve me very sorrily . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.754

You may write every day to this place , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.755

and yet I do not know what is the event of the Southwark Election ,
though I am sure , you ought to believe that I am very far from
indifference {COM:sic} about it . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.756

Do {TEXT:Do;} Let me know as soon as you can . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.757

Our Election was yesterday . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.758

Every possible influence of hope and fear was , I believe , enforced on
this occasion , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,208.759

the <P_1,209> slaves of power , and the solicitors of favour were driven
hither from the remotest corners of the Kingdom ,
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.760

but Judex honestum praetulit utili . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.761

The Virtue of Oxford has once more prevailed . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.762

The death of Sir Walter Bagot a litle before the Election left them no
great time to deliberate , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.763

and they therefore joined to Sir Roger Newdigate their old
Representative , an Oxfordshire Gentleman of no name , no great interest
, nor perhaps any other merit , than that of being on the right side .
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.764

Yet when the {TEXT:missing_"the"} poll was numbered , it produced for
Sir R. Newdigate 352 Mr Page 296 Mr Jenkinson 198 Dr Hay 62
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.765

Of this I am sure you must be glad , JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.766

for without enquiring into the opinions or conduct of any party , it
must be for ever pleasing to see men adhering to their principles
against their interest , especially when you consider that these Voters
are poor , and never can be much less poor but by the favour of those
whom they are now opposing . JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.767

I am , Madam , Your most obliged and most humble Servant Sam: Johnson
JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.768

Oxford JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.769

March 24 . 1768 JOHNSON-176X-2,1,209.770

