<BEGIN_keimer-1718-2>

<P_3>

Know , Reader , I was born of sober and honest Parents of repute , both
still alive , and dwelling in the Parish of <font> Thomas <$$font> 's
<font> Southwark <$$font> , having {TEXT:haivng} Inhabited there almost
40 Years . KEIMER-1718-2,3.3

My Mother was a Woman who made a strict Profession of Religion , and
attended upon the Preaching of <font> Nathaniel Vincent <$$font> , a Man
, formerly not a little known amongst those who were call'd <font>
Presbyterians . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,3.4

She having but one Child besides me , <paren> but what dy'd in their
Infancy <$$paren> <font> viz. <$$font> a Daughter some Years younger
than my_self , took a particular Care in our Edcuation , and according
to the best of her Knowledge , to instruct us in the Ways of God ,
having a strict Watch over us , in our younger Years , that we might not
offend God in the Way commonly practis'd by many other Children , <font>
viz. the taking God's Holy Name in vain , - Telling a Lie , - Using any
wicked Words , - Snatching or catching the least Thing from any other
Children <$$font> ; instilling to the utmost of her Power , such
Principles of exact Justice , that have been inseparable from , and most
closely connected to the several innate Faculties of my Soul ever since
. KEIMER-1718-2,3.5

Nor was she less diligent in her Care for our Reading the Scriptures ,
sometimes encouraging me with some little pecuniary Reward ; so that by
the help of a good Memory , which I then had , I could with Ease turn to
the Chapter , if not Verse , of almost any Passage of Scripture when
mentioned . KEIMER-1718-2,3.6

All these , I acknowledge were very great Mercies , and were a Means by
which {TEXT:missing_"which"} the secret Influence of the Spirit of God ,
<paren> as I now believe it to be , tho' then I was ignorant what to
attribute it to , whether to natural Conscience , or the Terrors of the
<font> Law <$$font> those Terms being the <font> Shibboleth <$$font> of
the Teachers I generally attended upon for instruction by their
Preaching <$$paren> began to raise in me a very awful Sense of a Divine
Being . KEIMER-1718-2,3.7

One Passage I shall here relate , that being very young , on one
First-Day Evening , <paren> commonly call'd Sabbath-Day or Sunday
<$$paren> after Supper complaining that I had eat too much for Supper ,
my Mother bid me turn to the Story of the rich Glutton , as related by
the Evangelist <font> Luke <$$font> , and making Application of it to my
Case , it so much affected me that I wept with Bitterness of Spirit .
KEIMER-1718-2,3.8

As I grew up , my Impressions of Divine Things , at several Times , grew
somewhat stronger , KEIMER-1718-2,3.9

and I had fervent Desires of being a Christian , and going to Heaven
when I dy'd <paren> as I then us'd to term it , <$$paren>
KEIMER-1718-2,3.10

and accordingly did delight to attend upon the most awakening Preachers
of the Presbyterian Perswasion , <P_4> <font> Samuel Pomfret , John
Reynolds , <$$font> &c. under whose Preaching I was at Times somewhat
affected . KEIMER-1718-2,4.11

And here I must take notice , that altho' I receiv'd the Mercies above
mentioned by the Means of a religious Education , yet was I not without
being tinctur'd with the Leaven of Prejudice against those who differ'd
from my Opinion , <paren> who as yet knew but very little <$$paren> such
as those of the <font> Baptist Perswasion <$$font> , and especially
against the <font> Quakers <$$font> ; believing the former did exclude
their Children from the Covenant , and that the latter were no
Christians , because of the Denial of the two great Ordinances , <font>
viz. Water-Baptism <$$font> and receiving the <font> Bread <$$font> and
<font> Wine <$$font> , and for the omission of which , I concluded they
would all to a Man , be unavoidably everlastingly damn'd .
KEIMER-1718-2,4.12

I remember my Parents had a Neighbour , who made Profession of the
Religion of the People call'd <font> Quakers <$$font> , a Woman of very
circumspect Behaviour , and who us'd to be at my Father's sometimes :
KEIMER-1718-2,4.13

Observing her innocent Deportment , I was secretly troubled , that a
Woman of such excellent Qualifications as I saw in her , should
everlastingly perish for want of submitting to the Ordinances before-@
@mention'd . KEIMER-1718-2,4.14

Such was my prodigious Ignorance ! KEIMER-1718-2,4.15

It pleas'd the Divine Disposer of all Things , I became an Apprentice to
<font> Robert Tookey <$$font> Printer , in <font> Christopher <$$font>
's Court , in <font> Thread-needle-street <$$font> , a very sober
religious Man , of the <font> Baptist <$$font> Perswasion , <paren> and
not a Dishonour to it , <$$paren> a Man endued with many excellent
Vertues , and well belov'd by all that know him . KEIMER-1718-2,4.16

Here it was I had an Opportunity of being better Inform'd in my several
Notions of religious Matters ; KEIMER-1718-2,4.17

and took particular Delight in searching and seeking out the Way of
Salvation and Rest for my Soul , which at Times was in some measure
<font> weary and heavy laden . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,4.18

If perchance I had heard of any Person that had made a good and
comfortable End , having led a holy Life , I was very much affected
therewith , KEIMER-1718-2,4.19

and could scarce forbear weeping , wishing my_self in their Stead .
KEIMER-1718-2,4.20

I likewise retain'd such a true sincere Desire of Justice and Honesty to
the Persons of all Mankind , KEIMER-1718-2,4.21

and was so tender on that Point , that remembring I had taken a
Half-penny-worth of Ginger-bread , without paying for it , when a
School-boy , I could not be at peace in my Mind , till I went and paid
for it , which I did the first Opportunity . KEIMER-1718-2,4.22

<P_5>

Another Time being at Play , with my Fellow-Apprentice , for Money , I
chanc'd to win about 10 <font> d. <$$font> <paren> as nigh as I can
remember <$$paren> in ready Money , and about Half-@ @a-@ @Crown upon
Trust , for which he gave me Notes of his Hand , for the Payment of ,
according to Agreement . KEIMER-1718-2,5.24

However being afterwards somewhat affected on a religious Account , I
thought my_self oblig'd to give him up his Notes again before they
became due , as believing the Money was not lawfully got , because by
the way of Gaming . KEIMER-1718-2,5.25

Thus the blessed Spirit of God or Light of Christ was to me a Reprover ,
tho' I knew it not , KEIMER-1718-2,5.26

and had I kept strictly and closely to its Holy Requirings , I had been
safe and happy . KEIMER-1718-2,5.27

But alas ! KEIMER-1718-2,5.28

Not knowing the true Way of Deliverance from my natural Corruptions ,
which now began to exert themselves on me , and were too prevalent for
me to withstand and overcome by my own Strength , I became a more easy
Prey to Satan . KEIMER-1718-2,5.29

I had read the Scriptures over and over , KEIMER-1718-2,5.30

and they were no more than a dead Letter to me , with respect to the
giving me any true Light how to overcome my powerful inbred Corruptions
. KEIMER-1718-2,5.31

I had likewise heard from the Pulpit of <font> coming to God thro'
Christ , and of being cleans'd by the Blood of Christ from all Sin
<$$font> ; and many other like Things , which I could by no means
understand , being confounded the more I sought after a true Information
. KEIMER-1718-2,5.32

Thus was I like a diseas'd Person , who falling into the Hands of an
unskilful Physitian , instead of receiving a Cure , his Disease is
thereby made more desperate . KEIMER-1718-2,5.33

It was about the Third or Fourth Year of my Apprenticeship , I happen'd
to light on some Books writ <font> Pro <$$font> and <font> Con <$$font>
by several of the Presbyterian and Independent Perswasion upon the
Subject of <font> Justification by Faith <$$font> , occasion'd by a
Sermon preach'd by <font> Daniel Williams <$$font> , at <font>
Pinners-Hall <$$font> , in which Controversy the Disputants made such
wretched Work of it as tended more to puzzle and confound a serious
Enquirer , than to give him any true Light into Gospel-Mysteries .
KEIMER-1718-2,5.34

And now , Reader , 't@ @was about this Time the <font> French <$$font>
and <font> English Prophets <$$font> began to make a Noise as before
mentioned . KEIMER-1718-2,5.35

And I being inform'd that a Meeting was intended to be kept in <font>
Southwark <$$font> , by the Invitation of several sober well-meaning
People on that side the Water , who had not yet made Trial of the Spirit
operating upon them , got leave of my Master , for half a Day , to go
abroad , not acquainting him with my <P_6> intended Business , which if
he had known , he would have been far from suffering me to go one Step
on such an Occasion . KEIMER-1718-2,6.36

When I came into <font> Southwark <$$font> , I was with some others
conducted to the Meeting of the said <font> Prophets , <$$font> which
was kept at the Meeting-House formerly us'd by the <font> Baptists
<$$font> , near <font> Mary Overies-Dock . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,6.37

As soon as I enter'd the Room , which was large and pretty full of
People , the first Objects which drew my Observation , were a Woman well
drest , on her Knees , and a Man standing before her , with his Hands
upon her Head , uttering several Sentences , mixt with strange Hiccups ,
and Shakings of his Head forwards and backwards , his Body as it seem'd
to me , jumping while he was speaking . KEIMER-1718-2,6.38

Between every two or three Words speaking , he cry'd , Hoh , Hoh , Hoh ,
Hoh , O-h , O-h , O-h , as if he were taking his last Gasp .
KEIMER-1718-2,6.39

This Man's Name was <font> John Lacy <$$font> , Esq; a Person known by
many to be a Man of Sobriety and Substance , and who belong'd to a
Congregation of Presbyterians , to whom <font> Edmond Calamy <$$font> a
noted Man , was Preacher . KEIMER-1718-2,6.40

This Laying on of Hands , and speaking to the Person on her Knees , was
call'd as I afterwards came to understand , <font> the Gift of Blessing
. <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,6.41

The next Scene that offer'd , was a <font> Frenchman <$$font> violently
agitated and shaken , but in another Sort of a Manner than the former .
KEIMER-1718-2,6.42

This Person , whose Name was <font> John Cavalier <$$font> , <paren> one
of those who arriv'd from France <$$paren> on a sudden , being under
Agitation , was flung along upon the Ground , with a sort of violent
Force , shewing several strange Postures , such as Boys in their Play
commonly {TEXT:commmonly} call <font> Bending the Sea-Crab <$$font> ,
walking on his Hands , with his Legs erect , <font> &c. <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,6.43

There were several Men <font> English <$$font> and <font> French
<$$font> , who sat at a Table , taking down in writing what was spoken
and afterwards read it to the Assembly present . KEIMER-1718-2,6.44

There was , I think a Third that spoke , whose Name was <font> Elias
Marion <$$font> , another of those that came from <font> France .
<$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,6.45

When all was over , the Spectators severally made their Remarks on what
had happen'd ; KEIMER-1718-2,6.46

some were of Opinion it might possibly be of God , KEIMER-1718-2,6.47

some ascrib'd it to Madness , some to a Diabolical Operation , some to
one Thing , and some to another . KEIMER-1718-2,6.48

For my own Part , I could see little of God or Religion in this strange
Appearance , KEIMER-1718-2,6.49

and did not know what to make of it . KEIMER-1718-2,6.50

However , I plainly saw the Infection had diffused it_self like the
Plague , insensibly at first , upon several who came to enquire into it
, or to be Spectators . KEIMER-1718-2,6.51

<P_7>

Amongst this Number were Two Neighbours , one of whose Names was <font>
William Draycott <$$font> , a Brazier in <font> Tooley-street <$$font> ,
a Man accounted of a sober Life and Conversation , and one that had been
join'd for several Years in Church-Membership , with the particular
<font> Baptists <$$font> ; KEIMER-1718-2,7.53

the other was <font> Anna Finkley <$$font> a Widow in <font>
Joyners-street <$$font> , who was likewise of good Repute , who invited
the <font> Prophets <$$font> home to her House , to refresh themselves ,
<font> &c. <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,7.54

After their so doing , one of the Prophets being seiz'd with the Spirit
, call'd for the Mistress or Head of the House , who being come to him ,
he bless'd her and her House , with many others , who kneel'd , and had
the Prophets Hands laid upon their Heads . KEIMER-1718-2,7.55

Here it was , that my Sister , before-@ @mentioned , began to be greatly
affected , having , as I think been bless'd <paren> as they call'd it
<$$paren> but of that I will not be certain , and was taken with a
violent Fit of weeping , as was another young Woman , and a very little
Girl . KEIMER-1718-2,7.56

This was the first Day of their {TEXT:theirs} and my seeing the Prophets
, KEIMER-1718-2,7.57

and I saw nothing more remarkable that Time , which was I think about
the beginning of the Sixth Month , call'd <font> August <$$font> , in
the Year 1707 . KEIMER-1718-2,7.58

The next Time I went to my Father's , which was about a Week after , to
my great Surprize , my Sister had commenc'd <font> Prophetess <$$font> ,
having at Times the Agitations upon her very violent and surprising .
KEIMER-1718-2,7.59

While I was there , the Spirit came upon her , KEIMER-1718-2,7.60

and she spoke somewhat ; KEIMER-1718-2,7.61

but what I ca@ @n't remember . KEIMER-1718-2,7.62

By this Time my Mother <paren> who tho' she was a Woman that made a
strict Profession , knew little of the Essence or Spiritual Part of
Religion <$$paren> began to have a favourable Opinion of this Matter ;
KEIMER-1718-2,7.63

and being perswaded by some to be bless'd , after some Reluctance , at
last she submitted , KEIMER-1718-2,7.64

had several fine Things <paren> pleasing to corrupt Nature <$$paren>
said to her ; KEIMER-1718-2,7.65

and in some little Time after became a Captive of Satan , by firmly
believing , and giving her_self up to him , in this his Work .
KEIMER-1718-2,7.66

Here was now Mother and Daughter caught , KEIMER-1718-2,7.67

there remain'd only Father and son . KEIMER-1718-2,7.68

For {TEXT:For,} my Part , it was a long while before I could in the
least be reconcil'd to it . KEIMER-1718-2,7.69

Nevertheless , in the mean Time , I had very awakening Thoughts of my
Soul , KEIMER-1718-2,7.70

and would many Times in great Distress of Mind weep by my_self , wishing
I had never been born ; KEIMER-1718-2,7.71

and being willing to be inform'd rightly in those Things which concern'd
my eternal Welfare , I read all the Books I could get that treated on
Religious Subjects , KEIMER-1718-2,7.72

and amongst <P_8> the rest , I had in my Search , got some destructive
Books of those False Teachers , who hold , That God has elected such a
particular Number , and reprobated all the rest , who must avoidably
perish . KEIMER-1718-2,8.73

This Doctrine fill'd my poor distracted Soul with fresh Fears .
KEIMER-1718-2,8.74

What to do I could not tell . KEIMER-1718-2,8.75

Thus was I harried up and down , KEIMER-1718-2,8.76

could get no Peace , being wholly ignorant my Helper was so nigh me , as
afterwards I found . KEIMER-1718-2,8.77

However , by my reading the several Controversies , I became thoroughly
convinc'd that <font> Infant-Sprinkling <$$font> was nothing more than
an human Invention , altogether unknown to the primitive Christians in
the first and second Centuries , and that what was perfom'd on me by the
Consent of my Parents , was null and void , and stood me in no manner of
Stead ; That I must first be a Believer in Christ , and then be baptiz'd
in the Name of the Father , <font> &c. <$$font> for the Remission of
Sins . KEIMER-1718-2,8.78

I likewise came to see several other Corruptions in Discipline and
Worship among the various Professors of Christianity , who generally
take Things upon Trust , in what concerns their Eternal Salvation ,
<paren> tho' by the way they are much wiser in their Temporal Affairs
<$$paren> and if they have been but educated in a sort of a religious
Form , make it their Study to defend by Arguments what they have been
educated in , right or wrong . KEIMER-1718-2,8.79

This was not my Case now , KEIMER-1718-2,8.80

for I was willing to embrace Truth , tho' in Rags , and never so much
despis'd and ridicul'd by the Wise and Learned of this World ;
KEIMER-1718-2,8.81

and observing the innocent and blameless Conversation of my Master
before-@ @mention'd , and likewise of a Sister of his , of the same
Profession , I thought with my_self , the <font> Baptist <$$font> Way of
Worship the most spiritual Way , and the most exact according to the
Scriptures ; KEIMER-1718-2,8.82

and therefore imagin'd , if I could but repent heartily of , and forsake
my Sins , and be baptiz'd , I should be happy . KEIMER-1718-2,8.83

It was much about this Time , that my Mother and Sister were caught in
the Snare as before-@ @mention'd ; KEIMER-1718-2,8.84

and my Mother being a zealous Woman for what she profess'd , tho'
without true Knowledge was earnest with me to go and be bless'd - which
I for several times , refus'd , fearing it was the Devil that possessed
these Prophets , and being unwilling to be caught in his Snare .
KEIMER-1718-2,8.85

It was some Months I continu'd thus aloof off from being bless'd , tho'
at Times I went to several of their Meetings , <P_9> having a Desire to
be inform'd thoroughly in this Matter . KEIMER-1718-2,9.86

At one of their Meetings , which was kept at the Rummer near <font>
Honey-Lane-Market <$$font> , where I was present , there was one <font>
Thomas Dutton <$$font> , a Lawyer , seiz'd , being a Man well dress'd ,
in a long Tie-Wig , and I think , having a Sword by his Side .
KEIMER-1718-2,9.87

This Man under Agitations , much like the rest whom I had seen , utter'd
a very rational Discourse , or Warning , in which I well remember was
somewhat to this Effect , <font> You call this a Delusion ; but can it
be a Delusion to bid you repent ? Will the Devil preach Repentance ?
<$$font> with many other things to the same Purpose .
KEIMER-1718-2,9.88

After he had done , there was a young Woman spoke , whose Name I can@
@not tell . KEIMER-1718-2,9.89

This Spirit of Prophecy had by this Time arose to a great Height
{TEXT:Heighth} , KEIMER-1718-2,9.90

and many were the Followers of it . KEIMER-1718-2,9.91

Likewise there were several sober Persons who became Prophets and
Prophetesses , particularly one <font> John Potter <$$font> , a <font>
Baptist <$$font> , and a Member of a large Congregation to which -
<font> Foxwel <$$font> is Pastor , at <font> Horslydown <$$font> ,
<font> Southwark <$$font> , <font> John Glover <$$font> , a Baptist
Preacher , <font> Mary Aspinal <$$font> , <font> Mary Turner <$$font> ,
<font> Sarah Draycott <$$font> with many more whom I shall not here
mention . KEIMER-1718-2,9.92

Observing there were many sober People , some of whom I knew , who
profess'd Faith in this Appearance , and who loudly cry'd it up as the
Work of God ; that it was the beginning of the fulfilling of the many
glorious Promises mention'd in Scripture , <font> viz. the Calling of
the Jews , the Lion's lying down with the Lamb , <$$font> &c. I began
to have a favourable Opinion of it ; KEIMER-1718-2,9.93

and being perswaded by my Mother to receive a Blessing , accordingly
with some Reluctance , I consented , KEIMER-1718-2,9.94

and at the next Meeting I was at , in a Neighbour's House , after almost
all present had been bless'd , I went towards the Prophet , whose Name
was <font> Elias Marion <$$font> , KEIMER-1718-2,9.95

and falling on my Knees before him , he laid his Hands on my Head ,
KEIMER-1718-2,9.96

and spoke several Sentences in <font> French <$$font> after which , he
took his Hands off , and I arose from off my Knees . KEIMER-1718-2,9.97

The Meeting soon after broke up , KEIMER-1718-2,9.98

and as 't@ @was usual , those who took down in Writing what was spoke ,
if it was in <font> French <$$font> , translated it , KEIMER-1718-2,9.99

and read it in <font> English <$$font> to those present ,
KEIMER-1718-2,9.100

and if desir'd , would write out Copies of what was spoken , and
particularly Blessings , and give 'em the Persons so desiring .
KEIMER-1718-2,9.101

My Blessing came at last to be read over , at which I <P_10> was
somewhat affected , or rather elevated , which being given me in Writing
a Day or Two after , was exactly as follows : KEIMER-1718-2,10.102

My Child , till now , thou hast been rebellious to my Will .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.103

I come , I tell thee , to appropriate thy Heart to me .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.104

I come to make thee a New Creature . KEIMER-1718-2,10.105

I come to give thee , the Engagement promised to my Children .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.106

Thou hast Habitation in my House : KEIMER-1718-2,10.107

Thou may'st ask me without Fear ; KEIMER-1718-2,10.108

but let thy Heart humble it_self before me . KEIMER-1718-2,10.109

Let it seek my Word , whilst I do present it to thee .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.110

The Blessing of God the <font> Father <$$font> , the <font> Son <$$font>
, and the <font> Holy Ghost <$$font> , rest upon thee ,
KEIMER-1718-2,10.111

and shall never depart from thee . KEIMER-1718-2,10.112

Go in peace . KEIMER-1718-2,10.113

Pray to me without ceasing , KEIMER-1718-2,10.114

and draw back entirely from the World , and its Commerce .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.115

Resign thy_self to follow me . KEIMER-1718-2,10.116

I call thee . KEIMER-1718-2,10.117

This Blessing , when I came to read it over , had a strange and uncommon
Effect on my Mind . KEIMER-1718-2,10.118

I read it over and over , being much affected therewith .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.119

I was willing , with a sort of Hope on one hand , to believe that it was
God spoke to me ; KEIMER-1718-2,10.120

on the other Hand , I was very much afraid , it was the alluring Voice
of the Devil , to draw me in to the Destruction of my immortal Soul .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.121

Sometimes my Mind was raised to a high Pitch of Elevation ,
KEIMER-1718-2,10.122

and sometimes I was cast down in great Perplexity .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.123

What to do I could not tell . KEIMER-1718-2,10.124

I thought it could not be of God , it flatter'd me so much .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.125

And then I consider'd with my_self , God was a gracious Being , infinite
in Mercy , and boundless in his Love towards the Children of Men .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.126

At last after a great deal of Exercise of Mind , at different Times
concerning this Affair , I came to be fully perswaded ,
KEIMER-1718-2,10.127

and did sincerely believe it was of God , and that He was come in a
wonderful Manner , to do a mighty Work on the Earth .
KEIMER-1718-2,10.128

Nor had I , in the least , any other View or Prospect in my receiving or
believing this Voice to be of God , than the good of my precious Soul ,
about which , I had been earnestly concern'd <P_11> at Times , almost
ever since I could speak . KEIMER-1718-2,11.129

The All-knowing God , before whom I must shortly appear , at the great
Tribunal knows I utter Truth . KEIMER-1718-2,11.130

It was not long after , to the best of my Remembrance , that a Messenger
came out of <font> Southwark <$$font> , to my Master's {TEXT:Masters} ,
to speak with me one Seventh-Day-Night . KEIMER-1718-2,11.131

The Message he came upon was to acquaint me , that my Mother desired my
Master to give me leave to go over ; for that the Spirit had told my
Sister , thro' her own Mouth , that that very Night at Twelve of Clock
she was to die . KEIMER-1718-2,11.132

The News very much startled me , KEIMER-1718-2,11.133

and made me sorrowful , to think of parting with my Sister , whom I
lov'd very well . KEIMER-1718-2,11.134

And getting Leave of my Master , I went over , in full Purpose , to
condole , and take my {TEXT:word_unclear} Farewell of my dying Sister .
KEIMER-1718-2,11.135

When I came to my Father's , I found her in Bed , my Mother and several
Neighbours who were Believers , being in the same Room .
KEIMER-1718-2,11.136

It was about Ten of the Clock I got there , KEIMER-1718-2,11.137

and my Mother having sent for a Quart of Wine before , we each of us
drank to , and afterwards saluted my Sister , fully expecting at the
Hour appointed she would certainly die . KEIMER-1718-2,11.138

Twelve of the Clock being nigh come , I observ'd , one or two in the
room compos'd themselves to private Prayer , on this Occasion .
KEIMER-1718-2,11.139

For my own part I waited with Grief of heart {TEXT:word_unclear} to see
my Sister depart , between Hope , and Fear , when on {TEXT:word_unclear}
a sudden , she was violently seiz'd , and agitated to such a Degree , as
was amazing , which continuing for some Time , <paren> I think about a
Quarter of an Hour , <$$paren> the Spirit went off her ,
KEIMER-1718-2,11.140

and we were inform'd she was not to die this Time , to my very great Joy
, as well as to theirs who were present , who wept upon this Occasion .
KEIMER-1718-2,11.141

There were many Conjectures upon this Failure of Prediction .
KEIMER-1718-2,11.142

One would have it to mean , that she was to die to Sin , another that it
was for the Trial of our Faith , KEIMER-1718-2,11.143

and a Third gave another Reason different from both .
KEIMER-1718-2,11.144

It was not long after , ere the Prophets and Prophetesses began to
predict many particular , strange and wonderful things , naming Persons
, Times , and Places . KEIMER-1718-2,11.145

And there being one <font> Thomas Emes <$$font> , commonly call'd Dr.
<font> Emes <$$font> , a reputed Socinian , who had receiv'd this Spirit
, and had become a Prophet , and to whom the Spirit thro' several of the
rest of the Prophets had promis'd should do many marvelous Things : This
<font> Emes <$$font> , <paren> notwithstanding all that was assur'd him
, of his being a <P_12> great Instrument to work Miracles of all Sorts ,
<$$paren> was taken ill about the 4th Day of the 10th Month , commonly
call'd <font> December <$$font> , with a violent Head-Ach , or Megrim ,
KEIMER-1718-2,12.146

and died on the 22d , KEIMER-1718-2,12.147

and was buried the 25th of the same Month on the Day call'd <font>
Christmas-Day <$$font> , 1707 . in the Burying-Place , in <font>
Bunhill-fields <$$font> , commonly call'd <font> Tyndall <$$font> 's
<font> Burying-Ground . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,12.148

While he lay ill , he was told , <font> by {TEXT:By} John Lacy <$$font>
, <font> John Potter <$$font> , <font> &c. <$$font> under Agitation ,
many flattering Stories , that if he dy'd , he should quickly be rais'd
again , which the poor Man , as I have reason to think , firmly believ'd
. KEIMER-1718-2,12.149

After the Doctor was dead , instead of being laid out , as is usual for
a dead Corps , he was kept hot in his Bed , till he stunk so , as there
was scarce any enduring it , several imagining he would come to Life
again . KEIMER-1718-2,12.150

The Day he was buried , I being at a Meeting in <font> Southwark
<$$font> , at the Dwelling-House of <font> Guy Nutt <$$font> , at which
was present <font> John Potter <$$font> , whom I had heard much of , but
never before had seen , to my Knowledge , upon whom the Spirit came ,
and after violent Agitations , with a very awful Voice , spoke as
follows , Remember this Day , my Children . KEIMER-1718-2,12.151

I say , remember this Day . KEIMER-1718-2,12.152

It is known vulgarly to all . KEIMER-1718-2,12.153

For , I say , from this Day will I be glorified , in all that believe .
KEIMER-1718-2,12.154

This Day shall be a Day of Joy to you , my Children ; of exceeding Joy
unto all that trust in me . KEIMER-1718-2,12.155

Remember it therefore . KEIMER-1718-2,12.156

For know from this Day I will make an extraordinary Beginning .
KEIMER-1718-2,12.157

The wonderful Works of your God shall be seen visibly , if you will but
behold . KEIMER-1718-2,12.158

And I say , Whoso seeth not is worse than blind naturally .
KEIMER-1718-2,12.159

This Day shall be unto you as the Beginning of Days .
KEIMER-1718-2,12.160

And as Days were before Months ; so the First Day of the next Month
shall be to you , the Beginning of Months . KEIMER-1718-2,12.161

For I will work , KEIMER-1718-2,12.162

and nothing shall let {COM:sic} . KEIMER-1718-2,12.163

My Word shall run and be glorified . KEIMER-1718-2,12.164

My Power shall be made known . KEIMER-1718-2,12.165

The Strength of my Arm shall be felt . KEIMER-1718-2,12.166

The Power of the Almighty shall cause such Echos {TEXT:Ecchoes} in this
City , as that the City shall tremble . KEIMER-1718-2,12.167

Blessed are they that hear . KEIMER-1718-2,12.168

It is on them I will set my Mark ; that , when the Destroying Angel
cometh , they may be preserved . KEIMER-1718-2,12.169

But whoso will not hear , in their Bowels shall the Sword of mine
Indignation be sheathed . KEIMER-1718-2,12.170

It shall gore in their Hearts . KEIMER-1718-2,12.171

It shall be made drunk with their Blood . KEIMER-1718-2,12.172

This , this , this is the great and notable Day of the Lord : Terrible
to <P_13> the wicked ; but Cause of exceeding Joy to those that obey .
KEIMER-1718-2,13.173

Therefore , my obedient ones , ye who have heard my Voice , and say , we
know it is the Voice of God , I am now about to answer your Prayers .
KEIMER-1718-2,13.174

I@ @'ll give now undeniable Proof , that this is my Word : That these
distracted Motions are caused by the Operation of my Spirit , in my
Children . KEIMER-1718-2,13.175

The Restoring of the Blind , the Healing of the Sick , the raising of
the Dead shall decide it , after some Months being interred .
KEIMER-1718-2,13.176

Will not this do ? KEIMER-1718-2,13.177

Take heed , you , that say , I shall believe , when I see this .
KEIMER-1718-2,13.178

Take heed , I say , you simple ones : KEIMER-1718-2,13.179

For if Faith , as thou confessest , be the Gift of God ; thou knowest
not whether I will give Faith then . KEIMER-1718-2,13.180

No , no , I will not gratify the Humours of my Worms , in whose
Destruction I can be glorified ; KEIMER-1718-2,13.181

and I will , if you will not accept of this Act of Grace , which is now
proclaimed by the Mouths of my Servants . KEIMER-1718-2,13.182

Therefore it is now , that I call unto you . KEIMER-1718-2,13.183

Come , come , come ; come , all you that would escape approaching
Judgments ; KEIMER-1718-2,13.184

and enter into this Ark , which I have prepared for your Safety .
KEIMER-1718-2,13.185

Yes , I will raise the Dead . KEIMER-1718-2,13.186

By the same Power , that I have raised <font> Jesus <$$font> , will I
raise that Body now asleep ; More fat , and more fair , than ever he has
been : KEIMER-1718-2,13.187

It shall not be known by his Friends , that he hath fasted so many
Months . KEIMER-1718-2,13.188

So fat , so lovely shall he appear , that the Beholders shall fall in
Love with him . KEIMER-1718-2,13.189

Yes , the same Body , the same Face , tho' more lovely .
KEIMER-1718-2,13.190

For the Beams of my Glory shall overshadow that Earthly Tabernacle ; so
as that it shall be made glorious thereby . KEIMER-1718-2,13.191

Come , my Children , KEIMER-1718-2,13.192

I know you wait . KEIMER-1718-2,13.193

<bracket> <font> Here he fell backward in his Chair ,
KEIMER-1718-2,13.194

and cry'd out in a different Tone from what he had before spoken with ,
<$$font> <$$bracket> O Lord ! KEIMER-1718-2,13.195

<bracket> <font> Then the Spirit answer'd , by way of Dialogue ,
<$$font> <$$bracket> What would you that I say unto you ?
KEIMER-1718-2,13.196

<bracket> <font> He then cry'd out in the different Tone <$$font>
<$$bracket> By another , Lord ! KEIMER-1718-2,13.197

<bracket> <font> And then fell down with some Force to the Ground ,
where he lay silent . <$$font> <$$bracket> KEIMER-1718-2,13.198

In a little Time afterwards {TEXT:aftewards} , <font> Anna Maria King
<$$font> , a Girl of 12 Years old , was seiz'd , KEIMER-1718-2,13.199

and under Agitations , spoke as follows , Rejoice greatly , O my
Children , KEIMER-1718-2,13.200

and be exceeding glad : KEIMER-1718-2,13.201

For great is your Reward in Heaven . KEIMER-1718-2,13.202

And be you assured , that all that I have spoken by my Servant , at this
Time , and all other Times , shall come to pass . KEIMER-1718-2,13.203

And if you knew me , you would believe me . KEIMER-1718-2,13.204

By the Hand of my Servant <font> Lacy <$$font> , <P_14> will I raise the
Body of my Servant , that is now dead . KEIMER-1718-2,14.205

But you must wait my Time : KEIMER-1718-2,14.206

For I am not at your Will ; KEIMER-1718-2,14.207

neither will I be . KEIMER-1718-2,14.208

He I say , he shall arise and fulfil his Testimony .
KEIMER-1718-2,14.209

Did I ever speak in vain ? KEIMER-1718-2,14.210

No , I assure you ; KEIMER-1718-2,14.211

I never did , KEIMER-1718-2,14.212

nor I never will . KEIMER-1718-2,14.213

You have sufficient Proof already , that this is the Power of God .
KEIMER-1718-2,14.214

But there is none can deny this , that I am going to bring to pass .
KEIMER-1718-2,14.215

If he be dead and rotten , yet I will raise him , as I have spoken , to
fulfill his Testimony . KEIMER-1718-2,14.216

There is not one Tittle of what I have spoken shall pass away .
KEIMER-1718-2,14.217

I will do greater Things than these . KEIMER-1718-2,14.218

Yes , I will do such Things as never yet have been .
KEIMER-1718-2,14.219

After which <font> John Potter <$$font> being again seiz'd , spoke as
follows , KEIMER-1718-2,14.220

O Thou timorous Child ! Why prayest thou thus unto me ?
KEIMER-1718-2,14.221

Thinkest thou , that I will be entreated by thee , to speak that , by
others , which I purpose to speak by Thee ? KEIMER-1718-2,14.222

I tell thee , I will not . KEIMER-1718-2,14.223

Therefore let me no more be sollicited upon such Occasions .
KEIMER-1718-2,14.224

I will excuse thee for this Time . KEIMER-1718-2,14.225

But know , from thy Mouth , shall be declared the Positive Day in which
my Servant shall be raised from the Dead . KEIMER-1718-2,14.226

I only give thee Time to consider of the Weakness of thy Prayer .
KEIMER-1718-2,14.227

I have heard it ; KEIMER-1718-2,14.228

but I assure thee , I approve not of it . KEIMER-1718-2,14.229

<bracket> Here he fell into most violent and surprizing Agitations ,
crying out , in a different Tone of Voice , <font> O Lord ! Who can
bear it ? <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,14.230

the Spirit thro' his own Mouth , then said , <$$bracket> Thou shalt ,
and a_Thousand times more . KEIMER-1718-2,14.231

<font> If thou wilt enable me , Lord . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,14.232

Thy Brethren may judge of the Weakness of thy Prayer by that Childish
Expression . KEIMER-1718-2,14.233

Did I ever require any Thing at any Time , to be done , by any of my
Servants , but they were assisted by me , in the Performance of it ?
KEIMER-1718-2,14.234

<font> True Lord , I know thou never didst . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,14.235

Well ; learn then to know my Will , and do it . KEIMER-1718-2,14.236

For know Thou shalt not only declare the Days in which I will work
Miracles : KEIMER-1718-2,14.237

But thou shalt likewise with a loud Voice , in this City , declare the
Positive Day , in which my Judgment shall descend from Heaven .
KEIMER-1718-2,14.238

Thou shalt tell the Day , in which Fire and Brimstone shall descend , to
the consuming to ashes , famous Buildings in this City .
KEIMER-1718-2,14.239

Be thou still <P_15> therefore : KEIMER-1718-2,15.240

And know , that I am God : And that it is I that speak in thee ; and not
thou thy_self . KEIMER-1718-2,15.241

The next Day <font> John Potter <$$font> was seiz'd again by the Spirit
, at another Meeting , KEIMER-1718-2,15.242

and spoke as follows , by Way of Dialogue . KEIMER-1718-2,15.243

Wilt thou declare willingly , with an open Mouth , those Words which I
speak unto thee ? KEIMER-1718-2,15.244

<font> Do thou rule , O Lord , over all my Faculties .
KEIMER-1718-2,15.245

My Will is , that thine may be {TEXT:be_be} done . KEIMER-1718-2,15.246

Take Possession of it , Lord , and it shall be so . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,15.247

But I will , that thou resist not . KEIMER-1718-2,15.248

<font> Lord , remember my Weakness ; KEIMER-1718-2,15.249

thou knowest that I am but Dust . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,15.250

What ! KEIMER-1718-2,15.251

Wilt thou still interrogate ? KEIMER-1718-2,15.252

Have I not told thee , I will be Strength in thy Weakness , Wisdom in
thy Folly ; and that I will always assist thee , as the Matter requires
? KEIMER-1718-2,15.253

Take heed , lest I strike thee dumb : Which I will , if thou ceasest not
. KEIMER-1718-2,15.254

<font> Thy Will be done , Lord , Lord ; KEIMER-1718-2,15.255

Lord , thy Will be done . KEIMER-1718-2,15.256

I must speak yet unto thee , Lord . KEIMER-1718-2,15.257

Spare me Lord , KEIMER-1718-2,15.258

send me not ; KEIMER-1718-2,15.259

For I can@ @not bear . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,15.260

<bracket> Here he was thrown down backward , KEIMER-1718-2,15.261

and lay so on the Floor for some Time ; after which he rose again ; and
in a most lamentable and affecting Tone , he cryed <$$bracket> <font> O
! the Burden of the Lord ! The Burden of the Lord ! <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,15.262

Do thou remember , my Child , how much the Excuse of my Servant <font>
Moses <$$font> tended to his Loss . KEIMER-1718-2,15.263

Was it not Weakness , in him to say unto me , thou knowest I am a Man of
a stammering Tongue ; KEIMER-1718-2,15.264

and at the same Time , I would have given him the Tongue of the Learned
? KEIMER-1718-2,15.265

He lost the Honour of being a famous Orator , by his excusing himself .
KEIMER-1718-2,15.266

Therefore , say not , I am weak ; but the contrary ;
KEIMER-1718-2,15.267

in the Lord am I strong : KEIMER-1718-2,15.268

His Power inhabits my Heart . KEIMER-1718-2,15.269

And that shall appear in all that trust in me . KEIMER-1718-2,15.270

Therefore , when I command thee , be thou willing ; Saying , on thine
Arm will I trust . KEIMER-1718-2,15.271

What sayest thou now my Child ? KEIMER-1718-2,15.272

Art thou willing ? KEIMER-1718-2,15.273

Say no more , thy Will be done , Lord , KEIMER-1718-2,15.274

and then frame Excuses for thy_self . KEIMER-1718-2,15.275

<font> I will not excuse my_self , Lord : KEIMER-1718-2,15.276

Only this , only this ; KEIMER-1718-2,15.277

Spare me yet a little while . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,15.278

If I should , it will be always , KEIMER-1718-2,15.279

Yet a little while . KEIMER-1718-2,15.280

<font> No , Lord , no ; KEIMER-1718-2,15.281

but I entreat thee now . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,15.282

<P_16>

Thou sayest well in every Thing ; KEIMER-1718-2,16.284

but when it comes to the Trial , thou startest back .
KEIMER-1718-2,16.285

I will be entreated by thee . KEIMER-1718-2,16.286

Thou are spared . KEIMER-1718-2,16.287

But let the Time be spent in considering the Nature of the Message :
KEIMER-1718-2,16.288

For thou canst not say , thou art ignorant of it . KEIMER-1718-2,16.289

<font> I am not , Lord . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,16.290

And in thy continual Prayers , see thou ask for Strength ; and I will
give it thee . KEIMER-1718-2,16.291

The next day being the 27th , <font> John Potter <$$font> was again
seiz'd , KEIMER-1718-2,16.292

and spoke by way of Dialogue , as follows , KEIMER-1718-2,16.293

Behold , KEIMER-1718-2,16.294

I come , KEIMER-1718-2,16.295

I come , KEIMER-1718-2,16.296

I come . KEIMER-1718-2,16.297

My Children , see to your_selves therefore . KEIMER-1718-2,16.298

For , I say , the Righteous shall scarcely be saved :
KEIMER-1718-2,16.299

Be ye not careful therefore , what the State of the Wicked shall be :
KEIMER-1718-2,16.300

No , no ; look unto your_selves . KEIMER-1718-2,16.301

Rejoice in your God therefore , you , whom I have called .
KEIMER-1718-2,16.302

And know of a Truth , that so long as you obey my Voice , which speaketh
through you , you are safe . KEIMER-1718-2,16.303

But I tell you , there are some amongst you , which obeyeth not that
Voice . KEIMER-1718-2,16.304

Thou , thou Wretch , by whom I speak disobeyest . KEIMER-1718-2,16.305

<bracket> Here he was thrown all along upon the Floor , crying out ,
<$$bracket> <font> Slay me Lord , and thou shalt be just , <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,16.306

I will not ; KEIMER-1718-2,16.307

yet will I be just . KEIMER-1718-2,16.308

Thou complainest of the Burden of the Lord . KEIMER-1718-2,16.309

<font> I will speak Lord , KEIMER-1718-2,16.310

I can@ @not bear it , KEIMER-1718-2,16.311

tho' the unworthyest of all , yet be merciful . O Lord God . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,16.312

Rise thou . KEIMER-1718-2,16.313

<bracket> Here <font> John Cavalier <$$font> was seized with most
violent Agitations . <$$bracket> KEIMER-1718-2,16.314

I tell thee , the Burden thou complainest of shall be five Times heavier
. KEIMER-1718-2,16.315

<font> Thy Will be done , Lord , KEIMER-1718-2,16.316

thou art strong : KEIMER-1718-2,16.317

On thy Arm will I lean . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,16.318

Thou audacious Presumer ! KEIMER-1718-2,16.319

Wilt thou rebell against me , and say , Lord , on thy Arm will I trust !
KEIMER-1718-2,16.320

<font> Thou knowest my Heart , O Lord ! <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,16.321

I do ; KEIMER-1718-2,16.322

and I will burst in Pieces that Heart : KEIMER-1718-2,16.323

I will consume thy Bones : KEIMER-1718-2,16.324

The Flames of my Wrath shall consume thee , if thou wilt not give Vent
to that within thee . KEIMER-1718-2,16.325

<font> Thy Will be done , Lord , KEIMER-1718-2,16.326

I can@ @not . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,16.327

I told thee how it would be . KEIMER-1718-2,16.328

Didst thou not say , it should not be so ? KEIMER-1718-2,16.329

<font> Lord , I did not think thou wouldst have called so soon .
<$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,16.330

<P_17>

Thou foolish Child ! KEIMER-1718-2,17.332

Must the wicked say so , when I appear ? KEIMER-1718-2,17.333

<font> Be entreated , O Lord , to speak by another Mouth ;
KEIMER-1718-2,17.334

but if not ; thou must spare me yet . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,17.335

I will speak by thee ; KEIMER-1718-2,17.336

and I will spare thee that thy Burden may be encreased Five Times .
KEIMER-1718-2,17.337

Thou shalt be an Example to the rest , KEIMER-1718-2,17.338

for thou art not alone . KEIMER-1718-2,17.339

Thou Fool ! KEIMER-1718-2,17.340

Can Death ease thee ? KEIMER-1718-2,17.341

No , no . KEIMER-1718-2,17.342

Art thou fit to die ? KEIMER-1718-2,17.343

Consider , thou dost not know what it is to die . KEIMER-1718-2,17.344

<font> Lord , I am ignorant of every Thing . KEIMER-1718-2,17.345

Thou hast called me ; KEIMER-1718-2,17.346

but I am as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,17.347

But I will accustom thee to it . KEIMER-1718-2,17.348

I know what thou art . KEIMER-1718-2,17.349

<font> Unworthy I <$$font> ! KEIMER-1718-2,17.350

Yes , thou art unworthy : KEIMER-1718-2,17.351

And the language of thy Actions is this , KEIMER-1718-2,17.352

I will be more unworthy . KEIMER-1718-2,17.353

<bracket> <font> Here <$$font> John Cavalier <font> was again seized ;
KEIMER-1718-2,17.354

and with a naked Knife in his Hand , and his Arm lifted up , he said ,
<$$font> <$$bracket> {COM:french_omitted} KEIMER-1718-2,17.355

But I say , that stiff Neck of thine shall be broken ; so that thou
shalt couch to the Burden of the Lord , and not cry out of its being
heavy . KEIMER-1718-2,17.356

<bracket> Then <font> John Potter <$$font> cry'd out , <$$bracket>
<font> Thou only canst do it O Lord : KEIMER-1718-2,17.357

Do it soon . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,17.358

The same Day , <font> John Potter <$$font> receiv'd a Blessing , Part of
which , was as follows , KEIMER-1718-2,17.359

My Child , I have great Things to do by thee . KEIMER-1718-2,17.360

I shall come in a few Days to give thee a full Accomplishment of the
Promises that I have made unto thee . KEIMER-1718-2,17.361

And I shall come to open thy Mouth , to declare a Day of Peace , of Joy
, and of Consolation to my Children . KEIMER-1718-2,17.362

And the Positive Day shall be declared by the Mouth , of the
Resurrection of my Servant , who has been buried . KEIMER-1718-2,17.363

I will open thy Mouth by Force . KEIMER-1718-2,17.364

And I tell thee , thou shalt declare the Day , the terrible Day , the
frightful Day , In which the Heavens shall rain Fire and Brimstone ,
Fire and Brimstone , Fire and Brimstone . KEIMER-1718-2,17.365

I accomplish every Day my Strength in thy Infirmities .
KEIMER-1718-2,17.366

I have Compassion of thy Weaknesses . KEIMER-1718-2,17.367

Take Care , I tell thee , to do my Will ; KEIMER-1718-2,17.368

and be not disobedient to thy Creator ; KEIMER-1718-2,17.369

for otherwise , I will root thee out . KEIMER-1718-2,17.370

My Child , take Courage . KEIMER-1718-2,17.371

Thou shalt see the fulfilling of the Things foretold by thy Mouth ;
KEIMER-1718-2,17.372

rest assured of it . KEIMER-1718-2,17.373

Be assured , that not one Word of them has been uttered , <P_18> but
from me , and which my Holy Spirit did put into thy mouth .
KEIMER-1718-2,18.374

The next Day being the 28th , <font> John Potter <$$font> was for a long
Time under violent Agitations ; KEIMER-1718-2,18.375

and labour'd greatly , with Strugglings in his Throat and Organs of
Speech ; almost as if he were choaking ; KEIMER-1718-2,18.376

and utter'd some inarticulate Sound , After which he spoke the following
Warning . KEIMER-1718-2,18.377

Did ye understand , my Children ? KEIMER-1718-2,18.378

You shall know more perfectly in a short Time . KEIMER-1718-2,18.379

The Words were pronounced , even the Day , in which my Servant <font>
Emes <$$font> shall rise . KEIMER-1718-2,18.380

Take this as a mark . KEIMER-1718-2,18.381

<bracket> <font> Here the Spirit instantly threw him upon the Floor ;
where he lay stretched out as dead , without Motion or Breathing .
KEIMER-1718-2,18.382

After some Time , there came a trembling Motion into every Part of him
at once ; his Feet , Legs , Hands , Arms and Shoulders : After which
there appeared some Breathing ; which grew still louder and stronger in
him . KEIMER-1718-2,18.383

After he had been in that Manner , for some Time , he said <$$font> ;
<$$bracket> The Operation of my Spirit upon his Body shall cause the
Earth over him to be loosened . KEIMER-1718-2,18.384

You shall not break the Ground ; KEIMER-1718-2,18.385

no , he shall rise without : In this form . KEIMER-1718-2,18.386

<bracket> <font> Here he raised up his Head , and his Body forward ,
into a sitting Posture . <$$font> <$$bracket> KEIMER-1718-2,18.387

By thy Mouth will I command . KEIMER-1718-2,18.388

<bracket> <font> This he directed to <$$font> John Lacy , <font> who sat
by him . <$$font> <$$bracket> KEIMER-1718-2,18.389

and thou shall raise him . KEIMER-1718-2,18.390

<bracket> <font> He then stretch'd out his Hand , KEIMER-1718-2,18.391

and took hold of <$$font> John Lacy's <font> Hand , KEIMER-1718-2,18.392

and thereupon stood up upon his Feet . <$$font> <$$bracket>
KEIMER-1718-2,18.393

About this Time as <font> John Potter <$$font> and <font> John Cavalier
<$$font> were passing by the Place where Dr. <font> Emes <$$font> was
buried ; <font> John Potter <$$font> was seiz'd with the Spirit ,
KEIMER-1718-2,18.394

and then said , Thou my Servant , who lies interr'd in this Place ,
shalt in a few Natural Months arise . KEIMER-1718-2,18.395

My Child , thy Tongue shall declare the Positive Day .
KEIMER-1718-2,18.396

Be thou obedient , and I will exceedingly reward thee .
KEIMER-1718-2,18.397

But if thou resistest , I will break thy Neck with a Rod of Iron .
KEIMER-1718-2,18.398

Consider therefore KEIMER-1718-2,18.399

and be wise . KEIMER-1718-2,18.400

On the 29th , <font> John Cavalier <$$font> spoke a Warning in <font>
French <$$font> , which being translated into <font> English <$$font> ,
is as follows , KEIMER-1718-2,18.401

My Children , in a few Natural Months you shall see greater Miracles
wrought , than I wrought upon <font> Lazarus . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,18.402

<P_19>

When I raised <font> Lazarus <$$font> , he had been but Four days in his
Grave . KEIMER-1718-2,19.404

I commanded that the Stone that lay upon it , should be taken away :
KEIMER-1718-2,19.405

But you , and the Inhabitants of this City , shall , in a few natural
Months , see my faithful Servant , who has been buried , raised , in the
Presence of Men : KEIMER-1718-2,19.406

My Children , he shall come out of his Grave , without the Earth being
taken away , that lies upon him . KEIMER-1718-2,19.407

He shall come forth , In the presence of Men , KEIMER-1718-2,19.408

and he shall unty his Shroud , in which he is now wrap'd .
KEIMER-1718-2,19.409

This shall not be in secret ; no , but in publick .
KEIMER-1718-2,19.410

I do ask of you all , if you do believe that I am able to do this .
KEIMER-1718-2,19.411

Answer me , if you have no Murmuring in your Hearts .
KEIMER-1718-2,19.412

Answer sincerely . KEIMER-1718-2,19.413

I am the Invincible , the great <font> Jehovah <$$font> , who speak to
you at this Time ; the Almighty ; the King of Heaven and Earth .
KEIMER-1718-2,19.414

<bracket> <font> Then one in the Company answered , Lord , I believe
that it is more easy to thee to raise him <paren> if there are
Differences in the Degrees of thy Power <$$paren> then it was , either
to create Man at the first , or to go on to produce them , by the
ordinary way . <$$font> <$$bracket> KEIMER-1718-2,19.415

Thy faith is great , I say unto thee ; KEIMER-1718-2,19.416

but all those who hear my Voice , have it in not so great Measure .
KEIMER-1718-2,19.417

Cause them to understand these Things , that they may give their Answer
, in their own Tongue . KEIMER-1718-2,19.418

<bracket> <font> The aforesaid Discourse being then read in English ,
<$$font> John Potter <font> answer'd <$$font> , Lord , I believe thou
canst and wilt . <$$bracket> KEIMER-1718-2,19.419

My Child , thou knowest the Time , KEIMER-1718-2,19.420

and I will make thee to declare it in a few Days . KEIMER-1718-2,19.421

Those who will cry to me , Thou King of Heaven and Earth , All Might is
in thy Hand ; Thou canst do all Things ; we make no doubt of it ; they
shall see it , in Truth . KEIMER-1718-2,19.422

I do protest to you , with an oath , that if you answer me with
Sincerity , your Eyes shall see these Things . KEIMER-1718-2,19.423

Then <font> John Potter <$$font> spoke as follows , KEIMER-1718-2,19.424

My Child , thou knowest the Time , KEIMER-1718-2,19.425

and I will make thee declare it in a short Time . KEIMER-1718-2,19.426

<font> Pray for me , my Brethren and Sisters , that I may discharge my
Duty faithfully . KEIMER-1718-2,19.427

O Pray for me <$$font> ! KEIMER-1718-2,19.428

<font> Consider , if it were your own Case . KEIMER-1718-2,19.429

Lord , by some other Mouth , any , any save mine . KEIMER-1718-2,19.430

But thy Will , O Lord . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,19.431

It shall appear to all it is my Will , and not thine , thou disobedient
one . KEIMER-1718-2,19.432

All I now command of thee , is , that thou be Passive in every thing .
KEIMER-1718-2,19.433

<font> I promise to thee , O thou Great and Mighty Being , that I will
do nothing in it . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,19.434

But wilt thou not resist ? KEIMER-1718-2,19.435

<P_20>

<font> Lord , I will not . KEIMER-1718-2,20.437

Strike me dead , if I do . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,20.438

None of thy Brethren are sensible how much thou hast suffered by thy
disobedience . KEIMER-1718-2,20.439

<font> Thou knowest the Sincerity of my Heart , Lord . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,20.440

Thou shalt endure more , because of it . KEIMER-1718-2,20.441

<font> Thy Will be done , O Lord . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,20.442

It shall be done in Spite of them . KEIMER-1718-2,20.443

Neither Devils or Men can alter my Purpose , KEIMER-1718-2,20.444

but remember this , KEIMER-1718-2,20.445

I command thee , that thou be Passive . KEIMER-1718-2,20.446

<font> I will , Lord . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,20.447

<bracket> <font> During the Time of the foregoing Discourse <$$font> ,
John Cavalier <$$font> who sat {TEXT:sate} by him , being seized with
the Spirit , fell down at his Feet , KEIMER-1718-2,20.448

and lay as dead . <$$font> <$$bracket> KEIMER-1718-2,20.449

Thou shalt not , as thou hast said , say , Lord , I did not think thou
wouldst call so soon ; KEIMER-1718-2,20.450

for I have given thee Time , KEIMER-1718-2,20.451

and thou knowest how much I have allow'd thee : KEIMER-1718-2,20.452

Therefore prepare thy_self , by Prayer . KEIMER-1718-2,20.453

<font> O my Brethren , pray for me . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,20.454

With as little Trouble will I command him , who is dead indeed , by the
Mouth of him whom I have appointed ; as I do him , who is but a Sign .
KEIMER-1718-2,20.455

<bracket> <font> Here he took hold of <$$font> John Cavalier <font> by
the Hand , who instantly leap'd up from the Ground , where he lay , and
stood on his Feet . <$$font> <$$bracket> KEIMER-1718-2,20.456

Shall not my Glory then appear ? KEIMER-1718-2,20.457

Will not that stop the Mouths of those who have already exalted
themselves above my appearance in my Children ? KEIMER-1718-2,20.458

I say therefore , observe it ; KEIMER-1718-2,20.459

those Mouths which have declar'd unto others that they ought not to
believe ; in that Day shall my Judgments immediately descend upon them .
KEIMER-1718-2,20.460

'T@ @is not their being Ministers of the Gospel shall prevent my
Judgments reaching them . KEIMER-1718-2,20.461

No , no . KEIMER-1718-2,20.462

Sore and heavy shall they be , upon the Heads of those Blasphemers of my
Name , those despisers of my Appearance , those Rejecters of my Voice ;
that will not enter the Kingdom themselves , but as Assistants to the
Devil , work with all their Might , to prevent others .
KEIMER-1718-2,20.463

Wo , Wo , Wo be unto such . KEIMER-1718-2,20.464

I say <font> Sodom <$$font> and <font> Gomorrha <$$font> shall appear ,
to the aggravating of their Misery . KEIMER-1718-2,20.465

For if those mighty Works had been done in <font> Sodom <$$font> as have
been done in <font> London <$$font> under this Dispensation , they would
have repented . KEIMER-1718-2,20.466

Less Miracles than that of Raising the Dead , would have been sufficient
to have turned them unto me . KEIMER-1718-2,20.467

Therefore the Sinners of <font> Sodom <$$font> shall aggravate their
Punishment . KEIMER-1718-2,20.468

It shall be manifest that the raising of this Body , by my Command , out
of the Mouth <P_21> of my Servant , shall be a greater Miracle than that
of your Lord , when he raised <font> Lazarus . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,21.469

For I say unto you , that <font> Lazarus <$$font> lay but Four Days .
KEIMER-1718-2,21.470

But my Servant shall lie much longer , in his Grave : Yes , I say , more
Months than he lay Days . KEIMER-1718-2,21.471

Must it not then be the Power of the Eternal God ? KEIMER-1718-2,21.472

What say ye then , O ye People ? KEIMER-1718-2,21.473

Can any thing short of an invincible Power , put Life into that which
shall be corrupted , nay rotten ? KEIMER-1718-2,21.474

Those that have beheld my Servant , before interr'd , shall judge
whether or no his Flesh must not be consumed . KEIMER-1718-2,21.475

Yet shall he rise fat and lovely ; fair indeed ; so that he shall
captivate the Affections of the Beholders . KEIMER-1718-2,21.476

Blessed are ye that believe . KEIMER-1718-2,21.477

O believe this , my Children ; KEIMER-1718-2,21.478

it shall be accounted to you for Righteousness . KEIMER-1718-2,21.479

Your Faith will be rewarded . KEIMER-1718-2,21.480

Happy will they be , who when they see , will be convinced it is my
Power . KEIMER-1718-2,21.481

But happy , happy , happy , yea indeed eternally happy shall they be who
believe now . KEIMER-1718-2,21.482

Therefore suffer not the least Doubt , concerning this Matter , to arise
in your Hearts ; lest you , by your doubts , be wholly bereft of Faith .
KEIMER-1718-2,21.483

And , if so , the beholding of him , after risen , will not beget Faith
in you . KEIMER-1718-2,21.484

Look to your_selves therefore . KEIMER-1718-2,21.485

Many are harden'd by his Death . KEIMER-1718-2,21.486

They have suffer'd themselves to be captivated by the Devil .
KEIMER-1718-2,21.487

Shall they believe in his Resurrection ? KEIMER-1718-2,21.488

I tell you no . KEIMER-1718-2,21.489

They shall behold that Glorious Body , and not know it is He .
KEIMER-1718-2,21.490

Yet Thousands and Ten Thousands shall believe thereby .
KEIMER-1718-2,21.491

For , as I declar'd to him , before his Death , that him I had qualified
for a Minister extraordinary ; it was for this ; it was for this ; tho I
did not make him sensible of it . KEIMER-1718-2,21.492

That was his Burden . KEIMER-1718-2,21.493

But as he departed in the Belief of his Resurrection miraculously ; as a
Reward of his Faith shall he behold himself alive , in that room where
he departed . KEIMER-1718-2,21.494

And many that there saw him dead , shall likewise there see him alive .
KEIMER-1718-2,21.495

They that then were afraid to touch him , shall run to embrace him ,
saying , Thou Servant of the Living God , thou Perfecter of his Glory ,
we bless our God , because of thee . KEIMER-1718-2,21.496

For thee , indeed , has he made an Instrument to convert more Souls ,
than the Traders of my Word have , in many Ages past .
KEIMER-1718-2,21.497

Will not this be a strange Work , my Children ? KEIMER-1718-2,21.498

How strange soever it may seem , I say , Dead Men shall turn Souls to
the Living God . KEIMER-1718-2,21.499

O believe this , I command you ; and as you would enter the Kingdom .
KEIMER-1718-2,21.500

Look unto <font> Abraham <$$font> , my Children ; who was commanded to
offer up his only Son <font> Isaac <$$font> , from whose Loins was come
a numberless Seed . KEIMER-1718-2,21.501

But did that Command shake <font> Abraham <$$font> 's <P_22> Faith ?
KEIMER-1718-2,22.502

I tell you no . KEIMER-1718-2,22.503

Therefore was it accounted to him for Righteousness ,
KEIMER-1718-2,22.504

Look to your_selves ; KEIMER-1718-2,22.505

I am the same God . KEIMER-1718-2,22.506

And I tell you , <font> Abraham <$$font> trusted in me , knowing I was
Omnipotent . KEIMER-1718-2,22.507

Therefore he believed that I could restore <font> Isaac <$$font> to Life
again . KEIMER-1718-2,22.508

If he had been slain , it was equal to me . KEIMER-1718-2,22.509

But know this , I did it only for the Trial of this Faith , which was
great . KEIMER-1718-2,22.510

Therefore was this Seed blessed , because of that .
KEIMER-1718-2,22.511

Therefore , now ye , as the Seed of <font> Abraham <$$font> ,
demonstrate it by your Faith to my Promises : KEIMER-1718-2,22.512

For they are certain ; yes . KEIMER-1718-2,22.513

Can the Eternal Being cease to be ? KEIMER-1718-2,22.514

I tell you , No ; KEIMER-1718-2,22.515

there is the same Possibility for one as the other .
KEIMER-1718-2,22.516

Therefore I say , not one Tittle of what I have declar'd , by this Mouth
, shall fail . KEIMER-1718-2,22.517

I the eternal God have said it . KEIMER-1718-2,22.518

My Christian Reader may observe here with what Solemnity these Warnings
were utter'd , being spoke in the first Person , as if the Great and
Omnipotent God , the Creator of all things had been the Author of 'em :
And likewise what was herein promis'd to the Believers .
KEIMER-1718-2,22.519

I shall now proceed in my Narrative , by acquainting him , that we were
told that on the First Day of the 10th Month , commonly call'd <font>
New-Years-Day <$$font> , Wonderful Things were to be declar'd by the
Spirit , and the positive Day , in which the Doctor was to be rais'd out
of his Grave . KEIMER-1718-2,22.520

And this being to be the Beginning of Months , as before declar'd , we
all were rais'd with vast Expectations . KEIMER-1718-2,22.521

It happen'd that I had the Liberty of going abroad on this Day ;
KEIMER-1718-2,22.522

and as I was walking pretty betimes into <font> Southwark <$$font> , I
met my Mother , and several others , who were going to a Meeting
appointed at the <font> Three Foxes <$$font> in <font> Holloway <$$font>
. KEIMER-1718-2,22.523

We took Coach , KEIMER-1718-2,22.524

and as we were proceeding in our Journey , before we got out of Town ,
the Spirit seiz'd my Sister in the Coach , KEIMER-1718-2,22.525

and we were told , that that very Day , it should be declar'd when
<font> Dr. Emes <$$font> should rise . KEIMER-1718-2,22.526

When we came to the Place aforesaid , there was a handsome large Room
appointed for the Meeting of the <font> English <$$font> , and another
over that , for the <font> French . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,22.527

In a little Time the Room began to fill , KEIMER-1718-2,22.528

and the Spirit had before commanded us , as was there inform'd , to
salute one another with a Kiss , which we accordingly
{TEXT:acccordingly} did . After which , being seated , and the Writers
plac'd round the Table , as usual , the Spirit in a little Time began to
operate <P_23> upon several Men , Women and Children very violently ,
making a strange and awful Noise , which continu'd for some considerable
Time , KEIMER-1718-2,23.529

and then by Degrees decreasing , <font> John Lacy <$$font> began to
speak a Warning , which to the best of my Remembrance , was to the
Purport following , <font> That the Children of God had hitherto been in
a Wilderness-State , like the Israelites of old , That as they went over
the River <$$font> Jordan , <font> so must we expect to pass over the
<$$font> Jordan <font> of Afflictions ; and as when they drew near the
Land of <$$font> Canaan , <font> God took <$$font> Moses <font> up to
Mount <$$font> Pisgah <font> to give him a Sign of the Land ; so we
should in a little Time <$$font> , <paren> either in a few Minutes or
Hours <$$paren> <font> have a Sight or Taste of the Spiritual <$$font>
Canaan , &c. KEIMER-1718-2,23.530

As soon or before he had done speaking , <font> John Potter <$$font> was
carried violently by the Spirit from the Place where he sat , into
another Room , several Persons that were Believers , following him to
see what he was going about . KEIMER-1718-2,23.531

For my own Part , I was not so curious . KEIMER-1718-2,23.532

However , it was not long before he came into the Room again , but in
such a Manner , as was the most awful and affecting as ever I saw ;
KEIMER-1718-2,23.533

for he being a tall Man , under most violent Agitations , came in , his
Arms extended to the utmost , in each of his Hands holding and shaking a
piece of Paper , and crying out with a thundering Voice , Grace , Grace
, Grace , which Words having repeated several Times , he threw one of
the Pieces of Paper which was blank , backwards over his Head , and the
other Piece {TEXT:Peice} on which was somewhat he had wrote when out of
the Room , he laid on the Table , which being read by Sir <font> Richard
Bulkely <$$font> , was <paren> to the best of Remembrance , for I would
not add one Tittle more than Truth <$$paren> as follows ,
KEIMER-1718-2,23.534

Here@ @'s your Pardon purchas'd by the Blood of the <font> Lamb <$$font>
, for all your Sins past to this Day . KEIMER-1718-2,23.535

Sign'd and seal'd by the Great <font> Jehovah . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,23.536

I am . KEIMER-1718-2,23.537

This Paper was no sooner read but the whole Room full , as it seem'd to
me , was in the Heighth of Elevation and Extacy , some crying , some
jumping and dancing , with all the Signs of Joy possible .
KEIMER-1718-2,23.538

For my own Part , I was in such Raptures , as thinking this was the
<font> Pisgah <$$font> spoken of by <font> John <P_24> Lacy <$$font> ,
or rather , being wrapt up into the third Heavens , that I could scarce
contain my_self . KEIMER-1718-2,24.539

And indeed what could possibly be more affecting , than to believe , the
God Himself was speaking to us , telling us , that all our Sins were
pardon'd , as it were , Face to Face ? KEIMER-1718-2,24.540

The Extasies and Agitations of the Inspir'd were so prodigious and loud
, that I expected nothing less than the House , by a miraculous Power to
be rent in twain . KEIMER-1718-2,24.541

After many more Things spoke by the other Inspir'd , <font> John Potter
<$$font> under violent Agitations , spoke as follows ,
KEIMER-1718-2,24.542

I have that to declare by this Mouth , KEIMER-1718-2,24.543

see that it startle you not , KEIMER-1718-2,24.544

see that you believe it . KEIMER-1718-2,24.545

I have given you Pardon ; KEIMER-1718-2,24.546

let not your Disbelief bring all that Score , which I have cast behind
my Back , in View . KEIMER-1718-2,24.547

I say , whoso questions my Power shall not be remitted .
KEIMER-1718-2,24.548

See to it . KEIMER-1718-2,24.549

<bracket> <font> Here he fell into more violent Agitations ,
KEIMER-1718-2,24.550

and keckled extreamly in his Throat , as if he were choaking ;
KEIMER-1718-2,24.551

and uttered several inarticulate Sounds . <$$font> <$$bracket>
KEIMER-1718-2,24.552

Know ye the Day in which my Servant was Interred : KEIMER-1718-2,24.553

Five Months from that Day , The Twenty Fifth Day of <font> May <$$font>
, you shall behold him rise again . One Month above the Number of Days
that <font> Lazarus <$$font> was in his Grave . KEIMER-1718-2,24.554

The very Hour he was put in the Earth shall he arise .
KEIMER-1718-2,24.555

Know ye the Day , my Children ? KEIMER-1718-2,24.556

<bracket> <font> It was answered <$$font> Yes . <$$bracket>
KEIMER-1718-2,24.557

Well . The Twenty Fifth Day of <font> May . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,24.558

Right . KEIMER-1718-2,24.559

I say ye shall see him rise that@ @'s now Dead . KEIMER-1718-2,24.560

For thy part , by whom I speak , thou shalt not laugh until thou
beholdest him . KEIMER-1718-2,24.561

No , thou shalt not smile , I say , because of thy Unwillingness to
declare . KEIMER-1718-2,24.562

Thy Joy shall be abated . KEIMER-1718-2,24.563

Fear not , KEIMER-1718-2,24.564

thy Peace shall be multiplied . KEIMER-1718-2,24.565

O ye that have heard the Day declar'd in which , I will , by thee ,
<bracket> <font> Here he laid his Hand upon <$$font> John Lacy's <font>
Shoulders <$$font> <$$bracket> raise him , who shall be rotten . Behold
him by whom I speak ; KEIMER-1718-2,24.566

if you see any Sign of Joy fixed on his Visage , say then , The Words
were not the Lord's . KEIMER-1718-2,24.567

Let this , my Child , be a sure Sign unto thy_self .
KEIMER-1718-2,24.568

I love thee ; KEIMER-1718-2,24.569

therefore it is that I pronounce no greater Judgment .
KEIMER-1718-2,24.570

For know , More have I to say by thee ere that is accomplished ;
KEIMER-1718-2,24.571

else shouldst thou be struck dumb . KEIMER-1718-2,24.572

<bracket> <font> Here he spoke to <$$font> John Lacy . <$$bracket>
KEIMER-1718-2,24.573

Fear thou not , my Child , KEIMER-1718-2,24.574

I say , Thou shalt appear upon the Five_and_Twentieth of <font> May
<$$font> next , in that Ground where my Servant lieth .
KEIMER-1718-2,24.575

Wait thou there , with others of my Children , from Twelve at Noon ,
until Six in the Evening . KEIMER-1718-2,24.576

I will surround you , KEIMER-1718-2,24.577

An Angelick Host <P_25> shall guard thee , with thy Companions .
KEIMER-1718-2,25.578

No Hurt shall come unto thee , nor any of mine . KEIMER-1718-2,25.579

Yet shall they see those who come , thinking to believe by seeing , be
consumed before thee . KEIMER-1718-2,25.580

Provide no Cloathing for my Servant ; KEIMER-1718-2,25.581

for he shall arise bare and innocent . KEIMER-1718-2,25.582

Therefore no Shame shall attend him . KEIMER-1718-2,25.583

Neither shall it be esteem'd Indecency , for him to walk naked into his
Habitation . KEIMER-1718-2,25.584

Remember , remember the Day ; the Time ; KEIMER-1718-2,25.585

observe it ; from Twelve to Six . KEIMER-1718-2,25.586

But ere That , my Glory shall appear . KEIMER-1718-2,25.587

I will , before that Day , make it manifest that I am God .
KEIMER-1718-2,25.588

O many , with you , shall acknowledge the same . KEIMER-1718-2,25.589

But others will compare you , my Children , unto the Magitians of <font>
Egypt <$$font> , who , by their Arts , wrought Wonders , to the
astonishing of the People . KEIMER-1718-2,25.590

But that will stop all Mouths . KEIMER-1718-2,25.591

For know , the Power of the Devil never extended so far as to raise the
Dead ; which I will , by my Servant {COM:missing_comma} do ;
KEIMER-1718-2,25.592

and <paren> when raised <$$paren> many will be his Persecutors .
KEIMER-1718-2,25.593

But he nor you shall have no need to fear . KEIMER-1718-2,25.594

Believe , this , my Children . KEIMER-1718-2,25.595

Do you believe it ? KEIMER-1718-2,25.596

<bracket> <font> It being answer'd <$$font> Yes , <font> It was then
said <$$font> , <$$bracket> All you that believe , hold up your Hands ,
<bracket> <font> Upon which most , if not all present , held up their
Hands , some crying , some jumping , some leaping , one lying all along
upon the Ground , and the whole room full being as it seem'd to me in
the Heighth of Elevation , or Spiritual Madness , KEIMER-1718-2,25.597

several cry'd out <$$font> Yes , Lord help our Unbelief . <$$bracket>
KEIMER-1718-2,25.598

My Children , I know you do . KEIMER-1718-2,25.599

But pray that your Faith may not fail . KEIMER-1718-2,25.600

Many , at his Appearing , will deny my Appearance .
KEIMER-1718-2,25.601

Look to your_selves . KEIMER-1718-2,25.602

I say , some in this Room will deny that it was the Appearance of God .
KEIMER-1718-2,25.603

Therefore look to your_selves . KEIMER-1718-2,25.604

That you all may be watchful , is the Reason that I nominate none .
KEIMER-1718-2,25.605

Some Time after this Warning was over , <font> John Cavalier <$$font>
came from the upper Room with a Woman , who had lately buried her Son ,
whom the Spirit promis'd likewise should be rais'd much about the same
Time with Dr. <font> Emes . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,25.606

And a little while after , <font> John Cavalier <$$font> jump'd up on a
Table in the Middle of the Room , KEIMER-1718-2,25.607

and with his Foot stamp'd distinctly many Times thereon ,
KEIMER-1718-2,25.608

and spoke somewhat in <font> French <$$font> , which was interpreted by
one present <paren> I think Sir <font> Richard Bulkely <$$font>
<$$paren> to signify either the Number of Weeks , or Number of Days ,
Dr. <font> Emes <$$font> should lay in his Grave .
KEIMER-1718-2,25.609

<P_26>

The Resurrection of the Doctor was also predicted by several , if not
all , the Inspired , soon after . KEIMER-1718-2,26.611

And now , Reader it was , that I was fully given up to Satan , to
believe Lies ; KEIMER-1718-2,26.612

now it was , the Reason which God gave me , came to be captivated and
destroy'd ; my Will and Affections rais'd to an elevated Pitch , by the
Power of vain Imaginations which <paren> like Poyson in the Body , that
diffuses it_self thro' every Part of the Man <$$paren> infected me
throughout in Body Soul and Spirit , and consequently led me into a
Labyrinth of Confusion , Misery and Distress , hereafter to be mentioned
. KEIMER-1718-2,26.613

Now it was , I enter'd my_self a Voluntier under the Banner of Beelzebub
, believing him to be Jesus , the Captain of my Salvation .
KEIMER-1718-2,26.614

And instead of being enlightened {TEXT:inlightned} and reprov'd by the
Spirit of Christ , I was caress'd , flatter'd and sooth'd
{COM:illegible_word} in my Sins , by the flattering Voice of the Devil .
KEIMER-1718-2,26.615

Nor was it my Case alone ; KEIMER-1718-2,26.616

for there were many others who in the Sincerity of their Hearts , were
seeking the Way of <font> Sion <$$font> , but thro' Ignorance , were
enticed and prevail'd upon by the Voice of the Deluder , to whom I trust
, God will in his own Time , make known his Salvation , by their
Deliverance . KEIMER-1718-2,26.617

But to return to my Relation . KEIMER-1718-2,26.618

There being now a considerable Number of Inspir'd , and a far larger
Number of Believers , several of the latter being Men of distinguished
Sense and Judgment in natural Things , as well as Substance , the Spirit
now begins to predict and thunder forth most lamentable Judgments on the
Inhabitants of this Land <font> &c. <$$font> such as Pestilence ,
Famine , Fire and Blood , KEIMER-1718-2,26.619

and several frightful Representations were made thereof as Signs , under
Agitation , much like Players upon a Stage . KEIMER-1718-2,26.620

It was not long after this , the Spirit commanded the Believers to wear
a Green Ribbon , of about a Yard long , as a Mark for the destroying
Angel to know us by , when he should come to execute the Judgments of
the Lord . KEIMER-1718-2,26.621

Accordingly , I with the rest bought a green Ribbon ,
KEIMER-1718-2,26.622

and wore it according to Command , on the left Side under my upper
Garment . KEIMER-1718-2,26.623

After some Time we were all commanded to wear it on our Heads , and
round our right Arms , all which I , in Sincerity and Simplicity , with
many others exactly obey'd , KEIMER-1718-2,26.624

and particularly one <font> Mavey {TEXT:word_unclear} <$$font> , a
<font> Frenchman <$$font> was commanded to wear his Ribbon openly which
he did ; by fixing it upon an upper Breast-Button of his <P_27> coat .
KEIMER-1718-2,27.625

This wearing of Ribbon was also adjudged {TEXT:adjug'd} and look'd upon
as a Bride Favour for <font> the Marriage of the Lamb <$$font> , which
we were often told by the Inspir'd , under Operation , would very
quickly be solemnis'd . KEIMER-1718-2,27.626

We were also commanded by the Spirit , each of us for our_selves , to
buy the largest and fairest Apple that could be bought for Money , and
write our Names thereon ; KEIMER-1718-2,27.627

accordingly I being sent of an Errand , bought the best I could light on
, at <font> Stocks-Market <$$font> , for which I gave a Penny ,
KEIMER-1718-2,27.628

brought it home KEIMER-1718-2,27.629

and very devoutly wrote my Name thereon . KEIMER-1718-2,27.630

This I kept several Months , as choice {COM:sic} as possible under Lock
and Key , until it was rotten : KEIMER-1718-2,27.631

And then , to the best of my Remembrance , I think I eat it .
KEIMER-1718-2,27.632

One <font> Anne Steed <$$font> , <paren> hereafter to be mentioned ,
<$$paren> being unwilling to have her Apple spoil'd , made a Dumpling
{TEXT:Dumplin} with it , as I was inform'd : KEIMER-1718-2,27.633

But what the rest of the Believers did with theirs I can@ @not tell .
KEIMER-1718-2,27.634

It was much about this Time , <paren> as I take it <$$paren> that being
in <font> Southwark <$$font> I heard that <font> John Potter <$$font>
was at a Meeting hard by , and had the Gift of Blessing . Upon the News
of which , I immediately posted away , to partake of what <paren>
{COM:sic} I then thought <$$paren> a great Favour .
KEIMER-1718-2,27.635

By that Time I got there , almost all in the Room were blest , as I
afterwards found , KEIMER-1718-2,27.636

and making up to the Prophet , the next Vacancy , I presented my_self on
my Knees , KEIMER-1718-2,27.637

and had the Prophet's Hands laid on me , who spoke the following Words ,
KEIMER-1718-2,27.638

The Spirit is willing ; KEIMER-1718-2,27.639

and I will so strengthen thee : KEIMER-1718-2,27.640

Thou are not forgotten by me . KEIMER-1718-2,27.641

I remember thee in thy Bonds ; KEIMER-1718-2,27.642

but know , I will make hard Things easy in a little Time .
KEIMER-1718-2,27.643

Rejoice in this , that thou canst call upon thy God .
KEIMER-1718-2,27.644

The Hearts of all are in my Hands , KEIMER-1718-2,27.645

and as the Rivers of Waters , I will turn them : KEIMER-1718-2,27.646

But thou shalt be exercis'd . KEIMER-1718-2,27.647

I will appear for thee . KEIMER-1718-2,27.648

Be thou faithful in thy Stations ; KEIMER-1718-2,27.649

therein thou obeyest me . KEIMER-1718-2,27.650

Thou shall receive my Spirit . KEIMER-1718-2,27.651

It shall operate in thee . KEIMER-1718-2,27.652

Thou shalt bless my People , KEIMER-1718-2,27.653

and those thou livest with , shall kneel before <P_28> thee .
KEIMER-1718-2,28.654

See thy Heart is upright in Humility . KEIMER-1718-2,28.655

Receive this , KEIMER-1718-2,28.656

praise my Name . KEIMER-1718-2,28.657

Take all Opportunities to obey my Commands . KEIMER-1718-2,28.658

In so doing , thou wilt incur my Favours , and oblige me to manifest
my_self unto thee , more and more . KEIMER-1718-2,28.659

While the Spirit was speaking to me thus , I remember I was affected ,
as believing God immediately spoke to me very suitable to my Case .
KEIMER-1718-2,28.660

But to proceed , The Spirit had now commanded several of the inspir'd
and others to leave off their Trades , which they accordingly did ,
<font> viz. John Potter <$$font> , who was a Packer in <font>
Aldermanbury <$$font> , in good Business , and in a thriving way ,
<font> Thomas Dutton <$$font> , a lawyer , who as I am inform'd , flung
himself out of a very considerable Yearly Income upon this Affair ,
<font> Nathaniel Sheppard <$$font> , a young Apothecary , just coming
into the World , <paren> a Man , whose Fellow for his sober Conversation
, exquisite Sense and Parts , and other Accomplishments , to do him
Justice , I must needs say , I never in all my Life met with ,
considering his Age , <$$paren> with several others , I shall not , lest
I be too tedious , here mention . KEIMER-1718-2,28.661

We were now pretty well moddel'd , as a Body of People ,
KEIMER-1718-2,28.662

and the Spirit commanded each Family or Believer for themselves to lay
up Six Months Provisions of those Eatables that would keep , for that
there should be a very sore Famine in a few Days , KEIMER-1718-2,28.663

and several of the Inspir'd had Visions , as they said , thereof , which
represented Numbers of Persons dropping down dead in the Streets for
Hunger , and several Howling , as ready to perish .
KEIMER-1718-2,28.664

Accordingly each Family bought in or had sent in , large Quantities of
Provisions , KEIMER-1718-2,28.665

and several fine Things were said to us , of God's Blessings , <font>
&c. <$$font> relating thereto . KEIMER-1718-2,28.666

I remember my Mother bought in a Quantity of Meal , Peas , Beef , Pork ,
Oil , Raisins , Red-Herrings , and the like . KEIMER-1718-2,28.667

This was much about the Time the Noise was , of the Person call'd the
Pretender his being about to make his first Descent upon <font> Scotland
<$$font> . KEIMER-1718-2,28.668

I well remember , having a great Love for my Master <font> Tookey
<$$font> I was concern'd in my Mind , whether to acquaint him with the
approaching Famine , <paren> for him to prepare <$$paren> or not , he
never believing the least Tittle of what the Prophets pretended to ;
KEIMER-1718-2,28.669

at last after great Consideration , I concluded , That when <P_29> the
Famine came , I would give him some of the Provision which my Mother
laid up for me , sparing it out of my own Belly , to keep him from
starving . KEIMER-1718-2,29.670

We were likewise commanded to go and be mark'd in the Forehead by an Old
French Woman nam'd <font> Rous <$$font> , dwelling somewhere about the
<font> Seven-Dials <$$font> ; for that an Angel had appear'd to her ,
and so order'd . Upon which I went one First-Day , with several other
sober People , who were also mark'd , which was done by dipping her
Finger into a bason of Water , and rubbing it on the Forehead , <paren>
and I think crossing , but of that I wo@ @nt be positive . <$$paren>
KEIMER-1718-2,29.671

We were here told that we must read over one of <font> David <$$font> 's
Psalms , every Day , or Night which I took care to do for several Days
successively , KEIMER-1718-2,29.672

and sometimes after I had done Work , and was weary , I would hurry the
reading over , scarce knowing , even as to the Letter , what I read .
KEIMER-1718-2,29.673

Such was my stupid Ignorance and spiritual Blindness .
KEIMER-1718-2,29.674

We were likewise commanded to meet by Sevens , having seven Candles
lighted , which was accordingly put in Practice . KEIMER-1718-2,29.675

But I being an Apprentice , could not be present at any of those
Meetings , KEIMER-1718-2,29.676

so can give no Account of what was said or done there .
KEIMER-1718-2,29.677

There were also very often Love-Feasts commanded , which were perform'd
by select Companies meeting at proper Places , KEIMER-1718-2,29.678

and after having eat and drank what they had a Mind to of what was
provided , which was generally very good , the Spirit would come upon
one or more of the Inspir'd , who would administer the Sacrament <paren>
as t@ @is call'd <$$paren> of Bread and Wine , to all Persons present .
KEIMER-1718-2,29.679

There were also <font> Love-Meetings <$$font> commanded by the Spirit ,
which were abominable , KEIMER-1718-2,29.680

but of those hereafter . KEIMER-1718-2,29.681

The Sacrament of Bread and Wine was several Times administer'd without
the Love-Feasts , KEIMER-1718-2,29.682

and I intending to receive that most holy Ordinance , <paren> as I
thought it <$$paren> took Care to prepare my_self according to my vain
Imaginations , <font> viz. <$$font> by reading a Book or Books wrote
upon that Subject , saying my Prayers , upon my Knees , &c.
KEIMER-1718-2,29.683

The Time being come , for the Performance whereof , I went one First Day
to the Dwelling House of <font> James Jackson <$$font> in <font>
George-Court <$$font> in <font> Jones <$$font> 's , when being conducted
into an upper Room , where was a Table spread with a Linnen-Cloth , and
after having sat down waiting some Time , the Spirit came upon <font>
John Potter <$$font> , and several others , whom after speaking a <P_30>
great deal , somewhat suitable to the Occasion , I received the Bread
with several others , from the Hands of <font> John Potter <$$font> ,
and the Cup from <font> Elias Marion <$$font> a Frenchman , who spoke
all in <font> French <$$font> , and of which I did not understand one
Word , except <font> Mon Enfant , My Child <$$font> , or so .
KEIMER-1718-2,30.684

What was spoken by <font> John Potter <$$font> was much to the same
Purpose as is generally spoken by the Dissenting Teachers , but with
this Difference , as the latter when they are celebrating that Ordinance
, speak to their People as Men , saying , <font> Behold your dying Lord
, as represented <$$font> , &c. the Prophets spoke as <font> Jehovah
<$$font> to this Effect , <font> Behold the Flesh of my Son , behold the
Blood of my Christ <$$font> , with many other such like affecting Words
. KEIMER-1718-2,30.685

At the same Time of receiving with me , there was one <font> Nathaniel
Finkly <$$font> , <paren> to the best of my Remembrance , <$$paren> a
Furrier , now dwelling at the Sign of the <font> Lamb <$$font> , betwixt
<font> Watling-street <$$font> and the End of <font> Queen-street
<$$font> , one <font> Ebenezer Draycot <$$font> , a Printer , Apprentice
to the Widow <font> Everingham <$$font> , and a little Girl of about
Seven or eight Years of Age , with several others .
KEIMER-1718-2,30.686

After we had receiv'd and had had a great deal of flattering Stuff said
to each of us , we rose up off our Seats , to make room for others .
KEIMER-1718-2,30.687

What was spoken in <font> French <$$font> , was afterwards read in
<font> English . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,30.688

These and several other Commands were implicitly obey'd by the Body of
Believers which now were not for Number inconsiderable ,
KEIMER-1718-2,30.689

and had the Spirit commanded a thing never so vile , we were by this
Time so modell'd , as punctually to obey it , as I shall shew hereafter
several in a more private Capacity did . KEIMER-1718-2,30.690

Nor was the Spirit presiding in the Prophets , less wonderful in its
Predictions , than it was in its Commands , and not only out of the
Mouth of one or Two of them , but of all of them , KEIMER-1718-2,30.691

some few Instances I shall here insert , among some of the several
Hundreds that were utter'd at distinct Times under the Operation of
their Spirit . KEIMER-1718-2,30.692

And first , it was prophesy'd by several of the inspir'd , that <font>
John Potter <$$font> should never speak by a wrong Spirit , under
Agitation , but should always infallibly utter the {TEXT:the_the} pure
Truth of the Mind and Will of the Holy and Eternal God .
KEIMER-1718-2,30.693

For my Part I had such a thorough Belief of the Divinity of the Spirit
presiding , that had <font> John Potter <$$font> under Operation ,
commanded me to kill my Father , Mother , or even the late Queen on the
Throne , I sincerely believe I should immediately have attempted it .
KEIMER-1718-2,30.694

To such a Heighth of Diabolical Madness was I with others , arriv'd to
{COM:sic_doubled_preposition} ! KEIMER-1718-2,30.695

<P_31>

It was prophecy'd by <font> John Potter <$$font> and several others ,
that the late Queen <font> Anne <$$font> should become a Prophetess ,
and be agitated in like Manner as they were , the Spirit calling her by
the Name of , <font> My Servant Anne <$$font> , that she should go to
<font> Barbican <$$font> , which Place was prophecy'd should become more
noted over the whole World , than ever <font> Jerusalem <$$font> had
been , and there preach the everlasting Gospel , and that the Queen
should give to <font> Mary Beer <$$font> my Wifes own Sister , <paren>
whom he took upon his Knee , <$$paren> the right Hand of Fellowship , as
her elder Sister , as being the elder Prophetess . KEIMER-1718-2,31.697

It was prophecy'd also by <font> John Potter <$$font> , and several
others , that on the 25th Day of <font> March <$$font> following <paren>
for so the Prophets Spirit call'd it , like the <font> Heathens <$$font>
<$$paren> <font> Fire and Brimstone <$$font> should be poured from
Heaven to the consuming the City of <font> London <$$font> and all the
wicked therein . KEIMER-1718-2,31.698

But all those who believ'd in this Appearance , should be wonderfully
preserv'd . KEIMER-1718-2,31.699

The Day prefix'd being come , a Prophet came to a Neighbour of my
Fathers , where were several of the Believers , KEIMER-1718-2,31.700

and was seiz'd by the Spirit , KEIMER-1718-2,31.701

and pronounc'd a Warning to the purpose as follows ,
KEIMER-1718-2,31.702

<font> My Children , now even now are my Judgments descending upon the
City , KEIMER-1718-2,31.703

now is Fire and Brimstone pouring from Heaven <$$font> &c.
KEIMER-1718-2,31.704

Upon which I was inform'd some went as far as <font> London-Bridge
<$$font> to see whether it was so , but found there was nothing in it .
KEIMER-1718-2,31.705

It was also predicted by several , if not all , of the Prophets and
Prophetesses , they should have the Power of striking dead on the spot
all their Opposers , that when they should be mobb'd at <font> Barbican
, &c. <$$font> such miraculous Powers should be given them , as with a
Word of their Mouth such a Slaughter should be made , as that they
should walk over Shoes in the Blood of their Enemies :
KEIMER-1718-2,31.706

Nay , further , it was said by <font> Cavalier <$$font> , that a Boat
shou'd sail in the Streets , in the Blood of the Slain .
KEIMER-1718-2,31.707

It was likewise predicted by several , that when the miraculous Powers
were given to 'em to inflict , that they should then be prosecuted as
Conjurers , Witches , and as having to do with familiar Spirits :
KEIMER-1718-2,31.708

and poor Lord_Chief_Justice {TEXT:chief} <font> Holt <$$font> <paren>
since dead <$$paren> was thundringly threaten'd by the Spirit in <font>
John Potter <$$font> , that while he was sitting to give Judgment , the
Blood should burst out of his Veins from Head to Foot , and that he
should in an Agony , cry out , to this Effect , <font> Behold the
Judgments of the Great God upon me , by the Hands of his Servants .
<$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,31.709

It was also predicted that such a Desolation should be in this Land , as
that the Living should not be enough to bury <P_32> the Dead ,
KEIMER-1718-2,32.710

and <font> John Lacy <$$font> had a doleful Sign of the same , by a
melancholly <font> Toll , Toll , Toll , <$$font> in imitation of a
Passing-Bell . KEIMER-1718-2,32.711

We were also commanded , to pray for the hastening of the Judgments , on
the Heads of our Enemies . KEIMER-1718-2,32.712

At another Time , <font> John Lacy <$$font> and my Sister both under the
Operation of the Spirit , perform'd a Sign , as they call'd it , which
was as follows , KEIMER-1718-2,32.713

<font> John Lacy <$$font> represented a Jaylour , <font> Mary Keimer
<$$font> one of the inspir'd being about to be cast into Prison for her
Prophecies . KEIMER-1718-2,32.714

After many strange Passages between 'em , <font> John Lacy <$$font>
cries out , in way of Ridicule and Laughter , <font> Moll , Moll , Moll
, <$$font> where are your Prophecies now <font> Moll <$$font> ? much
like a Clown on the Stage . KEIMER-1718-2,32.715

And I suppose <font> Moll <$$font> was not behind hand in her
Performances to make the Sign compleat . KEIMER-1718-2,32.716

It was likewise prophecy'd , that <font> Mary Keimer <$$font> should go
to <font> France <$$font> , and there speak to the late <font> French
<$$font> King , who should upon his Disobedience be immediately struck
dead by her Mouth . KEIMER-1718-2,32.717

This Prophecy was confirm'd by Vision , as were many others , of the
like Stamp . KEIMER-1718-2,32.718

It was also predicted , and Times set for the Performance of all Sorts
of Miracles , KEIMER-1718-2,32.719

and <font> John Lacy <$$font> imagin'd he had receiv'd Earnests of the
said Gifts , KEIMER-1718-2,32.720

and a Miracle was said to be wrought by him upon <font> James Jackson
<$$font> , in restoring him to Sight , after he had been blind many
Years . KEIMER-1718-2,32.721

I thought this a little strange , when some Time after , I saw the same
<font> Jackson <$$font> led along as a blind Man , not able to see his
Way . KEIMER-1718-2,32.722

However , this poor old Man fancy'd he could see , KEIMER-1718-2,32.723

and published a Half-Sheet of Paper to cry up the Miracle .
KEIMER-1718-2,32.724

The Time being come , that Dr. <font> Emes <$$font> was to rise ,
according to <font> John Potter <$$font> , the infallible Prophet , and
the rest of the inspir'd@ @'s Prediction , we did not go to the Place
appointed , according to Order , though there was one or more commanded
that very Day to attend there . KEIMER-1718-2,32.725

Thus tho' in every thing we found our_selves disappointed , yet so
deeply rooted were we in this Delusion , that all the Reason , solid
Arguments and plain Scriptures that were brought by our Friends , to
convice us of our grand Mistake , prov'd ineffectual .
KEIMER-1718-2,32.726

The 30th of the same Month , being the First Day of the Week after the
Day the Doctor was to be rais'd , John Potter at a Meeting , had a very
comical Warning , wherein he mimicked the several Preachers on that Day
, who were telling their Hearers they might now see how the false
Prophets had discover'd themselves , &c. bantering and ridiculing the
said Preachers , in his Warning , at a great rate , telling us the
Wisdom of Man should be baffled , confounded and brought to nought ,
with several smooth exhortatory Precepts , to continue stedfast in our
Faith , &c. KEIMER-1718-2,32.727

At the close of the Meeting , <font> John Glover <$$font> had the Gift
of Blessing , to all present ; KEIMER-1718-2,32.728

and mine was as follows . KEIMER-1718-2,32.729

O my Child , I have said that thou shalt be a Minister Extraordinary in
this Dispensation ; KEIMER-1718-2,32.730

and in Order thereunto , I will visit thee with my Holy Spirit :
KEIMER-1718-2,32.731

Thou shalt receive it in great Abundance : KEIMER-1718-2,32.732

It shall descend upon thee visibly in cloven Tongues of Fire .
KEIMER-1718-2,32.733

Thou shalt receive the Gift of Languages , the Gift of healing all
manner of Diseases . KEIMER-1718-2,32.734

Thou shalt receive the Gift of Revelation , by which it will be manifest
{TEXT:mafest} that thou art inspir'd by the All-wise God , who only
knows the Thoughts of the Children of Men . KEIMER-1718-2,32.735

Thou shalt not always be bound to an Earthly Master ;
KEIMER-1718-2,32.736

No ; thou shalt be at Liberty from those Bonds , before the Time be
expired , which was agreed upon betwixt thee and him .
KEIMER-1718-2,32.737

Draw near to me , by thy Prayers . KEIMER-1718-2,32.738

Lift up thy Heart unto me , in secret , and I will reward thee , openly
. KEIMER-1718-2,32.739

Go in Peace , my Child , KEIMER-1718-2,32.740

my Blessing is upon thee . KEIMER-1718-2,32.741

My Reader may here perceive the fine delusive Promises of the Devil ,
very agreeable to the corrupt Part of Man ! KEIMER-1718-2,32.742

and just after such a Shock as the Failure of raising Dr. <font> Emes
<$$font> had given me . KEIMER-1718-2,32.743

Nor were such Promises made to me alone , but to many others , at the
same , or at other Times . KEIMER-1718-2,32.744

I well remember in the Blessing of <font> Nathaniel Shephard <$$font> ,
an Apothecary , there was this Advice , <font> That he should take great
Care of himself , for that when the Gifts of healing all manner of
Diseases was given him , which would be in a little Time , his
Fellow-Traders <$$font> , <paren> the Apothecaries <$$paren> <font>
would say <$$font> , Come <P_34> let us give this Fellow a Dose of
Poyson , KEIMER-1718-2,34.745

for he will quietly take away all our Business . KEIMER-1718-2,34.746

- As if it was likely a Man endu'd with all sorts of miraculous Gifts ,
need fear being hurt by the private Malice of his Neighbour .
KEIMER-1718-2,34.747

Stupendous Folly ! KEIMER-1718-2,34.748

The many Failures which had came from the Mouths of the Inspir'd , and
many of a publick Nature , began to give some People a little Uneasiness
, fearing they were not of God . Upon which , <font> Nicholas Facio
<$$font> , a great Mathematician , a Member of the Royal Society , and
one , as 't@ @is said , who understands well to speak and write 52
Languages . This Man writes a very cunning and subtle Exposition on the
22d Verse of the 18th Chapter of <font> Deuteronomy <$$font> , viz.
<font> When a Prophet speaketh in the Name of the Lord , if the thing
follow not , nor come to pass , that <$$font> is <font> the Thing which
the Lord hath not spoken <$$font> , but <font> the Prophet hath spoken
it presumptuously : thou shalt not be afraid of him . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,34.749

This Exposition was so cunningly made , that I now verily believe had
twenty Jesuits join'd together in Consult {TEXT:word_unclear} they could
not have given a more clever Turn to overthrow the Meaning of so clear a
Text , as this <font> Facio <$$font> did . KEIMER-1718-2,34.750

The Exposition was handed about amongst Believers , and I think not
without its intended Success . KEIMER-1718-2,34.751

Much about this Time , a Schism arose amongst us , occasion'd by one
<font> Whitrow <$$font> , an <font> English Prophet <$$font> , one who
had receiv'd many great Promises , to do mighty Things .
KEIMER-1718-2,34.752

This <font> Whitrow <$$font> had got Sir <font> Richard Bulkely <$$font>
over to his Side , <paren> who was a Man of Substance , having , as I
have been inform'd , some Thousands <font> per_Ann. <$$font> and 30,000
<font> l. <$$font> in Cash , <$$paren> with some others .
KEIMER-1718-2,34.753

No sooner was this Separation made , but <font> Whitrow <$$font> in his
Warnings , preaches up the Doctrine of <font> Levelling <$$font> , or ,
that the Rich must part with all their Estates , and become poor , if
ever they design'd to enter the Kingdom of Heaven .
KEIMER-1718-2,34.754

This Doctrine was oppos'd by the Spirit , thro' <font> John Lacy
<$$font> , who himself was worth about 2,000 <font> l. per_Ann.
<$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,34.755

and in a very rational and scriptural Discourse , the Doctrine of <font>
Levelling <$$font> was expos'd and confuted . KEIMER-1718-2,34.756

The Warning was order'd to be sent to Sir <font> Richard <$$font> for
Information that he was under a Delusion , calling <font> Whitrow
<$$font> a Deceiver . KEIMER-1718-2,34.757

Several of the Inspir'd had Visions much about the same Time , of the
dreadful Judgments that were to fall upon <font> Whitrow <$$font> ,
KEIMER-1718-2,34.758

and particularly one had a Vision of him , seeing him with his Head
split in twain , one half of which hanging over the <P_35> Shoulder
{TEXT:word_unclear} , and the other Part over the other Shoulder , with
many {TEXT:word_unclear} other sad Things , full as ridiculous .
KEIMER-1718-2,35.759

A little before this Separation of Sir <font> Richard , Whitrow <$$font>
, tho' a Prophet , had beat his Wife in a lamentable Manner with a
Horsewhip for committing Adultery with another Man .
KEIMER-1718-2,35.760

The poor Woman at first deny'd it , KEIMER-1718-2,35.761

and the Spirit thro' <font> John Glover <$$font> , asserted her
Innocence , against <font> Whitrow . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,35.762

However being reprov'd by the Light of Christ , she in a little Time
after confess'd her Guilt , KEIMER-1718-2,35.763

and declar'd she had several Times committed that Sin for which her
Husband had beat her , tho' the Spirit thro' many of the Inspir'd had
bless'd and flatter'd her to a great Degree . KEIMER-1718-2,35.764

Sir <font> Richard Bulkely <$$font> however , being deluded by <font>
Whitrow <$$font> would by no means hearken to the Spirit , thro' the
other Prophets , nay , not to <font> John Lacy <$$font> himself , who
had done an extraordinary Miracle upon him , as he had before given out
in one of his printed Books , KEIMER-1718-2,35.765

and tho' he had been promis'd to be made strait , <paren> having been
many Years very crooked <$$paren> nothing could prevail with him to
return to the Body of the Prophets . KEIMER-1718-2,35.766

<font> Whitrow <$$font> by this Time , having made sure of Sir <font>
Richard <$$font> , quickly got rid of the rest siding with him ,
KEIMER-1718-2,35.767

and then had Commands , for them both to go up and down the Countries ,
in <font> England <$$font> and <font> Ireland <$$font> , and give away
Sir <font> Richard <$$font> 's Money to the Poor . KEIMER-1718-2,35.768

Accordingly , Sir <font> Richard <$$font> in the Simplicity of his Heart
, readily obey'd , laying out his Money , by the Hand of <font> Whitrow
<$$font> , in Bread , Meat , Clothes , which were given away in great
Quantities to the Poor , in the several Countries they came to .
KEIMER-1718-2,35.769

After the Money they had by them , was exhausted , and they seemingly
{TEXT:word_unclear} wanted , <paren> till fresh Supplies could be
remitted from <font> London <$$font> &c. <$$paren> on a sudden to their
great Surprize , they found pieces of Gold , in the midst of a
Half-penny or Penny-Loaf , <paren> suppos'd to be put there by the
Contrivance of <font> Whitrow <$$font> <$$paren> which Sir <font>
Richard <$$font> would cry up as a great Miracle . KEIMER-1718-2,35.770

At other Times , <font> Whitrow <$$font> would have Warnings bidding him
go to such and such a Place , where he should find such and such Moneys
: KEIMER-1718-2,35.771

Accordingly they would go and find it exactly , as foretold : Upon which
Sir <font> Richard <$$font> , with Hands and Eyes lift up to Heaven ,
would give God Thanks for this pretended Miracle , tho' as t@ @is said ,
nothing less than the black Villany of <font> Whitrow <$$font> , who had
before put it there . KEIMER-1718-2,35.772

<P_36>

Thus was this poor Man led up and down for a Year , Two or Three , till
at last having made away most , if not all he {COM:missing_"he"} could
<paren> as I am credibly inform'd <$$paren> seeing his fatal Mistake ,
broke his Heart , and quickly dy'd . KEIMER-1718-2,36.774

<font> Whitrow <$$font> after this , was very rich ,
KEIMER-1718-2,36.775

liv'd at a great Rate , KEIMER-1718-2,36.776

and kept his Chariot , KEIMER-1718-2,36.777

but whether he got the Money , by Miracle , or out of Sir <font> Richard
<$$font> , I@ @'ll leave to the Reader's Judgment to determine .
KEIMER-1718-2,36.778

At a Meeting in <font> Lombard-street <$$font> , one First Day , <font>
Thomas Dutton <$$font> had the Gift of Blessing , KEIMER-1718-2,36.779

and spoke to me as follows , KEIMER-1718-2,36.780

Thou shalt confound those that do speak against this my Appearance unto
thee . KEIMER-1718-2,36.781

Thou shalt see how I will work . KEIMER-1718-2,36.782

They that think themselves so wise , shall be found covered with Shame
and Folly . KEIMER-1718-2,36.783

Give thou not heed unto the Advice of Men , who counsel according to the
Wisdom of this World , which is Foolishness before God :
KEIMER-1718-2,36.784

Do they teach a turning of the Back upon the World , a taking up the
Cross , and following the Lord ? KEIMER-1718-2,36.785

No , they teach a turning the Back upon the Lord , and engaging with the
World . KEIMER-1718-2,36.786

It is not with them , first seek the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness ; KEIMER-1718-2,36.787

but it is , first seek the Riches , the Pleasures of this World , and
then the Kingdom of God : KEIMER-1718-2,36.788

They act as if it were to be added unto 'em . KEIMER-1718-2,36.789

But before your Lord was to enter into his Glory , he was to endure
Sufferings , Trials , Tribulations , a Cross . KEIMER-1718-2,36.790

That@ @'s the Way ; KEIMER-1718-2,36.791

and every true Christian , true Disciple of the Lord , does find , that
that is the Way by which he must arrive at the Joy of his Lord .
KEIMER-1718-2,36.792

Seek thou unto God only , KEIMER-1718-2,36.793

seek unto him by earnest Prayer . KEIMER-1718-2,36.794

Regulate thy Life and Conversation , according to the Directions that he
has laid <P_37> down in his Word . KEIMER-1718-2,37.795

Endeavour with all thy Might , to keep thy_self unspotted from the World
. KEIMER-1718-2,37.796

Be thou ready . KEIMER-1718-2,37.797

Prepare thy Vessel , that when I call , thou may'st answer , <font> Lord
, I am here ready to do thy Will . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,37.798

Take Care of Snares and Temptations . KEIMER-1718-2,37.799

Be thou always upon thy Watch . KEIMER-1718-2,37.800

Let not any thing seduce thee unto Evil ; KEIMER-1718-2,37.801

nor do thou conform thy Conversation to that of those who speak lightly
and contemptuously of this my Appearance . KEIMER-1718-2,37.802

The Eye of God is every where : KEIMER-1718-2,37.803

Wherever thou art , thou art in his Presence : KEIMER-1718-2,37.804

Consider that ; KEIMER-1718-2,37.805

do his Will , and it will be a Joy unto thee . KEIMER-1718-2,37.806

My Peace , my Love , and my Blessings are upon thee .
KEIMER-1718-2,37.807

Go in Peace . KEIMER-1718-2,37.808

My Christian Reader may here behold a lively Instance of Satan's
transforming himself into an Angel of Light , and how far the Devil may
go , in deceiving poor Souls , by this Blessing . KEIMER-1718-2,37.809

What can be more cunning and subtle , than , after my Reason being
captivated , and the Light of Christ extinguish'd in my Soul , to begin
with a Promise , the most suitable as can be , to what was my Darling
Lust , <font> Pride <$$font> , viz. Thou shalt confound those that do
speak against this my Appearance <$$font> , &c. then to make a
Complaint of the Degenerating and Wickedness of Mankind , afterwards ,
to declare several excellent Truths , in Opposition to them , and last
of all , to dismiss me with a soothing flattering , lying Good-By ,
<font> My Peace , My Love , and My Blessing are upon thee .
KEIMER-1718-2,37.810

Go in Peace ? <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,37.811

Nor am I wrong in the least , to declare , that this Blessing with the
rest , which I receiv'd , and all those given to others , are nothing
less than damnable Delusions , as destructive to the Souls of those that
believe 'em , as the most strong Dose of Poyson is to the Bodies of
those who drink it , as I shall in the close of my Book , prove to a
Demonstration . KEIMER-1718-2,37.812

But to proceed , At the same Meeting where I receiv'd the above Blessing
, by <font> Thomas Dutton <$$font> , there were two sober ingenious
young Men , KEIMER-1718-2,37.813

the one was - <font> Eaton <$$font> , Son to an eminent Dissenting
Minister in the Country , who himself was design'd for a Preacher ,
KEIMER-1718-2,37.814

<P_38>

and the other was <font> Isaac Owen <$$font> , Son to another Dissenting
Minister , sometime since well known to those of the <font> Presbyterian
<$$font> Perswasion , having wrote several Books in their Behalf ,
<font> viz. Moderation a Virtue <$$font> , and <font> Moderation still
a Virtue <$$font> , in Answer to <font> Charles Lesly ; <$$font> and
whose Life was printed , and sold by <font> John Lawrence <$$font> , in
the <font> Poultry <$$font> <$$paren> {COM:missing_matching_open_paren}
and design'd for a Doctor of Physick , intending to go to <font> Holland
<$$font> , in Order to take his Degrees . KEIMER-1718-2,38.816

This being the first Time they ever saw the Prophets , as one of 'em
told me , by the Plausible Pretences of the Spirit at that Meeting ,
they were prevail'd on , to kneel , and receive Blessings ,
KEIMER-1718-2,38.817

and thereby were caught , to both their eternal Ruin , if God , in his
infinite Mercy , do not prevent . KEIMER-1718-2,38.818

In a short Time after - <font> Eaton <$$font> went into the Country ,
KEIMER-1718-2,38.819

and his Father dying , he succeeded {TEXT:succeded} him in Estate , and
as Preacher to the same People ; KEIMER-1718-2,38.820

and in the Accounts we had of him , we were inform'd , he had several
Times the Agitations in the Pulpit , while he was preaching ; and that
after some Time , thinking with himself , that having the true Spirit of
God , he would no longer preach the Study of his own Brain , and
therefore laid it down , claps on a long Wig and Sword , travels abroad
, to <font> Rome , &c. <$$font> kisses the <font> Pope <$$font> 's
Slipper , and some Months since , returns to <font> England <$$font> ,
as compleat , and airy a Gentleman , as most are . KEIMER-1718-2,38.821

As for poor <font> Isaac Owen <$$font> , he staid in Town
KEIMER-1718-2,38.822

and lodg'd for the most Part at Dr. <font> Angier <$$font> 's in <font>
Wallbrook <$$font> , KEIMER-1718-2,38.823

wholly declin'd following his intended Study of Physick ,
KEIMER-1718-2,38.824

sold his Estate , expecting the great Revolutions the Spirit had told
him of , KEIMER-1718-2,38.825

liv'd upon the Principal , KEIMER-1718-2,38.826

and after having travell'd up and down the Countries , in Missions ,
with the Prophets and Prophetesses , spending his Time and Money , for
the Propagating that <font> Spirit of Confusion <$$font> , went
KEIMER-1718-2,38.827

and dwelt meanly with a Relation of his in <font> Tower-street <$$font>
, who told me , KEIMER-1718-2,38.828

having spent all to about five or ten Pounds , took it to Heart ,
KEIMER-1718-2,38.829

sicken'd , and dy'd . KEIMER-1718-2,38.830

It was not long after this , another fine Branch sprouted forth from
this Tree of <font> French Prophecy , viz. <$$font> One <font> Harling
<$$font> , <paren> an Old Woman , a Believer , and one whom , I think ,
had great Blessings too <$$paren> set up for a great Body , pretending
to be inspir'd . KEIMER-1718-2,38.831

This Woman had drawn away a Number of Believers <font> French <$$font>
and <font> English <$$font> , who were at her Discretion ,
KEIMER-1718-2,38.832

and call'd her_self <font> The Permanent Spring . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,38.833

Her Way of Discipline , as it was something uncommon , so it will shew ,
to what a monstrous Pitch of Madness several were arriv'd to ,
KEIMER-1718-2,38.834

I shall faithfully <P_39> relate it as follows . KEIMER-1718-2,39.835

The usual Practice was , that after each of her Followers had confess'd
their particular Sins to her , in as full and ample a Manner as possible
, she , with a Whip knotted , with sharp Needles or Pins fastned thereto
, <paren> they having first enudated themselves , whether Men , or Women
<$$paren> would severely whip them , till the Blood issued forth in
great abundance . After which , her Practice was , to cleanse 'em ,
<paren> as she call'd it <$$paren> by lifting up her own Cloaths , and
making Water upon the several Parts that had offended , which she call'd
the <font> Permanent Spring . <$$font> KEIMER-1718-2,39.836

Among the many that submitted to this accursed Practice , was one <font>
Spong , <$$font> <paren> mentioned in <font> John Lacy <$$font> 's or
Sir <font> Richard Bulkely <$$font> 's Books , for a miraculous Cure
wrought upon him <$$paren> who having confess'd himself guilty of <font>
Adultery <$$font> , was severly whipp'd , and his <font> Part <$$font>
offending , was wash'd by that Beast of a Woman@ @'s making Water upon
it . KEIMER-1718-2,39.837

Such hellish and infernal Practices as these were frequently practis'd ,
under a Belief that it was God commanded it . KEIMER-1718-2,39.838

O abonimable ! KEIMER-1718-2,39.839

O Hellish ! KEIMER-1718-2,39.840

The Prophets and Prophetesses had gone Missions , as they term'd 'em ,
into several Parts of the Kingdom KEIMER-1718-2,39.841

and were now commanded on several more ; KEIMER-1718-2,39.842

some went to <font> Bristol <$$font> , <font> Coventry <$$font> , <font>
Worcester <$$font> , <font> Oxford <$$font> , <font> Cambridge <$$font>
, &c. KEIMER-1718-2,39.843

others went to <font> Holland <$$font> , <font> Ireland <$$font> ,
<font> Scotland <$$font> and <font> Wales . <$$font>
KEIMER-1718-2,39.844

Nor were they without Success in their several Progresses , deluding
many sincere People into a Belief of the strange Revolutions approaching
, much to the Purpose as I have before-@ @mention'd , were expected in
this City . KEIMER-1718-2,39.845

