<BEGIN_kimber-1742-1>

<P_257.C1>

<heading>

Elizabeth . KIMBER-1742-1,257.C1.4

<$$heading>

Mary being dead , her Sister <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , Daughter of
<font> Henry <$$font> VIII , and <font> Anne Bolleyn <$$font> , ascended
the Throne , <font> Novemb. <$$font> 17 , 1558 , pursuant to the Order
of Succession settled by that King's Will , as authorized by Act of
Parliament . KIMBER-1742-1,257.C1.6

The Counsellors and Ministers of the late Queen would , doubtless , have
been glad to have set her aside , as they were conscious how deeply they
were concern'd in restoring Popery and persecuting the Protestants , and
as they knew <font> Elizabeth <$$font> was a Protestant in her Heart ,
tho' , to save her Life , she had , as we are told , outwardly conform'd
to her Sister's Religion ; who would have excluded her from the
Succession , but found it impracticable . KIMBER-1742-1,257.C1.7

In the Amazement they were in , they conceal'd the Queen's Death for
some Hours . KIMBER-1742-1,257.C1.8

But as the Parliament was sitting , all they could do , was to send a
Message to the two Houses , to inform them of this <P_257.C2> Event ,
and leave the Declaration of the Successor to them .
KIMBER-1742-1,257.C2.9

As the Act , whereby <font> Elizabeth <$$font> was declar'd illegitimate
, had never been repeal'd , there were two other Princesses , who might
have pretended to the Crown . KIMBER-1742-1,257.C2.10

These were <font> Mary <$$font> Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> ,
Grand-Daughter to <font> Margaret , Henry <$$font> VIII@ @'s eldest
Sister , and <font> Frances <$$font> , Duchess of <font> Suffolk
<$$font> , Daughter to <font> Mary <$$font> , his younger Sister .
KIMBER-1742-1,257.C2.11

But there was no disputing <font> Henry's <$$font> Will , as 't@ @was
made in Consequence of an Act of Parliament , which had never been
repeal'd . KIMBER-1742-1,257.C2.12

And in this Will the Descendants of <font> Margaret <$$font> were not
expressly named at all ; KIMBER-1742-1,257.C2.13

and as far as they might be understood , were placed last in the
Succession . KIMBER-1742-1,257.C2.14

And as to the Descendants of <font> Mary <$$font> , tho' named in the
Will , they were set after <font> Elizabeth <$$font> ;
KIMBER-1742-1,257.C2.15

and so could have no Right to come in before the Queen of <font> Scots
<$$font> , but what <font> Henry's <$$font> Will gave them , which Will
was equally in favour of <font> Elizabeth's <$$font> coming before them
, notwithstanding <P_258.C1> her having been declared illegitimate , as
well as her Sister <font> Mary <$$font> , who succeeded by Virtue of the
same Will . KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.16

Upon this Foot then there could be no Dispute : KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.17

And as <font> Mary <$$font> Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> was married
to the Dauphin of <font> France <$$font> , the Parliament might well
fear that the Consequence of her succeeding to the Crown of <font>
England <$$font> would be its becoming a Province to <font> France .
<$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.18

Besides , she was as bigotted a Papist as the late Queen <font> Mary
<$$font> of <font> England <$$font> ; KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.19

and the Parliament as well as the Nation in general were grown pretty
sick of the late Cruelties on account of Religion ,
KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.20

and might justly fear the Return of those Barbarities , in case the
Queen of <font> Scotland <$$font> should become Queen of <font> England
. <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.21

Add to this , that the Majority of the Lords , if not of the Commons ,
seem to have wished well to the Reformation , tho' they dissembled in
the Reign of <font> Mary <$$font> ; and perhaps were afraid , if Popery
should continue , that they should be obliged , one Time or other , to
restore the rich Abbey-Lands they were possess'd of : And those who were
real Friends to the Papal Religion might hope , that <font> Elizabeth
<$$font> would , at least , favour them , as she thought fit , if we may
believe <font> Camden <$$font> , to be a Conformist during her Sister's
Reign . KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.22

Be this as it will , the House of Lords first , and then the Commons ,
unanimously declar'd for <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , who was thereupon
proclaim'd Queen of <font> England , France <$$font> and <font> Ireland
. <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.23

She was then at <font> Hatfield <$$font> , KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.24

and upon her receiving the agreeable News , she came up to <font> London
<$$font> , attended by a numerous Train of Lords and Ladies ,
KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.25

and was received every where with the loud and joyful Acclamations of
infinite Crowds of People . KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.26

Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> began her Reign at 25 Years of Age ,
KIMBER-1742-1,258.C1.27

and in the Course of it shew'd the most consummate Policy and Skill in
Government , acquiring , upon the Whole , <P_258.C2> the Character of a
great and glorious Queen . KIMBER-1742-1,258.C2.28

As to her Person , she was tolerably handsome , her Mien grand , noble
and majestick . KIMBER-1742-1,258.C2.29

But what she is most to be admir'd for are the Endowments of her Mind ,
her solid Judgment , her great Capacity , her deep Penetration ; all
which she discover'd in the Choice of her Ministers , in the prudent and
frugal Management of her Revenues , in a thorough Knowledge of the
Interests , Views , and Intrigues of foreign States , and taking her
Measures accordingly , for her own Safety and the Peace and Prosperity
of her People ; and above all , in taking Care , by her affable and
engaging Deportment , to reign in the Hearts of her Subjects , and
preserve their Affection , as she knew that to be the best Means of
preserving her Crown , and making it fit easy upon her Head .
KIMBER-1742-1,258.C2.30

After all , it must be allow'd , that Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font>
had some Faults , and was guilty of some Severities which can hardly be
excused , unless she thought them necessary to the Safety of her Person
, and the Peace of her Kingdoms ; wherein too she might possibly be
mistaken . KIMBER-1742-1,258.C2.31

However , these Faults were greatly outweigh'd by her Virtues .
KIMBER-1742-1,258.C2.32

And if we consider , that she had for Enemies , <font> France <$$font>
and <font> Spain <$$font> , the Pope , and all the Catholick Powers ,
who deny'd her Title ; that the Queen of <font> Scotland <$$font> was
supported by all those Powers , in her Pretensions to her Crown ; that
her own Roman-Catholick {COM:font_change_around_"Roman"} Subjects wish'd
to have her dethroned , and were often in Plots for that Purpose , in
which they were encourag'd by foreign Powers , that the <font> Irish
<$$font> , who were strongly attach'd to the Pope , were rebellious ,
and occasion'd many intestine Commotions in that Kingdom : And yet that
in the Midst of all she , without any Allies , supported herself thro' a
long and glorious Reign : defeated all the <P_259.C1> Projects of her
Enemies , and kept the Crown unshaken on her Head to the last , purely
by her good Policy , and the Affection , Zeal and Loyalty of her
faithful Subjects , whom by her wise Behaviour she attach'd firmly to
her Interest : I say , if we consider all these Things , her vast and
surprizing Abilities will evidently appear . KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.33

After these general Reflections , I shall now proceed to give some
Account of the chief Transactions and Occurrences in the long Reign of
this renowned Queen . KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.34

After dispatching Ambassadors to foreign Courts to notify her Accession
, the Queen form'd her Council , in which she continu'd 13 that had been
Counsellors to the late Queen , all Roman-Catholicks
{COM:font_change_around_"Roman"} . KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.35

To these she added 8 more , who were all as zealous Protestants : Among
whom were <font> Francis Russel <$$font> Earl of <font> Bedford <$$font>
, Sir <font> William Cecil <$$font> , and Sir <font> Nicholas Bacon
<$$font> , who was made Keeper of the Great Seal .
KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.36

With these and some others of the Protestant Counsellors she held secret
Consultations , how to restore the Reformed Religion in <font> England .
<$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.37

Before this was done , King <font> Philip <$$font> of <font> Spain
<$$font> offer'd her Marriage , which tho' she was resolv'd against , as
being his Sister-in-Law , as well as on other Accounts , yet she would
not give a peremptory Denial , but kept him in Suspense , because it was
not her Interest to break with him at present . KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.38

But when once she had establish'd the Reformation , there was an End of
the Affair , KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.39

and <font> Philip <$$font> , of {COM:sic} her Friend , became her Enemy
. KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.40

What made the Restoring of the Reformation the easier was this , that
tho' the Kingdom appear'd wholly Popish , it was not really so ;
KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.41

but the Majority had been compell'd to put on the outward Procession by
the Severity of the Laws , which they would be glad to quit when they
could do it with Safety . KIMBER-1742-1,259.C1.42

The Methods taken for this Purpose <P_259.C2> were , to remove all the
zealous Catholicks from the Council , and from all Posts of Authority ,
and to turn out the Popish Magistrates of Counties and Corporations ,
and put Protestants in their Room , in order to have such Members chosen
and return'd to serve in Parliament , as should favour the Reformation .
KIMBER-1742-1,259.C2.43

And before they met , the Queen shew'd her Intentions , by publishing a
Proclamation , allowing Divine Service to be perform'd , and the Holy
Scriptures to be read , in the vulgar Tongue . KIMBER-1742-1,259.C2.44

The Queen was crown'd on the 15th of <font> Jan. <$$font> 1559 , by
<font> Oglethorpe <$$font> Bishop of <font> Carlisle <$$font> , all the
rest of the Bishops refusing to be concern'd in the Office , because
they already saw <font> Elizabeth's <$$font> Aversion to the Church of
<font> Rome . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,259.C2.45

About ten Days after , the Parliament met , who restor'd the <font>
First Fruits <$$font> and <font> Tenths <$$font> to the Crown ,
appointed publick Worship to be perform'd in the vulgar Tongue , and
restor'd the Queen to her Right of Supremacy in all Causes
Ecclesiastical , as well as Civil , empowering her to put the Exercise
of it into what Hands she pleased ; which gave Rise to a new Court ,
call'd the <font> High-Commission-Court <$$font> , in which several
Commissioners had the same Power that <font> Cromwell <$$font> had as
<font> Viceregent {TEXT:Vicegrent} <$$font> in the Reign of <font> Henry
<$$font> VIII . KIMBER-1742-1,259.C2.46

They also renew'd and confirm'd all the Acts of <font> Edward <$$font>
VI. concerning Religion , KIMBER-1742-1,259.C2.47

passed the famous Act of Uniformity , KIMBER-1742-1,259.C2.48

and by another Act suppress'd all the Religious Houses which <font> Mary
<$$font> had founded , KIMBER-1742-1,259.C2.49

and gave their Lands and Revenues to the Crown .
KIMBER-1742-1,259.C2.50

To finish at once , what I would say on this Subject , I shall add ,
that in 1563 , an Act pass'd against holding and maintaining the
Authority of the Bishop of <font> Rome <$$font> , and another to
establish and confirm the Queen's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs :
KIMBER-1742-1,259.C2.51

<P_260.C1>

And the Articles of the Church of <font> England <$$font> , as they
stand at this Day , were settled by the Convocation .
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.53

Thus the Reformation , which , with several Interruptions , had been
carrying on above 30 Years , was at last firmly established :
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.54

But the Act of Uniformity , and the Subscriptions that were requir'd ,
occasion'd Divisions among the Protestants themselves , which in Time
produc'd fatal Consequences ; those who were afterwards called <font>
Puritans <$$font> , contending for a farther Reformation , whilst the
others were as stiffly against it ; tho' the former seemed to be as much
for Uniformity and Subscriptions in their own Way , as their Antagonists
were in theirs . KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.55

And from the Mischiefs that these Contentions produc'd , we may see the
Reasonableness and Necessity of a general Toleration .
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.56

'T@ @is observ'd , that of 9,400 beneficed Clergymen in <font> England
<$$font> , only 14 Bishops , 12 Archdeacons , 15 Heads of Colleges , and
about 80 of the Parochial Clergy refus'd to comply with the Reformation
, who were turn'd out , and their Places fill'd by Protestants .
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.57

What tended very much to the Safety of Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font>
and her Government , and secur'd her from the Attempts of foreign Powers
, was their having their Hands full with the intestine Broils of their
own Subjects . KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.58

These Troubles she politickly promoted as much as she could ,
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.59

and made her Advantage of them . KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.60

As they were chiefly on account of Religion , she assisted the
Protestants in <font> Scotland , France <$$font> , and the <font>
Low-Countries <$$font> , against their respective Sovereigns , or the
governing Party , by whom they had been cruelly oppress'd and persecuted
. KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.61

The Reformation had prevail'd greatly in <font> Scotland <$$font> ,
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C1.62

and the Protestants there had enter'd into an Association , with <font>
James Stuart <$$font> , Prior of St. <font> Andrew's , <$$font> their
Queen's <P_260.C2> Bastard Brother , at their Head , to stand up in
their own Defence against the Roman-Catholicks
{COM:font_change_around_"Roman"} , who had the Government in their Hands
, and were supported by <font> France . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C2.63

The Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> and the Dauphin her Husband had , by
Order of <font> Henry <$$font> II. of <font> France <$$font> , taken
the Arms of <font> England <$$font> , with the Title of Sovereigns of
that Kingdom , KIMBER-1742-1,260.C2.64

and continued to do so , after the Dauphin , by the Death of his Father
, became King of <font> France <$$font> , by the Name of <font> Francis
<$$font> II. when the Duke of <font> Guise <$$font> and Cardinal of
<font> Lorrain <$$font> , the Queen's Uncles , govern'd all in <font>
France . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,260.C2.65

This rais'd the Jealousy of Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , who from
that Time look'd upon <font> Mary <$$font> , Queen of <font> Scotland
<$$font> , as a dangerous Rival , especially as she was supported by the
<font> French <$$font> , who had sent Forces into <font> Scotland
<$$font> , in order to subdue the Protestant Party , and then to turn
their Arms against <font> England <$$font> , to dethrone <font>
Elizabeth <$$font> and set up <font> Mary <$$font> in her Room .
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C2.66

This induc'd Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , in 1560 , to enter into a
Treaty with the <font> Scotch <$$font> Malecontents , in pursuance of
which she sent an Army into <font> Scotland <$$font> , in order to break
the Measures of her Enemies ; which had the desir'd Success .
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C2.67

For the same Purpose she some Time after assisted the <font> Huguenots
<$$font> in <font> France <$$font> , <paren> as the Protestants were
there call'd <$$paren> against their Enemies the Papists , who by the
Instigation of the <font> Guises <$$font> had commenc'd a violent
Persecution against them , and brought them to the Necessity of taking
Arms . KIMBER-1742-1,260.C2.68

By these Means Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> kept both <font> France
<$$font> and <font> Scottland <$$font> so employ'd , that they could
find no Opportunity to put their Schemes of dethroning her in Execution
. KIMBER-1742-1,260.C2.69

<font> Robert Dudley <$$font> , Son to the late Duke of <font>
Northumberland <$$font> , was now a great Favourite at Court .
KIMBER-1742-1,260.C2.70

The Queen some Time after made him <P_261.C1> Earl of <font> Leicester
<$$font> ; tho' he had so little Merit , that 't@ @was hard to account
for the Ascendant he had over her . KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.71

At the same Time Sir <font> William Cecil <$$font> , Secretary of State
, a Man of vast Abilities , of great Integrity and deep Penetration ,
was First-Minister for the Affairs of the Government .
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.72

The Queen afterwards created him Lord <font> Burleigh <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.73

and made him Lord High-Treasurer , KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.74

and he continued a faithful Servant to her Majesty till his Death ,
which happened not till many Years after . KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.75

<font> Mary <$$font> , upon the Death of her Husband <font> Francis
<$$font> II. who was succeeded by his Brother <font> Charles <$$font>
IX. left <font> France <$$font> , KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.76

and arriv'd in <font> Scotland <$$font> in 1561 .
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.77

She now , by the Advice of the <font> Guises <$$font> her Uncles , till
they should have a better Opportunity to act in her Favour , quitted the
Title and Arms of Queen of <font> England <$$font> ;
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.78

but this did not satisfy <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , who insisted upon
her declaring she had no Right ever to take them , and upon her
ratifying the Treaty of <font> Edinburgh <$$font> , whereby she was to
promise never to resume them : Which <font> Mary <$$font> refused to do
, KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.79

and this was the Source of a perpetual Difference and Animosity between
the two Queens . KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.80

Before <font> Mary's <$$font> Arrival , the States of <font> Scotland
<$$font> , who met by Virtue of a Patent from her to <font> James Stuart
<$$font> , soon after made Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> , had
establish'd the Protestant Religion in that Kingdom ; after which , by
their Order , the Monasteries were all demolished .
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.81

The Pope , not yet quite out of Hopes of reclaiming <font> Elizabeth
<$$font> , was desirous , about this Time , to send a Nuncio into <font>
England . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.82

He was actually arriv'd in <font> Flanders <$$font> ,
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.83

and demanded Permission to continue his Journey to <font> England
<$$font> , KIMBER-1742-1,261.C1.84

but could never obtain it ; the Queen saying , she had nothing to do
with the Pope , who had no more Authority than <P_261.C2> other Bishops
. KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.85

After this , being well assur'd , that the Pope would spare no Pains to
give her Disturbance from all Quarters , both at home and abroad , she
took the wisest Precautions for her Safety , keeping a good Fleet always
in Readiness against any Invasion , and securing more and more the
Affections of her Subjects , which she look'd upon as her only Support .
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.86

In 1563 , the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> had the Satisfaction of
being deliver'd from one Rival , by the Death of <font> Frances Brandon
<$$font> Duchess of <font> Suffolk <$$font> , Granddaughter
{TEXT:Grandaughter} to <font> Henry <$$font> VII , who , as has been
said , was plac'd next after <font> Elizabeth <$$font> in <font> Henry
<$$font> VIII@ @'s Will . KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.87

The Year following , Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> visited the
University of <font> Cambridge <$$font> , where she was very
magnificently receiv'd , KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.88

and express'd her Satisfaction in an elegant <font> Latin <$$font>
Speech , of which Tongue she was perfect Mistress .
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.89

Shortly after , she visited the University of <font> Oxford <$$font> ,
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.90

was receiv'd in the same Manner , KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.91

and made the same Return . KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.92

In 1565 , the Queen of <font> Scotland <$$font> married <font> Henry
Stuart <$$font> , Lord <font> Darnley <$$font> , Son to the Countess of
<font> Lenox <$$font> , Daughter of <font> Margaret <$$font> Queen of
<font> Scotland <$$font> by her second Husband the Earl of <font> Angus
<$$font> ; by which Means she united the Title of that Family to the
Crown of <font> England <$$font> with her own . KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.93

After this Marriage there was nothing but Confusion in <font> Scotland .
KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.94

Darnley <$$font> was a Catholick , KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.95

and <font> Murray <$$font> and several other Lords were against the
Match , as fearing it would endanger the Reformation , as well as on
their own private Accounts . KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.96

The Queen about this Time was more than ordinarily attach'd to one
<font> David Rizzo <$$font> , Son to a Musician of <font> Turin <$$font>
, who had so insinuated himself into her Favour , as to become , in a
Manner , Prime-Minister ; KIMBER-1742-1,261.C2.97

and , if we believe <font> Buchanan <$$font> , she was guilty of
scandalous Familiarities <P_262.C1> with him . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.98

However that be , the King her Husband grew jealous of him .
KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.99

This Jealousy was increas'd by the Aversion the Queen , on all Occasions
, shew'd him , soon after the Marriage ; KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.100

and the Sway <font> Rizzo <$$font> bore in her Affection , fill'd
several of the Nobles with Indignation . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.101

This ended in the Murder of <font> Rizzo <$$font> , by Order of the King
, in 1566 . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.102

The Lord <font> Ruthven , Douglas <$$font> and others , rushing into the
Queen's Chamber , fell upon him KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.103

and kill'd him in her Presence , when she was five Months gone with
Child . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.104

She was kept under a Guard for some Time , KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.105

but put on such an artful Fondness for her Husband , that she found
Means to regain her Freedom and resume her Authority ; after which she
express'd a greater Antipathy to the King her Husband than before , and
took all Occasions to mortify him . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.106

She could not bear the Sight of him , KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.107

and fled from his Company ; so much had <font> Rizzo's <$$font> Murder
increas'd her Aversion . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.108

And now the Earl of <font> Bothwell <$$font> began to have the same
Place in her Heart that <font> Rizzo <$$font> had before ,
KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.109

and became as great a Favourite , and as absolute at Court ; whilst the
King was entirely neglected , and once had Poison given him , which
however had not the Effect his Enemies desir'd :
KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.110

But soon after , at the Beginning of the Year 1567 , he was murder'd in
his Bed by <font> Bothwell's <$$font> Procurement , the Queen also
herself being strongly suspected to be privy to the Crime ;
KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.111

and what strengthen'd this Suspicion was her marrying <font> Bothwell
<$$font> in a short Time after , whom all the World charg'd with this
Murder . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C1.112

I shall just observe , that between the Murder of <font> Rizzo <$$font>
and that of the King , <font> June <$$font> 15 , 1566 , Queen <font>
Mary <$$font> was brought to bed of a Prince , named <font> James
<$$font> , who was afterwards our King <font> James <$$font> I. when
<P_262.C2> he had been for many Years King of <font> Scotland .
<$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.113

Plots had been continually carrying on in <font> England <$$font> in
Favour of <font> Mary <$$font> , which had even infected the two Houses
of Parliament , who strongly press'd Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font>
either to marry , or to name her successor , having a View to the Queen
of <font> Scots <$$font> , tho' they did not speak out .
KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.114

But she would do neither the one nor the other .
KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.115

It seems she was always resolv'd not to marry , tho' she was courted by
almost all the young Princes in <font> Europe <$$font> , and fed them
with Hopes , only to make her own Advantage whilst such Negotiations
were on foot . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.116

And she would never make the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> her Heir ,
lest her Party in <font> England <$$font> , which was already strong ,
should become stronger , and she should be exposed to the Mortification
of seeing her Subjects adore the Rising-Sun . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.117

This Affair , however , might have given her great Uneasiness , if the
Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> had not lost her self by her late
shameful Conduct , and evidently lessen'd her Party in <font> England .
<$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.118

The Murder of the King , and the Queen's Marriage with <font> Bothwell
<$$font> , produc'd great Alterations in <font> Scotland . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.119

The Earls of <font> Argyll , Morton , Marr , Athol , Glencairn <$$font>
and others , enter'd into a Confederacy to bring the Murderers to
Justice , and dissolve the Queen's Marriage . KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.120

They rais'd Forces , KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.121

and <font> Edinburgh <$$font> declar'd for them .
KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.122

The Queen and <font> Bothwell <$$font> retir'd to <font> Dunbar <$$font>
, KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.123

and levy'd some Troops in order to oppose the Confederates .
KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.124

But they not appearing hearty , and many deserting , the Queen had no
other Way , than to capitulate with the confederate Lords , and put
herself into their Hands , who conducted her to <font> Edinburgh
<$$font> and set a Guard over her : KIMBER-1742-1,262.C2.125

And upon discovering <P_263.C1> that she still kept a Correspondence
with <font> Bothwell <$$font> by Letters , they confin'd her in <font>
Lochleven-Castle . KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.126

Bothwell <$$font> , after this , finding there was no Safety for him in
<font> Scotland <$$font> , retir'd to the <font> Orkneys <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.127

and turn'd Pirate , KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.128

and afterward escap'd to <font> Denmark <$$font> , where he was
imprison'd , and liv'd in great Misery for some Years , which at length
turn'd his Brains . KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.129

Soon after the Queen's Imprisonment , the Confederates oblig'd her to
resign her Crown to her Son , who was but about a Year old ,
KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.130

and the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> was appointed Regent .
KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.131

But quickly a strong Party was form'd against him in order to restore
the Queen , who had escap'd from her Confinement .
KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.132

Forces were rais'd on both Sides ; KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.133

but the Regent , with a much inferior Number , in 1568 , defeated the
Queen's in the Battle of <font> Glasgow <$$font> ,
KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.134

and forced her to fly into <font> England <$$font> , where Queen <font>
Elizabeth <$$font> kept her a Prisoner many Years , and from whence she
never return'd . KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.135

The Troubles in <font> Scotland <$$font> still continued , of which I
shall say no more , but that the politick Queen of <font> England
<$$font> avail'd her self of them all : KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.136

And after <font> Murray's <$$font> Murder , when her Enemies there
attempted a Union among the <font> Scots <$$font> , in order to act
against her with the Assistance of foreign Forces , she artfully
fomented their Differences , KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.137

and so broke all their Measures . Tho' afterwards , when <font> Mary's
<$$font> Party was sufficiently weakened , and <font> France <$$font>
was endeavouring to keep up the Differences in <font> Scotland ,
Elizabeth <$$font> thought it her Interest to compose them ; in which
she happily succeeded . KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.138

The Persecution of the Protestants in the <font> Low-Countries <$$font>
under the Duke of <font> Alva <$$font> , whom the King of <font> Spain
<$$font> had sent with an Army against them , occasion'd several <font>
Flemish <$$font> Families to fly for Refuge to <font> England .
<$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,263.C1.139

Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> settled them at <P_263.C2> <font>
Norwich , Colchester , Sandwich <$$font> , and several other Places ;
which turned greatly to the Advantage of the Nation , they being the
first , who brought hither , the Art of making <font> Bays <$$font> and
<font> Says <$$font> , and other Linen and Woollen Cloths of the like
Sort . KIMBER-1742-1,263.C2.140

At the same Time the Persecution was rekindled against the <font>
Huguenots <$$font> in <font> France <$$font> , the two Courts of <font>
France <$$font> and <font> Spain <$$font> having agreed , at the famous
Interview of <font> Bayonne <$$font> , to use their joint Endeavours to
extirpate Hereticks . KIMBER-1742-1,263.C2.141

Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , not doubting but when they had
accomplish'd their Ends in their own Dominions , they would turn their
Arms against her , assisted the <font> Huguenots <$$font> again , as she
had done before . KIMBER-1742-1,263.C2.142

And how she assisted the <font> Hollanders <$$font> in throwing off the
<font> Spanish <$$font> Yoke , will be seen in its proper Place .
KIMBER-1742-1,263.C2.143

At the Beginning of the Year 1569 , several great Men , of the Queen's
Council , who were Friends to the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> , and
wanted either to have her on the Throne , or declar'd <font> Elizabeth's
<$$font> presumptive Heir , conspir'd to get Secretary <font> Cecil
<$$font> remov'd , whom they knew to be an Enemy to all such Designs ,
and to be heartily in his Mistress's Interest .
KIMBER-1742-1,263.C2.144

But <font> Elizabeth <$$font> knowing the Fidelity of her Minister ,
silenc'd his Enemies , KIMBER-1742-1,263.C2.145

and effectually discourag'd their Attempts . KIMBER-1742-1,263.C2.146

Soon after , the Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> , who had been in great
Favour with the Queen , but was one of those concern'd in the Plot
against <font> Cecil <$$font> , fell under her Displeasure ,
KIMBER-1742-1,263.C2.147

and was sent to the <font> Tower <$$font> , for having carried on an
Intrigue for marrying the Queen of <font> Scots . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,263.C2.148

This Project was favour'd by all the Malecontents , Sticklers for that
Queen , who certainly carried their Views farther than the Duke of
<font> Norfolk <$$font> , who was a profess'd Protestant , might at
first intend ; tho' afterwards , it is probable , <P_264.C1> he gave
them Hopes of complying with their whole Design , which was to set the
Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> on the Throne of <font> England <$$font>
, and to restore the Popish Religion . KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.149

This appears by the Rebellion , which broke out about the same Time in
the <font> North <$$font> , under the Earls of <font> Northumberland
<$$font> and <font> Westmoreland <$$font> , and <font> Dacres <$$font> a
<font> Northern <$$font> Gentleman ; who among other Things in their
<font> Manifesto <$$font> say , that their Design in taking Arms was to
<font> restore the Religion of their Forefathers . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.150

Besides , they burnt the <font> English <$$font> Bibles and
Common-Prayer Books , KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.151

and said <font> Mass <$$font> publickly . KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.152

Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , by her good Policy and timely
Preparations suppress'd this Rebellion , having before , for the greater
Security , remov'd the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> from <font>
Tutbury-Castle <$$font> in <font> Staffordshire <$$font> , to <font>
Coventry . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.153

Several of the Rebels were hang'd , some out-law'd , and the rest
pardon'd . KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.154

The Earl of <font> Westmoreland <$$font> and <font> Dacres <$$font>
escap'd into <font> Flanders ; <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.155

and the Earl of <font> Northumberland <$$font> , after having conceal'd
himself for some Time in <font> Scotland <$$font> , was first seiz'd and
imprison'd by the Earl of <font> Murray <$$font> , and afterwards
deliver'd to Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , by the Earl of <font>
Morton <$$font> , and beheaded . KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.156

The Duke of <font> Norfolk <$$font> had been releas'd out of the <font>
Tower <$$font> , upon his promising to think no more of marrying the
Queen of <font> Scots . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.157

But some Time after , having resum'd that Project , and engag'd deeper
in the Plot against <font> Elizabeth <$$font> and her Government ,
having held a Correspondence not only with the <font> Scotch <$$font>
Queen , but with the Bishop of <font> Ross <$$font> her Ambassador , the
<font> French <$$font> and <font> Spanish <$$font> Ambassadors , and
even with <font> Ridolpho <$$font> , who was privately the Pope's Agent
in <font> England <$$font> for raising a Rebellion against the Queen ;
he was again apprehended , and recommitted to the <font> Tower <$$font>
, KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.158

and lost his Head on a Scaffold in 1572 . KIMBER-1742-1,264.C1.159

<P_264.C2>

These and many other Plots , for which the Queen of <font> Scots
<$$font> and the freeing her from her Confinement was made a Handle ,
and which she her self encourag'd as much as she could , furnish'd Queen
<font> Elizabeth <$$font> with farther Reasons for detaining her still a
Prisoner . KIMBER-1742-1,264.C2.161

For if she could give her so much Trouble in her present Situation , she
was likely to occasion more , if she were at Liberty , and at the Head
of her Party in <font> Scotland <$$font> and <font> England . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,264.C2.162

The many Conspiracies against the Queen , occasioned the Parliament to
pass some severe Acts against the Catholicks , for the Safety of the
Queen's Person , the Defence of her Title , and the Security of the
Protestant Religion . KIMBER-1742-1,264.C2.163

The Year 1571 pass'd chiefly in Negotiations for a Marriage between
Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> and the Duke of <font> Anjou <$$font> ,
second Son to <font> Catharine de Medicis <$$font> , and Brother to
<font> Charles <$$font> IX. King of <font> France . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,264.C2.164

Both <font> Charles <$$font> and <font> Elizabeth <$$font> found their
Account in this Negotiation , tho' neither of them intended it should
take Effect . KIMBER-1742-1,264.C2.165

<font> Charles's <$$font> Design was to amuse <font> Elizabeth <$$font>
and all the Protestants , particularly the <font> Huguenots <$$font> ,
with whom he had made a perfidious Peace till he had drawn them into the
Snare , in order to destroy them by Treachery , when he found it
difficult to do it by open Force ; which accordingly happened the next
Year in the Massacre of St. <font> Bartholomew <$$font> , in which
Admiral <font> Chatillon <$$font> , and all those <font> Huguenots
<$$font> who had been drawn to Court under Pretence of celebrating the
Nuptials of the King of <font> Navarre <$$font> with <font> Charles's
<$$font> Sister , were inhumanly butcher'd ; tho' there were still
enough left to occasion him further Trouble . KIMBER-1742-1,264.C2.166

Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> enter'd into the Negotiation of the
Match to please her Ministers , who were continually pressing her to
marry , <P_265.C1> in order to cut off all Hopes from the Queen of
<font> Scots : <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,265.C1.167

Besides , whilst her Enemies believ'd the Marriage was going to be
concluded , they would of Course be disheartened .
KIMBER-1742-1,265.C1.168

And she dissembled so well in this Affair , that even <font> Cecil
<$$font> himself , who was now Lord <font> Burleigh <$$font> , thought
for some Time she was in earnest . KIMBER-1742-1,265.C1.169

But it was at last broke off on account of Religion , which was always
<font> Elizabeth's <$$font> last Resort for breaking off Treaties of
this Kind . KIMBER-1742-1,265.C1.170

However , this did not hinder a defensive League being concluded between
the two Crowns , from which <font> Elizabeth <$$font> hoped to draw some
Advantage for her own Safety , tho' the perfidious Court of <font>
France <$$font> intended no such Thing , but only farther to amuse the
<font> Huguenots <$$font> ; KIMBER-1742-1,265.C1.171

for 't@ @was soon after the Conclusion of this Alliance that the
barbarous Massacre above mention'd happened . KIMBER-1742-1,265.C1.172

Nevertheless , even after this , the highest Protestations of Friendship
pass'd between the two Courts , <font> Charles <$$font> being afraid of
the Queen of <font> England@ @'s <$$font> assisting the <font> Huguenots
<$$font> , and she being willing to gain Time , that she might penetrate
farther into the Designs of her Enemies ; so that the <font> Huguenots
<$$font> could not tell what to make of their good Protectress , who had
even gone so far as to stand Godmother to <font> Charles's <$$font>
new-born Daughter , after the Massacre of <font> St. Bartholomew
<$$font> ; which might make one believe , that her Zeal for the
Protestant Religion was always subordinate to her private Interest .
Tho' this must be observ'd , that she ordered her Ambassador , who was
to represent her , not to be present at the <font> Mass <$$font> in the
Ceremony of the Christening ; and if it should be insisted on , to get
the Queen of <font> Navarre <$$font> to stand in his Room .
KIMBER-1742-1,265.C1.173

And tho' she did not openly assist the <font> Huguenots <$$font> in
<font> Rocbelle <$$font> , yet she conniv'd at her Subjects <P_265.C2>
doing it at their own Expence . KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.174

She knew there was no Sincerity in <font> Charles's <$$font> Pretensions
of Friendship ; KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.175

but to keep him at Bay , she resolv'd to match him in Dissimulation ,
KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.176

and at the same Time made all the necessary Preparations for her Defence
. KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.177

<font> Charles <$$font> died soon after , KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.178

and was succeeded by his Brother the Duke of <font> Anjou <$$font> , by
the Name of <font> Henry <$$font> III. who also carried on Hostilities
against the <font> Huguenots <$$font> , at the same Time that he press'd
Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> to renew the League between the two
Crowns ; which she did , but underhand supply'd the Prince of <font>
Condé <$$font> with Money for the <font> Huguenots . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.179

Some Time after , another Negotiation was carried on for a Marriage
between her and the Duke of <font> Alençon <$$font> , now Duke of <font>
Anjou , Henry <$$font> 's Brother , which went much farther than the
former , even to the Signing of the Marriage Articles ,
KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.180

and the Duke came over in Person , KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.181

and was received by her in such a Manner , that every body thought the
Match as good as concluded ; KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.182

but by_and_by it was all broke off on a sudden , as the other had been .
KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.183

Her Conduct in this Affair was somewhat unaccountable .
KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.184

'T@ @is most likely 't@ @was purely the Effect of her Policy ; tho' one
<font> Stubbs <$$font> had his right Hand cut off on a Scaffold for
writing against the Marriage ; when he pulled off his Hat with his left
, and cry'd , <font> God save the Queen ! <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.185

The Oppressions of the <font> Spaniards <$$font> in the <font>
Low-Countries <$$font> , had for some Time occasion'd great Confusions
there . KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.186

<font> Philip <$$font> was not only bent upon extirpating the
Protestants in those Parts , but upon suppressing all the antient Rights
and Privileges of those Provinces , and governing them by his own
absolute Will and Pleasure . KIMBER-1742-1,265.C2.187

The Duke of <font> Alva <$$font> with his Army of <P_266.C1> <font>
Spaniards <$$font> committed excessive Cruelties ,
KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.188

and had introduc'd the Inquisition , so odious to all the Inhabitants ,
Papists as well as Protestants . KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.189

This forced them at last to enter into a Confederacy , and take Arms for
the Defence of their Liberties ; KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.190

and Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> thought it good Policy to assist
them both with Men and Money , since it was well known , that when once
those Provinces were reduc'd to Obedience , and the Reformation there
entirely suppressed , the Design was to invade <font> England <$$font> ,
dethrone the Queen , and restore the Popish Religion .
KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.191

She began therefore to aid the oppressed States in 1577 , when she lent
them 100,000 <font> l. <$$font> Sterling to enable them to carry on the
War . KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.192

Next Year several Companies of Voluntiers were formed in <font> England
<$$font> , who went over to serve the States with the Queen's
Approbation . KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.193

Some Years after she sent over a good Body of <font> English <$$font>
Forces under the Earl of <font> Leicester <$$font> ;
KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.194

but he making a bad Use of the Power the States had intrusted him with ,
and soon discovering his Ambition to set himself up as Sovereign of the
<font> Low-Countries <$$font> , gave great Offence to the States . Upon
which the Queen recall'd him , and appointed the Lord <font> Willougbby
<$$font> , General of the <font> English <$$font> Forces in his Room .
KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.195

In short , from Maxims of Policy , she continued to support them to the
last ; KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.196

and this War , chiefly under the Conduct of the brave Princes of <font>
Orange <$$font> , ended in a total Revolt of seven of these Provinces
from the Dominion of <font> Spain ; <$$font> {COM:sic_font_change} which
now make the most considerable Republick in the World :
KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.197

And to this , Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> , by her Assistance ,
contributed not a little . KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.198

Things were come to that Pass in <font> France <$$font> , that it became
agreeable to Queen <font> Elizabeth's <$$font> Policy , openly to assist
the <font> Huguenots <$$font> again . KIMBER-1742-1,266.C1.199

<P_266.C2>

A League had been form'd against them by the Catholicks in the Reign of
<font> Henry <$$font> III. who himself had approv'd of it , and swore
to do his utmost to extirpate them . KIMBER-1742-1,266.C2.201

But he being a weak and indolent Prince , and having no Child , the Duke
of <font> Guise <$$font> , who was at the Head of the Catholicks ,
form'd a powerful Party in order to raise himself to the Throne , either
before or after <font> Henry's <$$font> Death .
KIMBER-1742-1,266.C2.202

He assum'd such an exorbitant Power , that <font> Henry <$$font> was no
more than the Shadow of a King , who therefore hated him , and made use
of <font> Henry <$$font> of <font> Bourbon <$$font> , King of <font>
Navarre <$$font> , first Prince of the Blood of <font> France <$$font> ,
who was at the Head of the <font> Huguenots <$$font> , and whose Title
to the Crown he supported , to oppose the Duke's Measures , who had made
a League with <font> Spain <$$font> , and brought the <font> Spaniards
<$$font> into <font> France <$$font> to support him against the <font>
Huguenots <$$font> , and assist him to mount the Throne .
KIMBER-1742-1,266.C2.203

<font> Henry <$$font> III. got him and his Brother assassinated , upon
which the League and the City of <font> Paris <$$font> declar'd against
him ; KIMBER-1742-1,266.C2.204

and whilst he was besieging that Place , he was kill'd by one <font>
Clement <$$font> a <font> Jacobine <$$font> Friar , who stabb'd him in
the Belly . KIMBER-1742-1,266.C2.205

The King of <font> Navarre <$$font> succeeded him , by the Name of
<font> Henry <$$font> lV <font> . KIMBER-1742-1,266.C2.206

Elizabeth <$$font> assisted him and the <font> Huguenots <$$font> , both
before and after his Accession to the Crown of <font> France <$$font> ;
KIMBER-1742-1,266.C2.207

but finding the Priests and Monks and all the Roman-Catholicks
{COM:font_change_around_"Roman"} so strong a Party against him , he
thought fit to change his Religion in order to preserve his Crown .
Upon which Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> remonstrated to him , in a
very pathetick Letter she wrote him on that Occasion .
KIMBER-1742-1,266.C2.208

It was not without Reason , that Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font>
assisted the Protestants in <font> France <$$font> and the <font>
Netherlands <$$font> , as she thereby kept her Enemies employ'd , and
hinder'd them <P_267.C1> from executing their Projects against <font>
England . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.209

The Pope had excommunicated her , and absolv'd her Subjects from their
Allegiance . KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.210

The King of <font> Spain <$$font> and Duke of <font> Guise <$$font> were
in a League with the Pope , to invade <font> England <$$font> , dethrone
the Queen , and set up the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> in her Room .
KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.211

In the mean Time , many Plots were set on foot by the Popish Emissaries
, to take away her Life ; for which several Priests , Jesuits and others
were executed . KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.212

A Body of <font> Spaniards <$$font> and <font> Italians <$$font> were
landed in <font> Ireland <$$font> , to drive the <font> English <$$font>
out of that Kingdom ; KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.213

but this had no Effect , thro' the Vigilance of the Earl of <font>
Ormond . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.214

The Queen being thus threaten'd from all Quarters , a general
Association was formed in <font> England <$$font> , to prosecute to the
Death such as should attempt any Thing against her Person and Government
. KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.215

The Parliament approv'd and confirm'd this Association ,
KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.216

and pass'd a severe Act against Popish Priests and Jesuits , whereby
they were requir'd to depart the Kingdom , KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.217

and if any return'd , they were to be guilty of High-Treason , and those
who harbour'd them , of Felony . KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.218

A little after , the Queen made an Alliance with the King of <font>
Scotland <$$font> , for their mutual Defence , and the Security of the
Protestant Religion . KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.219

To be beforehand with the King of <font> Spain <$$font> , Queen <font>
Elizabeth <$$font> resolv'd to carry War into <font> America . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.220

Accordingly in 1585 , she sent thither a Fleet under Sir <font> Francis
Drake <$$font> , <paren> who some Time before had made a Voyage round
the World <$$paren> with a Body of Land Forces under <font> Christopher
Carlisle . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.221

They took St. <font> Jago <$$font> , one of the <font> Cape de Verde
Islands <$$font> , St. <font> Domingo <$$font> and <font> Carthagena
<$$font> , KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.222

burnt St. <font> Antonio <$$font> and St. <font> Helena <$$font> in
<font> Florida <$$font> , KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.223

and return'd Home with a large Booty . KIMBER-1742-1,267.C1.224

<font> Ralph Lane <$$font> , whom Sir <font> Walter Raleigh <$$font> had
left in <font> Virginia <$$font> , <P_267.C2> came home with this Fleet
, KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.225

and was the first that brought Tobacco into <font> England . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.226

This Year died the learned and ingenious Sir <font> Philip Sidney
<$$font> , of a Wound he received in a Battle in the <font>
Low-Countries . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.227

The Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> was the Occasion of continual
Uneasiness to <font> Elizabeth . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.228

Her pretended Title to the Crown was always made a Handle of by <font>
Elizabeth's <$$font> Enemies both at home and abroad , for all their
Plots and Conspiracies , to destroy her in order to set <font> Mary
<$$font> on the Throne ; KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.229

but their principal View in this , was by her Means to restore the
<font> Roman-Catholicks {COM:font_change_around_"Roman"} , both in
<font> England <$$font> and <font> Scotland . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.230

It is no Wonder therefore , since <font> Mary's <$$font> Advancement to
the Throne could not be brought about but by the Destruction of <font>
Elizabeth <$$font> , that she should resolve at last to sacrifice her to
her own Safety , and should be glad of some plausible Pretence for that
Purpose . KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.231

This <font> Mary <$$font> herself , by her Indiscretion , and the Zeal
and Officiousness of her Friends , furnish'd her with .
KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.232

That both she and her Friends should be still contriving Means for her
Liberty , was not strange ; KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.233

but they always join'd with this not only the restoring her to the
Throne of <font> Scotland <$$font> , but placing her on that of <font>
England <$$font> , to which they pretended she had a better Right than
<font> Elizabeth . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.234

This was the Pretence for all the Plots against her , by the Pope , the
King of <font> Spain <$$font> , the House of <font> Guise <$$font> , and
the <font> Irish , Scotch <$$font> and <font> English <$$font>
Catholicks ; in which <font> Mary <$$font> had too plainly shew'd her
self to be an Accomplice . KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.235

This was particularly the Case of the Plot in 1586 , call'd <font>
Babington's <$$font> Conspiracy , because he , with several Popish
Priests from the Seminaries abroad , and others , was the chief
Instrument in it . KIMBER-1742-1,267.C2.236

It was laid for a foreign Invasion , to <P_268.C1> kill the Queen , free
the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> , and set her on the Throne ;
KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.237

and was timely discover'd by the Vigilance and Dexterity of Secretary
<font> Walsingham <$$font> , who had continually his Spies amongst them
, to give him an Account of their Proceedings .
KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.238

At last the Conspirators , to the Number of fourteen , were all
apprehended together , KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.239

and after impeaching one another , and discovering the whole Matter ,
were arraign'd , condemn'd and executed . KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.240

As the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> appear'd , by Letters and
otherwise , to have a Hand in this Conspiracy , it was resolv'd now to
prosecute her on an Act of Parliament made the preceding Year <paren>
and very probably with a View to her <$$paren> whereby the Person for
whom or by whom any Thing should be attempted against the Queen was made
liable to Death . KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.241

Commissioners were accordingly sent down to try her at <font>
Fotheringham-Castle <$$font> in <font> Northamptonshire <$$font> , where
she was then in Custody ; who in the End pass'd Sentence upon her , on
the 25th of <font> October . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.242

Four Days after , it was approv'd and confirm'd by Parliament .
KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.243

On <font> Dec. <$$font> 6. it was proclaim'd in <font> London <$$font>
, and then throughout the Kingdom : KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.244

And on <font> Feb. <$$font> 7. following , the Sentence was executed
upon her in the Hall of the said Castle , by severing her Head from her
Body , which she suffered with great Calmness and Resolution .
KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.245

Queen <font> Elizabeth's <$$font> Policy appear'd thro' this whole
Transaction . KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.246

She pretended all along to be in Suspense ; KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.247

and to remove the Blame from her self , it was so manag'd , that the
Parliament should press her to put the Sentence in Execution .
KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.248

She still seem'd under great Perplexity ; KIMBER-1742-1,268.C1.249

but at last , upon some Rumours of Plots and Invasions <paren> which
perhaps were artfully rais'd by the Court <$$paren> she sign'd a Warrant
for the Execution , ordering <P_268.C2> Secretary <font> Davison
<$$font> to keep it privately by him . KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.250

But being , from her whole Behavior , in some Doubt about her intention
, he shew'd it to some of the Council , and they to the rest , who
thought fit to hasten the Execution : After which the Queen put on a
great Shew of Concern and Sorrow , drove her Privy Counsellors from her
Presence , and order'd them to be examined in the <font> Star-Chamber .
<$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.251

But none suffer'd but <font> Davison <$$font> , who was fin'd 10,000
<font> l. <$$font> and imprison'd during the Queen's Pleasure .
KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.252

Notwithstanding all this , it is most probable that the Execution was
not without her Approbation , tho' she endeavour'd to make the World
believe otherwise . KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.253

However , this tragical Death of the Queen of <font> Scots <$$font> ,
had serv'd for abundant Matter of Reflection to Queen <font> Elizabeth's
<$$font> Enemies . KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.254

It must be confess'd there were some Things very irregular in the
Proceedings against her ; KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.255

and <font> Elizabeth <$$font> is no otherwise to be justify'd but upon
the Principle of Self-Preservation ; which may also serve to justify in
some Measure the Council and the Parliament , since they were persuaded
, that neither the Queen , nor themselves , nor the Protestant Religion
, could be safe without the Death of <font> Mary <$$font> ;
KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.256

and it was certainly no more reconcilable to the Principles of strict
Justice , to murder <font> Elizabeth <$$font> in order to restore Popery
, than to put <font> Mary <$$font> to Death in order to keep it out :
KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.257

And 't@ @is natural for those who are in Possession , to take care to
secure themselves . KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.258

The next Year , 1588 , is memorable for the mighty Attempt against the
Queen and the Protestant Religion , made by <font> Philip <$$font> King
of <font> Spain <$$font> ; to which he was encourag'd by the Pope ,
<font> Sixtus <$$font> V. who on this Occasion again thunder'd out the
<font> Anathemas <$$font> of the Church against <font> Elizabeth .
KIMBER-1742-1,268.C2.259

Philip <$$font> had been long <P_269.C1> making vast Preparations in all
his Ports , for an Expedition against <font> England <$$font> ; which
was to have been executed last Year , but was retarded by the Queen's
sending <font> Drake <$$font> to the Coast of <font> Spain <$$font> ,
<paren> who burnt a great Number of Ships laden with Provisions and
Stores , together with two large Galleons , and afterwards took a rich
Carack coming from the <font> East-Indies <$$font> ; <$$paren> as also
by that great Statesman <font> Walsingham@ @'s <$$font> getting all the
<font> Spanish <$$font> Bills , which were to supply King <font> Philip
<$$font> with Money , protested at <font> Genoa . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.260

In the mean Time , the Queen made all the necessary Preparations for
opposing this formidable Invasion . KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.261

Twenty_thousand Men were dispos'd along the <font> Southern <$$font>
Coasts ; KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.262

an Army of 22,000 Foot and 1000 Horse , was encamp'd at <font> Tilbury
<$$font> , where the Queen review'd them , and made them a very engaging
Speech : KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.263

And there was another Army of 34,000 Foot and 2000 Horse , to guard the
Queen's Person : KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.264

Her Subjects shew'd the utmost Readiness to stand up in her Defence :
KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.265

And she fitted out a considerable Fleet , under the most experience'd
Commanders , the Lord <font> Howard <$$font> of <font> Essingham
<$$font> as Admiral , and <font> Drake , Hawkins <$$font> and <font>
Forbisher <$$font> , Vice-Admirals ; KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.266

and sent <font> Seymour <$$font> , with forty <font> English <$$font>
and <font> Dutch <$$font> Ships , to the Coast of <font> Flanders
<$$font> , to hinder the Prince of <font> Parma <$$font> from joining
the <font> Spanish <$$font> Fleet , which they already called the <font>
Invincible Armada . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.267

It consisted of 130 great Ships , 20 <font> Caravels <$$font> and 10
<font> Salves <$$font> , having above 20,000 Soldiers on board , with
Seamen , Ammunition and Provisions in Proportion .
KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.268

This formidable Fleet , commanded by the Duke of <font> Medina Celi
<$$font> , put to Sea from the Coast of <font> Portugal <$$font> , then
under the Dominion of <font> Spain <$$font> , about the Beginning of
<font> June <$$font> ; KIMBER-1742-1,269.C1.269

but being dispers'd by a Storm , it was the 19th of <font> July <$$font>
before <P_269.C2> they enter'd the <font> Channel <$$font> ; where the
<font> English <$$font> Fleet kept close to them , and soon took some of
their Ships . KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.270

On <font> July <$$font> 24 , there was a pretty smart Engagement , not
at all to the Advantage of the <font> Spaniards <$$font> , whose Ships
were too unweildy , whilst those of the <font> English <$$font> could
easily stand off or on , as there was Occasion .
KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.271

On the 27th , the <font> Spanish <$$font> Fleet came to an Anchor off
<font> Calais <$$font> , expecting , in vain , the Duke of <font> Parma
<$$font> to put to Sea with his Army , and make a Descent on <font>
England <$$font> , as it had been agreed . KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.272

They were follow'd by the <font> English <$$font> Fleet , which was now
strengthen'd by the Addition of a good Number of Ships , not only of the
Queen's , but of private Persons , who had fitted out several at their
own Charge ; so that the Fleet now consisted of 140 Ships of War , not
so large indeed as the <font> Spanish <$$font> ones , but more easy to
be manag'd . KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.273

Whilst the <font> Spanish <$$font> Fleet lay off <font> Calais <$$font>
, the <font> English <$$font> Admiral in the Night sent in amongst them
eight Fire-Ships , which so terrify'd them , that they cut their Cables
and put to Sea in the utmost Confusion ; when the <font> English
<$$font> took the Admiral Galleass after a sharp Engagement , and <font>
Hugo de Moncada <$$font> , who commanded it , was slain .
KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.274

In short , the whole Fleet was now dispers'd , KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.275

and the <font> Spaniards <$$font> seeing their Design frustrated ,
resolv'd to make the best of their Way home , by sailing round <font>
Scotland <$$font> and <font> Ireland <$$font> , where several of their
{TEXT:there} Ships were lost . KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.276

In the <font> Channel <$$font> , the <font> English <$$font> took and
destroy'd of this mighty Fleet , 15 great Ships , and 4791 Men ; and
afterwards , on the Coast of <font> Ireland <$$font> , 17 Ships and 5394
Men . KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.277

Others were lost by Storms ; KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.278

and of this prodigious Armament , only 60 Ships return'd to <font> Spain
<$$font> , and those too in a very shatter'd Condition .
KIMBER-1742-1,269.C2.279

The <font> Spaniards <$$font> suffer'd so much in this Expedition ,
<P_270.C1> and some others in this Reign , equally disastrous , that
they have not recover'd themselves to this Day .
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.280

Queen <font> Elizabeth <$$font> appointed a publick Thanksgiving in all
the Churches for this remarkable Deliverance , KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.281

and went herself to St. <font> Paul's <$$font> in great State , on the
Occasion . KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.282

The Earl of <font> Leicester <$$font> , the Queen's Favourite , died
this Year ; and <font> John Fox <$$font> , the famous Martyrologist ,
the Year before . KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.283

In 1590 , Sir <font> Francis Walsingham <$$font> , an able and faithful
Minister of the Queen's , and Secretary of State , famous for his Policy
and good Intelligence , departed this Life . KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.284

He died so poor , that he was buried privately to save Charges : So
remarkable was the Frugality and Oeconomy of this Reign !
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.285

Sir <font> Robert Cecil <$$font> , Son to the Lord Treasurer <font>
Burleigh <$$font> , succeeded him as Secretary of State .
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.286

In 1592 , Sir <font> Walter Raleigh <$$font> , with fifteen Sail ,
undertook an Expedition against the <font> Spanish <$$font> Settlements
in <font> America <$$font> ; KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.287

and tho' he was hinder'd by contrary Winds from putting his Project in
Execution , to make him some Amends , he met with a very large and rich
<font> Spanish <$$font> Carack near the <font> Azores <$$font> , which
he made himself master of , with little Difficulty .
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.288

Not long after , <font> Roderigo Lopez <$$font> a Jew , who was the
Queen's Physician , two <font> Portugueze <$$font> , and <font> Patrick
Cullen <$$font> , an <font> Irishman <$$font> , were brib'd by the
<font> Spanish <$$font> Governors of the <font> Netherlands <$$font> to
make her away by Poison or otherwise ; KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.289

but the Plot being discover'd , the Conspirators were seiz'd and
executed : As were <font> Edmund York <$$font> , and <font> Richard
{TEXT:Richaed} Williams <$$font> , the next Year , 1595 , for having
undertaken to commit the same Crime , on the Promise of 40,000 Florins
from the said <font> Spanish <$$font> Governors .
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C1.290

The same Year , Sir <font> Walter <P_270.C2> Raleigh <$$font> made a
second Expedition to <font> America <$$font> at his own Expence ; which
was attended with no great Success : As neither was that of <font> Drake
<$$font> and <font> Hawkins <$$font> , who were sent thither by the
Queen with 26 Ships ; KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.291

and both died in the Expedition . KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.292

But the Fleet and Army , which the Queen sent the next Year to the Coast
of <font> Spain <$$font> , under <font> Howard <$$font> , the Earl of
<font> Essex <$$font> , Sir <font> Walter Raleigh <$$font> and other
brave Men , were attended with all the Success that could be desir'd .
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.293

For , after a long and obstinate Engagement , the <font> Spaniards
<$$font> were defeated , KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.294

their Admiral Ship the St. <font> Philip <$$font> and two others near
her were burnt to Ashes , KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.295

two more were taken , and most of the other Ships in the Harbour of
<font> Cadiz <$$font> run ashore . KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.296

In the mean Time the Land-Forces , under the Earl of <font> Essex
<$$font> , took and plunder'd <font> Cadiz <$$font> ,
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.297

and carried off a very rich Booty ; whilst Sir <font> Walter Raleigh
<$$font> burnt the Merchant-Ships lying at <font> Port Real . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.298

In short , the <font> Spaniards <$$font> lost by this Expedition ,
besides the Merchant-Men , two Galleons , 13 Men of War , 11 Ships laden
for the <font> Indies <$$font> , and 13 others , besides the Provisions
for another Expedition against <font> England . <$$font>
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.299

This did not hinder <font> Philip <$$font> from drawing all the Ships in
his other Ports together , and attempting a second Invasion of this
Nation ; KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.300

but it came to nothing , his Fleet being dispers'd by a violent Storm in
their Voyage , and many Ships lost . KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.301

He however made another Attempt the next Year , 1597 ; but with no
better Success , and from the same Cause . KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.302

Soon after , in 1598 , <font> Henry <$$font> IV. of <font> France
<$$font> made a separate Peace with the King of <font> Spain <$$font> ,
without his Allies , the Queen of <font> England <$$font> , and the
<font> States . <$$font> KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.303

They both loudly complain'd of it , KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.304

but <font> Henry <$$font> pleaded the Necessity of his Affairs .
KIMBER-1742-1,270.C2.305

And now the Queen and <font> States <$$font> agreed {TEXT:agree} to
<P_271.C1> carry on the War against <font> Spain <$$font> by themselves
; for which Purpose a new Treaty was made between them , in which Queen
<font> Elizabeth <$$font> had the Address to turn all to her own
Advantage . KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.306

The same Year King <font> Philip <$$font> of <font> Spain <$$font> , so
famous for his Projects against <font> England <$$font> , and the
Protestant Religion , died , KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.307

and was succeeded by his Son <font> Philip <$$font> III .
KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.308

<font> William Cecil <$$font> , Baron of <font> Burleigh <$$font> ,
Lord-Treasurer , and the Queen's Prime Minister , and faithful
Counsellor , died also at this Time , very old ,
KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.309

and was succeeded , as Treasurer , by the Lord <font> Buckhurst .
KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.310

Spenser <$$font> the Poet deceased too this Year ; and <font> Hooker
<$$font> , Author of the <font> Ecclesiastical Polity <$$font> , the
Year following . KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.311

<font> Robert Devereux <$$font> , Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> , a
young Nobleman of lively Wit and Parts , had been for some Time in great
Favour with the Queen ; in Consequence of which she had rais'd him to
several great Posts and Commands ; which he ascribing to his own Merit ,
became proud , vain and presumptious , imagin'd he could govern the
Queen herself , and often disobey'd her express Orders :
KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.312

Yet her Affection for him still continu'd , tho' she would often
severely reprove him for his haughty and obstinate Behaviour .
KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.313

At length he carried his Insolence so far , in maintaining his Opinion
on a certain Affair contrary to that of the Queen's , as to turn his
Back upon her with an Air of Contempt ; at which she was so provok'd
that she gave him a Box on the Ear . KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.314

He instantly clapt his Hand on his Sword , protesting with an Oath ,
that <font> he neither could nor would put up such an Affront , and if
<$$font> Henry VIII. <font> were alive , he could not have taken it
from him <$$font> ; KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.315

and so withdrew from Court . KIMBER-1742-1,271.C1.316

Yet after this , upon his making his Submission , the Queen pardon'd him
; tho' <P_271.C2> 't@ @is very probable , that from this Time his Mind
was wholly set upon Revenge ; KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.317

and to that End he strove to make himself popular , to such a Degree ,
that he was in a Manner ador'd by the People . KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.318

The Earl of <font> Tyrone <$$font> having rais'd a Rebellion in <font>
Ireland <$$font> , encourag'd thereto by the Promise of Assistance ,
from <font> Spain <$$font> , the Earl of <font> Essex <$$font> was sent
over with an Army , in 1599 , to stop his Progress .
KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.319

But here he acted in such an unaccountable Manner , contrary to his own
Advice in Council , and to the Queen's Orders , that she suspected him
of some ill Design ; KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.320

and when she wrote to him about it , to add to his other Acts of
Disobedience , he came over without Leave to justify himself .
KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.321

But she order'd him to keep to his Chamber , KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.322

and he was soon after put under Arrest , and confin'd at the
Lord-Keeper's House . KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.323

Upon his humbling himself , the Queen permitted him to retire to his own
House , KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.324

but forbad him to come to Court . KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.325

Here he soon fell into violent Courses , KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.326

and his own Rashness , and the preposterous Zeal of his numerous Friends
, put him upon dangerous Projects against the Government , and even upon
conspiring to seize the Queen's Person , under Pretence of revenging
himself on his Enemies ; tho' it was thought he had farther Designs ,
and that he even aspir'd to the Crown . KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.327

And now his House was open to all Malecontents , Papists as well as
Puritans ; KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.328

he entertain'd the Swordsmen in and about <font> London <$$font> ,
KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.329

and establish'd a Council , to consult what was to be done in his favour
; whilst his Enemies at Court took care to have Spies about him , to
inform them of what passed , which they did not fail representing to the
Queen as much to his Disadvantage as possible .
KIMBER-1742-1,271.C2.330

The Queen sent some of her Counsellors to <P_272.C1> know the Reason of
so great a Concourse at his House ; KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.331

but they were made Prisoners , KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.332

and immediately the Earl march'd out with his Company ,
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.333

and depending on the Affections of the People , endeavour'd to raise the
City of <font> London <$$font> ; KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.334

but he was disappointed , KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.335

they were so wise that not one appear'd in his Favour .
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.336

In the mean Time , the Court had taken all necessary Precautions ,
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.337

and he was proclaim'd a <font> Traitor <$$font> in several Parts of the
City . KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.338

Upon this , he with much Difficulty got back to his House in the <font>
Strand <$$font> , which was presently invested by the Lord Admiral ;
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.339

and the Earl and his Associates being at last oblig'd to surrender ,
were sent , some to the <font> Tower <$$font> , and some to other
Prisons . KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.340

These Things were transacted in the Year 1600 , and the Beginning of
1601 . KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.341

<font> Lee , <$$font> the Earl's Creature , and an intimate Friend of
the Earl of <font> Tyrone , <$$font> was the first that was executed ;
by whose Confession it appear'd , that <font> Essex <$$font> was in
Confederacy with that Rebel against the Queen .
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.342

On <font> Feb. <$$font> 19 , 1601 , the Earls of <font> Essex <$$font>
and <font> Southampton <$$font> were both tried , and condemn'd to die .
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.343

<font> Southampton <$$font> had his Life given him ,
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.344

but was kept in Prison . KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.345

<font> Essex <$$font> was beheaded on the 25th of the same Month .
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.346

He made an ample Confession , KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.347

and express'd great Sorrow for his rash Conduct .
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.348

The Queen shew'd some Irresolution , when the fatal Day came , which has
furnish'd some Writers with Matter for Plays and Romances , in which she
is represented as toss'd between the Passions of Love and Rage .
KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.349

But as she was then in her 68th Year , one would think there could be no
great Reason for such an Imagination . KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.350

Some other {COM:sic} of the Earl's Accomplices were afterwards executed
, and the rest fin'd or imprison'd . KIMBER-1742-1,272.C1.351

