<BEGIN_kinglake-1844-2>

<P_70>

<heading>

Chapter VII KINGLAKE-1844-2,70.4

Cyprus KINGLAKE-1844-2,70.5

<$$heading>

There was a Greek at Limesol , who hoisted his flag as an English
Vice-Consul , KINGLAKE-1844-2,70.7

and he insisted upon my accepting his hospitality .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,70.8

With some difficulty , and chiefly by assuring him that I could not
delay my departure beyond an early hour in the afternoon , I induced him
to allow my dining with <P_71> his family , instead of banqueting all
alone with the representative of my sovereign , in consular state and
dignity . KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.9

The lady of the house , it seemed , had never sat at table with an
European ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.10

she was very shy about the matter , KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.11

and tried hard to get out of the scrape , KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.12

but the husband , I fancy , reminded her that she was theoretically an
Englishwoman , by virtue of the flag that waved over her roof , and that
she was bound to show her nationality by sitting at meat with me .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.13

Finding herself inexorably condemned to bear with the dreaded gaze of
European eyes , she tried to save her innocent children from the hard
fate awaiting herself , KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.14

but I obtained that all of them <paren> and I think there were four or
five <$$paren> should sit at the table . KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.15

You will meet with abundance of stately receptions , and of generous
hospitality too , in the East , KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.16

but rarely , very rarely in those regions <paren> or even , so far as I
know , in any part of southern Europe <$$paren> , does one gain an
opportunity of seeing the familiar and in-door life of the people .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.17

This family party of the good Consul's <paren> or rather of mine , for I
originated the idea , though he furnished the materials <$$paren> went
off very well : KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.18

the mamma was shy at first , KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.19

but she veiled her awkwardness by affecting to scold the children .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.20

These had all immortal names - names , too , which they owed to
tradition , and certainly not to any classical enthusiasm of their
parents : KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.21

every instant I was delighted by some such phrases as these :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.22

- ' Themistocles , my love , do@ @n't fight . ' KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.23

- ' Alcibiades , ca@ @n't you sit still ? ' KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.24

- ' Socrates , put down the cup . ' KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.25

- ' Oh , fie ! Aspasia , do@ @n't oh ! do@ @n't be naughty ! '
KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.26

It is true that the names were pronounced , Socrahtie , Aspahsie - that
is , according to accent , and not according to quantity ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.27

but I suppose it is scarcely now to be doubted that they were so sounded
in ancient times . KINGLAKE-1844-2,71.28

<P_72>

To me , it seems that of all the lands I know <paren> you will see in a
minute how I connect this piece of prose with the Isle of Cyprus
<$$paren> , there is none in which mere wealth - mere unaided wealth -
is held half so cheaply , none in which a poor devil of a millionaire
without birth or ability occupies so humble a place as in England .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.30

My Greek host was chatting with me <paren> I think upon the roof of the
house , for that is the lounging place in Eastern climes <$$paren> ,
when suddenly he assumed a serious air , and intimated a wish to talk
over the British Constitution , - a subject with which , as he assured
me , he was thoroughly acquainted . KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.31

He presently , however , remarked that there was one anomalous
circumstance attendant upon the practical working of our political
system which he had never been able to hear explained in a manner
satisfactory to himself . KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.32

From the fact of his having found a difficulty in his subject , I began
to think that my host might really know rather more of it than his
announcement of a thorough knowledge had led me to expect ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.33

I felt interested at being about to hear from the lips of an intelligent
Greek , quite remote from the influence of European opinions , what
might seem to him the most astonishing and incomprehensible of all those
results which have followed from the action of our political
institutions . KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.34

The anomaly - the only anomaly which had been detected by the
Vice-Consular wisdom - consisted in the fact that Rothschild <paren> the
late money-monger <$$paren> had never been the Prime Minister of England
! KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.35

I gravely tried to throw some light upon the mysterious causes that had
kept the worthy Israelite out of the Cabinet , KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.36

but I think I could see that my explanation was not satisfactory .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.37

Go KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.38

and argue with the flies of summer that there is a power divine yet
greater than the sun in the heavens , KINGLAKE-1844-2,72.39

but never dare hope to convince the <P_73> people of the South that
there is any other God than Gold . KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.40

My intended journey was to the sight of the Paphian temple .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.41

I take no antiquarian interest in ruins , KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.42

and care little about them unless they are either striking in themselves
, or else serve to mark some spot very dear to my fancy .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.43

I knew that the ruins of Paphos were scarcely , if at all , discernible
, KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.44

but there was a will , and a longing , more imperious than mere
curiosity , that drove me thither . KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.45

For this , just then , was my Pagan soul's desire - that <paren> not
forfeiting my inheritance for the life to come <$$paren> it had yet been
given me to live through this world - to live a favoured mortal under
the old Olympian dispensation - to speak out my resolves to the
listening Jove , and hear him answer with approving thunder - to be
blessed with divine counsels from the lips of Pallas Athênie
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} - to believe - ay , only to
believe - to believe for one rapturous moment that in the gloomy depths
of the grove by the mountain's side , there were some leafy pathway that
crisped beneath the glowing sandal of Aphrodêtie
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} - Aphrodêtie
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} , not coldly disdainful of
even a mortal's love ! KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.46

And this vain , heathenish longing of mine was father to the thought of
visiting the scene of the ancient worship . KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.47

The isle is beautiful : KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.48

from the edge of the rich , flowery fields on which I trod , to the
midway sides of the snowy Olympus , the ground could only here and there
show an abrupt crag or a high straggling ridge that upshouldered itself
from out of the wilderness of myrtles , and of a_thousand bright-@
@leaved shrubs that twined their arms together in lovesome tangles .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,73.49

The air that came to my lips was warm and fragrant as the ambrosial
breath of the goddess , infecting me - not <paren> of course <$$paren>
with a faith in the old religion of the <P_74> isle , but with a sense
and apprehension of its mystic power - a power that was still to be
obeyed - obeyed by <font> me <$$font> ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.50

for why otherwise did I toil on with sorry horses to ' where , for HER ,
the hundred altars glowed with Arabian incense , and breathed with the
fragrance of garlands ever fresh ? KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.51

I passed a sadly disenchanting night in the cabin of a Greek priest -
not a priest of the goddess , but of the Greek Church ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.52

there was but one humble room , or rather shed , for man , and priest ,
and beast . KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.53

The next morning I reached Baffa <paren> Paphos <$$paren> , a village
not far distant from the site of the temple . KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.54

There was a Greek husbandman there who <paren> not for emolument , but
for the sake of the protection and dignity which it afforded <$$paren>
had got leave from the man at Limesol to hoist his flag as a sort of
Deputy-provisionary-sub-vice-pro-acting-consul of the British Sovereign
. KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.55

The poor fellow instantly changed his Greek head-gear for the cap of
consular dignity , KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.56

and insisted upon accompanying me to the ruins . KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.57

I would not have stood this , if I could have felt the faintest gleam of
my yesterday's pagan piety , KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.58

but I had ceased to dream , KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.59

and had nothing to dread from any new disenchanters .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.60

The ruins <paren> the fragments of one or two prostrate pillars
<$$paren> lie upon a promontory bare and unmystified by the gloom of
surrounding groves . KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.61

My Greek friend in his consular cap stood by , respectfully waiting to
see what turn my madness would take now that I had come at last into the
presence of the old stones . KINGLAKE-1844-2,74.62

If you have no taste for research , and ca@ @n't affect to look for
inscriptions , there is some awkwardness in coming to the end of a
merely <P_75> sentimental pilgrimage , when the feeling which impelled
you has gone : KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.63

in such a strait you have nothing to do but to laugh the thing off ' as
well as you can - KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.64

and , by the by , it is not a bad plan to turn the conversation <paren>
or rather allow the natives to turn it <$$paren> towards the subject of
hidden treasures : KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.65

this is a topic on which they will always speak with eagerness ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.66

and if they can fancy that you , too , take an interest in such matters
, they will not only begin to think you perfectly sane ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.67

but will even perhaps give you credit for some more than human powers of
forcing dark Earth to show you its hoards of gold .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.68

When we returned to Bafta , the Vice-Consul seized a club , with the
quietly determined air of a brave man , resolved to do some deed of note
; KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.69

he went into the yard adjoining his cottage where there were some thin ,
thoughtful , canting cocks , and serious , low-church-looking hens ,
respectfully listening , and chickens of tender years so well brought up
as scarcely to betray in their conduct the careless levity of youth .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.70

The Vice-Consul stood for a moment quite calm - collecting his strength
; KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.71

then suddenly he rushed into the midst of the congregation ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.72

and began to deal death and destruction on all sides ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.73

he spared neither sex nor age ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.74

the dead and dying were immediately removed from the field of slaughter
, KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.75

and in less than an hour , I think , they were brought to the table ,
deeply buried in mounds of snowy rice . KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.76

My host was in all respects a fine , generous fellow .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.77

I could not bear the idea of impoverishing him by my visit ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.78

and my faithful Mysseri not only assured me that I might safely offer
money to the Vice-Consul , KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.79

but recommended that I should give no more to him than to ' the others '
, meaning any other peasant . KINGLAKE-1844-2,75.80

I felt , however , that there was something about the man , besides the
flag and cap , which <P_76> made me shrink from offering coin ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.81

and , as I mounted my horse on departing , I gave him the only thing fit
for a present that I happened to have with me , a rather handsome
clasp-dagger , brought from Vienna . KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.82

The poor fellow was ineffably grateful , KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.83

and I had some difficulty in tearing myself from out of the reach of his
thanks . KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.84

At last I gave him what I supposed to be the last farewell ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.85

and rode on ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.86

but I had not gained more than about a_hundred yards , when my host came
bounding and shouting after me , with a goats' milk cheese in his hand ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.87

and this <paren> it was rather a burthensome gift <$$paren> he fondly
implored me to accept . KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.88

In old times the shepherd of Theocritus , or <paren> to speak less
dishonestly <$$paren> the shepherd of the ' Poetae Graeci ' , sung his
best song ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.89

I in this latter age presented my best dagger , KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.90

and both of us received the same rustic reward . KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.91

It had been known that I should return to Limesol ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.92

and when I arrived there , I found that a noble old Greek had been
hospitably plotting to have me for his guest . KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.93

I willingly accepted his offer . KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.94

The day of my arrival happened to be my host's birthday ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.95

and during all the morning there was a constant influx of visitors who
came to offer their congratulations . KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.96

A few of these were men , KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.97

but most of them were young graceful girls . KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.98

Almost all of them went through the ceremony with the utmost precision
and formality : KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.99

each in succession spoke her blessing in the tone of a person repeating
a set formula , KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.100

- then deferentially accepted the invitation to sit ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.101

- partook of the proffered sweetmeats and the cold , glittering water ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.102

- remained for a few minutes either in silence or engaged in very thin
conversation - KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.103

then arose , KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.104

delivered a second benediction , followed by an elaborate farewell ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.105

and departed . KINGLAKE-1844-2,76.106

The bewitching power attributed at this day to <P_77> the women of
Cyprus is curious in connection with the worship of the sweet goddess
who called their isle her own . KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.107

The Cypriot is not , I think , nearly so beautiful in face as the Ionian
queens of Izmir , KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.108

but she is tall , and slightly formed ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.109

there is a high-souled meaning and expression - a seeming consciousness
of gentle empire that speaks in the wavy lines of the shoulder , and
winds itself like Cytherea's own cestus around the slender waist ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.110

then the richly abounding hair <paren> not enviously gathered together
under the head-dress <$$paren> descends the neck ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.111

and passes the waist in sumptuous braids . KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.112

Of all other women with Grecian blood in their veins , the costume is
graciously beautiful , KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.113

but these , the maidens of Limesol - their robes are more gently , more
sweetly imagined , KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.114

and fall like Julia's Cashmere in soft , luxurious folds .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.115

The common voice of the Levant allows that in face the women of Cyprus
are less beautiful than their majestic sisters of Smyrna , and yet ,
says the Greek , he may trust himself to one and all the cities of the
Egean , and may still weigh anchor with a heart entire , but that so
surely as he ventures upon the enchanted Isle of Cyprus , so surely will
he know the rapture or the bitterness of Love . KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.116

The charm , they say , owes its power to that which the people call the
astonishing ' politics ' {COM:greek_omitted} of the women , meaning , I
fancy , their tact , and their witching ways ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.117

the word , however , plainly fails to express one-@ @half of that which
the speakers would say . KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.118

I have smiled to hear the Greek with all his plenteousness of fancy ,
and all the wealth of his generous language , yet vainly struggling to
describe the ineffable spell which the Parisians dispose of in their own
smart way , by a summary ' Je ne sçai quoi ' . KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.119

I went to Larnecca , the chief city of the isle , and over the water at
last to Beyrout . KINGLAKE-1844-2,77.120

<P_78>

<heading>

Chapter VIII KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.123

Lady Hester Stanhope KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.124

<$$heading>

Beyrout on its land side is hemmed in by mountains .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.126

There dwell the Druses . KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.127

Often enough I saw the ghostly images of the women with their exalted
horns stalking through the streets , KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.128

and I saw too in travelling the affrighted groups of the mountaineers as
they fled before me , under the fear that my troop might be a company of
Income-tax commissioners , or a press-gang enforcing the conscription
for Mehemet Ali , KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.129

but nearly all my knowledge of the people , except in regard of their
mere costume and outward appearance , is drawn from books and despatches
. KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.130

To these last I have the honour to refer you . KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.131

I received hospitable welcome at Beyrout , from the Europeans as well as
from the Syrian Christians , KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.132

and I soon discovered that in all society the standing topic of interest
was an Englishwoman <paren> Lady Hester Stanhope <$$paren> who lived in
an old convent on the Lebanon range , at the distance of about a day's
journey from the town . KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.133

The lady's habit of refusing to see Europeans added the charm of mystery
to a character which , even without that aid , was sufficiently
distinguished to command attention . KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.134

Many years of Lady Hester's early womanhood had been passed with Lady
Chatham , at Burton Pynsent , KINGLAKE-1844-2,78.135

and during that inglorious period of the heroine's life , her commanding
character , and <paren> as they would have called it , in the language
of those days <$$paren> her ' condescending kindness ' towards my
mother's <P_79> family , had increased in them those strong feelings of
respect and attachment , which her rank and station alone would have
easily won from people of the middle class . KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.136

You may suppose how deeply the quiet women in Somersetshire must have
been interested , when they slowly learned by vague and uncertain
tidings , that the intrepid girl who had been used to break their
vicious horses for them was reigning in sovereignty over the wandering
tribes of Western Asia ! KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.137

I know that her name was made almost as familiar to me in my childhood
as the name of Robinson Crusoe ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.138

both were associated with the spirit of adventure ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.139

but whilst the imagined life of the cast-away mariner never failed to
seem glaringly real , the true story of the Englishwoman ruling over
Arabs always sounded to me like a fable . KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.140

I never had heard , nor indeed , I believe , had the rest of the world
ever heard anything like a certain account of the heroine's adventures :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.141

all I knew was , that in one of the drawers , the delight of my
childhood , along with atta of roses , and fragrant wonders from
Hindostan , there were letters carefully treasured , and trifling
presents which I was taught to think valuable because they had come from
the Queen of the Desert - a Queen who dwelt in tents , and reigned over
wandering Arabs . KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.142

The subject , however , died away , KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.143

and from the ending of my childhood up to the period of my arrival in
the Levant , I had seldom even heard a mentioning of the Lady Hester
Stanhope ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.144

but now wherever I went I was met by the name so familiar in sound , and
yet so full of mystery , from the vague , fairy-tale sort of idea which
it brought to my mind : KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.145

I heard it too connected with fresh wonders , KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.146

for it was said that the woman was now acknowledged as an inspired being
by the people of the Mountains , KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.147

and it was even hinted with horror that she claimed to be <font> more
than a prophet . <$$font> KINGLAKE-1844-2,79.148

<P_80>

I felt at once that my mother would be sorry to hear that I had been
within a day's ride of her early friend without offering to see her ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.150

and I therefore despatched a letter to the Recluse , mentioning the
maiden name of my mother <paren> whose marriage was subsequent to Lady
Hester's departure <$$paren> , and saying that if there existed on the
part of her Ladyship any wish to hear of her old Somersetshire
acquaintance , I should make a point of visiting her .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.151

My letter was sent by a foot messenger who was to take an unlimited time
for his journey , so that it was not , I think , until either the third
or the fourth day that the answer arrived . KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.152

A couple of horsemen covered with mud suddenly dashed into the little
court of the ' Locanda ' , in which I was staying , bearing themselves
as ostentatiously as though they were carrying a cartel from the Devil
to the Angel Michael ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.153

one of these <paren> the other being his attendant <$$paren> was an
Italian by birth <paren> though now completely orientalized <$$paren> ,
who lived in my Lady's establishment as doctor nominally , but
practically as an upper servant ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.154

he presented me a very kind and appropriate letter of invitation .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.155

It happened that I was rather unwell at this time , so that I named a
more distant day for my visit than I should otherwise have done ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.156

and after all I did not start at the time fixed .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.157

Whilst still remaining at Beyrout I received another letter from Lady
Hester ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.158

this I will give you , KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.159

for it shows that whatever the eccentricities of the writer may have
been , she could at least be thoughtful and courteous :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.160

- Sir , I hope I shall be disappointed in seeing you on Wednesday ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.161

for the late rains have rendered the river Damoor , if not dangerous ,
at least very unpleasant to pass for a person who has been lately
indisposed , KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.162

for if the animal swims , you would be immerged in the waters .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.163

The weather will probably change after the 21st of the moon ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,80.164

and after a couple of <P_81> days the roads and the river will be
passable , KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.165

therefore I shall expect you either Saturday or Monday .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.166

It will be a great satisfaction to me to have an opportunity of
inquiring after your mother , who was a sweet , lovely girl when I knew
her . KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.167

Believe me , Sir , Yours sincerely , Hester Lucy Stanhope .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.168

Early one morning I started from Beyrout . KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.169

There are no established relays of horses in Syria , at least not in the
line which I took , KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.170

and you therefore hire your cattle for the whole journey , or at all
events for your journey to some large town . KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.171

Under these circumstances you do@ @n't of course require a functionary
empowered to compel the supply of horses , KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.172

and you can therefore dispense with a Tatar . KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.173

In other respects the mode of travelling through Syria differs very
little from that which I have described as prevailing in Turkey .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.174

I hired my horses and mules for the whole of the journey from Beyrout to
Jerusalem . KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.175

The owner of the beasts <paren> he had a couple of fellows under him
<$$paren> was the most dignified member of my party ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.176

he was , indeed , a magnificent old man , KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.177

and was called Shereef , or ' holy ' , - a title of honour , which ,
with the privilege of wearing the green turban , he well deserved , not
only from the blood of the Prophet that glowed in his veins , but from
the well-known sanctity of his life , and the length of his blessed
beard . KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.178

Mysseri , of course , still travelled with me , KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.179

but the Arabic was not one of the seven languages which he spoke so
perfectly , KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.180

and I was , therefore , obliged to hire another interpreter .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.181

I had no difficulty in finding a proper man for the purpose - one
Demetrius , or , as he was always called , Dthemetri , a native of Zante
, who had been tossed about by fortune in all directions .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.182

He spoke the Arabic well , KINGLAKE-1844-2,81.183

and communicated <P_82> with me in Italian . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.184

The man was a very zealous member of the Greek Church .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.185

He had been a tailor . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.186

He had a thoroughly Tatar countenance , - a countenance so odd and ugly
that it expressed all his griefs of body and mind in the most ludicrous
manner imaginable . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.187

He embellished the natural caricature of his person by suspending about
his neck and shoulders and waist , quantities of little bundles and bags
filled with treasures , which he thought too valuable to be entrusted to
the jerking of packsaddles . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.188

The mule that fell to his lot on this journey every now and then ,
forgetting that his rider was a saint , and remembering that he was a
tailor , took a quiet roll upon the ground , KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.189

and stretched his limbs calmly and lazily , like a good man awaiting a
sermon . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.190

Dthmetri never got seriously hurt , KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.191

but the subversion and dislocation of his bundles made him for the
moment a sad spectacle of ruin , KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.192

and when he regained his legs , his wrath with the mule was sure to be
very amusing . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.193

He always addressed the beast in language implying that he , a Christian
and saint , had been personally insulted and oppressed by a Mahometan
mule . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.194

Dthemetri however , on the whole , proved to be a most able and capital
servant . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.195

I suspected him of now and then leading me out of my way , in order that
he might have the opportunity of visiting the shrine of a saint ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.196

and on one occasion , as you will see by_and_by , he was induced by
religious motives to commit a gross breach of duty ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.197

but putting these pious faults out of the question <paren> and they were
faults of the right side <$$paren> , he was always faithful and true to
me . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.198

I left Saide <paren> the Sidon of ancient times <$$paren> on my right ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.199

and about an hour , I think , before sunset , began to ascend one of the
many low hills of Lebanon . KINGLAKE-1844-2,82.200

On the summit before me was a broad , grey mass of irregular building ,
which , from its position , as well as <P_83> from the gloomy blankness
of its walls , gave the idea of a neglected fortress ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.201

it had , in fact , been a convent of great size , KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.202

and , like most of the religious houses in this part of the world , had
been made strong enough for opposing an inert resistance to any mere
casual band of assailants who might be unprovided with regular means of
attack : KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.203

this was the dwelling-place of Chatham's fiery grand-daughter .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.204

The aspect of the first court I entered was such as to keep one in the
idea of having to do with a fortress , rather than a mere peaceable
dwelling-place . KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.205

A number of fierce-looking and ill-clad Albanian soldiers were hanging
about the place , inert , and striving , as well as they could , to bear
the curse of Tranquillity ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.206

two or three of them were smoking their tchibouques ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.207

but the rest were lying torpidly upon the flat stones , like the bodies
of departed brigands . KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.208

I rode on to an inner part of the building , KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.209

and at last , quitting my horses , was conducted through a doorway that
led me at once from an open court into an apartment on the ground floor
. KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.210

As I entered , an Oriental figure in male costume approached me from the
further end of the room , with many and profound bows ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.211

but the growing shades of evening prevented me from distinguishing the
features of the personage who was receiving me with this solemn welcome
. KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.212

I had always , however , understood that Lady Hester Stanhope wore the
male attire , KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.213

and I began to utter in English the common civilities that seemed to be
proper on the commencement of a visit by an uninspired mortal to a
renowned Prophetess ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.214

but the figure which I addressed only bowed so much the more ,
prostrating itself almost to the ground , but speaking to me never a
word . KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.215

I feebly strived not to be outdone in gestures of respect ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.216

but presently my bowing opponent saw the error under which I was acting
, KINGLAKE-1844-2,83.217

and suddenly <P_84> convinced me that at all events I was not <font> yet
<$$font> in the presence of a superhuman being , by declaring that he
was far from being ' Miladi ' , and was , in fact , nothing more or less
godlike than the poor Doctor who had brought his Mistress's letter to
Beyrout . KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.218

Lady Hester , in the right spirit of hospitality , now sent
KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.219

and commanded me to repose for a while after the fatigues of my journey
, and to dine . KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.220

The cuisine was of the Oriental kind , - highly artificial , and , as I
thought , very good . KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.221

I rejoiced too in the wine of the Lebanon . KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.222

After dinner the Doctor arrived with Miladi's compliments , and an
intimation that she would be happy to receive me if I were so disposed .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.223

It had now grown dark , KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.224

and the rain was falling heavily , so that I got rather wet in following
my guide through the open courts that I had to pass in order to reach
the presence chamber . KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.225

At last I was ushered into a small chamber , protected from the draughts
of air passing through the doorway by a folding_screen ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.226

passing this , I came alongside of a common European sofa .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.227

There sat the Lady Prophetess . KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.228

She rose from her seat very formally - KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.229

spoke to me a few words of welcome , KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.230

pointed to a chair - one already placed exactly opposite to her sofa at
a couple of yards distance - KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.231

and remained standing up to the full of her majestic height , perfectly
still , and motionless , until I had taken my appointed place :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.232

she then resumed her seat - not packing herself up according to the mode
of the Orientals , but allowing her feet to rest on the floor or the
footstool ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.233

at the moment of seating herself she covered her lap with a mass of
loose , white drapery . KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.234

It occurred to me at the time , that she did this in order to avoid the
awkwardness of sitting in manifest trowsers under the eye of an European
; KINGLAKE-1844-2,84.235

but I can <P_85> hardly fancy now , that , with her wilful nature , she
would have brooked such a compromise as this . KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.236

The woman before me had exactly the person of a Prophetess - not ,
indeed , of the divine Sibyl imagined by Domenichino , so sweetly
distracted betwixt Love and Mystery , but of a good , businesslike ,
practical Prophetess , long used to the exercise of her sacred calling .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.237

I have been told by those who knew Lady Hester Stanhope in her youth ,
that any notion of a resemblance betwixt her and the great Chatham must
have been fanciful ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.238

but at the time of my seeing her , the large commanding features of the
gaunt woman , then sixty years old or more , certainly reminded me of
the statesman that lay dying in the House of Lords according to Copley's
picture : KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.239

her face was of the most astonishing whiteness ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.240

she wore a very large turban made seemingly of pale cashmere shawls ,
and so disposed as to conceal the hair ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.241

her dress , from the chin down to the point at which it was concealed by
the drapery on her lap , was a mass of white linen loosely folding - an
ecclesiastical sort of affair - more like a surplice than any of those
blessed creations which our souls love under the names of ' dress ' ,
and ' frock ' , and ' boddice ' , and ' collar ' , and ' habit-shirt ' ,
and sweet ' chemisette ' . KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.242

Such was the outward seeming of the personage that sat before me ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.243

and indeed she was almost bound by the fame of her actual achievements ,
as well as by her sublime pretensions , to look a little differently
from the rest of womankind . KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.244

There had been something of grandeur in her career .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.245

After the death of Lady Chatham , which happened in 1803 , she lived
under the roof of her uncle , the second Pitt , KINGLAKE-1844-2,85.246

and when he resumed the Government in 1804 , she became the <P_86>
dispenser of much patronage , and sole Secretary of State for the
department of Treasury banquets . KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.247

Not having seen the Lady until late in her life , when she was fired
with spiritual ambition , I can hardly fancy that she could have
performed her political duties in the saloons of the Minister with much
of feminine sweetness and patience : KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.248

I am told , however , that she managed matters very well indeed ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.249

perhaps it was better for the lofty-minded leader of the House to have
his reception-rooms guarded by this stately creature than by a merely
clever and managing woman ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.250

it was fitting that the wholesome awe with which he filled the minds of
the country gentleman , should be aggravated by the presence of his
majestic niece . KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.251

But the end was approaching . KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.252

The sun of Austerlitz showed the Czar madly sliding his splendid army ,
like a weaver's shuttle , from his right hand to his left , under the
very eyes - the deep , gray , watchful eyes of Napoleon ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.253

before night came , the coalition was a vain thing - meet for history ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.254

and the heart of its great author , when the terrible tidings came to
his ears , was wrung with grief - fatal grief . KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.255

In the bitterness of his despair , he cried out to his niece ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.256

and bid her ' Roll Up The Map Of Europe ' ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.257

there was a little more of suffering , KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.258

and at last , with his swollen tongue <paren> so they say <$$paren>
still muttering something for England , he died by the noblest of all
sorrows . KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.259

Lady Hester , meeting the calamity in her own fierce way , seems to have
scorned the poor island that had not enough of God's grace to keep the '
heaven-sent ' Minister alive . KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.260

I can hardly tell why it should be , KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.261

but there is a longing for the East , very commonly felt by proud people
when goaded by sorrow . KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.262

Lady Hester Stanhope obeyed this impulse ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.263

for some time , I believe , she was at Constantinople ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,86.264

and there her magnificence , as well as her near alliance to the late
<P_87> Minister , gained her great influence . KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.265

Afterwards she passed into Syria . KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.266

The people of that country , excited by the achievements of Sir Sydney
Smith , had begun to imagine the possibility of their land being
occupied by the English , KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.267

and many of them looked upon Lady Hester as a Princess who came to
prepare the way for the expected conquest . KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.268

I do@ @n't know it from her own lips , or indeed from any certain
authority , KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.269

but I have been told that she began her connection with the Bedouins by
making a large present of money 500 +L {TEXT:+L500} - immense in
piastres <$$paren> to the Sheik whose authority was recognised in the
Desert , between Damascus and Palmyra . KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.270

The prestige created by the rumours of her high and undefined rank , as
well as of her wealth and corresponding magnificence , was well
sustained by her imperious character and her dauntless bravery .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.271

Her influence increased . KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.272

I never heard anything satisfactory as to the real extent or duration of
her sway , KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.273

but I understood that , for a time at least , she certainly exercised
something like sovereignty amongst the wandering tribes .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.274

And now that her earthly kingdom had passed away , she strove for
spiritual power , KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.275

and impiously dared , as it was said , to boast some mystic union with
the very God of very God ! KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.276

A couple of black slave girls came at a signal , KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.277

and supplied their mistress as well as myself , with lighted tchibouques
, and coffee . KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.278

The custom of the East sanctions , and almost commands , some moments of
silence whilst you are inhaling the first few breaths of the fragrant
pipe : KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.279

the pause was broken , I think , by my Lady , who addressed to me some
inquiries respecting my mother , and particularly as to her marriage ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.280

but before I had communicated any great amount of family facts , the
spirit of the Prophetess kindled within her , KINGLAKE-1844-2,87.281

and <P_88> presently <paren> though with all the skill of a woman of the
world <$$paren> she shuffled away the subject of poor dear Somersetshire
, KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.282

and bounded onward into loftier spheres of thought .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.283

My old acquaintance with some of ' the twelve ' enabled me to bear my
part <paren> of course a very humble one <$$paren> in a conversation
relative to occult science . KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.284

Milnes once spread a report that every gang of gipsies was found upon
inquiry to have come last from a place to the westward , and to be about
to make the next move in an eastern direction ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.285

either , therefore , they were to be all gathered together towards the
rising of the sun by the mysterious finger of Providence ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.286

or else they were to revolve round the globe for ever and ever .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.287

Both of these suppositions were highly gratifying , because they were
both marvellous ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.288

and though the story on which they were founded plainly sprang from the
inventive brain of a poet , no one had ever been so odiously statistical
as to attempt a contradiction of it . KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.289

I now mentioned the story as a report to Lady Hester Stanhope ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.290

and asked her if it were true : KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.291

I could not have touched upon any imaginable subject more deeply
interesting to my hearer - more closely akin to her habitual train of
thinking ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.292

she immediately threw off all the restraint belonging to an interview
with a stranger ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.293

and when she had received a few more similar proofs of my aptness for
the marvellous , she went so far as to say that she would adopt me as
her ' eleve ' in occult science . KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.294

For hours and hours , this wondrous white woman poured forth her speech
, for the most part concerning sacred and profane mysteries ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.295

but every now and then she would stay her lofty flight , and swoop down
upon the world again : KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.296

whenever this happened , I was interested in her conversation .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,88.297

<P_89>

She adverted more than once to the period of her lost sway amongst the
Arabs , KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.299

and mentioned some of the circumstances that aided her in obtaining
influence with the wandering tribes . KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.300

The Bedouin , so often engaged in irregular warfare , strains his eyes
to the horizon in search of a coming enemy just as habitually as the
sailor keeps his ' bright look out ' for a strange sail .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.301

In the absence of telescopes , a far-reaching sight is highly valued ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.302

and Lady Hester had this power . KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.303

She told me that , on one occasion , when there was good reason to
expect hostilities , a far-seeing Arab created great excitement in the
camp by declaring that he could distinguish some moving objects upon the
very farthest point within the reach of his eyes :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.304

Lady Hester was consulted , KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.305

and she instantly assured her comrades in arms that there were indeed a
number of horses within sight , but they were without riders :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.306

the assertion proved to be correct , KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.307

and from that time forth her superiority over all others in respect of
far sight remained undisputed . KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.308

Lady Hester related to me this other anecdote of her Arab life .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.309

It was when the heroic qualities of the Englishwoman were just beginning
to be felt amongst the people of the desert , that she was marching one
day , along with the forces of the tribe to which she had allied herself
. KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.310

She perceived that preparations for an engagement were going on ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.311

and upon her making inquiry as to the cause , the Sheik at first
affected mystery and concealment , KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.312

but at last confessed that war had been declared against his tribe on
account of its alliance with the English Princess , and that they were
now unfortunately about to be attacked by a very superior force :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,89.313

he made it appear that Lady Hester was the sole cause of hostility
betwixt his tribe and the impending <P_90> enemy , and that his sacred
duty of protecting the Englishwoman whom he had admitted as his guest
was the only obstacle which prevented an amicable settlement of the
dispute . KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.314

The Sheik hinted that his tribe was likely to sustain an almost
overwhelming blow , KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.315

but at the same time declared that no fear of the consequences , however
terrible to him and his whole people , should induce him to dream of
abandoning his illustrious guest . KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.316

The heroine instantly took her part : KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.317

it was not for her to be a source of danger to her friends , but rather
to her enemies ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.318

so she resolved to turn away from the people , and trust for help to
none , save only her haughty self . KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.319

The Sheiks affected to dissuade her from so rash a course ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.320

and fairly told her that although they <paren> having been freed from
her presence <$$paren> would be able to make good terms for themselves ,
yet that there were no means of allaying the hostility felt towards her
, and that the whole face of the desert would be swept by the horsemen
of her enemies so carefully , as to make her escape into other districts
almost impossible . KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.321

The brave woman was not to be moved by terrors of this kind ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.322

and bidding farewell to the tribe which had honoured and protected her ,
she turned her horse's head , KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.323

and rode straight away , without friend or follower .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.324

Hours had elapsed , KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.325

and for some time she had been alone in the centre of the round horizon
, when her quick eye perceived some horsemen in the distance .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.326

The party came nearer and nearer ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.327

soon it was plain that they were making towards her ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.328

and presently some hundreds of Bedouins , fully armed , galloped up to
her , ferociously shouting , and apparently intending to take her life
at the instant with their pointed spears . KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.329

Her face at the time was covered with the yashmack , according to
Eastern usage ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,90.330

but at the <P_91> moment when the foremost of the horsemen had all but
reached her with their spears , she stood up in her stirrups -
KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.331

withdrew the yashmack that veiled the terrors of her countenance -
KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.332

waved her arms slowly and disdainfully , KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.333

and cried out with a loud voice , ' Avaunt ! ' KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.334

The horsemen recoiled from her glance , but not in terror .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.335

The threatening yells of the assailants were suddenly changed for loud
shouts of joy and admiration at the bravery of the stately Englishwoman
, KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.336

and festive gun-shots were fired on all sides around her honoured head .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.337

The truth was that the party belonged to the tribe with which she had
allied herself , and that the threatened attack , as well as the
pretended apprehension of an engagement , had been contrived for the
mere purpose of testing her courage . KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.338

The day ended in a great feast prepared to do honour to the heroine ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.339

and from that time her power over the minds of the people grew rapidly .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.340

Lady Hester related this story with great spirit ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.341

and I recollect that she put up her yashmack for a moment , in order to
give me a better idea of the effect which she produced by suddenly
revealing the awfulness of her countenance . KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.342

With respect to her then present mode of life , Lady Hester informed me
that for her sin she had subjected herself during many years to severe
penance , and that her self-denial had not been without its reward .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.343

' Vain and false , ' said she , ' is all the pretended knowledge of the
Europeans - KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.344

their doctors will tell you that the drinking of milk gives yellowness
to the complexion ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.345

milk is my only food , KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.346

and you see if my face be not white . ' KINGLAKE-1844-2,91.347

Her abstinence from food intellectual was carried as far as her <P_92>
physical fasting : KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.348

she never , she said , looked upon a book , nor a newspaper ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.349

but trusted alone to the stars for her sublime knowledge ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.350

she usually passed the nights in communing with these heavenly teachers
, KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.351

and lay at rest during the day-time . KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.352

She spoke with great contempt of the frivolity and benighted ignorance
of the modern Europeans ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.353

and mentioned , in proof of this , that they were not only untaught in
astrology , but were unacquainted with the common and every-day
phenomena produced by <font> magic art <$$font> : KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.354

she spoke as if she would make me understand that all sorcerous spells
were completely at her command , but that the exercise of such powers
would be derogatory to her high rank in the heavenly kingdom .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.355

She said that the spell by which the face of an absent person is thrown
upon a mirror was within the reach of the humblest and most contemptible
magicians , but that the practice of such like arts was unholy , as well
as vulgar . KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.356

We spoke of the bending twig by which , it is said , precious metals may
be discovered . KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.357

In relation to this , the Prophetess told me a story rather against
herself , and inconsistent with the notion of her being perfect in her
science ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.358

but I think that she mentioned the facts as having happened before she
attained to the great spiritual authority which she now arrogated .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.359

She told that vast treasures were known to exist in a situation which
she mentioned , if I rightly remember , as being near Suez ; that
Napoleon , profanely brave , thrust his arm into the cave containing the
coveted gold , and that instantly his flesh became palsied : but the
youthful hero <paren> for she said he was great in his generation
<$$paren> was not to be thus daunted ; he fell back characteristically
upon his brazen resources , and ordered up his artillery ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.360

yet man could not strive with demons , KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.361

and Napoleon was foiled . KINGLAKE-1844-2,92.362

In latter <P_93> years came Ibrahim Pasha , with heavy guns , and wicked
spells to boot ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.363

but the infernal guardians of the treasure were too strong for him .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.364

It was after this that Lady Hester passed by the spot ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.365

and she described with animated gesture the force and energy with which
the divining twig had suddenly leaped in her hands :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.366

she ordered excavations , KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.367

and no demons opposed her enterprise ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.368

the vast chest in which the treasure had been deposited was at length
discovered , KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.369

but lo ! and behold , it was full of pebbles ! KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.370

She said , however , that the times were approaching , in which the
hidden treasures of the earth would become available to those who had '
true knowledge ' . KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.371

Speaking of Ibrahim Pasha , Lady Hester said that he was a bold , bad
man , and was possessed of some of those common and wicked magical arts
upon which she looked down with so much contempt :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.372

she said , for instance , that Ibrahim's life was charmed against balls
and steel , and that after a battle he loosened the folds of his shawl ,
and shook out the bullets like dust . KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.373

It seems that the St. Simonians once made overtures to Lady Hester :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.374

she told me that the Pere Enfantin <paren> the chief of the sect
<$$paren> had sent her a service of plate , but that she had declined to
receive it . KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.375

She delivered a prediction as to the probability of the St. Simonians
finding the ' mystic mother ' , KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.376

and this she did in a way which would amuse you : KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.377

unfortunately I am not at liberty to mention this part of the woman's
prophecies ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.378

why , I can@ @not tell , KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.379

but so it is , that she bound me to eternal secrecy .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.380

Lady Hester told me that since her residence at Djoun , she had been
attacked by an illness so severe as to render her for a long time
perfectly helpless ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.381

all her attendants fled , KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.382

and left her to perish . KINGLAKE-1844-2,93.383

Whilst she lay thus alone and quite unable to rise , robbers <P_94> came
KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.384

and carried away her property : KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.385

she told me that they actually unroofed a great part of the building ,
and employed engines with pullies for the purpose of hoisting out such
of her valuables as were too bulky to pass through doors .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.386

It would seem that before this catastrophe Lady Hester had been rich in
the possession of Eastern luxuries ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.387

for she told me , that when the chiefs of the Ottoman force took refuge
with her after the fall of Acre , they brought their wives also in great
numbers : KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.388

to all of these , Lady Hester , as she said , presented magnificent
dresses ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.389

but her generosity occasioned strife only instead of gratitude ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.390

for every woman who fancied her present less splendid than that of
another , with equal or less pretension , became absolutely furious .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.391

All these audacious guests had now been got rid of ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.392

but the Albanian soldiers who had taken refuge with Lady Hester at the
same time still remained under her protection . KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.393

In truth , this half-ruined convent , guarded by the proud heart of an
English gentlewoman , was the only spot throughout all Syria and
Palestine in which the will of Mehemet Ali and his fierce Lieutenant was
not the law . KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.394

More than once had the Pasha of Egypt commanded that Ibrahim should have
the Albanians delivered up to him ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,94.395

but this white woman of the <P_95> mountain <paren> grown classical ,
not by books , but by very pride <$$paren> answered only with a
disdainful invitation to ' come and take them ' .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.396

Whether it was that Ibrahim was acted upon by any superstitious dread of
interfering with the Prophetess <paren> a notion not at all incompatible
with his character as an able Oriental commander <$$paren> , or that he
feared the ridicule of putting himself in collision with a gentlewoman ,
he certainly never ventured to attack the sanctuary ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.397

and so long as Chatham's grand-daughter breathed a breath of life ,
there was always this one hillock , and that too in the midst of a most
populous district , which stood out , and kept its freedom .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.398

Mehemet Ali used to say , I am told , that the Englishwoman had given
him more trouble than all the insurgent people of Syria and Palestine .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.399

The Prophetess announced to me that we were upon the eve of a stupendous
convulsion which would destroy the then recognised value of all property
upon earth ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.400

and , declaring that those only who should be in the East at the time of
the great change could hope for greatness in the new life that was then
close at hand , she advised me , whilst there was yet time , to dispose
of my property in poor , frail England , and gain a station in Asia :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.401

she told me that , after leaving her , I should go into Egypt , but that
in a little while I should return into Syria . KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.402

I secretly smiled at this last prophecy as ' a bad shot ' , because I
had fully determined , after visiting the Pyramids , to take ship from
Alexandria for Greece . KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.403

But men struggle vainly in the meshes of their destiny !
KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.404

the unbelieved Cassandra was right after all : KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.405

the plague came , KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.406

and the necessity of avoiding the quarantine detention , to which I
should have been subjected if I had sailed from Alexandria , forced me
to alter my route . KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.407

I went down into Egypt , KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.408

and stayed there for a time , KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.409

and then crossed the Desert once more , KINGLAKE-1844-2,95.410

and came <P_96> back to the mountains of the Lebanon , exactly as the
Prophetess had foretold . KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.411

Lady Hester talked to me long and earnestly on the subject of Religion ,
announcing that the Messiah was yet to come . KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.412

She strived to impress me with the vanity and falseness of all European
creeds , as well as with a sense of her own spiritual greatness .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.413

Throughout her conversation upon these high topics , she carefully
insinuated , without actually asserting , her heavenly rank .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.414

Amongst other much more marvellous powers , the Lady claimed one which
most women have more or less , - namely , that of reading men's
characters in their faces . KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.415

She examined the line of my features very attentively ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.416

and told me the result : KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.417

this , however , I mean to keep hidden . KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.418

One favoured subject of discourse was that of ' race ' :
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.419

upon this she was very diffuse , and yet rather mysterious .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.420

She set great value upon the ancient French , not Norman blood
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.421

<paren> for that she vilified <$$paren> , KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.422

but professed to despise our English notion of ' an old family ' .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.423

She had a vast idea of the Cornish miners on account of their race ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.424

and said , if she chose she could give me the means of rousing them to
the most tremendous enthusiasm . KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.425

Such are the topics on which the Lady mainly conversed ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.426

but very often she would descend to more worldly chat ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,96.427

and then she was no longer the Prophetess , but the sort of woman that
you sometimes <P_97> see , I am told , in London drawing-rooms , - cool
- decisive in manner - unsparing of enemies - full of audacious fun ,
and saying the downright things that the sheepish society around her is
afraid to utter . KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.428

I am told that Lady Hester was , in her youth , a capital mimic ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.429

and she showed me that not all the queenly dulness to which she had
condemned herself , - not all her fasting and solitude , - had destroyed
this terrible power . KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.430

The first whom she crucified in my presence was poor Lord Byron .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.431

She had seen him , it appeared , I know not where , soon after his
arrival in the East , KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.432

and was vastly amused at his little affectations .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.433

He had picked up a few sentences of the Romaic , KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.434

and with these he affected to give orders to his Greek servant in a '
ton d' apameibomenos ' style . KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.435

I ca@ @n't tell whether Lady Hester's mimicry of the bard was at all
close , KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.436

but it was amusing : KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.437

she attributed to him a curiously coxcomical lisp .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.438

Another person , whose style of speaking the Lady took off very
amusingly , was one who would scarcely object to suffer by the side of
Lord Byron , KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.439

- I mean Lamartine . KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.440

The peculiarity which attracted her ridicule was an over-refinement of
manner . KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.441

According to my Lady's imitation of Lamartine <paren> I have never seen
him myself <$$paren> , he had none of the violent grimace of his
countrymen , and not even their usual way of talking ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.442

but rather bore himself mincingly , like the humbler sort of English
dandy . KINGLAKE-1844-2,97.443

<P_98>

Lady Hester seems to have heartily despised every thing approaching to
exquisiteness . KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.445

She told me , by the by <paren> and her opinion upon that subject is
worth having <$$paren> , that a downright manner , amounting even to
brusqueness , is more effective than any other with the Oriental ; and
that amongst the English , of all ranks and all classes , there is no
man so attractive to the Orientals - no man who can negotiate with them
half so effectively , as a good , honest , open-hearted , and positive
naval officer of the old school . KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.446

I have told you , I think , that Lady Hester could deal fiercely with
those she hated : KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.447

one man above all others <paren> he is now uprooted from society
<$$paren> she blasted with her wrath ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.448

you would have thought that , in the scornfulness of her nature , she
must have sprung upon her foe with more of fierceness than of skill ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.449

but this was not so , KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.450

for , with all the force and vehemence of her invective , she displayed
a sober , patient , and minute attention to the details of vituperation
, which contributed to its success a_thousand times more than mere
violence . KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.451

During the hours that this sort of conversation or rather discourse was
going on , our tchibouques were from time to time replenished ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.452

and the Lady as well as I continued to smoke with little or no
intermission till the interview ended . KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.453

I think that the fragrant fumes of the Latakiah must have helped to keep
me on my good behaviour as a patient disciple of the Prophetess .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.454

It was not till after midnight that my visit for the evening came to an
end . KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.455

When I quitted my seat the lady rose , KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.456

and stood up in the same formal attitude <paren> almost that of a
soldier in a state of ' attention ' <$$paren> which she had assumed on
my entrance ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.457

at the same time she pushed the loose drapery from her lap ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.458

and let it fall down upon the floor . KINGLAKE-1844-2,98.459

<P_99>

The next morning after breakfast I was visited by my Lady's Secretary -
the only European , except the Doctor , whom she retained in her
household . KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.461

This Secretary , like the Doctor , was Italian , KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.462

but he preserved more signs of European dress and European pretensions
than his medical fellow-slave . KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.463

He spoke little or no English , though he wrote it pretty well , having
been formerly employed in a mercantile house connected with England .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.464

The poor fellow was in an unhappy state of mind .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.465

In order to make you understand the extent of his spiritual anxieties ,
I ought to have told you that the Doctor <paren> who had sunk into the
complete Asiatic , and had condescended accordingly to the performance
of even menial services <$$paren> had adopted the common faith of all
the neighbouring people , and had become a firm and happy believer in
the divine power of his mistress . KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.466

Not so the Secretary . KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.467

When I had strolled with them to such a distance from the building as
rendered him safe from being overheard by human ears , he told me in a
hollow voice , trembling with emotion , that there were times at which
he doubted the divinity of ' Miledi ' . KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.468

I said nothing to encourage the poor fellow in his frightful state of
scepticism , KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.469

for I saw that , if indulged , it might end in positive infidelity .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.470

Lady Hester , it seemed , had rather arbitrarily abridged the amusements
of her Secretary ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.471

and especially she had forbidden him from shooting small birds on the
mountain side . KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.472

This oppression had aroused in him a spirit of inquiry that might end
fatally - perhaps for himself - perhaps for the ' religion of the place
' . KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.473

The Secretary told me that his mistress was strongly disliked by the
surrounding people , and that she oppressed them a good deal by her
exactions . KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.474

I know not whether this statement had any truth in it ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,99.475

but <P_100> whether it was or was not well founded , it is certain that
in Eastern countries hate and veneration are very commonly felt for the
same object ; and the general belief in the superhuman power of this
wonderful white lady - her resolute and imperious character , and above
all , perhaps , her fierce Albanians <paren> not backward to obey an
order for the sacking of a village <$$paren> , inspired sincere respect
amongst the surrounding inhabitants . KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.476

Now the being ' respected ' amongst Orientals is not an empty or merely
honorary distinction , KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.477

but carries with it a clear right to take your neighbour's corn , his
cattle , his eggs , and his honey , and almost any thing that is his ,
except his wives . KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.478

This law was acted upon by the Princess of Djoun ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.479

and her establishment was supplied by contributions apportioned amongst
the nearest of the villages . KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.480

I understood that the Albanians <paren> restrained , I suppose , by the
dread of being delivered up to Ibrahim <$$paren> had not given any very
troublesome proofs of their unruly natures . KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.481

The Secretary told me that their rations , including a small allowance
of coffee and tobacco , were served out to them with tolerable
regularity . KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.482

I asked the Secretary how Lady Hester was off for horses ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.483

and said that I would take a look at the stable .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.484

The man did not raise any opposition to my proposal ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.485

and affected no mystery about the matter , KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.486

but said that the only two steeds which then belonged to Miledi were of
a very humble sort . KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.487

This answer , and a storm of rain then beginning to descend , prevented
me at the time from undertaking my journey to the stables ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.488

and I do@ @n't know that I ever thought of the matter afterwards , until
my return to England , when I saw Lamartine's eye-witnessing account of
the strange horse saddled , as he pretends , by the hands of his Maker !
KINGLAKE-1844-2,100.489

<P_101>

When I returned to my room <paren> this , as my hostess told me , was
the only one in the whole building that kept out the rain <$$paren> ,
Lady Hester sent to say she would be glad to receive me again .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.491

I was rather surprised at this , KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.492

for I had understood that she reposed during the day ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.493

and it was now little later than noon . KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.494

' Really ' , said she , when I had taken my seat and my pipe , ' we were
together for hours last night , KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.495

and still I have heard nothing at all of my old friends ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.496

now , <font> do <$$font> tell me something of your dear mother , and her
sister ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.497

I never knew your father - KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.498

it was after I left Burton Pynsent that your mother married . '
KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.499

I began to make slow answer ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.500

but my questioner soon went off again to topics more sublime ; so that
this second interview , though it lasted two or three hours , was all
occupied by the same sort of varied discourse as that which I have been
describing . KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.501

In the course of the afernoon the captain of an English man-of-war
arrived at Djoun , KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.502

and Lady Hester determined to receive him for the same reason as that
which had induced her to allow my visit - namely , an early intimacy
with his family . KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.503

I and the new visitor - he was a pleasant , amusing man - dined together
, KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.504

and we were afterwards invited to the presence of my Lady ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.505

and with her we sat smoking till midnight . KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.506

The conversation turned chiefly , I think , upon magical science .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.507

I had determined to be off at an early hour the next morning ,
KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.508

and so at the end of this interview I bade my Lady farewell .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.509

With her parting words she once more advised me to abandon Europe , and
seek my reward in the East ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.510

and she urged me too to give the like counsels to my father , and tell
him that ' <font> She had said it <$$font> ' . KINGLAKE-1844-2,101.511

Lady Hester's unholy claim to supremacy in the spiritual kingdom was ,
no doubt , the suggestion of <P_102> fierce and inordinate pride most
perilously akin to madness ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.512

but I am quite sure that the mind of the woman was too strong to be
thoroughly overcome by even this potent feeling .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.513

I plainly saw that she was not an unhesitating follower of her own
system ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.514

and I even fancied that I could distinguish the brief moments during
which she contrived to believe in Herself , from those long and less
happy intervals in which her own reason was too strong for her .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.515

As for the Lady's faith in Astrology and Magic science , you are not for
a moment to suppose that this implied any aberration of intellect .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.516

She believed these things in common with those around her ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.517

and it could scarcely be otherwise , KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.518

for she seldom spoke to anybody except crazy old dervishes who at once
received her alms and fostered her extravagances ;
KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.519

and even when <paren> as on the occasion of my visit <$$paren> she was
brought into contact with a person entertaining different notions , she
still remained uncontradicted . KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.520

This entourage , and the habit of fasting from books and newspapers ,
were quite enough to make her a facile recipient of any marvellous story
. KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.521

I think that in England we scarcely acknowledge to ourselves how much we
owe to the wise and watchful press which presides over the formation of
our opinions , and which brings about this spendid result , namely ,
that in matters of belief the humblest of us are lifted up to the level
of the most sagacious , so that really a simple Cornet in the Blues is
no more likely to entertain a foolish belief about ghosts , or
witchcraft , or any other supernatural topic , than the Lord High
Chancellor , or the Leader of the House of Commons .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.522

How different is the intellectual régime of Eastern countries !
KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.523

In Syria , and Palestine , and Egypt , you might as well dispute the
efficacy of grass or grain as of Magic . KINGLAKE-1844-2,102.524

There is no controversy about <P_103> the matter .
KINGLAKE-1844-2,103.525

The effect of this , the unanimous belief of an ignorant people , upon
the mind of a stranger , is extremely curious , and well worth noticing
. KINGLAKE-1844-2,103.526

A man coming freshly from Europe is at first proof against the nonsense
with which he is assailed ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,103.527

but often it happens that after a little while the social atmosphere of
Asia will begin to infect him , and , if he has been unaccustomed to the
cunning of fence by which Reason prepares the means of guarding herself
against a fallacy , he will yield himself at last to the faith of those
around him ; KINGLAKE-1844-2,103.528

and this he will do by sympathy , it would seem , rather than from
conviction . KINGLAKE-1844-2,103.529

