<BEGIN_kingsley-1897-2>

<P_548>

<heading>

Chapter XXIV KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.4

Ascent of the Great Peak of Cameroons KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.5

<$$heading>

Setting forth how the Voyager is minded to ascend the mountain called
Mungo Mah Lobeh , or the Throne of Thunder , and in due course reaches
Buea , situate thereon . KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.7

After returning from Corisco I remained a few weeks in Gaboon ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.8

and then regretfully left on the <font> Niger . <$$font>
KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.9

My regrets , I should say , arose from leaving the charms and interests
of Congo Francais , KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.10

and had nothing whatever to do with taking passage on one of the most
comfortable ships of all those which call on the Coast .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.11

The <font> Niger <$$font> was homeward-bound when I joined her ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.12

and in due course arrived in Cameroon River , KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.13

and I was once again under the dominion of Germany .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.14

It would be a very interesting thing to compare the various forms of
European government in Africa - English , French , German , Portuguese ,
and Spanish ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.15

but to do so with any justice would occupy more space than I have at my
disposal , KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.16

for the subject is extremely intricate . KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.17

Each of these forms of government have their good points and their bad .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.18

Each of them are dealing with bits of Africa differing from each other -
in the nature of their inhabitants and their formation , and so on -
KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.19

so I will not enter into any comparison of them here , but merely remark
that , on the whole , German colonial methods in Africa are more akin to
English than to French , and that Germany has one of the main English
faults in an emphasised state - namely , a want of due appreciation of
the work of the men who serve her in Africa . KINGSLEY-1897-2,548.20

Time after time I have come across cases of German officers in Cameroon
who have done their country <P_549> good and noble service , and who yet
, on their return to the Fatherland they have loved so well , have found
, not only a want of due reward , but worse . KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.21

When the flush of enthusiasm for colonial enterprise dies out in Germany
- as it may die out in the face of the want of profit from her colonies
, arising from a too heavy expenditure of money on them - the sin of her
ingratitude to those men who have served her in Cameroon will find her
out , KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.22

and no longer will her best and bravest sons risk their honour in her
service . KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.23

The worst case of German ingratitude to Germans is the last , that of
the late Vice-Governor of Cameroon , Herr von Lucke , of whom I shall
later have occasion to speak . KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.24

This fine young officer , full of enthusiasm for his country and devoted
to his Emperor , was driven to suicide from a vile lie to the effect
that he had spoken disrespectfully of his Emperor - a lie told by I know
not whom , but I presume by some of those in Germany who seem to make it
their special mission in life to run down her greatest colony , Cameroon
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.25

A more devoted subject , or a truer gentleman and soldier than Herr von
Lucke , no country and no ruler ever possessed . KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.26

I also see in German newspapers that Governor von Puttkamer has been
accused of severity to natives in Cameroon , KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.27

and I and those Englishmen who know him have no hesitation in saying
this accusation is also ill-founded ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.28

but I hope Germany in carpet slippers and in barracks has by this time
realised that it is not fitted to judge Germany in Africa .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.29

I will say no more , however , on this subject KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.30

<paren> for I am devoted through good and ill report to my first-cousins
, the German and the Dane <$$paren> , KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.31

but will return to my own trivial experiences . KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.32

From the deck of the <font> Niger <$$font> I found myself again
confronted with my great temptation - the magnificent Mungo Mah Lobeh -
the Throne of Thunder . KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.33

Now it is none of my business to go up mountains .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.34

There@ @'s next to no fish on them in West Africa , and precious little
good rank fetish , as the population on them is sparse - the African ,
like myself , abhorring cool air . KINGSLEY-1897-2,549.35

Nevertheless , I feel quite sure that no white man has ever looked on
the great Peak of Cameroon without a desire arising in his mind to
ascend it and know in detail the highest point on the western side of
the <P_550> continent , and indeed one of the highest points in all
Africa . KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.36

Do not , however , imagine that the ascent is a common incident in a
coaster's life ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.37

far from it . KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.38

The coaster as a rule resists the temptation of Mungo firmly , being
stronger_minded than I am ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.39

moreover , he is busy and only too often fever-stricken in the bargain .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.40

But I am the exception , I own , KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.41

and I have given in to the temptation KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.42

and am the third Englishman to ascend the Peak and the first to have
ascended it from the south-east face . KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.43

The first man to reach the summit was Sir Richard Burton , accompanied
by the great botanist , Gustav Mann . KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.44

He went up , as did the succeeding twenty-five <paren> mostly Germans
<$$paren> from Babundi ; a place on the seashore to the west .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.45

The first expedition to reach the summit from the side I tackled it was
composed of the first lieutenant and doctor of the German man-of-war
<font> Hyaena . <$$font> KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.46

These gentlemen had accomplished this feat a few weeks before I landed
at Victoria to make my attempt . KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.47

I go into these details so as to excuse myself for subsequently giving
you a detailed account of the south-east face of Mungo mah Lobeh .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.48

So great is the majesty and charm of this mountain that the temptation
of it is as great to me to-day as it was on the first day I saw it ,
when I was feeling my way down the West Coast of Africa on the S.S .
<font> Lagos <$$font> in 1893 , and it revealed itself by good chance
from its surf-washed plinth to its sky-scraping summit .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.49

Certainly it is most striking when you see it first , as I first saw it
, after coasting for weeks along the low shores and mangrove-fringed
rivers of the Niger Delta . KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.50

Suddenly , right up out of the sea , rises the great mountain to its
13,760 feet , while close at hand , to westward , towers the lovely
island mass of Fernando Po to 10,190 feet . KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.51

But every time you pass it by its beauty grows on you with greater and
greater force , though it is never twice the same .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.52

Sometimes it is wreathed with indigo-black tornado clouds , sometimes
crested with snow , sometimes softly gorgeous with gold , green , and
rose-coloured vapours tinted by the setting sun , sometimes completely
swathed in dense cloud so that you can@ @not see it at all ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.53

but when you once know it is there it is all the same ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.54

and you bow down KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.55

and worship . KINGSLEY-1897-2,550.56

<P_551>

There are only two distinct peaks to this glorious thing that geologists
brutally call the volcanic intrusive mass of the Cameroon Mountains ,
viz. , Big Cameroon and Little Cameroon . KINGSLEY-1897-2,551.58

The latter , Mungo Mah Etindeh , has not yet been scaled , although it
is only 5,820 feet . KINGSLEY-1897-2,551.59

One reason for this is doubtless that the few people in fever-stricken ,
over-worked West Africa who are able to go up mountains , naturally try
for the adjacent Big Cameroon ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,551.60

the other reason is that Mungo Mah Etindeh , to which Burton refers as "
the awful form of Little Cameroon , " is mostly sheer cliff , and is
from foot to summit clothed in an almost impenetrable forest .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,551.61

Behind these two mountains of volcanic origin , which cover an area on
an isolated base of between 700 and 800 square miles in extent , there
are distinctly visible from the coast two chains of mountains , or I
should think one chain deflected , the so-called Rumby <P_552> and Omon
ranges . KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.62

These are no relations of Mungo , being of very different structure and
conformation ; the geological specimens I have brought from them and
from the Cameroons being identified by geologists as respectively
schistose grit and vesicular lava . KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.63

After spending a few pleasant days in Cameroon River in the society of
Frau Plehn , my poor friend Mrs. Duggan having , I ought to say ,
departed for England on the death of her husband , I went round to
Victoria , Ambas Bay , on the <font> Niger , <$$font>
KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.64

and in spite of being advised solemnly by Captain Davies to " chuck it
as it was not a picnic , " I started to attempt the Peak of Cameroons as
follows . KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.65

<font> September 20th {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} <$$font> ,
1895 . KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.66

- Left Victoria at 7.30 , KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.67

weather fine . KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.68

Herr von Lucke , though sadly convinced , by a series of experiments he
has been carrying on ever since I landed , and I expect before , that
you can@ @not be in three places at one time , is still trying to do so
; KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.69

or more properly speaking he starts an experiment series for four places
, man-like , instead of getting ill as I should under the circumstances
, KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.70

and he kindly comes with me as far as the bridge across the lovely
cascading Lukole River , KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.71

and then goes back at about seven miles an hour to look after Victoria
and his sick subordinates in detail . KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.72

I , with my crew , keep on up the grand new road the Government is
making , which when finished is to go from Ambas Bay to Buea , 3,000
feet up on the mountain's side . KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.73

This road is quite the most magnificent of roads , as regards breadth
and general intention , that I have seen anywhere in West Africa ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.74

and it runs through a superbly beautiful country ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.75

It is , I should say , as broad as Oxford Street ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.76

on either side of it are deep drains to carry off the surface waters ,
with banks of varied beautiful tropical shrubs and ferns , behind which
rise , 100 to 200 feet high , walls of grand forest , the column-like
tree-stems either hung with flowering , climbing plants and ferns , or
showing soft red and soft grey shafts sixty to seventy feet high without
an interrupting branch . KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.77

Behind this again rise the lovely foot hills of Mungo , high up against
the sky , coloured the most perfect soft dark blue .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,552.78

The whole scheme of colour is indescribably rich and full in <P_553>
tone . KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.79

The very earth is a velvety red brown , KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.80

and the butterflies - which abound - show themselves off in the sunlight
, in their canary-coloured , crimson , and peacock-blue liveries , to
perfection . KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.81

After five minutes' experience of the road I envy those butterflies .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.82

I do not believe there is a more lovely road in this world ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.83

and besides , it@ @'s a noble and enterprising thing of a Government to
go and make it , considering the climate and the country ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.84

but to get any genuine pleasure out of it , it is requisite to hover in
a bird- or butterfly-like way , KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.85

for of all the truly awful things to walk on , that road , when I was on
it , was the worst . KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.86

Of course this arose from its not being finished , not having its top on
in fact : KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.87

the bit that was finished , and had got its top on , for half a mile
beyond the bridge , you could go over in a Bath chair .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.88

The rest of it made you fit for one for the rest of your natural life ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.89

for it was one mass of broken lava rock , and here and there leviathan
tree-stumps that had been partially blown up with gunpowder .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.90

When we near the forest end of the road , it comes on to rain heavily ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.91

and I see a little house on the left-hand side , and a European engineer
superintending a group of very cheerful natives felling timber .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.92

He most kindly invites me to take shelter , saying it can@ @not rain as
heavily as this for long . KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.93

My men also announce a desire for water , KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.94

and so I sit down KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.95

and chat with the engineer under the shelter of his verandah , while the
men go to the water-hole , some twenty minutes off .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.96

The engineer is an Alsatian , KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.97

and has been engaged on the Congo Free State Railway , which he
abandoned because they put him up at the end station , on those awful
Palaballa mountains . KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.98

Four men who were at the station died of fever KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.99

and he got it himself , KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.100

and applied for leave to go down to Matadi to see a doctor .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.101

His request was peremptorily refused , KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.102

and he was told he must remain at his post until another engineer came
up to take over charge . KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.103

He stayed for some days waiting , KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.104

but no one came KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.105

or gave signs of coming , KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.106

and he found the company had given all their employes orders that he was
not to be allowed on a train , KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.107

so he walked down to Matadi . KINGSLEY-1897-2,553.108

How he did it , knowing that <P_554> country , I can@ @not think ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.109

but he was exceedingly ill when he got there , as may easily be imagined
, KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.110

and as soon as he had sufficiently recovered , he came up to Cameroons ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.111

and obtained his present appointment , after having been kept and nursed
up in the hospital there , to his considerable surprise after his Congo
experiences . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.112

He was not hopeful about the future of that Congo railroad , or of that
of its directors . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.113

He quoted as one of the reasons for his leaving it the doubt that it
would ever be finished . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.114

Inexplicable is man ! KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.115

Why he should have cared whether it was finished or not as long as it
kept on paying him 1 +L {TEXT:+L1} a day , I do not know .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.116

He had kept a diary of the accidents , which averaged two a day , and
usually took the form of something going off the line , because the
railway engines used were so light as to be flighty , and not really
powerful enough to take up more than two trucks at a time , though
always expected to do so . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.117

The wages of the natives employed were from 1 <font> s. <$$font> to 1
<font> s. <$$font> 6 <font> d. <$$font> a day ; very high pay .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.118

The Chinamen imported as navvies were an awful nuisance , always making
palaver . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.119

The Senegal men are dangerous , because the French officials on the line
always support them against other white men , Senegalese being Frenchmen
, just as Kruboys are Englishmen . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.120

While I am getting this last news from Congo , the rain keeps on pouring
down . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.121

I presently see one of my men sitting right in the middle of the road on
a rock , totally unsheltered , KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.122

and a feeling of shame comes over me in the face of this black man's
aquatic courage . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.123

Besides , Herr von Lucke had said I was sure to get half-drowned and
catch an awful cold , KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.124

so there is no use delaying . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.125

Into the rain I go , KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.126

and off we start . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.127

I may remark I subsequently found that my aquatic underling was drunk .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.128

I conscientiously attempt to keep dry , by holding up an umbrella ,
knowing that though hopeless it is the proper thing to do .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.129

We leave the road about fifty yards above the hut , turning into the
unbroken forest on the right-hand side , and following a narrow ,
slippery , muddy , root-beset bush-path that was a comfort after the
road . KINGSLEY-1897-2,554.130

Presently we come to a lovely mountain torrent flying down over
red-brown rocks in white foam ; <P_555> exquisitely lovely , and only a
shade damper than the rest of things . KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.131

Seeing this I solemnly fold up my umbrella KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.132

and give it to Kefalla . KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.133

My relations , nay , even Mrs. Roy , who is blind to a large percentage
of my imperfections , say the most scathing things about my behaviour
with regard to water . KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.134

But really my conduct is founded on sound principles .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.135

I know from a series of carefully conducted experiments , carried out on
the Devonshire Lynn , that I can@ @not go across a river on slippery
stepping-stones ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.136

therefore , knowing that attempts to keep my feet out of water only end
in my placing the rest of my anatomy violently in , I take charge of
Fate KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.137

and wade . KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.138

This particular stream , too , requires careful wading , the rocks over
which it flows being arranged in picturesque , but perilous confusion ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.139

however all goes well , KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.140

and getting to the other side I decide to " chuck it , " as Captain
Davis would say , as to keeping dry , KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.141

for the rain comes down heavier than ever . KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.142

Now we are evidently dealing with a foot-hillside ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.143

but the rain is too thick for one to see two yards in any direction ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.144

and we seem to be in a ghost-land forest , KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.145

for the great palms and red-woods rise up in the mist before us ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.146

and fade out in the mist behind , as we pass on .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.147

The rocks which edge and strew the path at our feet are covered with
exquisite ferns and mosses - all the most delicate shades of green
imaginable , and here and there of absolute gold colour , looking as if
some ray of sunshine had lingered too long playing on the earth , and
had got shut off from heaven by the mist , and so lay nestling among the
rocks until it might rejoin the sun . KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.148

The path now becomes an absolute torrent , with mud-thickened water ,
which cascades round one's ankles in a sportive way , and round one's
knees in the hollows in the path . KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.149

Five seconds after abandoning the umbrella I am wet through ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.150

but it is not uncomfortable at this temperature , something like that of
a cucumber frame with the lights on , if you can clear your mind of all
prejudice , as Dr. Johnson says , and forget the risk of fever which
saturation entails . KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.151

On we go , KINGSLEY-1897-2,555.152

the path underneath the water seems a pretty <P_556> equal mixture of
rock and mud , KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.153

but they are not evenly distributed . KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.154

Plantations full of weeds show up on either side of us ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.155

and we are evidently now on the top of a foot-hill .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.156

I suspect a fine view of the sea could be obtained from here , if you
have an atmosphere that is less than 99_3$$4 per_cent. of water .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.157

As it is , a white sheet - or more properly speaking , considering its
soft , stuffy woolliness , a white blanket - is stretched across the
landscape to the south-west , where the sea would show .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.158

We go down-hill now , the water rushing into the back of my shoes for a
change . KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.159

The path is fringed by high , sugar-cane-like grass which hangs across
it in a lackadaisical way , swishing you in the face and cutting like a
knife whenever you catch its edge , and pouring continually insidious
rills of water down one's neck . KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.160

It does not matter . KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.161

The whole Atlantic could not get more water on to me than I have already
got . KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.162

Ever and again I stop KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.163

and wring out some of it from my skirts , KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.164

for it is weighty . KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.165

One would not imagine that anything could come down in the way of water
thicker than the rain , KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.166

but it can . KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.167

When one is on the top of the hills , a cold breeze comes through the
mist chilling one to the bone , KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.168

and bending the heads of the palm trees , sends down from them water by
the bucketful with a slap ; hitting or missing you as the case may be .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.169

Both myself and my men are by now getting anxious for our " chop , "
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.170

and they tell me , " We look them big hut soon . "
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.171

Soon we do look them big hut , but with faces of undisguised horror ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.172

for the big hut consists of a few charred roof-mats , &c , lying on the
ground . KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.173

There has been a fire in that simple savage home .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.174

Our path here is cut by one that goes east and west ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.175

and after a consultation between my men and the Bakwiri , we take the
path going east , down a steep slope between weedy plantations ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.176

and shortly on the left shows a steep little hill-side with a long low
hut on the top . KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.177

We go up to it KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.178

and I find it is the habitation of a Basel Mission black Bible-reader .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.179

He comes out KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.180

and speaks English well , KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.181

and I tell him I want a house for myself and my men ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.182

and he says we had better come and stay in this one .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,556.183

It is divided into two chambers , one in which the children who attend
the mission-school stay , and wherein there is a fire , <P_557> and one
evidently the abode of the teacher . KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.184

I thank the Bible-reader KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.185

and say that I will pay him for the house , KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.186

and I and the men go in streaming , KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.187

and my teeth chatter with cold as the breeze chills my saturated garment
while I give out the rations of beef , rum , blankets , and tobacco to
the men . KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.188

Then I clear my apartment out KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.189

and attempt to get dry , operations which are interrupted by Kefalla
coming for tobacco to buy firewood off the mission teacher to cook our
food by . KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.190

Presently my excellent little cook brings in my food ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.191

and in with it come two mission teachers - our first acquaintance , the
one with a white jacket , and another with a blue .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.192

They lounge about KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.193

and spit in all directions , KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.194

and then chiefs commence to arrive with their families complete ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.195

and they sidle into the apartment KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.196

and ostentatiously ogle the demijohn of rum . KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.197

They are , as usual , a nuisance , sitting about on everything .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.198

No sooner have I taken an unclean-looking chief off the wood sofa , than
I observe another one has silently seated himself in the middle of my
open portmanteau . KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.199

Removing him and shutting it up , I see another one has settled on the
men's beef and rice sack . KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.200

It is now about three o'clock KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.201

and I am still chilled to the bone in spite of tea .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.202

The weather is as bad as ever . KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.203

The men say that the rest of the road to Buea is far worse than that
which we have so far come along , and that we should never get there
before dark , and " for sure " should not get there afterwards , because
by the time the dark came down we should be in " bad place too much . "
KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.204

Therefore , to their great relief , I say I will stay at this place -
Buana - for the night , and go on in the morning time up to Buea ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.205

and just for the present I think I will wrap myself up in a blanket and
try and get the chill out of me , KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.206

so I give the chiefs a glass of rum each , plenty of head tobacco , and
my best thanks for their kind call , KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.207

and then turn them and the expectorating mission teachers out .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.208

I have not been lying down five minutes on the plank that serves for a
sofa by day and a bed by night , when Charles comes knocking at the door
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.209

He wants tobacco . KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.210

" Missionary man no fit to let we have firewood unless we buy em . "
KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.211

Give Charles a head KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.212

and shut him out again , KINGSLEY-1897-2,557.213

and drop <P_558> off to sleep again for a quarter of an hour ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.214

then am aroused by some enterprising sightseers pushing open the
window-shutters ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.215

when I look round there are a mass of black heads sticking through the
window-hole . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.216

I tell them respectfully that the circus is closed for repairs ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.217

and fasten up the shutters , KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.218

but sleep is impossible , KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.219

so I turn out KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.220

and go KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.221

and see what those men of mine are after . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.222

They are comfortable enough round their fire , with their clothes
suspended on strings in the smoke above them , KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.223

and I envy them that fire . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.224

I then stroll round to see if there is anything to be seen ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.225

but the scenery is much like that you would enjoy if you were inside a
blancmange . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.226

So as it is now growing dark I return to my room KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.227

and light candles , KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.228

and read Dr. Gunther on Fishes . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.229

If this sort of weather goes on I expect I shall specialise fins and
gills myself . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.230

Room becomes full of blacks . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.231

Unless you watch the door , you do not see how it is done .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.232

You look at a corner one minute KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.233

and it is empty , KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.234

and the next time you look that way it is full of rows of white teeth
and watching eyes . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.235

The two mission teachers come in KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.236

and make a show of teaching a child to read the Bible .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.237

I , having decided that it does not matter much what kind of fins you
wear as they all work well , write up my log . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.238

About seven I get cook to make me some more tea ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.239

and shortly after find myself confronted with difficulties as to the
disposal of the two mission teachers for the night .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.240

This class of man , has no resource in him , KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.241

and I think worse of the effects of mission-teaching than usual as I
prepare to try and get a sleep {COM:sic} ; not an elaborate affair , I
assure you , KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.242

for I only want to wrap myself round in a blanket and lie on that plank
, KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.243

but the rain has got into the blankets KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.244

and horror ! there is no pillow . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.245

The mission men have cleared their bed paraphernalia right out .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.246

Now you can do without a good many things , but not without a pillow ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.247

so hunt round to find something to make one with ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.248

find the Bible in English , the Bible in German , and two hymn-books ,
and a candle-stick . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.249

These seem all the small articles in the room - KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.250

no , there is a parcel behind the books - mission teachers' Sunday
trousers - KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.251

make delightful arrangement of books bound round with trousers and the
whole affair wrapped in one of my towels . KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.252

Never saw till now advantage of Africans having trousers .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,558.253

<P_559>

Civilisation has its points after all . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.255

But it is no use trying to get any sleep until those men are quieter .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.256

The partition which separates my apartment from theirs is a bamboo and
mat affair , straight at the top so leaving under the roof a triangular
space above common to both rooms . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.257

Also common to both rooms are the smoke of the fire and the conversation
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.258

Kefalla is holding forth in a dogmatic way , KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.259

and some of the others are snoring . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.260

There is a new idea in decoration along the separating wall .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.261

Mr. Morris might have made something out of it for a dado .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.262

It is composed of an arrangement in line of stretched out singlets .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.263

Vaseline the revolver . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.264

Wish those men would leave off chattering . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.265

Kefalla seems to know the worst about most of the people , black and
white , down in Ambas Bay , KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.266

but I do not believe those last two stories . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.267

Evidently great jokes in next room now ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.268

Kefalla has thrown himself , still talking , in the dark , on to the top
of one of the mission teachers . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.269

The women of the village outside have been keeping up , this hour and
more , a most melancholy coo-ôoing
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.270

Those foolish creatures are evidently worrying about their husbands who
have gone down to market in Ambas Bay , and who , they think , are lost
in the bush . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.271

I have not a shadow of a doubt that those husbands who are not home by
now are safely drunk in town , or reposing on the grand new road the
kindly Government have provided for them , either in one of the side
drains , or tucked in among the lava rock . KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.272

<font> September 21st {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} <$$font> .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.273

- Coo-ôoing {COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} went on all-night
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.274

I was aroused about 9.30 P.M. , by uproar in adjacent hut :
KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.275

one husband had returned in a bellicose condition
KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.276

and whacked his wives , KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.277

and their squarks and squalls , instead of acting as a warning to the
other ladies , stimulate the silly things to go on coo-ôoing
{COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} louder and more entreatingly
than ever , so that their husbands might come home and whack them too ,
I suppose , KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.278

and whenever the unmitigated hardness of my plank rouses me I hear them
still coo-ôoing {COM:circumflex_accent_represents_macron} .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.279

No watchman is required to wake you in the morning on the top of a
Cameroon foot-hill by 5.30 , because about 4 A.M. the dank chill that
comes before the dawn does so most effectively .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.280

One old chief turned up early out of the mist KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.281

and dashed me a bottle of palm wine ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,559.282

he says he wants to <P_560> dash me a fowl , KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.283

but I decline , KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.284

and accept two eggs , KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.285

and give him four heads of tobacco . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.286

The whole place is swathed in thick white mist through which my audience
arrive . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.287

But I am firm with them , KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.288

and shut up the doors and windows KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.289

and disregard their bangings on them while I am dressing , or rather
redressing . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.290

The mission teachers get in with my tea , KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.291

and sit and smoke and spit while I have my breakfast .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.292

Give me cannibal Fans ! KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.293

I do not believe Blue Jacket is a teacher at all , but a horrible
Frankenstein parasite thing on White Jacket . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.294

He takes everything away from White Jacket as soon as I give it him :
White Jacket feebly remonstrating . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.295

I see as we leave that he is taking the money I gave the latter <font>
vi_et_armis <$$font> out of his pocket . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.296

It is pouring with rain again now , KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.297

and we go down the steep hillock to the path we came along yesterday ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.298

keep it until we come to where the old path cuts it ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.299

and then turn up to the right following the old path's course
KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.300

and leave Buana without a pang of regret . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.301

Our road goes N.E. KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.302

Oh , the mud of it ! KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.303

Not the clearish cascades of yesterday but sticky , slippery mud ,
intensely sticky , and intensely slippery . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.304

The narrow path which is filled by this , is V-shaped underneath from
wear , KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.305

and I soon find the safest way is right through the deepest mud in the
middle . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.306

The white mist shuts off all details beyond ten yards in any direction .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.307

All we can see , as we first turn up the path , is a patch of kokos of
tremendous size on our right . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.308

After this comes weedy plantation , and stretches of sword grass hanging
across the road . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.309

The country is not so level as - or rather , I should say , more acutely
unlevel than that we came over yesterday . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.310

On we go , patiently doing our mud pulling through the valleys ; toiling
up a hillside among lumps of rock and stretches of forest ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.311

for we are now beyond Buana's plantations ; and skirting the summit of
the hill only to descend into another valley . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.312

Evidently this is a succession of foot-hills of the great mountain
KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.313

and we are not on its true face yet . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.314

As we go on they become more and more abrupt in form , the valleys mere
narrow ravines . KINGSLEY-1897-2,560.315

Evidently in the wet season <paren> this is only the tornado season
<$$paren> each of these valleys is occupied by a raging <P_561> torrent
from the look of the confused water-worn boulders .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.316

Now among the rocks there are only isolated pools ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.317

for the weather for a fortnight before I left Victoria had been fairly
dry , KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.318

and this rich porous soil soaks up an immense amount of water .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.319

It strikes me as strange that when we are either going up or down the
hills , the ground is less muddy than when we are skirting their summits
, KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.320

but as my brother would say , " it is perfectly simple , if you think
about it , " because on the inclines the rush of water clears the soil
away down to the bed_rock . KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.321

There is an outcrop of clay down by Buana , KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.322

but though that was slippery , it is nothing to the slipperiness of this
fine , soft , red-brown earth that is the soil higher up , and also
round Ambas Bay . KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.323

This gets churned up into a sort of batter where there is enough water
lying on it , KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.324

and , when there is not , an ice slide is an infant to it .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.325

My men and I flounder about ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.326

thrice one of them , load and all , goes down with a squidge and a crash
into the side grass , KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.327

and says " damn ! " with quite the European accent ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.328

as a rule , however , we go on in single file , my shoes giving out a
mellifluous squidge , and their naked feet a squish , squash .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.329

The men take it very good_temperedly , KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.330

and sing in between accidents ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.331

I do not feel much like singing myself , particularly at one awful spot
, which was the exception to the rule that ground at acute angles forms
the best going . KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.332

This exception was a long slippery slide down into a ravine with a long
, perfectly glassy slope up out of it . KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.333

I remember one of my tutors saying , " Always when on a long march
assume the attitude you feel most inclined to , as it is less tiring .
" KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.334

There could not be the least shadow of a doubt about your inclinations
as to attitude here , nor to giving way to them ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.335

so we arrive at the bottom of that ravine in a fine confused heap .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.336

As for going up out of it , it was not mere inclination -
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.337

it was passion that possessed you . KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.338

What you wanted to do was to plant your nose against the hill-side and
wave your normally earthward extremities in the air , particularly when
you were near the middle of the slope , or close to the top .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.339

Two of the boys gave way to this impulse ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.340

I , of course , did not , KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.341

but when I felt it coming on like a sort of fit , flung myself sideways
into the dense bush that edges the path , KINGSLEY-1897-2,561.342

<P_562>

and when it had passed off , scrambled out KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.344

and had another try at the slide . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.345

After this we have a stretch of rocky forest , KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.346

and pass by a widening in the path which I am told is a place where men
blow , <font> i.e. , <$$font> rest , KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.347

and then pass through another a little further on , which is Buea's bush
market . Then through an opening in the great war-hedge of Buea , a
growing stockade some fifteen feet high , the lower part of it wattled .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.348

Close by is a cross put up to mark the spot where that gallant young
German officer fell last January twelvemonth , when on the first
expedition to open up this side of the mountain .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.349

At the sides of the path here grow banks of bergamot and balsam ,
returning good for evil and smiling sweetly as we crush them .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.350

Thank goodness we are in forest now , and we seem to have done with the
sword-grass . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.351

The rocks are covered with moss and ferns , KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.352

and the mist curling and wandering about among the stems is very lovely
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.353

I have to pause in life's pleasures because I want to measure one of the
large earthworms , which , with smaller sealing-wax-red worms , are
crawling about the path . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.354

He was eleven inches and three-quarters . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.355

He detained me some time getting this information , because he was so
nervous during the operation . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.356

In our next ravine there is a succession of pools , part of a mountain
torrent of greater magnitude evidently than those we have passed ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.357

and in these pools there are things swimming . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.358

Spend more time catching them , with the assistance of Bum .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.359

I do not value Kefalla's advice , ample though it is , as being of any
real value in the affair . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.360

Bag some water-spiders and two small fish . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.361

The heat is less oppressive than yesterday . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.362

All yesterday one was being alternately smothered in the valley and
chilled on the hill-tops . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.363

To-day it is a more level temperature , about <font> 70@ @=o= , <$$font>
I fancy . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.364

The soil up here , about 2,500 feet above sea-level , though rock-laden
is exceedingly rich , KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.365

and the higher we go there is more bergamot , native indigo , with its
under-leaf dark blue , and lovely coleuses with red markings on their
upper leaves , and crimson linings . KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.366

I , as an ichthyologist , am in the wrong paradise .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.367

What a region this would be for a botanist ! KINGSLEY-1897-2,562.368

The country is gloriously lovely if one could only see it for <P_563>
the rain and mist ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.369

but one only gets dim hints of its beauty when some cold draughts of
wind come down from the great mountains and seem to push open the
mist-veil as with spirit hands , and then in a minute let it fall
together again . KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.370

I do not expect to reach Buea within regulation time ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.371

but at 11.30 my men say " we close in , " KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.372

and then , coming along a forested hill and down a ravine , we find
ourselves facing a rushing river , wherein a squad of black soldiers are
washing clothes , with the assistance of a squad of black ladies , with
much uproar and sky-larking . KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.373

I hesitate on the bank . KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.374

I am in an awful mess - mud-caked skirts , and blood-stained hands and
face . KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.375

Shall I make an exhibition of myself and wash here , or make an
exhibition of myself by going unwashed to that unknown German officer
who is in charge of the station ? KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.376

Naturally I wash here , standing in the river and swishing the mud out
of my skirts ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.377

and then wading across to the other bank , I wring out my skirts ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.378

but what is life without a towel ? KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.379

The ground on the further side of the river is cleared of bush ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.380

and only bears a heavy crop of balsam ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.381

a few steps onwards bring me in view of a corrugated iron-roofed ,
plank-sided house , in front of which , towards the great mountain which
now towers up into the mist , is a low clearing with a quadrangle of
native huts - the barracks . KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.382

I receive a most kindly welcome from a fair , grey-eyed German gentleman
, KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.383

only unfortunately I see my efforts to appear before him clean and tidy
have been quite unavailing , KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.384

for he views my appearance with unmixed horror , KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.385

and suggests an instant hot bath . KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.386

I decline . KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.387

Men can be trying ! KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.388

How in the world is any one going to take a bath in a house with no
doors , and only very sketchy wooden window-shutters ?
KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.389

The German officer is building the house quickly , as Ollen-dorff would
say , KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.390

but he has not yet got to such luxuries as doors ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.391

and so uses army blankets strung across the doorway ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.392

and he has got up temporary wooden shutters to keep the worst of the
rain out , KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.393

and across his own room's window he has a frame covered with greased
paper . KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.394

Thank goodness he has made a table , and a bench , and a washhand-stand
out of planks for his spare room , which he kindly places at my disposal
; KINGSLEY-1897-2,563.395

and the Fatherland has evidently stood him an iron <P_564> bedstead and
a mattress for it . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.396

But the Fatherland is not spoiling or cosseting this man to an extent
that will enervate him in the least . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.397

I get the loads brought into my room , where they steam and distil rills
of water on to the bare floor , KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.398

and then , barricading the door-blankets and the window-shutters , I
dispossess myself of the German territory I have acquired during the
last twenty-four hours , KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.399

and my portmanteau having kept fairly watertight , I appear as a
reasonable being before society - <font> i.e. , <$$font> Herr Liebert ,
the German officer - KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.400

and hunt up my boys to get me tea . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.401

This being done , I go out on the verandah KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.402

and discourse . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.403

Society has got a dreadfully bad foot ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.404

weeks ago he injured it on the road , KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.405

and then in cleaning out a bad sore on one of the men some of the
purulent matter got into the wound , KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.406

and consequently he has nearly lost his leg , or more properly speaking
his life , KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.407

for he lay thirteen days in bed , KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.408

and there was no doctor even down in Victoria to take the leg off , if
it had turned to gangrene , as it seemed likely to do .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.409

He makes nothing of it , KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.410

and hops about in a most energetic way , looking after seventy black
soldiers and their wives and children , giving them out their rations ,
drilling them , doctoring them , and everything else , and hankering to
do more . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.411

Many of the soldiers are down with bad feet , in consequence of the
badness of the roads hereabouts . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.412

These soldiers are an assortment of Wei-Weis and Su-Su from Sierra Leone
, and some Yorubas . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.413

They are smart men and well cared for , and their uniforms far more
reasonable and military than the absurd uniforms we put our Haussas into
in Calabar , KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.414

only the Fatherland ordains that they shall wear braces ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.415

and these unnecessary articles for an African are worn flowing free ,
except by those men actually on duty . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.416

The mist clears off in the evening about five , KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.417

and the surrounding scenery is at last visible .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.418

Fronting the house there is the cleared quadrangle , facing which on the
other three sides are the lines of very dilapidated huts ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.419

and behind these the ground rises steeply , the great S.E. face of
Mungo Mah Lobeh . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.420

It looks awfully steep when you know you have got to go up it .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.421

This station at Buea is 3,000 feet above sea-level , which explains the
hills we have had to come up . KINGSLEY-1897-2,564.422

The mountain <P_565> wall when viewed from Buea is very grand , although
it lacks snow-cap or glacier , and the highest summits of Mungo are not
visible because we are too close under them , KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.423

but its enormous bulk and its isolation make it highly impressive .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.424

The forest runs up it in a great band above Buea ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.425

then sends up great tongues into the grass belt above .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.426

But what may be above this grass belt I know not yet ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.427

for our view ends at the top of the wall of the great S.E. crater .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.428

My men say there are devils and gold up beyond , KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.429

but the German authorities do not support this view .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.430

Those Germans are so sceptical . KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.431

This station is evidently on a ledge , KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.432

for behind it the ground falls steeply , KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.433

and you get an uninterrupted panoramic view of the Cameroon estuary and
the great stretches of low swamp lands with the Mungo and the Bimbia
rivers , and their many creeks and channels , and far away east the
strange abrupt forms of the Rumby Mountains . KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.434

Herr Liebert says you can see Cameroon Government buildings from here ,
if only the day is clear , though they are some forty miles away .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.435

This view of them is , save a missionary of the Basel mission , the only
white society available at Buea . KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.436

Society here says the intercourse , though better than none , is slow .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.437

I suggest he should pay calls and indulge in conversation by means of a
code of fireworks . KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.438

" Ha ! " says he , " you@ @'re like the Calabar major . "
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.439

" Which one ? " say I , KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.440

for there are majors and majors . KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.441

" The one who came here last dry season , " he said , " and who went up
on to the wall and set the grass on fire to show how he was going on ,
and had to run down for his life . " KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.442

I know that man , KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.443

and a very excellent man he is , KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.444

but he is not in Calabar , KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.445

nor is he a major ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.446

but society everywhere makes mistakes in technical things .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.447

I hear more details about the death of poor Freiherr von Gravenreuth ,
whose fine monument of a seated lion I saw in the Government House
grounds in Cameroons the other day . KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.448

Bush fighting in these West African forests is dreadfully dangerous work
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.449

Hemmed in by bush , in a narrow path along which you must pass slowly in
single file , you are a target for all and any natives invisibly hidden
in the undergrowth ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.450

and the war-hedge of Buea must have made an additional danger and
difficulty here for the attacking party . KINGSLEY-1897-2,565.451

<P_566>

The lieutenant and his small band of black soldiers had , after a stiff
fight , succeeded in forcing the entrance to this , when their
ammunition gave out , and they had to fall back .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.453

The Bueans , regarding this as their victory , rallied ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.454

and a chance shot killed the lieutenant instantly .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.455

A further expedition was promptly sent up from Victoria
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.456

and it wiped the error out of the Buean mind and several Bueans with it
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.457

But it was a very necessary expedition . KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.458

These natives were a constant source of danger to the more peaceful
trading tribes , whom they would not permit to traverse their territory
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.459

The Bueans have been dealt with mercifully by the Germans ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.460

for their big villages , like Sapa , are still standing ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.461

and a continual stream of natives come into the barrack-yard , selling
produce , or carrying it on down to Victoria markets , in a perfectly
content and cheerful way . KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.462

I met this morning a big burly chief with his insignia of office - a
great stick . KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.463

He , I am told , is the chief or Sapa whom Herr von Lucke has called to
talk some palaver with down in Victoria . KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.464

At last I leave Herr Liebert , because everything I say to him causes
him to hop , flying somewhere to show me something , and I am sure it is
bad for his foot . KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.465

I go KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.466

and see that my men are safely quartered . KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.467

Kefalla is laying down the law in a most didactic way to the soldiers .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.468

Herr Liebert has christened him " the Professor , "
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.469

and I adopt the name for him , KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.470

but I fear " Windbag " would fit him better . KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.471

At 7.30 a heavy tornado comes rolling down upon us .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.472

Masses of indigo cloud with livid lightning flashing in the van , roll
out from over the wall of the great crater above ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.473

then with that malevolence peculiar to the tornado it sees all the
soldiers and their wives and children sitting happily in the barrack
yard , howling in a minor key and beating their beloved tom-toms ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.474

so it comes KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.475

and sits flump down on them with deluges of water ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.476

and sends its lightning running over the ground in livid streams of
living death . KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.477

Oh they are nice things {COM:amalgam} are tornadoes !
KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.478

I wonder what they will be like when we are up in their home ; up atop
of that precious wall ? KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.479

I had no idea Mungo was so steep . KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.480

If I had - well , I am in for it now ! KINGSLEY-1897-2,566.481

<P_567>

<heading>

Chapter XXV KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.484

Ascent of the Great Peak of Cameroons - <paren> <font> Continued
<$$font> <$$paren> KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.485

<$$heading>

Wherein is recounted how the Voyager sets out from Buea , and goes up
through the forest belt to the top of the S.E. crater of Mungo Mah
Lobeh , with many dilemmas and disasters that befell on the way .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.487

<font> September 22nd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} <$$font> .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.488

- Wake at 5 . KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.489

Fine morning . KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.490

Fine view towards Cameroon River . KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.491

The broad stretch of forest below , and the water-eaten mangrove swamps
below that , are all a glorious indigo flushed with rose colour from "
the death of the night , " as Kiva used to call the dawn .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.492

No one stirring till six , when people come out of the huts , and
stretch themselves and proceed to begin the day , in the African's usual
perfunctory , listless way . KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.493

I am not stating this as a peculiar trait arising from his cerebral
development ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.494

it is merely the natural sequence of the nights he goes in for so
cheerily : KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.495

<font> Katzenjammer , <$$font> is , I believe , the technical term .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.496

My crew are worse than the rest . KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.497

I go KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.498

and hunt cook out . KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.499

He props open one eye , with difficulty , KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.500

and yawns a yawn that nearly cuts his head in two .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.501

I wake him up with a shock , by saying I mean to go on up to-day , and
want my chop , and to start on {TEXT:one} time .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.502

He goes off KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.503

and announces my horrible intention to the others .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.504

Kefalla soon arrives upon the scene full of argument ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.505

" You no sabe this be Sunday , Ma ? " says he in a tone that tells he
considers this settles the matter . KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.506

I " sabe " unconcernedly ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.507

Kefalla scratches his head for other argument , KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.508

but he has opened with his heavy artillery ; which being repulsed throws
his rear lines into confusion . KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.509

Bum , the head man , then turns up , sound asleep inside , but quite
ready to come . KINGSLEY-1897-2,567.510

Bum , I find , is always ready to do what he is <P_568> told , but has
no more original ideas in his head than there are in a chair leg .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.511

Kefalla , however , by scratching other parts of his anatomy diligently
, has now another argument ready , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.512

the two Bakwiris are sick with abdominal trouble , that requires rum and
rest , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.513

and one of the other boys has hot foot . KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.514

Herr Liebert now appears upon the scene , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.515

and says I can have some of his labourers , who are now more or less
idle , because he can@ @not get about much with his bad foot to direct
them , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.516

so I give the Bakwiris and the two hot foot cases " books " to take down
to Herr von Lucke who will pay them off for me , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.517

and seeing that they have each a good day's rations of rice , beef , &c
, eliminate them from the party . KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.518

In addition to the labourers , I am to have as a guide Sasu , a black
sergeant , who went up the Peak with the officers of the <font> Hycena ,
<$$font> KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.519

and I get my breakfast , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.520

and then hang about watching my men getting ready very slowly to start .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.521

They spin some plausible yarns about getting food cooked , in case they
can@ @not get a fire when we reach the top of the forest belt , where we
are to camp . KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.522

I never saw a forest yet in Africa where you could not get a fire ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.523

but knowing that my previous experiences have never been beyond 5,000
feet in elevation , I let them have their way . KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.524

Off we get about 8 , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.525

and start with all good wishes , and grim prophecies , from Herr Liebert
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.526

Led by Sasu , and accompanied by " To-morrow , " a man who has come to
Buea from some interior unknown district , and who speaks no known
language , and whose business it is to help to cut a way through the
bush , we go down the path we came KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.527

and cross the river again . KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.528

This river seems to separate the final mass of the mountain from the
foot-hills on this side . KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.529

Immediately after crossing it we turn up into the forest on the right
hand side , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.530

and " To-morrow " cuts through an overgrown track for about half an hour
{TEXT:half-an-hour} , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.531

and then leaves us . KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.532

Everything is reeking wet , KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.533

and we swish through thick undergrowth KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.534

and then enter a darker forest where the earth is rocky and richly
decorated with ferns and moss . KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.535

For the first time in my life I see tree-ferns growing wild in luxuriant
profusion . KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.536

What glorious creations they are ! KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.537

Then we get out into the middle of a koko plantation .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,568.538

Next to sweet-potatoes , <P_569> the premier abomination to walk through
, give me kokos for good all-round tryingness , particularly when they
are wet , as , is very much the case now . KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.539

These gigantic arums poise in their broad leaves little reservoirs of
water , which you upset over yourself as you pass through .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.540

The big round roots are excellent things to fall over .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.541

They project above the earth , KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.542

and you can jam your foot against them and pitch forward ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.543

or you can step on one of them and fall backwards or sideways .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.544

The entertainment they afford the wayfarer is not monotonous ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.545

but it is exasperating . KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.546

Getting through these we meet the war hedge again ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.547

and after a conscientious struggle with various forms of vegetation in a
muddled , tangled state , Sasu says , " No good ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.548

path done got stopped up , " KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.549

so we turn KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.550

and retrace our steps all the way , KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.551

cross the river , KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.552

and horrify Herr Liebert by invading his house again .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.553

We explain the situation . KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.554

Grave headshaking between him and Sasu about the practicability of any
other route , because there is no other path . KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.555

I do not like to say " so much the better , " because it would have
sounded ungrateful , KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.556

but I knew from my Ogowe experiences that a forest that looks from afar
a dense black mat is all right underneath , KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.557

and there is a short path recently cut by Herr Liebert that goes
straight up towards the forest above us . KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.558

It had been made to go to a clearing , where ambitious agricultural
operations were being inaugurated , when Herr Liebert hurt his foot .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.559

Up this we go , KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.560

it is semi-vertical while it lasts , KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.561

and it ends in a scrubby patch that is to be a plantation ;
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.562

this crossed we are in the <font> Urwald , <$$font>
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.563

and it is more exquisite than words can describe , but not good going ,
particularly at one spot where a gigantic tree has fallen down across a
little rocky ravine , and has to be crawled under .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.564

It occurs to me that this is a highly likely place for snakes , and an
absolutely sure find for scorpions , KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.565

and when we have passed it three of these latter interesting creatures
are observed on the load of blankets which is fastened on to the back of
Kefalla . KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.566

We inform Kefalla of the fact on the spot . KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.567

A volcanic eruption of entreaty , advice , and admonition results ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.568

but we still hesitate . KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.569

However , the gallant cook tackles them in a sort of tip-cat way with a
stick , KINGSLEY-1897-2,569.570

and we proceed into a patch of long grass , beyond which there <P_570>
is a reach of amomums . KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.571

The winged amomum I see here in Africa for the first time .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.572

Horrid slippery things amomum sticks to walk on , when they are lying on
the ground ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.573

and there is a lot of my old enemy the calamus about .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.574

On each side are deep forested dells and ravines ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.575

and rocks show up through the ground in every direction ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.576

and things in general are slippery , KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.577

and I wonder now and again , as I assume with unnecessary violence a
recumbent position , why I came to Africa ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.578

but patches of satin-leaved begonias and clumps of lovely tree-ferns
reconcile me to my lot . KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.579

Cook does not feel these forest charms , KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.580

and gives me notice after an hour's experience of mountain forest-belt
work ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.581

what cook would not ? KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.582

As we get higher we have to edge and squeeze every few minutes through
the aerial roots of some tremendous kind of tree , plentiful hereabouts
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.583

One of them we passed through I am sure would have run any Indian banyan
hard for extent of ground covered , if it were measured .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.584

In the region where these trees are frequent , the undergrowth is less
dense than it is lower down . KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.585

Imagine a vast , seemingly limitless cathedral with its countless
columns covered , nay , composed of the most exquisite dark-green ,
large-fronded moss , with here and there a delicate fern embedded in it
as an extra decoration . KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.586

The white , gauze-like mist comes down from the upper mountain towards
us : creeping , twining round , and streaming through the moss-covered
tree columns - long bands of it reaching along sinuous , but evenly ,
for fifty and sixty feet or more , and then ending in a puff like the
smoke of a gun . KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.587

Soon , however , all the mist-streams coalesce KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.588

and make the atmosphere all their own , wrapping us round in a clammy ,
chill embrace ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.589

it is not that wool-blanket , smothering affair that we were wrapped in
down by Buana , but exquisitely delicate . KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.590

The difference it makes to the beauty of the forest is just the same
difference you would get if you put a delicate veil over a pretty
woman's face or a sack over her head . KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.591

In fact , the mist here was exceedingly becoming to the forest's beauty
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.592

Now and again growls of thunder roll out from , and quiver in the earth
beneath our feet . KINGSLEY-1897-2,570.593

Mungo is making a big <P_571> tornado , KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.594

and is stirring and simmering it softly so as to make it strong .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.595

I only hope he will not overdo it , as he does six times in seven , and
make it too heavy to get out on to the Atlantic , where all tornadoes
ought to go . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.596

If he does the thing will go and burst on us in this forest to-night .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.597

The forest now grows less luxuriant though still close -
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.598

we have left the begonias and the tree-ferns , KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.599

and are in another zone . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.600

The trees now , instead of being clothed in rich , dark-green moss , are
heavily festooned with long , greenish-white lichen .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.601

It pours with rain . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.602

At last we reach the place where the sergeant says we ought to camp for
the night . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.603

I have been feeling the time for camping was very ripe for the past hour
, KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.604

and Kefalla openly said as much an hour and a half ago ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.605

but he got such scathing things said to him about civilians' legs by the
sergeant that I did not air my own opinion . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.606

We are now right at the very edge of the timber belt .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.607

My head man and three boys are done to a turn . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.608

If I had had a bull behind me or Mr. Fildes in front , I might have
done another five or seven miles , but not more .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.609

The rain comes down with extra virulence as soon as we set to work to
start the fire and open the loads . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.610

I and Peter have great times getting out the military camp-bed from its
tight , bolster-like case , while Kefalla gives advice , until , being
irritated by the bed's behaviour , I blow up Kefalla and send him to
chop firewood . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.611

However , we get the thing out and put up after cutting a place clear to
set it on : KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.612

owing to the world being on a stiff slant hereabouts , it takes time to
make it stand straight . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.613

I get four stakes cut , KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.614

and drive them in at the four corners of the bed ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.615

and then stretch over it Herr von Lucke's waterproof ground-sheet ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.616

guy the ends out to pegs with string , KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.617

feel profoundly grateful to both Herr Liebert for the bed and Herr von
Lucke for the sheet , KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.618

and place the baggage under the protection of the German Government's
two belongings . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.619

Then I find the boys have not got a fire with all their fuss ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.620

and I have to demonstrate to them the lessons I have learnt among the
Fans regarding fire-making . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.621

We build a fire-house KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.622

and then all goes well . KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.623

I notice they do not make a fire Fan fashion , but build it in a circle
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,571.624

<P_572>

Evidently one of the labourers from Buea , named Xenia , is a good man .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.626

Equally evidently some of my other men are only fit to carry
sandwich-boards for Day and Martin's blacking . KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.627

I dine luxuriously off tinned fat pork and hot tea ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.628

and then feeling still hungry go on to tinned herring .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.629

Excellent thing tinned herring , KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.630

but I have to hurry because I know I must go up through the edge of the
forest on to the grass land , and see how the country is made during the
brief period of clearness that almost always comes just before nightfall
. KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.631

So leaving my boys comfortably seated round the fire having the evening
chop , I pass up through the heavily lichen-tasselled fringe of the
forest-belt into deep jungle grass , and up a steep and slippery mound .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.632

In front the mountain-face rises like a wall from behind a set of
hillocks , similar to the one I am at present on .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.633

The face of the wall to the right and left has two dark clefts in it .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.634

The peak itself is not visible from where I am ; KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.635

it rises behind and beyond the wall . KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.636

I stay taking compass bearings KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.637

and look for an easy way up for to-morrow . KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.638

My men , by now , have missed their " ma " KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.639

and are yelling for her dismally , KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.640

and the night comes down with great rapidity KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.641

for we are in the shadow of the great mountain mass ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.642

so I go back into camp . KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.643

Alas ! how vain are often our most energetic efforts to remove our
fellow creatures from temptation . KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.644

I knew a Sunday down among the soldiers would be bad for my men ,
KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.645

and so came up here , KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.646

and now , if you please , these men have been at the rum , because Bum ,
the head man , has been too done up to do anything but lie in his
blanket and feed . KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.647

Kefalla is laying down the law with great detail and unction .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.648

Cook who has been very low in his mind all day , is now weirdly cheerful
, KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.649

and sings incoherently . KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.650

The other boys , who want to go to sleep , threaten to " burst him " if
he " no finish . " KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.651

It@ @'s no good - KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.652

cook carols on , KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.653

and soon succumbing to the irresistible charm of music , the other men
have to join in the choruses . KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.654

The performance goes on for an hour , growing woollier and woolier in
tone , and then dying out in sleep . KINGSLEY-1897-2,572.655

I write by the light of an insect-haunted lantern , sitting on the bed ,
which is tucked in among the trees some twenty <P_573> yards away from
the boys' fire . KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.656

There is a bird whistling in a deep rich note that I have never heard
before . KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.657

<font> September 23rd {COM:font_change_excludes_numerals} <$$font> .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.658

- Morning gloriously fine . KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.659

Rout the boys out , KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.660

and start at seven , with Sasu , Head man , Xenia , Black boy , Kefalla
and Cook . KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.661

The great south-east wall of the mountain in front of us is quite
unflecked by cloud , KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.662

and in the forest are thousands of bees . KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.663

We notice that the tongues of forest go up the mountain in some places
a_hundred yards or more above the true line of the belt .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.664

These tongues of forest get more and more heavily hung with lichen , and
the trees thinner and more stunted , towards their ends .
KINGSLEY-1897-2,573.665

