<BEGIN_kirkland-1774-2>

<P_50>

<heading>

Chap. I . KIRKLAND-1774-2,50.4

<font> On Child_bed Fevers . <$$font> KIRKLAND-1774-2,50.5

<$$heading>

In order to have a clear idea of the nature of <font> puerperal fevers
<$$font> , it seems necessary that we should first examine the pregnant
and puerperal state ; as much depends upon a thorough acquaintance with
the change that women suffer after conception . KIRKLAND-1774-2,50.7

The face , the index to the fate of the body , soon points out that some
alteration has taken place ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,50.8

and can there be any doubt , that the chief part of the symptoms
attending pregnancy arise from increased irritability ?
KIRKLAND-1774-2,50.9

The nausea , vomiting , swelling of the glands of the breasts , hysteric
symptoms , ptyalism , and being surprised by any slight accidents , are
symptoms surely owing to increased irritability , KIRKLAND-1774-2,50.10

and take their rise from the <font> uterus <$$font> , the situation of
the first cause . KIRKLAND-1774-2,50.11

Indeed , as the nerves of the <font> uterus <$$font> become <P_51> more
habituated to distension , as the <font> uterus <$$font> becomes more at
liberty by rising above the brim of the pelvis , and as the <font>
foetus <$$font> grows in size , and takes off the accumulated blood to
nourish it ; the nausea and vomiting often cease : KIRKLAND-1774-2,51.12

yet there always remains more or less of the other symptoms , which
shews that women are attended with increased irritability of the
spasmodic kind during pregnancy , and which may be necessary to promote
the delivery of the foetus . KIRKLAND-1774-2,51.13

Are not the spurious pains and <font> diarrhoea <$$font> , which so
frequently precede labour , and the convulsions which accompany it ,
owing to an irritable state of the nerves , and to an impression made
upon the nerves in the <font> uterus ? <$$font> KIRKLAND-1774-2,51.14

How else comes it to pass , that opium affords such certain relief when
signs of inflammation do not appear ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,51.15

And is there not reason to believe , that , in general , this
irritability of the nerves is more or less increased during the time of
labour , since the mouth of the womb frequently <P_52> in parturition
becomes more sensible , and a vomiting , from the nerves of the stomach
becoming more irritable , attends the labour ? To which is not only
added a weakness of the contents , and of the muscles of the abdomen ,
from pressure of the gravid <font> uterus <$$font> , but those parts are
also more or less injured by spasms during the time of parturition :
KIRKLAND-1774-2,52.16

in all probability , many of the small vessels are for a time rendered
incapable of acting upon their contents , KIRKLAND-1774-2,52.17

and obstructions are thus formed . KIRKLAND-1774-2,52.18

But in a week , more or less , after delivery , when every thing goes on
well , all these temporary inconveniencies are removed ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,52.19

and the woman is restored to the estate she enjoyed previous to
conception ; by sweating , by the coming of her milk , and a proper
discharge of the <font> lochia . <$$font> KIRKLAND-1774-2,52.20

Indeed it can@ @not be doubted by those who have had opportunities of
informing themselves , that in the pregnant state , the <P_53> <font>
uterus <$$font> is more irritable than usual : KIRKLAND-1774-2,53.21

and that this irritability is more or less increased during labour , is
not less evident ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,53.22

nor is uterine irritability , we see , confined to the <font> uterus
<$$font> only , but extended to every part of the body .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,53.23

Consequently <paren> as all fevers are owing to inflammatory
irritability , or nervous irritation <$$paren> people in this situation
will be readily and violently affected by any cause , that increases
this preternatural irritability of the nerves : KIRKLAND-1774-2,53.24

accordingly , it has been observed from the days of Hippocrates , that
women in child-bed are very liable to epidemic diseases ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,53.25

and it might be from this cause , that in one of the plagues at
Constantinople , most of the women in child-bed died .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,53.26

Experience has taught , that inoculation , under a state of dentition ,
is often dangerous ; probably because the whole nervous system is
already under a state of preternatural irritability , from a tension of
the nerves about the teeth ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,53.27

and by still increasing this irritability , by the <P_54> insertion of
acrid matter , we multiply the disease KIRKLAND-1774-2,54.28

and endanger the patient . KIRKLAND-1774-2,54.29

Just so it seems to be with those in child-bed , who take cold , are
kept too hot , or suffer from any cause , that may bring on a fever :
KIRKLAND-1774-2,54.30

nor is it any wonder that the muscles and the contents of the abdomen ,
which are in the same state as parts which are bruised , should be so
greatly affected , as upon dissection they are found to be .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,54.31

Scythe-grinders are subject to a disease of the lungs , from particles
of sand mixed with iron dust , which among themselves they call the
grinder's rot . KIRKLAND-1774-2,54.32

One of these men , who had been seized with a peripneumony , and
afterward with a troublesome cough , which lasted some time ; came to me
a year at least after he was recovered , on account of a <font> sinus
<$$font> in his foot : KIRKLAND-1774-2,54.33

he gave me , however , no account of his former illness ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,54.34

nor had I any reason to suspect a complaint in his lungs , because he
played me several tunes on the French horn . KIRKLAND-1774-2,54.35

<P_55>

I opened the <font> sinus <$$font> which was about three inches long .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,55.37

A moderate fever accompanied the succeeding inflammation ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,55.38

a peripneumony came on , KIRKLAND-1774-2,55.39

and he died of suppurated lungs . KIRKLAND-1774-2,55.40

Now , if so small a cause could produce such an effect , in a part where
the disease had disappeared for some time , what may we not expect from
the effects of a more violent fever , in a part recently affected ?
KIRKLAND-1774-2,55.41

I believe it is a certain fact , whatever may be the cause of a <font>
puerperal fever <$$font> , that within a limited time the whole abdomen
is more or less inflamed ; because the belly always turns green and
putrid , in a very short time after death , in the same manner as we
find it happen to these who have died of an inflammation of the bowels .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,55.42

Accordingly , upon opening the bodies of many of the women Peu mentions
to have died in child-bed of an hospital fever , abscesses were found in
the abdominal <font> viscera . <$$font> KIRKLAND-1774-2,55.43

<P_56>

" A woman in child-bed having the <font> lochia <$$font> suppressed ,
complained of a pain , swelling , and hardness , in the region of the
<font> uterus <$$font> , accompanied with fever , headache
{TEXT:headach} , and cough ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,56.45

her breasts became flaccid on the fourth day , KIRKLAND-1774-2,56.46

and on the fifth she died . KIRKLAND-1774-2,56.47

Upon dissection , the <font> uterus <$$font> and <font> ovaria <$$font>
were found inflamed ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,56.48

the intestines were covered with matter resembling milk ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,56.49

the same kind of matter appeared in the lungs , KIRKLAND-1774-2,56.50

and there was a great deal of whitish serum both in the thorax and
abdomen . " KIRKLAND-1774-2,56.51

But before we proceed , I will illustrate what has been said , by
observations made from cases , with which , upon reflection , <P_57>
every man who practices midwifery will be well acquainted ; as they are
common , and such as must have happened within the notice of those , who
have been engaged in a considerable share of practice .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,57.52

Many are the cases upon record , where uterine irritability has risen so
high , as to <P_58> bring on convulsions during labour , from the
child's pressing against the <font> os_uteri <$$font> ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,58.53

and the object of our present enquiry is concerning uterine irritability
, accompanied with inflammation : because this produces a fever , which
partakes so evidently both of spasmodic and inflammatory irritability ,
that Sydenham was induced to call it an hysteric disorder .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,58.54

A young woman , in the eighth month of her first pregnancy , was seized
with spurious pains , resembling the colic , such as often precede
labour : KIRKLAND-1774-2,58.55

after ordering a clyster , and giving opium , the <font> accoucheur
<$$font> who attended , waited the event for some time ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,58.56

but instead of labour-pains coming on , or the colic giving way , it
became more troublesome , KIRKLAND-1774-2,58.57

and the patient growing more feverish , my advice was desired .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,58.58

I found her colic-like pains accompanied with a quicker pulse , and a
greater degree of heat than was natural ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,58.59

the <font> os_tincae <$$font> was become so very irritable , that <P_59>
the slightest touch gave considerable pain , and disturbed the whole
body ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,59.60

and a particular wildness in her looks , and other symptoms convinced me
, that a <font> mania <$$font> was coming on . KIRKLAND-1774-2,59.61

As spasmodic irritability never produces a fever , the increased heat
and quick pulse evinced , that the irritability of the <font> uterus
<$$font> was degenerated into the inflammatory kind ; , wherefore I
ordered bleeding , purging , with small doses of Glauber's salt , and
that nitre should be taken : upon which , in four or five days , all the
symptoms , except the <font> mania <$$font> , left her , which remained
till she was brought to-bed at her full time . KIRKLAND-1774-2,59.62

But after having a safe and easy delivery she perfectly recovered ,
without any accident ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,59.63

and she has since had two more children , without any remarkable
inconvenience from an irritable state . KIRKLAND-1774-2,59.64

<P_60>

A young married lady , of an healthful and vigorous constitution , but
naturally of a very irritable habit , was seized with spurious pains in
the night-time in the beginning of her labour , which in the morning
were quieted by opium ; and about noon , still lingering ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,60.66

but more regular pains came on as the birth advanced .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,60.67

She now became very restless , KIRKLAND-1774-2,60.68

and when the child's head began to pass the <font> os_tincae <$$font> ,
which was found to be very irritable , she became delirious , during
each pain ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,60.69

but instantly became sensible again , upon the pain going off .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,60.70

Under these circumstances , the labour advanced , till one or two
o'clock next morning , when the hind part of the head was so very low ,
that it was expected every pain would bring matters to a crisis ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,60.71

but they were insufficient to bring the head any farther ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,60.72

and as she grew more restless , the pains more irregular , and the
delirium of longer continuance , at about six o'clock <P_61> the forceps
were applied with perfect success . KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.73

Nature soon after completed the delivery , except that some assistance
was given to the coming away of the placenta , <font> after <$$font> it
was forced into the <font> vagina <$$font> by pulling gently at the
chord . KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.74

Her spirits were afterward very good , KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.75

and she seemed to be tolerably well , considering her circumstances ;
except that the same kind of pain , which accompanied her labour , still
continued ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.76

and as it did not decrease in the afternoon , I gave her a dose of
laudanum , KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.77

I was then obliged to leave her , KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.78

and being engaged all the next day , I did not see her again till the
third day from her delivery . KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.79

I found the natural discharge was mostly come away in large clots ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.80

she had little or no sleep ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.81

the pain and spasms in the hypogastric region had been very troublesome
; KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.82

her pulse was excessive quick , and rather weak , KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.83

and she was costive ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,61.84

but having no remarkable heat , she seemed to <P_62> be so little
diseased , that her attendants thought she had only been troubled with
after-pains . KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.85

Next morning a <font> diarrhoea <$$font> with curdled stools came on ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.86

her fever increased , KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.87

and there was a soreness all over the abdomen . KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.88

Instead of that turgidity of the breasts , which shews the coming of the
milk , the glands seemed to be in an indolent state ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.89

the breasts were becoming flaccid , KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.90

and an ichorous discharge from the <font> uterus <$$font> was
excessively foetid . KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.91

In short , she had all the symptoms of what is called <font> the
puerperal fever <$$font> ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.92

and she died on the ninth day after her delivery .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.93

It was easy to discover soon after she was dead , that the <font> uterus
<$$font> was quite sunk into the <font> pelvis <$$font> ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.94

but the abdomen swelled soon afterward KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.95

and became very green . KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.96

Equally unfortunate was the sister of this lady , when she fell in
labour of her first child , as I was informed by the physician who
attended . KIRKLAND-1774-2,62.97

She was immediately <P_63> seized with convulsions , which rendered her
insensible ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,63.98

and , though she was delivered as soon as proper assistance could be got
, yet she died in a few hours afterward . KIRKLAND-1774-2,63.99

In the one , uterine irritability ended in death , by degenerating into
inflammation ; and , in the other , by an extreme degree of spasmodic
irritability . KIRKLAND-1774-2,63.100

I was called to a young woman of her first child , who had a very good
time ; nature soon delivering to my care her own work , which she best
performs , when no impediment is in the way . KIRKLAND-1774-2,63.101

But the same kind of pains immediately followed which she had during her
labour , KIRKLAND-1774-2,63.102

and they were so very pressing , that I was apprehensive an excressence
of some kind or other might be the cause ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,63.103

but a cautious enquiry discovered , that they were owing to the <font>
uterus <$$font> being extremely irritable . KIRKLAND-1774-2,63.104

The next day she had a very quick weak pulse , and a fever ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,63.105

her belly became sore and tender , KIRKLAND-1774-2,63.106

and the <font> lochia <$$font> were not discharged <P_64> in so large
quantities as they ought to be . KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.107

The next day after , the <font> lochia <$$font> were ichorous , and very
foetid ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.108

she became delirious ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.109

a diarrhoea with curdled stools came on ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.110

an eruption appeared all over the body ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.111

her eyes were convulsed inward ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.112

her breasts were flaccid ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.113

and she died the day following . KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.114

The abdomen soon afterward turned green . KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.115

Now can there be any doubt in these cases , that the whole mischief was
owing to an inflammation of the <font> uterus <$$font> , added to
uterine irritability ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.116

or to make this matter clearer , let us compare the effects of uterine
inflammation in the <font> puerperal <$$font> state , brought on by
violence done to the uterus . KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.117

My assistance was desired many years ago to a woman , where the midwife
could not deliver the <font> placenta <$$font> ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.118

and when I came into the room , she had just brought part of it away in
pieces . KIRKLAND-1774-2,64.119

Upon introducing my hand , I discovered several small pieces of <P_65>
the <font> placenta <$$font> still adhering to the <font> fundus uteri
<$$font> , which seemed to be lacerated , KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.120

and I therefore chose to commit the whole to nature , rather than to
offer any farther violence . KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.121

Next morning I found she had not slept ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.122

her weak pulse was very quick , KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.123

and I was informed she had been troubled with after-pains ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.124

otherwise there did not appear any unpromising symptoms .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.125

However , in the evening a nausea came on , KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.126

she frequently threw up whatever she had taken , KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.127

and in the morning of the third day I found her heat increased ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.128

she complained of a soreness about the <font> os_pubis <$$font> ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.129

the <font> lochia <$$font> were very foetid , ichorous , and in small
quantity ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.130

a diarrhoea came on ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.131

her belly became more sore , KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.132

and was rather swelled : KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.133

instead of milk coming , the breasts grew flaccid ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.134

her fever still increased , KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.135

and a delirium and death closed the scene , about a week after she was
brought to bed . KIRKLAND-1774-2,65.136

<P_66>

I saw another woman lately , where part of the after-birth had been
brought away by force , and part left behind ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,66.138

but from the account given me , it did not appear that her attendant ,
or those about her , were apprehensive of any thing being amiss till
four or five days after , when they were disappointed in the coming of
her milk : KIRKLAND-1774-2,66.139

and though a quick pulse and fever were discovered , yet , as she was
able to get up , and take notice of her child , danger was not thought
of till near a week after , when my assistance was desired .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,66.140

I found her dying , with flaccid breasts , a sore tender belly , after
having been troubled with what they called after-pains ; and all the
symptoms , except a looseness , which usually attend puerperal fevers .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,66.141

The abdomen turned green very soon after death . From all which cases ,
it is evident , that an inflammation of the <font> uterus <$$font> , and
a consequent absorption of putrid matter from this part , will bring on
what is <P_67> now called the puerperal fever ; and that the
inflammation of the abdomen , &c. is frequently the consequence of the
fever thus brought on . KIRKLAND-1774-2,67.142

Some , because the breasts are flaccid , have supposed this fever to
arise from a non-secretion of the milk ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,67.143

but it is not likely that the fluids , which constitute milk , should
produce any inconvenience by being detained in the habit ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,67.144

if so , a milk diet would be dangerous ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,67.145

and we are to remember , that that part of the blood , which afterward
becomes milk , is not a distinct fluid while it circulates in the
blood-vessels : KIRKLAND-1774-2,67.146

it is therefore as impossible , that a fever , or extravasations ,
should <P_68> in this case arise from milk , as that a jaundice should
come on without the bile being first secreted . KIRKLAND-1774-2,68.147

We very well know the influence the <font> uterus <$$font> has upon the
breasts , KIRKLAND-1774-2,68.148

and I look upon the flaccidity of the breasts to be in this instance
intirely owing to a disease of the <font> uterus <$$font> , which
renders the nerves that belong to the gland of the breasts , incapable
of exerting the least effort toward secreting milk :
KIRKLAND-1774-2,68.149

nor are the curdled stools any proof to the contrary , as these happen ,
most probably , from the <font> ichor <$$font> which is absorbed from
the <font> uterus <$$font> , &c. as the same circumstance happens
wherever a sharp <font> ichor <$$font> is absorbed from wounds .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,68.150

Milk , therefore , can@ @not possibly bring on a fever , till after it
has been secreted , or till it begins to distend the nerves in the
breasts ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,68.151

yet I believe an inflammation of <P_69> the contents of the abdomen is
sometimes the cause of a child-bed fever . KIRKLAND-1774-2,69.152

Dr. Hulm thinks , that an inflammation of the <font> omentum <$$font>
and intestines is always the cause of <font> the puerperal fever
<$$font> , to which they are predisposed by the pressure of the gravid
<font> uterus . <$$font> KIRKLAND-1774-2,69.153

But if this was always the case , would not the disorder be more
frequent than it is , because this predisposing cause " is common to
pregnant women , at all times , and in all climates ? "
KIRKLAND-1774-2,69.154

Of course , the effects would be more commonly the same in all places ;
whereas in private practice , under proper management , <font> puerperal
fevers <$$font> , of the mortal kind , are rather rare than common .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,69.155

The only instances in which I have had reason to suspect an inflammation
in the abdomen to be the cause of the fever , has been in very quick
labours , where the quantity of water was large , and the <font> uterus
<$$font> suddenly emptied by a hasty delivery , as soon as the membranes
broke , <P_70> without care being taken to make an immediate pressure
upon the belly ; whence the blood may rush into , and stagnate in a
great part of the vessels of the abdominal viscera ; which , not having
had time to recover themselves , will be incapable of acting upon their
contents . KIRKLAND-1774-2,70.156

Hence an inflammation may be produced ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,70.157

but notwithstanding , it seems most certain , that the injury we find
done to these parts , upon dissection , is more frequently the effect ,
than the cause of the fever . KIRKLAND-1774-2,70.158

But there are other causes , beside inflammation , which bring on a
<font> puerperal fever <$$font> ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,70.159

for it sometimes happens , that coagulated blood lodges in the <font>
uterus <$$font> after delivery , KIRKLAND-1774-2,70.160

and putrifying from access of {TEXT:of_of} air , forms a most active
poison , KIRKLAND-1774-2,70.161

is in part absorbed , KIRKLAND-1774-2,70.162

and brings on a putrid fever . KIRKLAND-1774-2,70.163

In this case , the discharge , which should immediately follow delivery
, is not sufficiently large , making allowance for the difference which
happens to different <P_71> women in this respect :
KIRKLAND-1774-2,71.164

small clots of blood make part of the <font> lochia <$$font> , which are
less in quantity than they ought to be ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,71.165

but the patient has not any other sort of complaint , for three or four
days , till the retained blood begins to putrify .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,71.166

A fever then first makes its appearance , preceded by rigors , which are
followed by a quick , weak pulse , thirst , pain in the head , want of
sleep , sighing , load at the <font> praecordia <$$font> , restlessness
, great weakness , dejection of spirits , either wildness or despair in
the countenance , KIRKLAND-1774-2,71.167

and the white of the eyes is often a little inflamed .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,71.168

Sometimes the patient has a difficulty of breathing , with pain in the
sides ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,71.169

the skin is dry , KIRKLAND-1774-2,71.170

the tongue is of a glossy brown colour , and also very dry :
KIRKLAND-1774-2,71.171

and I have sometimes , in an advanced state of the fever observed , upon
laying my hand a while upon the patient , the same kind of prickling
sensation , though in a less degree , as is felt , after having the
fingers in warm putrid <P_72> blood . KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.172

There is nothing to be learnt from the urine , as it is mixed with black
putrid blood , which is constantly draining through the <font> vagina .
<$$font> KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.173

A diarrhoea , in which the stools are very foetid , liquid , and
sometimes black , is a constant attendant : KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.174

<font> Aphthoe <$$font> too frequently come on , KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.175

the breasts are flaccid , KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.176

and upon drawing them , blood , instead of milk is often discharged .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.177

Milk may indeed appear in the breasts , when the putrefaction is several
days ; before it takes place ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.178

yet they soon become perfectly flaccid . KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.179

Sometimes the belly swells during the course of the disease ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.180

but a soreness and tenderness of it is a never failing attendant ,
<font> soon after <$$font> the fever begins . KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.181

A delirium is common , through a great part of the disorder , which too
frequently ends in death . KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.182

Nor are inflammation or obstruction the only causes which render the
<font> lochia <$$font> putrid ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,72.183

for they frequently , where the patient has been kept too hot , become
putrid , without <P_73> either of these circumstances happening ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,73.184

and produce a putrid fever , more or less active , according to the
degree of acrimony of the humours absorbed . KIRKLAND-1774-2,73.185

Seeing then that an absorption of putrid matter will bring on a <font>
puerperal fever <$$font> , with common symptoms , may we not conclude ,
that the putrid miasms of lying-in hospitals will produce the same
effect ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,73.186

Is it not reasonable to suppose , that the <font> puerperal fever
<$$font> , which has been observed in hospitals , is owing to some cause
peculiar to hospitals ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,73.187

Otherwise would it not be equally frequent in other places ?
KIRKLAND-1774-2,73.188

Dr. Pringle informs us , that the foul air , occasioned by one
mortified limb , brought on a malignant fever in the military hospital .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,73.189

Peu also seems to have proved , that the putrid <font> effluvia <$$font>
exhaling from wounded men , brought on a fever , which killed a great
many child-bed women , <P_74> who lay in the same hospital ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,74.190

and are not the putrid <font> effluvia <$$font> , arising from the
lochial discharge , in lying-in hospitals , capable of producing the
same disease ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,74.191

I have sometimes been called to women in child-bed , where the offensive
<font> effluvia <$$font> arising from this kind of evacuation , pent up
in a small close room , at once evinced to what cause their fever was
owing ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,74.192

and though I have not any doubt , but in lying-in hospitals every
attempt is made to preserve the air pure , and the patient in a state of
cleanliness , yet where many women lie in the same ward , it is perhaps
impossible to obtain these advantages in the perfection to be wished .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,74.193

We know the effects of an hospital air , notwithstanding every
precaution , in fractures of the skull , and compound fractures ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,74.194

and is it not more likely to produce violent effects in these very
irritable habits ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,74.195

But , perhaps , we shall still convey a clearer idea of the fevers , of
which we have been <P_75> speaking , if we recite some of the
appearances and effects , in large wounds , which have very justly been
compared with the state of the <font> uterus <$$font> immediately after
delivery . KIRKLAND-1774-2,75.196

During the state of inflammation , an inflammatory fever in a greater or
less degree , with a white and not very dry tongue , costiveness ,
rigors , and in irritable habits , vomiting , attend .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,75.197

The discharge from the wound is sometimes nearly stopped ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,75.198

becomes hot and corrosive , KIRKLAND-1774-2,75.199

and if acrid matter afterward ensues , being in part absorbed , brings
on a colliquative fever . KIRKLAND-1774-2,75.200

If it is a contused or lacerated wound , and the external opening is
small , so that extravasated blood lodges , after the first inflammation
is over , a new inflammation arises in the wound , from putrid blood
irritating the parts with which it comes in contact ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,75.201

and some of the more active <P_76> parts being absorbed , bring on a
putrid colliquative fever . KIRKLAND-1774-2,76.202

But if the inflammation of the wound happen to be of such a nature as to
terminate in a mortification , a general mortification will of course
ensue , if not prevented either by nature or art .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,76.203

Now apply this to the fevers , we have been speaking of ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,76.204

and we shall see the analogy . KIRKLAND-1774-2,76.205

If the <font> uterus <$$font> be inflamed , it brings on at first a
common inflammatory fever , with a white moist tongue , costiveness ,
sometimes vomiting , and other symptoms arising from inflammation ,
peculiar to the situation of the patient . KIRKLAND-1774-2,76.206

The <font> lochia <$$font> is sometimes suppressed , <font> in
consequence <$$font> of the inflammation obstructing the vessels of the
<font> uterus <$$font> , KIRKLAND-1774-2,76.207

or sometimes they are diminished only , KIRKLAND-1774-2,76.208

and lose the florid complexion sooner than they ought to do , from the
inflamed vessels only admitting a bloody <font> ichor <$$font> ; which
acquiring acrimony , and being in part absorbed , <P_77> afterward
brings on a colliquative fever . KIRKLAND-1774-2,77.209

If coagulated blood be obstructed in the <font> uterus <$$font> , it
certainly will inflame the <font> uterus <$$font> when it begins to
putrify . KIRKLAND-1774-2,77.210

The symptoms of inflammation will appear , KIRKLAND-1774-2,77.211

and then a colliquative putrid fever ensues , from part of this very
active poison being absorbed : KIRKLAND-1774-2,77.212

and does not this analogy hold good , when the puerperal fever is owing
to putrid effluvia being taken into the habit by the absorbents <font>
ab extra ? <$$font> KIRKLAND-1774-2,77.213

Suppose a man having an healthy wound is seized with a putrid fever ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,77.214

the matter , which was before good , becomes ichorous , and so corrosive
, as to inflame the parts with which it comes in contact :
KIRKLAND-1774-2,77.215

if any part of it be absorbed , it will still increase the fever ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,77.216

and yet does not the sore appear , without any marks of inflammation ,
if the patient happens to die ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,77.217

When putrid miasms affect women in child-bed , they bring on a fever
with <P_78> all the symptoms peculiar to the situation of the patient ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,78.218

and the discharge from the <font> uterus <$$font> is for the most part
either suppressed KIRKLAND-1774-2,78.219

or becomes foetid and ichorous ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,78.220

and the <font> uterus <$$font> has an healthy appearance , upon
dissection , because it was not the principal seat of the disease .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,78.221

Nor is it putrid miasma alone which is to be dreaded ; but any other
cause , which is capable of bringing on inflammatory irritability ,
while the patient is in this very irritable state .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,78.222

A tenderness , soreness , and pain of the abdomen , are not sufficient
to alarm us , unless attended with a quick pulse , and a fever ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,78.223

for it is well known , that after long and hard labours , women often
complain of the whole abdomen being so very sore , that they can scarce
turn themselves in their beds : KIRKLAND-1774-2,78.224

yet if no fever appears , the patient recovers without inconvenience .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,78.225

Nor are flaccid breasts and non-appearance of milk any bad symptoms ,
<P_79> if a fever is absent ; as this may arise from a large discharge
at the time of delivery , and a variety of other causes which nature
safely gets over in time . KIRKLAND-1774-2,79.226

On the contrary , when I find a quick pulse and febrile heat
accompanying an inactivity in the breasts , at the time the milk should
come , or even a quick pulse with pain resembling after-pains , I am
always apprehensive of danger , however favourable other symptoms may
appear : KIRKLAND-1774-2,79.227

for these symptoms , and inflammation , are inseparable ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,79.228

and the <font> uterus <$$font> will frequently shew no other signs of
being diseased , for some time ; which may perhaps be owing to its
particular structure . KIRKLAND-1774-2,79.229

Many books indeed tells us , that when the <font> uterus <$$font> is
inflamed , there is a sensation of weight and tumour , and a continual
burning , throbbing pain , in the region of the <font> uterus <$$font> ,
extending to the adjacent parts ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,79.230

but so far as I can judge from what I have seen , I believe the symptoms
of an inflamed <font> uterus <$$font> are pains , which put on <P_80>
the appearance of after-pains , and shoot from the loins and belly into
the groin , and thighs , with a quick pulse and a fever .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,80.231

It is very well known , that whatever irritates the <font> uterus
<$$font> , during the pregnant state , brings on labour pains , or pains
resembling them , KIRKLAND-1774-2,80.232

and an inflammation of the <font> uterus <$$font> , keeping it in a
constant state of irritation , must of course produce a similar effect .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,80.233

In Case X. an inflammation of the mouth of the womb brought on spurious
labour-pains ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,80.234

and I have not any doubt but the violent after-pains in Cases XI. and
XIII. were owing to the same cause ; because they were accompanied with
heat , and a quick pulse , which never happen when the irritability is
confined to the spasmodic kind . Wherefore the absence or presence of
febrile heat , and a quick pulse in the puerperal state , is the
criterion by which we are to judge about the safety or danger of the
patient . KIRKLAND-1774-2,80.235

But , as these symptoms are common to all kinds <P_81> of inflammatory
irritability , it follows , that we should distinguish the diseases
which bring them on . KIRKLAND-1774-2,81.236

If the fever is owing to an inflammation of the <font> uterus <$$font>
arising from uterine irritability , it will , in all probability ,
commence during labour , or soon after , accompanied with pains
resembling after-pains , which sometimes shoot from the loins and belly
into the groin and thighs , without any perfect intermissions ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,81.237

and these are the only symptoms that may appear for some time .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,81.238

Afterward the <font> anus <$$font> and neck of the bladder sometimes
become very sensible . KIRKLAND-1774-2,81.239

The tongue will be white and moist , and the patient costive , during
the inflammatory state ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,81.240

the <font> lochia <$$font> either will be suppressed entirely
{TEXT:intirely} , KIRKLAND-1774-2,81.241

or instead of blood a brown foetid <font> ichor <$$font> will be
discharged , KIRKLAND-1774-2,81.242

and the breast will be perfectly inactive , and not in the least
disposed to secrete milk . KIRKLAND-1774-2,81.243

<P_82>

When the fever arises from injury done in extracting the <font> placenta
<$$font> , &c. the mode of operation will afford light into the nature
of the disease ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,82.245

and the symptoms in proportion to the degree of inflammation which
ensues , will be much the same as those arising from an inflammation of
the <font> uterus <$$font> , brought on by uterine irritability ; except
that several hours , or a day or more may elapse , before the quickness
of the pulse gives the alarm . KIRKLAND-1774-2,82.246

When a fever comes on from an inflammation of the abdominal <font>
viscera <$$font> , in consequence of blood rushing into , and stagnating
in the weakened vessels of these parts , after a quick labour , &c.
much may be learned from enquiring into the progress of the labour , and
of the steps that were afterward taken : KIRKLAND-1774-2,82.247

but the <font> uterus <$$font> seems at first unaffected ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,82.248

and the patient only complains of a dull weight and pain in the belly .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,82.249

Sometimes the fever is not very violent , nor the pulse remarkably quick
, KIRKLAND-1774-2,82.250

and the patient is costive during <P_83> the whole illness ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,83.251

at other times the fever rises higher , KIRKLAND-1774-2,83.252

and brings on a <font> diarrhoea <$$font> , with other symptoms usual to
fevers in child_bed : KIRKLAND-1774-2,83.253

but I believe from the few cases of this kind , which I recollect , the
patient is afflicted much like those , who die of bruises on the belly ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,83.254

and upon dissection , not only an inflammation , but a suffusion of
blood seems to have brought on death . KIRKLAND-1774-2,83.255

If it arises from putrid blood inflaming the <font> uterus <$$font> ,
and being absorbed , the <font> lochia <$$font> will be suppressed from
the beginning , KIRKLAND-1774-2,83.256

or they will mostly come away in small clots ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,83.257

otherwise the patient will be perfectly free from disease , till about
the third or fourth day ; when the coagulated blood , beginning to
putrify , a fever and looseness come on , nearly together , accompanied
with a dry , brown , red tongue , and a hot , dry skin ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,83.258

and the <font> lochia <$$font> come away putrid and black .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,83.259

In like manner when a fever arises from part or all of the afterbirth
remaining undelivered , no symptoms <P_84> of danger appear till
putrefaction takes place . KIRKLAND-1774-2,84.260

If putrid effluvia <font> ab extra <$$font> are the immediate cause of
mischief , though they may for a little time produce symptoms of local
inflammation , yet the disorder may be distinguished from an original
disease of the <font> uterus <$$font> ; <paren> unless the patient is
seized with an epidemic disease , previous to , or during labour
<$$paren> by the <font> lochia <$$font> being <font> at first <$$font>
regular , and the after-pains , if there are any , at the same time
unaccompanied with symptoms of inflammation . KIRKLAND-1774-2,84.261

The same may be said of all other accidental causes , which bring on
fevers in child-bed ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,84.262

but we are to remember that the symptoms will vary according to the time
of seizure . KIRKLAND-1774-2,84.263

If the fever happens in three or four days after delivery , all the
symptoms usual to the situation of the patient will make their
appearance ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,84.264

but if it does not happen till the milk has been secreted , and the
lochial discharge is nearly finished , the symptoms , if the breasts are
properly <P_85> drawn , will for the most part be those only , which are
common to that kind of disorder which brings on the fever .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.265

A young woman very lately , had , as I was informed , an extreme good
time of her first child ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.266

but she was unfortunately put into a bed , out of which her sister , my
patient , was removed , who had long lain ill of a slow nervous fever .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.267

If we except her not having a stool , she went on very well for five or
six days , the <font> lochia <$$font> being properly discharged ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.268

she slept well , KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.269

and her breasts were filled with milk : KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.270

but about the conclusion of this period , probably when the <font>
miasma <$$font> received from the curtains and bed-cloaths began to take
effect , she complained of a pain in her head , KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.271

was feverish , KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.272

and her fever increasing with want of sleep , I was desired to see her
on the eighth day of her lying-in . KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.273

I then found her in a hot sweat , with an excessive quick weak pulse ,
and exactly the same kind of symptoms , which accompanied her sister's
fever . KIRKLAND-1774-2,85.274

<P_86>

A clyster was immediately given with good effect ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.276

other remedies were ordered , KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.277

and her breasts had been , and still continued to be carefully drawn ,
till they became flaccid from milk not being secreted :
KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.278

but the parents of this woman having lost another daughter in child-bed
, were firmly persuaded that this would also die .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.279

Thus she continued in the same bed , KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.280

remedies were intirely neglected , KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.281

she soon became delirious , KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.282

and did die on the twelfth day from her delivery ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.283

but she had neither diarrhoea , pain , soreness , or swelling in any
part of the abdomen , though the <font> lochia <$$font> intirely stopped
on the second day of the fever . KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.284

But the discharge , before she began to be ill , was lymph only , and
small in quantity from having been very regular ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.285

and it was now incapable of producing much , if any inconvenience from
being suppressed . KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.286

Fevers occasioned by milk during the time of lying-in , are certainly
puerperal fevers ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,86.287

and are of two kinds , one from a <P_87> distension of the nerves in the
breasts , which is readily distinguished by the swelling of the glands ;
the other from an absorption of milk , which has become acrid by
stagnating , and is known by a rigor and looseness coming on <font>
after <$$font> the breasts have been <font> inflamed <$$font> and <font>
painful . <$$font> KIRKLAND-1774-2,87.288

Nor is the fever , which happens to women in this situation from a
retension of excrement , less obvious , KIRKLAND-1774-2,87.289

and may properly enough be called a puerperal fever ; because it ensues
in consequence of the intestines being rendered incapable of performing
their office by pregnancy and parturition . KIRKLAND-1774-2,87.290

But in regard to the miliary fever , which has been supposed to be a
child-bed disease , I never yet saw it happen , unless the woman had
been kept long sweating , and too hot ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,87.291

and it rather seems to me to be brought on by mismanagement , than by
any other cause ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,87.292

and therefore can@ @not be ranged among puerperal fevers .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,87.293

These then are the chief symptoms , so far as I now remember , which
distinguish <P_88> one cause of puerperal fevers from another ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,88.294

but the other symptoms which have been observed to attend women in this
situation , are , I believe , common to all of them .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,88.295

All that we can learn from a rigor seems to be , that the irritability
of the habit is preternaturally increased , and the more irritable the
patient , the more violent will this symptom be .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,88.296

We have already observed , that pain , soreness , with a tenderness of
the belly , and a pain above the <font> os_pubis <$$font> , are common
to all kinds of child-bed fevers . KIRKLAND-1774-2,88.297

A shortness of breath , without wheezing , and the patient chusing to
lie upon her back , will be the consequence of any cause , which
inflames the muscles , subservient to respiration .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,88.298

A <font> nausea <$$font> , or vomiting , frequently , if not always
accompanies an inflammation of the <font> uterus <$$font> ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,88.299

but as they also accompany inflammation in other parts of the abdominal
<font> viscera <$$font> , they can only be considered as common symptoms
, unless joined with particular circumstances , which may point <P_89>
out their source . KIRKLAND-1774-2,89.300

But whether they arise from an inflamed <font> uterus <$$font> , or not
, bilious matter will be discharged , if it happens <paren> on account
of increased irritability <$$paren> to be secreted in a larger quantity
than ordinary : KIRKLAND-1774-2,89.301

no information can therefore be gathered about the seat of the disease
from this kind of evacuation , which is in consequence of another
disease having taken place . KIRKLAND-1774-2,89.302

The <font> lochia <$$font> will mostly be suppressed or altered ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,89.303

and the breasts will become flaccid , in every child-bed fever , the
milk-fever excepted ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,89.304

and a more troublesome <font> diarrhoea <$$font> than commonly happens
in fevers will be a constant attendant , whereever acrid matter is
absorbed from the <font> uterus <$$font> or the cavity of the abdomen ,
in consequence of the very irritable state of the nerves of the
intestines , and matter acting upon them with a double force .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,89.305

- From this increased state of irritability , the pulse too will always
be quicker in puerperal , <P_90> than in other fevers ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,90.306

and it will mostly be weak , in consequence of the blood lost at the
time of delivery . KIRKLAND-1774-2,90.307

Upon the whole , it appears , that puerperal fevers are those only which
arise from an inflammation of the <font> uterus <$$font> ; from the
abdominal viscera being inflamed , in consequence of an hasty delivery ;
from the absorption of putrid blood , or other putrid matter from the
<font> uterus <$$font> ; from the coming of the milk ; from an
inflammation of the breasts ; from the absorption of acrid milk , and
from a retention of excrement . KIRKLAND-1774-2,90.308

Epidemic , or hospital fevers , or fevers which take their rise from
diseases foreign to the pregnant or puerperal state , are only
adventitious diseases happening to lying-in women .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,90.309

But though it be distressing to reflect upon the various disorders
incident to child-bearing women ; yet , on the other hand , it affords
pleasure to observe , that this state of increased irritability , &c.
which <P_91> renders them liable to so many accidents , seems in a great
measure to decrease after proper discharge of the <font> lochia <$$font>
, and the coming of the milk ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,91.310

at least , they are no longer liable to those disorders , which are the
consequence of pregnancy and parturition , costiveness excepted ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,91.311

and I have long taken notice , that whatever disorders happen to women
in child-bed after this period , they are not in common equally
dangerous with those which come on before it is over .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,91.312

Therefore my whole experience has led me to depend much upon a
favourable issue , after a proper discharge of the <font> lochia
<$$font> , and a vigorous flow of the milk , provided no accident
intervenes . KIRKLAND-1774-2,91.313

<P_92>

<heading>

Chap. II . KIRKLAND-1774-2,92.316

<font> On the Cure of Child-bed Fevers . <$$font>
KIRKLAND-1774-2,92.317

<$$heading>

We are now come to the principal object in view , the cure of <font>
Puerperal Fevers <$$font> ; in which we should always remember , that
whatever may be the cause , there is mostly an absorption of matter ,
more or less putrid from the <font> uterus <$$font> or abdomen , which
often produces those <P_93> symptoms of putrescency , so frequent in
these disorders , and to which particular <P_94> attention must be paid
in our prescriptions . KIRKLAND-1774-2,93.319

However , in the beginning , an inflamed <font> uterus <$$font> <paren>
except when the inflammation arises from its being irritated with putrid
blood <$$paren> must be treated like other local inflammations , which
are cured by dispersion . KIRKLAND-1774-2,93.320

The antiphlogistic method we see cured , Case X , KIRKLAND-1774-2,93.321

and I have sometimes , I think , put a period to this disorder coming on
after delivery , when I happened to be present at its first approach ,
by a similar treatment , suited to the situation of the patient .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,93.322

But the misfortune is , that neither bleeding or purging can be used in
their full force in child-bed fevers : KIRKLAND-1774-2,93.323

for where they do not intirely remove the inflammation in the first
instance , they constantly render the patient less capable <P_95> of
undergoing the remainder of the disease , by thinning her blood ,
emptying her vessels , and reducing her strength .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,95.324

If we bleed and purge much in compound fractures or large wounds , to
abate the inflammation , where there has been a considerable loss of
blood , the colliquative fever , which afterward arises from the
absorption of matter , is always more violent , and the patient less
able to bear it : KIRKLAND-1774-2,95.325

and does not the same thing happen in child-bed fevers , where there has
been a considerable evacuation at the time of delivery ?
KIRKLAND-1774-2,95.326

On the other hand it is evident , from the relief given by external
applications , which take off tension , either by relaxing or promoting
a discharge , and unloading the obstructed vessels ; that the principal
point in curing inflammation arising from , or being kept up by
distension , is taking off the increased irritability of the affected
part : and that where external applications <P_96> can@ @not be used ,
this must be effected by medicines , which lessen irritability , and are
capable of rendering the vessels pervious ; the principal of which are
bleeding , purging , and sweating , though purging seems to have the
preference . KIRKLAND-1774-2,96.327

Cheselden observed , and daily experience evinces , the very powerful
effects of purges in bruises , without any external wound , which must
certainly be owing to their dissolving and removing the stagnated blood
: KIRKLAND-1774-2,96.328

and does not the effect of purges in sores explain the whole of this
matter to our satisfaction ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,96.329

If we give salts , or other sort of purges , where a sore is in an
healing state , the matter becomes ichorous , KIRKLAND-1774-2,96.330

is discharged in larger quantities , KIRKLAND-1774-2,96.331

and it is evident from their ragged appearance , that the small vessels
have been irritated . So that purges do not only irritate , and unload
the intestines , but they also irritate and unload every order of
vessels , and thus lessen irritability when it arises from distension .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,96.332

They are on this account more <P_97> to be relied on in the cure of
inflammation arising from this cause , than bleeding .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,97.333

Bleeding , by thinning the blood , and lessening its quantity , abates
its impulse against the impervious vessels , KIRKLAND-1774-2,97.334

and thus takes off tension , KIRKLAND-1774-2,97.335

and lessens the power of any additional cause of irritation .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,97.336

But then the blood-vessels seem to have a power of adapting themselves
to the quantity of blood remaining in the body ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,97.337

and unless the obstructed vessels unload themselves , which sometimes
happens after bleeding , increased irritability and a fever , in which
the blood moves with equal celerity , tho' not with equal force , are
kept up . KIRKLAND-1774-2,97.338

We will explain this matter by practice . KIRKLAND-1774-2,97.339

<P_98>

The placenta not following the delivery of the child , in an healthy
woman , the midwife attempted to extract it with her hand ; upon which ,
a flooding ensued : KIRKLAND-1774-2,98.341

and being now perplexed , she brought it away piecemeal , after
abundance of trials , in which time the woman was near bleeding to death
; she appearing so pale , cold , and lifeless , that it was imagined she
could not have survived half an hour . KIRKLAND-1774-2,98.342

However , she recovered for the present ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,98.343

but in a few days an <font> anasarca <$$font> came on ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,98.344

and yet an inflammation of the womb <paren> in which the pulse was quick
and small <$$paren> and a puerperal fever succeeded the injury done to
the <font> uterus <$$font> , KIRKLAND-1774-2,98.345

and seemed to be the immediate cause of her death .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,98.346

A woman had been attempted to be cured of a violent inflammatory
rheumatism , by repeated bleeding ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,98.347

and though she had lost so much blood , that her legs became anasarcous
, yet her pain and fever were not removed : KIRKLAND-1774-2,98.348

and her pulse was quick , small , and hard , even to her death .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,98.349

<P_99>

Probably she lost her life because bleeding alone was incapable of
removing the obstruction , KIRKLAND-1774-2,99.351

and there had not been sufficient reliance upon other remedies .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,99.352

On the contrary , purges frequently relieve inflammation , when bleeding
has proved ineffectual : KIRKLAND-1774-2,99.353

for instance , small doses of Glauber's salt , continued for a week or
ten days , have often removed an inflammation of the eye , when bleeding
, and those deobstruents , as they are called , which have not an
irritating quality , have been tried long to no purpose .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,99.354

From what has been said , together with the following case , we may be
pretty certain of the manner in which they produce their effects .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,99.355

A young woman , about twenty-five years of age , had a violent
inflammation in both her eyes , for which she had undergone such a
variety of well-intended remedies , that there seemed , at first sight ,
no room left for making any amendment . KIRKLAND-1774-2,99.356

However , considering the difficulty of internal <P_100> medicines ever
arriving at the affected part , I determined to try purging medicines ,
by way of topical application , having seen their effects when thus used
in sores . KIRKLAND-1774-2,100.357

For this purpose , I blew into one eye a small quantity of Glauber's
salt , in very fine powder , which at first rather increased the
inflammation ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,100.358

but a discharge of lymph followed , KIRKLAND-1774-2,100.359

and next day the inflammation was entirely gone .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,100.360

Nor had I less success in the other eye , upon using the same remedy .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,100.361

From all this I would infer , that though bleeding is often a powerful
assistant in removing increased irritability , arising from , or being
kept up by distension ; yet the main remedies are those <font> after
<$$font> bleeding , which have a dissolving power , and are capable of
irritating and creating an oscillatory motion in the small vessels .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,100.362

By this means not only purges , but saline sudorifics do service in
every inflammation arising from this cause ; KIRKLAND-1774-2,100.363

and women in child bed , bear evacuation <P_101> by the skin , much
better than by the bowels . KIRKLAND-1774-2,101.364

But it must be remembered , that purges in the present case , make a
discharge more immediately from the affected part , and ought first to
take place . KIRKLAND-1774-2,101.365

When a sickness and vomiting arise from the nerves of the stomach
becoming more irritable , in consequence of an inflamed <font> uterus
<$$font> , by that consent of parts we have taken notice of ; can a
vomit be given with propriety , unless there happen , at the same time ,
to be a bile or something offensive upon the stomach ?
KIRKLAND-1774-2,101.366

Would not carrying it downward by purging medicines under these
circumstances be preferable ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,101.367

If , instead of removing the cause of the vomiting in the lady , whose
breast was taken off , Case I . we had given her a vomit , should not
we have harrassed the patient without any prospect of affording her
relief ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,101.368

Is it not then horrible to think of applying any thing irritating to
nerves , which are already incapable of <P_102> bearing a very light
fluid , and , of the injury that must be done by the action of vomiting
to the abdominal <font> viscera <$$font> , and the muscles of the
abdomen already inflamed ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,102.369

If a surgeon were to attempt the dispersion of external inflammation by
rubbing and squeezing the part violently , would not he , instead of
relieving , increase the malady ? KIRKLAND-1774-2,102.370

Chamomile , green , or bohea tea , where there is in this case an
inclination to vomit , will sufficiently wash the stomach ,
KIRKLAND-1774-2,102.371

and the patient will be less fatigued , and less injured by retching
{TEXT:reaching} , with a soft fluid upon her stomach , than without it .
KIRKLAND-1774-2,102.372

But surely , this irritability of the nerves of the stomach , instead of
calling out for irritating medicines , points out the necessity of
joining such medicines along with antiphlogistic , as are capable of
preventing them from irritating the <font> primae viae <$$font> ;
KIRKLAND-1774-2,102.373

and if the local inflammation can be subdued , the vomiting and sickness
will cease of course . KIRKLAND-1774-2,102.374

