<BEGIN_knox-1786-2>

<P_3>

The great west road by Carlisle , is branched out into four principal
divisions , viz. The road by Leeds , Derby , Coventry , Birmingham .
KNOX-1786-2,3.3

The first turns off the main east road at Ferry-Bridge , 175 miles from
London , KNOX-1786-2,3.4

and passes through Leeds , Harrowgate , Richmond , and Penrith .
KNOX-1786-2,3.5

The second leads through St. Albans , Northampton , Derby , Buxton ,
Manchester , Preston , Lancaster , Kendal , and Penrith .
KNOX-1786-2,3.6

Those who take the southern roads , pass through Oxford , Coventry , and
Litchfield , to Manchester ; KNOX-1786-2,3.7

or they may proceed to that place by Oxford , Warwick , and Birmingham .
KNOX-1786-2,3.8

The difference in miles , by these four roads to Carlisle , is very
inconsiderable ; KNOX-1786-2,3.9

and it has been determined by the gentlemen of the northern counties ,
that no fractions , or parts of a mile , shall be demanded of , or paid
by those who travel in post-chaises . KNOX-1786-2,3.10

I set out by the last mentioned road for Carlisle , and from thence ,
through Annan , Dumfries , and Moffat , to Edinburgh . KNOX-1786-2,3.11

The people of Birmingham were then fully employed , <P_4> in consequence
, as they said , of large orders from France . KNOX-1786-2,4.12

In a short time after , the effects of the treaty then negociating ,
reached Manchester and the whole manufacturing county of Lancaster .
KNOX-1786-2,4.13

The comparative dimensions of Birmingham and Manchester are at present
disputed by the inhabitants of these towns . KNOX-1786-2,4.14

Both of them are possessed of an old and a new town . KNOX-1786-2,4.15

The new streets are numerous , extensive , and elegant ;
KNOX-1786-2,4.16

the public buildings are magnificent . KNOX-1786-2,4.17

The inhabitants in each town are supposed to exceed 40,000 .
KNOX-1786-2,4.18

Manchester is situated in the great manufacturing county of Lancaster ,
KNOX-1786-2,4.19

and forms a center where the western roads unite . KNOX-1786-2,4.20

From thence the road to Carlisle is almost due north , and agreeably
diversified with hill and dale . KNOX-1786-2,4.21

Within an hour's ride , after leaving Carlisle , the Solway Firth
appears . KNOX-1786-2,4.22

This great bay divides the two kingdoms on the west . KNOX-1786-2,4.23

The river Esk rises in Scotland , KNOX-1786-2,4.24

and falls into the head of the bay at Longtown . KNOX-1786-2,4.25

<heading> Scotland . <$$heading> KNOX-1786-2,4.26

Soon after crossing the bridge over the Esk at Longtown , a striking
contrast is observable <P_5> in the appearance of the country , of the
people , and of the cattle , upon the two opposite shores of the Solway
Firth . KNOX-1786-2,5.27

From Longtown to Dumfries westward , a track of thirty miles , and as
far as the eye can reach northward , the country consists in some parts
of a {TEXT:a_a} dead flat , at other parts , of gentle risings , the
whole capable of very great improvement ; but which , at present ,
exhibits a picture of dreary solitude , of smoaky hovels , naked , ill
cultivated fields , lean cattle , and a dejected people , without
manufactures , trade , or shipping . KNOX-1786-2,5.28

Dumfries is a handsome small town ; KNOX-1786-2,5.29

it was formerly a place of trade , and the capital port on the Solway
Firth , which was lined with little trading towns . KNOX-1786-2,5.30

At present the trade of this extensive coast scarcely deserves a name ;
KNOX-1786-2,5.31

and though herrings generally set in about the month of September every
season , upon the Scottish side , the principal fishery is carried on by
people from the opposite coast of Cumberland . KNOX-1786-2,5.32

The herrings are small , but good ; KNOX-1786-2,5.33

they are taken by fixed nets , while the tide is making .
KNOX-1786-2,5.34

This fishery might be carried to a great extent ; KNOX-1786-2,5.35

but the fallacious allurements <P_6> of smuggling , the late
restrictions on the fisheries , and other causes , have impoverished the
people , and ruined their ports . KNOX-1786-2,6.36

The country around Dumfries is in high cultivation , KNOX-1786-2,6.37

but these appearances soon vanish , as we advance towards Moffat .
KNOX-1786-2,6.38

It has been affirmed , that while these southern countries remain under
strict entails , while they are no longer frequented by the proprietors
, but left solely to the management of factors or stewards , all the
feeble efforts of a poor commonalty will be inadequate to the great
object of internal improvement , in a country where lime is scarce , and
where coals are burdened with a high duty , besides a water and a land
carriage , proportioned to the distance of each district from the Solway
Firth . KNOX-1786-2,6.39

Moffat , a small town , lies twenty-one miles from Dumfries ,
KNOX-1786-2,6.40

and has long been noted for its spas ; on which account it is much
frequented in the summer season . KNOX-1786-2,6.41

The country northwards becomes almost entirely pastoral .
KNOX-1786-2,6.42

<P_7>

The lands rise to lofty mountains , from one of which issues the Annan ,
which falls into the Solway Firth below the small town of Annan ; the
Tweed , which , after many serpentine windings , divides England and
Scotland on the east side , and falls into the German sea at Berwick ;
the Clyde , famous for its commerce , its manufactures , the industry of
its inhabitants , and the number of its towns , namely , Hamilton ,
Glasgow , Paisley , Dunbarton , Port-Glasgow , Greenock , Rothsay ,
Campbeltown , Saltcoats , Irvine , Air , and Stranraer .
KNOX-1786-2,7.44

The head of the Annan rises at the edge of the road , upon the right
hand ; KNOX-1786-2,7.45

it was quite dry when I passed that way . KNOX-1786-2,7.46

Half a mile farther , on the left , is the head of the Tweed ;
KNOX-1786-2,7.47

and a little farther is the head of the Clyde . KNOX-1786-2,7.48

The ascent of the road from Moffat towards the summit of these mountains
, presents a most extensive view to the south , where the prospect is
bounded by the mountains of Cumberland , whose appearance , tho' at a
great distance , is majestic and sublime ; KNOX-1786-2,7.49

and here an English traveller takes a parting view of his native country
. KNOX-1786-2,7.50

<P_8>

Mr. Pennant has done more than justice to the views and beauties of
North Britain , KNOX-1786-2,8.52

but in speaking of this part of the road , he falls greatly short of its
merits , owing , probably , to the following cause : " But incessant
rains throughout my journey from Edinburgh , rendered this part of my
tour both disagreeable and unedifying . " KNOX-1786-2,8.53

The road northwards runs for many miles along the west side of the Tweed
; KNOX-1786-2,8.54

the valley is called Tweed-dale , and bounded by verdant downs , rising
, on the east side , in the form of pyramids , and covered with numerous
flocks of sheep , whose wool is of superior excellence , and brings a
high price . KNOX-1786-2,8.55

Arrive at Edinburgh , KNOX-1786-2,8.56

and observe with pleasure the rapid improvements of that northern
metropolis , which bids fair to vie in a short time with the most
elegant cities of Europe . KNOX-1786-2,8.57

Edinburgh is situated in 55 deg. 57 min. north latitude , and 3 deg.
14 min. west longitude from London distant from that city , by Berwick
, as before observed , ... 388 {COM:missing_punctuation} Distant from
Dublin , by Port-Patrick , 268 {COM:missing_punctuation} <P_9> Distant
from Glasgow , by the south road , 44 ... by the north road , 48
{COM:missing_punctuation} KNOX-1786-2,9.58

Considering its northern situation , the air is mild , KNOX-1786-2,9.59

and the soil is fertile , producing in great abundance all the real
necessaries of life . KNOX-1786-2,9.60

The number of inhabitants in Edinburgh , the port of Leith , and the
adjacent villages , is calculated at 100,000 . KNOX-1786-2,9.61

It is well supplied with hotels for the conveniency of strangers who
resort to this seat of learning , elegance , and polite amusements .
KNOX-1786-2,9.62

The inhabitants are courteous , obliging , open , hospitable , and well
inclined to the bottle , owing , it may be supposed , to their social
dispositions and the excellence of their wines . KNOX-1786-2,9.63

Strangers who come to this place from motives of health or amusement ,
generally visit Glasgow , Loch Lomond , and Inveraray , on the west ; or
Perth , Dunkeld , Blair , and Taymouth , on the north .
KNOX-1786-2,9.64

Many gentlemen visit all these places ; KNOX-1786-2,9.65

and this is called <font> The Short Tour of <$$font> Scotland .
KNOX-1786-2,9.66

It may also be termed <font> the short way to health , spirits , and
vigour . <$$font> KNOX-1786-2,9.67

The journey which I proposed to myself admitted of no delay ;
KNOX-1786-2,9.68

I therefore set out by the way of Stirling , an ancient royal borough
<P_10> situated on the river Forth , at the distance of thirty-six miles
north-west from Edinburgh . KNOX-1786-2,10.69

Stirling was anciently the seat of kings , who resided on a lofty rock
called the Castle . KNOX-1786-2,10.70

A part of the old palace still remains , KNOX-1786-2,10.71

and is now inhabited by the commanding officer of a garrison , which is
generally composed of invalids . KNOX-1786-2,10.72

A comparatively modern palace was built here by James V .
KNOX-1786-2,10.73

and is occupied at present as barracks for the garrison .
KNOX-1786-2,10.74

The parliament-house is 120 feet in length , KNOX-1786-2,10.75

and was of a proportionable height . KNOX-1786-2,10.76

When I first saw this building , the roof was entire ; KNOX-1786-2,10.77

when I saw it a second time , a part of the roof was bare ;
KNOX-1786-2,10.78

and in my last journey , the whole roof was demolished .
KNOX-1786-2,10.79

The timbers were oak , ornamented with carved work , and a great variety
of figures , which it would be difficult to explain ; as also many
inscriptions in a character resembling the Hebrew . KNOX-1786-2,10.80

I do not find that the Antiquarian Societies at Edinburgh have paid much
attention to those ancient remains . KNOX-1786-2,10.81

Some of the carved figures have , however , been sent to Lord Hales .
KNOX-1786-2,10.82

The age of the old palace , and the parliament-house , is unknown .
KNOX-1786-2,10.83

<P_11>

In the chapel , which is of considerable antiquity , there is a boat
that goes upon wheels , designed , probably , for the amusement of the
royal children . KNOX-1786-2,11.85

In the same place are kept wooden models of the four principal castles
in Scotland . KNOX-1786-2,11.86

The inhabitants of Stirling have , with great taste and judgement ,
planted a steep declivity on the south side of the castle , with various
kinds of trees and shrubs , through which there is a most retired shady
walk . KNOX-1786-2,11.87

A track of level ground , beneath this declivity , formed the royal
gardens , of which some vestiges still remain . KNOX-1786-2,11.88

The views from the castle scarcely yield in soft luxuriancy to the most
admired scenery in Italy . KNOX-1786-2,11.89

The river Forth glides , in numerous beautiful meanders , through a rich
, a populous , and a highly cultivated country , ornamented with
plantations and gentlemen's {TEXT:gentlemens} seats . KNOX-1786-2,11.90

This fine track is bounded on the north-east by lofty verdant downs ,
called the Ochil Hills ; beyond which , the Grampian Mountains close the
distant prospect . KNOX-1786-2,11.91

These mountains begin at the edge of Loch Lomond on the west ,
KNOX-1786-2,11.92

and run in a north-east direction <P_12> to the vicinity of Aberdeen .
KNOX-1786-2,12.93

They formed a strong natural barrier against all invaders .
KNOX-1786-2,12.94

By means of these , the ancient Caledonians resisted , with wonderful
courage and perseverance , the whole force of the Roman arms in Britain
, during a period of nearly four centuries . KNOX-1786-2,12.95

Towards these mountains I once again took my direction from Stirling ,
leaving the more southern part of the Highlands to be visited after my
return ; a journey of no extent , danger , or difficulty , compared to
that immediately before me , which required both good weather and a long
day . KNOX-1786-2,12.96

The first stage was sixteen miles , through a level , and not unpleasant
country , to Calendar , a neat village , finely situated .
KNOX-1786-2,12.97

At some distance from Stirling , that great and good man , Lord Kaims ,
set his countrymen an example in rural improvements , which few of them
have yet been able to equal . KNOX-1786-2,12.98

About half way to Calendar , at another village called Down , there is a
large ancient castle , the property of the Earl of Moray .
KNOX-1786-2,12.99

From thence the road is enlivened by the <P_13> river Teith , which at
Calendar is extremely beautiful . KNOX-1786-2,13.100

This river , and some inland lakes , supply the country with salmon and
trout . KNOX-1786-2,13.101

The salmon are chaced out of the lakes by pike ; KNOX-1786-2,13.102

and having thus escaped one enemy , they fall soon into the snares of
another , KNOX-1786-2,13.103

and are caught by nets as well as the rod . KNOX-1786-2,13.104

The distance from Calendar to Loch Earne head is fourteen miles .
KNOX-1786-2,13.105

After riding three miles on the banks of the Teith , reach Loch Lubnich
, five miles in length , where some gentlemen were fishing with the rod
, and several country people with a boat and net . KNOX-1786-2,13.106

Near this lake are some natural woods , consisting chiefly of dwarf-oak
, now a valuable article on account of the bark , which sells at one
shilling per stone . KNOX-1786-2,13.107

At the inn , upon the head of Loch Earne , have a full view of that
beautiful sheet of water , which is eight miles in length , and fringed
on both sides with small woods . KNOX-1786-2,13.108

From this lake the river Earne glides eastward through the extensive and
beautiful valley of Strathearne , KNOX-1786-2,13.109

and falls into the Tay some miles below Perth . KNOX-1786-2,13.110

<P_14>

Killein , six miles from Loch Earne , is a small village , at the head
of Loch Tay . KNOX-1786-2,14.112

The beauties of this place are finely delineated by Mr. Pennant , whose
enthusiasm carries him sometimes too far . KNOX-1786-2,14.113

Loch Tay is fifteen miles in length , one in breadth ,
KNOX-1786-2,14.114

and the depth is from fifteen to a_hundred fathoms . KNOX-1786-2,14.115

Its banks , on both sides , are fruitful , populous , and finely
diversified by the windings of the lake , and the various appearances of
the mountains . KNOX-1786-2,14.116

Here I had the pleasure of being informed that the Earl of Breadalbane
intends to build a regular town , nearly upon the plan proposed to the
<font> British Society for Extending the Fisheries . <$$font>
KNOX-1786-2,14.117

The road from Killein to Tyndrum is twenty miles . KNOX-1786-2,14.118

It leads westward through a pleasant valley called Glen Dochart , and
Strath Fillan , watered by the Tay , and shaded in some parts with
natural woods . KNOX-1786-2,14.119

Tyndrum , at the head of this valley , is an elevated situation , from
whence issues the river Tay , which takes an eastern direction to Loch
Tay , out of which it flows in a copious stream to Dunkeld , and from
thence to Perth and Dundee , where it falls into the German Ocean .
KNOX-1786-2,14.120

The banks of this river , from its <P_15> source to the sea , are justly
celebrated by all admirers of picturesque scenery . KNOX-1786-2,15.121

A good inn is much wanted towards the upper end of Strath Fillan , where
the traveller would be amused with the views of Benmore , and the soft
landscapes of the valley ; whereas the inn at Tyndrum is situated on the
summit of an unhospitable bleak moor , and it is also too far distant
from the stages at Loch Earne and Killein . KNOX-1786-2,15.122

The road from these places is also carried injudiciously from one rising
ground to another , instead of being formed on a level with the waters .
KNOX-1786-2,15.123

From Tyndrum to Dalmally is twelve miles , through Glen Lochy , a fine
pastoral strath , watered by the Lochy , with a descent almost the whole
way . KNOX-1786-2,15.124

The hills on both sides , though remarkably lofty , form agreeable sheep
walks . KNOX-1786-2,15.125

Within two miles of Dalmally , the traveller looks down at once upon a
pleasant country , which receives additional beauty from the junction of
two streams , and a considerable woody island , on which stands the
church and the parson's house . KNOX-1786-2,15.126

A commodious inn at this place is rented at 6@ @l. KNOX-1786-2,15.127

and the window-tax amounts to 4@ @l. 10@ @s. KNOX-1786-2,15.128

This disproportion arises from the well-judged <P_16> munificence of the
proprietor , who thus , almost at his own expence , accommodates
travellers with decent lodgings . KNOX-1786-2,16.129

Dalmally is a fine situation for an inland town . KNOX-1786-2,16.130

The adjacent country is partly arable , KNOX-1786-2,16.131

and abounds in cattle , sheep , timber , and lime-stone .
KNOX-1786-2,16.132

It is watered by two considerable streams , which , at the distance of
two miles , fall into Loch Awe , a fresh-water lake , above twenty miles
in length , that might , at no great expence , be opened to the Western
Ocean , near Crinan , the intended course of a navigable canal , to
shorten the passage into the Clyde . KNOX-1786-2,16.133

Dalmally has also the advantage of roads of communication in every
direction . KNOX-1786-2,16.134

From Dalmally to Bunawe , the distance is twelve miles ;
KNOX-1786-2,16.135

seven of these are carried along the north side of Loch Awe , which , at
the north end , is triangular , and ornamented with several woody
islands . KNOX-1786-2,16.136

On one of these islands stands Kilchurn-Castle , a considerable pile ,
falling to ruins . KNOX-1786-2,16.137

On another island are the vestiges of a fortress ; KNOX-1786-2,16.138

and a third was honoured with a cell or church . KNOX-1786-2,16.139

It is scarcely possible to do justice to the grandeur of this road .
KNOX-1786-2,16.140

A ridge , or face of mountains , some miles in length , rises from
<P_17> the edge of the lake to a great height , KNOX-1786-2,17.141

and is covered with wood , from the water to the very summit .
KNOX-1786-2,17.142

The trees are of various species , vigorous , and many of them lofty .
KNOX-1786-2,17.143

The road rises gradually from the water . KNOX-1786-2,17.144

- In some places it is cut through a declivity , almost perpendicular ,
KNOX-1786-2,17.145

and on that account , it is fenced by walls , for the security of the
frightened traveler . KNOX-1786-2,17.146

A branch of the lake , called Pool-Awe , runs westward ,
KNOX-1786-2,17.147

and empties itself at Bunawe , into a navigable salt-water lake , called
Loch Etive , where it affords a considerable fishery of salmon .
KNOX-1786-2,17.148

Here ends the Earl of Breadalbane@ @'s estate on this part of the
continent , which extends eastward to Taymouth , and three miles further
. KNOX-1786-2,17.149

Three or four market towns would enable the numerous tenantry on this
estate to increase his lordship's rent-roll very considerably .
KNOX-1786-2,17.150

Bunawe is a straggling village , situated at the junction of the water
Awe with Loch Etive . KNOX-1786-2,17.151

Here an English company have long carried on the smelting business , by
means of the woods in that country , and other parts of the Highlands .
KNOX-1786-2,17.152

This business has been highly beneficial to the poor natives , who
<P_18> find employment , and good wages , in the various departments of
the work . KNOX-1786-2,18.153

The verdant fields , and other agreeable appearances on this little spot
, plainly indicate the residence of Englishmen . KNOX-1786-2,18.154

The company have also built a pier at this place . KNOX-1786-2,18.155

The road from Bunawe , by Loch Etive , to Abatis is 10 miles .
KNOX-1786-2,18.156

At Connel , four miles west from Bunawe , a chain of sunk rocks crosses
the lake almost from one side to the other , KNOX-1786-2,18.157

and exhibits at half flood and half ebb , particularly the ebb of spring
tides , a most furious cataract of about ten feet high , called the
Falls of Connel . KNOX-1786-2,18.158

Four miles further stands {COM:sic} the remains of Dunstaffnage Castle ,
a seat of the Scottish kings , previous to the conquest of the Picts in
843 , by Kenneth II. and where the coronation chair was kept , till it
was removed by that monarch to Scone , near Perth , where he fixed his
residence , as being more centrical for the purpose of government .
KNOX-1786-2,18.159

This chair remained at Scone till the thirteenth century , when it was
carried off by Edward III. of England ; KNOX-1786-2,18.160

and it is now in Westminster Abbey . KNOX-1786-2,18.161

<P_19>

Some parts of an ancient regalia were preserved at Dunstaffnage , till
within the present century , when they were embezzled by the keeper's
servants , during his infirm years , probably for the silver with which
the articles were ornamented ; KNOX-1786-2,19.163

and nothing now remains , excepting a battle-axe , nine feet in length ,
of beautiful workmanship , and ornamented with silver .
KNOX-1786-2,19.164

Mr. Campbell , the present proprietor of Dunstaffnage , has also in his
possession , a small ivory image of a monarch sitting in his chair ,
with a crown on his head , a book in his left hand , and seemingly in a
contemplative mood , as if he was preparing to take the coronation oath
. KNOX-1786-2,19.165

His beard is long and venerable ; KNOX-1786-2,19.166

his dress , particularly his robe edged with fur , or ermine , is
distinctly represented . KNOX-1786-2,19.167

This figure was found among the ruins of Dunstaffnage ,
KNOX-1786-2,19.168

and being consequently engraved before the conquest of the Picts , it
may be considered as one of the greatest curiosities now in our island .
KNOX-1786-2,19.169

Mr. Pennant has given an excellent representation of this figure , and
also of the castle , in the second volume of his Tour in Scotland , page
354 . KNOX-1786-2,19.170

<P_20>

The castle is built upon a rock , at the mouth of Loch Etive , whose
waters expand within , to a beautiful bay where ships may safely ride in
all weather . KNOX-1786-2,20.172

Of the ancient building , nothing remains except the outer walls , which
; though roofless , are still in good order . KNOX-1786-2,20.173

At a small distance is a small roofless chapel , struggling against time
and weather , to accompany this seat of kings through ages yet to come .
KNOX-1786-2,20.174

Facing the chapel is a perpendicular rock , which ends abruptly , and
turns suddenly to the south-east . KNOX-1786-2,20.175

The words of {TEXT:of_of} any person who stands in a certain direction
under the rock , are singly and distinctly echoed back , to the
astonishment of every stranger . KNOX-1786-2,20.176

The situation of this regal seat was calculated for pleasure as well as
strength ; a proof that mankind , even in the rudest ages of society ,
were more or less governed by taste . KNOX-1786-2,20.177

The views of mountains , vallies , waters , and islands , are delightful
. KNOX-1786-2,20.178

On the north side of Loch Etive stood the town of Beregonium , supposed
to have been the capital of the West Highlands . KNOX-1786-2,20.179

It seems , from certain mounds , excavations , and other appearances ,
<P_21> to have been a strong fortress , to prevent invasion , or to
secure a retreat , as occasions might require . KNOX-1786-2,21.180

At present this district is ornamented with several seats , particularly
those of Duncan Campbell , Esq. of Lochnell , and John Campbell , Esq.
of Airds . KNOX-1786-2,21.181

Facing Dunstaffnage is the country of Upper Lorn , a beautiful peninsula
, bounded by Loch Etive on the south , and the Linnhe Loch on the north
, which is navigable as high as Inverlochy , now Fort William , where
stood another seat of the Scottish monarchs ; KNOX-1786-2,21.182

but the present edifice is thought to be of later date .
KNOX-1786-2,21.183

Being now arrived on the western shore , I began , at Abatis , to
investigate with more than usual minuteness , the most eligible
situations for villages or fishing stations . KNOX-1786-2,21.184

I mean , in the subsequent detail , to speak of these stations exactly
in the order in which they fell under view , during the course of my
cruises and journies {TEXT:journeys} . KNOX-1786-2,21.185

I propose , afterwards , to arrange them geographically , from south to
north , as they appear on the map . KNOX-1786-2,21.186

<P_22>

<heading> General Description of the West Highlands and Hebride Isles .
<$$heading> KNOX-1786-2,22.188

The west coast of Scotland , or , as it is usually called , the West
Highlands , is washed by the Atlantic , KNOX-1786-2,22.189

and extends two_hundred_and_thirty-four miles in a direct line from the
Mull of Cantire on the <P_23> south , to Cape Wrath on the north .
KNOX-1786-2,23.190

The promontory called the Mull , or more properly the Moil of Cantire ,
forms the north entrance of the Irish Channel , KNOX-1786-2,23.191

and lies within thirteen miles of the county of Antrim in Ireland .
KNOX-1786-2,23.192

It also forms the west entrance into the Firth of Clyde , an inland sea
, forty miles in width , bounded by Galloway and Airshire on the east .
KNOX-1786-2,23.193

Cape Wrath is the north-west extremity of Scotland and of Great Britain
. KNOX-1786-2,23.194

The nearest continent to this cape is the frozen region of Greenland ,
on the north , and Labrador , on the west . KNOX-1786-2,23.195

Between the Mull of Cantire and Cape Wrath , are situated the Hebride
Islands , at very unequal distances from the main land , some being
within a quarter of a mile , KNOX-1786-2,23.196

and others lie at the distance of sixty miles . KNOX-1786-2,23.197

The number of these islands has been calculated at three_hundred , of
which forty were supposed to be inhabited ; KNOX-1786-2,23.198

but upon close inquiry , I have procured the names nearly of one_hundred
, that contain from one family to two_thousand_five_hundred families ;
KNOX-1786-2,23.199

and <P_24> it is probable that some have escaped my notice .
KNOX-1786-2,24.200

This great line of coast , and the islands by which it is studded , are
comprehended within the under-mentioned counties , viz.
{COM:table_omitted} <P_25> {COM:table_omitted} KNOX-1786-2,25.201

<P_26>

At the distance of fifty-four miles west from the Long Island , lies St.
Kilda , which belongs to the proprietor of Harris . KNOX-1786-2,26.203

This is the most westerly part of Great Britain , between which and
North America there is no land . KNOX-1786-2,26.204

About fifty miles north from the Butt of the Lewis there are two small
islands called Bara and Rona , which belong to the proprietor of the
Lewis . KNOX-1786-2,26.205

These rocks lie within three_hundred_and_fifty miles of Iceland , a
large island belonging to the king of Denmark , whose shores abound in
large cod and ling , which are caught by the Dutch and other European
nations , but much neglected by Great-Britain . {TEXT:,}
KNOX-1786-2,26.206

The aggregate extent of all these islands is nearly equal to Wales , or
the great county of York . KNOX-1786-2,26.207

The face of the country , the produce by sea and land , the language ,
manners , and dress of the people , are similar in those respects to the
opposite coast of the Highlands ; KNOX-1786-2,26.208

but the timber is nearly exhausted . KNOX-1786-2,26.209

The natural produce of the West Highlands by sea and land , including
the islands , are fish <P_27> of endless variety , inexhaustible in
number , and excellent in quality . KNOX-1786-2,27.210

These seem to have been intended by the Author of nature as a
compensation for the inclemency of the seasons , and the sterility of
the soil . KNOX-1786-2,27.211

Of grain , this coast can@ @not raise , with the greatest exertions , a
sufficiency for the use of the inhabitants ; KNOX-1786-2,27.212

and of every year's produce of Barley , a third or fourth part is
distilled into a spirit called whisky , of which the natives are
immoderately fond . KNOX-1786-2,27.213

Roots , vegetables , sallads , and common fruits , being less hurt by
the rains , can be raised in any quantity . KNOX-1786-2,27.214

Their kail and cabbages are only exceeded in delicacy by the turnip ,
which , for its flavour , and the fineness of its grain , is presented
raw at genteel tables , with fruits , wild berries , &c.
KNOX-1786-2,27.215

Potatoes serve , throughout the Highlands , as a substitute for grain .
KNOX-1786-2,27.216

A small portion of lime , or any other manure , brings forward a
plentiful crop , and of a quality greatly superior to those that are
raised upon richer soils ; KNOX-1786-2,27.217

but when severe frosts set in early , as in 1782 , this root is rendered
totally unfit for use , KNOX-1786-2,27.218

and the people perish through want . KNOX-1786-2,27.219

<P_28>

The culture of hemp and flax may be improved , particularly in some of
the islands . KNOX-1786-2,28.221

Along the banks of some of the lakes , on the main land , there are
natural woods , which produce a considerable return every twenty-five
years , when the timber is cut down for the bark , as well as for
charcoal . KNOX-1786-2,28.222

Many hundred_thousand acres of land might be occupied in the growth of
timber ; which at present lie wild , and useless to the proprietors .
KNOX-1786-2,28.223

Black cattle , horses , and sheep , are considerable articles in the
Highlands , KNOX-1786-2,28.224

and it is chiefly from these that the tenantry pay their rents .
KNOX-1786-2,28.225

The beef and the mutton , when properly fed , are fine in the grain ,
tender , and high_flavoured . KNOX-1786-2,28.226

To these may be added , though of inferior consequence , venison , hare
, partridge , solan geese , wild geese , wild ducks , and great variety
of moor fowl , that find excellent shelter among the heather , with
which the face of the country is chiefly covered . KNOX-1786-2,28.227

Copper has been discovered in the Highlands , but not in sufficient
quantity to defray the expence of working . KNOX-1786-2,28.228

Iron stone abounds in many places ; KNOX-1786-2,28.229

and lead mines have long been wrought with success . KNOX-1786-2,28.230

<P_29>

The slate of Esdale , and other islands in its vicinity , supplies the
whole kingdom of Scotland , besides many cargoes to foreign parts .
KNOX-1786-2,29.232

It is composed of two different qualities and colours , the dark and the
light blue . KNOX-1786-2,29.233

- Other parts abound in slate , KNOX-1786-2,29.234

but the want of roads , towns , and navigation , prevent its being
brought into use . KNOX-1786-2,29.235

Marble , both white and variegated , is found in many parts , though
from the great expence of the workmanship in some parts , and of the
carriage in other parts , no other benefit of any consequence has been
derived from it , than the use of it as lime , and in building the walls
of cottages . KNOX-1786-2,29.236

Coals are also found in different parts , KNOX-1786-2,29.237

but no attempts have yet been made with success , excepting in the
neighbourhood of Campbeltown , where a small quantity is raised for the
supply of that district . KNOX-1786-2,29.238

In Mull and Sky there are appearances of coal , KNOX-1786-2,29.239

but the vein is too thin for working . KNOX-1786-2,29.240

It does not however appear , that proper attention has been given to
this important article ; KNOX-1786-2,29.241

no pit has yet been dug of any considerable depth , KNOX-1786-2,29.242

and until this experiment is made , no just conclusion can be formed .
KNOX-1786-2,29.243

It is now in contemplation <P_30> to open pits on the estate of
Dunstaffnage , and on Clanronald's estate . KNOX-1786-2,30.244

Limestone , shell sand , and sea wreck , are in general use for
fertilizing the soil . KNOX-1786-2,30.245

Kelp has become , of late years , a great article of export .
KNOX-1786-2,30.246

This vegetable is burned from the sea wreck till it becomes a liquid ;
KNOX-1786-2,30.247

when cool , it appears a dry cinder , KNOX-1786-2,30.248

and , in this state , it is sold to the manufacturers of glass and soap
. KNOX-1786-2,30.249

The Highlands , and the west coast of Ireland , produce the greatest
quantities of kelp . KNOX-1786-2,30.250

There , the wreck vegetates , KNOX-1786-2,30.251

and clings around the stones of the rocky beach , till it grows to
maturity , every second or third year , when it is cut down .
KNOX-1786-2,30.252

The expence of cutting down , drying , and burning , is generally 1@ @l.
11@ @s. 6@ @d. {COM:missing_space_here_and_passim} per ton ;
KNOX-1786-2,30.253

and the price in Scotland is from 4@ @l. to 5@ @l. while in Ireland it
is sold at 3@ @l. owing to the latter being mixed with gravel and
stones . KNOX-1786-2,30.254

As the great varieties of fish which are found in the lakes , channels ,
and seas of the Highlands , may be considered as the grand natural
staple of that country , exceeding in value all the other resources
united ; and as the extent to which these fisheries may be carried is
boundless , I can@ @not do justice to this <P_31> head without bringing
together in one view , such information as may give a general idea of
the fisheries upon these shores . KNOX-1786-2,31.255

By such representation of facts , a probable conjecture may be formed ,
whether the exertions of the British Society , if properly conducted ,
be likely to answer the ends proposed at the formation of that
institution . KNOX-1786-2,31.256

In the <font> View of the British Empire <$$font> I entered fully upon
these subjects , KNOX-1786-2,31.257

stated their various revolutions , the causes of their failure , and the
best means of establishing extensive and permanent fisheries upon the
seas and coasts of Great Britain . KNOX-1786-2,31.258

That subject begins with the history of fish , and the fisheries , some
extracts from which I have given in the Appendix . KNOX-1786-2,31.259

Besides the great migrating shoals from the northern ocean , as there
described , our own seas and lakes abound with herrings , through a
great part of the year , though not always in equal numbers .
KNOX-1786-2,31.260

Thus the herrings , which surround Great Britain and Ireland , are
composed , first , of stationary or native herrings , spawned in the
British seas , and found upon the coast at all seasons . - Secondly ,
the mighty shoals of emigrants , or <P_32> strangers , from the north
seas , as reinforcements to the former ; KNOX-1786-2,32.261

but whether these two divisions of herrings , the natives and the
strangers , unite or blend together , is a matter of mere speculation .
KNOX-1786-2,32.262

We only know for a certainty , that the great northern shoals are found
upon the coast of Shetland about the 24th of June , when they give full
employment to hundreds of foreign vessels , and thousands of people ,
day and night . KNOX-1786-2,32.263

We also know , that this body of herrings remains on the Scottish coast
, though not on every part of it , till the beginning of spring , when a
fresh shoal is advancing from the northern ocean towards our highly
favoured shores , to incite our industry , and to supply our wants .
KNOX-1786-2,32.264

Scotland therefore from its northern situation , and the natural
movements of the herrings , enjoys , or may enjoy , an almost certain
fishery during eight months in the year ; a duration unknown in any
other country , and which gives that kingdom a decided advantage over
all the nations of Europe , but of which the natives have not fully
availed themselves . KNOX-1786-2,32.265

For this fishery , the West Highlands far surpasses all other parts of
the kingdom in <P_33> local situation , the number of its salt-water
lakes , and the frugality of the inhabitants . KNOX-1786-2,33.266

This is the grand thoroughfare , as before observed , of the western
shoals . KNOX-1786-2,33.267

The lakes , or openings of that coast are numerous , KNOX-1786-2,33.268

many of them are capacious , and all of them extremely deep .
KNOX-1786-2,33.269

Here the herrings take shelter from the turbulence of the open sea ,
KNOX-1786-2,33.270

or they are forced thither by the direction of the winds , and the
incessant persecutions of {TEXT:of_of} the larger species of fish , who
, in the eagerness of pursuit , sometimes run the herrings and
themselves almost dry upon the beach . KNOX-1786-2,33.271

Next in consequence , are the White Fish , which , as well as the
herring , are the natives of northern {TEXT:northen} latitudes ,
KNOX-1786-2,33.272

and these consequently abound in greater quantities upon the coast of
Scotland , than in any other <P_34> part of Europe , the coast of
Iceland and Norway excepted . KNOX-1786-2,34.273

These come also under two descriptions , the native , and the foreign
fish , which follow the herrings from the northern ocean , through all
their movements , and even into the inmost creeks and crevices of the
shores . KNOX-1786-2,34.274

But the most certain and invariable fisheries are upon the banks , which
are placed in the British seas , where the fish are collected together ,
and thereby fall an easy prey to the patient and venturous
{TEXT:ventrous} seamen . KNOX-1786-2,34.275

Where the tops of the banks are shallow , and covered with a barren
shifting sand , which affords no subsistence , and the water from its
shallowness , being generally agitated , the fish are found , in the
greatest numbers , upon the sloping edges and in the pits of the banks .
KNOX-1786-2,34.276

Besides these banks of the West Highlands , which furnish white fish of
inferior size , the main ocean , as far as European vessels have yet
examined , is an almost continued fishery . KNOX-1786-2,34.277

Many banks have of late been discovered , KNOX-1786-2,34.278

and the best fishing grounds upon the old stations are now better
ascertained . KNOX-1786-2,34.279

<P_35>

The white fish found in those great repositories , and cured for home
and foreign markets , are ling , cod , and tusk . KNOX-1786-2,35.281

The cod , when caught in winter and spring , is esteemed superior to the
Newfoundland , which is taken in the summer only , KNOX-1786-2,35.282

and brings a better price at the European markets . KNOX-1786-2,35.283

The ling and tusk being unknown at Newfoundland , find a ready sale .
KNOX-1786-2,35.284

The tusk is less than the cod , but superior in taste and flavour to all
fish of that species . {TEXT:,} KNOX-1786-2,35.285

Haddocks and whitings are found in such abundance in the lochs , as well
as the main sea , that scarcely any value is set upon them in the
Highlands . KNOX-1786-2,35.286

Lythe , a fish equal in size to a small cod , and cuddies , a fish
nearly equal to the herring , swarm upon these shores ,
KNOX-1786-2,35.287

and are esteemed delicate eating by the inhabitants of every description
. KNOX-1786-2,35.288

Flat Fish , as turbot , halybut , skate , soles , and flounders , are in
little request , among the common people , who consequently seldom or
ever attempt to fish for them . KNOX-1786-2,35.289

Mackerel {TEXT:Mackarel} come periodically , in mighty shoals ;
KNOX-1786-2,35.290

but these are also despised , though capable of being cured for
exportation . KNOX-1786-2,35.291

Salmon . KNOX-1786-2,35.292

This fish , though comparatively harmless , yet partakes of the offered
bounty <P_36> which the herrings afford . KNOX-1786-2,36.293

Some years ago , a small body of the latter was thrown upon shore by a
sudden gust of wind ; KNOX-1786-2,36.294

the tribe of pursuers shared the same fate , among which were a number
of salmon . KNOX-1786-2,36.295

The value of this fish was not known in the Highlands till very lately ,
KNOX-1786-2,36.296

and the fishery was much neglected . KNOX-1786-2,36.297

Shell_Fish , as lobsters , oysters , crabs , clams , mussels , cockles ,
bring no price , KNOX-1786-2,36.298

and consequently incite no attention , though it is well known that some
of these fish might be pickled and exported . KNOX-1786-2,36.299

Besides the various species of fish above enumerated , which are suited
for the table , the western coasts are stored with all kinds of
Cetaceous {TEXT:Cataceous} Fish , from whales of every denomination down
to the grampus . KNOX-1786-2,36.300

These have lately drawn the attention of the natives on account of the
oil which they produce . KNOX-1786-2,36.301

The Sail Fish , or as it is called by Mr. Pennant , the basking shark ,
is supposed to be a migratory fish from the Arctic {TEXT:Artic} Circle .
KNOX-1786-2,36.302

They frequent the coast of Norway , the Orkney and Hebride Islands , the
Firth of Clyde , the Bay of Ballishannon in Ireland , and the west coast
of Wales , particularly Carnarvonshire <P_37> and Anglesey .
KNOX-1786-2,37.303

They appear in the Firth of Clyde , near the Isle of Arran , in small
shoals of seven or eight , but more generally in pairs , sometimes in
June , KNOX-1786-2,37.304

and remain till the end of July , when they disappear .
KNOX-1786-2,37.305

Though their size is from twenty-five to forty feet in length , they are
most inoffensive fish , and so tame , or so stupid , that they will
suffer themselves to be stroked in the water . KNOX-1786-2,37.306

They generally lie motionless , on the surface of the water , as if
asleep , commonly on their bellies , and sometimes like tired swimmers ,
on their backs . KNOX-1786-2,37.307

A hot sunshine day is the best time to prosecute this fishery with
success . KNOX-1786-2,37.308

A harpooner strikes as near the gills as possible - KNOX-1786-2,37.309

The fish still remains inactive , till the united strength of two men
has forced the weapon deeper , when it plunges to the bottom , and
strives to disengage itself , by rolling on the ground , as appears from
the harpoon , which is often bent . KNOX-1786-2,37.310

This effort proving ineffectual , the fish swims away with such rapidity
, as to endanger the boat , to which the rope is fixed ;
KNOX-1786-2,37.311

and in this manner the fishers are sometimes employed <P_38> ten or
twelve hours . KNOX-1786-2,38.312

The liver is the only useful part , KNOX-1786-2,38.313

and yields , particularly in the female , from six to eight barrels of
pure sweet oil , very proper for lamps , and much valued by tanners ,
who buy it at 3@ @l. per barrel . KNOX-1786-2,38.314

The Seal , an amphibious animal , is found every where ,
KNOX-1786-2,38.315

and is valuable both for its oil and its skin . KNOX-1786-2,38.316

The last , though not the least numerous , are the Dog Fish , the most
mischievous of all the finny tribe , both to fish and nets .
KNOX-1786-2,38.317

After a small quantity of oil is extracted , they are dried for winter's
provision , among the poorer sort of people , who give them the
preference to others of far superior qualities . KNOX-1786-2,38.318

Such are the treasures which these northern seas afford , a source of
wealth unequalled on southern shores , and which might give full
employment to the inhabitants , in the various branches that relate to
fisheries , of which the Dutch reckon thirty ; as fishermen , coopers ,
curers of red herrings , ship carpenters , block-makers , joiners ,
painters , blacksmiths , hecklers , spinners , net-makers , sail-cloth
manufacturers , sail-makers , rope-makers , tanners , salt makers ,
coasters , <P_39> bargemen , curriers , labourers , women , children ,
and old people , who gut the herrings , and wash them at the second
packing . KNOX-1786-2,39.319

Thus we find that the Highlands , besides supplying home demands ,
exports {COM:sic} fish , black cattle , horses , sheep , timber , bark ,
lead , slate , and kelp ; to which may be added sundry articles of less
importance , as skins , feathers , oil . KNOX-1786-2,39.320

The aggregate amount of these exports is surely sufficient to procure
the necessary articles of grain , and various utensils in iron , steel ,
timber , &c. wherewith to improve their lands , extend their fisheries
, furnish themselves with decked vessels , and erect more comfortable
dwellings . KNOX-1786-2,39.321

Such are the specific wealth and the specific wants of the Highlands .
KNOX-1786-2,39.322

But as the value of its natural produce , by sea and land , is almost
wholly absorbed by the great landholders , and by many of them spent at
Edinburgh , London , Bath , and elsewhere ; as the people are thus left
more or less at the mercy of stewards and tacksmen , the natural
resources of the country , instead of a benefit , become a serious
misfortune to many improveable districts . KNOX-1786-2,39.323

Those who , by their <P_40> education and their knowledge of the world
might diffuse general industry , and raise a colony of subjects , useful
to their king , to their country , and to themselves , are the very
persons who glean these wilds of the last shilling , and who render the
people utterly unqualified for making any effectual exertions in any
case whatever . KNOX-1786-2,40.324

<P_41>

<heading> Cruises and journies along the coast of the main land , and
among the Hebride Islands , between Oban and Cape Wrath .
KNOX-1786-2,41.326

Description of Argyleshire . <$$heading> KNOX-1786-2,41.327

Argyleshire , from whence I took my departure , extends
one_hundred_and_fourteen miles in length , from the Mull of Cantire , on
the south , to the Point of Ardnamurchan , on the north , where it joins
the shire of Inverness . KNOX-1786-2,41.328

Its medium breadth is from thirty to forty miles , except the long
peninsula of Cantire , which is only from eight to nine miles .
KNOX-1786-2,41.329

The number of inhabited islands which compose a part of this shire ,
amount , as before stated , to thirty-nine , of which Mull , Ilay , and
Jura , are the principal . KNOX-1786-2,41.330

This very extensive county is inhabited chiefly by the Campbells ,
Macleans , Macneils , Macdonalds ; KNOX-1786-2,41.331

and , of these , the Campbells are the most numerous .
KNOX-1786-2,41.332

During the <P_42> last war , Argyleshire raised a complete regiment of
Fencibles , besides a considerable number who enlisted in the marching
regiments . KNOX-1786-2,42.333

As this is properly a maritime fishing county , washed on one side by
the Atlantic , and on the other side by the Firth of Clyde and Loch-Fine
, the number of seamen drawn from thence to the Royal Navy must have
been very great . KNOX-1786-2,42.334

Above nine_hundred men enlisted KNOX-1786-2,42.335

or were pressed into the service in different parts of the world ,
{COM:head_of_relative_clause_is_subject_of_previous_token} all of whom
were natives of Campbeltown and its neighbourhood , and had been brought
up in the fishing business carried on by the herring busses from that
port . KNOX-1786-2,42.336

When the projected canal shall be completed , and some villages and
harbours erected , this populous county will become one of the most
valuable provinces in the British empire . KNOX-1786-2,42.337

It abounds in black cattle , sheep , and fish , though the latter are
less numerous than those on the more northern shores .
KNOX-1786-2,42.338

Washed on both sides by the sea , deeply indented by navigable lakes and
bays ; having an easy communication with the fishing grounds on the
North Highlands ; with Glasgow , and the trading town on the Clyde ;
<P_43> with Ireland , Wales , Whitehaven , Liverpool , Bristol , and
other marts on the west coast of England , we may easily conceive , that
the period is at no great distance , when Argyleshire will become a
great commercial county . KNOX-1786-2,43.339

To corroborate this opinion , I have to observe , that after a vessel
gets under sail from this coast , she enters at once into the Atlantic ,
where she meets with no interruption till she makes the coast of America
or the West-Indies . KNOX-1786-2,43.340

The line , therefore , which nature points out for the inhabitants , is
, that of salt-making , fishing , ship-building , freights or the
carrying trade ; soap , and glass-making , by means of the kelp upon
their shores , and sand found upon Gia Island , which is adapted for the
latter . KNOX-1786-2,43.341

Argyleshire has only three small towns , viz. 1. Inveraray , the
capital , which has risen to some consequence , through the exertion of
the family of Argyle , which have a princely seat here , surrounded with
above a_million of trees , that occupy many square miles . 2. <font>
Campbeltown <$$font> the property of the same family , which rose
entirely by the herring fisheries on the coast of the North Highlands .
<P_44> 3. <font> Bowmore <$$font> , in the Island of Ilay , the
property of Mr. Campbell of Shawfield . KNOX-1786-2,44.342

Though these are sea-ports , there are stations in this country far
superior , both for distant fisheries and navigation .
KNOX-1786-2,44.343

The first and most improvable is Oban , which lies in the part of
Argyleshire , called Mid-Lor . KNOX-1786-2,44.344

It has a good Highland country behind , with a free-stone quarry , Mull
and other islands in front , KNOX-1786-2,44.345

and is of itself capacious , and sufficiently deep for the largest ships
. KNOX-1786-2,44.346

Without , is the island of Kerera , three miles in length ; between
which , and the main land , is the Sound of Kerera , a good road ,
through which coasters and fishing vessels generally pass , between the
Clyde and the fishing grounds in the North Highlands .
KNOX-1786-2,44.347

This coast , and the island of Kerera , have also a free navigation to
the white fisheries off Bara , and the herring fisheries on the
north-west coast of Ireland . KNOX-1786-2,44.348

A custom-house is already erected , KNOX-1786-2,44.349

something is done in ship building , KNOX-1786-2,44.350

and above twenty families have been collected together with a view to
the fisheries . KNOX-1786-2,44.351

But these are inferior considerations to the national advantages which
may be derived <P_45> from this much frequented harbour and road .
KNOX-1786-2,45.352

Oban is formed by nature , and by a combination of favourable
circumstances , for being a principal harbour , a place of trade , a
centrical mart for the South Highlands , and the numerous islands that
lie in its vicinity . KNOX-1786-2,45.353

Here also a Royal dock and an arsenal might be erected .
KNOX-1786-2,45.354

It is well known , that the best designs of Government for annoying the
enemy , or defending our trade and Colonies , are sometimes frustrated
by means of contrary winds , which prevent the Royal fleets and
transports from getting out of the harbours , or from getting round to
the Land's End . KNOX-1786-2,45.355

It is also certain , that the enemy are informed by news-papers , and
otherwise , of every equipment and motion of our ships and troops ,
which enables them to counteract our designs , by means of similar
squadrons , or {TEXT:for} by secret dispatches to commanding officers
abroad . KNOX-1786-2,45.356

The delays , and the loss to the nation , arising from these
circumstances , must be very great ; to remedy which , in a certain
degree , it would be highly expedient to have an arsenal and a Royal
dock-yard on the west coast of Scotland , where small squadrons <P_46>
and transports , with troops , could be secretly fitted out , and from
whence they could sail at all times of the year , and with any wind that
blows . KNOX-1786-2,46.357

By this means , a fleet with troops might reach America , or the
West_Indies , before the enemy could have the smallest intelligence of
the design , which would give our fleets and armies a decided advantage
in that quarter of the world . KNOX-1786-2,46.358

If Government should be disposed to regard this proposal as a matter
that merited some attention , I believe that Oban would be found the
best adapted upon that coast . KNOX-1786-2,46.359

Here , and in the Sound of Kerera , a_hundred sail of the line might
ride , at some distance from the shore , in five to twenty-seven fathom
water . KNOX-1786-2,46.360

By means of this <P_47> sound , vessels have a passage to the south ,
and also to the north , which gives them an opportunity of sailing out
with any wind , KNOX-1786-2,47.361

and in less than half an hour they are in the open ocean .
KNOX-1786-2,47.362

Next to these advantages is the happy situation of Oban , between Loch
Linnhe and the Sound of Mull , on the north , and the proposed
communication with the Clyde , on the south . KNOX-1786-2,47.363

Loch Linnhe is a large body of water , which is navigable to Fort
William ; KNOX-1786-2,47.364

from there there is a good military road to Fort Augustus , and from
thence to Fort George . KNOX-1786-2,47.365

<P_48>

Thus one fort stands on the west sea , KNOX-1786-2,48.367

and has an easy communication with Ireland and the west coast of England
; KNOX-1786-2,48.368

another fort stands in the center , at the distance of thirty-one miles
; and a third , upon the east coast , KNOX-1786-2,48.369

and has an easy communication with Edinburgh and England , on that side
. KNOX-1786-2,48.370

These forts can lodge , upon an emergency , five or six_thousand men ,
all of whom could be conveyed from Fort William to Oban in a short time
; KNOX-1786-2,48.371

or should the wind blow strong from the western points , the distance by
land is not very great . KNOX-1786-2,48.372

Further , were recruits to be ordered from the west coast of
Inverness-shire , Ross-shire , Sutherland , Sky , and other islands in
the North Highlands , the Sound of Mull is the direct channel to Oban ,
which lies near the entrance of that sound . KNOX-1786-2,48.373

On the south , the proposed canal to open a communication with the Clyde
, will make the navigation for coasters , from that river , so easy ,
that troops might be conveyed in two days from Greenock to Oban .
KNOX-1786-2,48.374

Hitherto the troops have embarked at the former place , which is subject
to the same inconveniencies from contrary winds , as the <P_49> Thames ,
or Portsmouth . KNOX-1786-2,49.375

No fleets can sail from Greenock down the Firth of Clyde with southerly
and south-west winds , which sometimes continue in that quarter four or
five weeks ; KNOX-1786-2,49.376

neither can they clear the Mull of Cantire , without some hazard of
receiving damage on those turbulent shores , or of being forced into a
port , where they might be detained some weeks . KNOX-1786-2,49.377

As I speak of these matters from a long acquaintance with that coast ,
and the effects of the winds on both sides of the peninsula of Cantire ,
I think it incumbent to state them fairly , in the hope , that sooner or
later , these suggestions may prove the means of farther investigation .
KNOX-1786-2,49.378

If any attention is to be paid to the improvement of the Highlands , and
if in return , the Highlands can be rendered more useful to the state ,
it is to be wished , that for the sake of mutual advantage , the
business may be done completely . KNOX-1786-2,49.379

<P_50>

<heading> Journal . <$$heading> KNOX-1786-2,50.381

Having given this general sketch of the south part of the West Highlands
, I shall trouble the reader with such particulars of my journey and
voyages northwards , as , I hope , will contribute to a better knowledge
of that country and people . KNOX-1786-2,50.382

When I arrived at Oban , I saw the main ocean on one side , and an
extensive line of coast on the other . KNOX-1786-2,50.383

The first presented an almost endless group {TEXT:groupe} of islands and
rocks , among which I was to cruise , amidst the rapid tides occasioned
by promontories and bold shores , where the sea is pent up sometimes
within the breadth of a mile , and runs with the velocity of the
strongest currents . KNOX-1786-2,50.384

The land exhibited one continued mass of lofty and pathless mountains ,
covered with heath , frequently with moss , and intersected at the bases
, by large bays or lakes , called <font> lochs <$$font> , which were
unavoidably to be crossed in all kinds of weather , and where the
navigation , owing to the sudden gusts <P_51> of wind from the tops of
the surrounding mountains , is often attended with danger .
KNOX-1786-2,51.385

During all my former journies {TEXT:journeys} , I had been uncommonly
fortunate in escaping accidents of any kind , by land and water .
KNOX-1786-2,51.386

Presuming on the success of these experiments , I resolved at a season
far too late , to embark on a hitherto unattempted enterprize , without
a vessel or boat , that I could call my own . KNOX-1786-2,51.387

The first cruise was to be through the Sound of Mull , a long narrow
channel , which separates that great island from Morven on the continent
. KNOX-1786-2,51.388

A course of dry weather had encouraged a hope that I would enjoy some
days , at least , of that fine season ; KNOX-1786-2,51.389

but , on the morning when I was to take my departure from Oban , the
weather was entirely changed from serenity and sunshine , to a strong
head wind , attended with rain and fog . KNOX-1786-2,51.390

To go up the Sound of Mull , even in the most favourable season , was a
dangerous experiment for a small open boat , such as Oban afforded .
KNOX-1786-2,51.391

Two brothers , of the name of Stevenson , who are traders in that place
, and to whose industry that whole <P_52> district is under great
obligations , seeing my situation , readily offered to accompany me up
the sound , in a new vessel of their own , lying in the bay .
KNOX-1786-2,52.392

" No , " said a person in company , " he shall not go in your boat ;
KNOX-1786-2,52.393

the Cumbras cutter shall land him safe in Mull . " KNOX-1786-2,52.394

- " There is not such a sailer , " said he , " in the whole Clyde ;
KNOX-1786-2,52.395

she can do every thing but speak ; KNOX-1786-2,52.396

and we have thirty-six hands which no cutter in the service can equal .
KNOX-1786-2,52.397

We take more prizes than any two of them . KNOX-1786-2,52.398

The smugglers fly , and skulk , and turn from her , as if the d-l was in
pursuit of them . KNOX-1786-2,52.399

Tho'f {COM:sic} it be an ugly day , you shall see presently , how she
will tack , and lie to in the wind's teeth . " KNOX-1786-2,52.400

Such a flattering invitation was very acceptable , KNOX-1786-2,52.401

and one of the Stevensons agreed to bear us company .
KNOX-1786-2,52.402

We embarked in the long boat , for the cutter , which lay in a snug
little bay , at the outside of Kerera . KNOX-1786-2,52.403

She is clinker_built , KNOX-1786-2,52.404

lies deep in the water , KNOX-1786-2,52.405

and though one_hundred_and_fifty tons burden , appears so small at a
distance , that smuggling vessels are thereby decoyed into situations
from whence they can@ @not escape . KNOX-1786-2,52.406

<P_53>

The person to whom I was obligated for the passage through the sound ,
was Mr. Ritchie the first mate , who commanded the vessel in the
absence of that terrible foe to illicit trade , Captain Crawfurd , who
was confined by illness . KNOX-1786-2,53.408

The men seemed to answer the character that Mr. Ritchie had given them
. KNOX-1786-2,53.409

They were stout , sober , and steady . KNOX-1786-2,53.410

They seldom swore , KNOX-1786-2,53.411

and they had saved , from 150@ @l. to 300@ @l. per man .
KNOX-1786-2,53.412

The greatest part of them had families , for whom they had built small
neat houses on the Cumbra , an island in the Firth of Clyde .
KNOX-1786-2,53.413

Captain Crawfurd set the example , by building a handsome house for
himself ; KNOX-1786-2,53.414

Mr. Ritchie erected another ; KNOX-1786-2,53.415

and in three or four years the place began to assume the appearance of a
regular town . KNOX-1786-2,53.416

Finding myself thus accommodated , I began to entertain a hope that
chance might put a smuggling vessel in our way . KNOX-1786-2,53.417

My business was , however , to collect information from Mr. Ritchie and
his people respecting the coast , the different openings or bays , the
effects of particular winds upon each bay , with other nautical
intelligence . KNOX-1786-2,53.418

Mr. Ritchie spoke very feelingly of the poor Highlanders ,
KNOX-1786-2,53.419

<P_54>

and was an enthusiast for the measures I had so often recommended .
KNOX-1786-2,54.421

Mr. Stevenson , whose knowledge of the Highlands is very extensive ,
was , if possible , still more zealous , KNOX-1786-2,54.422

and both of them gave a proof of their sincerity , by becoming
subscribers . KNOX-1786-2,54.423

Mr. Ritchie having twelve children , I proposed that he should take
only half a share . KNOX-1786-2,54.424

We were now under sail , KNOX-1786-2,54.425

and had the day been fine , the numerous islands along the coast , with
the various appearances of distant mountains on the continent , would
have produced the most magnificent views of rude nature .
KNOX-1786-2,54.426

Among the islands on the south , two lofty mountains called the Paps of
Jura overtop the whole group {TEXT:groupe} , KNOX-1786-2,54.427

and are seen at a great distance from every direction .
KNOX-1786-2,54.428

They rise in the form of a sugar loaf . KNOX-1786-2,54.429

The highest is nearly three_thousand feet , KNOX-1786-2,54.430

and <P_55> commands a most extensive prospect of the Hebrides , the
north of Ireland , Argyleshire , and the Firth of Clyde .
KNOX-1786-2,55.431

On the west , we saw the islands of Colonsay and Oransay appear as spots
in the ocean . On the east , a large fertile island , called Lismore ,
at the mouth of Loch Linnhe , a capacious lake , and navigable for the
largest ships to Fort William , which stands in the country called
Lochaber . KNOX-1786-2,55.432

The Island of Lismore , thus placed between the south channel which
leads to the Clyde , the Sound of Mull , which leads to the northern
shores , and the Linnhe Loch , which opens a communication with Fort
William , and the interior part of the Highlands , seems to merit
particular attention . KNOX-1786-2,55.433

This island contains 1,500 people ; KNOX-1786-2,55.434

is above seven miles in length , by one in breadth ; KNOX-1786-2,55.435

and being composed of lime-stone , it might be rendered the granary of
that coast . KNOX-1786-2,55.436

Hitherto it has derived little advantage from the lime-stone , owing to
the want of good peat , the neglect of timber , and still more , the
duty <P_56> upon coals . KNOX-1786-2,56.437

Thus , with the advantages of navigation , in every direction , and of a
soil lying upon the richest manure , the people are indigent , and
frequently obliged to import meal for their subsistence .
KNOX-1786-2,56.438

Many of them live a part of the year upon milk only .
KNOX-1786-2,56.439

If this be the situation of a spot naturally fertile , we may easily
conceive the distress of the parish , of which Lismore forms only a very
small part . KNOX-1786-2,56.440

This parish contains , besides Lismore , the district of Appin , Duror ,
Glen-Co , Glen-Creran , and Kingerloch ; the whole extending forty miles
in length , and inhabited by five_thousand people , who are under the
care of one minister and two missionaries . KNOX-1786-2,56.441

At the north-east end of Lismore , there is a small island , which
defends a bay , sufficiently extensive for all the purposes of fisheries
and coasting business . KNOX-1786-2,56.442

The benefits <P_57> of a port and market , both to the natives of this
island , and the shores upon the Linnhe Loch , must appear obvious to
any person who has the map or chart before him . KNOX-1786-2,57.443

After passing Lismore , we entered the narrow part of the sound ,
against both wind and tide ; an attempt which none but Mr. Ritchie , on
board the Cumbras cutter , would have thought of . KNOX-1786-2,57.444

Other vessels were bearing away for places of shelter .
KNOX-1786-2,57.445

A stranger , who seemed to be an Englishman , spoke us {COM:sic} with
the trumpet , KNOX-1786-2,57.446

and begged that we would inform him of a safe harbour or anchoring place
. KNOX-1786-2,57.447

Our commander answered him by the trumpet , in a very obliging manner ,
KNOX-1786-2,57.448

and the stranger steered immediately for port . KNOX-1786-2,57.449

The day began to mend , KNOX-1786-2,57.450

and our vessel being observed by two gentlemen on the Morven side , they
thought proper to launch their boat , and board us , to hear news .
KNOX-1786-2,57.451

The curiosity of Highlandmen , when a stranger goes among them is
proverbial . KNOX-1786-2,57.452

The lower sort generally interrogate a stranger , at the very first
interview , thus : KNOX-1786-2,57.453

" May I ask your name , Sir ? KNOX-1786-2,57.454

- From whence came you ? KNOX-1786-2,57.455

- Where <P_58> are you going . {COM:missing_close_quote}
KNOX-1786-2,58.456

There was , however , a very good reason for curiosity in the present
case : KNOX-1786-2,58.457

Mr. Ritchie had thought proper to go up the sound with colours flying ,
which , no doubt , brought these gentlemen from home ;
KNOX-1786-2,58.458

and great must their disappointment have been , when they found that
Ritchie had played a trick upon them . KNOX-1786-2,58.459

But he made them ample amends at a well furnished table in the cabin
{TEXT:cabbin} . KNOX-1786-2,58.460

Towards evening we landed at Aros , in Mull , accompanied with our
visitors ; KNOX-1786-2,58.461

and here I began to make my observations on that island .
KNOX-1786-2,58.462

The first object that presented itself , was the ruins of a considerable
building , situated immediately above the sea . KNOX-1786-2,58.463

It is called the Castle of Aros , KNOX-1786-2,58.464

and was once the residence of Macdonald of the Isles .
KNOX-1786-2,58.465

At the south entrance of the sound , we had passed another ruin , upon
the edge of the sea , called Castle Duart , <P_59> which was formerly a
seat of the chief of the Macleans , who wrested this island from the
Lord of the Isles , and by whom one half of it was ceded to the family
of Argyle , in the last century . KNOX-1786-2,59.466

Some miles west from Castle Duart stands the Castle of Moy , an ancient
seat of the Macleans of Lochbuy . KNOX-1786-2,59.467

If we are to believe the inhabitants , Mull is twenty-four Scots , or
thirty_six English miles in length , and nearly the same in breadth .
KNOX-1786-2,59.468

It contains three parishes , nine places of worship , seven churches ,
five society schools , three parochial ditto , and seven_thousand people
, who are protestants of the church of Scotland . KNOX-1786-2,59.469

The masters of the free schools have only 10@ @l. per_annum ,
KNOX-1786-2,59.470

and being generally old domestic servants , are not sufficiently
qualified for the charge committed to them . KNOX-1786-2,59.471

The whole rent of the island is from 7 to 8,000@ @l. of which the Duke
of Argyle@ @'s share is said to be 4000@ @l. KNOX-1786-2,59.472

Maclean of Lockbuy , of Toloisk , of Coll , and Kinloch Alin , possess
most of the remainder . KNOX-1786-2,59.473

Mull sends out 1,500 black cattle at 3@ @l. per head , upon an average
; some small horses , <P_60> and 300 ton {COM:sic} of kelp .
KNOX-1786-2,60.474

About two_hundred deer range among the hills , but no hares .
KNOX-1786-2,60.475

It is upon the whole , a rough , mountainous country , covered with
heath or moss ; KNOX-1786-2,60.476

but near the shores , there is some good arable land , especially on the
west side ; KNOX-1786-2,60.477

and much more might be reclaimed , if the inhabitants were allowed coals
, duty free . KNOX-1786-2,60.478

Mull is much indented by capacious bays or openings which afford the
natives an ample supply of salmon , white and shell fish .
KNOX-1786-2,60.479

There is not , in this large island , any appearance of a regular well
built village , or of manufactures , or even spinning to any extent .
KNOX-1786-2,60.480

One half of the young women are perfectly idle , except in the harvest
time , when they go to the Lowlands to shear , the earnings of which
supply them with trifling necessaries , to the amount to twenty or
twenty-four shillings . KNOX-1786-2,60.481

Combining all these circumstances ; the extent of the island ; the
number and inactive state of the inhabitants ; the want of towns ,
market , ports , and the very centrical situation of Mull for trade and
navigation , being the thoroughfare where vessels are continually
passing between Cape Wrath and the Irish Channel , one market <P_61>
town , situated on the Sound of Mull , and another on the west side of
the island , would be attended with the most beneficial consequences to
the proprietors , as well as to ten_thousand people , who inhabit Mull
and its islands , with the opposite coast of Morven and Loch Sunart .
KNOX-1786-2,61.482

Supposing a town to be built at Oban , and another upon the Island of
Lismore , we are to look for two stations in Mull , at proper distances
from these two places , and from each other . KNOX-1786-2,61.483

If nature should also favour this distribution of stations , both with
regard to distances , and the qualifications of harbours , the business
, so far as it relates to situation , seems to be decided .
KNOX-1786-2,61.484

The lochs and bays in Mull , though numerous , are not in general very
good ; KNOX-1786-2,61.485

they are either too shallow , or too open , and therefore unsafe for
vessels to run into , during stormy weather , or when the tides are low
. KNOX-1786-2,61.486

One of the most celebrated , and most frequented bays in the Highlands ,
lies , however , near the north end of the Sound of Mull ,
KNOX-1786-2,61.487

and is called Tobirmory , which signifies the Well of the Virgin Mary ,
from a little spring that is shown to strangers , and of whose qualities
<P_62> many wonderful stories have been told . KNOX-1786-2,62.488

The bay of Tobirmory is sufficiently capacious for a number of the
largest ships . KNOX-1786-2,62.489

It is sheltered by the island of Calve , which stretches along the
entrance , and leaves a passage at each extremity . KNOX-1786-2,62.490

At present the northern passage only is navigable , which is a great
defect in this bay , and might be easily remedied , at least , for the
navigation of coasting vessels , by removing some great stones that
choke {TEXT:choak} up the south passage . KNOX-1786-2,62.491

