<BEGIN_knyveton-1752-actually-gray-1937-2>

{COM:this_text_is_a_20th_century_hoax;_see_info_file_for_details}

<P_141>

<font> April 7 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.4

Did not enter in this Journal last night , being All Mazed with the
Strangeness of my surroundings ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.5

and for that matter , am still .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.6

Rose betimes yester morn , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.7

and after breaking my fast and taking a final leave of the Hunts , took
my valise in hand , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.8

and repaired to a Pawn_Shop ; having with difficulty prevented Mr. Hunt
from coming to see me off by telling him I was going to the Hospital
first ; for which small peccadilloe may God forgive me .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.9

The man who owned the Pawn_Shop naught but a Rogue ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.10

and would not give me more than two guineas for my watch ; with which I
had to be content . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.11

Then on to the Coaching House where to my Surprise I did find Mr.
Blumenfield , Mr. Pope , and Mr. St. Clair waiting for me , they
having come to give me a Send-Off .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.12

And the coach waiting in the Yard , I did climb to the outside seat that
I had taken , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.13

and the Guard blew his horn , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.14

and we drove off , my friends cheering and Mr. Pope calling after me to
" Bring Him back a Mermaid ! " at which the other passengers on the
coach were much Amused . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.15

The day fine , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.16

and I rather glad thereat , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.17

for I was somewhat downcast in my spirits .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,141.18

<P_142>

But I took pleasure after a while in the ride ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.20

and could look about me with enjoyment , the country just commencing
Spring Time and the buds showing on the trees .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.21

But when we had covered scarce half our journey , and were out on the
first marshes , the Off Leader shies at a hen flying across the road ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.22

and before we had scarce time to think what was afoot , the Coach
lurches , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.23

and then tumbles over into a ditch , the road being soft with mud at
that point . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.24

The ditch was deep KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.25

so none was hurt bad ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.26

but two women inside began to scream most piercing , being badly shook
in their wits ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.27

and one gentleman was thrown clean off the roof into a hedge
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.28

and was hauled out by Yr. Obdt. Servant and the Guard all abroad in
<font> his <$$font> Wits . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.29

The horses were in an aweful Tangle , kicking and struggling so that it
was as much as the Coachman could do to calm them ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.30

the Guard and a gentleman in a bottle_green coat went to aid him ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,142.31

and after some twenty minutes and much hard swearing of Oaths the horses
were got free of their harness and taken up on to the road ; when it was
found that the bay leader was lame in the near fore , and I to bathe the
swelling then coming up with water from the ditch , and at the Guard's
suggestion to bleed the beast also at the neck : the Guard observing in
a Hoarse Whisper that I might bleed the Females also , they still
screaming faintly at regular intervals , like he informed me the Watch
Guns of <P_143> the Revenue Men .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.32

The coach was wedged firm between the banks of the ditch , one wheel
being out of sight , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.33

and the Coachman and the Guard both agreed that it was probably cracked
. KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.34

We did all get together and endeavour to push the coach free ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.35

but its weight was against us , so that after some sweating we did
desist , and turn to helping the ladies from within ; they vowing that
their bones were all broke to little pieces and they could not stir , no
, not for the Judgement day , and more to the same effect ; at which the
Guard loses patience , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.36

and wrenching the door open grabbed what his hand found
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.37

and hauled the first lady on to the road , her screams breaking out anew
as he slipped an arm round her waist to prevent her slipping into the
ditch . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.38

The other lady within also began to scream at this Brutality of the
Guard , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.39

and protested that she would not be hauled out like a sack of Malt ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.40

and began to stab with her parasol so that the Guard took off his hat
and scratched his head in Bewilderment .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.41

Only the gentleman in the bottle_green coat puts him aside ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.42

and bending as elegantly as he might under the circumstances , removes
his head-gear KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.43

and inserts his poll within the coach ; at which a fresh burst of
screams from the lady , dying away most strangely as the gentleman , a
pleasant looking fellow enough , says " that he begs her humblest
apologies for Discommoding her ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,143.44

but the position of the coach being Somewhat insecure , Might <P_144> he
have the Honour to assist her to the Road ? " this with a very winning
smile ; at which the lady goes all of a flutter , says she really does@
@n't know - KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.45

perhaps the coach is insecure -
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.46

it might be as well to alight - if the gentleman will excuse her
deshaibill√© - KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.47

she is mortified to find herself in such straits -
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.48

she is but a poor helpless Woman -
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.49

if the gentleman perhaps would take pity on her - if the gentleman could
- KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.50

and the gentleman with another smile <font> does , <$$font>
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.51

and hands her very gently to the road , she giving a squeak at seeing
the empty ditch beneath the coach step and clinging to his arm , looking
slyly up at her Preserver with a most arch smile ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.52

then when set on her feet beside the other decides to exercise the
Prerogative of Her Sex to have the Vapours ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.53

and the other not to be outdone joins her ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.54

and they both go off in the Hystericks ; at which the guard runs to the
ditch , fills his hat with water , and running back again , was about to
Throw It All Over Both of Them ; only again is put aside by the
gentleman in the bottle_green coat who falls to one knee beside the lady
he had helped out of the coach and fondling her hand murmurs Endearments
to her , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.55

and I to assist the other Female . At which , she finding that no other
gentleman comes to <font> her <$$font> aid , and the wench with the
gallant not desiring to lose any chance of Romance , they both came
round as suddenly as they had gone off ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,144.56

and I began to hunt in my valise for my Iv'ry_Handled Lancets , with
<P_145> intent to bleed the gentleman thrown from the coach top ; which
I did , he becoming quite Sane thereby , and thanking me heartily for my
Timely Aid . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,145.57

An argument arises between the Coachman and the Guard as to what should
be done next ; the road being deserted and it imperative that Someone go
for Help ; but the Guard refusing to leave his Mails , and the Coachman
his horses ; it finally being settled that another gentleman , a Farmer
, should take one of the team and ride off for assistance ; which he did
, and the Coachman to suggest that we passengers should walk on to the
next Posting House ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,145.58

but the ladies showing signs of Hystericks at this idea , we did all
stay , not helped thereby by a fine drizzle that began to fall ; which
did make us all miserable , except the wag in the bottle_green coat , to
whom it gave fresh opportunities for gallantry .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,145.59

After nigh two hours the Farmer returns with fresh horses and Assistance
, KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,145.60

and the coach was dragged out of the ditch and the team harnessed afresh
; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,145.61

only , that wheel which had hung in the ditch being thought insecure ,
it was decided that only the ladies should ride within , and the team
proceed at a walk . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,145.62

So we set off , one lady sulking , the other not caring at all as the
gentleman in the bottle_green coat was walking outside clasping her hand
through the window , she all enveloped in his cape and fair enough to
look at , as I think the little rogue well knew , <P_146> being dark and
petite , her curls shown up against the green collar of his cape .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.63

It took us an hour more to reach the Posting House ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.64

and we were glad enough when we reached it to find Mine Host had
prepared a meal both of hot and cold meats , with Tea for the ladies ,
and Wine and Ale for the gentlemen .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.65

There were sausages and eggs and ham , with pork-pies and brawn , and a
side of beef , with a crusty new loaf and salt and fresh butter ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.66

and as there was moreover a roaring fire we were all greatly comforted .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.67

There was another coach in the yard ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.68

but this had to be prepared , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.69

and it was past dusk when we once more took our seats , and gone seven
before I alighted at Blackstakes .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.70

This naught but a cottage and an ale house , from which rose a most
noisy chorus . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.71

The coach rumbled away almost before I had alighted
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.72

and feeling most Vilely Low in Spirits I did stand looking about me
wondering what to do . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.73

The rain had ceased , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.74

but the marshes were all covered with a low mist in which the coach
lamps were speedily lost . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.75

I knocked at the Ale House door
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.76

and receiving no answer entered , to find as thick a fog within as out ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.77

only that within doors was caused by the mingled fumes of a smoky fire
and the coarsest of tobacco . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.78

The place was full of sailors , the landlord sitting in their midst ,
and one of the seamen with a girl <paren> I found after to be his
daughter <$$paren> upon his knee .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,146.79

They were bawling some Sea Chanty as I <P_147> entered ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.80

but on my coming into the room they did all cease
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.81

and gazed at me as though I was some strange wonder risen from their
Seas . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.82

Addressing the landlord , I asked if he could tell me aught of the Sixth
Rate Vessel Lancaster , where she was lying , whether at Dock side or in
the roads ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.83

but at this the fellow with the girl on his knee puts her to the ground
with a " Cheerily , lass ! " KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.84

and steps up to me , enquiring civilly enough what my business with that
ship might be . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.85

He was a brawny fellow , with a mass of close-@ @cropped curls , better
dressed than his companions , in white linen shorts , woollen stockings
, and heavy shoes ; a striped shirt and a thick blue coat ; and a silver
whistle hung from a lanyard about his neck .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.86

He spoke as one having some authority ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.87

and I told him that I was newly appointed Surgeon's Mate to the
Lancaster ; on which he roars out " Lads ! Here@ @'s our new sawbones !
" KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.88

and then offering me a sinewy hand all stained with tar , adds " Shake
hands , my bully , with Ned Tollit , bosun of the Lancaster ! "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.89

and as I hesitated , says again , " Come shake , lad !
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.90

We@ @'re all glad to welcome our new shipmate ! "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.91

and gives my hand a squeeze that nigh crushed the bones in it .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.92

I asked him how I was to get on ship ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.93

but he informs me that the sailors there gathered were my only means of
getting aboard , the ship lying out some distance in the roads , and no
wherryman would venture out in the mist .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,147.94

He told me also that very few officers were then present , most of them
being <P_148> away and joining the ship at Portsmouth in two days ; only
a Lieutenant in charge , and he ashore , so that there would be no one
to report to until the morning .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.95

" Come KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.96

and sit ye down , chum ! " says Ned , throwing a great arm round my
shoulders . " KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.97

There is naught to worry ye . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.98

We will take ye with us when we go ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.99

and Ned Tollit will show you your quarters ! "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.100

and thus constrained I joined the company , feeling very strange amongst
such fellows , whose bronzed faces and tattooed arms spoke of the
Hazardous lives they led . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.101

But I found them although rough the kindliest of fellows ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.102

each one of them was anxious to shake my hand and force drink on me and
so make me feel at Ease ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.103

and after the worthy bosun had insisted on my drinking a glass of rum
with him to celebrate my arrival , I found my Lowness of Spirits quite
gone ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.104

and learnt the words of sundry Sea-Songs , so that when they at last
rose to go I already felt myself one of them .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.105

We left the Ale house KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.106

and walked for some few minutes until we reached the shore , where we
found the ship's boat drawn up ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.107

and the worthy Ned tumbled me into it
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.108

and the seamen pushed off , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.109

and he took a place beside me in the sternsheets to direct us .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,148.110

And so we reached the Lancaster , she looming up sudden out of the mist
after the sailors had pulled for some quarter of an hour , and I to
marvel how they found their way , until Ned Tollit <P_149> points out to
me the tips of her masts sticking from the top of the fog-bank .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.111

She carried two riding lights , lanterns slung from spars ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.112

but no one answered Ned's hail ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.113

and he fell to cursing the Watch something to marvel at , saying that
the Lubbers had belike Gone and Turned in , there being no one to Keep
them Alert ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.114

and so lets out a Howl that nigh split my ear-drums ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.115

and gets in response a very faint cry ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.116

and as we slipped along the ship's side a seaman appears at the rail
above us KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.117

and throws a rope , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.118

and Ned falls to cursing him again .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.119

I was by that time Most Infernally Fatigued ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.120

and had only time to note the single row of gun-ports before Ned pushes
a rope into my hand and gives me a Heave that near scattered my brains
on the trap of one of the gun-ports aforesaid ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.121

and so I scrambled somehow to the deck ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.122

and was gaped at by the Watch as though I was King Neptune himself come
aboard ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.123

and then Ned climbs over beside me ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.124

and leads me forward to a cabin {TEXT:cabinn} beneath the gun-deck just
abaft the Fore-Mast ; the Mast driving down to the bowels of the ship
right through my cabin {TEXT:cabbinn} , its bulk forming as support for
the door and a shelf on which was placed , inside a wooden rack , a
large wood chest . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.125

There was a bunk behind it , and a swivel chair ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.126

and that was all the furnishing , the room being small so that I could
scarce stand upright in it , and have to be careful in stretching my
arms that I do not knock the skin off my knuckles against the walls .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,149.127

<P_150>

In front of my door was a round space , with an alley running across
from one side of the ship to the other ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.129

two ladders rose from this alley to the deck above ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.130

and Ned explains that the round space is the Cock-Pit to which the
wounded and sick are brought , and that the alley leads to a magazine
and the sailor's quarters in the Forecastle <paren> Pronounced - Foc'sle
<$$paren> . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.131

I put my valise on the bunk KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.132

and remarked smiling to Ned that my quarters were small but cosy , and
that the ship seemed stout enough ; to which he gave a great bellow of
Laughter , and says in the affectionate manner of which a Man will speak
of his Mistress " She was a damned Old Baggage , and like to go to the
bottom on her Next Voyage - KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.133

but there , he did@ @n't give a Rush ! "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.134

and then touches his forelock KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.135

and begs to be excused ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.136

and I left to myself , to unpack my box , and climb into my bunk ; where
despite the Strangeness of my new bed , I straightway fell asleep ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.137

the last sound I heard was Ned Tollit's voice calling on the seamen to
make the boat fast . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.138

The first sound that awoke me this morning was the same Ned Tollit's
voice and a rumbling noise on deck ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.139

and I rose in haste , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.140

and was half dressed when there was a knock at the door
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.141

and opening it I found an urchin with an ewer of hot water , very
acceptable to shave with ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.142

and then I made my way on deck , where I found friend Ned conducting
three sailors who were washing down the decks .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,150.143

{COM:illustration_omitted}

<P_151>

The mist of the night before had cleared
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.146

and I had a fine view of the distant marshes and the sea all sparkling
in the early morning sunlight ; the crying of the gulls and the chanting
of the three sailors blending curiously to make a Harmonious Whole .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.147

Ned comes up to me , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.148

and enquires " How I found my new Dock ? "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.149

and then informs me that Breakfast was awaiting me in the Saloon
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.150

and directs me thither , where food was served me by a very old man
whose age I found on enquiry to be eighty-two years , he having served
in His Majesty's Navy since a boy , and seen thereby more sea-fights
than he could count . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.151

The food very plain and somewhat coarse , but plentiful ; cold meat ,
bread and butter , with the choice of Ale or Coffee as drink ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.152

I did choose Coffee , having had enough of Liquor the night previous ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.153

and so I finished , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.154

and on deck again . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.155

The Lancaster is a well found ship , being newly built ; and carrying 24
guns , to wit , twenty nine-pounders on the Main Gun Deck and four
three_pounders , two on the quarter deck and two on the forecastle .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.156

Her burthen is 504 tons , and her complement 172 men fighting strength .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.157

These facts I learnt later , as I had scarce glanced around me with keen
interest when Ned Tollit approaches and knuckling his forehead asks "
Would I be good enough to see one - two men who were sick ? " to which
of course I agreed , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.158

and so down to the Cockpit , where I found three sailors gathered .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,151.159

A glance at <P_152> these showed me that my first cases as a Ships
Chirurgeon were naught serious ; one man suffering from a Surfeit of
Drink , which I eased with a purge and acid drink ; another a boil at
the back of his neck , which I lanced ; and the third an Exfoliation of
the skin of his ear very tender , which I eased with an ointment that I
had with me in my valise ; there being I discovered some drugs in a
wooden chest screwed to the wall of the cockpit , but these few in
number and of poor quality . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.160

The sailors did not seem worried in any@ @way about their Trifling
Complaints , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.161

and I think had come to see what manner of man I was ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.162

by the time I had done with the last quite a number of their companions
were gathered about , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.163

and all seemed somewhat surprised that I took so much trouble with them
, and to talk with them . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.164

Then the Lieutenant comes aboard , and I to his cabin to report ; he a
young spark mighty supercilious , who informs me that the Lancaster is
captained <paren> or commanded it seems is the correct term <$$paren> by
the Honourable John Hamilton ; as though Royalty were coming aboard at
Portsmouth ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.165

then seeing that I was not duly impressed the Spark gets up saying he
had work to do and would shortly have some work for me ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.166

and goes up on deck KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.167

and calls Ned Tollit , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.168

and Ned falls to blowing his silver whistle
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.169

and six seamen run up all armed with cutlasses ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,152.170

and then they and Ned and the Lieutenant get into the <P_153> boat
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.171

and it pulls away for the shore ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.172

and I fill a Pipe of Tobacco - a habit I have newly acquired -
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.173

and seating myself in the bows on a coil of rope , whence I had a view
over the length of the ship , sat and smoked
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.174

and Mused on all these new changes in my life .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.175

The sun was then quite warm , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.176

and the morning passed very Agreeably , I finding much to Intrigue my
Interest and Excite my Curiosity ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.177

I did admire on the one hand the manner in which the Masts and Spars of
this ship my new home towered to the sky , very graceful ; and on the
other the Grim Utility of the brass carronades on the forecastle beside
me ; being thereby reminded of the Old Stave :
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.178

Bold were the Men who on the Ocean first Spread the new Sails , when
Ship-wreck was the worst ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.179

More dangers Now {TEXT:NOW} from Man {TEXT::MAN} alone we find Than from
the Rocks , the Billows , and the Wind .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.180

... and from that fell to regarding the Sea that Dimpled and Rippled so
near me ; whence rising from my seat I could see trailing from the ship
side the Long Streamers of the Sea Weeds , with shoals of tiny fish
playing amongst their Forest Recesses : marvelling at their nimbleness
and wondering what Quaint Structures might thereat be revealed by the
Microscope of Mr. Kelly . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.181

Dinner was served at twelve by the old cook in the same Saloon in which
I had breakfasted ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.182

and after it I slept awhile , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,153.183

and awoke to find Ned and <P_154> the Lieutenant still absent , and to
wonder what they were at ; and so to pass the time to enter all this in
my Journal . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.184

As dusk was falling however they returned ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.185

I had then gone on deck to take the Air , when my attention was catched
by sundry seamen running to the side all laughing and cheering ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.186

and crossing to that Landward side , did observe the boat returning , as
yet little more than a speck , but a speck that swelled and grew small
in manner Amazing ; whence I did see as it approached that this Systole
and Diastole was caused by three New Strangers in the boat , they
seemingly very Restless ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.187

and so as the boat drew still nearer I did see that these were three
likely lads empressed by the Lieutenant and his sailors , they having
gone ashore to recruit seamen , being armed as these Press Gangs are
greatly feared and hated by the landsmen .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.188

One man was quieter than the others ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.189

but his two companions were Wrestling and Fighting so that every minute
I expected to see the boat overturn ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.190

and when it was still some distance from the ship one Valiant Rogue
suddenly jumps up KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.191

and springs into the Sea ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.192

only as he swum past the boat's stern , the Lieutenant snatches off the
Tiller Bar KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.193

and crowns him with it , so that he was Stunned and like to have sunk ,
only that one of the Sailors pushes his oar under his arms and so holds
him until other seamen lean over and drag him once more into the boat .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,154.194

And so they were brought to the Ship's side , the <P_155> Lieutenant
cursing because Salvaging the wight had soaked his Breeches , one of the
Impressed men crying aloud on them to Have Mercy on him for the sake of
his young wife , she seemingly very sick , one all wet and insensible ,
and the third Quiet with the Resignation of Despair ; and all three very
bloody and bruised , as were most of their captors .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.195

But what was my Amazement to recognise in the Resigned Man my friend the
Consumptive of Infirmary Hall ! He having grown heavy with flesh and
his face rosy so that I scarce knew him .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.196

As Ned Tollit hoisted him to the deck I took his hand
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.197

and asked him if he knew Me ; at which he stares at me agape ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.198

and then his face lights up , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.199

and he falls to his knees , clasping my hands , and saying that he
thanked God for having sent him one friend ; at which I did see some of
the sailors glancing curious at him ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.200

only the Lieutenant comes up swearing
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.201

and kicks him to his feet saying , " Get below , dog ! "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.202

and so he and the others were hustled off to the seamen's quarters , the
stunned man being brought into the Cockpit for my attention .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.203

He was then coming to his wits ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.204

and on my bleeding him recovered them completely ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.205

and so I to tell Ned to get him to a bunk out of way of the Lieutenant ,
he being much bruised having evidently made a fight for it ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.206

and would be little good for anything till he had had a night's rest .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,155.207

I supped with the Lieutenant in the <P_156> Saloon , never speaking as
his manner was very offensive ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.208

and so after another Pipe to my cabbinn , where finishing this I will
Turn In , as they say in the Navy .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.209

<font> April 10 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.210

Today we lie outside the Harbour of Portsmouth .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.211

Early yester morning we weighed anchor with much cheery noise , the
Carpenter seating himself on the capstan and playing a tune on his
fiddle to which the seamen spun the bars , they all singing the refrain
Oh , there was a little drummer
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.212

and he loved a one_eyed cook ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.213

And he loved her , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.214

Oh , he loved her though she had a cock-eyed look , With her one eye in
the pot , and the t'other up the chimney , With a Bow-wow-wow , Fal-lal
the dow-a - diddy , etc. KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.215

Then when the Anchor had come up all muddy and green and dripping with
water and been safely Catted , the Lieutenant , pacing up and down the
quarter Deck with his glass under his arm , very fierce barks an order
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.216

and the Quartermaster shouts ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.217

and Ned Tollit blows his whistle ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.218

and the seamen run to the Halliards
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.219

and Swarm out along the Spars with a nimbleness that did amaze me .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.220

The carpenter struck up another tune ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,156.221

and a tall sailor with a fine melodious though untrained voice strikes
up : <P_157> Oh , blow the man down , bullies , blow the man down ! To
which the sailors did all respond as they hauled at the Halliards To me
, Way-ay , blow the man down !
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.222

Then the tall seaman again : Oh , blow the man down , bullies ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.223

blow him away ! KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.224

and his messmates : Oh ! Gim@ @me some time to blow the man down !
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.225

And so through sundry verses until the sails bellied out and , the wind
being fair , we set off to the Open Sea ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.226

and I mighty excited , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.227

and to walk about until outside the bar the ship began to rise and fall
very disturbing ; so that when dinner came I had no stomach for my Meat
, and in the Afternoon felt that Death was surely approaching me ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.228

but was somewhat cheered by the worthy Ned , who visited me with a bowl
of soup and informed me that this Upheaval of Man's Economy was but the
price paid by all to Neptune ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.229

and so I managed to compose myself for sleep ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.230

and was this morning fairly recovered , though still somewhat Queasy .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.231

The wind continuing fair , we made reasonable progress ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,157.232

and this afternoon came in sight of our Harbour , anchoring outside in
the Roads amongst a great profusion of <P_158> ships of all sizes and
callings ; round_bellied merchantmen , clippers from the Indie Seas ,
and Naval vessels also , gun boats , sloops , fourth and third_raters ,
and one mighty Line_of_Battle_Ship called Ned informs me the Ramillies ,
carrying one_hundred guns of all sizes .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.233

Most of our ship's company have gone ashore , including to my relief the
Lieutenant <paren> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.234

His name by the way is Mr. Duhamel <$$paren> ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.235

but I have elected to stay aboard , my legs still being weak .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.236

Shall to bed as soon as this is wrote , though it is only just gone nine
of the clock by the ship's bell .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.237

<font> April 11 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.238

Today we have lain in the roadstead , the motion of the ship being
somewhat erratic , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.239

but to my delight no Illness to me thereby ; the which I take as fair
proof that I have now acquired my Sea Legs .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.240

This morning did attend sundry wights in the Cockpit ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.241

and meeting with the Consumptive did talk with him awhile ; he informing
me that he had greatly benefited by his sojourn with his uncle , this
worthy determined to get some return for his Hospitality before his
nephew died , and so getting him up early in the morning and setting him
to work about the farmyard and in the fields by day ; teaching him much
about sheep , the which was the Consumptive's undoing ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,158.242

for going down to the country near Black-stakes to report on a Flock ,
he was dining in an Alehouse when the Pressgang breaks in ; at which he
<P_159> being near the door was promptly secured though one wight with
him jumps through a window and so escapes .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.243

He is now seemingly quite cured of his Distemper ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.244

says that he has no cough , and , curiously , that he has now no desire
to spin poetry ; the which Rhyming I take it is one of those devices
employed by Thoughtful Nature to distract the Sufferers Wits from his
Complaint . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.245

His two companions are now resigned to their lot , though the one with
the wife Broods Much , and Ned Tollit keeps a wary eye on him lest he
break out Frantic and throw himself overboard .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.246

The ship very busy today , some Officers coming aboard , the most very
foxed ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.247

and we have also taken aboard a Great Quantity of Stores , Cags of
Gunpowder and Flour , Crates with Vegetables and some Conies and
Chickens , Sail Cloth , and sundries for the Carpenter , Casks of Water
and Pickled Meat , Cartridges and Buckets of Cannon_Balls and Small Arm
Shot for the Musketeers ; so that the deck has nigh been invisible
beneath their load , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.248

and the sailors running hither and thither I have spent most of my time
beneath Deck . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.249

This night the Commander has come aboard to see that all is progressing
satisfactorily . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.250

I have not yet met him , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.251

and shall see but little of him ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.252

for as the Jove of this Aquatic Olympus he lives the most of his
sea-life in his Great Cabbinn in the stern .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,159.253

<P_160>

<font> April 12 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.255

Sunday , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.256

and did see our Commander , he taking a short service in the middle of
the morning , the Chaplain being sick ashore .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.257

The service very impressive , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.258

the men all gathered in the Waist with their Officers ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.259

the Bosun , the Gunner and Gunner's Mate , and the Quartermasters
standing in front , with the First , and Second Lieutenants and the
Midshipmen standing in a little group in front of them ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.260

the Marines and the First and Second Marine Officers with their
Musketeers facing the Lieutenants and the Commander and the First Marine
Officer on the Poop , with the Carpenter standing by with his fiddle ,
and the Master to con the ship that naught might go awry whilst we paid
our duties to God . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.261

Yr. Obdt. Servant stood with the Midshipmen ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.262

and had thereby a fine view of our Commander , he a tall elderly man
with something of a crack in his voice .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.263

The day being fine all passed off well ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.264

and we could hear the singing from the rest of the Fleet .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.265

Being Sunday little work was done save that essential to securing the
ship , the men lying about on deck mending their clothes and shaving ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.266

and the carpenter with his fiddle was greatly in request , there being
much singing . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.267

More sailors arrived tonight , and also the Lancaster's Surgeon , Mr.
Nadauld ; in whom I was delighted to find an old friend of my father's ,
they having been students together at Hospital .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,160.268

He has a fine Cabbinn towards the after end of the ship , <P_161> near
the Officer's Quarters , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,161.269

and conducted me thither , very kindly giving me a glass of wine and
asking me concerning myself and my father ; expressing Great Sorrow to
hear my father was dead . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,161.270

He then informs me that this His Present Post was but a stepping stone
to Greater Things , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,161.271

and says that if I will be diligent and conscientious about my Duties ,
he will see that I am made a Full Surgeon at the end of the Year ; which
I took very kindly of him , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,161.272

for oft such as I have to wait a weary time before receiving Advancement
. KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,161.273

He did then pass to speaking of the ship , saying that the Lancaster
though small and a sixth rater was a Gentleman's Vessel , all the
officers being of Good Family ; this to lead to my own affairs , he
desiring that I should clothe myself more fitly ; and I to acquaint him
of the State of my Purse ; on which he laughs , and says that he will
arrange with the Commander that I receive an advance of Pay ; which I
thanked him heartily for . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,161.274

So to bed , once more sensible of the manner in which God is troubling
over my affairs ; so that this being finished I will to my knees to
thank Him most Humbly and Deeply .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,161.275

<font> April 13 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,161.276

An uproar this early morning .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,161.277

The man with the wife impressed at Blackstakes did sneak from his
Hammock and attempt to get into a small boat secured at the stern ; from
which he was prevented <P_162> by the Marine posted at the Alley leading
to the Officer's Cabbinn ; this man's musket going off in his grappling
with the poor wight , so that the whole ship was aroused and the man
secured and bound with strong ropes by the Watch .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.278

He was then thrust into the Bilboes until after breakfast ; when
Commander Hamilton and three other Officers sit in Judgement on him ;
finding him guilty of Attempted Desertion , so that he was sentenced to
be flogged . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.279

But his circumstances being taken into account , and our Commander being
a merciful man he was given only two_dozen lashes .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.280

The crew and the Marines were summoned ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.281

and all arranging themselves as yesterday the man was roped with his
arms above his head to the Mainmast ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.282

and then Ned Tollit lays on the lashes with a Tarred Rope with split
ends ; the wight proving sullen until the fourteenth stroke , when his
Fortitude deserted him with a Loud Shriek ; on which Mr. Nadauld steps
forward and takes his pulse , and then nods to Commander Hamilton , who
gives the signal to continue ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.283

and Ned lays on the rest , the man fainting at the twentieth blow ; when
a sailor hands Ned a bucket of water which he slings over him ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.284

and then he being semiconscious Ned gives him the rest as mere love taps
; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.285

and the man was cut down and hurried below ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.286

and Mr. Nadauld comes over to me
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,162.287

and says that I can attend him ; which I do , going below to find the
Flogged Man on his Stomach on the floor of the <P_163> Foc'sle , his
mates all bent over him ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.288

and so to Minister to him , rubbing salt into the wounds and pouring a
measure of rum down his throat ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.289

and so to get him into his Hammock ; wondering I must confess whether
such Treatment is like to make a good sailor of him ; he being already
so crazed that Whipping is like to turn him into a Savage Beast .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.290

And so up on deck again , to find more Trouble ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.291

for a seaman due to return the night before had just come alongside Very
Drunk in a wherryman's boat ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.292

and Commander Hamilton looks down at him ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.293

and then cries furiously to get him on deck ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.294

and then shouts to Ned Tollit , " Show me that Drunken Rascal's Backbone
! " KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.295

and so he was triced up to the Mainmast
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.296

and Ned flogs him until his arm began to weaken ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.297

but though the sot had then received Thirty One Lashes and had passed
from drunkenness to sobriety and so again to insensibility , still
Commander Hamilton urged him to lay on ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.298

and did not cry " Cease ! " until the man had received forty lashes
more ; by which time the flesh was most cut from his back ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.299

and then the Commander seeing that he could not be revived with
sea-water as heretofore , orders him to be cut down ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.300

and he was , and carried below , this time , at my bidding , to the
Cockpit ; where on examination I found the bones of his ribs exposed in
two places KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,163.301

and so to dress the gashes , wondering whether he would recover ; which
I very much doubt , his Vital Spirits surely being shook <P_164> badly
with Drink and the Subsequent Punishment .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.302

And so to the deck once more , where I found Mr. Nadauld taking the air
; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.303

and with him to the Captain's Great Cabbinn , where we found sundry
officers gathered , amongst them Lieutenant Duhamel , they taking wine
with Commander Hamilton , who enquires our business ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.304

and Mr. Nadauld to remind him that he had spoken to him about me ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.305

and so the Commander laughs , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.306

and stares at me , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.307

and says that I certainly look as though I need fresh Linen ; at which
Mr. Duhamel assents , remarking that I stank like an Ostler ; at which
all laugh , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.308

and then the Commander gives me a Paper to take to the Purser ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.309

and then as I took my leave , says that I have seen something of Navy
Discipline that morning , and that the Fortitude with which the Rascals
of Sailors learn to withstand flogging is the Reason why they are so
Invincible in Battle ; and more to the same effect ; adding that he
hoped for G-d's sake I was a good Chirurgeon ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.310

for he could not afford to lose any men , being already short_handed ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.311

and so gives me leave to go ashore ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.312

and I to the purser to hand him my Paper
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.313

and thereby received five pounds , this being two months advance pay ,
and which was a great relief to me .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.314

I had to wait till after Dinner to get ashore , when the Gunner and
Gunner's Mate took boat to the Ordnance Yard ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.315

and so I got ashore . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,164.316

Portsmouth is a town of medium size , like to be eclipsed by the <P_165>
Neighbouring Suburb of Portsea , which is almost as big and still
growing , many of the merchants having their houses there to be away
from the streets of Portsmouth which is a Garrisoned Town and it's
{COM:sic} roads thereby crowded not only with Sailors but Soldiers ,
their conduct very often Most Reprehensible .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,165.317

The only building that interested me in Portsmouth was the fine stone
fort newly built at the Southern end of the High Street .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,165.318

It is of course only fitting that a city whose history <paren> I learn
<$$paren> dates from a founding by Richard the Lion_Hearted King of
England should be filled with the Appurtenances and Preparation for War
, KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,165.319

but I did grow tired of the Soldiers and the jostling of them , fights
betwixt them and the Sailors being common ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,165.320

and so after equipping myself with a new pair of breeches , four shirts
, two cravats , five pair of stockings , and a fine Naval Blue Coat -
His Gracious Majesty King George having grown enamoured of a blue riding
coat faced with white worn by the Duchess of Bedfordshire , and thereby
desiring all holding posts in the Navy to change from Red Uniforms to
Blue set with White - I did therefore take my parcels
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,165.321

and repaired to a quiet Inn by the Waterfront , where I seated myself by
the window having a fine view of the ships and the distant Isle of Wight
; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,165.322

and there did take a stoup of wine and a small collation , marvelling at
the merchantmen , which carry cattle and merchandise round from the
Essex and Kent coasts and <P_166> from Ireland , and at the black hulls
of the Warships . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.323

But Lord , I had been there but scarce a half-hour when I hear a great
outcry in the street ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.324

and all those present did snatch up their hats and run out ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.325

and I was left , wondering at the awkward gait of a young Spark dressed
as a Sailor , who had been seated with a Gallant a little older , also
dressed as a Sailor , a little way from me .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.326

I to my feet , wondering what was to do ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.327

and then peering from the window see a Pressgang from our ship securing
the Spark and the Gallant with him , and much noise thereby ; the Spark
screaming most amazing and the Gallant laying about him with his cane
until one of the Sailors knocks it from his hand .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.328

And then our First Lieutenant Mr. Rose comes running ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.329

and the Gallant seizes him by his cravat ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.330

and the Lieutenant asks what is afoot ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.331

and one of the sailors knuckles his forehead
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.332

and says they have catched two likely Recruits ; at which the Gallant
falls to swearing he is a Gentleman ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.333

and Mr. Rose with some heat pulls his neck-cloth
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.334

and replies that Gentry or no , he was taking him aboard ; at which the
Spark takes to screaming again ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.335

and the Lieutenant remarks that he has a Remarkable Shrill Voice ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.336

and one Sailor securing him with an Arm around his waist says with a
Grin that he believes him to be no Man but a Woman ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.337

and the Spark breaks to blubbing
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.338

and snatches off his Straw Hat ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,166.339

and Lord it was a Woman in truth , as a great mass of yellow curls comes
rippling down <P_167> to testify .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.340

Mr. Rose makes a bow to this Hermaphrodite ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.341

and begs her Humblest Pardon ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.342

and she falls to entreating him that he will let them both go , they
being in Sailor's dress to go to a Masque to be held at some Lord's
house the same afternoon ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.343

and the Lieutenant looks at her , being loath I could see to let the
Gallant go , having taken a dislike to him ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.344

and one of the Sailors says with another grin that they being dressed as
sailors they should surely secure one of them ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.345

and the Gallant bursts out cursing again , saying that they were both
dressed as Sailors , and therefore it was as sensible to take either of
them ; to which the Seaman replied , staring at the wench's hair ; " Aye
, but Moll there d'@ @ye see carries too much sail in her head-tops and
top-gallants to be a good craft to cruise along with ! "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.346

and the wench makes a set at him
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.347

and tries to scratch his eyes out .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.348

So the Lieutenant at this display of temper bursts out laughing also ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.349

and noting the Firmness of the Lady's mouth , says to the Gallant , " Go
your way ! KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.350

But shortly you will , t@ @is plain , set out to sea as a Hen_Pecked
Frigate ! " KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.351

and so they left them , the wench reviling her protector that he did not
forthright demand Redress from the Lieutenant ; which one could scarce
expect him in Sanity to do , Mr. Rose being taller by a good Head and
Shoulders . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,167.352

Later when returned to the ship did see Mr. Rose returning with his men
and four unlucky wights , one still holding a cook's wooden spoon , he
<P_168> having been at his Oven when they secured him .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.353

Tomorrow I learn we set forth with the Fleet on a cruise .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.354

<font> April 14 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.355

This morning before breakfast I did repair to the Foc'sle to see how the
men flogged yesterday did fare , the seamen I noted somewhat surprised
at my visit . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.356

Found both of them in much pain , the Consumptive John Barlow
ministering to them , he having picked up something of Physic and
Surgery during his sojourn at the Infirmary .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.357

As both had some degree of Fever did bleed 'em both ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.358

the Drunk Man whose bones were exposed I do not think will live , he
complaining of pains in his chest .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.359

And so to breakfast with the Under_Officers in the Saloon , afterwards
taking the air upon the deck ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.360

there to meet with Mr. Nadauld also walking ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.361

and he to enquire as to the two flogged men ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.362

and then straightway to ask me whether I did not think Commander
Hamilton a very Agreeable and Condescending Man ; to which I assented ,
having a mind to add that having met him but once I could not as yet
have formed any opinion of him of Real Worth ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.363

but thought it imprudent to do so .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.364

And then the Officers came on deck , and after some little time our
Captain ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.365

and much shouting , and blowing of Ned Tollit's whistle ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.366

and so to the tune of the Carpenter's fiddle the anchor was brought up ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,168.367

and the Tall Singing Sailor <P_169> strikes up a new ditty , called , I
believe , Drops Of Brandy , very appropriate for sailors .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.368

Seaman : And why should I not love Johnny ?
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.369

Chorus : And why should not Johnny love me ?
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.370

Seaman : And why should I not love Johnny ?
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.371

Chorus : As well as another bodie ! etc.
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.372

Then the Commander bawled new orders , passed on by the Master ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.373

and the Fore Sheets were unfurled and the Sprit Sail unreefed , the
Singing Sailor thereby striking up a new song , very jolly : Seaman : We
hove to our ships when the wind was sou'west , lads .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.374

Chorus : We hove to our ships for to strike soundings clear .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.375

Seaman : Then we filled our main tops'ls ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.376

and bore right away , boys , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.377

Chorus : And right up the Channel our course we did steer !
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.378

and the men both on the Yards as well as the deck singing , the ship
Rang with music , very enjoyable .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.379

The day was fine , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.380

and across the sunny waters we could hear the singing of the sailors of
the other Ships of the Fleet ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.381

and I to think that despite its manifold hardships there was no life so
fit for a Man as that of a Sailor's .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,169.382

Our Fleet did consist of the Commodore on board the Flagship the great
Line_of_Battle_ship the Ramillies ; a frigate of thirty_two guns ; the
Lancaster and another sixth-rater the <P_170> Mercury ; and a sloop the
Dragon ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.383

and as our sails were set the Commodore hoisted his Broad Pennant ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.384

and was saluted thereby by every ship in the Squadron with ten guns , he
replying with the same . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.385

I did marvel at the System aboard the Lancaster and the Disciplined
Bearing of All ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.386

as the Sails were unfurling Ned Tollit's whistle pealed again ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.387

and sixty sailors came running , six to each of the ten forward guns ,
the First Lieutenant Mr. Rose being in charge of these ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.388

the guns were run in , the charges rammed home ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.389

and then as the captains of each gun crew raised his arm , the gunner
standing by the linstock flaming in his fist , the Commander gave an
order , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.390

the Midshipman at the foot of the Poop ladder repeated it ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.391

the Linstocks were applied to the priming ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.392

and the sturdy ship rocked as the nine_pounders went off with a Terrific
Roar ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.393

I could see the shot skipping away across the sea , raising little
plumes of Spray as they cut the Wave-tops .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.394

And then Commander Hamilton unfurled his colours ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.395

and the seamen struck up a Fresh Ditty
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.396

and the look-outs were posted ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.397

and the Marines ran to the Waist
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.398

and formed into line KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.399

and beat their Drum ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.400

and we set out to sea , the Ramillies leading , the Frigate behind her
and somewhat to the starboard Tack , the sloop being on her weather bow
; and we and the Mercury almost in line , bringing up the rear ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,170.401

and so we stood down the channel , a seaman pointing out to me the white
chalk of the Cliffs of the Isle of Wight , very <P_171> pretty in the
sunlight , and later those Crags which tooth the Southern Angle , these
called the Needles , and very dangerous to Shipping when the Gales blow
up the Channel ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.402

and I went below to see to my patients , Mr. Nadauld seemingly being
Employ'd elsewhere , and to examine the ear of the Sailor , now
progressing well , and another wight who had crack'd his thumb on a Spar
, and one with a Constipation .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.403

I did think our Squadron was bound for a cruise in the Channel and
Northern coast of Spain ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.404

but meeting with Mr. Nadauld after dinner , he to inform me that Our
Destination was not Fix'd , the Commodore expecting orders from London
at the foot of the Channel . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.405

And sure enough , in the middle of the afternoon , our course being then
East by East by South the Dorset coast on our lee the Ramillies heaves
to KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.406

and fires a gun ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.407

and then in an hour a brig comes up
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.408

and lets go her anchor , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.409

and puts off a boat ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.410

and then those in her clamber aboard the flagship , as I did see through
the spy-glass of Mr. Rose , he very kindly proffering it me ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.411

and then after a little while more we hear very faint the sound of
distant cheers from the Ramillies ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.412

and those from the brig back to their boat and so to their ship ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.413

and the Commodore runs up a string of little flags ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.414

and fires another gun , and much excitement thereat on board our vessel
; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.415

and I learn that we have received Orders to sail to the West Indie Isles
, there to impress the Spaniards with a gesture of firm friendliness .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,171.416

<P_172>

And so Commander Hamilton gives orders that we should fire a salute of
four shotted guns , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,172.418

and the other ships in the Squadron did likewise ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,172.419

and then we ceased from Tacking
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,172.420

and set a course direct up the Channel , the Ramillies at first behind ,
but soon forging ahead with her Mighty Press of canvas .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,172.421

So tonight my cabin sways gently with the first of those Atlantic
Billows that I learn from Ned Tollit do out away from Land rise to a
Fury unbelievable . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,172.422

<P_173>

<font> April 15 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.424

The winds continuing fair we did this day pass Land's End , it not
visible for mist and the hour , which drew towards dusk .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.425

The flogged sailors improved ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.426

I do think that the one whose bones were bared will after all Make a
Recovery ; his back discharging very healthily , and not much Fever in
his blood . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.427

The other wight's back also Goes Well
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.428

but I do not like his Manner , it being sullen and morose ; though I am
glad to see that he does not extend this surliness to me .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.429

Barlow the erstwhile Consumptive has been aiding both these to their
comfort , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.430

and with an eye to future Help I did this day discourse to him on the
Rudiments of Surgery , he proving very Quick_Witted thereat .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.431

After dinner I was summoned to the Commander's Cabbinn ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.432

and found him seated before a chart , Mr. Nadauld also there at another
table throwing the dice with Mr. Duhamel , Mr. Butler , the first
Marine Officer , and Mr. Lester the Second Marine Officer ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.433

and Commander Hamilton to inquire cheerily how the men went that had
been flogged ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,173.434

and I to reply that they fared as well as might be expected ; at which
answer he frowned , and then enquired of me how long it would be before
<P_174> they were fit for duty ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.435

and I to reply at least a full week ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.436

and Mr. Duhamel looks up with a sneer
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.437

and says , " A Week ? KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.438

You do not know your work , Master Sawbones !
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.439

These are no lily-fingered damsels to be cosseted over ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.440

they are Rogues of Seamen who must be treated firmly ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.441

else they grow Insubordinate ! "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.442

at the which I was about to answer him Angrily ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.443

only I did catch sight of Mr. Nadauld putting his finger to his lip and
shaking his head at me . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.444

Commander Hamilton purses his mouth ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.445

and turning to Mr. Nadauld says that he must explain to me that this is
not an Infirmary for the Convalescing of the Sick , but one of His
Majesty's Ships , where a man must work or die ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.446

and so dismisses me , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.447

and I to walking on the deck in some Perplexity of mind , until Mr.
Nadauld comes out and taking my arm says that I must remember now that I
am a servant of His Majesty's and employed solely to preserve the health
of the seamen so that the most work can be got out of them ; the
Humanities very well in their place , but not to be applied to common
sailors , who were recruited from the Stews and naught but Gallows fruit
; and so comes down with me to the Foc'sle , pinching his nostrils at
the smell , and not examining the Seamen's backs at all , but standing
off a little way plucking at his wig ; and then on deck again says that
they do very well , and that to give them longer to recover was to breed
ideas above their Station in their Hearts ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,174.448

and so he to report to <P_175> Commander Hamilton ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.449

and I to seek the worthy Bosun Ned , and to inform him of all that had
befallen and to ask him to find them some light work before the
Lieutenants drove them to such place as the Spars where they would
likely die ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.450

and he to get them with the Carpenter sewing Sail Cloth , so that he did
report to Commander Hamilton that they were at work and all was Settled
Peaceable . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.451

In the afternoon did pass much Sea-Wrack .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.452

<font> April 17 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.453

These days we have stood out into the Atlantic ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.454

and very lonely and desolate the Ships do appear on its waste , they
seeming but cockleshells , all but the Ramillies , that rides them with
a stubborn English Pride . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.455

Much singing tonight from the seamen's quarters , they all gathered on
the deck and chanting some sad Fare-Thee-Well songs ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.456

amongst those that did catch my Int'rest was one called " Polly M'Down .
" KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.457

<font> April 18 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.458

Still no ships seen but those of our Squadron .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.459

A school of Porpoise fish was off our bow today at noon , their Antics
very quaint . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.460

<font> April 19 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.461

Service on board taken by the Commander , the Chaplain being too sick to
join the Lancaster . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,175.462

<P_176>

<font> April 20 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.464

This morning it was found that last night we had lost touch with our
Squadron , the day breaking to reveal not a soul in sight , and
Commander Hamilton in a great Passion thereat , saying that the ship
would be better manned by children and bumboat women than by his present
crew ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.465

and so we sailed throughout that day , the lookout sighting a ship
towards dusk , and giving a hail of " Sail-Ho ! "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.466

and so we catch up with the Sloop of the Squadron , she having sprung a
leak and signalling us to send her our Carpenter ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.467

so our Captain in a fury does so ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.468

and closes ship towards the Dragon ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.469

and we lay together until dawning , when the Pumps of the sloop having
been made secure we separated , and set off once more towards our
Destination ; the Captain of the Dragon informing us that the Ramillies
when last seen was bearing West by South , and likely not far ahead .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.470

<font> April 21 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.471

This day a Marine slipped on the deck
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.472

and dislocated his shoulder ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.473

so with Barlow's help to reduce it , the common seamen and the
Musketeers being left to me to attend , Mr. Nadauld attending the
officers . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.474

The Dragon still in sight , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.475

the wind fair . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.476

<font> April 22 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.477

Sighted a brig at noon KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.478

and gave chase , firing the forward guns to bring her to .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,176.479

She was naught but a <P_177> Portugee however with a cargo of small
worth , KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.480

so let her go . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.481

The Dragon on our weather bow ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.482

but yet no signs of the others .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.483

The back of the flogged seamen now healing .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.484

<font> April 23 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.485

Much excitement this day we sighting the tops of the Ramillies <paren>
we thought <$$paren> but these turning out to belong to a French Forty
Gun Cruiser ; so that we did make signals to the Dragon and crammed on
all sail , the Frenchman firing sundry guns at us ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.486

but she being slow - with weed Ned Tollit thought - we did by the mercy
of God escape . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.487

Tonight the wind is getting up .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.488

<font> April 23 . <$$font> KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.489

Have been quite unable these last days to enter in this my Journal
because of the tossing of the ship ; there having arisen one of those
terrible storms that make the life of the Sailor so Arduous .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.490

On April 24 the Wind blew with great force
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.491

and sail was shortened and the Sprit sail Yard taken in ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.492

and then the Wind continuing and rising with even Greater Vehemence all
sail was snugged , the guns secured ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.493

and we ran with bare Poles , the Captain saying gloomily that it would
endanger us All to attempt to keep to the course pricked on the chart ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,177.494

and so we were swept far out , losing all sight of the Dragon ; on whom
and her crew may God <P_178> have mercy she already being Leaky .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,178.495

Could scarce sleep on April 24 night because of the plunging of the ship
, three times being thrown from my bunk .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,178.496

On the morning of the 25 going on deck for Air , that below decks being
very Foul , did find the Wind had Whipp'd the Seas to a Hideous Fury ,
they crashing onto our decks from a height nigh as tall as our Masts ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,178.497

and so below again in haste , feeling not a little troubled in Mind .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,178.498

At noon the Great Yard of the Mainmast and its top were carried away and
a most dismal crash like to Thunder thereat ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,178.499

and the Flogged Seaman {TEXT:Seamen} with the Wife , who is I am Certain
going Distracted , to scream aloud , " God have mercy on us all !
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,178.500

We are going down {TEXT:Down} ! "
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,178.501

and with Barlow's aid and two - three other sailors to secure him and
bind him in his hammock , where I did bleed him to cool his Frenzy some
forty ounces . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,178.502

And so we did Fly before the Wind and the seas all that day , none save
the Watch venturing on deck , and the air growing very heavy below ; and
so all through the night , I endeav'ring to sleep but unable ; being
summoned at dawn by Ned Tollit to the Cockpit , where I did find two
sailors Battered to Insensibility by the Waves , they having been swept
against the Barge by a Heavy Sea .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,178.503

One man had the arm broken but not the bones protruding , and three
great gashes across his Neck and Shoulder ; the other in Graver Straits
having had his Belly torn open by the Barge's broken timbers and his
Bowels <P_179> protruding through the wound .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.504

So to call Barlow and he holding the first sailor , and another wight a
lantern , to wedge myself as best I might against the wall of the
Cockpit against the Rolling of the Ship and to set the arm of the first
sailor Fixing it with a charge of tow and tar ; and then to attend the
other man , doing him last as he was still insensible and like to die in
any case ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.505

did sponge the protruding Bowel with sea water finding it to my relief
mostly Mesentery and the man wearing only his britches at the time of
his Accident and no cloth therefore in the wound ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.506

and pushed it back KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.507

and sewed up the muscle and skin , this being at all times a Hazardous
enterprise from the risk of plunging the needle into the Bowel and
rendered a_Thousand Times more so from the Intolerable antics of the
Ship ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.508

I was as often on my side as on my feet .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.509

And so to sponge with sea-water and close up their sundry gashes ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.510

and to get them into their hammocks ; bleeding both as a Discouragement
of the Fever that will follow .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.511

And then to breakfast , being unable to shave for the tossing of my
cabin ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.512

and the Seas still continuing high we did run before them all that day ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.513

and this morning a seaman was carried away by them , and no more seen .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.514

Today the wind and the sea both strong , though abating in Strength ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.515

and have ventured on deck . KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.516

The hurt seamen do continue fair ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,179.517

I hope that the one with the Gashed Belly may live , his wound
commencing to suppurate , but not unduly <P_180> offensive .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,180.518

Did seek out Mr. Nadauld KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,180.519

and held converse with him concerning the Flogged Seaman with the Wife ;
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,180.520

I convinced in my mind that he is going Mad ,
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,180.521

but Mr. Nadauld to laugh heartily , and say that whether he be so or no
, he can still work , and must be kept working until he Grows Dangerous
. KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,180.522

No sail in sight ; KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,180.523

all on board do wonder of the Luck of the Dragon , she if not gone to
the bottom , surely a Complete Wreck .
KNYVETON-1752-ACTUALLY-GRAY-1937-2,180.524

