<BEGIN_lancaster2-1794-2>

<P_3>

A plan , &c. LANCASTER2-1794-2,3.3

Education , in its true extent , may be understood to comprehend the
application of all the arts and sciences which are necessary to render a
child , by that time he shall become a man , able to sustain a
respectable character and occupation in civilized and polished society .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,3.4

Great abilites , assiduity , experience and temper , are requisite to
the successful discharge of its several duties . LANCASTER2-1794-2,3.5

To habituate youth to a vigorous exercise of their faculties - to
inspire <P_4> them with a love of solid learning - and to point out the
best methods of attaining it ; - to improve their understanding -
protect their innocence - establish in them principles of honour and
duty - train them up in good habits - and reform their faults with a due
mixture of gentleness and authority - are employments sufficient to
engross the whole attention of the most active and diligent Tutor .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,4.6

The management of a school is considered difficult :
LANCASTER2-1794-2,4.7

but to a man who can bring himself to delight in the various functions
it requires , and will give himself the trouble to gain the affections
of his Pupils , without diminishing <P_5> their respect for him ; habit
will render it easy and pleasant . LANCASTER2-1794-2,5.8

This occupation is confessedly of very great importance .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,5.9

For upon the performance or neglect of its duties , depends in a great
measure , the happiness or misery , not only of the children themselves
; but also , in many instances , that of all their nearest connections .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,5.10

No wonder then that Parents , who are sensible of the importance of the
trust , are scrupulously nice in their enquiries respecting such as may
best answer the purposes of it . LANCASTER2-1794-2,5.11

The Writer of this is himself a Parent : LANCASTER2-1794-2,5.12

<P_6>

he feels the propriety of such investigations : LANCASTER2-1794-2,6.14

and to afford authentic information to those who have occasion to make
them , is the object of this address ; which , as it is to convey a
plain and correct detail of the plan on which he conducts his school ,
neither claims the merit of originality , nor can reasonably incur the
censure of plagiarism , though it should appear that he has availed
himself of what others have written . LANCASTER2-1794-2,6.15

The points to be considered in placing out a son to school , are many
and various . LANCASTER2-1794-2,6.16

Perhaps the most essential may be comprized under the following heads ;
viz. <P_7> <heading> <font> Health , Learning , Discipline , Religion
and Morals . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,7.17

I. Health . LANCASTER2-1794-2,7.18

<$$heading>

When we compare the enjoyments of healthy , and the sufferings of sickly
children , and reflect on the different prospects with which they must
enter into life ; we can@ @not but be sensible of the great care that
should be taken to select all circumstances favourable to bodily health
and strength , at least so far as a choice is practicable .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,7.20

Great regard is due to diet , clothing , lodging , air , exercise and
cleanliness . LANCASTER2-1794-2,7.21

<P_8>

<heading>

I. {TEXT:I,} <font> Diet . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,8.24

<$$heading>

Under this head , the mode of procuring the articles of which it is to
consist , demands some consideration . LANCASTER2-1794-2,8.26

Most things are best at the first hand . LANCASTER2-1794-2,8.27

This holds particularly of such as are of a perishable nature .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,8.28

Thus , where there is a large garden and a Gardener constantly employed
, a table can@ @not but be better and more plentifully supplied , than
where every article of vegetable produce is to be purchased at a dear
rate . LANCASTER2-1794-2,8.29

And a plentiful dairy {TEXT:diary} affords a still more estimable
advantage , above those who must buy all their butter and milk vitiated
with the usual adulterations . LANCASTER2-1794-2,8.30

<P_9>

Every article of food provided for youth at school , should be equally
and unexceptionably good : so as to obviate all desire to be at home for
the sake of <font> better living . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,9.32

And , though it may seem imprudent , if not impracticable ; the
cheerfulness of my Pupils shall be encouraged , by allowing them a free
choice of whatever appears on a table always well supplied with variety
of animal and vegetable food . LANCASTER2-1794-2,9.33

In short ; I am for imposing no restraint in this case , which a prudent
Parent would not himself insist on . LANCASTER2-1794-2,9.34

<heading>

2. {TEXT:2,} <font> Clothing . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,9.36

<$$heading>

The vicissitudes of season sufficiently <P_10> point out the propriety
of suitable changes of apparel . LANCASTER2-1794-2,10.38

To maintain that equal degree of circulation and perspiration which is
essential to the welfare of the animal economy , warm clothing in winter
, and light in summer , are requisite . LANCASTER2-1794-2,10.39

<heading>

3. <font> Lodging . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,10.41

<$$heading>

The number that must be accommodated with lodging in such schools as
admit no Pupils but Boarders , renders it impossible to allot to each
individual a separate apartment . LANCASTER2-1794-2,10.43

But this disadvantage is amply compensated by single beds and lofty
rooms , well ventilated and constantly kept clean .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,10.44

Also , it is of great importance , that the <P_11> School-room should be
large , well_aired , and capable of having its degree of warmth adjusted
to the comfort of those assembled in it , according to the exigency of
existing circumstances . LANCASTER2-1794-2,11.45

It is now generally known , that a large room is best warmed by a stove
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,11.46

<heading>

4. <font> Air . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,11.48

<$$heading>

The air that is breathed by young Persons , whose friends desire to see
them grow up healthy and strong , can@ @not be selected with too much
care . LANCASTER2-1794-2,11.50

Low situations are subject to damp and stagnant vapours :
LANCASTER2-1794-2,11.51

and the immediate vicinity of a great town is often as unwholesome as
the worst part of the <P_12> town itself . LANCASTER2-1794-2,12.52

- A just elevation , on a light soil , and at a reasonable distance from
town , is not only free from these objections , LANCASTER2-1794-2,12.53

but also possesses the contrary good qualities in a degree truly
desirable . LANCASTER2-1794-2,12.54

- The frequency with which youth should be allowed the benefit of a
salubrious air , leads me to speak of <heading> 5. {TEXT:5,} <font>
Exercise . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,12.55

<$$heading>

The opportunities of recurring to this necessary relief from study
should be as many as can possibly consist with a due attention to the
immediate object of education . LANCASTER2-1794-2,12.57

Before they begin business in the morning - <P_13> after they have
breakfasted - before and after dinner - as well as after the conclusion
of their afternoon's business , they should be permitted to exercise
their bodies , and amuse their minds , by a spontaneous application to
any of those innocent and healthful diversions , of which every boy is
acquainted with a sufficient variety , and in which most boys are
sufficiently expert . LANCASTER2-1794-2,13.58

An inclosed playground covered with gravel , will afford full scope for
their ordinary amusements . LANCASTER2-1794-2,13.59

And an occasional resort to an extensive , dry common will agreeably
vary the scene of their {TEXT:ther} relaxations .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,13.60

- A discreet superintendant will always take care to guard them , <P_14>
on the one side , against such excessive exertions of bodily activity ,
as might endanger their health ; and on the other , against such
sedentary games as might give an irreparable taint to their morals , by
inducing an itch for gambling . LANCASTER2-1794-2,14.61

Under the title of exercise may very well be included the polite and
elegant accomplishment of <font> dancing , <$$font> which <paren> to say
nothing of the engaging address and graceful deportment of those who
excel in it <$$paren> is unquestionably the most healthful and lively
amusement that can be practised within doors . LANCASTER2-1794-2,14.62

It is taught here by <font> Mr. Galliard . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,14.63

<P_15>

Also the <font> military exercise , <$$font> which conduces much to make
a boy erect and firm in his gesture and motion , deserves to be regarded
with particular attention . LANCASTER2-1794-2,15.65

<heading>

6. <font> Cleanliness <$$font> <$$heading> Is very essential to health
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,15.67

That the pupils may enjoy this comfort , they are not only required to
wash and comb themselves , in their own apartments , every morning ;
LANCASTER2-1794-2,15.68

but also , they are every evening attended , for the same purpose , by a
steady matron , with whose assistance all the operations pertaining to
this business are effectually and regularly performed , <P_16> and
proper changes of linen supplied . LANCASTER2-1794-2,16.69

In addition to these precautions , such as choose it , are , during the
summer months , indulged with the use of a cold bath .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,16.70

Moreover , to encourage a habit of cleanliness and neatness , the pupils
are taught to consider it as a thing unbecoming a gentleman , to be seen
in a dirty or slovenly condition . LANCASTER2-1794-2,16.71

Before I quit the subject of <font> health , <$$font> it may be proper
to observe , that there is a certain kind of <font> general attention
<$$font> to the comfort and happiness of young persons , which never
fails to secure a most useful attachment towards those who have the
happy talent of exercising it with discretion . LANCASTER2-1794-2,16.72

<P_17>

And where the whole system of domestic economy has an obvious tendency
to the comfort of the pupil , I shall not fear his <font> feeling
<$$font> and joyfully confessing it . LANCASTER2-1794-2,17.74

<heading>

II. Learning . LANCASTER2-1794-2,17.76

<$$heading>

To convey learning , or instruction , with good success , not only a
perfect knowledge of the branch a man professes to teach , but also a
good address and persevering temper are requisite .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,17.78

And these qualifications are in no instance more so , than in teaching
the first rudiments . LANCASTER2-1794-2,17.79

To make a child know his letters - distinguish the vowels and consonants
- and form syllables <P_18> with accuracy and promptness , has often
tired the patience , and exhausted the spirits of a man who could with
pleasure conduct a student through the most difficult Latin and Greek
Authors . LANCASTER2-1794-2,18.80

However , as these things are indispensably initiatory to all other
branches of learning , it is necessary that the young pupil should be
made master of them , in the most skilful and engaging manner .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,18.81

Under a guide so qualified , the acquisition of learning will be
attended with a sensible pleasure to the pupil , LANCASTER2-1794-2,18.82

and he will press forward , with the eagerness of a successful warrior
after fresh conquests . LANCASTER2-1794-2,18.83

<P_19>

When a child has gained a correct idea of the formation of <font>
syllables , <$$font> he will learn to <font> read <$$font> with less
difficulty than might be expected . LANCASTER2-1794-2,19.85

He may now be led forward by that emulation to excel others , which is a
most valuable spring to voluntary exertions , and which a judicious
teacher always knows how to manage to the best advantage .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,19.86

Indeed this principle of emulation is of the utmost utility in the whole
economy of a school . LANCASTER2-1794-2,19.87

And to fix a boy's attention on the efficacy of his own industry and
application , towards his advancement in rank and attainment of
emoluments , may reasonably be expected to have the happiest effects ,
both at school , and through the <P_20> whole course of his life .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,20.88

To this end , a daily prize to the most diligent , and frequent changes
of place for the advancement of all who are found to have excelled their
fellows , together with a general tenor of encouraging language on the
part of the teachers , are found extremely serviceable .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,20.89

And when once a pupil is fairly initiated in this good way , the
vigilant and temperate care of his tutor will have no very difficult
task , to restrain him from any great deviations , and to produce <P_21>
the expected degree of improvement , progressively from time to time .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,21.90

While , by this mode of treatment , we encourage the young genius to
display itself , and often have the pleasure of finding considerable
talents where we had little expectation ; our general rule happily
affords encouragement and comfort to those of the slenderest abilities .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,21.91

They who are in the habit of teaching can easily see , whether <paren>
in case of any deficiency <$$paren> a boy fails from want of attention ,
or want of capacity . LANCASTER2-1794-2,21.92

Our fundamental maxim to all , therefore , is , " That they are expected
to do their best . " LANCASTER2-1794-2,21.93

And when it appears that a boy <font> has <$$font> done his best ,
though <P_22> he may not have accomplished all that was required , no
disgrace ensues ; LANCASTER2-1794-2,22.94

but , on the contrary , he is taught to consider himself in a
respectable light , for the laudable exertions he has used .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,22.95

He is not terrified with a tyrannical requisition of more than he is
able to perform : LANCASTER2-1794-2,22.96

and his peace of mind is not suffered to be destroyed by the scoffs or
taunts of those to whom nature has been more bountiful .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,22.97

And as this discrimination is always made with all possible caution and
exactness , a boy soon learns to know practically , that by an honest
exertion of his abilities , he will be safe from every kind of disgrace
, vexation and trouble . LANCASTER2-1794-2,22.98

And this will afford a satisfaction perhaps as adequate <P_23> to the
gratification of <font> his <$$font> mind , as honours and emoluments to
the more brilliant and aspiring genius . LANCASTER2-1794-2,23.99

I hope I need not apologize for this digression .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,23.100

As soon as a boy can read an easy book , he will most probably request
permission to learn to write : LANCASTER2-1794-2,23.101

and I can see no reason why his request should not be granted , as soon
as made . LANCASTER2-1794-2,23.102

To write well and expeditiously is an essential qualification .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,23.103

As well literary , as commercial men feel the advantage of it .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,23.104

And to despatch the business of the pen with ease and gracefulness ,
requires assiduous practice and long habit . LANCASTER2-1794-2,23.105

Besides , the privilege of learning <P_24> to write being granted to the
learner's request , lays him under an obligation in honour , to make all
possible improvement from the instructions of his teacher .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,24.106

Also , this will diversify his employments : LANCASTER2-1794-2,24.107

and every change from one business to another will operate as a relief
to his spirits and a spur to his industry . LANCASTER2-1794-2,24.108

I will suppose the pupil to proceed thus , devoting his attention
alternately to his <font> Spelling-book , Reading and Writing <$$font> ,
till he has gone completely through his Spelling-book .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,24.109

This done , he may have an easy English Grammar put into his hands .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,24.110

And as this book is to be wholly committed to memory , <P_25> great care
must be taken to proportion the quantity that shall be required daily ,
to the memory of the learner , that no early difficulties may create a
lasting disgust towards Learning in general , and that of Grammar in
particular . LANCASTER2-1794-2,25.111

This would be a most serious misfortune ; as it would occasion the
<font> Latin and French Grammars , <$$font> which are soon to follow in
their successive order , to be received by the young learner with
additional dislike . LANCASTER2-1794-2,25.112

By the time that boys have made a considerable progress in their English
Grammar , they will generally have made so much improvement in reading
and writing , that they may occasionally <P_26> be put to write down a
few moral sentences , dictated to them by a teacher , either <font>
extempore <$$font> , or from any English author .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,26.113

This will exercise them in spelling , familiarize the construction of
their own language , and being committed to memory improve their morals
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,26.114

Their knowledge of their own language will be very much promoted by a
<font> weekly recital <$$font> of the principal parts of the English
Grammar , in the catechetical form . LANCASTER2-1794-2,26.115

On this occasion , the whole school makes but one class .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,26.116

It may be finished in less than an hour , LANCASTER2-1794-2,26.117

and the trouble is richly repaid in the correctness of their
performances . LANCASTER2-1794-2,26.118

<P_27>

Another expedient to make correct writing familiar to them , which is
also in itself a very essential part of education , is Letter-writing .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,27.120

Every boy who is capable of it , is frequently required to produce a
letter of his own composition . LANCASTER2-1794-2,27.121

In this business , correctness and expedition are particularly
encouraged : LANCASTER2-1794-2,27.122

and every boy being at liberty to copy his letter neatly and transmit it
to his friends , they are , by such means , sure of hearing from him as
often as they please . LANCASTER2-1794-2,27.123

When the learner has conquered the <font> declensions and conjugations
<$$font> in his accidence , his employment will admit a little more
variety . LANCASTER2-1794-2,27.124

He may <P_28> be instructed to write out at length , in regular
succession , according to the paradigms in his Accidence , all the
varieties that usually occur in the several declensions of substantives
and adjectives , and in the conjugations of the different kinds of verbs
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,28.125

Having thus attained a reasonable skill in the inflexions of all the
declinable parts of speech , and made himself perfect master of his
Accidence , except the Syntax , he may proceed to an easy <font> Latin
<$$font> book with an <font> English <$$font> translation .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,28.126

The style of Cordery's Colloquies is neat and pure , and the matter
suitable to the understanding of the learner . LANCASTER2-1794-2,28.127

And a selection from <P_29> them , published a few years ago , by the
<font> Rev. Mr. Farrer <$$font> , is well adapted for the use and
progressive improvement of beginners . LANCASTER2-1794-2,29.128

Our learner must now be required , not only to construe his lesson into
<font> English <$$font> , and occasionally out of <font> English
<$$font> into <font> Latin <$$font> ; but also to <font> analyze
<$$font> a certain number of his Latin words in every lesson , by
declining or conjugating them according to the paradigms he has learned
in his Accidence . LANCASTER2-1794-2,29.129

When he has done this , he must be shewn the <font> grammatical
connexion <$$font> of one word with another , together with the <font>
rule <$$font> , on the authority of which every word is put in this or
that particular <P_30> case , gender and number , or mood and tense .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,30.130

This exercise furnishes occasions of exemplifying the several rules of
<font> Syntax : <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,30.131

and each rule , with one or more of the examples under it , must be
carefully committed to memory by the learner , the first time its use
occurs , and the rule itself marked in his book .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,30.132

The teacher will require the rule to be correctly recited , every time
its use recurs . LANCASTER2-1794-2,30.133

And as the number of rules will accumulate , a <font> weekly repetition
<$$font> of them and their examples will secure to them an indelible
impression on his memory . LANCASTER2-1794-2,30.134

A suitable and patient perseverance in this practice will , in due time
, imperceptibly get him over the most discouraging <P_31> part of his
grammatical studies ; LANCASTER2-1794-2,31.135

and he will soon be able to display and increase , his knowledge of
Syntax , and his skill in the inflexions of words , by producing daily a
portion of <font> Turner's <$$font> exercises to the Accidence .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,31.136

After a sufficient time spent in acquiring the improvement which is to
be gained from a diligent perusal of Farrer's Cordery , the learner may
have an easy book without a translation , such as <font> Whittaker's
Fables <$$font> , lately published , or <font> Selectae è Veteri
Testamento Historiae . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,31.137

<P_32>

Here it may be prudent to begin with a distinction in the lessons , and
give him alternately , a short lesson to <font> be construed and parsed
throughout , <$$font> and one a little longer to be <font> construed and
translated into English . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,32.139

An experiment may now be made , to ascertain how far he remembers the
Latin words of his Author , by taking away his printed book , and
requiring him to translate his lesson back again into <font> Latin .
<$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,32.140

If he should succeed tolerably well , he may proceed with his Latin , as
well as with his English translations . LANCASTER2-1794-2,32.141

This will contribute much to correctness and fluency of expression in
both languages , LANCASTER2-1794-2,32.142

and will gradually furnish him with that <font> copia <P_33> <font>
verborum , <$$font> which so elegantly distinguishes the perfect Scholar
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,33.143

Should the Latin translation be found too great an undertaking for the
pupil in this early stage , the discerning teacher will suspend the
demand of it , till his further proficiency shall warrant its renewal .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,33.144

We will take it for granted , that the learner proceeds , with
commendable attention , to discharge the several duties imposed upon him
, till it is thought proper to let him engage with <font> Erasmus's
<$$font> colloquies , or <font> Eutropius <$$font> , or both .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,33.145

From the former , the judicious teacher will select certain parts , to
be construed , passed and occasionally committed <P_34> to memory .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,34.146

The latter , in consideration of his succinct and comprehensive detail
of the affairs of ancient Rome , comprizing a period of more than
eleven_hundred years , should be translated and re-translated quite
through ; if that could be done , without too much encroaching upon the
time which must be reserved to give the Pupil <paren> in the course of
his education <$$paren> sufficient specimens of the style of the other
Roman historians and orators . LANCASTER2-1794-2,34.147

About this time , it may be proper <P_35> to begin the practice of
<font> dictating <$$font> to the boys in <font> Latin . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,35.148

The prudence and skill of the teacher will naturally suggest to him the
propriety of giving them at first , short and easy sentences of two or
three words , and so proceeding gradually , in just pace with their
improvement {TEXT:improvment} , to such as are more complex and
difficult . LANCASTER2-1794-2,35.149

When finished , let each boy translate them , with the help of his
dictionary alone . LANCASTER2-1794-2,35.150

This may be <font> varied <$$font> at discretion , by delivering
dictates in <font> English , <$$font> to be <font> turned <$$font> into
<font> Latin . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,35.151

After some acquaintance with the pure and classical dialogues of Erasmus
, we will , if you please , present <P_36> our young Pupil with <font>
Ovid's Metamorphoses , <$$font> accompanied by <font> King's History of
the Heathen Gods and Heroes <$$font> , which will assist him much in
extending his view to the <font> Mythology <$$font> of the ancients ,
and whet his appetite for the pleasing narrations of Ovid .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,36.152

This author is not to be read indiscriminately forward , which , I think
, can@ @not be done without injury to the morals of the pupil , which
ought always to be religiously guarded against every possibility of
defilement . LANCASTER2-1794-2,36.153

But Ovid has an abundance of beautiful and highly finished passages ,
which a judicious Teacher can select for the entertainment and
improvement of <P_37> his Pupil , without danger to his morals .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,37.154

The labours of our Pupil are now susceptible of additional variety .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,37.155

Many portions of this Author must be <font> committed to memory <$$font>
: LANCASTER2-1794-2,37.156

and he must be taught to investigate the structure of Hexameter verse ,
by the frequent application of his <font> scanning rules . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,37.157

After some progress in Ovid , he may begin with the <font> Greek Grammar
, <$$font> if intended to learn that language .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,37.158

<font> Dr. Ward's <$$font> new edition of the grammar abridged by
<font> Camden , <$$font> from the larger work of <font> Grant <$$font>
his predecessor , for the use of <font> Westminster school <$$font> , is
particularly <P_38> well accommodated to the Tyro in Greek .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,38.159

Here , as in the Latin grammar , let the learner make himself perfect in
the <font> declensions and conjugations <$$font> , before he attempts to
go regularly thro' the grammar . LANCASTER2-1794-2,38.160

When he has learned these , St. John's Gospel will be found easy to
begin with : LANCASTER2-1794-2,38.161

and if he is required to <font> parse every word <$$font> in each lesson
, before he has gone half through it , he may be removed to Luke , which
is rather more difficult . LANCASTER2-1794-2,38.162

When Luke becomes easy to him , the Acts and Epistles will furnish
lessons for his progressive improvement . LANCASTER2-1794-2,38.163

Pretty nearly in this way , we proceed to improve the classical
knowledge <P_39> of our pupil , and refine his taste for solid learning
, by carrying him thro' the most celebrated poets and other authors of
ancient <font> Greece and Rome . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,39.164

The <font> Master's <$$font> particular attention is directed to such
illustrations , as tend to make his pupils relish the beauties of those
immortal standards of just composition . LANCASTER2-1794-2,39.165

He also occasionally {TEXT:occasionly} points out the excellencies of
the various Writers , whose works have adorned and enriched our own
language . LANCASTER2-1794-2,39.166

And as this is a work of time , he recommends that the pupil be kept to
it as much as possible , for two , three or four years immediately
previous to his departure for the university ; but , not however , so as
to debar him from attending to <P_40> the demonstration of <font>
Euclid's Elements <$$font> and the rudiments of <font> Algebra .
<$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,40.167

With respect to such Pupils as are not designed for the University , or
a profession ; it is found most eligible <paren> because it generally
best answers the views of their parents <$$paren> that they should not
devote more than a <font> third part <$$font> of their time at school to
classical learning . LANCASTER2-1794-2,40.168

The great and general demand of a thorough proficiency in the French
Tongue has induced the Master to assign the <font> same proportion
<$$font> of time to <font> that <$$font> language ; in teaching which ,
nearly the same gradually progressive <P_41> method , as has been
minutely described with respect to the Latin , is practised with success
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,41.169

In a mercantile {TEXT:merchantile} community , penmanship and commercial
knowledge will necessarily claim a large share of the time alloted for
education , which is generally expected to be completed , by the
{TEXT:that} time the Pupil attains the age of fourteen or fifteen .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,41.170

Therefore to accommodate {TEXT:accomodate} the <font> merchantile
interest , <$$font> the remaining <font> third part <$$font> of our time
is devoted to the improvement of our pupils in Penmanship , Arithmetic ,
Merchants' Accompts and Mathematicks , together with their own Language
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,41.171

Such as are well <P_42> skilled in these branches <paren> and such only
are competent {TEXT:competant} to judge <$$paren> know , that to excel
in them , a considerable length of time and close application are
requisite . LANCASTER2-1794-2,42.172

And to such as have known the trouble and hinderance to the business of
a counting-house , which have accrued from raw , half-educated boys ,
who can scarcely copy a letter correctly , and by no means expeditiously
; boys who are well acquainted with their own and the French language ,
understand accompts perfectly , write well and quickly , and have
contracted habits of industry , must doubtless be very desirable .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,42.173

Besides the attention which is here <P_43> paid to Geography , by
pointing out places in the maps , as their names occur in the books
which our Pupils read , they are carried thro' a regular course of this
study , in the evenings , when they have the use of larger maps and
suitable treatises on the subject . LANCASTER2-1794-2,43.174

And to enlarge their ideas on this head , they are , in their turns ,
exercised two or three times a week , in the solution of the most
entertaining and interesting <font> problems , <$$font> on <font>
Adams's <$$font> excellent improved <font> globes . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,43.175

They are also taught to solve a variety of problems on the <font> maps
<$$font> themselves . LANCASTER2-1794-2,43.176

And when they have acquired a competent knowledge of <font> geography ,
<$$font> <P_44> they are progressively introduced to the History of
their own and other nations both ancient and modern and to Biography .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,44.177

While one set of boys is engaged in solving problems , another is
occupied in <font> committing to memory <$$font> a speech , or rather
extract from some eminent Author , to be recited publickly as an
exercise {TEXT:exercite} in <font> elocution . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,44.178

On this occasion , the body of Speakers is drawn out before the Master's
desk : LANCASTER2-1794-2,44.179

each , in his turn , stands to deliver his speech , at the other end of
the school-room , to encourage a habit of speaking audibly and
distinctly : LANCASTER2-1794-2,44.180

the whole school assembled and disengaged from all other <P_45> business
, constitutes the audience : LANCASTER2-1794-2,45.181

and the best Speaker is always praised and rewarded .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,45.182

At the same time that these two sets are solving problems and preparing
speeches , a third is employed in Composition .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,45.183

The <font> themes <$$font> are afterwards examined , their merits
ascertained , and their defects pointed out . LANCASTER2-1794-2,45.184

These employments are assigned , by Rotation , to all who are capable of
them . LANCASTER2-1794-2,45.185

The young gentlemen speak <font> French <$$font> two weeks in every
three , the third <P_46> week being alloted to the use and improvement
of their native tongue . LANCASTER2-1794-2,46.186

Dancing , drawing and the <font> Prussian <$$font> exercise are taught
regularly twice every week . LANCASTER2-1794-2,46.187

Those who learn Short Hand are instructed daily by the <font> Master
<$$font> himself , during the time of their {TEXT:theit} attendance on
the Writing Master . LANCASTER2-1794-2,46.188

The system used here is remarkably simple and easy .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,46.189

A conviction that an agreeable <font> variety <$$font> relieves the
young mind from that kind of disgust which will , in some degree , arise
from too long an <P_47> application to one branch of study , has induced
the Master of this seminary to diversify the daily employments of his
Pupils , as much as the prescribed plan of their education will permit .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,47.190

And that they may execute their business with pleasure , he takes every
gentle method to kindle in their youthful breasts a commendable <font>
emulation , <$$font> to excel , and a willing and industrious exertion
of their abilities , to accomplish that excellence .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,47.191

The satisfaction of those who honour him with their commands , being an
object of which he desires never to lose sight ; he requires each Pupil
, every Saturday , to give an exact account of the business he has done
during the week ; which , at the end of the half year , is summed up ,
copied out and sent home , for the inspection of his parents and friends
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,47.192

The writer of this address acknowledges himself a decided advocate for
Exhibitions calculated to display the attainments of pupils .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,47.193

They have been in many instances , the happy means of calling forth
latent genius and introducing its Possessors to valuable connexions and
enlarged prospects in life . LANCASTER2-1794-2,47.194

But as even the intrinsic excellence of a thing will not always warrant
its indiscriminate application , he finds it necessary to modify his
practice in this <P_49> respect , in such a manner , as <paren> he hopes
<$$paren> will give satisfaction to all - LANCASTER2-1794-2,49.195

Some parents , who know that their children's abilities are not of the
first rank , are perhaps apprehensive that an exhibition will expose
defects which they would wish to conceal - LANCASTER2-1794-2,49.196

Some may be willing to indulge the aversion of their children to the
extraordinary application that is requisite to their passing thro' the
solemnity of an exhibition with <font> eclat <$$font> -
LANCASTER2-1794-2,49.197

Some censure exhibitions , on a ill founded presumption , that they are
intended only <font> ad captandum vulgus . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,49.198

- And others are unfavourable to them , from an idea that the time spent
in preparation is too great an interruption to the ordinary <P_50>
course of business , and consequently so much time thrown away .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,50.199

- Doubtless many are duly sensible of their great utility , towards the
{TEXT:the_the} improvement of all who are intended for professions ,
which require the practice of speaking in publick .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,50.200

Now amidst this variety of opinions , he wishes to shew due respect to
all , by declaring , that in future no pupil shall be required to appear
at an exhibition , who can produce a letter or {TEXT:or_or} note from
his parents , expressive of their desire that he should be excused .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,50.201

Such may proceed with their ordinary business , while the others are
preparing for the exhibition . LANCASTER2-1794-2,50.202

But should the <P_51> number of those who are desirous to avail
themselves of this mode of improvement , at any time , unfortunately
bear only a small proportion {TEXT:porportion} to that of those who wish
to decline it , the obvious inference is , that it must be discontinued
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,51.203

<heading>

III. Discipline . LANCASTER2-1794-2,51.205

<$$heading>

With respect to <font> Discipline , <$$font> an exact and continual
attention to the behaviour of pupils will be the best lesson that can be
given them . LANCASTER2-1794-2,51.207

It will from time to time furnish the intelligent and watchful Teacher
with opportunities of knowing their dispositions and ascertaining <P_52>
their characters . LANCASTER2-1794-2,52.208

And here , every instance of improper conduct is to be noticed in some
way or other . LANCASTER2-1794-2,52.209

Very frequently , a friendly and temperate admonition , candidly adapted
to convince the offender's understanding of his error and its evil
consequences , will induce a degree of caution , which shall restrain
him from a second offense of the same kind . LANCASTER2-1794-2,52.210

And when we perceive that this mild and reasonable admonition has its
effect , we have no occasion to resort to stronger methods of enforcing
general good behaviour and conformity to established rules and orders .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,52.211

But all boys are not of this mild and <P_53> considerate turn .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,53.212

The generality are more bold and less thoughtful -
LANCASTER2-1794-2,53.213

and some even bring to school corrupt habits of deplorable wickedness .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,53.214

For the first , those I mean who are too giddy or too daring to regard a
sober and mild admonition , a <font> task <$$font> proportioned to the
nature of the offense , of which one of this description stands
convicted , will most probably prove a salutary punishment .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,53.215

For as this task is to be learned whilst the others are at play , his
desire of amusement will naturally urge him to be more attentive to his
conduct in future . LANCASTER2-1794-2,53.216

Should the offense , nevertheless , be often repeated and persisted in ,
corporal punishment must , at length , though <P_54> with reluctance ,
be resorted to . LANCASTER2-1794-2,54.217

And in such a case , previously to the actual punishment , I would
commonly make an offender Judge of his own fault - expose it calmly to
him in its true colours - reckon up its aggravations - contrast it with
the conduct he ought to have observed - and then ask him , how I can
consistently with my duty do otherwise than correct him ?
LANCASTER2-1794-2,54.218

The happiest effects have resulted from this practice .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,54.219

As to those who betray habits of deplorable wickedness ; though it is
possible a case may happen , in which a master , being candidly
forewarned , may , and ought to assist a disconsolate <P_55> parent , by
attempting the reformation of a profligate child ; the hopes of success
are so small , that I shall lay it down , as my general rule , to
dismiss at once an incorrigible Pupil ; rather than <paren> by retaining
him <$$paren> incur the risque of his corrupting others .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,55.220

In case of a <font> complaint <$$font> preferred by one boy against
another , the most <font> summary <$$font> way of proceeding is the best
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,55.221

The accuser declares his complaint in the presence of the party accused
, who must immediately acknowledge , or deny the charge .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,55.222

In some cases , a sense of honour - and in others , the fear of the
punishment annexed to lying and equivocation , will <P_56> produce an
explicit confession ; which being made , the party aggrieved is asked ,
what satisfaction he demands . LANCASTER2-1794-2,56.223

This is an appeal to his <font> candour <$$font> , which , seeing he now
has his adversary , as it were , in his power , usually overcomes his
anger or resentment so far , as to make him declare , that he desires no
other satisfaction than a forbearance to repeat the offense complained
of , upon which the offender makes his bow , and apologises for his
misconduct , or returns thanks for the lenity shewn him .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,56.224

A suitable admonition , if necessary , is then given to one or both ,
LANCASTER2-1794-2,56.225

and they retire in mutual good humour . LANCASTER2-1794-2,56.226

By this method , much of the <font> petulance <$$font> <P_57> incident
to boys is happily suppressed , LANCASTER2-1794-2,57.227

- a spirit of forbearance on one side - and honour on the other , is
cultivated and cherished - LANCASTER2-1794-2,57.228

and they manifest a gradual improvement in that truly-@ @desirable
qualification - a <font> liberal <$$font> and <font> gentlemanly
behaviour . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,57.229

- Should the satisfaction demanded appear disproportionate to the injury
alledged , judgment is deferred till the resentment which urged the
demand be reasonably allayed . LANCASTER2-1794-2,57.230

However , in some cases punishment will be unavoidable .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,57.231

But <font> antecedent <$$font> to all punishments , and to the
possibility of their being necessary , it is proper to state to each
scholar , at the time of his entrance , <P_58> the general outlines of
moral conduct he will be expected to observe ; and to inculcate , in
suitable language , the propriety of conforming to the rules and
regulations of the society , of which he is about to become a member .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,58.232

An admonition of this kind , by way of <font> charge <$$font> , at a
time when a boy's mind is <font> unusually susceptible <$$font> , will
sink deep in his heart . LANCASTER2-1794-2,58.233

<heading>

Limited Number . LANCASTER2-1794-2,58.235

<$$heading>

That the Pupils of this School may fully enjoy the benefit of <font>
liberal education <$$font> , their Number is <font> limited <$$font> to
Forty . LANCASTER2-1794-2,58.237

They must all be the children <P_59> of truly respectable parents .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,59.238

And as the disposition of the master inclines him to render the most
ample justice to his Pupils , he constantly retains in his house an
<font> able teacher <$$font> for each of the three departments above
mentioned . LANCASTER2-1794-2,59.239

Conformably to this arrangement , the whole school is distributed into
<font> three divisions <$$font> , LANCASTER2-1794-2,59.240

and in the course of a day , each division receives the instructions of
every teacher . LANCASTER2-1794-2,59.241

- The <font> master <$$font> 's attentions are either extended generally
over the whole ; or particularly engaged , successively , by each
individual , as he sees occasion . LANCASTER2-1794-2,59.242

In this manner are <font> four teachers <$$font> continually employed in
forwarding the improvement <P_60> of <font> forty pupils <$$font> ,
making , on the whole , an average of <font> ten <$$font> scholars to
<font> each . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,60.243

It must be obvious , that this arrangement is much more favourable to
the improvement of the scholars , than to the emolument of the master .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,60.244

It is to be understood , that this arrangement is not so rigidly
insisted on , as to debar any pupil from devoting his whole time to the
prosecution of his studies in any one or two of these departments .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,60.245

No Pupil is constrained to pursue any branch of study which his parents
apprehend he will not have occasion for , or with respect to which they
are willing to indulge <P_61> any peculiar aversion , or deficiency of
genius in him . LANCASTER2-1794-2,61.246

The <font> reputation <$$font> of a school is best-@ @promoted by the
<font> complete and speedy accomplishment of the parents' commands :
<$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,61.247

and to <font> that <$$font> the writer of this address will always look
up as the only human means of securing a succession of Pupils .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,61.248

And as this school , by the above moderate limitation of its number ,
will be kept free from that inundation of scholars , which <paren> in
such seminaries as admit all that apply <$$paren> is frequently found to
retard the proficiency of many , and diminish the comfort of all ;
LANCASTER2-1794-2,61.249

it is hoped that parents will not think it unreasonable , that <P_62>
<font> six months' {TEXT:month's} notice <$$font> of their intention to
remove their children from it , will be expected .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,62.250

Indeed , without such friendly intimations , it will not be possible for
him to <font> keep up <$$font> the number , which , for <font> their
satisfaction <$$font> he engages <font> not to exceed . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,62.251

<heading>

IV. Religion and Morals . LANCASTER2-1794-2,62.253

<$$heading>

I have joined these two articles together , because the latter ought to
bear the same relation to the former , as the Effect bears to its Cause
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,62.255

For as the first , without the last , is detectable hypocrisy and
fanaticism ; so the last , without the first , <P_63> is mere Pagan
virtue . LANCASTER2-1794-2,63.256

But before I proceed further , I beg leave to explain that the Religion
I mean to inculcate has nothing <font> morose , melancholy <$$font> , or
<font> austere <$$font> in it . LANCASTER2-1794-2,63.257

In a just medium between the blasphemous Atheist , who would pretend to
<font> live without God in the world <$$font> ; and the weak votary of
enthusiasm and superstition , who would with us to consider " every
innocent enjoyment as an offence to the deity ; " I would have my
Pupil's mind well convinced of the existence of God - competently
instructed in his nature and attributes - and accustomed to think of him
with cheerfulness . LANCASTER2-1794-2,63.258

He should be taught to regard the supreme Being as the author of all his
enjoyments , <P_64> and consequently to look up to him with gratitude
and love . LANCASTER2-1794-2,64.259

He should be frequently reminded , that the eye of this beneficent
Creator and Ruler of the universe , is always over him - that he is
<font> particularly pleased <$$font> with those who are <font> obedient
<$$font> to his laws , which are revealed to us in the holy Scriptures -
and that he is <font> terrible <$$font> only to such as <font> despise
<$$font> and <font> disobey <$$font> his commandments .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,64.260

All the perfections of the Divine Nature may be illustrated to the Pupil
, in such a way , as to make <font> each <$$font> a suitable foundation
in his <font> mind <$$font> , for the superstructure of some <font>
virtue <$$font> in his <font> conduct . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,64.261

<P_65>

Such parts of every <font> Sunday <$$font> as are not occupied in
attending publick worship , may be profitably filled up by reading the
Holy Scriptures and other books which deliver religious instruction in a
sober and rational manner . LANCASTER2-1794-2,65.263

And a portion of this day ought generally to be assigned to the business
of storing the young mind with the doctrines of <font> Christianity
<$$font> , so far at least as an able and judicious illustration of our
excellent <font> Church Catechism <$$font> will authorize us to proceed
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,65.264

There are many valuable works on this subject , by some of our best
divines , as Bishop <font> Williams , Mr. Lewis <$$font> , Archbishop
<font> Wake <$$font> , and Archbishop <font> Secker <$$font> ; some of
which are very proper to be committed <P_66> to memory , and others to
be attentively perused . LANCASTER2-1794-2,66.265

In aid to the good impressions which we endeavour to make on the minds
of our pupils , by spending the <font> Lord's Day <$$font> in an
improving manner ; it is thought necessary and proper to begin and end
the business of <font> every <$$font> day with Prayers selected from the
service of the Church . LANCASTER2-1794-2,66.266

This contributes to preserve a sense of the presence and blessings of
God , LANCASTER2-1794-2,66.267

and is conducive to the order and regularity of business .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,66.268

Religion , thus attended to , affords a suitable and firm foundation for
the practice of <font> good morals and gentlemanly <P_67> behaviour
<$$font> on all occasions . LANCASTER2-1794-2,67.269

And if my pupil duly remembers that he is a <font> Gentleman <$$font>
and <font> a Christian <$$font> , I shall have great hopes of his acting
up to the respectability and value of those characters .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,67.270

The whole concern of Morals respects <font> ourselves <$$font> , and
<font> those <$$font> with whom we are <font> connected . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,67.271

With respect to <font> himself <$$font> , the pupil must be instructed ,
that his improvement in knowledge , the cultivation of his understanding
, the good government of his passions and appetites , prudence ,
discretion , diligence and cheerfulness , are duties which he owes
<P_68> to himself ; and that the practice of them will be of unspeakable
advantage , and the neglect of equal prejudice to him .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,68.272

The <font> social duties <$$font> respect <font> all those <$$font> with
whom we are any way <font> connected . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,68.273

Under this head , much may be done by a frequent application to the
great rule of <font> doing to others as we would have them to do to us .
<$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,68.274

Duly recollected , it will teach the pupils to exercise justice ,
benevolence , truth , candour , gratitude , friendship , condescension
and politeness , and help them to suppress a spirit of contention and
resentment . LANCASTER2-1794-2,68.275

Dutifulness to parents , a cheerful and ready obedience to masters and
teachers , <P_69> and a temperate subordination to all lawful superiors
, are duties of great importance to the peace and happiness of the
community , LANCASTER2-1794-2,69.276

and claim the particular attention of all who are intrusted with the
sacred charge of educating the rising generation .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,69.277

A sense of <font> honour <$$font> - the desire of maintaining a <font>
good character <$$font> - is of great use to restrain boys from any
considerable violations of moral duty . LANCASTER2-1794-2,69.278

This is therefore to be cherished and encouraged with all possible
address and delicacy , on the part of the teacher .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,69.279

And nothing is so likely to make the pupil become a <font> Man of Honour
<$$font> , as habituating him early to regard <P_70> every <font>
violation of duty <$$font> as something <font> base , mean and unworthy
of a gentleman . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,70.280

I know of but one <font> stronger <$$font> incentive to good conduct ,
LANCASTER2-1794-2,70.281

and that is a <font> religious sense of duty . <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,70.282

That the Almighty Creator and Judge requires this , and forbids that ,
is unquestionably the most powerful motive that can be proposed , to
induce a reasonable Being to perform what is commanded , and forbear
what is forbidden . LANCASTER2-1794-2,70.283

Young minds are soon susceptible of such impressions ,
LANCASTER2-1794-2,70.284

and we can@ @not be too early in inculcating them , in various ways ,
suited to the age and understanding of each . LANCASTER2-1794-2,70.285

And <font> long habits <$$font> of recurring <P_71> to such a <font>
principle <$$font> of action , may be expected to impress it on the mind
of the <font> boy <$$font> with such <font> firmness <$$font> , that the
<font> man <$$font> shall be the <font> better <$$font> for it as long
as he lives . LANCASTER2-1794-2,71.286

<font> All that is here intended <$$font> can be done without prejudice
to the <font> natural cheerfulness <$$font> of my pupil , which I would
on <font> no account violate or depress <$$font> , but only <font>
regulate <$$font> , for the preservation of his innocence , that he may
go out into the world with a <font> good character <$$font> , honourably
merited , and make his way in it , with as little danger as possible ,
from the snares of vice , debauchery and wickedness .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,71.287

<P_72>

Under this head , it may be proper to observe , that as habits of
Extravagance , which are often early contracted , are powerful
incitements to <font> vice <$$font> , and forerunners of <font> misery ,
shame <$$font> and <font> ignominy <$$font> ; it is of great importance
to accustom youth to be <font> frugal <$$font> in the expenditure of
such sums of money as the bounty of their friends may furnish them with
. LANCASTER2-1794-2,72.289

To this end , every boy has a Cash-book , in which his receipts and
disbursements are to be faithfully entered , accurately balanced , and
produced every Saturday , that it may be seen that the account and the
cash in hand agree together . LANCASTER2-1794-2,72.290

This examination affords an opportunity of advising the pupil , what
articles <P_73> of expense are improper : LANCASTER2-1794-2,73.291

and in a short time he will learn to avoid all that are so accounted .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,73.292

The habit of this practical economy , continued through life , would be
of great utility . LANCASTER2-1794-2,73.293

A turn for <font> pernicious expenses <$$font> being thus timely checked
, the mind will be more at liberty to pursue its <font> improvement .
<$$font> To encourage a <font> voluntary application <$$font> to which ,
a collection of Entertaining and Instructive Books is provided , for the
use of those who incline to devote a part of their leisure to reading .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,73.294

The reader has now before him the <font> tout ensemble <$$font> of a
Plan of Education , <P_74> in which the advantage of the scholar , and
the satisfaction of the parent have been uniformly considered .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,74.295

The Author's aim in digesting it , as well as in the practical execution
of it , is to mix the <font> useful <$$font> and the <font> pleasant
<$$font> , in such a manner , as to divest his school of those <font>
terrors <$$font> , with which young minds have been known to regard
<font> seminaries of learning . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,74.296

How far such terrors are well or ill founded , he does not presume to
enquire : LANCASTER2-1794-2,74.297

but he is clearly of opinion , that it is possible to make the time a
youth must spend at school , pass away <font> agreeably <$$font> and
<font> pleasantly <$$font> - to make him <font> love <$$font> his <font>
teachers <$$font> and his <font> learning <$$font> - and so to pave the
way to <P_75> his <font> solid improvement <$$font> in both <font>
knowledge and virtue . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,75.298

Children <font> love <$$font> their <font> parents <$$font> , because
they pay attention to their <font> comfort : <$$font>
LANCASTER2-1794-2,75.299

and the <font> master <$$font> who will exercise the <font> same
{TEXT:some} attention <$$font> , shall be sure to <font> share their
affection . <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,75.300

<font> Such <$$font> is the <font> principle <$$font> of a School for
Young Gentlemen , established in a most <font> eligible situation
<$$font> , at an <font> easy distance <$$font> from town .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,75.301

The Author has endeavoured throughout to express himself with that
<font> simplicity <$$font> and <font> candour <$$font> which his <font>
profession demands : <$$font> LANCASTER2-1794-2,75.302

and he has <font> studiously avoided <$$font> the mention of <font> any
advantage <$$font> , which is not <font> actually <P_76> realized
<$$font> in the economy of his house and school .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,76.303

<heading>

His Terms <$$heading> For Board and Education in the English , French ,
Latin and Greek Languages , Writing , Arithmetick , Merchants' Accompts
, Mathematicks , Geography , the Use of the Globes , and Short-hand
Writing , are Thirty Guineas per_Annum . LANCASTER2-1794-2,76.305

He requires no Entrance-fee : LANCASTER2-1794-2,76.306

but those who desire to have the benefit of the Library , contribute
each a guinea towards its augmentation . LANCASTER2-1794-2,76.307

<P_77>

Those who demand extra accommodations will not object to a
proportionable increase in the charge . LANCASTER2-1794-2,77.309

Dancing , Drawing , Music and <paren> commonly <$$paren> the
Military-Exercise , are extra Expenses ; as are also weekly Allowances ,
Books , stationary Wares and Tradesmen's Bills .
LANCASTER2-1794-2,77.310

This school keeps two Vacations , of a calendar Month each ; the
Christmas Vacation commencing on the Thursday before the 24th of
December ; and that of Midsummer , on the Thursday before the 24th , of
June . LANCASTER2-1794-2,77.311

Those who reside here at such times , <P_78> are subject to a moderate
additional charge . LANCASTER2-1794-2,78.312

It also allows a short Recess at Easter , from Holy Thursday to the end
of Easter-week . LANCASTER2-1794-2,78.313

The bills are to be paid at Christmas and Midsummer ;
LANCASTER2-1794-2,78.314

and <font> Messrs. Staples , Newman , Anderson , Staples and Lynn
<$$font> , his Bankers , No. 83 . <font> Cornhill , London <$$font> ,
will give receipts to such Gentlemen as choose to pay them into their
hands . LANCASTER2-1794-2,78.315

Ladies and Gentlemen desirous of testimonies in support of what the
Author has said , are respectfully requested to address , or call upon ,
the <P_79> <font> Rev. T. Lancaster , Wimbledon , Surry <$$font> , who
can give references to persons of the first respectability , both in
London and the Country . LANCASTER2-1794-2,79.316

<heading>

Finis . LANCASTER2-1794-2,79.318

<$$heading>

