<BEGIN_lancaster1-1806-1>

<P_29>

<heading>

Principles on which <font> The Institution is conducted . <$$font>
LANCASTER1-1806-1,29.4

<$$heading>

The influence a master has over his scholars is very great ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,29.6

the veneration wherewith they regard him is almost equal to idolatry ,
and that simply by his conduct in his station ; so much so , that they
are all his willing servants , and doubly proud to be his ambassadors on
trivial occasions : LANCASTER1-1806-1,29.7

his smiles are precious , LANCASTER1-1806-1,29.8

and even bitter things are sweet , when bestowed by his hand .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,29.9

The following quotation may be worthy the reader's attention :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,29.10

- " By way of sport , or to try the dexterity of the pupils , the master
leads them to a clump of trees , LANCASTER1-1806-1,29.11

and , while he is counting fifteen , every one must climb up some tree ,
so high , as to be out of the reach of his cane ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,29.12

all exert themselves , with much laughter , to escape the stick , as if
some wild {TEXT:some-wild} beast were at their heels ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,29.13

if one be defective <P_30> in agility , he will be reached , and receive
the penance of a few playful strokes . " - <font> Sallzmann's
Gymnastics for Youth , <$$font> page 225 . LANCASTER1-1806-1,30.14

These playful strokes , from a companion or an equal , would most likely
produce a tough battle , and black eyes ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,30.15

but from a master , a beating , we read , is taken very pleasantly .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,30.16

The effects of approbation , or the contrary , expressed by the senior
boys to lesser , seem to carry a degree of weight , almost similar to
that of their master . LANCASTER1-1806-1,30.17

Whenever a neat , ingenious trick , of a mischievous nature , has been
played , we may be sure some arch wag , who officiates as captain of the
gang , perhaps a Franklin {COM:footnote_omitted} , was the original and
life of the conspiracy . LANCASTER1-1806-1,30.18

<P_31>

The predominant feature in the youthful disposition is an almost
irresistible propensity to action ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,31.20

this , if properly controlled by suitable employment , will become a
valuable auxiliary to the master ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,31.21

but , if neglected , will be apt to degenerate into rebellion .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,31.22

<font> Active youths , when treated as ciphers , will generally show
their consequence by exercising themselves in mischief . <$$font>
LANCASTER1-1806-1,31.23

I am convinced , by experience , that it is practicable for teachers to
acquire a proper <font> dominion <$$font> over the minds of the youth
under their care , by directing those active spirits to good purposes .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,31.24

This liveliness should never be repressed , but directed to useful ends
; LANCASTER1-1806-1,31.25

and I have ever found , the surest way to cure a <font> mischievous
<$$font> boy was to <font> make him a monitor . <$$font>
LANCASTER1-1806-1,31.26

I never knew any thing succeed much better , if so well .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,31.27

In education nothing can be more important than economy of time , even
when we have a reasonable prospect of a good portion of it at our
disposal ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,31.28

but it is most peculiarly necessary in primary schools , and in the
instruction of the poor : - cases <P_32> wherein the pupil seldom has
too much on his hands ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.29

and very often a fine genius or noble talents are lost to the state ,
and to mankind , from the want of it . LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.30

If we wish to do the best for the welfare of youth , and to promote
their interest through life , it will be well for us to study economy of
their precious time . LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.31

" Be careful of time , " says the philosopher , LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.32

" for time is the stuff life is made of . " LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.33

In this respect , I would recommend the teachers of youth , for example
, to the industry of the Chinese waterman , who plies one oar with his
right foot , another with his left hand , dexterously guiding the sail ,
in the mean time , with his right , while he enjoys his whiff of tobacco
seemingly quite at his ease . LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.34

As a further proof of the benefit resulting from this mode of
instruction , the following instance is remarkable .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.35

Several boys , belonging to my school , were in the habit of playing
truant continually . LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.36

This habit was contracted , as it usually is , by frequenting bad , idle
company . LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.37

One boy seemed quite incorrigible : LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.38

his father got a log and chain , LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.39

chained it to his foot , LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.40

and , in that condition , beating him all the way , followed him to
school repeatedly . LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.41

Nothing was of any avail - LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.42

neither was the lad reformed by any thing the parent could do .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.43

At last he was reformed by a contest about <font> an old rusty nail .
<$$font> LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.44

I am not fond of laying wagers ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,32.45

but , without <P_33> any other design than the improvement of two
classes , by raising a spirit of emulation among them , I betted , with
one of my subordinate monitors , a <font> shilling <$$font> against an
{TEXT:an_<font>_an} old rusty nail , <$$font> that another class would
excel in writing on the slate , that in which he taught .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.46

In case it did , the old rusty nail was to be mine ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.47

and the oddity of the thing tickled the fancy of the boys ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.48

and served as well for the bone of contention as any thing else .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.49

Both classes were disposed to exert all their powers on the ocasion ,
determined not to be excelled . LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.50

I lost the wager in the sequel ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.51

but if it had been fifty times the value , it could not have had a
better effect than it had . LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.52

The truants , I have been mentioning , were in the two contending
classes . LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.53

The interest they took in the honor of their classes was so great , that
instead of playing truant , they came to school ; to aid their
companions in securing the honor , which was more than the prize .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.54

The interest they took in the thing was so great , that they became
pleased with school ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.55

and , above all , the almost incorrigible boy became reformed , and one
of the best proficients in learning in the whole school ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.56

and , for two years after , which he remained with me , no more was
heard of his playing truant . LANCASTER1-1806-1,33.57

Thus , a little emulation and mental interest in what he had to do ,
produced that improvement in conduct , and delight in learning , which
neither the log , nor the horse-whip , or any other severe treatment he
received from his father , <P_34> could produce .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,34.58

The reformation was more striking in him , because he seemed a more
hardened offender ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,34.59

but there were several others who were completely reformed at the same
time , and by the same means . LANCASTER1-1806-1,34.60

It is by the application of this powerful influence , and by controlling
and directing the influence the lads have over each other , to useful
purposes , that , under the <font> blessing <$$font> which hath rested
on my labours , I have been so successful ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,34.61

and , I believe , that others who may wish to establish similar
institutions , upon the same principles as mine , must build on the same
foundation . LANCASTER1-1806-1,34.62

The passions of the human heart must be their study ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,34.63

and they will find the system itself answer to the effects , as face to
face in a glass . LANCASTER1-1806-1,34.64

From successfully cultivating the affections , and studying the
dispositions of my senior lads , it is , that I have been able to turn
the public spirit of youth in my institution against vice and
profaneness . LANCASTER1-1806-1,34.65

The following is a short extract from a letter addressed to John Foster
, Chancellor of the Exchequer for Ireland , on Education for the Poor in
that Country : <paren> <font> sold by Darton and Harvey , London :
<$$font> <$$paren> a tract I wish to recommend to the perusal of the
reader ; and which , as well as the system of education , I am happy to
say has the marked approbation of the great and enlightened statesman to
whom I had the honor of addressing it . LANCASTER1-1806-1,34.66

He has <P_35> repeatedly visited the institution ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.67

and , as well as his noble friends , {COM:footnote_omitted} was
extremely gratified at the sight of such a large number of boys ,
self_educated in so singular a manner . LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.68

" A benevolent friend of mine , who resides at a village , near London ,
where he has a school of the class of those called Sunday Schools ,
recommended several lads to me for education . LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.69

He is a pious man , LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.70

and these children had the advantage of good precepts under his
instruction , in an eminent degree , LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.71

but had reduced them to very little practice . LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.72

As they came to my school from some distance , they were permitted to
bring their dinners ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.73

and , in the interval between morning and afternoon school-hours , spent
their time , with a number of lads under similar circumstances , in a
play-ground adjoining the school-room . LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.74

In this play-ground the boys usually enjoy an hour's {TEXT:our's}
recreation : tops , balls , races , or what best suits their inclination
, and the season of the year ; but , with this charge , ' Let all be
kept in innocence . ' LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.75

These lads thought themselves very happy , at play , with their new
associates ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.76

but on a sudden they were seized LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.77

and overcome by numbers , were brought into school just as people in the
street would seize a pickpocket , and bring him to a police officer .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,35.78

Happening at that time to <P_36> be within , I inquired , ' Well , boys
, what is all this bustle about ? ' LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.79

' Why , Sir , ' was the general reply , ' these
{COM:five_asterisks_in_text} lads have been swearing . '
LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.80

This was announced with as much emphasis and solemnity , as a judge
would use in passing sentence upon a criminal . LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.81

The culprits were , as may be supposed , in much terror .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.82

After the examination of witnesses and proof of the facts , they
received an admonition as to the offence ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.83

and , on promise of better behaviour , were dismissed .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.84

No more was ever heard of their swearing ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.85

yet it is observeable , that they were better acquainted with the theory
of Christianity , and could give a more rational answer to questions
from the Scriptures , than several of the boys who had thus treated them
, in comparison , as constables would do a thief . "
LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.86

I call this practical religious instruction , LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.87

and could , were it needful , add many such anecdotes ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.88

but there are two things very remarkable : LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.89

it is considered as an incumbent duty on every lad attending school ,
and , above all , the monitors , " not to screen vice or profaneness ; "
LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.90

and I lately had two complaints in one day , of boys swearing .
{TEXT:,} LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.91

The informer against the first culprit had to repeat to me the words
which he had been using ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.92

he seemed to think his lips would be polluted by the repetition ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.93

so he wrote them upon the slate . LANCASTER1-1806-1,36.94

The second accuser spelt the words very deliberately , instead of
pronouncing them at full length , as is usual in other <P_37> cases .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.95

I have often observed boys reluctant , and afraid to make such
repetitions ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.96

and am always happy to see timidity on such occasions , and the
watchfulness many of the youth , under my care , exercise over each
other for good . LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.97

In establishing this institution , the influence a master has over his
scholars , and the influence they have one over another , have been the
objects of constant study and practice ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.98

it has most happily succeeded in proving , that a very large number of
children may be superintended by one master ; and that they can be
self-educated by their exertions , under his care .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.99

The whole school is arranged in classes ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.100

a monitor is appointed to each , who is responsible for the cleanliness
, order , and improvement of every boy in it . LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.101

He is assisted by boys , either from his own or another class , to
perform part of his duties for him , when the number is more than he is
equal to manage himself . LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.102

The proportion of boys who teach , either in reading , writing , or
arithmetic , is one to ten . LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.103

In so large a school , there are duties to be performed which simply
relate to order , and have no connexion with learning ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.104

for these duties , different monitors are appointed .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.105

The word monitor , in this institution , means , any boy that has charge
either in some department of tuition or of order ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,37.106

and is <P_38> not simply confined to those boys who teach .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.107

- The boy who takes care that the writing books are ruled , by machines
made for that purpose , is the monitor of ruling .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.108

The boy who superintends the inquiries after the absentees , is called
the monitor of absentees . LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.109

The monitors who inspect the improvement of the classes in reading ,
writing and arithmetic , are called inspecting monitors ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.110

and their offices are , indeed , essentially different from that of the
<font> teaching monitors . <$$font> LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.111

A boy whose business it is to give to the other monitors such books ,
&c. as may be wanted or appointed for the daily use of their classes ,
and to gather them up when done with ; to see all the boys do read , and
that none leave school without reading , is called the monitor-general .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.112

Another is called the monitor of slates , because he has a general
charge of all the slates in the school . LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.113

The benefits resulting from a system of education which will create
motives in the minds of youth , and induce them to exert their powers ,
is far superior to any benefit the exertions of their master can produce
to them . LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.114

This will be illustrated in a striking manner , by the following curious
fact . LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.115

- Some years ago , a lad , when about thirteen years of age , took it
into his head to write paragraphs for newspapers :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.116

he did so , LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.117

but all his paragraphs were returned to him unprinted .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,38.118

Previously to this , he had <P_39> attempted to write a collection of
anecdotes : LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.119

in this he did not persevere . LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.120

He attempted to write a sermon , LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.121

and left it nearly finished , and better than could be expected ,
considering his education and youth . LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.122

His next attempt was an Answer to Paine's Rights of Man , which was
followed by a <font> new <$$font> System of Physic , a Democratical
Pamphlet , and A Defence of Revealed Religion .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.123

In all these attempts he wasted many quires of paper ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.124

rose in the morning early , LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.125

neglected his meals , LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.126

and was often wholly swallowed up in the subject with which his mind was
engaged . LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.127

These were his various and fluctuating pursuits .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.128

But what was the result of all these laughable attempts ?
LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.129

He insensibly acquired the art of thinking intensely and clearly on any
subject on which his mind was engaged ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.130

and , in the end , attained a concise , familiar style of writing ,
which , it is probable , he never would have acquired by any other means
. LANCASTER1-1806-1,39.131

<P_40>

<heading>

<font> On the Arrangement of the Institution , as connected with
Improvements in Education . <$$font> LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.134

<$$heading>

To promote emulation , and facilitate learning , the whole school is
arranged into classes , and a monitor appointed to each class .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.136

A class consists of any number of boys whose proficiency is on a par :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.137

these may all be classed and taught together . LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.138

If the class is small , one monitor may teach it ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.139

if large , it may still continue the same class , but with more or less
assistant monitors , who , under the direction of the principal monitor
, are to teach the subdivisions of the class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.140

If only four or six boys should be found in a school , who are learning
the same thing , as A , B , C , ab . &c. Addition , Subtraction , &c.
I think it would be advantageous for them to pursue their studies after
the manner of a class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.141

If the number of boys studying the same lesson , in any school , should
amount to six , their proficiency will be nearly doubled by being
classed , and studying in conjunction . LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.142

There are two descriptions of boys to be found in every school ; those
who are learning to read , and those who have learnt ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.143

to the last , reading is not a study , but a medium of religious or
moral instruction . To the first , a progressive series of lessons ,
rising step by step , to that point , where children may begin to store
their minds with knowledge for use in future life .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,40.144

This is the second object of instruction , and to which a series of
<P_41> reading lessons connected with those mechanical , or other
pursuits in life , which they are likely to be engaged in , and with
religious knowledge , is a valuable auxiliary .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,41.145

{COM:lists_omitted} With these last three classes , I use a particular
series of reading , which is annexed ; not as the most excellent , but
the one I have been able to find , well adapted to their moral and
religious improvement . LANCASTER1-1806-1,41.146

I now proceed to describe the method of tuition used in the first class
. LANCASTER1-1806-1,41.147

<P_42>

<heading>

<font> Of the method of teaching to read . <$$font>
LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.150

First Class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.151

<$$heading>

The first , or lower class of scholars , are those who are yet
unacquainted with their alphabet . LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.153

This class may consist of ten , twenty , or an_hundred ; or any other
number of children , who have not made so much progress as to know how
to distinguish all their letters at first sight .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.154

If there are only ten or twenty of this description in the school , one
boy can manage and teach them ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.155

if double the number , it will require two boys as teachers , and so in
proportion for every additional twenty boys . LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.156

The reader will observe , that , in this and every other class ,
described in the succeeding plan and arrangement , the monitor has but
one plain , simple object to teach , though in several ways ; and the
scholars the same to learn . LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.157

This simplicity of system defines at once the province of each monitor
in tuition . LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.158

The very name of each class imports as much - LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.159

and this is called the first A , B , C , class .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.160

The method of teaching is as follows : LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.161

a bench is placed or fixed to the ground for the boys to sit on ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.162

another , about a foot higher , is placed before them .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,42.163

On the desk before them is placed deal ledges <paren> a pantile lath ,
nailed down to the desk , would answer the same purpose <$$paren> thus :
<P_43> {COM:figure_omitted} LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.164

The letter A , shows the entire surface of the desk , which is supported
by two , three , or more legs , as usual for such desks , and according
to the size . LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.165

B , is a vacant space , where the boys lean their left arms , while they
write or print with the right hand . LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.166

The sand is placed in the space C . {COM:footnote_omitted}
LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.167

The double lines represent the ledges <paren> or pantile laths <$$paren>
which confine the sand in its place : LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.168

sand of any kind will do , LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.169

but it must be dry . LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.170

The boys print in the sand , with their fingers :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.171

they all print at the <font> command <$$font> given by their monitor .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.172

A boy who knows how to print , and distinguish some of his letters , is
placed by one who knows few or none , with a view to assist him ; and ,
particularly , that he may copy the form of his letters , from <font>
seeing <$$font> him make them . LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.173

We find this copying one from another a great step towards proficiency .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,43.174

In teaching the boys to print the alphabet , the monitor first <P_44>
makes a letter on the sand , before any boy who knows nothing about it ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.175

the boy is then required to <font> retrace <$$font> over the same letter
, which the monitor has made for him , with his fingers ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.176

and thus he is to continue employed , till he can make the letter
himself , without the monitor's assistance . LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.177

Then he may go on to learn another letter . LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.178

The letters are taught in courses : LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.179

they are arranged in three courses , according to their similarity of
form . LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.180

There are three simple examples , which regulate the formation of the
whole alphabet . <font> First <$$font> , a line , as in the letters , I
, H , T , L , E , F , i , l : <font> Second <$$font> , depending upon
the formation of an angle ; as , A , V , W , M , N , Z , K , Y , X , - v
, w , k , y , z , x : a circle , or a curve ; as , O , U , C , J , G , D
, P , B , R , Q , S , - a , o , b , d , p , q , g , e , m , n , h , t ,
u , r , s , f , j . LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.181

These courses of letters are soon acquired , on account of the
similarity of form . LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.182

The greatest difficulty in teaching the letters occur in those , the
form of which are exactly alike , and are only distinguished by change
of position ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.183

p , q , and b , d , are perpetually mistaken for each other ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.184

by <font> making <$$font> the two letters at the same time , the
children readily learn to distinguish them . LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.185

Then again , they are all employed in printing at once ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,44.186

and it is both curious and diverting to see a number of little creatures
, many not more than four or five years old , and some hardly that ,
stretching out their little fingers with <P_45> one consent , to make
the letters . LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.187

When this is done , they sit quietly till the sand is smoothed for them
, by the monitor , with a <font> flat-iron <$$font> , as commonly used
for ironing linen . LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.188

The sand being dry , the iron meets no resistance ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.189

and thus , all the letters made in a very short time , by each boy , are
, in as short a time , obliterated by the monitor ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.190

and the boys again apply their <font> fingers <$$font> to the sand ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.191

and proceed as before . LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.192

Another method of teaching the alphabet is , by a large sheet of
pasteboard suspended by nail on the school wall ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.193

twelve boys , from the sand class , are formed into a circle round this
alphabet , standing in their numbers , 1 , 2 , 3 , &c. to 12 .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.194

These numbers are pasteboard tickets , with number 1 , &c. inscribed ,
suspended by a string from the button of the bearer's coat , or round
his neck . LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.195

The best boy stands in the first place ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.196

he is also decorated with a leather ticket , gilt , and lettered ,
<font> merit <$$font> , as a badge of honor . LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.197

He is always the first boy questioned by the monitor , who points to a
particular letter in the alphabet , LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.198

" What letter is that ? " LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.199

If he tells readily , what letter it is , all is well ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.200

and he retains his place in the class ; which he forfeits , together
with his number and ticket , to the next boy who answers the question ,
if he can@ @not . LANCASTER1-1806-1,45.201

<P_46>

This promotes constant emulation . LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.203

It employs the monitor's attention continually ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.204

he can@ @not look one way , while the boy is repeating his letters
another ; or at all neglect to attend to him , without being immediately
discovered . LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.205

It is not the monitor's business to teach , but to see the boys in his
class or division teach each other . LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.206

If a boy calls A , by the name of B , or O , he is not to say , it is
not B , or O , LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.207

but it is A ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.208

he is to require the next boy in succession to correct the mistakes of
his senior . LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.209

These two methods of the sand and alphabet card , with their inferior
arrangements detailed , are made use of daily in rotation ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.210

and serve as a mutual check and relief to each other .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.211

The figures are taught in the same manner . LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.212

Sand is a cheap substitute for books any where ; but more so in those
parts of the country where the soil is sandy , than in London .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.213

<font> This <$$font> method was taken in the outline from Dr. Bell ,
formerly of Madras ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.214

but he did not say , in this printed account of that institution ,
whether wet or dry sand was used . LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.215

It , for a long time , involved our minor classes in much difficulty ,
having begun with the wet sand : LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.216

we continued it some time . LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.217

It required great care in wetting : LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.218

if wetted either too much or too little , it was equally useless and
inconvenient ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.219

it occasioned a deal of trouble to smooth , LANCASTER1-1806-1,46.220

and took double or <P_47> treble the quantity of sand which it would
have taken dry . LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.221

All these difficulties , my boys overcame in a short time ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.222

but every time we had a change of monitors in this class , we found it a
troublesome qualification for him to attain the art of preparing it
properly . LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.223

All these difficulties were obviated by my hearing from Dr. Bell , that
it was dry sand . LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.224

This circumstance fully shows , how essential a minute detail is , to
the ready practice of any experiment , LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.225

and will be an apology for the length of this , on the art of teaching
the A , B , C . LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.226

We , of course , use no books for this class of children , nor , indeed
, for several other classes , as will be seen in the sequel .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.227

<heading>

Second Class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.229

<$$heading>

The second class are chiefly boys who , having learnt to print the
alphabet and <font> figures <$$font> in sand , and readily to
distinguish the same on paper , are then advanced to this second , and
comparatively superior class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.231

Their business is to spell short words , by writing them with their
fingers in the sand , as the monitor dictates to them : a method clearly
described in the account of the new method of spelling in the sequel ;
the monitor pronouncing a word , as , to , &c. ; or a syllable , as ,
ba , &c. and each boy printing it on the sand with his fingers , and
thus spelling it . LANCASTER1-1806-1,47.232

The order of the desks , and smoothing <P_48> the sand with the irons ,
is the same as in the first class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.233

They also make the figures in the sand , to a great number .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.234

Besides this , they have small slates , the method of obtaining which
will be described hereafter . LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.235

On these slates they learn to make all the alphabet in writing :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.236

this is done that they may not , when in the preceding class , be
perplexed with learning the printed and written alphabet at once .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.237

Care is also taken , that the series of words , and syllables of two
letters , which this class , print in the sand , is so arranged as to
contain all the letters of the alphabet ; which , otherwise , being
recently learnt , would be easily forgotten , unless kept in memory by
daily practice . LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.238

This arrangement of words , and syllables of two letters , will be
published on a sheet by itself , for the use of persons concerned in the
education of youth . LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.239

The words are arranged by themselves , and syllables by themselves :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.240

words of two letters , being most familiar to the juvenile mind , are
placed first . LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.241

Syllables are what they can@ @not attach any sense to :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.242

and , in fact , have no sense or meaning , unless compounded into words
above the comprehensions of children in this class .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.243

They have a card , with words and syllables of two letters , round which
the whole class <font> successively <$$font> assemble , in subdivisions
of twelve boys each . LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.244

The first boy is required to spell a word by the monitor in the same
manner as the first boy , in the a , b , c , was required to distinguish
a single letter ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,48.245

and precedency is awarded according to excellence , <P_49> as before .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.246

In short , this method is the same as with the a , b , c , card ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.247

only it is combining the letters , instead of distinguishing them .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.248

The succeeding classes have no sand allowed them ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.249

but they write on a slate . LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.250

They are taught to read and spell on the same plan ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.251

and therefore , the management of them will be best described by
detailing the methods of reading , spelling , writing , arithmetic ,
emulation , competition , and reward . LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.252

It is only to be observed , that the class which reads and spells in
three letters , spells , by writing on the slate , words of three
letters ; the 4th , or four-letter class , writing words of four letters
; and the 5th , or five-letter class , writing words of five letters on
the slate ; and the superior classes words of three or four syllables ;
also , words with the meanings attached . LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.253

Each class has cards , in the same manner as the first and second
classes ; all of which are made use of in a similar way , only varying
as to the length of the words or syllables each class may be learning .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.254

<heading>

<font> Improved Method of Teaching Spelling by Writing . <$$font>
LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.256

<$$heading>

This method of spelling seems to be excellent : it being entirely an
<font> addition <$$font> to the regular course of studies , without
interfering with , or deranging them in the least .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.258

It commands attention , LANCASTER1-1806-1,49.259

gratifies <P_50> the active disposition of youth ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.260

and is an excellent introduction and auxiliary to writing .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.261

It supersedes , in a great measure , the use of books in tuition , while
<paren> to speak moderately <$$paren> it doubles the actual improvement
of the children . LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.262

It is as simple an operation as can well be conceived .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.263

- Thus , supply twenty boys with slates and pencil ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.264

and pronounce any word for them to write , LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.265

suppose it is the word " ab-so-lu-ti-on ; " LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.266

they are obliged to listen with attention , to catch the sound of every
letter as it falls from their teacher's lips ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.267

again , they have to retrace the idea of every letter , and the
pronunciation of the word , as they write it on the slates .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.268

If we examine ourselves when we write letters , {TEXT:.} we shall find ,
that writing is so much associated and connected with orthography , that
we can@ @not write a word without spelling as we write , and
involuntarily correcting any inaccuracy that may occur .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.269

Now these twenty boys , if they were at a common school , would each
have a book ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.270

and , one at a time , would read or spell to their teacher , while the
other nineteen were looking at their books or about them , as they
pleased : LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.271

or , if their eyes are rivetted on their books , by terror and coercion
, can we be sure that the attention of their minds is engaged , as
appearance seems to speak it is ? LANCASTER1-1806-1,50.272

On the contrary , when they have slates , the twentieth boy may read
<P_51> to the teacher {COM:footnote_omitted} , while the other nineteen
are spelling words on the slate , instead of sitting idle .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.273

The class , by this means , will spell , write , and read , at the same
instant of time . LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.274

In addition to this , the same trouble which teaches twenty , will
suffice to teach sixty or a_hundred , by employing some of the senior
boys to inspect the slates of the others , they not omitting to spell
the word themselves ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.275

and , on a signal given to them by the principal teacher , that the word
is finished by all the boys they overlook , he is informed when to
dictate another to the class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.276

This experiment has been tried with some hundreds of children ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.277

and it has been found , that they could all write , from one boy
dictating the words to be written . LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.278

The benefit of this mode of teaching , can only be limited by the want
of hearing distinctly the monitor's {TEXT:monitors} voice ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.279

for , if seven_hundred boys were all in one room , as one class ,
learning the same thing , they could all write and spell by this method
at the dictation of one monitor . LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.280

I appeal to the candour and good sense of every reader , justly to
appreciate the benefit and importance of this method of teaching .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.281

The <font> repetition <$$font> of one word by the monitor , serves to
rivet it firmly on the minds of each one of the class , and also on his
own memory ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.282

thus <font> he <$$font> can@ @not possibly teach the class without
improving <font> himself <$$font> at the same time .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,51.283

When we reflect , <P_52> that by the advantage of {TEXT:if} this
invention , a boy who is associated in a class of an_hundred others ,
not only reads as much as if he was a solitary individual under the
master's care , but he will also spell sixty or seventy words of four
syllables , by writing them on the slate , in less than two hours :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,52.284

when this additional number of words , spelt by each boy daily is taken
into account , the aggregate will amount to repetitions of many
thousands of words annually ; when , not a word would be written or
spelt , and nothing done by nineteen twentieths of the scholars in the
same time . LANCASTER1-1806-1,52.285

Thus , it is entirely an improvement and an introduction to their other
studies , without the least additional trouble on the part of the
teacher ; without any extra time of attendance being requisite from the
scholar ; without deranging or impeding his attention to other studies ,
as is usually the case with the study of extra lessons ; at least , more
than doubling the advances of each individual towards a proficiency , at
the same time ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,52.286

and , possessing all these advantages , it prevents idleness ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,52.287

and procures that great desideratum of schools , <font> quietness
<$$font> by commanding attention : LANCASTER1-1806-1,52.288

for , as it requires much writing , but few boys can write and talk at
the same time . LANCASTER1-1806-1,52.289

In this , nothing is wholly committed to the pupil or monitor .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,52.290

Some studies require a degree of mental exertion , that may or may not
be made , LANCASTER1-1806-1,52.291

and yet the omission remain undetected ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,52.292

but this is so visible , that every boy's attention to his lesson may be
seen on his <P_53> slate ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,53.293

and detection immediately follows idleness , or an indifferent
performance ! LANCASTER1-1806-1,53.294

That a thing , so simple in itself , should abound with so many
advantages , is scarcely to be supposed , at a first glance ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,53.295

but , that it does , I am well convinced , by daily experience of its
utility ; particularly , the improvement it affords by so great a
practice in writing . LANCASTER1-1806-1,53.296

Boys who learn by the new mode , have six times the usual practice in
writing ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,53.297

but , in the old way , the expense is , at the first cost , 5_1$$2 d per
month , for writing books , pens , and ink , each boy :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,53.298

this will be six times increased , if it is desired to give both classes
of boys equal practice ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,53.299

the usual cost for sixty boys is 16 <font> l. <$$font> 10 <font> s.
<$$font> per_annum . LANCASTER1-1806-1,53.300

{COM:table_omitted}

<P_54>

The many hundreds of respectable characters , nobility , clergy , gentry
, merchants , and others , who have visited the institution , can bear
witness , that the progress of the boys in writing , by this method of
writing all they spell , is astonishing ! Not of one , or a few boys ,
but of the whole school . LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.303

By this practice of writing on the slate , they learn to humour their
pencils , so as to write just like a pen , in making the up and down
strokes of the letters . LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.304

About one_hundred_and_fifty boys have writing books ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.305

and their writing on the slate , is a <font> fac_simile <$$font> of
their writing in books : which they seldom do , more than four times in
a week , and then only a single copy , which covers but a quarto page ,
each time . LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.306

Slates are an article so great in request , on this plan , that it is
proper to procure the best sort : LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.307

those of a reddish cast allow the pencil to play with more freedom ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.308

those of the black kind , though neater in appearance , are generally
hard and brittle ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.309

and the pencil is more apt to scratch than write thereon :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.310

yet , there are some of the black kind which are an exception to this
observation . LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.311

If any gentleman , in a country town or village , should be pulling down
an old building that has been slated , the damaged slates from it would
be a valuable acquisition to village children : LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.312

for , by the friction of a little Portland stone and water , on the
surface of the slate , they will obtain a good polish , and serve as
well for use , as slates of ten times their value .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,54.313

I hope to see the day , when slates <P_55> and slate-pencils will be
more resorted to than they have heretofore been , and thus afford to
every poor child a cheap and ready medium of instruction , in spelling ,
writing , and arithmetic . LANCASTER1-1806-1,55.314

<heading>

<font> A Method of Teaching to Spell and Read , <$$font> Whereby One
Book Will Serve Instead of Six_Hundred Books . LANCASTER1-1806-1,55.316

<$$heading>

It will be remembered , that the usual mode of teaching requires every
boy to have a book : LANCASTER1-1806-1,55.318

yet , each boy can only read or spell one lesson at a time , in that
book . LANCASTER1-1806-1,55.319

Now , all the other parts of the book are in wear , and liable to be
<font> thumbed <$$font> to pieces ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,55.320

and , whilst the boy is learning a lesson on one part of the book , the
other parts are at that time useless . Whereas , if a spelling book
contains twenty or thirty different lessons , and it were possible for
thirty scholars to read the thirty lessons in that book , it would be
equivalent to thirty books for its utility . LANCASTER1-1806-1,55.321

To effect this , it is desirable the whole of the book should be printed
three times larger than the common size type , which would make it equal
in size and cost to three common spelling books , value from eight-pence
to a shilling each . LANCASTER1-1806-1,55.322

Again , it should be printed with only one page to a leaf , which would
again double the price , and make it equivalent in bulk and cost to five
or six common books ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,55.323

its different parts should then be pasted on pasteboard , and suspended
by a string , to a nail in <P_56> the wall , or other convenient place :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,56.324

one pasteboard should contain the alphabet ; others , words and
syllables of from two to six letters . The reading lessons gradually
rising from words of one syllable , in the same manner , till they come
to words of five or six letters , or more , preparatory to the Testament
lessons . LANCASTER1-1806-1,56.325

There is a circumstance , very seldom regarded enough , in the
introductory lessons which youth usually have to perform before they are
admitted to read in the Testament . LANCASTER1-1806-1,56.326

A word of six letters or more , being divided by hy-phens , reduces the
syllables , which compose it to three , four , or five letters each ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,56.327

of course , it is as easy to read syllables , as words of five letters :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,56.328

and the child , who can read or spell the one , will find the other as
easily attainable . LANCASTER1-1806-1,56.329

In the Testament , the words of two and three syllables are undivided ,
which makes this division of the lessons a more natural introduction to
the Testament . LANCASTER1-1806-1,56.330

In the preparatory lessons I have used , the words are thus di-vi-ded .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,56.331

When the cards are provided , as before mentioned , from twelve to
twenty boys may stand in a circle round each card , and clearly
distinguish the print to read or spell , as well or better than if they
had a common spelling book in each of their hands .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,56.332

If one spelling book was divided into thirty different parts or lessons
, and each lesson given to <P_57> a different boy , it would only serve
thirty boys , changing their lessons among themselves , as often as
needful ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.333

and the various parts would be continually liable to be lost or torn .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.334

But , every lesson placed on a card , will serve for twelve or twenty
boys at once : LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.335

and , when that twelve or twenty have repeated the whole lesson , as
many times over as there are boys in the circle , they are dismissed to
their spelling on the slate , LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.336

and another like number of boys may study the same lesson , in
succession : LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.337

indeed , <font> two_hundred boys <$$font> may all repeat their lessons
from <font> one <$$font> card , in the space of <font> three hours .
<$$font> LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.338

If the value and importance of this plan , for saving paper and books in
teaching reading and spelling , will not recommend itself , all I can
say in its praise , from experience , will be of no avail .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.339

When standing in circles , to read or spell , the boys wear their
numbers , tickets , pictures , &c. as described under the head ,
Emulation and Reward ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.340

and give place to each other , according to merit , as mentioned in the
account of the two first classes . LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.341

In reading , they read lines of sentences , and sometimes paragraphs ,
in rotation . LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.342

They are required to read every word slowly and deliberately , pausing
between each . LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.343

They read long words in the same manner , only by syllables :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.344

thus , in reading the word , Composition , they would not read it at
once , but by syllables : thus , Com-po-si-ti-on ; making a pause at
every syllable . LANCASTER1-1806-1,57.345

This deliberate <P_58> method is adapted to prevent those mistakes ,
which boys so often make in reading , by pronouncing words wrong :
adding , or taking syllables at random , from the words in their lesson
, so as to make nonsense of it . LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.346

A boy may read the word , He-te-ro-dox , LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.347

in haste , he may call it Heterodoxy ; or vary it in any way that haste
induces him to misapprehend : LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.348

but if he read it deliberately , He-te-ro-dox , pronouncing every
distinct syllable by itself , he can@ @not possibly read it amiss .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.349

This method , also , accustoms the eye at once to read the syllables in
every word , before the word is pronounced . LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.350

For those who are apt to make blunders in learning to read , this mode
will be found the best remedy . LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.351

We are daily in the habit of speaking to each other ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.352

in so doing , we combine syllables into words , and words into sentences
; by which we make ourselves understood . LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.353

This is combination ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.354

but those who combine syllables or words improperly , do well to look
back to analysis . LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.355

Syllables are the component parts of words ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.356

those who can read syllables distinctly , will soon learn to combine
them into words . LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.357

Every sentence we express , is a combination of syllables and words ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.358

under the influence of these daily habits , there is more danger of
inattention in learners , to the leading principles of correct reading ,
than to any other circumstance . LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.359

I am much indebted to Doctor Bell , late of Madras , for the preceding
information on the subject : LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.360

I have reduced it to practice , LANCASTER1-1806-1,58.361

and find it does honor to <P_59> its benevolent inventor : to which I
have added several valuable improvements , particularly that of the
reading and spelling cards . LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.362

<heading>

<font> Extempore Method of Spelling . <$$font> LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.364

<$$heading>

In this method of spelling , the card is used instead of a book -
LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.366

the monitor assembles his whole class , by successive circles , or
rather semicircles , of twelves or twenties ; calling each scholar by
numbers ; so as to begin at number 1 , and go regularly through the
whole class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.367

This preserves a regularity in their reading , LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.368

and prevents any one scholar omitting a lesson .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.369

At first this is troublesome , LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.370

and occasions some noise ; because , in the minor classes , the monitors
are obliged to call the boys to read or spell , by the list of their
names ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.371

but , as a number is affixed to each name , the monitors soon become
familiar with the names and numbers of boys in their respective classes
, LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.372

and this obviates the difficulty . LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.373

When the circle is formed around their card or lesson , the monitor
points , with his pencil or pen , to the columns of spelling which form
the lesson for the day . LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.374

The first boy reads six words , by syllables : LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.375

he does not spell the words by repeating each letter , but , by
repeating , in a distinct manner , each syllable in every word .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,59.376

If he commits any mistake , <P_60> the next boy is required to rectify
it , without being told what the mistake is ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.377

if the second boy can@ @not correct the first , the third or fourth may
: in which case , the scholar who rectifies the mistake takes precedency
of him that committed it , and receives his <font> insignia <$$font> of
merit at the same time . LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.378

In no case is a monitor suffered to teach or tell the boys in his circle
what the error is , unless they should all be equally ignorant :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.379

then it becomes his duty to do it . LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.380

This is , in fact , each boy teaching himself ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.381

and the principal duty of the monitor is not so much to teach them , as
to see that they teach one another . LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.382

When the boys , in the circle , have thus studied their spelling by
reading it , the monitor takes the card into his own hand ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.383

and requires them to spell and pronounce such words extempore , as he
repeats to them . LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.384

In doing this , they correct each other's faults ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.385

and take precedence as before described . LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.386

This method of spelling is commonly practised in schools ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.387

but , for the method of <font> studying <$$font> the spelling lessons ,
I am indebted to Dr. Bell , believing it was his peculiar invention .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.388

A great advantage derived from this method , is , that it forms an
excellent practical counterpart of the method of spelling on the slate .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.389

The boys usually spell this way in rotation ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.390

but , if the monitor detects any boy looking about him instead of
looking at the lesson , he immediately requires him to perform a part of
the lesson which he was inattentive to : LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.391

he usually performs it ill ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,60.392

<P_61>

and thus his negligence immediately punishes itself , by his losing
precedency in his class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.394

It is very important that in all these modes of teaching , the monitor
can@ @not do as the watermen do , look one way and row another .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.395

His business is before his eyes ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.396

and , if he omits the performance of the smallest {TEXT:smallesr} part
of his duty , the whole circle are idle or deranged :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.397

and detection , by the master , immediately follows his negligence .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.398

In society at large , few crimes are ever committed openly ; because ,
immediate detection and apprehension of the offender would follow .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.399

On the contrary , many are committed in privacy and silence .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.400

It is the same , in performing the simple duties of monitors in my
institution : LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.401

their whole performances are so visible , that they dare not neglect
them ; and , consequently , attain the habit of performing the task
easily and well . LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.402

This effect is produced from this one cause : that every thing they do
is brought to account , or rendered visible in some conspicuous way and
manner . LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.403

What applies to the monitors strictly applies to the boys .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.404

There is not a boy , who does not feel the benefits of this constant
emulation , variety , and action ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.405

for , they insensibly acquire the habit of exercising their attention
closely , on every subject that comes before them ; and this , without
straining it too much . LANCASTER1-1806-1,61.406

<P_62>

<heading>

Arithmetic . LANCASTER1-1806-1,62.409

An Account of the <font> Improved Method of Instruction , <$$font> in
the Elementary Parts of <font> Arithmetic . <$$font>
LANCASTER1-1806-1,62.410

<$$heading>

It is necessary to premise a little respecting the usual mode of
teaching arithmetic , which many of my readers will remember to be the
method in practice in such schools as they frequented in early youth .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,62.412

The sums , are in many instances , <font> set <$$font> in the boys'
books , by the master or teacher , at the expense of much pains and
labour ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,62.413

in other instances , they are copied by the pupil , from Walkingame's ,
or some other arithmetic . LANCASTER1-1806-1,62.414

The boys are , or should be , instructed how to work their sums , in the
first instance , by the master or teacher ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,62.415

they are then expected to do other sums of a like nature , by the
example shown . LANCASTER1-1806-1,62.416

This is to be done by them , at their seats ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,62.417

and , when it is finished , the master or teacher should , and in most
cases does , inspect it , to see if done correctly .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,62.418

<P_63>

But this operation of adding or subtracting , for instance , is
intellectual , not mechanical or audible ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.420

of course , we can@ @not ascertain how many times a boy repeats his sum
before it is brought to his master for inspection :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.421

steady boys may do it five or six times , LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.422

but the idle and careless seldom do it more than once ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.423

here is much time lost , LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.424

and a remedy adapted to the case is not in the teacher's power .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.425

Again , when sums are brought up to the master for inspection , each
boy's must be individually attended to ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.426

here is another great loss of invaluable time .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.427

Perhaps , twenty boys have sums ready for inspection at once ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.428

and nineteen wait , LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.429

sit idle , LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.430

or talk , while the twentieth is at his master's desk , with his sums .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.431

Nor is this all : LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.432

if an incorrigible dunce happens to show up his sums first , and , as is
often the case , adds new blunders to mistakes , he may easily delay his
master , and the boys who are waiting to follow him in succession , for
some time ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.433

and a few instances of this sort , arising from carelessness ,
inattention , or incapacity on the part of the scholars , will
completely derange the business of a morning , and keep a number of
their school-fellows unemployed . LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.434

Independent of this , it is disgusting to teachers of any description to
be continually plodding over the same ground of elementary arithmetic .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,63.435

<font> Sameness , <$$font> <P_64> <font> in every instance , produces
listlessness ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.436

and variety is ever productive of agreeable sensations . <$$font>
LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.437

I have seen a respectable schoolmaster , well versed in the mathematics
, have a_dozen boys standing round his desk , waiting for him to attend
to their sums , while he has been listening to a slow boy , repeating
his sum , <font> till he has bitten his lips with vexation . <$$font>
LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.438

To prevent this dulness , I have invented an entire new method of
teaching arithmetic , that commences when children begin to make their
figures . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.439

The following is the arrangement of the ciphering classes :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.440

Class 1 , Combination of figures . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.441

2 , Addition . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.442

3 , Compound ditto . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.443

4 , Subtraction . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.444

5 , Compound ditto . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.445

6 , Multiplication . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.446

7 , Compound ditto . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.447

8 , Division . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.448

9 , Compound ditto . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.449

10 , Reduction . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.450

11 , Rule of Three . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.451

12 , Practice . LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.452

The first object is to teach children to make their figures .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,64.453

In order to do this , the class learning to make figures are assembled
under the monitor , in <P_65> one part of the school , by themselves .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.454

It is to be observed , the same boys who are in one class , according to
their proficiency in reading , are in another , according to their
progress in arithmetic ; that , when the school is ciphering , the
classes are organized on the annexed plan of the ciphering classes ;
when they are reading , they are arranged on the plan of the reading
classes , given in a preceding page . LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.455

They always , on the commencement of school , come in , in their
different reading classes , LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.456

and , when ciphering , afterwards , separate to their several
arithmetical classes : LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.457

after having performed the ciphering , they return to their reading
classes , before they go out of school . LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.458

This changing about from class to class , in which three fourths of the
whole school are concerned , is attended with but little bustle , and no
confusion . LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.459

It is usually done in less than five minutes ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.460

and the school-room is so large , it will take near that time to go
round it . LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.461

If there are any boys who can@ @not cipher , they remain under the
monitor's care , for instruction in reading , while the others are
ciphering . LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.462

The modes of teaching arithmetic are so simple and easy , that all the
boys in the school , who can read and write text-hand in four letters ,
are put in the first ciphering class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.463

It is not uncommon to find boys thus instructed , who learn to write and
cipher remarkable well , in six months , who never handled a pen , or
were taught by any other method . LANCASTER1-1806-1,65.464

Before boys go into arithmetic <P_66> it is needful they should learn to
make the figures : LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.465

on my plan , they learn to make and <font> combine <$$font> them at the
same time . LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.466

The class of boys , who are learning to make their figures , form , in
the institution . <heading> <font> The First Class of Arithmetic .
<$$font> <$$heading> LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.467

In the tuition of this class , the boys who constitute it , are not
limited {TEXT:limitted} to number : LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.468

any boy , for whom it is requisite , is immediately placed in it .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.469

Instead of teaching them to make figures in the order of the nine digits
, as is usually done , by writing occasionally in copy-books , they have
each a slate . LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.470

The monitor takes a long Addition table , which combines not only units
with <font> units , <$$font> but tens with <font> units <$$font> : a
thing in which the pupil's greatest difficulty , as to simple and
compound Addition , occurs . LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.471

The monitor reads from this table : LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.472

9 and 1 are 10 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.473

9 and 2 are 11 , &c. LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.474

25 and 1 are 26 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.475

25 and 2 are 27 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.476

25 and 3 are 28 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.477

25 and 4 are 29 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.478

25 and 5 are 30 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.479

25 and 6 are 31 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.480

25 and 7 are 32 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.481

25 and 8 are 33 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.482

25 and 9 are 34 ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.483

or other variations of the same table . LANCASTER1-1806-1,66.484

When these are dictated , each boy writes them on his slate : the
monitor and senior boys in the class , <P_67> assisting in teaching the
beginners , to make the figures , till they can make them themselves .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.485

The monitor also varies the table : LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.486

Take 9 from 10 , 1 remains ; 9 from 11 , 2 remain ; 9 from 12 , 3 remain
, &c. LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.487

He also uses the Multiplication table , LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.488

and reverses it in the same manner : LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.489

6 times 2 are 12 , LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.490

2 in 12 6 times . LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.491

In the same way , he teaches them the Shillings and Pence tables .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.492

The knowledge of figures which the children acquire by this method is
great ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.493

and the improvement of this class in making the figures , does much
credit to the class and teachers . LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.494

It is true , the class are told all they are to do ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.495

but , in doing what they are bidden , they acquire a ready knowledge of
the figures ; whilst they are insensibly led into the habit of giving
attention to all they do , and taking pains in doing it .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.496

By making their figures so many times over , they unavoidably attain
freedom in making them ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.497

and this is the best step that can possibly be taken to facilitate their
improvement in the next stage of their progress in arithmetic .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,67.498

The same variation and tables , without the total , or answer to the
monitor's question , applies to Subtraction , Multiplication , Division
, and the Pence <P_68> and Shillings tables . LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.499

This method of instruction has also a counterpart :
LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.500

an arithmetical table of this kind , applied to the first four rules ,
without the amount of each combination annexed , is placed on the wall ,
or other convenient place . LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.501

In the former instance , the monitor told the class , 9 and 9 are 18 ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.502

and they wrote it . LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.503

He now subdivides the class ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.504

and they assemble , successively , in circles of twelve boys , around
the tables of figures on the wall . LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.505

They have their numbers , insignia of merit , prizes , &c. as in other
divisions of classes . LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.506

The monitor then puts the question to the first boy -
LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.507

How much are 9 and 4 ? LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.508

and the boy is expected to tell the amount - 13 .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.509

If he can@ @not answer correctly , the monitor puts the question to
another boy , till he finds one who can : LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.510

and he takes precedence , and the badge of merit , from the boy who is
unable to answer the question . LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.511

The boys in this class are called out , in successive companies of
twelve each , to answer questions of this nature , <font> applicatory to
the similar lesson they have that day been performing on the slate ;
<$$font> LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.512

and he varies the questions , as , How much are 9 and 9 ?
LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.513

- take 9 from 18 - what remains ? LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.514

- How much are 9 times 9 ? LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.515

- How many times 9 in 81 ? LANCASTER1-1806-1,68.516

Whilst one company of twelve boys <paren> the number need not be
restricted to twelve , but it can hardly be more than twenty with
propriety <$$paren> are performing this task , the remainder of the
class continue at <P_69> their seats , writing what the monitor dictates
, till the first division of twelve have finished their lesson .
LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.517

Then another division goes out , to the same lesson on the card ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.518

and they return to write on the slate . LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.519

This is done every day , till the whole class has performed their lesson
both ways . LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.520

This method serves as an introduction to Numeration , which , it will be
seen in the sequel , is only taught <font> in a practical way .
<$$font> LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.521

The next is the Simple Addition class . LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.522

Each boy , in every ciphering class , has a slate and pencil ;
LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.523

and we may consider that the subject , now before us , relates to the
best method of conveying the knowledge of arithmetic to those who are
unacquainted with it . LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.524

They usually begin with small sums , LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.525

and gradually advance to larger ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.526

but boys , who have been well instructed in the preceding class , are
not only qualified for this , LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.527

but have a foundation laid for their future proficiency in every branch
of arithmetic . LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.528

As the reader will observe the whole of this method of teaching is
closely connected with writing : LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.529

it not only unites a mental exertion with itself ,
LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.530

but always renders that <font> mental <$$font> exertion , however great
or small , visible to the teacher ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.531

and enables him to say , with certainty , that his pupils have performed
their business . LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.532

The monitor , or subordinate teacher of the class , has a written book
of sums , which his class are to do ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,69.533

and <P_70> he has another written book , containing a key to those sums
, on a peculiar plan , which will be described , and which fully shows
how they are to be done . LANCASTER1-1806-1,70.534

{COM:footnote_omitted}

In the first place , when his class are seated , he takes the book of
sums - LANCASTER1-1806-1,70.536

suppose the first sum is as follows : LANCASTER1-1806-1,70.537

{COM:figure_omitted}

He repeats audibly the figures 27,935 LANCASTER1-1806-1,70.539

and each boy in the class writes them ; LANCASTER1-1806-1,70.540

they are then inspected , LANCASTER1-1806-1,70.541

and if done correct , he dictates the figures , 3,963 , which are
written and inspected in like manner : LANCASTER1-1806-1,70.542

and thus he proceeds till every boy in the class has the sum finished on
his slate . LANCASTER1-1806-1,70.543

