<BEGIN_layard-1894-2>

<P_91>

<heading>

Chapter V LAYARD-1894-2,91.4

<$$heading>

We left Baghdad on June 30 to enter upon the most dangerous and
difficult part of our long journey . LAYARD-1894-2,91.6

I had determined to assume the Persian dress . LAYARD-1894-2,91.7

Although I had been industriously studying the Persian language during
my residence of nearly two months at Baghdad , my acquaintance with it
was not , of course , sufficient to enable me to disguise my European
character . LAYARD-1894-2,91.8

But I was advised that by wearing the native costume I should attract
less notice , and consequently be less exposed to danger , and be less
liable to insult and annoyance from the fanatical populations through
which I should now have to pass . LAYARD-1894-2,91.9

I accordingly threw aside my Turkish dress which I had hitherto worn in
travelling - LAYARD-1894-2,91.10

it was well-nigh in rags from long and rough use - LAYARD-1894-2,91.11

and replaced it by the long flowing robes , confined at the waist by a
shawl , shalwars or loose trousers , and the tall black lambskin cap or
' kulâh ' then worn by the Persians . LAYARD-1894-2,91.12

In addition I wore , when riding , a pair of baggy trousers of cloth
tied at the ankles , into which the ends of the long outer garment were
thrust . LAYARD-1894-2,91.13

My scanty linen , stockings , and shoes were also after the Persian
fashion , LAYARD-1894-2,91.14

and later on I shaved the crown of my head , leaving a ringlet on each
side , LAYARD-1894-2,91.15

and dyed my hair and beard black with henna and ' rang . '
LAYARD-1894-2,91.16

I could thus pass very well , so long as my mouth was closed , for an
orthodox Persian . LAYARD-1894-2,91.17

At this time the English Government , in consequence of a diplomatic
misunderstanding , had suspended its relations <P_92> with the Persian
Court , LAYARD-1894-2,92.18

and had withdrawn its ambassador from Tehran . LAYARD-1894-2,92.19

It was expected that hostilities would soon break out between the two
nations , LAYARD-1894-2,92.20

and the air was full of rumours of war . LAYARD-1894-2,92.21

We were , therefore , running some risk in venturing into what might be
considered an enemy's country . LAYARD-1894-2,92.22

On our arrival at Kermanshah , a city on the Persian frontier , the
governor refused to allow us to proceed on our journey without the
special permission of the Shah , LAYARD-1894-2,92.23

and sent us under escort to Kangowar , where his Majesty was encamped at
the head of an army of about 13,000 men , with which he had threatened
to invade the neighbouring Turkish territory . LAYARD-1894-2,92.24

I had been furnished at Baghdad with letters for Mirza Aga Baba , the
Shah's ' Hakim-Bashi , ' or principal physician , at that time an
influential and much-respected personage at the Persian Court , who
spoke our language with fluency . LAYARD-1894-2,92.25

We informed him of our position , and of our object in passing through
Persia , LAYARD-1894-2,92.26

and asked his advice as to the course we should pursue .
LAYARD-1894-2,92.27

He recommended us to call without delay upon the Minister for Foreign
Affairs , to show him our passports and such papers establishing our
character as simple travellers as we might possess , and to ask for a
royal firman to enable us to continue our journey . LAYARD-1894-2,92.28

We accordingly made our way to the minister's tent - a magnificent
pavilion , lined with the finest Cashmere shawls and spread with the
choicest carpets . LAYARD-1894-2,92.29

Mirza Ali , who was at that time charged with the administration of the
foreign affairs of his country , was a beardless youth of about
two-and-twenty . LAYARD-1894-2,92.30

In this important office he was associated with his father , Mirza
Masoud , a statesman of experience and reputation . LAYARD-1894-2,92.31

He spoke French , LAYARD-1894-2,92.32

and had among his secretaries a Frenchman . LAYARD-1894-2,92.33

He received us with politeness , LAYARD-1894-2,92.34

seemed satisfied as to the object of our journey , LAYARD-1894-2,92.35

and promised to speak on the subject to the Shah in the evening .
LAYARD-1894-2,92.36

On July 10 the Shah moved with his camp to Hamadan , a large city
occupying the site of the ancient Ecbatana . LAYARD-1894-2,92.37

We followed him thither . LAYARD-1894-2,92.38

The Prime Minister , with whom we were now in constant communication ,
and who had promised to obtain for us the firman to enable us to travel
in <P_93> his Majesty's dominions , was Mirza Agasi , familiarly known
as ' the Haji , ' from the pilgrimage he had made to Mecca .
LAYARD-1894-2,93.39

He was the man of the greatest influence , power , and authority in
Persia . LAYARD-1894-2,93.40

He had the reputation of being crafty and unscrupulous , cruel and
treacherous , and a fanatical hater of Christians . LAYARD-1894-2,93.41

His misgovernment and the corruption and oppression which prevailed
throughout the kingdom had brought it to the verge of ruin ,
LAYARD-1894-2,93.42

and he was execrated as the cause of the misery , sufferings , and
discontent of the population . LAYARD-1894-2,93.43

He evidently suspected that we were spies and agents of the British
Government . LAYARD-1894-2,93.44

Hence the delays in granting us the promised firman .
LAYARD-1894-2,93.45

It was evident from the information we had received that we should
encounter very great difficulties in attempting to pass through the
Seistan to Kandahar . LAYARD-1894-2,93.46

The Persian Government were resolved to prevent us from doing so ,
LAYARD-1894-2,93.47

and if we ventured to proceed without its authority and in spite of its
opposition , trusting to our disguise , our lives would be in imminent
danger in a country notorious for the lawlessness of its inhabitants .
LAYARD-1894-2,93.48

Mr. Mitford was unwilling to incur the risk , LAYARD-1894-2,93.49

and being now anxious to reach his destination , determined upon taking
the most direct route to India - that through the north of Persia by
Meshed and Herat . LAYARD-1894-2,93.50

But it was not without its dangers , owing to the disturbed state of
Central Asia . LAYARD-1894-2,93.51

He was , however , assured that he need be under no fear so long as he
was within the Shah's dominions . LAYARD-1894-2,93.52

I was unwilling to renounce the attempt , to reach the Lake of Furrah .
LAYARD-1894-2,93.53

I was not without hope that at Isfahan I might find an opportunity of
joining a caravan , or a party of travellers , going to Yezd , and that
I might even perform the journey without attracting the notice of the
Persian authorities . LAYARD-1894-2,93.54

I determined , therefore , to separate from Mr. Mitford and to proceed
in the first instance to that city . LAYARD-1894-2,93.55

We accordingly asked for separate firmans , which were promised to us .
LAYARD-1894-2,93.56

But we soon learnt the value of Persian promises . LAYARD-1894-2,93.57

It was not until August 8 , after having been detained for nearly one
month at Hamadan , that we obtained the documents we required and the
permission of <P_94> the Shah to continue our journey .
LAYARD-1894-2,94.58

We spent the greater part of that time in going backwards and forwards
from the Prime Minister to the Minister for Foreign Affairs .
LAYARD-1894-2,94.59

We were always received with politeness , LAYARD-1894-2,94.60

our remonstrances were listened to , LAYARD-1894-2,94.61

and we were assured that on the following morning , without fail , we
should be in possession of all that was required to enable us to take
our departure . LAYARD-1894-2,94.62

The morning came , but not the firmans . LAYARD-1894-2,94.63

We were the more anxious to leave Hamadan , as in riding through the
town and the camp we were exposed to constant annoyance and insult , and
were occasionally in some danger . LAYARD-1894-2,94.64

The population of the city was fanatical , LAYARD-1894-2,94.65

the soldiers were insolent and without discipline , LAYARD-1894-2,94.66

there were in the irregular cavalry wild fellows from the mountain
tribes , who would not have scrupled to take the life of a Christian and
a European , LAYARD-1894-2,94.67

and there was a lawless and vicious rabble of camp followers .
LAYARD-1894-2,94.68

Stones were frequently thrown at us as we rode among the tents .
LAYARD-1894-2,94.69

We were occasionally threatened with actual violence ,
LAYARD-1894-2,94.70

and in the streets we were usually greeted with cries of ' Káfir '
<paren> infidel <$$paren> , ' dog , ' and other opprobrious epithets .
LAYARD-1894-2,94.71

This state of things was only partly put an end to when , on one
occasion , a sentry having hurled a large stone at me which struck my
horse , I proceeded to the Haji and demanded redress , threatening to
appeal to the Shah himself unless it was afforded me .
LAYARD-1894-2,94.72

I was able to identify the culprit , who was arrested and received a
bastinado . LAYARD-1894-2,94.73

We were not afterwards molested in the camp , LAYARD-1894-2,94.74

but in the city we were constantly insulted in the most foul language .
LAYARD-1894-2,94.75

His Majesty treated me generously , commanding , in his firman , that I
was to travel at the public expense , and to be furnished , without
payment , with a certain number of horses . LAYARD-1894-2,94.76

I was to receive at every place where I stopped for the night provisions
for eight persons , including chickens , meat , eggs , rice , bread ,
sugar , and many other things , and barley and straw for my horses .
LAYARD-1894-2,94.77

The ' mehmandar ' who was to accompany me and to see to all my wants ,
was to give receipts <P_95> to the heads of the villages for the
provisions supplied to me , the price of which was to be allowed to them
in their taxes and other payments to the Shah's treasury .
LAYARD-1894-2,95.78

As I well knew that this was a mere idle form , that the villagers
themselves would have to bear the expense , and that these rations and
allowances to travellers of rank are made the excuse for great
oppression and extortion , I determined not to avail myself of his
Majesty's liberality , but to travel as economically as I possibly could
and to pay for all I required . LAYARD-1894-2,95.79

I should have gladly dispensed with the attendance of the mehmandar ,
LAYARD-1894-2,95.80

but as he had received the Shah's express commands to accompany me , and
was probably set to watch and report my movements - the Haji not having
divested himself of the suspicion that I had other motives for
travelling than those of pursuing geographical and antiquarian
researches - I was compelled , very unwillingly , to retain him .
LAYARD-1894-2,95.81

The governors of districts and towns on my way were ordered to furnish
me with escorts whenever danger was to be apprehended ,
LAYARD-1894-2,95.82

and were made responsible for my safety . LAYARD-1894-2,95.83

In addition to the firman I received a letter from the Haji to Mehemet
Taki Khan , the great Bakhtiyari chief , recommending me to his special
protection . LAYARD-1894-2,95.84

I was also furnished with a letter to the governor of Isfahan , who was
directed to afford me facilities for the prosecution of my journey .
LAYARD-1894-2,95.85

On August 8 I rode with Mr. Mitford as far as the village of Shaverin ,
where I took leave of him , and he started on his long and perilous
journey through the north of Persia to Kandahar . LAYARD-1894-2,95.86

We had been together for above a year , LAYARD-1894-2,95.87

and I much regretted that we had to part . LAYARD-1894-2,95.88

He had proved an excellent fellow-traveller , never complaining , ready
to meet difficulties or hardships , and making the best of everything .
LAYARD-1894-2,95.89

I then returned to Hamadan . LAYARD-1894-2,95.90

The Shah had left in the morning LAYARD-1894-2,95.91

and his camp had been raised . LAYARD-1894-2,95.92

There was silence <P_96> and desolation where a few hours before there
had been tumult and bustling crowds . LAYARD-1894-2,96.93

Before leaving the city the soldiers had pillaged the bazars .
LAYARD-1894-2,96.94

All the shops were closed LAYARD-1894-2,96.95

and the inhabitants , dreading violence and ill-treatment , had
concealed themselves in their houses . LAYARD-1894-2,96.96

The gardens around the town had been stripped of their produce and the
trees cut down . LAYARD-1894-2,96.97

The place looked as if it had been taken and sacked in war .
LAYARD-1894-2,96.98

Such was the usual result of a visit from the Shah , his Ministers , and
his army . LAYARD-1894-2,96.99

<P_97>

<heading>

Chapter VI LAYARD-1894-2,97.102

<$$heading>

I WAS now alone . LAYARD-1894-2,97.104

The most arduous and dangerous part of my journey to India , if I
persisted in my attempt to reach Kandahar through the Seistan , was
before me . LAYARD-1894-2,97.105

In order to be entirely independent in my movements , and to be able to
choose the route which suited me best , I had bought from a soldier a
strong sturdy horse . LAYARD-1894-2,97.106

As it had probably been stolen I paid but a few tomans for it .
LAYARD-1894-2,97.107

All I possessed in the way of luggage was contained in a pair of small
saddle-bags . LAYARD-1894-2,97.108

I was not , consequently , in need of a second horse for my baggage .
LAYARD-1894-2,97.109

My quilt and carpet were placed over my saddle . LAYARD-1894-2,97.110

It would have been impossible to travel with fewer encumbrances .
LAYARD-1894-2,97.111

It was not until the afternoon of August 9 that a Ghulâm , named Imaum
Verdi Beg , who had been appointed my mehmandar , had completed his
preparations for the journey and was ready to start .
LAYARD-1894-2,97.112

We could , therefore , make but a short stage . LAYARD-1894-2,97.113

He joined me , mounted on a good horse , and in travelling costume - his
robes thrust into a pair of baggy trousers of brown cloth - armed with a
long gun , a huge pistol , and the usual curved dagger , and various
<P_98> contrivances for holding powder and balls hanging from his belt .
LAYARD-1894-2,98.114

We left the city together , LAYARD-1894-2,98.115

and rode through a well-cultivated and fertile plain , thick with
habitations surrounded by trees and gardens , and watered by numberless
streams . LAYARD-1894-2,98.116

In about two hours we reached the large village of Yalpand .
LAYARD-1894-2,98.117

The Ghulâm put his horse to a gallop when we came in sight of it , to
precede and prepare my lodging . LAYARD-1894-2,98.118

He secured a clean and airy room for me at the top of the best house in
the place , LAYARD-1894-2,98.119

and when the sun went down an excellent supper with a variety of dishes
was served to me . LAYARD-1894-2,98.120

When , in the morning , I wished to pay for my night's entertainment , I
was informed that I was the Shah's guest , and that , consequently , I
was travelling at his Majesty's expense . LAYARD-1894-2,98.121

I remonstrated in vain . LAYARD-1894-2,98.122

The Ghulâm declared that the royal firman must be obeyed , and that no
one would dare to receive money for anything supplied to me .
LAYARD-1894-2,98.123

Our departure was delayed by a quarrel between my mehmandar and the head
of the village . LAYARD-1894-2,98.124

I then discovered that he had sent back his horse to Hamadan the
previous evening , as he wished to spare it the long journey to Isfahan
. LAYARD-1894-2,98.125

He was now demanding from the villagers the horses with which ,
according to the Shah's firman , they were bound to provide me .
LAYARD-1894-2,98.126

After a great deal of wrangling and threatening , he succeeded in
obtaining a wretched horse and a donkey , upon which a load was placed .
LAYARD-1894-2,98.127

What the load consisted of I could not at first imagine , as he had not
been encumbered with luggage on his departure from Hamadan .
LAYARD-1894-2,98.128

I soon discovered that he had already commenced a system of extortion ,
for which the inhabitants of the villages at which I might stop for the
night were to be the victims during the whole of my journey to Isfahan .
LAYARD-1894-2,98.129

My firman specified the supplies that I was to receive at each place .
LAYARD-1894-2,98.130

The Ghulâm had exacted them at Yalpand , LAYARD-1894-2,98.131

and as they were far beyond what he or I could consume , he insisted
upon carrying off the surplus . LAYARD-1894-2,98.132

This accounted for the donkey's load . LAYARD-1894-2,98.133

I was very angry , LAYARD-1894-2,98.134

declared that I would not be a party to so flagrant an abuse of the
Shah's orders , and that , much as I valued his Majesty's generosity and
hospitality , I would not profit by them to the detriment of his
subjects . LAYARD-1894-2,98.135

But the <P_99> mehmandar persisted . LAYARD-1894-2,99.136

He argued that , as he had given a receipt for what he had taken to the
' Ket-Khuda " , ' or head of the village , the inhabitants would be
repaid from the royal treasury , and that if he had not exacted all the
supplies granted to me they would nevertheless be charged to the Shah .
LAYARD-1894-2,99.137

Why , therefore , should we not profit by his Majesty's bounty instead
of the ' gourumsags ' - the scoundrels - who wished to cheat him ?
LAYARD-1894-2,99.138

Although the argument had some weight , I could not reconcile myself to
the idea of travelling at the public expense , especially as I was well
aware that the villagers had but little chance of being repaid out of
the Shah's empty treasury . LAYARD-1894-2,99.139

I again protested that I was resolved to pay for all that had been
supplied to me and my horse . LAYARD-1894-2,99.140

But both the master of the house in which we had lodged , and the
Ket-Khudâ , were too much afraid of the consequences of offending a
public officer to accept the money that I tendered to them ,
LAYARD-1894-2,99.141

and I rode away in very ill-humour with my mehmandar , who was urging on
the donkey , which , unable to keep up with the horses , greatly delayed
our progress . LAYARD-1894-2,99.142

I had resolved to avoid the usual road between Hamadan and Isfahan , and
to keep as close as I could to the great range of the Luristan Mountains
. LAYARD-1894-2,99.143

I should thus pass through a part of Persia which , I had reason to
believe , had not been at that time explored by previous travellers , as
it was a blank upon my map . LAYARD-1894-2,99.144

After a pleasant ride through a hilly country abounding in villages ,
and offering constant views of high and picturesque peaks rising in the
distance , we arrived late in the afternoon at Tashbandou <paren> ?
<$$paren> , having breakfasted on our way , again at the public expense
, at Samanabad . LAYARD-1894-2,99.145

As the Khan , or chief , to whom the village belonged , was absent , and
the inhabitants did not appear inclined to obey the firman without his
orders , I took up my quarters in the doorway of a small fort which he
was constructing . LAYARD-1894-2,99.146

In the meanwhile my Ghulâm was bullying and threatening the villagers ,
who , he declared , were ' yâghi , ' or rebellious to the Shah , and ,
when reported as such to his Majesty , would receive condign punishment
. LAYARD-1894-2,99.147

He succeeded at last in finding a house , to which I removed .
LAYARD-1894-2,99.148

<P_100>

During the night the man who was in charge of the horse and donkey
carried off from Yalpand decamped with them , LAYARD-1894-2,100.150

and we had fresh difficulties in procuring others .
LAYARD-1894-2,100.151

The Ghulâm , however , possessed , in addition to my firman , an order
from the prince governor of Hamadan which entitled him to claim two
horses at every village , or the amount of their hire in money .
LAYARD-1894-2,100.152

Although the inhabitants at first resisted the demand , they found the
horses for him , after a few blows from his heavy whip administered
right and left , LAYARD-1894-2,100.153

and we continued our journey with a further addition to the supplies he
had exacted at the other villages through which we had passed .
LAYARD-1894-2,100.154

At the next village , Daeleh , where we stopped to breakfast , the
inhabitants proved more loyal to the Shah , kissing the firman and
pressing it to their foreheads , LAYARD-1894-2,100.155

and supplied the required horses without delay . LAYARD-1894-2,100.156

We continued through a hilly country , passing numerous villages and
crossing many streams , LAYARD-1894-2,100.157

and reached Douletabad early in the afternoon . LAYARD-1894-2,100.158

I was surprised to find it a considerable town , although not indicated
on the maps I possessed , surrounded by an embankment of earth and a
ditch , and by double mud-built walls , the inner of which was very
lofty and furnished with bastions . LAYARD-1894-2,100.159

Passing through a gateway and through a heap of ruins , I found myself
in a large quadrangle formed by low buildings having numerous arched
recesses , serving for rooms , and handsomely decorated with stucco
ornaments in relief . LAYARD-1894-2,100.160

At one end of this square was an extensive palace , formerly the
residence of the governor , but fast falling to decay .
LAYARD-1894-2,100.161

It must at one time have been a building of much magnificence .
LAYARD-1894-2,100.162

The walls of a spacious hall which I entered were painted in the
brightest colours with human figures , animals of various kinds , birds
and flowers , and arabesque ornaments . LAYARD-1894-2,100.163

Beyond this fine hall was a courtyard of large dimensions , in the
centre of which was a tank of clear water , supplied by a spring .
LAYARD-1894-2,100.164

Around it were wide-spreading trees , rose-bushes , and flower-beds .
LAYARD-1894-2,100.165

At one extremity was a kind of screen concealing the entrance to an
inner court , panelled with porcelain tiles of exquisite beauty , on
which were <P_101> enamelled in gorgeous colours the exploits of Rustem
, the hero of the great Persian epic of the ' Shah-Nameh , ' with
numerous figures of warriors in mail and in fantastic costumes , and of
horses with gaudy trappings . LAYARD-1894-2,101.166

I passed into this inner court , which was surrounded by numerous rooms
partly in ruins , but still retaining remains of the ornaments in
coloured stucco , glass , and carved woodwork with which they had been
decorated . LAYARD-1894-2,101.167

Beyond this court was a second , with fountains , rose-bushes , and
parterres of flowers , and with similar rooms opening into it .
LAYARD-1894-2,101.168

It had been the enderun , or women's apartments . LAYARD-1894-2,101.169

I lingered with delight in admiration of these examples of Persian
architecture and art in this deserted but still beautiful building ,
until the return of the Ghulâm , who had been to the governor of the
town to obtain a lodging for me . LAYARD-1894-2,101.170

He had succeeded , LAYARD-1894-2,101.171

and we left the palace together . LAYARD-1894-2,101.172

We passed a fine mosque , the cupola and walls of which were covered
with coloured tiles , and a kind of kiosk , in the form of a tower ,
elaborately painted , but falling to ruin . LAYARD-1894-2,101.173

After making our way through a crowded and well-supplied bazar , we
entered , through an archway , spacious pleasure-grounds intersected by
avenues of lofty poplars , and watered by rills of running water ,
forming ponds and reservoirs . LAYARD-1894-2,101.174

Roses and other flowers filled the air with a delightful perfume .
LAYARD-1894-2,101.175

Between the avenues were fruit trees and vines laden with grapes .
LAYARD-1894-2,101.176

In this garden were several detached kiosks , or summer-houses .
LAYARD-1894-2,101.177

One of them , standing on the margin of a little lake , had been
assigned to me as a lodging . LAYARD-1894-2,101.178

The room in which I spread my carpet was beautifully decorated with
arabesques surrounding tablets on which were painted scenes from the
chase - horsemen with spear and sword pursuing stags and hares , or more
noble game , such as lions , tigers , and leopards ; or with hawks on
their wrists following partridges and other birds .
LAYARD-1894-2,101.179

In the centre of the room were two live falcons seated upon their
perches , LAYARD-1894-2,101.180

and in one of the corners were collected guns , swords , and spears .
LAYARD-1894-2,101.181

The palace and the kiosk , I learned , belonged to Prince Sheikh Ali
Mirza , one of the sons of Feth-Ali Shah . LAYARD-1894-2,101.182

<P_102>

A large window , which could be closed with a wooden trellis of elegant
design , opened upon a second garden with parterres of flowers and
running water , even more spacious than that through which I had passed
. LAYARD-1894-2,102.184

Beyond was a long avenue of stately trees , which ended with a view of
the cragged and snow-covered peaks of one of the mountains of the great
Luristan range , called Kuh Arsenou . LAYARD-1894-2,102.185

I had scarcely seated myself on my carpet in this delicious retreat when
two attendants placed before me an immense tray in which grapes ,
apricots , and other fruit were piled in pyramids .
LAYARD-1894-2,102.186

After I had eaten I wandered about the garden LAYARD-1894-2,102.187

and entered one of the palaces , which was without inhabitants .
LAYARD-1894-2,102.188

It was a spacious building with a magnificent hall which , judging from
the freshness of its coloured ornaments , appeared to have been recently
restored . LAYARD-1894-2,102.189

In the walls and ceiling small pieces of glass or mirrors were
tastefully arranged in patterns - a favourite mode of decoration in
Persia and Baghdad . LAYARD-1894-2,102.190

Other apartments which I entered were similarly ornamented .
LAYARD-1894-2,102.191

Painted life-size on the walls were figures of dancing girls in various
postures , and of richly-@ @clad ladies with almond-shaped eyes and
black locks , as they are usually represented in Persian pictures , and
hunting scenes , with horsemen bearing falcons on their wrists .
LAYARD-1894-2,102.192

The Palace was reflected in a reservoir of crystal water , about
a_hundred paces in length . LAYARD-1894-2,102.193

As I wandered through this beautiful building , which was without a
human inmate and as silent as the grave , I might have fancied myself in
one of those enchanted palaces whose inhabitants had been turned to
marble , as described in the ' Arabian Nights , ' and which had so
captivated my imagination in childhood . LAYARD-1894-2,102.194

It was not without much regret that I left this paradise ,
LAYARD-1894-2,102.195

but time pressed LAYARD-1894-2,102.196

and I could not stay . LAYARD-1894-2,102.197

At five in the morning the governor sent a soldier to accompany us to a
neighbouring village , where the Ghulâm expected that he would meet with
difficulties in obtaining horses , LAYARD-1894-2,102.198

for we were now approaching a country inhabited by a wild and lawless
population little disposed to respect the Shah's firman .
LAYARD-1894-2,102.199

After leaving Douletabad we entered a highly cultivated and <P_103>
thickly populated plain . LAYARD-1894-2,103.200

On all sides were villages , generally surrounded by mud-built walls ,
and containing a small fort in which the khan or village chief resided ,
as they were exposed to frequent attacks by marauding parties from the
wild tribes inhabiting the mountains of Luristan .
LAYARD-1894-2,103.201

I rode through vineyards and fields white with the cotton-bearing plant
. LAYARD-1894-2,103.202

To the right rose the Elwend Mountains , which separate this rich plain
- a blank on my map from Luristan and the great range of Zagros .
LAYARD-1894-2,103.203

Towering above them , and almost overhanging Douletabad , rose the fine
conical peak of Arsenou . LAYARD-1894-2,103.204

After passing through a fortified village called Gouran , overlooked by
a castle built upon a high and precipitous mound , we reached in about
three hours Kala Khalifa , where the Ghulâm stopped to procure fresh
horses . LAYARD-1894-2,103.205

The inhabitants at first absolutely refused to supply them ,
LAYARD-1894-2,103.206

and it was only after a delay of nearly four hours that , with the aid
of the soldier , he succeeded in obtaining a young horse and two donkeys
to carry his increasing stores , exacted from the villagers as we went
along . LAYARD-1894-2,103.207

A Lur named Ali , who had accompanied us on foot from Hamadan , bought
this horse for him for three tomans <paren> thirty shillings <$$paren> .
LAYARD-1894-2,103.208

Imaum Verdi borrowed one toman from me , promising to repay it at the
end of our journey . LAYARD-1894-2,103.209

He sold the horse shortly afterwards for five shillings more than he
gave for it , LAYARD-1894-2,103.210

but did not offer to pay back the money I had lent him .
LAYARD-1894-2,103.211

In Kala Khalifa there is a tomb said to be that of the son of Imaum Ali
, which is held in great veneration , and is a place of pilgrimage .
LAYARD-1894-2,103.212

We now left the plain LAYARD-1894-2,103.213

and entered the hills . LAYARD-1894-2,103.214

They equally abounded in villages - each with its castle , its walls and
bastions , having at a distance a rather imposing appearance , and
showing the unsettled state of the country . LAYARD-1894-2,103.215

The lands were irrigated by innumerable streams conveyed in artificial
water-courses and in subterranean conduits called kanâts .
LAYARD-1894-2,103.216

A little before sunset we came in sight of Burujird , a large town
situated in an extensive and well-cultivated plain , with the lofty
range of Zagros , its higher peaks covered with snow , bounding it to
the west . LAYARD-1894-2,103.217

We did not , however , reach the gates until long after dark .
LAYARD-1894-2,103.218

I would not <P_104> disturb the governor at so late an hour to obtain a
lodging , LAYARD-1894-2,104.219

but took up my quarters in a large and well-built caravanserai .
LAYARD-1894-2,104.220

The Ghulâm , who had been sent to protect me , had already given me much
trouble , LAYARD-1894-2,104.221

and I had formed a very bad opinion of him . LAYARD-1894-2,104.222

He now threatened in an insolent manner to leave me and to return to
Hamadan , unless I gave him a sum of money far beyond what I could
afford to pay . LAYARD-1894-2,104.223

I was not disposed to yield to his menaces , LAYARD-1894-2,104.224

and told him that he might continue with me or leave me as he thought
proper , but that in either case I should at once send a messenger to
the Shah with a letter complaining of his behaviour .
LAYARD-1894-2,104.225

I reminded him , at the same time , of the fate of one Mirza Jaffer ,
the mehmandar of a French traveller , who , having been guilty of
similar misconduct , had , upon complaint made to his Majesty , been
condemned to lose his head . LAYARD-1894-2,104.226

As he saw that I was resolved to resist the imposition , and was
preparing to find my way to the governor to represent what had occurred
and to engage a messenger to be sent to the Shah , he became alarmed ,
LAYARD-1894-2,104.227

and implored me to pass over what had occurred and not to put my
intention into execution . LAYARD-1894-2,104.228

He went himself , at the same time , to the governor , to make , he said
, all necessary arrangements for my journey to Korumabad .
LAYARD-1894-2,104.229

He returned shortly afterwards with many obliging messages from this
official , and with assurances that I should be furnished even with
fifty soldiers if they were needed to ensure my safety in Luristan .
LAYARD-1894-2,104.230

I remained at Burujird the next day in order to call upon the governor
and to make arrangements to continue my journey . LAYARD-1894-2,104.231

He was a Sirdar , or General , named Mirza Zamein .
LAYARD-1894-2,104.232

He received me at once , LAYARD-1894-2,104.233

and expressed himself ready to help me as far as it might be in his
power , LAYARD-1894-2,104.234

but endeavoured to dissuade me from going to Korumabad .
LAYARD-1894-2,104.235

Not only , he declared , were the roads very unsafe on account of the
unsettled state of the Lur tribes , who were in open revolt against the
Shah , and were making constant depredations in the district through
which I should have to pass , LAYARD-1894-2,104.236

but the heat was so great at this time of the year at Shuster that no
human being could possibly endure it . LAYARD-1894-2,104.237

<P_105>

His statements were corroborated by others , LAYARD-1894-2,105.239

and as I had reason to believe that there was some truth in them , I
decided upon changing my route and endeavouring to reach Shuster by
going to Freydan or Feridun , and thence to cross the Bakhtiyari
Mountains . LAYARD-1894-2,105.240

To make up for his misconduct on the previous evening , the Ghulâm
exerted himself to the utmost to please me , LAYARD-1894-2,105.241

and I found him on returning to the caravanserai followed by several men
bearing loads of provisions - bread , meat , fowls , rice , eggs ,
butter , tea , and firewood - enough to feed a regiment .
LAYARD-1894-2,105.242

He declared that they were a present from the governor , and that it
would be considered a want of politeness and an offence on my part not
to accept them . LAYARD-1894-2,105.243

A very small portion of them sufficed for my wants ;
LAYARD-1894-2,105.244

the rest went into the capacious sacks in which he had stowed the
various supplies that he had been collecting on our way , and which he
sold when he reached a town . LAYARD-1894-2,105.245

In the afternoon I walked through the bazars , which I found extensive
and well supplied with the produce of the country and foreign fabrics .
LAYARD-1894-2,105.246

The town , the position of which was wrongly marked on my map , contains
about twenty_thousand inhabitants , LAYARD-1894-2,105.247

and is the largest in the province . LAYARD-1894-2,105.248

It possesses several handsome mosques , whose domes and minarets give it
a striking and picturesque appearance from a distance ,
LAYARD-1894-2,105.249

and stands in the midst of extensive gardens and orchards , irrigated by
streams coming from the hills . LAYARD-1894-2,105.250

They are celebrated for their fruit , especially for melons and a small
black grape of delicious flavour . LAYARD-1894-2,105.251

In the bazar , melons , peaches , apricots , and plums were piled up in
great heaps , LAYARD-1894-2,105.252

and were sold for a mere trifle . LAYARD-1894-2,105.253

But this abundance of fruit is one of the causes of fevers and dysentery
, from which the population suffer severely during the autumn .
LAYARD-1894-2,105.254

The town contains a few Jewish families , but no Christians .
LAYARD-1894-2,105.255

I left Burujird early on the morning of August 14 ,
LAYARD-1894-2,105.256

and continued during the greater part of the day through the highly
cultivated and thickly peopled plain which we had entered after crossing
the hills of Douletabad . LAYARD-1894-2,105.257

I had rarely seen a country so densely populated and with so prosperous
and flourishing an appearance . LAYARD-1894-2,105.258

We were evidently entering <P_106> upon a district whose inhabitants had
not been exposed to the oppressive rule of the Persian Government , with
its attendant suffering and misery . LAYARD-1894-2,106.259

It was harvest time in these high regions , LAYARD-1894-2,106.260

and the peasants were everywhere engaged in cutting and carrying the
corn . LAYARD-1894-2,106.261

In all directions were long lines of beasts of burden , bearing sheaves
of wheat and barley to the villages , where they were deposited on the
threshing-floors , to be threshed by a rude roller , made of wood with
iron spikes , drawn by oxen or horses . LAYARD-1894-2,106.262

This mode of threshing prevails throughout the greater part of Western
Asia . LAYARD-1894-2,106.263

About nightfall we stopped at the village of Khosrauabad .
LAYARD-1894-2,106.264

We were getting farther and farther from the country in which the
authority of the Shah and his officers was fully recognised ,
LAYARD-1894-2,106.265

and were entering upon that inhabited by the semi-independent tribes of
Luristan . LAYARD-1894-2,106.266

The Lur khan , the chief of Khosrauabad , declined to obey his Majesty's
firman , LAYARD-1894-2,106.267

and declared that he owed no allegiance to him . LAYARD-1894-2,106.268

High words ensued . LAYARD-1894-2,106.269

Imaum Verdi Beg drew his sword , LAYARD-1894-2,106.270

and a very pretty quarrel , which might have led to bloodshed and
serious consequences to myself , seemed to be impending .
LAYARD-1894-2,106.271

However , the khan at length yielded to alternate threatening and
coaxing , LAYARD-1894-2,106.272

and procured us a night's lodging . LAYARD-1894-2,106.273

But the Ghulâm and our companion Ali were alarmed by these signs of
rebellion , LAYARD-1894-2,106.274

and declared that matters would get worse as we penetrated farther into
the mountains of Luristan , where the authority of the Government was no
longer recognised , and where it would consequently be impossible to
obtain either provisions or horses . LAYARD-1894-2,106.275

They urged me to give up the attempt to pass through the Lur Mountains
to Shuster , and to take the direct road to Isfahan .
LAYARD-1894-2,106.276

To corroborate what they had told me about the dangers and difficulties
of the route I proposed to take , they brought to me several '
charwardars , ' or muleteers , who were preparing to leave with a
caravan for the latter city . LAYARD-1894-2,106.277

They described to me , with circumstantial details , a number of murders
and robberies which they affirmed had been recently committed upon
travellers by the ferocious Lurs . LAYARD-1894-2,106.278

As I could not depend upon the <P_107> Ghulâm , and as it was evident
that we had now entered a part of Persia in which the Shah's firman was
no longer respected , I thought it advisable to make my way to the
district of Freydan , instead of striking at once into the mountains .
LAYARD-1894-2,107.279

I hoped that thence I might still find means of carrying out my original
intention of crossing the Luristan range to the plains of Khuzistan .
LAYARD-1894-2,107.280

If insurmountable difficulties were in the way , I could always join the
high road between Hamadan and Isfahan . LAYARD-1894-2,107.281

We had some trouble on the following morning in obtaining horses ,
LAYARD-1894-2,107.282

but managed to resume our journey about seven o'clock .
LAYARD-1894-2,107.283

At the southern extremity of the plain of Burujird we entered a low
range of barren hills . LAYARD-1894-2,107.284

Although we still passed many villages , they were not surrounded by
gardens and trees as in the low country . LAYARD-1894-2,107.285

But each had its small bastioned mud fort , generally perched upon a
mound or a projecting rock , and having from a distance a very
picturesque appearance . LAYARD-1894-2,107.286

They are the residences of the khans to whom the villages belong ,
LAYARD-1894-2,107.287

and serve as places of refuge for the inhabitants when they are engaged
in the quarrels which constantly ensue between their chiefs , or when
exposed to raids from the tribes of the neighbouring mountains .
LAYARD-1894-2,107.288

This part of Persia had always been in a very disturbed state ,
LAYARD-1894-2,107.289

and its population appeared to live in perpetual warfare .
LAYARD-1894-2,107.290

Every petty chief considered himself independent of the Shah and at
liberty to attack and plunder his neighbour , to carry off his corn ,
and to drive away his cattle . LAYARD-1894-2,107.291

Life and property were nowhere safe , LAYARD-1894-2,107.292

and the villages were for the most part in ruins .
LAYARD-1894-2,107.293

We saw in the distance during the day several encampments of black tents
belonging to the Bakhtiyari , a nomad mountain tribe renowned for its
courage and daring , and dreaded by the settled inhabitants of the
plains . LAYARD-1894-2,107.294

Their ' chapaws , ' or forays for plundering villages and caravans ,
were carried on by bodies of horsemen to a great distance .
LAYARD-1894-2,107.295

Even the neighbourhood of Isfahan was not safe from them .
LAYARD-1894-2,107.296

They were everywhere the terror of travellers and of the population .
LAYARD-1894-2,107.297

We continued to skirt the lofty range of the Luristan Mountains , whose
summits were covered with snow , which <P_108> I was assured remained
throughout the year . LAYARD-1894-2,108.298

A river which we had hitherto been following now turned towards the
south-west , LAYARD-1894-2,108.299

and disappeared in a deep gorge , to issue again , I was told , in the
plains of Khuzistan , or Susiana , near Dizful . LAYARD-1894-2,108.300

I much regretted that I was unable to continue along it , and thus to
reach by the shortest route the principal object of my journey , the
ruins of Susan . LAYARD-1894-2,108.301

We stopped at a village fort at the foot of Mount Shuterun .
LAYARD-1894-2,108.302

The khan was absent , LAYARD-1894-2,108.303

but arrived soon after , accompanied by a crowd of ferocious-looking
horsemen carrying matchlocks and armed to the teeth .
LAYARD-1894-2,108.304

He was a tall man , with a flowing black beard and a somewhat sinister
countenance . LAYARD-1894-2,108.305

He was probably returning from a raid , LAYARD-1894-2,108.306

but he was civil to me , LAYARD-1894-2,108.307

gave me a substantial breakfast , LAYARD-1894-2,108.308

and asked me many questions about England , the Shah's army , which he
heard I had seen , and my object in visiting his country .
LAYARD-1894-2,108.309

Although he professed to treat his Majesty's firman and the Ghulâm with
the utmost contempt , he provided us with a horse and a couple of
donkeys , LAYARD-1894-2,108.310

and we continued our journey , reaching at nightfall the village of
Derbend , the largest we had seen during the day , and , like those in
the plain , surrounded by trees and gardens . LAYARD-1894-2,108.311

I passed a sleepless night , assailed by myriads of mosquitoes .
LAYARD-1894-2,108.312

We entered on the following morning upon a small plain , in which were
two Armenian villages , named Zarnou and Kirk . LAYARD-1894-2,108.313

It was divided by a range of low hills from a second plain inhabited by
Bakhtiyari . LAYARD-1894-2,108.314

The man who was in charge of the horses furnished to us at our last
sleeping-place declared that he could not venture amongst these savage
people , of whose deeds of murder and robbery he kept relating terrible
instances , entreating us to see to our arms and to be prepared for the
worst . LAYARD-1894-2,108.315

He wished to take back the horses , and to leave the Ghulâm with his
ill-acquired property to shift for himself . LAYARD-1894-2,108.316

But Imaum Verdi Beg refused to part with them , as there were no others
to be obtained . LAYARD-1894-2,108.317

The poor fellow , seeing that we were determined to venture among the
Bakhtiyari , and fearing to lose his life as well as his horses , took
to his heels LAYARD-1894-2,108.318

and left us in possession of them . LAYARD-1894-2,108.319

They had been taken by force , LAYARD-1894-2,108.320

and I was sorry for <P_109> him , LAYARD-1894-2,109.321

but there was nothing to be done . LAYARD-1894-2,109.322

My mehmandar would not listen to my remonstrances , maintaining that it
was only right that the Shah's firman should be obeyed .
LAYARD-1894-2,109.323

In the extensive plain before us were numerous mud-built castles
belonging to petty Bakhtiyari chiefs . LAYARD-1894-2,109.324

We stopped at one of them named Makiabad . LAYARD-1894-2,109.325

Najef Khan , its owner , welcomed me very cordially
LAYARD-1894-2,109.326

and invited me to share his breakfast , which was spread under a shady
tree and consisted of ' abi-dugh ' <paren> sour milk <$$paren> , a
universal beverage in Persia , thick curds and cheese , with large cakes
of unleavened bread , crisp and thin as a wafer , baked upon a concave
iron plate over hot embers . LAYARD-1894-2,109.327

He was a very handsome young man , with bright eyes and an open
intelligent countenance . LAYARD-1894-2,109.328

As we had the horses which had been left on our hands , there was no
necessity for showing my firman , or of making any demand upon his
village . LAYARD-1894-2,109.329

We consequently parted good friends . LAYARD-1894-2,109.330

I resumed my journey through a hilly and barren country , thinly
inhabited by Bakhtiyari . LAYARD-1894-2,109.331

As the sun was setting I came in sight of what appeared to be a grand
old castle on a mound rising above a village . LAYARD-1894-2,109.332

It reminded me of one of those baronial strongholds of the Middle Ages
of which ruins may yet be seen in many parts of Europe .
LAYARD-1894-2,109.333

These Bakhtiyari chiefs , indeed , lead the life of mediaeval barons -
at constant war with each other , plundering their neighbour's goods ,
his cattle and his flocks , and levying blackmail upon travellers and
merchants . LAYARD-1894-2,109.334

However , as we approached , the illusion was soon dispelled .
LAYARD-1894-2,109.335

The village proved to be in ruins and uninhabited .
LAYARD-1894-2,109.336

The mud fort itself was scarcely in better condition .
LAYARD-1894-2,109.337

After riding with some difficulty up the steep ascent to it , I entered
the gateway LAYARD-1894-2,109.338

and found myself in a courtyard , in which were a number of armed men of
very savage and sinister appearance lounging about .
LAYARD-1894-2,109.339

The khan soon made his appearance , LAYARD-1894-2,109.340

and as fortunately there was no need to show my firman , and I presented
myself as a simple wayfarer , he offered me at once a night's lodging
and entertainment , LAYARD-1894-2,109.341

and his followers were ready enough to help us and to see to our horses
, LAYARD-1894-2,109.342

for even the lawless Bakhtiyari , like all nomad tribes , . <P_110>
consider themselves bound to receive a stranger and to treat the
traveller with hospitality . LAYARD-1894-2,110.343

The chief even offered to take charge of my saddle-bags , for the better
security of their contents against thieves - an offer , however , which
I thought it prudent to decline . LAYARD-1894-2,110.344

The Ghulâm and Ali our travelling companion , expressed great alarm at
the aspect of the place and of its inhabitants . LAYARD-1894-2,110.345

Before settling myself to sleep on my carpet I looked carefully to my
arms , LAYARD-1894-2,110.346

and prepared myself for any attempt that might be made upon my life or
property in the night . LAYARD-1894-2,110.347

However , our host had been apparently calumniated by the timid Persians
, LAYARD-1894-2,110.348

and I slept undisturbed . LAYARD-1894-2,110.349

I had been suffering for some days from a severe attack of intermittent
fever , and , in addition , from dysentery . LAYARD-1894-2,110.350

As I felt very weak and scarcely fit to cross the Luristan Mountains by
difficult tracks almost impassable to horses , where the population was
as scant as it was hostile to strangers , and where I might find myself
even unable to procure food , I decided upon proceeding at once to
Isfahan , where I hoped to obtain some rest and medical advice before
continuing my journey . LAYARD-1894-2,110.351

I had been going through many hardships . LAYARD-1894-2,110.352

The heat was still almost unbearable in the burning rays of an August
sun , LAYARD-1894-2,110.353

and I was obliged to travel during the day . LAYARD-1894-2,110.354

My only bed had been for long but a small carpet , LAYARD-1894-2,110.355

and I could never take off my clothes , which were in a very ragged
condition . LAYARD-1894-2,110.356

My food had consisted of little else than sour curds , cheese , and
fruit . LAYARD-1894-2,110.357

It was not surprising , consequently , that my health should have
suffered . LAYARD-1894-2,110.358

We had now entered the district of Freydan , or Feridun , a considerable
part of which belonged to the great Bakhtiyari chief , Mehemet Taki Khan
. LAYARD-1894-2,110.359

We stopped at the principal village in it , which bore the same name ,
and which contained about one_hundred_and_fifty houses .
LAYARD-1894-2,110.360

It was inhabited by a Georgian colony , which had been established there
by Shah Abbas . LAYARD-1894-2,110.361

These Christians had retained their native language and their religion .
LAYARD-1894-2,110.362

They were industrious , LAYARD-1894-2,110.363

and their villages , which were numerous and surrounded by gardens and
orchards , had a prosperous appearance . LAYARD-1894-2,110.364

They <P_111> were to be recognised at once by their features , which
differed from those of the surrounding populations .
LAYARD-1894-2,111.365

Their women went unveiled , LAYARD-1894-2,111.366

and many among those whom I saw were strikingly handsome .
LAYARD-1894-2,111.367

An abundance of water from the mountains , carried by innumerable
water-courses and subterranean channels to all parts of the plain ,
irrigated a vast number of melon beds , producing fruit of excellent
quality , which was sent for sale to Isfahan and elsewhere .
LAYARD-1894-2,111.368

A kind of clover , bearing a small fragrant flower , was also largely
cultivated . LAYARD-1894-2,111.369

We did not reach Adun , a Christian village where I had decided upon
passing the night , until after dark . LAYARD-1894-2,111.370

We were not hospitably received , LAYARD-1894-2,111.371

and had much difficulty in getting a room . LAYARD-1894-2,111.372

When at last we had succeeded in finding one , it was immediately
crowded by idlers who came to gaze at the stranger , the news of whose
arrival had spread through the place . LAYARD-1894-2,111.373

Even the courtyard was filled with people who were waiting their turn to
enter my room to stare at me . LAYARD-1894-2,111.374

The women had congregated in numbers on the flat roof of the house ,
whence they could look down upon me through a hole in the ceiling which
served for a chimney . LAYARD-1894-2,111.375

I was placed to so much inconvenience by the men who crowded round me ,
that I was forced to threaten to drive them out with a thick stick .
LAYARD-1894-2,111.376

When at last they departed I stationed Ali at the door , who kept guard
with a drawn sword and would not allow any one to enter .
LAYARD-1894-2,111.377

The women could not be induced to withdraw , LAYARD-1894-2,111.378

but remained on the roof watching my proceedings until I settled myself
for the night . LAYARD-1894-2,111.379

As I was now about to enter upon the track between Hamadan and Isfahan
usually followed by caravans and travellers , I had no longer any need
of the services or protection of a mehmandar . LAYARD-1894-2,111.380

I had every reason to be dissatisfied with Imaum Verdi Beg .
LAYARD-1894-2,111.381

He had got me into constant trouble and quarrels in the villages by his
extortions and the manner in which he was accustomed to treat the
inhabitants . LAYARD-1894-2,111.382

As the number of horses he required to carry the stock of provisions
which he had been collecting during our journey could not be procured ,
he was obliged to be satisfied with donkeys . LAYARD-1894-2,111.383

As these animals were unable to keep up with <P_112> the horses , and
were continually straggling into fields of ripe corn or barley to feed ,
my progress was much delayed LAYARD-1894-2,112.384

and I lost a great deal of valuable time . LAYARD-1894-2,112.385

Accordingly I insisted that he should deliver the firman to me ,
LAYARD-1894-2,112.386

and I left him to do as he thought fit . LAYARD-1894-2,112.387

He sold for ten shillings one of the donkeys which he had stolen ,
LAYARD-1894-2,112.388

and then followed me . LAYARD-1894-2,112.389

Ali came with him on one of the horses . LAYARD-1894-2,112.390

We still skirted the lofty mountain range , from which rose a grand peak
called Dulan-kuh , which had been visible during the previous two days .
LAYARD-1894-2,112.391

The plain through which we rode appeared to be deserted .
LAYARD-1894-2,112.392

We saw no villages , LAYARD-1894-2,112.393

and the one or two caravanserais we passed were in ruins .
LAYARD-1894-2,112.394

The Ghulâm had been told that the inhabitants had fled on account of the
incursions of the Bakhtiyari , LAYARD-1894-2,112.395

and had been warned that we might probably fall in with one of their
marauding parties . LAYARD-1894-2,112.396

He was consequently very anxious that I should take an escort for my
protection , which , however , I refused to do . LAYARD-1894-2,112.397

Towards evening we reached a small Bakhtiyari village , where we were
unable to obtain either provisions for ourselves or barley for our
horses . LAYARD-1894-2,112.398

I saw a castle on a mound in the distance LAYARD-1894-2,112.399

and galloped to it . LAYARD-1894-2,112.400

But the place seemed deserted , LAYARD-1894-2,112.401

and when I entered the gateway I found myself amidst a heap of ruins
tenanted by a solitary herdsman with a pair of oxen .
LAYARD-1894-2,112.402

He could not help us , LAYARD-1894-2,112.403

but said that there was a village off the road near the foot of the
mountain where we might obtain what we required . LAYARD-1894-2,112.404

It was already dark , LAYARD-1894-2,112.405

but there was nothing to be done but to take the direction he pointed
out to us . LAYARD-1894-2,112.406

We were overtaken by a violent thunderstorm , LAYARD-1894-2,112.407

and I soon got wet to the skin . LAYARD-1894-2,112.408

Except when the vivid flashes of lightning , accompanied by deafening
peals of thunder , showed us surrounding objects , we were in total
darkness . LAYARD-1894-2,112.409

When the storm had ceased and we had wandered about for some time ,
distant lights and the barking of dogs directed us to the village of
which we were in search . LAYARD-1894-2,112.410

After scrambling through ditches and wading through water-courses , we
found our selves at the gate of a ruined khan where some men were
gathered round a bright fire . LAYARD-1894-2,112.411

They were strolling shoemakers , who were on their way to Isfahan , and
had taken up their quarters <P_113> for the night in a vaulted passage
which had afforded them shelter from the storm . LAYARD-1894-2,113.412

Upon the fire they had kindled was a large caldron of savoury broth ,
which was boiling merrily . LAYARD-1894-2,113.413

The long ride had given me an appetite , LAYARD-1894-2,113.414

and I seated myself without ceremony in the group ,
LAYARD-1894-2,113.415

and began to help myself without waiting for an invitation .
LAYARD-1894-2,113.416

The shoe-makers , although good Musulmans , made no objection to my
dipping my own spoon into the mess with them . LAYARD-1894-2,113.417

Seeing that my clothes were soaked by the rain , and that I was
suffering from ague , they very civilly left me alone in the recess in
which they had established themselves , LAYARD-1894-2,113.418

and I was able to dry myself by their fire and to spread my carpet for
the night by the side of its embers . LAYARD-1894-2,113.419

Next day we entered upon the great plain in which Isfahan is situated ,
LAYARD-1894-2,113.420

and I soon came to a broad , well-beaten track , which proved the
highway from Hamadan to that city . LAYARD-1894-2,113.421

After following it for a short distance I was so exhausted by a severe
attack of fever , and by the dysentery which had greatly weakened me ,
that I was obliged to dismount on arriving at a small village , and to
take a little rest . LAYARD-1894-2,113.422

After the shivering fit had passed I resumed my journey ,
LAYARD-1894-2,113.423

but being again overtaken by a heavy thunderstorm , I took refuge in a
flour-mill which was fortunately hard by . LAYARD-1894-2,113.424

When the rain had ceased I again mounted my horse ,
LAYARD-1894-2,113.425

but being too unwell and weak to proceed very far , stopped for the
night at Tehran , a large village surrounded by gardens , where I was
able to obtain a clean room and the repose of which I was so much in
need . LAYARD-1894-2,113.426

The gardens amongst which I had entered before arriving at Tehran reach
in an almost uninterrupted line to Isfahan . LAYARD-1894-2,113.427

They produce fruit and vegetables of all kinds , especially melons of
exquisite flavour , which have an unrivalled reputation throughout
Persia . LAYARD-1894-2,113.428

These gardens owe their extreme productiveness to the great number of
streams which descend into the plain from the Zerda-Kuh range of
mountains , and are divided into innumerable rivulets for the purpose of
irrigation , frequently carried underground by the tunnelled
watercourses or kanâts , which have well-like openings at regular
distances . LAYARD-1894-2,113.429

<P_114>

The many horsemen , and men and women carrying loads , whom I passed on
the road showed me that I was approaching Isfahan ;
LAYARD-1894-2,114.431

but nothing could be seen of the city , which was completely buried in
trees . LAYARD-1894-2,114.432

By constantly asking my way I managed to reach , through the labyrinth
of walls which enclose the gardens and melon beds , the Armenian quarter
of Julfa . LAYARD-1894-2,114.433

I had letters for M. Eugène Boré , a French gentleman ,
LAYARD-1894-2,114.434

and , not knowing where to find a lodging , I presented myself to him to
ask for advice . LAYARD-1894-2,114.435

He received me with great kindness , LAYARD-1894-2,114.436

and insisted that I should be his guest . LAYARD-1894-2,114.437

Mr. Edward Burgess , an English merchant from Tabreez , who was at
Isfahan on business , hearing that I had arrived , came to see me
LAYARD-1894-2,114.438

and offered to be of use to me . LAYARD-1894-2,114.439

He proposed that we should present ourselves to the governor , Manuchar
Khan , the Multemedi-Dowla , or , as he was usually called , ' the
Matamet , ' to whom he was personally known . LAYARD-1894-2,114.440

I was anxious to deliver the letter which had been given to me by the
Haji at Hamadan for this high personage , and at the same time to lodge
a complaint against Imaum Verdi Beg , my mehmandar , for his exactions
and his ill-treatment of the villagers on the road .
LAYARD-1894-2,114.441

He had left me as we approached the city , taking with him the horses
and donkeys laden with rice , sugar , and other spoils which he had
acquired by the use of my firman . LAYARD-1894-2,114.442

I was determined to have him punished , and compelled to restore to
their owners the animals that he had carried off , and to repay to the
village chiefs the money he had levied from them .
LAYARD-1894-2,114.443

Although very ill and weak , I rode with Mr. Burgess on the second day
after my arrival to the governor's palace . LAYARD-1894-2,114.444

The Armenian suburb of Julfa is at some distance from the main portion
of the city , in which only Musulmans were then permitted to live .
LAYARD-1894-2,114.445

After passing through extensive gardens we reached the Mohammedan
quarters , LAYARD-1894-2,114.446

and threading our way between mud-built houses , for the most part
falling to ruins , through narrow , paved streets , deep in dust and mud
<P_115> and choked with filth and rubbish , we at length reached the
Matamet's residence . LAYARD-1894-2,115.447

After entering , through a narrow dark passage , a spacious yard with
the usual fountains , running water , and flowers , we passed into the
inner court , where the governor gave audience . LAYARD-1894-2,115.448

The palace , which at one time must have been of great magnificence ,
was in a neglected and ruined condition , LAYARD-1894-2,115.449

but had been once profusely decorated with paintings , glass , and
inlaid work , such as I had seen in the palace of Douletabad .
LAYARD-1894-2,115.450

The building was thronged with miserably clad soldiers , ' ferrashes , '
men and women having complaints to make or petitions to present , and
the usual retinue and hangers-on of a Persian nobleman in authority .
LAYARD-1894-2,115.451

The Matamet himself sat on a chair , at a large open window , in a
beautifully ornamented room at the upper end of the court .
LAYARD-1894-2,115.452

Those who had business with him , or whom he summoned , advanced with
repeated bows , LAYARD-1894-2,115.453

and then stood humbly before him as if awestruck by his presence , the
sleeves of their robes , usually loose and open , closely buttoned up ,
and their hands joined in front - an immemorial attitude of respect in
the East . LAYARD-1894-2,115.454

In the ' hauz , ' or pond of fresh water , in the centre of the court ,
were bundles of long switches from the pomegranate tree , soaking to be
ready for use for the bastinado , which the Matamet was in the habit of
administering freely and indifferently to high and low .
LAYARD-1894-2,115.455

In a corner was the pole with two loops of cord to raise the feet of the
victim , who writhes on the ground and screams for mercy .
LAYARD-1894-2,115.456

This barbarous punishment was then employed in Persia for all manner of
offences and crimes , the number of strokes administered varying
according to the guilt or obstinacy of the culprit .
LAYARD-1894-2,115.457

It was also constantly resorted to as a form of torture to extract
confessions . LAYARD-1894-2,115.458

The pomegranate switches , when soaked for some time , become lithe and
flexible . LAYARD-1894-2,115.459

The pain and injury which they inflicted were very great ,
LAYARD-1894-2,115.460

and were sometimes even <P_116> followed by death .
LAYARD-1894-2,116.461

Under ordinary circumstances the sufferer was unable to use his feet for
some time , LAYARD-1894-2,116.462

and frequently lost the nails of his toes . LAYARD-1894-2,116.463

The bastinado was inflicted upon men of the highest rank - governors of
provinces , and even prime ministers - who had , justly or unjustly ,
incurred the displeasure of the Shah . LAYARD-1894-2,116.464

Hussein Khan , on his return from a special mission as ambassador to
England and France , had been subjected to it on a charge of peculation
. LAYARD-1894-2,116.465

Manuchar Khan , the Matamet , was a eunuch . LAYARD-1894-2,116.466

He was a Georgian , born of Christian parents , LAYARD-1894-2,116.467

and had been purchased in his childhood as a slave ,
LAYARD-1894-2,116.468

had been brought up as a Musulman , and reduced to his unhappy condition
. LAYARD-1894-2,116.469

Like many of his kind , he was employed when young in the public service
, LAYARD-1894-2,116.470

and had by his remarkable abilities risen to the highest posts .
LAYARD-1894-2,116.471

He had for many years enjoyed the confidence and the favour of the Shah
. LAYARD-1894-2,116.472

Considered the best administrator in the kingdom , he had been sent to
govern the great province of Isfahan , which included within its limits
the wild and lawless tribes of the Lurs and the Bakhtiyari , generally
in rebellion , and the semi-independent Arab population of the plains
between the Luristan Mountains and the Euphrates .
LAYARD-1894-2,116.473

He was hated and feared for his cruelty ; LAYARD-1894-2,116.474

but it was generally admitted that he ruled justly , that he protected
the weak from oppression by the strong , and that where he was able to
enforce his authority life and property were secure .
LAYARD-1894-2,116.475

He was known for the ingenuity with which he had invented new forms of
punishment and torture to strike terror into evil-doers , and to make
examples of those who dared to resist his authority or that of his
master the Shah , thus justifying the reproach addressed to beings of
his class , of insensibility to human suffering . LAYARD-1894-2,116.476

One of his modes of dealing with criminals was what he termed ' planting
vines . ' LAYARD-1894-2,116.477

A hole having been dug in the ground , men were thrust headlong into it
and then covered with earth , their legs being allowed to protrude to
represent what he facetiously called ' the vines . '
LAYARD-1894-2,116.478

I was told that he had ordered a horse-stealer to have all his teeth
drawn , which were driven into the soles of his feet as if he were being
<P_117> shod . LAYARD-1894-2,117.479

His head was then put into a nose-bag filled with hay ,
LAYARD-1894-2,117.480

and he was thus left to die . LAYARD-1894-2,117.481

A tower still existed near Shiraz which he had built of three_hundred
living men belonging to the Mamesenni , a tribe inhabiting the mountains
to the north of Shiraz , which had rebelled against the Shah .
LAYARD-1894-2,117.482

They were laid in layers of ten , mortar being spread between each layer
, and the heads of the unhappy victims being left free .
LAYARD-1894-2,117.483

Some of them were said to have been kept alive for several days by being
fed by their friends , a life of torture being thus prolonged .
LAYARD-1894-2,117.484

At that time few nations , however barbarous , equalled - none probably
exceeded - the Persian in the shocking cruelty , ingenuity , and
indifference with which death or torture was inflicted .
LAYARD-1894-2,117.485

The Matamet had the usual characteristics of the eunuch .
LAYARD-1894-2,117.486

He was beardless , LAYARD-1894-2,117.487

had a smooth , colourless face , with hanging cheeks and a weak , shrill
, feminine voice . LAYARD-1894-2,117.488

He was short , stout , and flabby , LAYARD-1894-2,117.489

and his limbs were ungainly and slow of movement .
LAYARD-1894-2,117.490

His features , which were of the Georgian type , had a wearied and
listless appearance , LAYARD-1894-2,117.491

and were without expression or animation . LAYARD-1894-2,117.492

He was dressed in the usual Persian costume - his tunic being of the
finest Cashmere cloth - LAYARD-1894-2,117.493

and he carried a jewel-handled curved dagger in the shawl folded round
his waist . LAYARD-1894-2,117.494

He received us courteously , LAYARD-1894-2,117.495

said a few civil things about the English nation , which he
distinguished from the English Government , LAYARD-1894-2,117.496

and invited us to come up into the room in which he was seated and to
take our places on a carpet spread near him . LAYARD-1894-2,117.497

I handed him my firman and the letter from the Haji ,
LAYARD-1894-2,117.498

and being unable to suppress my indignation against Imaum Verdi Beg , my
mehmandar , for his ill-treatment of the villagers on the road , I
denounced him at once in vehement terms , describing his misconduct and
the insolent manner in which he had behaved to me when I had
remonstrated against it . LAYARD-1894-2,117.499

The Matamet applied a variety of opprobrious and foul epithets to the
Ghulâm himself , and to his mother and all his female relatives , after
the Persian fashion , LAYARD-1894-2,117.500

and promised that he should receive condign punishment .
LAYARD-1894-2,117.501

And he was <P_118> as good as his word , LAYARD-1894-2,118.502

for two days after Imaum Verdi came hobbling to me with a very rueful
countenance , and his feet swollen from the effects of the bastinado
which he had received . LAYARD-1894-2,118.503

I was inclined to pity the poor wretch , although he had richly deserved
his punishment ; LAYARD-1894-2,118.504

but I almost regretted that I had denounced him to the Matamet when he
said to me in an appealing tone , ' What good , sir , has the stick that
I have eaten done you ? LAYARD-1894-2,118.505

Who has profited by it ? LAYARD-1894-2,118.506

You and I might have divided the money and the supplies that , as the
Shah's servant , I was entitled by his firman to obtain for you on our
way . LAYARD-1894-2,118.507

The villagers would have been none the worse , as they would have
deducted the amount from their taxes . LAYARD-1894-2,118.508

Do you think that they will get back their horses , or their donkeys ,
or their tomans ? LAYARD-1894-2,118.509

No , the Matamet has taken them all for himself . LAYARD-1894-2,118.510

He is a rich man LAYARD-1894-2,118.511

and does not want them ; LAYARD-1894-2,118.512

I am a poor man LAYARD-1894-2,118.513

and do . LAYARD-1894-2,118.514

He is the greater robber of the two . LAYARD-1894-2,118.515

He goes unpunished LAYARD-1894-2,118.516

and I have scarcely a nail left on my toes . ' LAYARD-1894-2,118.517

After the Matamet had made the usual inquiries as to the object of my
journey , and as to the route I desired to take and the places I wished
to visit , he said that , had I been accompanied by a competent Ghulâm ,
I should have met with no difficulty in carrying out my original
intention of crossing the Bakhtiyari Mountains to Shuster .
LAYARD-1894-2,118.518

He promised to send with me one of his own officers , who would conduct
me to that city . LAYARD-1894-2,118.519

A Bakhtiyari chief , named Shefi'a Khan , who happened to be present ,
confirmed what the governor had said , LAYARD-1894-2,118.520

and informed me that one of the brothers of Mehemet Taki Khan , the
great Bakhtiyari chief , was then in Isfahan . LAYARD-1894-2,118.521

When I took my leave of the governor he told me that my new mehmandar
would be ready to leave immediately , and that I should receive the
letters he had promised me without delay . LAYARD-1894-2,118.522

The day after my interview with the Matamet I succeeded , after some
trouble , in finding Shefi'a Khan , who had promised to introduce me to
Ali Naghi Khan , the brother of the principal chief of the Bakhtiyari
tribes . LAYARD-1894-2,118.523

They both lodged in the upper storey of a half-ruined building forming
part of one of the ancient royal palaces . LAYARD-1894-2,118.524

<P_119>

The entrance was crowded with their retainers - tall , handsome , but
fierce-looking men , in very ragged clothes . LAYARD-1894-2,119.526

They wore the common white felt skull-cap , sometimes embroidered at the
edge with coloured wools when worn by a chief , their heads being
closely shaven after the Persian fashion , with the exception of two
locks , called ' zulf , ' one on each side of the face .
LAYARD-1894-2,119.527

