<BEGIN_layer-1723-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

Die Mercurii 31=o= Die Octobris , 1722 . LAYER-1723-2,1.4

<$$heading>

<font> This Day <$$font> Christopher Layer , <font> Esq; was brought to
the Bar of the Court of <$$font> King's Bench <font> at <$$font>
Westminster , <font> upon a <$$font> Habeas_Corpus <font> directed to
the Lieutenant of the <$$font> Tower <font> of <$$font> London , <font>
in order to be arraign'd on an Indictment for <$$font> High Treason
<font> in compassing and Imagining the Death of the King , found by the
Grand Jury for the County of <$$font> Essex <font> before special
Commissioners of <$$font> Oyer_and_Terminer
{COM:font_change_around_"and"} . LAYER-1723-2,1.6

Mr. Serjeant <font> Pengelly . <$$font> My Lord , we pray the Return
of the <font> Habeas_Corpus <$$font> may be read . LAYER-1723-2,1.7

<font> Mr. <$$font> Harcourt <font> Clerk of the Crown , reads the
Return of the <$$font> Habeas_Corpus , <font> by which it appeared that
the Prisoner was committed to the <$$font> Tower <font> for High Treason
. <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,1.8

Mr. Serj. <font> Pengelly . <$$font> We pray that the Return may be
filed . LAYER-1723-2,1.9

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> Let it be filed . LAYER-1723-2,1.10

Mr. Serj. <font> Pengelly . <$$font> My Lord , There is an Indictment
of High Treason found in the County of <font> Essex <$$font> against Mr.
<font> Christopher Layer , <$$font> which hath been removed into this
Court by <font> Certiorari ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,1.11

the <font> Certiorari , <$$font> and Return thereof hath been filed ,
LAYER-1723-2,1.12

and the Prisoner is now brought into Court in order to be arraigned .
LAYER-1723-2,1.13

<font> Ld._Ch._Justice . <$$font> Read the Indictment .
LAYER-1723-2,1.14

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Christopher Layer , <$$font> Hold up your Hand .
LAYER-1723-2,1.15

You stand indicted by the Name of Christopher Layer , late of the Parish
of St. Andrew's Holbourn , in the County of Middlesex , Esq; For that
you being a Subject of our most Serene Lord GEORGE , now King of Great
Britain , France and Ireland , Defender of the Faith , &c. not having
the Fear of God in your Heart , nor weighing the Duty of your Allegiance
; but being moved and reduced by the Instigation of the Devil , as a
false Traitor against our said Lord the King , your Supreme , True ,
Lawful and Undoubted Lord ; withdrawing that Cordial Love , and true and
due Obedience , Fidelity and Allegiance , which every Subject of our
said Lord the King towards Him should and of Right ought to bear ; and
designing , and with all your Might Traiterously intending the
Government of this Kingdom , under our said Lord the King duly and
happily established , to Change , Alter , and Subvert ; and our said
Lord the King of and from the Title , Honour , Royal Estate , Empire and
Government of this Kingdom to Depose and Deprive ; and our said Lord the
King to Death and final Destruction to Bring and Draw ; and the Person
during the Life of the late King James the Second , pretended to be
Prince of Wales ; and after the Decease of the said late King ,
pretending to be , and taking upon himself the Style and Title of King
of England , by the Name of James the Third , to the Crown , Royal State
and Dignity of King of this Kingdom , and to the Empire , Government ,
and Possession of the same , to exalt and bring , the Twenty-Fifth Day
of August , in the Ninth Year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord
the King that now is ; and at divers other Days and Times , as well
before as after , at Laytonstone in the said County of Essex , Falsely ,
Maliciously , Devilishly , and Traiterously , did Compass , Imagine ,
and Intend , our said Lord the King , your Supreme , True , Lawful , and
Undoubted Lord , of and from the Title , Honour , Royal Estate , Empire
and Government of this Kingdom to Depose and Deprive ; and our said Lord
the King to Death and , final Destruction to Put and Bring .
LAYER-1723-2,1.16

And that you the said <$$font> Christopher Layer , <font> to accomplish
and bring about your said Treason , and Devilish and Traiterous Intents
and Purposes , did , with divers other false Traytors , to the Jurors
unknown , on the said Twenty-Fifth Day of <$$font> August , <font> in
the said Ninth Year of the Reign of our said Lord the King , and at
divers other Days and Times , as well before as after , at <$$font>
Laytonstone <font> aforesaid , in the said County of <$$font> Essex ,
<font> by Force and Arms , <$$font> &c. <font> Falsely , Maliciously ,
Devilishly and Traiterously meet , propose , consult , <$$font> <P_2>
<font> conspire , consent , and agree , to move , raise , and levy
Insurrection , Rebellion , and War , within this Kingdom against our
said Lord the King , for the Traiterous Purposes aforesaid .
LAYER-1723-2,2.17

And that you the said <$$font> Christopher Layer , <font> for the more
effectual compleating and perfecting the said Treason and Traiterous
Intentions and Purposes , on the said Twenty-Fifth Day of <$$font>
August , <font> in the Ninth Year aforesaid , at <$$font> Laytonstone
<font> aforesaid , in the said County of <$$font> Essex , <font> by
Force and Arms , <$$font> &c. <font> Maliciously and Traiterously did
publish a certain Malicious , Seditious , and Traiterous Writing ,
containing and purporting <paren> amongst other things <$$paren> an
Exhortation , Incitement , and Promises of Rewards , the faithful
Subjects of our said Lord the King , to perswade , move and excite , to
take up Arms , and to levy and make War within this Realm , against our
said Sovereign Lord the King , for the Traiterous Purposes and
Intentions aforesaid . LAYER-1723-2,2.18

And that you the said Christopher Layer , for the more Effectual
Compleating and Perfecting the said Treason and Traiterous Intentions
and Purposes , with other false Traitors , to the Jurors unknown , on
the said Twenty-Fifth Day of August , in the Ninth Year aforesaid , and
at divers other Days and Times , as well before , as after , at
Laytonstone aforesaid , in the said County of Essex , by Force and Arms
, &c. Falsely , Maliciously , Devilishly and Traiterously , did meet ,
propose , consult , conspire , consent and agree , by an armed Force ,
and by Soldiers to be raised and got ready for the Traiterous Purposes
aforesaid ; the said Person , during the Life of the said late King
James the Second , pretended to be Prince of Wales , and since the
Decease of the said late King , pretending to be , and taking upon
himself the Style and Title of King of England , by the Name of James
the Third , to the Crown Royal , Estate and Dignity , of King of this
Kingdom , and to the Empire , Government , and Possission of the same to
exalt and bring ; LAYER-1723-2,2.19

and that you the said <$$font> Christopher Layer , <font> for the more
Effectual Compleating and Perfecting the said Treason and Traiterous
Intentions and Purposes aforesaid , on the said Twenty-Fifth Day of
<$$font> August , <font> in the Ninth Year aforesaid , and at divers
other Days and Times , as well before as after , at <$$font> Laytonstone
<font> aforesaid , in the said County of <$$font> Essex , <font> by
Force and Arms , <$$font> &c. <font> Maliciously and Traiterously did
get ready , raise , and retain several Men , to the Jurors unknown , to
take up Arms , and to levy and Wage War within this Kingdom , against
our said Sovereign Lord the King , for the Traiterous Purposes aforesaid
; LAYER-1723-2,2.20

And that you the said <$$font> Christopher Layer , <font> for the more
Effectual Compleating and Perfecting the said Treason , and Traiterous
Intentions and Purposes aforesaid , on the said Twenty-Fifth Day of
<$$font> August , <font> in the Ninth year aforesaid , and at divers
other Days and Times , as well before as after , at <$$font> Laytonstone
<font> aforesaid , in the said County of <$$font> Essex , <font> with
other false Traitors to the Jurors unknown , by Force and Arms ,
<$$font> &c. <font> Maliciously , Devilishly , and Traiterously , did
meet , propose , consult , conspire , consent and agree , the Sacred
Person of our now Sovereign Lord King <$$font> GEORGE , <font> for the
Traiterous Purposes aforesaid , most wickedly to take , seize , imprison
, and detain in Custody , against the Duty of your Allegiance , against
the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King , his Crown and Dignity ,
and against the Form of the Statute in that Case made and provided .
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,2.21

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> If your Lordship will please to indulge me ;
My Lord , I am brought here in Chains , in Fetters and in Chains :
LAYER-1723-2,2.22

My Lord , I have been used more like an <font> Algerine <$$font> Captive
than a Freeborn <font> Englishman <$$font> : LAYER-1723-2,2.23

I have been dragged thro' the Streets by the Hands of Goalers ,
LAYER-1723-2,2.24

and have been made a Shew and a Spectacle of . LAYER-1723-2,2.25

I am now in a Court of Justice before your Lordship , LAYER-1723-2,2.26

and I hope the Time will come when I shall have a candid and fair Tryal
, and not be made a Sacrifice to the Rage and Fury of any Party , or the
Necessity of the Times . LAYER-1723-2,2.27

My Lord , I had not said this , LAYER-1723-2,2.28

but I have been insulted since I came into the Hall : LAYER-1723-2,2.29

A Gentleman came LAYER-1723-2,2.30

and told me , Either you must die , LAYER-1723-2,2.31

or the Plot must die . LAYER-1723-2,2.32

My Lord , This is Usage insufferable in a Christian Nation ;
LAYER-1723-2,2.33

and I think I can lay my Hand upon my Heart and say , I have done
nothing against my Conscience . LAYER-1723-2,2.34

Mr. Serj. <font> Pengelly . <$$font> If Mr. <font> Layer <$$font>
hath any Objections to the Indictment , he may make them ,
LAYER-1723-2,2.35

but should not go on in this Manner . LAYER-1723-2,2.36

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , I hope I shall have these Chains
taken off , that I may have the free Use of that Reason and
Understanding which God hath given me , LAYER-1723-2,2.37

<P_3>

They have given me the Strangury to that degree that is very painful ,
LAYER-1723-2,3.39

and I am told your Lordship is afflicted with that Distemper .
LAYER-1723-2,3.40

I hope these Chains shall be taken off in the first Place ,
LAYER-1723-2,3.41

and then I hope I shall have a fair and a tender Tryal .
LAYER-1723-2,3.42

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> There have been a great many things said
by you which we can@ @not examine into . LAYER-1723-2,3.43

You have given a General Charge of some People using you ill ,
LAYER-1723-2,3.44

your Expressions are not just and right ; LAYER-1723-2,3.45

you charge no Particular Person ; LAYER-1723-2,3.46

we can take no Notice of them . LAYER-1723-2,3.47

As to the Chains you complain of , it must be left to those to whom the
Custody of you is committed by Law , to make that Security that you may
not make your Escape ; LAYER-1723-2,3.48

when you come to your Tryal , then your Chains may be taken off .
LAYER-1723-2,3.49

Consider the Matter of this Day ; LAYER-1723-2,3.50

if you have any Objections to the Indictment , the Court will hear them
; LAYER-1723-2,3.51

if not , you must plead . LAYER-1723-2,3.52

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I am sure nothing is intended but that
he should have a fair Tryal ; LAYER-1723-2,3.53

but to complain here of hard Usage , of Chains , and Imprisonment ,
carries with it a Reflection of Cruelty , LAYER-1723-2,3.54

and we know what Effect these Things may have abroad .
LAYER-1723-2,3.55

My Lord , I do@ @n't believe there is any Occasion for saying any thing
more in Answer to this , than that the Prisoner hath been kept , as
every Body in his Circumstances are , when they have been attempting to
make an Escape ; LAYER-1723-2,3.56

there was an Attempt of that Nature made by him , LAYER-1723-2,3.57

and I believe no Body will say but on such an Occasion there is Reason
to take particular Care that he may not escape . LAYER-1723-2,3.58

My Lord , As to any other Matters of Hardship , I hope what he says is
not so ; LAYER-1723-2,3.59

I verily believe it is not , but that he hath as much Freedom and
Liberty as is proper and usual . LAYER-1723-2,3.60

And as to what is said in respect to the Man that insulted him in the
Hall , I know nothing of it , LAYER-1723-2,3.61

nor heard of it before ; LAYER-1723-2,3.62

but ca@ @n't but observe that it is an easy Matter for People to
contrive such a thing in concert together , with some particular Views ,
LAYER-1723-2,3.63

and I do@ @n't know but if the Fact was so , it might be some body set
on by himself that did it . LAYER-1723-2,3.64

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Alas ! If there hath been an Attempt to
escape , there can be no Pretension to complain of Hardship :
LAYER-1723-2,3.65

He that hath attempted an Escape once , if true , ought to be secured in
such Manner as to prevent his Escaping a second time .
LAYER-1723-2,3.66

The Gentleman Goaler , what doth he say ? LAYER-1723-2,3.67

<font> Gentleman-Goaler . <$$font> My Lord , He never attempted to
escape since he was in my Custody . LAYER-1723-2,3.68

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> No , it was before . LAYER-1723-2,3.69

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , This Complaint is made for no
other Purpose but to captivate the Minds of the By-Standers , without
any just Grounds in the World ; LAYER-1723-2,3.70

for if the whole of the Complaint made and aggravated in this solemn
Manner be considered , it amounts only to this , That a Prisoner who
stands charged with so great an Offence as High Treason , <paren> who I
admit notwithstanding the Weight of that Charge , ought to have all the
Justice and all the Opportunity of defending himself which the Law
allows <$$paren> I say it amounts to no more than this , That a Prisoner
in these Circumstances is brought up hither under a Guard , and in
Fetters , as Persons in that Condition usually are . LAYER-1723-2,3.71

It is very well known that when this Gentleman was in the Custody of a
Messenger , he not only made an Attempt to escape , but actually escaped
, got out of a Window two Pair of Stairs high , and from thence over the
Water into <font> South Wark ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,3.72

and since that is so , can there be any Colour to say that what was done
afterwards was unwarrantable ? LAYER-1723-2,3.73

I can@ @not help saying on this Occasion , that it does not become the
Candour a Person in the Prisoner's Circumstances ought to shew , to
aggravate and make such a Misrepresentation of the Usage he has received
. LAYER-1723-2,3.74

As to what has happened in the Hall , we know nothing of it ,
LAYER-1723-2,3.75

nor can possibly tell how true it is . LAYER-1723-2,3.76

If any such thing was said , it is not impossible to have been by some
Body that was set there on Purpose by the Friends of this Gentleman .
LAYER-1723-2,3.77

I say thus much , my Lord , not because I think it material to the
Business of this Day , but because I would not have it gone away with
that there has been any Hardship put upon the Prisoner contrary to Law .
LAYER-1723-2,3.78

No , His Majesty , who makes the Laws of the Land the Rule and Measure
of all His Actions , tho' he will have justice done to Himself and His
Government against any Person that shall conspire to overthrow it , yet
he will suffer no Hardships to be done even to such Persons , contrary
to Law ; LAYER-1723-2,3.79

and nothing has been done in this Case but what was legal and absolutely
necessary . LAYER-1723-2,3.80

<P_4>

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , I beg to be indulged a few
Words , LAYER-1723-2,4.82

That he is in Chains now is demonstrable , LAYER-1723-2,4.83

and he hath told me when in the <font> Tower <$$font> with him , that
they are so grievous to him that he can@ @not sleep but in one Posture ,
<font> viz. <$$font> upon his Back , LAYER-1723-2,4.84

and that he hath not attempted to escape out of the <font> Tower ,
<$$font> is given in Evidence by the Gent. Jailor , who hath , and will
, I verily believe , Execute his Authority with all Humanity ,
LAYER-1723-2,4.85

for he now helps to hold up his Chains , LAYER-1723-2,4.86

other wise the Prisoner could not Stand . LAYER-1723-2,4.87

My Lord , it is said it is nothing but what is usual in Cases of this
Nature . LAYER-1723-2,4.88

My Lord , I believe I might Challenge them to give an Instance where any
Prisoner was shackled with Iron in the <font> Tower <$$font> before Mr.
<font> Layer ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,4.89

His Majesty's Prisoners of the <font> Tower <$$font> are such Strangers
to this Usage , that they had not the very Materials there ,
LAYER-1723-2,4.90

they were sent for from <font> Newgate , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,4.91

and I hope they will be carryed back again thither . LAYER-1723-2,4.92

Your Lordship , hath hinted it as an Indulgence intended to him when he
comes to his Tryal , that his Irons shall be taken off :
LAYER-1723-2,4.93

But I humbly insist upon it that by Law he ought not to be called upon ,
even to Plead , till his Fetters are off : LAYER-1723-2,4.94

My Lord <font> Coke <$$font> is clearly of that Opinion in his Pleas of
the Crown ; LAYER-1723-2,4.95

and it is admitted on all Hands , that when he comes to be Tryed his
Shackles must be off , LAYER-1723-2,4.96

and upon a Debate it was so determined in <font> Cranburne's <$$font>
Case . LAYER-1723-2,4.97

The only Reason assigned for putting of Irons at all upon a Prisoner ,
is to keep him in safe Custody , LAYER-1723-2,4.98

<paren> for the Laws of <font> England <$$font> allow of no Tortures
<$$paren> LAYER-1723-2,4.99

and the Reason why they are taken off in the Course of Proceeding
against him in a Court of Justice , seems to be that his Mind should not
be disturbed by any Uneasiness his Body or Limbs should be under ;
LAYER-1723-2,4.100

and as to the Distinction that his Chains should be on when he Pleads ,
because but for a Moment , or a short Time , and off when he is Tryed ,
because that will be of longer Duration ; it is possible that what we
have now to lay may be as long as some Tryals . LAYER-1723-2,4.101

I should <paren> with Submission <$$paren> think that something of the
Dignity of the Court might be considered in this Matter ,
LAYER-1723-2,4.102

for a Court of Justice , the highest in the Kingdom for Criminal Matters
, where the King himself is supposed to be Personally present , to have
a Man Plead for his Life before them in Chains , seems to be very
unsuitable . LAYER-1723-2,4.103

He is now before the same Awful and Just Tribunal which he will be
before when he is Tryed , LAYER-1723-2,4.104

and why not therefore without Chains as well now as then ,
LAYER-1723-2,4.105

and as to the safe Custody intended by the Irons , is the Man like to
run away here ? LAYER-1723-2,4.106

Is he not here too well Guarded to Escape ? LAYER-1723-2,4.107

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> If your Lordship please to favour me a
few Words : LAYER-1723-2,4.108

My Lord , what hath been his Usage in bringing him up hither I can@ @not
tell ; LAYER-1723-2,4.109

what the Usage of the <font> Tower <$$font> is with respect to the
putting Chains upon Prisoners , I am ignorant of ; LAYER-1723-2,4.110

but this I must beg Leave to say , that he is entitled to have his
Chains off before he Pleads , in Point of Law : LAYER-1723-2,4.111

The Authorities for it are my Lord <font> Coke <$$font> in his 3d <font>
Instit. <$$font> Fol. 34 , who says , that when Prisoners come in
Judgment to Answer , they shall be out of Irons , and all manner of
Bonds , that their Pain may not take away their Reason , nor Constrain
them to Answer , but at their Free Will ; LAYER-1723-2,4.112

and in Fol. 35 . he cites the Words out of the <font> Mirrour ,
<$$font> Chap. 5 . Sect. I . LAYER-1723-2,4.113

It is an abuse that Prisoners be charged with Irons , or put to any Pain
before they be Attainted ; LAYER-1723-2,4.114

at the Tryal of <font> Cranburne , <$$font> when he was brought up here
before my Lord_Chief_Justice <font> Holt , <$$font> he insisted that his
Chains should be taken off before he Pleaded , LAYER-1723-2,4.115

and it was ordered ; LAYER-1723-2,4.116

This was likewise mentioned in the Tryals of <font> Dorrel , Gordon ,
<$$font> and <font> Kerr ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,4.117

when they came up in their Irons to Plead , it was moved at first that
those Irons ought to be taken off . LAYER-1723-2,4.118

The Court declared that if the Prisoners insisted on it , it ought to be
done : LAYER-1723-2,4.119

But they did not insist on it , LAYER-1723-2,4.120

they rather Chose to wave that Privilege than undergo the Trouble of
having them knockt off in Court : LAYER-1723-2,4.121

There is a Resolution in this Case : LAYER-1723-2,4.122

In the 10th Fol. of <font> Kelynge , <$$font> it is expresly declared
on a Consultation of all the Judges in <font> England , <$$font> That a
Prisoner ought to have his Irons taken off before he Pleads .
LAYER-1723-2,4.123

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> The Case of <font> Cranburne , <$$font>
you will find that Authority is when the Party was called upon to Plead
, and was tryed at the same Time . LAYER-1723-2,4.124

No Doubt when he comes upon his Tryal , the Authority is that he is not
to be <font> in Vinculis <$$font> during his Tryal , but should be so
far Free , that he should have the use of his Reason , and all
Advantages to clear his Innocence : LAYER-1723-2,4.125

Here he is only called upon to Plead , and to Plead by Advice of his
Counsel ; LAYER-1723-2,4.126

he is not to be Tryed now , LAYER-1723-2,4.127

when he comes to be Tryed , if he makes that Complaint , the Court <P_5>
will take Care he shall be in a Condition proper to make his Defence ;
LAYER-1723-2,5.128

but when he is only called upon to Plead , and his Counsel by him to
Advise him what to Plead , why are his Chains to be taken off this
Minute , and to be put on again the next ? LAYER-1723-2,5.129

It hath been said <paren> I can@ @not understand the Meaning of it
<$$paren> he is too well Guarded , LAYER-1723-2,5.130

I do@ @n't think a Man Charged with High Treason of this Nature , can be
said justly to be too well Guarded , especially if it be true what hath
been suggested , that he hath endeavoured to make his Escape ;
LAYER-1723-2,5.131

that will justify more than what the Law allows in other Cases .
LAYER-1723-2,5.132

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord I beg leave to explain myself
, what I mean by saying too well Guarded , LAYER-1723-2,5.133

I mean sufficiently Guarded . LAYER-1723-2,5.134

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Have you any thing more to offer ?
LAYER-1723-2,5.135

This is nothing but to Captivate the People , and to make Impressions
upon them that are not Just , LAYER-1723-2,5.136

or else what signifies his Chains being taken off this Minute , and
afterwards put on again the next ? LAYER-1723-2,5.137

this is nothing but to bring the People to have an Unjust Sense of the
Crime with which he is Charged . LAYER-1723-2,5.138

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , we might humbly apprehend
and hope that the better to prepare himself for his Tryal , he might
continue without his Chains till after that Time . LAYER-1723-2,5.139

<font> L._Ch._Justice . <$$font> I am of another Opinion ,
LAYER-1723-2,5.140

and if we should order his Chains to be taken off , and he Escape , I
do@ @n't know but we are Guilty of his Escape . LAYER-1723-2,5.141

As your Client hath said , he shall have a fair and a just Tryal ;
LAYER-1723-2,5.142

but to make Objections in Matters of this Nature , is to cast a
Reflection on the Court , for not doing that which is not in their Power
to do . LAYER-1723-2,5.143

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I am , my Lord , of Counsel with the
Prisoner , LAYER-1723-2,5.144

I have been so appointed by your Lordship , LAYER-1723-2,5.145

and I assure your Lordship that I , and I dare Answer for the other
Gentleman that is concerned in the same Service with me , shall make use
of that Power and Privilege you are pleased to give us , as we ought .
LAYER-1723-2,5.146

My Lord , I have read over the Record and the Indictment ,
LAYER-1723-2,5.147

we have a Copy of both , according to the Direction of the Act of
Parliament : LAYER-1723-2,5.148

I know we have at present a Right to Object to four sorts of Things ,
<font> viz. <$$font> Miswriting , Mispelling , False or improper <font>
Latin <$$font> : LAYER-1723-2,5.149

We are confined to make whatever Objections occur to us on these Heads
at this Time , LAYER-1723-2,5.150

and have not the Liberty to make it afterwards ; LAYER-1723-2,5.151

but there are likewise some Objections of another Nature , which we may
have Liberty to make at another Time . LAYER-1723-2,5.152

I have here in my Hand the whole Record delivered to the Prisoner , in
which , not only the Indictment is set forth , but the Commission of
<font> Oyer_and_Terminer {COM:font_change_around_"and"} . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,5.153

After the Commission hath enumerated the Names of the Commissioners , it
goes on , LAYER-1723-2,5.154

and says what are the Offences that they are Authorized to Inquire of ,
as High Treason , Misprisions of Treason , and other Offences of a
lesser Degree ; LAYER-1723-2,5.155

then it goes on LAYER-1723-2,5.156

and says what the Persons shall be , concerning whom this Inquiry shall
be made , LAYER-1723-2,5.157

<font> Et per quos vel per quem , cui vel quibus , quando , qualiter , &
quomodo , & de aliis Articulis & Circumstantiis , premissa & eorum
quodlibet seu eorum aliquod vel aliqua , qualitercunq; concernen' ,
plenius veritat' . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,5.158

My Lord , I have look'd into this Form , and considered the Words with
all the Accuracy I can , LAYER-1723-2,5.159

and have Endeavoured to render them into <font> English , <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,5.160

but can@ @not ; LAYER-1723-2,5.161

I must say I look upon those two Words <font> plenius veritat' ,
<$$font> as placed in this Record , to be Non-sense , and not capable of
being rendered into <font> English , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,5.162

for they import no meaning at all . LAYER-1723-2,5.163

It is a Blemish in the Commission it self , LAYER-1723-2,5.164

and if so , the Inquiry taken by Virtue of that Commission , must fall
to nothing , LAYER-1723-2,5.165

and consequently this Indictment must be naught . LAYER-1723-2,5.166

I have been so exact I have look't into the Forms of these Indictments ,
taken by Virtue of Commissions of <font> Oyer_and_Terminer
{COM:font_change_around_"and"} . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,5.167

My Lord_Chief_Justice <font> Coke <$$font> hath , for the sake of
Posterity , I suppose , given us the Form of the Commission of <font>
Oyer_and_Terminer {COM:font_change_around_"and"} <$$font> in his Time ;
LAYER-1723-2,5.168

in that Form of his these Words are entirely left out ;
LAYER-1723-2,5.169

they seem to me to be Words of no Signification , LAYER-1723-2,5.170

therefore we hope there shall be no further Proceedings till this is set
right , and that the Indictment shall be quash'd . LAYER-1723-2,5.171

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , there are other Objections ,
LAYER-1723-2,5.172

whether is it your Lordship's Pleasure that we should go on this first ,
or that we should mention the others , and so go upon them all together
? LAYER-1723-2,5.173

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Make all your Objections together .
LAYER-1723-2,5.174

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> Then , my Lord , in the Close of this
Commission it is said the Jury were charged to Inquire ,
LAYER-1723-2,5.175

but doth not say for what : LAYER-1723-2,5.176

but that Objection <P_6> may be made another Time , LAYER-1723-2,6.177

and therefore I will not trouble your Lordship with it now .
LAYER-1723-2,6.178

My Lord , the first Thing that occurs to me in the Indictment itself ,
and which certainly , if we prevail in , the whole Proceedings are wrong
; this Gentlemans Name is not Writ nor Spelt right , LAYER-1723-2,6.179

<font> Jurator' pro Dno' Rege , <$$font> &c. LAYER-1723-2,6.180

<font> Super Sacramentum , <$$font> &c. LAYER-1723-2,6.181

<font> quod Christopherus Layer , LAYER-1723-2,6.182

Christopherus <$$font> is there Writ with an E , whereas it should be
<font> Christophorus <$$font> with an O ; LAYER-1723-2,6.183

and if the Dictionaries and Lexicons are any Authority we are right .
LAYER-1723-2,6.184

These are the Objections which have occurred to me , LAYER-1723-2,6.185

the Gentleman joined with me in this Service , hath some other Remarks
to make . LAYER-1723-2,6.186

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , As it is your Lordship's
Pleasure to appoint us to be Counsel for this Gentleman , I shall not
make any Apology for our appearing on his Behalf , lest I receive the
same Reproof from the Court , which a Gentleman in my Station once
received upon a like Occasion . LAYER-1723-2,6.187

My Lord , We are at this Time proper to lay these four Points under your
Lordship's Consideration , which if we had staid till after Plea pleaded
by the <font> prisoner , <$$font> would have been too late ,
LAYER-1723-2,6.188

that Matter hath been often settled and determined by your Lordship ,
LAYER-1723-2,6.189

and I shall say no more to that , LAYER-1723-2,6.190

I believe they do@ @n't object to it ; LAYER-1723-2,6.191

now therefore is the only Time to make these Objections .
LAYER-1723-2,6.192

My Lord , The first that hath been mentioned by Mr. <font> Hungerford
<$$font> is in the Caption of the Indictment as to these Words <font>
plenius Veritatem ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,6.193

in our Copy , it is <font> plenius Veritat' <$$font> with a Dash that it
may be taken in any Case , LAYER-1723-2,6.194

but I submit it to your Lordship whether it can be made Sense , or is
proper <font> Latin <$$font> in any of the Cases either of the Singular
or Plural Number , that there can be made any Grammar of it , or that
there is any regular or preceeding <font> Verb <$$font> that can govern
it in any Case whatsoever ; LAYER-1723-2,6.195

they might have put in any Words entirely Inconsistent with respect to
the Part preceeding or subsequent ; LAYER-1723-2,6.196

leave out these Words and the other Part of the Sentence is Plain and
Intelligible , LAYER-1723-2,6.197

but , put in the Words and it is otherwise . And especially since we
have the Authority of my Lord <font> Coke <$$font> where these Words are
not in ; LAYER-1723-2,6.198

how they came to be put in , or of what Use they are , your Lordship
will observe on reading the Caption of the Indictment , <font> Ad
Inquirend' , <$$font> &c. LAYER-1723-2,6.199

<font> plenius Veritat' . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,6.200

Taking Exceptions to the Caption of the Indictment hath formerly been
objected to , LAYER-1723-2,6.201

but I believe that Right can@ @not be disputed at this Time .
LAYER-1723-2,6.202

As to the second Exception , That , in relation to <font> Christopherus
, <$$font> we submit it to your Lordship if that be not expresly within
the Defects mentioned in the Act of Parliament Miswriting , Mispelling ,
false and improper <font> Latin ; <$$font> nay , whether it is not
Subject to Censure under each of these four Heads . LAYER-1723-2,6.203

My Lord , It was impossible to bring all my Authorities , upon this
Point , along with me ; LAYER-1723-2,6.204

but I have here in Court several of the best Dictionaries and Lexicons
which shew the true Word to be <font> Christophorus , <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,6.205

and I believe the Gentlemen of the other Side ca@ @n't produce one
Instance in any authentick Book either <font> Greek <$$font> or <font>
Latin , <$$font> but it is always Spelt with an O and not with an E ,
LAYER-1723-2,6.206

it is <font> Christophorus <$$font> from the <font> Prateritum Medium
<$$font> of the <font> Greek Verb ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,6.207

and the Rules of Etymology and Formation of <font> Greek Verbals
<$$font> evince that it must be so and can@ @not be otherwise ;
LAYER-1723-2,6.208

and by all the <font> Latin <$$font> Dictionaries , the <font> Latin
<$$font> Word for <font> Christopher <$$font> is <font> Christophorus .
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,6.209

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> How do we know what his Name is ?
LAYER-1723-2,6.210

You must Plead it in Abatement ; LAYER-1723-2,6.211

we do@ @n't know his Name ; LAYER-1723-2,6.212

he might be christened <font> Christopherus <$$font> for ought we know .
LAYER-1723-2,6.213

<font> Mr. Ketelhey . <$$font> My Lord , for false Spelling -
LAYER-1723-2,6.214

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> How doth that appear to us ?
LAYER-1723-2,6.215

You are wrong in making your Objection at this Time , LAYER-1723-2,6.216

we ca@ @n't take Notice what his Name is ; LAYER-1723-2,6.217

in the Record of the Indictment he is called <font> Christopherus .
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,6.218

Can we enquire what his true Name is , whether in English it is <font>
Christopher <$$font> or <font> Christopherus ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,6.219

We ca@ @n't tell what his Name is , LAYER-1723-2,6.220

perchance his Name may be <font> Christopherus , <$$font> and the Name
by which he might be christened ; LAYER-1723-2,6.221

I desire I may not be understood as if I would prevent you from offering
any thing that is Material for your Client , LAYER-1723-2,6.222

but if I can satisfy you that you are improper in Form , it may save the
Time of the Court ; LAYER-1723-2,6.223

but if you can offer any thing Material , we are ready to hear it .
LAYER-1723-2,6.224

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , I hope your Lordship will
pardon me , LAYER-1723-2,6.225

here is the Life of a Man concern'd , LAYER-1723-2,6.226

and as I would not willingly offer any thing to your Lordship that in
the like Cases hath been over-ruled , so neither would I <P_7> omit any
thing that may be material for the Prisoner , whose Defence the Court
has intrusted us with ; LAYER-1723-2,7.227

therefore I will go on to the other Objections that we think to be
improper <font> Latin ; compassavit , imaginatus suit , & intendebat .
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,7.228

These are the Words , LAYER-1723-2,7.229

I do@ @n't know whether this <font> Latin <$$font> will go down in
<font> Westminster-Hall , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,7.230

but I am satisfy'd it would not in <font> Westminster-School . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,7.231

Here is the <font> Et Intendebat , Et <$$font> a Conjunction Copulative
between Verbs in several Tenses ; LAYER-1723-2,7.232

Here is <font> Compassavit <$$font> the Preterperfect Tense , <font>
Imaginatus suit <$$font> the Preterperfect Tense , and <font> Intendebat
<$$font> the Preterimperfect Tense : LAYER-1723-2,7.233

Why should not the last Verb have been put into the Preterperfect Tense
, according to the Rules of Classical <font> Latin , <$$font> as well as
the two former ? LAYER-1723-2,7.234

therefore we submit it how far it will go as to vitiating the Indictment
in Point of false <font> Latin . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,7.235

My Lord , There is one Word more , <font> <paren> Seisiend' <$$paren>
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,7.236

the Overt-Act , as laid in the Indictment , is , that the Prisoner
<font> Conspiravit ad sacram Personam Domini Regis capiend' , seisiend'
, & imprisonand' ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,7.237

by the Words that are coupled with it , I suppose <font> Seisiend'
<$$font> is intended to mean , the taking , or laying violent Hands upon
His Majesty's Person ; LAYER-1723-2,7.238

but sure there was never such a Word in any Indictment before , nor to
be found in any Author whatsoever ; LAYER-1723-2,7.239

't@ @is neither Classical <font> Latin , <$$font> Law <font> Latin ,
<$$font> nor to be met with among <font> Littleton's <$$font> Barbarisms
, never naturalized nor inoculated into Antient or Modern use ;
LAYER-1723-2,7.240

't@ @is a mere fictitious Word coin'd for this very Purpose without any
Precedent , any one Instance to warrant it . LAYER-1723-2,7.241

My Lord <font> Coke , <$$font> in his <font> Ist.
{COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} Instit. Fol. <$$font> 17 , says ,
That the Word <font> Seisitus <$$font> cometh of the <font> French
<$$font> Word <font> Seisin , <$$font> and that in the Common Law 't@
@is properly applied to Freehold , in Contradistinction to <font>
Possessionatus , <$$font> which relates to Chattels : LAYER-1723-2,7.242

For <font> Seisitus <$$font> and <font> possessionatus <$$font> are
mentioned as Terms of Art , Technical Words in the Law , that by long
Use have acquired to themselves one peculiar and determined
Signification ; LAYER-1723-2,7.243

for that Reason I do@ @n't object against the Word <font> Compassavit
<$$font> in this Indictment , it having been always used in Indictments
of High Treason to express compassing the Death of the King , ever since
the Statute of <font> Edward <$$font> the Third ; LAYER-1723-2,7.244

so <font> Murdrare , Felonia , <$$font> and several others , are known
Terms of Art in the Law . LAYER-1723-2,7.245

But , where did they meet with the Word <font> Seisend' , ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,7.246

And if they would fancy it to be a Gerund of some unknown Active Verb ,
how came they to give it this Sense , to make it signify the same as
<font> Capiendum ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,7.247

My Lord , I must beg Leave to say , that I apprehend the very Gist of
this Indictment , <paren> at least so much of it as relates to this
Overt Act <$$paren> entirely depends upon this Word <font> Seisiend' ;
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,7.248

and if it does appear to your Lordship to be insignificant , barbarous ,
false or improper <font> Latin , <$$font> I hope we are proper under the
Authority of the late Act of Parliament , humbly to insist upon this
Objection , and that it is sufficient to overthrow the whole Indictment
. LAYER-1723-2,7.249

My Lord <font> Coke , <$$font> in <font> Calvin's <$$font> Case , says ,
That Indictments for High Treason ought to be drawn with the greatest
Accuracy and Nicety ; LAYER-1723-2,7.250

but if Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> will please to shew me , that this
Word was ever once used to this Purpose , I will waive my Objection ,
and admit it to be as elegant a Word as any in the whole Indictment .
LAYER-1723-2,7.251

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> I think before the King's Counsel make
any Answer to that , we had best have that Part of the Indictment read ,
that we may the better judge of it . LAYER-1723-2,7.252

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> reads , <font> Quod tu <$$font>
Christopherus Layer , <font> &c. ad Capiend' Seisiend' & Imprisonand'
<$$font> &c. LAYER-1723-2,7.253

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. Ad Capiend' & Imprisonand' . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,7.254

Wo@ @n't these Words do , LAYER-1723-2,7.255

suppose the other Word <font> ad Seisiend' <$$font> insignificant ?
LAYER-1723-2,7.256

Mr. Serj. <font> Pengelly . <$$font> My Lord , These Objections have
been made with so much Ceremony , and usher'd in with such Pomp , as if
something else was meant , than the Quashing this Indictment .
LAYER-1723-2,7.257

We apprehend some of them are improper , LAYER-1723-2,7.258

and others which may be proper at this Time , are of no Force .
LAYER-1723-2,7.259

The Objections to the Commission , we apprehend are improper ;
LAYER-1723-2,7.260

it is not in the Power of the Court to quash the Commission ,
LAYER-1723-2,7.261

and therefore to make Mention of Mispelling , and of false and improper
<font> Latin <$$font> therein , signifies Nothing . LAYER-1723-2,7.262

As to the Indictment itself , the Court hath a Power ,
LAYER-1723-2,7.263

and if they think proper , if there be sufficient Cause , may quash it ;
LAYER-1723-2,7.264

but the Commission issues under the Great Seal , LAYER-1723-2,7.265

and that Part of it returned here , is not under the Power of this Court
to destroy ; LAYER-1723-2,7.266

but upon reading it , we think this objection will <P_8> quite vanish ;
LAYER-1723-2,8.267

these Words are used in all Commissions of the like Nature ,
LAYER-1723-2,8.268

and are inserted in the very Form of the Commission , and the Caption of
the Indictment , publish'd in the Treatise , allow'd by all the Judges
of <font> England , <$$font> call'd , <font> A Collection of Statutes
relating to High Treason , compos'd for the Assistance of the Justices
in <$$font> Scotland ; LAYER-1723-2,8.269

and because of the suppos'd Difficulty of understanding these Words , I
will , for the Sake of the Gentlemen of the other Side , read them in
the Order they are to be construed , thus , <font> Ad Inquirend' plenius
Veritatem per sacrum probor' & legal' Hom' , &c. de quibuscunq;
Proditionibus Misprissionib' &c. per quoscunq; & qualitercunq; Hit'
Fact' &c. ac de aliis Articulis , &c. & ad easdem Prodition' & al'
Premiss' audiend' & terminand' ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,8.270

Here they are to enquire more fully the Truth , of and concerning all
Treasons , Misprisions of Treason by any Person whomsoever committed ,
<font> &c. <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,8.271

And if the Words <font> <paren> plenius Veritat' <$$paren> <$$font> had
immediately followed the Word <font> <paren> Inquirend' <$$paren>
<$$font> every Body at first reading must be satisfied that no Objection
could be made thereto ; LAYER-1723-2,8.272

and the Objection now is only made on account of the placing these Words
at the End of the Sentence . LAYER-1723-2,8.273

But it makes no Difference in the Construction or Sense ;
LAYER-1723-2,8.274

how otherwise can it be construed or understood ? But to inquire more
fully the Truth of those Offences , there enumerated , and what Persons
are guilty , <font> &c. <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,8.275

And therefore I take it , that the Form of the Commission is proper ,
and will be justified , not only by the Sense of it , but by the usual
and common Course of Proceedings . LAYER-1723-2,8.276

- As to the next Objection , we apprehend that hath been already
over-ruled ; the Word <font> <paren> Christopherus <$$paren> <$$font>
with an <font> E <$$font> , and not with an <font> O : <$$font> And if
there be any Difference in the Name , that it must be pleaded in
Abatement , because if they would take Advantage of it , they must plead
that his Name is otherwise than is expressed in the Indictment .
LAYER-1723-2,8.277

This Man's Name <font> Christopherus <$$font> may be with an <font> E
<$$font> as well as an O for ought appears : LAYER-1723-2,8.278

But we apprehend , that the Name <font> Christopher <$$font> is seldom
writ in <font> Latin <$$font> with an O , but usually with an <font> E ;
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,8.279

if they think there is any thing material in the Objection , let them
plead it in Abatement , LAYER-1723-2,8.280

and we are ready to answer them . LAYER-1723-2,8.281

My Lord , As to the next Objection , that the Three Verbs which charge
the High Treason , <font> viz. Compassavit , Imaginatus suit , &
Intendebat , <$$font> that they are not in the same Tenses ; we submit
that in the strictest <font> Latin , <$$font> there is no Necessity the
last Verb should be of the same Tense with those that go before the
Copulative <paren> Et <$$paren> LAYER-1723-2,8.282

sure , tho' <font> Compassavit <$$font> and <font> Imaginatus suit
<$$font> be in the Preterperfect Tense , yet <font> Intendebat <$$font>
may be well added in the Preterimperfect Tense , LAYER-1723-2,8.283

and that will make no Difference , they being all three alledged and
found in the Time past , before the Indictment exhibited .
LAYER-1723-2,8.284

My Lord , The next Objection which they seem to rely upon , is at the
Conclusion of the Indictment , LAYER-1723-2,8.285

and that is to the Word <font> <paren> Seisiend' , &c. <$$paren>
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,8.286

They say , the Precedents have been look'd into , and there is no such
Word to be found in any Indictment of High Treason , LAYER-1723-2,8.287

I beg Leave to say in Answer , that since the Assassination-Plot against
King <font> William , <$$font> there hath been no such villanous Attempt
of this Nature ; LAYER-1723-2,8.288

therefore no Wonder if it can@ @not be found in other Indictments where
there has been no Occasion for the Word . LAYER-1723-2,8.289

This is an Overt-Act of conspiring and agreeing to take , seize , and
imprison , the very Person of the King ; LAYER-1723-2,8.290

and it must be laid according to the Fact itself ; LAYER-1723-2,8.291

but if this be not a proper Word , tho' I think the Word is proper and
significant , yet because this is not made , use of in alledging the
Treason itself , but the Overt-Act or Evidence of the Treason , it will
not vitiate that Part of the Indictment : LAYER-1723-2,8.292

For if any one of these Words alledged is proved upon the Tryal , the
Prisoner ought to be found Guilty , whether he compassed to take the
Person of the King , or to seize His Majesty , or to imprison and detain
Him ; LAYER-1723-2,8.293

any one of these Attempts is sufficient , if proved , LAYER-1723-2,8.294

and the Prisoner ought to be convicted . LAYER-1723-2,8.295

There was an Objection of this Nature taken upon one of the Tryals for
High Treason , before my Lord_Chief_Justice <font> Holt , <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,8.296

but he was pleased to say , That in alledging the Overt-Acts , where
several Overt-Acts are alledged , or several Words are used to express
the same Overt-Act , if they were mistaken in one of the Words , yet if
there were other Words sufficient in the Indictment to express the
Overt-Act ; or altho' one entire Overt-Act was insufficiently alledged ,
yet if there was another Overt-Act well laid , the Court would not quash
the Indictment , because this would be to deprive the Crown of the Right
of giving Evidence to prove any other Part of <P_9> the same Overt-Act ,
or any other Overt-Act alledged in the Indictment ; so that we hope this
is not a proper Objection , because the Court can@ @not quash the whole
Indictment if any other Overt-Act is sufficiently expressed , but the
Indictment must stand . LAYER-1723-2,9.297

- But the Word is proper , because the Words <font> Seisire & ad
Stipend' <$$font> are Terms known in the Law , and it is frequently used
in Actions of , Trespass , <font> Quod cepit , seisivit , & abduxit
<$$font> , or <font> asportavit <$$font> . LAYER-1723-2,9.298

My Lord , we think the Word <font> ad seisiend' <$$font> is a proper
Expression in this Case , to signify the Attempt or Design to seize and
apprehend the Person of His Majesty LAYER-1723-2,9.299

and we hope there is Nothing in these Objections . LAYER-1723-2,9.300

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , We are not against the
Gentlemen of the other Side@ @'s insisting upon every thing that may be
for their Client's Service . LAYER-1723-2,9.301

But sure these Objections have Nothing in them ; LAYER-1723-2,9.302

there is no Colour of Reason to support them . LAYER-1723-2,9.303

My Lord , as to the Exception taken to the Commission , Let us consider
, if there was any Weight in it , how it can possibly be taken at this
Time . LAYER-1723-2,9.304

- By Virtue of the Act of Parliament passed in the 7th Year of the Reign
of his late Majesty King <font> William , <$$font> it is provided , That
no Indictment for any of the Offences aforementioned in that Act , which
are Treasons ; <font> &c. <$$font> nor any Process or Return thereupon
, shall be quashed on the Motion of the Prisoner or his Counsel for
Miswriting , Mispelling , or false or improper <font> Latin <$$font>
<paren> under which last Words , the Counsel for the Prisoner would
entitle themselves to take this Objection <$$paren> unless such
Exception shall be taken and made in the respective Court , where such
Tryal shall be , by the Prisoner or his Counsel , assign'd before any
Evidence given in open Court upon such Indictment . LAYER-1723-2,9.305

But the Commission is a Thing distinct , and neither Indictment ,
Process , nor Return thereupon . LAYER-1723-2,9.306

And by Consequence no Objection can be made to the Commission at this
Time by Virtue of that Act : LAYER-1723-2,9.307

But however , because they may not trouble us with these Objections at
another Time , we beg Leave to answer them now . LAYER-1723-2,9.308

My Lord , These Words <font> <paren> plenius Veritatem <$$paren>
<$$font> are the very Point of the Inquiry of the Commissioners of
<font> Oyer_and_Terminer {COM:font_change_around_"and"} , <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,9.309

for they are to enquire , by the Oaths of Lawful Men of the County ,
fully of the Truth of all Treasons , Misprisions of Treasons , <font>
&c. <$$font> committed in that County , LAYER-1723-2,9.310

and that is the Tenour of the Commission . LAYER-1723-2,9.311

In the Book printed by the Approbation of all the Judges of <font>
England , <$$font> soon after the Union of the two Kingdoms , all the
Rules and Methods of Tryal in Cases of High Treason are laid down ,
LAYER-1723-2,9.312

there is the Commission of <font> Oyer_and_Terminer
{COM:font_change_around_"and"} <$$font> printed at large ;
LAYER-1723-2,9.313

and it is exactly in the same Words with this ; LAYER-1723-2,9.314

and your Lordship may please to observe , that immediately after those
Words <font> plenius Veritatem <$$font> there is a Comma , and none
before ; LAYER-1723-2,9.315

the whole Sentence before is entire , LAYER-1723-2,9.316

and therefore in Construction these Words , <font> plenius veritatem ,
<$$font> refer to the Words <font> ad inquirendum , <$$font> at the
Beginning of the Sentence ; LAYER-1723-2,9.317

and the Sense is plain , that the Commissioners are to enquire by the
Oaths of good and lawful Men of the County , and by other Ways and Means
, <font> &c. plenius veritatem , de quibuscunque Proditionibus ,
Misprisionibus , &c. <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,9.318

and then the Commission goes on , LAYER-1723-2,9.319

and there comes after the Comma , <font> & ad easdem Proditiones & alia
Premissa hac vice audiend' & terminand' secund' leges , &c. <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,9.320

In our legal Proceedings in <font> Latin , <$$font> we are not so nice
as to confine our selves to the <font> Latin <$$font> of the Classicks ;
LAYER-1723-2,9.321

but this is very proper <font> Latin , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,9.322

and the disjoining of the Words <font> plenius veritatem , <$$font> from
the Words <font> ad inquirendum , <$$font> by which they are governed by
the Interposition of so many Words , is no Objection ;
LAYER-1723-2,9.323

for nothing is more common in the best Authors , than placing the most
material Words at the Close of a very long Sentence , which in Point of
Construction must refer to others at the Beginning . LAYER-1723-2,9.324

And therefore I hope we shall hear no more of this Objection .
LAYER-1723-2,9.325

As to the <font> Christopherus <$$font> being with an E instead of an O
, that is not a proper Objection at this Time . LAYER-1723-2,9.326

No Man will pretend to say , he may not be Christen'd by that Name ,
LAYER-1723-2,9.327

as <font> Henry <$$font> is the usual Name , <font> Harry <$$font> is
the common nick_Name for <font> Henry , <$$font> yet a Person may be
Christen'd <font> Harry , <$$font> and so have many Persons been .
LAYER-1723-2,9.328

But , my Lord , we say this is a Word used in all the Law Proceedings
for <font> Christopher , <$$font> and spelt in this very manner with an
E . LAYER-1723-2,9.329

As to the other Objection ; as to the Alteration of the Tense in the
Words <font> compassavit , imaginatus suit & intendebat : <$$font> The
Objection is made as if we were tied down to those exact Forms of
Grammar ; LAYER-1723-2,9.330

if the Sense is plain , if the Facts are explained by proper <font>
Latin <$$font> Words , it is enough for us , whether <P_10> they are
carried on sometimes in one Tense , and sometimes in another , provided
they sufficiently charge the Fact to be done . LAYER-1723-2,10.331

The last Objection is the Word <font> seisiend , <$$font> That it is not
a Word known in Law ; LAYER-1723-2,10.332

if that would hold , it would not quash the Indictment , because there
are several other Words to the same Effect , which sufficiently express
this villainous Overt-Act , without this Word <font> seisiend' ;
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,10.333

for it is said , that the Prisoner did propose , consult , and agree ,
<font> ad sacram personam dicti Domini Georgii ruric' Regis , &c.
capiend' , seisiend' , imprisonand' , & in Custed' detinend' . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,10.334

But we insist , that this is a very proper Word . LAYER-1723-2,10.335

In the Court of Exchequer the Words used in Cases of Seisures is <font>
seisivit , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,10.336

Writs issue commanding the Sheriff <font> seisire <$$font> such Lands ,
<font> &c. <$$font> into the King's Hands , LAYER-1723-2,10.337

and the Sheriff returns <font> seisiri feci <$$font> ; so that if this
Word was look'd upon as an unknown and unintelligible Word , what must
become of many Judgments and Proceedings in that Court ?
LAYER-1723-2,10.338

It is a Law Word that is here applied to the Person of our Sovereign ,
LAYER-1723-2,10.339

and as it is in the Proceedings before-@ @mention'd applied to Seizing
Lands , <font> &c. <$$font> Why may it not be applied to the Seizing of
a Person ? LAYER-1723-2,10.340

And then if <font> seisire <$$font> be proper , the Gerund from that
must be <font> seisiendum . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,10.341

And therefore we apprehend , my Lord , that this is a plain Answer , and
that there is no Colour of Reason for this Objection .
LAYER-1723-2,10.342

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , As I apprehend these
Exceptions have no real Foundation , nor scarce any Colour in themselves
, so I do@ @n't know whether it would not be giving too much Credit to
them , for so many of the King's Counsel as attend your Lordship on this
Occasion , to spend the Time of the Court in giving Answers to them .
LAYER-1723-2,10.343

The true Answers , and all the Answers which can be given , have been
already offered and very fully enforced ; LAYER-1723-2,10.344

and therefore I shall not trouble your Lordship with any thing further .
LAYER-1723-2,10.345

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , I beg a few Words by way of
Reply LAYER-1723-2,10.346

as to the first Objection , we hope it is not yet answer'd .
LAYER-1723-2,10.347

We object against the Words <font> plenius veritat' <$$font> as Words of
no Sense . or Meaning , as rang'd or plac'd in this Indictment .
LAYER-1723-2,10.348

Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> hath endeavoured to make them Sense by
transposing them , and inserting <font> plenius veritat' <$$font> Ten
Lines before what the Indictment hath . LAYER-1723-2,10.349

We must take the Words as they are in the Indictment .
LAYER-1723-2,10.350

And if they are not Grammar or intelligible there , the Objection still
holds . LAYER-1723-2,10.351

I know not what liberty the King's Counsel hath to transpose the Words .
LAYER-1723-2,10.352

I know School-Boys sometimes pick up Words without Regard to Grammar ,
to make what thay call Nonsense Verses : LAYER-1723-2,10.353

But I never knew an Attempt before , by transposing of Words , to make
Nonsense Grammar , Prose , or Poetry . LAYER-1723-2,10.354

There is one Thing that hath been mentioned , that the Judges have
settled the Forms of Proceedings in Cases of High Treason by Direction
of the House of Lords , and this <font> plenius veritat' <$$font> is got
into the Form inserted in that Treatise : LAYER-1723-2,10.355

That Book , my Lord , notwithstanding the solemn Allowance of it by the
judges , is not , with Submission , a conclusive Authority :
LAYER-1723-2,10.356

It was denied to be so in the case of <font> Mathewes ; <$$font> which
Case I can the better speak to , because I was of Counsel in it .
LAYER-1723-2,10.357

The Objection taken in the Case of <font> Mathewes <$$font> was to the
Pannel of the Jury , for that the Addition and Places of Abode of the
Jurymen were not inserted in the Pannel , according to the Directions of
that Book , the better to guide the Prisoner in his Challenges .
LAYER-1723-2,10.358

My Lord_Chief_Justice King , who presided at that Tryal , assisted by
all the then Judges of <font> England , <$$font> <paren> except your
Lordship who was absent <$$paren> over-ruled that Exception ;
LAYER-1723-2,10.359

and I think the rest of my Lords the judges , now present , concurred in
that Resolution . Wherefore , if we have no Authority to combat with ,
but the Authority of that Book , which hath been solemnly deny'd to be a
good Authority , we hope this Objection shall stand .
LAYER-1723-2,10.360

My Lord , As to the Word <font> Christophorus , <$$font> without Doubt
the Etymology of the Word is as Mr. <font> Ketelbey <$$font> hath
opened ; LAYER-1723-2,10.361

and there is this further to justify that Way of Spelling which we
contend for , even the two first Syllables of the Word in the Indictment
are <font> Christo , <$$font> as the Greek with an O , and not <font>
Christo ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,10.362

and in Conformity with the Greek Spelling in the two first Syllables of
the Word , we hope the next Syllable must be spelt so too :
LAYER-1723-2,10.363

But since it is contended , that the Substance of this Objection must be
put into a Plea in Abatement , we shall wait the Direction of the Court
as to that Matter . LAYER-1723-2,10.364

As to the Words <font> compassavit , imaginatus suit & intendebat ,
<$$font> there is something in that Objection too , LAYER-1723-2,10.365

they all relate to a Time past , LAYER-1723-2,10.366

but they are in different Tenses or Times ; LAYER-1723-2,10.367

there is the Preterperfect and Preterimperfect Tense ,
LAYER-1723-2,10.368

and there is the Conjunction Copulative between them , as if both Tenses
implied the same Times , which it <P_11> is certain they do not ,
LAYER-1723-2,11.369

and therefore they Charge nought ; LAYER-1723-2,11.370

for a Thing can@ @not be done lately and formerly , and both at the same
Time . LAYER-1723-2,11.371

As to the other Words <font> ad rapiend seisiend & imprisonand' ,
<$$font> we are upon the Forms of an Indictment , LAYER-1723-2,11.372

and must be governed by the usual Forms : LAYER-1723-2,11.373

I believe there is no Instance on Record , where these Words are made
use of in any Accusation of this Kind ; for which Reasons we humbly hope
this Indictment shall be quash'd . LAYER-1723-2,11.374

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , I beg Leave to offer a Word
or two by way of Reply ; LAYER-1723-2,11.375

Mr. Serjeant <font> Pengelly <$$font> is pleased to say that Sense may
be made of these Words , and that <font> plenius veritatem <$$font> as
it is , is good <font> Latin , <$$font> by listing these Words from the
Bottom of the Sentence to the Top , and making them follow <font> ad
inquirendum . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,11.376

I believe four Parts in five of the Caption interfere between the <font>
inquirendum <$$font> and the <font> plenius veritatem , <$$font> a whole
Catalogue of Offences , several independent Sentences , different Times
, Persons , Places , Things all stationed between LAYER-1723-2,11.377

and yet these Words are to be united : LAYER-1723-2,11.378

I would be glad to know by what Rule of Grammar this can be done .
LAYER-1723-2,11.379

As to the Word <font> Christopherus <$$font> , I shall not further
insist upon that as a proper Objection under this Head , because your
Lordship seems to be of an Opinion that we ought to have pleaded it in
Abatement . LAYER-1723-2,11.380

As to the Word <font> seisiend' <$$font> , it hath been said it is a
Word well known in the Exchequer , LAYER-1723-2,11.381

but they do@ @n't shew one Instance whereever it was used :
LAYER-1723-2,11.382

Indeed they mention a Precept to the Sheriff <font> seisiri facias
<$$font> , and the Return <font> seisiri feci <$$font> ,
LAYER-1723-2,11.383

but what is that to <font> seisiendum <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,11.384

the one is justified by Usage , the <font> seisitus <$$font> as <font>
seisiri <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,11.385

besides <font> seisiri <$$font> is there used in the very same Sense
which the Law hath imposed Sheriff into the Hands of the King , that he
becomes seised thereof , <font> ut de foedo & in jure Coronae <$$font> ,
till an <font> amoveas manus <$$font> be obtained : LAYER-1723-2,11.386

But if ever that Word was put into any Indictment to signify to seize
and imprison the King , 't@ @is entirely unknown to me .
LAYER-1723-2,11.387

Indeed here is one Piece of Doctrine offered , that if it holds good
puts an End to all our Objections , and even to the Act of Parliament on
which they are founded ; LAYER-1723-2,11.388

but I must own it is entirely new to me : LAYER-1723-2,11.389

We are told there are other Words in the Indictment , and other
Overt-Acts , and if one Act is sufficiently expressed by any one Word ,
though there be Words that are improper and false <font> Latin <$$font>
, yet it shall not vitiate the Indictment ; LAYER-1723-2,11.390

what avails then this Act that empowers us to make Objections to
Miswriting , Mispelling , false and improper <font> Latin ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,11.391

It is impossible to suppose , that whoever hath the Drawing of an
Indictment should make Faults and blunder on from first to last :
LAYER-1723-2,11.392

No , in an Indictment for High Treason the greatest Care is , or ought
to be taken in the Drawing of it ; LAYER-1723-2,11.393

and where the Life of a Person , and all that is valuable is at Stake ,
the Law will not subject any one to such dreadful Penalties and
Forfeitures for an Offence expressed only by Words of an unknown or
dubious Signification ; LAYER-1723-2,11.394

and therefore , we hope that this goes to the whole , and that the
Indictment shall be quash'd , LAYER-1723-2,11.395

or else it would be nugatory for us to be allowed to take Exceptions to
one Part of the Indictment if the other were good . LAYER-1723-2,11.396

I believe Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> wo@ @n't shew any Instance ,
<paren> I submit it to his greater Experience <$$paren> where he ever
knew one Overt-Act in an Indictment set aside and the rest of the
Indictment held good : LAYER-1723-2,11.397

Exceptions have ever since the making this Act been taken and argued by
Counsel , and determined ; LAYER-1723-2,11.398

but if this be a sufficient Answer , surely they spent the Time of the
Court to very little Purpose , in debating whether there were any faults
in the Indictment , when it was so easy to shew it was not faulty
throughout . LAYER-1723-2,11.399

Mr. Serjeant <font> Pengelly <$$font> has been pleased to mention the
Opinion of my Lord_Chief_Justice <font> Holt , <$$font> upon one of the
Tryals before him , that altho' one entire Overt-Act was insufficiently
alledged , yet if there was any other well laid , the Court would not
quash the Indictment , LAYER-1723-2,11.400

I wish he had told us in what Tryal , or where it is to be found ,
LAYER-1723-2,11.401

for I do@ @n't remember it in any of the Printed Tryals :
LAYER-1723-2,11.402

As to what was mentioned , with regard to the Authority of that Book ,
for the Words <font> plenius veritatem , <$$font> Mr. <font> Hungerford
<$$font> rightly observed , that the Authority of that Book was utterly
denyed at the Tryal of <font> Mathewes ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,11.403

your Lordship was not there , LAYER-1723-2,11.404

my Lord_Chief_Justice <font> King <$$font> presided then upon the Bench
, LAYER-1723-2,11.405

that Book particularly directed , that not only the Names of the Jurors
should be incerted in the Pannel , but also their Additions , and the
Places where they lived , LAYER-1723-2,11.406

instead of that , the Copy of <P_12> the Pannel delivered , consisted
only of a long List of bare Names , no Additions , nor where they lived
; whereupon we made our Objection , and insisted on the Authority of
that Book . Notwithstanding which the Objection was then overruled ,
LAYER-1723-2,12.407

and consequently we hope we shall not be pinn'd down to the Authority of
this Book any more in this Case , than the other , LAYER-1723-2,12.408

for these Reasons we hope your Lordship will be of Opinion that the
King's Counsel have not given a full Answer to our Objections , and that
the Indictment shall be quashed . LAYER-1723-2,12.409

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , I beg leave to hand up this
Precedent of my Lord <font> Coke@ @'s , <$$font> where these Words are
entirely left out . LAYER-1723-2,12.410

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> What is the use you would make of setting
up an Extra_judicial Opinion of my Lord <font> Coke@ @'s , <$$font> as
you call it , against the Opinion of all the judges ?
LAYER-1723-2,12.411

Because it is not in my Lord <font> Coke@ @'s <$$font> Form , therefore
it is not necessary or right ; LAYER-1723-2,12.412

but at the same time you would have us Governed by my Lord <font> Coke@
@'s <$$font> Opinion , you would have us reject the Opinion of all the
Judges . LAYER-1723-2,12.413

My Lord <font> Coke <$$font> may be wrong ; LAYER-1723-2,12.414

the Opinion of all the Judges in an Extra_judicial Case may be wrong ,
LAYER-1723-2,12.415

but it would be very strange to give a greater Weight to the
Extrajudicial Opinion of my Lord <font> Coke , <$$font> because he hath
left the Words out , than to the Opinion of all the Judges that have put
the Words in ; LAYER-1723-2,12.416

neither is conclusive , LAYER-1723-2,12.417

but certainly the Opinion of all the Judges of later Times , must have
more Weight , than the Extrajudicial Opinion of a single Judge at any
former Time . LAYER-1723-2,12.418

As to the Matter of this Objection , you say that in the Recital of the
Commission of <font> Oyer_and_Terminer {COM:font_change_around_"and"} ,
<$$font> in the Caption of the Indictment , it is said the Commissioners
had Authority to inquire <font> de quibuscunq; Proditionibus , <$$font>
&c. <font> plenius Veritatem ; LAYER-1723-2,12.419

plenius Veritatem <$$font> comes in afterwards : LAYER-1723-2,12.420

We have been told of <font> Classical <$$font> and <font> Ciceronian
Latin , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,12.421

and if there be any Regard to be had to that , is any thing more common
in every Part of <font> Cisero , <$$font> than to put Words last , that
in Construction must come first ? LAYER-1723-2,12.422

I do@ @n't know any Rule that is laid down when the Words coming last ,
are in Construction to be taken first , but only this , that the
Construction is to be according to the Natural Sense and Import of the
Words ; and if so , then in the Authority of these Commissioners , where
it is said they were to inquire <font> de quibuscunq; Proditionibus ,
<$$font> &c. <font> plenius Veritatem , <$$font> in Construction the
last Words must be taken first . LAYER-1723-2,12.423

You say as they stand it is Nonsense and Signifies Nothing , and the
Words are Nugatory ; LAYER-1723-2,12.424

't@ @is not material where they stand , LAYER-1723-2,12.425

they must be taken in that manner of Construction as would make them
significant , that is , by taking the last Words , <font> plenius
Veritatem , <$$font> to go first in Construction ; LAYER-1723-2,12.426

then it is very proper and just , LAYER-1723-2,12.427

and all will be well . LAYER-1723-2,12.428

As to the Matter of the Misnomer that you have given up , and very
justly , LAYER-1723-2,12.429

for you are proper to Plead that in Abatement . LAYER-1723-2,12.430

The next Objection is , you say here is Improper <font> Latin ,
Compassavit <$$font> in the <font> Preterperfect Tense , Imaginatus suit
<$$font> in the same <font> Tense , <$$font> and <font> Intendebat
<$$font> in the <font> Preterim_perfect Tense ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,12.431

take these Words by themselves , LAYER-1723-2,12.432

suppose it had been <font> Compassavit <$$font> only , <font> Imaginatus
suit <$$font> only , or <font> Intendebat <$$font> only ,
LAYER-1723-2,12.433

Would not either of these Words , whether in the Preterperfect or
Preterimperfect Tense , have been sufficient to have charged Mr. <font>
Layer <$$font> with having some Time before compass'd and imagin'd the
Death of the King ? LAYER-1723-2,12.434

Every one of these Words charge him with the Intent of Compassing , and
Imagining , LAYER-1723-2,12.435

and that relates to a Time that is past , LAYER-1723-2,12.436

whether <font> Preterperfect Tense , <$$font> or <font> Preterimperfect
, <$$font> that is not Material : LAYER-1723-2,12.437

Then as to one of the Overt-Acts , as here be a great many to which no
Objection is made , the High Treason is Compassing and Imagining the
Death of the King ; LAYER-1723-2,12.438

the Overt-Acts are several , LAYER-1723-2,12.439

either is sufficient to maintain the Treason of Compassing and Imagining
the Death of the King . LAYER-1723-2,12.440

One of the Overt-Acts is , that he did Design , Consult , and Agree
<font> ad Capiend' , Seisiend' , & Imprisonand' , <$$font> the Person of
the King . LAYER-1723-2,12.441

Suppose it had been <font> Capiend' , & Imprisonand' , <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,12.442

then you say it had been well enough , but the putting in this Word
<font> Seisiend' , <$$font> will vitiate the whole , because it is an
improper and vitious Word . LAYER-1723-2,12.443

I do@ @n't know that , LAYER-1723-2,12.444

nor dare not say in a Court of Law that it is an improper and vicious
Word : LAYER-1723-2,12.445

You are told of a Court of Law where the Word is used , and hath the
same Signification as in the Indictment ; LAYER-1723-2,12.446

as to seize Lands into the Hands of the King , to seize Lands , or to
seize the King's Person , the Word is the same , LAYER-1723-2,12.447

and if <font> Seisire <$$font> is good , and enough to signify to seize
Lands , <font> Seisire <$$font> is enough to signify to seize the King's
Person , LAYER-1723-2,12.448

therefore I think it is a Proper <P_13> Word , LAYER-1723-2,13.449

but whether it is or not , there is sufficient in the indictment to
maintain the Charge against <font> Mr. Layer ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,13.450

for he is charged with a Consultation and Agreement to take the King ,
with a Consultation and Agreement to imprison and detain the King in
Prison : LAYER-1723-2,13.451

these are sufficient without the Word <font> Seisiend' <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,13.452

but the Word <font> Seisiend' <$$font> hath been a Law Word , and used
in our Proceedings at Law , never objected to ; LAYER-1723-2,13.453

but if we say it would not signify a seizing , we must set aside half
the Proceedings in the Court of <font> Exchequer . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,13.454

These are all the Objections you have made , LAYER-1723-2,13.455

and in my apprehension they can be of no use or service to your Client ;
LAYER-1723-2,13.456

they signify nothing . LAYER-1723-2,13.457

Mr. <font> Jus. Powys . <$$font> I am of the same Opinion .
LAYER-1723-2,13.458

Not the least Doubt remains with me . LAYER-1723-2,13.459

Mr. <font> Jus. Eyre . <$$font> I think the Caption of the Indictment
is in common Form , and the Exceptions to the Indictment it self are
fully answer'd . LAYER-1723-2,13.460

Mr. <font> Jus. Fortescue Aland . <$$font> I am of the same Opinion ,
LAYER-1723-2,13.461

and think the Objections to be of no Weight . LAYER-1723-2,13.462

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> The Objections being all over-ruled :
demand of him what he hath to plead . LAYER-1723-2,13.463

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Christopher Layer ; <$$font> Hold up your Hand .
LAYER-1723-2,13.464

How say you , <font> Christopher Layer , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,13.465

are you Guilty of the High-Treason whereof you stand Indicted or not
Guilty ? LAYER-1723-2,13.466

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I desire my Plea of Misnomer may be receiv'd
. LAYER-1723-2,13.467

And I plead not Guilty as to the Fact . LAYER-1723-2,13.468

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> reads the Plea . LAYER-1723-2,13.469

<font> Et Christophurus Layer ad Barram hic duct. in propria persona
sua venit , & habito auditu Indictament. predict. dicit quod ipse est
persona in Indictament. predict. mentionat. & intens. per nomen
Christopheri Layer , nuper de paroch. Sti. Andree Holborne in Com.
Mid. Ar. & versus quem indictment. predict. prolat. existit pro
alt. Proditione predict. & dicit quod ipse ad Indictament. illud
respondere compelli non debet , quia dic. quod ipse diu ante tempus
caption. Indictament. predict. necnon ante tempus offensi in
indictament. ill. specificat. & fieri supposit . Baptizatus fuit per
nomen Christophori , & per id nomen Christophori semper a tempore
Baptization. sue hucusq; vocat. nuncupat. & cognit. fuit , & hoc
parat. est verificare . unde ex quo ipse non nominatur in Indictament.
predict. per nomen Christophori , petit judicium de Indictament. illo
, & si ipse ad Indictament. predict. ulterius respondere compelli
debeat , &c. & quoad prodition. in Indictament. predict. mentionat.
ipse predict. Christopherus Layer dicit quod ipse in nullo est inde
culpabilis & inde de bono & malo ponit se super Patriam , &c. <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,13.470

J. Hungerford . LAYER-1723-2,13.471

Abel Ketelbey . LAYER-1723-2,13.472

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> Your Plea is received .
LAYER-1723-2,13.473

He hath pleaded in Abatement first , LAYER-1723-2,13.474

and then pleads over to the Treason . LAYER-1723-2,13.475

What say you to it ? LAYER-1723-2,13.476

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> It ca@ @n't be expected that we
should have a Replication ready to their Plea in Abatement :
LAYER-1723-2,13.477

we were not aware of this ; LAYER-1723-2,13.478

therefore we ought to have time to draw up a Replication .
LAYER-1723-2,13.479

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> What say you to it ? .
LAYER-1723-2,13.480

Mr. <font> Hungerford <$$font> and Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My
Lord , we have no Objection to it . LAYER-1723-2,13.481

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> Well , the Plea is recorded .
LAYER-1723-2,13.482

Consider now , the Question on this Plea is , whether he was baptized by
the Name of <font> Christophorus <$$font> or <font> Christopherus .
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,13.483

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> My Lord , to_morrow and next Day
being Holy-Days , <paren> else we should have been ready by to_morrow
<$$paren> we therefore pray , that he may be brought up again on <font>
Saturday <$$font> by Rule of this Court . LAYER-1723-2,13.484

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I have some doubt whether it can be
by Rule , or by <font> Habeas_Corpus . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,13.485

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> When once a <font> Habeas_Corpus <$$font>
hath been granted , and he is brought before us , we can order him to be
brought again by Rule . LAYER-1723-2,13.486

He must be taken back again , and brought up here on <font> Saturday
<$$font> next . LAYER-1723-2,13.487

<heading>

<font> Die Sabbati 3 . die Novembris <$$font> 1722 .
LAYER-1723-2,13.489

<$$heading>

<font> The Prisoner was this Day brought to the King's-Bench-Bar , by
the Lieutenant of the Tower , in obedience to the Rule of Court , made
the 31st of <$$font> October . LAYER-1723-2,13.491

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , I have demurred to the
Prisoner's Plea in Abatement , LAYER-1723-2,13.492

and pray the Demurrer may be read . LAYER-1723-2,13.493

<P_14>

Cl. <font> of the Cr. <$$font> reads the Demurrer .
LAYER-1723-2,14.495

<font> Et Robertus Raymond Mil. Attorn. Dom. Regis Generalis
quiproeodens Dom. Rege inbae parte sequitur babito audit . Placiti
proed. In cassation. Indictament. Pred. Superius placitat. Pro
eodem dom. Rege dicit guod idem placit. Materiaq; in eodem content.
Minus sufficien. In lege exist . Ad ipsum Christopherum a respondend .
Ad Indictament . ill. Excusand , ad quod quidem placit . Idem Attorn
. General , necesse non babet nec per legem terre tenetur aliquo modo
repondere . Et boc idem attorn , General , pro eodem Dom. Rege parat .
Est verificare prout Cur &c. Unde pro insufficient . Placit . ill.
Idem attorn Dom. Regis General. Pro eodem Dom. Rege petit judic. &.
Quod indictament predict. bon. & sufficiens adjudicetur , &c.
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,14.496

Rob. Raymond . LAYER-1723-2,14.497

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> We pray they may joyn in Demurrer
immediately . LAYER-1723-2,14.498

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , it is altogether a Surprize
to us , LAYER-1723-2,14.499

and as the Clerk hath read it , it is impossible for us to take the
substance of this Demurrer . LAYER-1723-2,14.500

We therefore hope we shall be allowed a few Days to consider of this
matter of joining in Demurrer . LAYER-1723-2,14.501

We shall not ask many . LAYER-1723-2,14.502

The Precedents are so , the Prisoner was always indulged with some time
in a case of this nature . LAYER-1723-2,14.503

Before the Act of Parliament for regulating of Tryals , where matters of
Law were started , or any special Pleading did arise the Prisoner was
indulged with a great number of Council . LAYER-1723-2,14.504

<font> Fitzharris <$$font> had Five , a greater number than I ever knew
engaged on one side in Deliberations of this kind , unless it were that
number of learned Council which met to advise upon and adjust this
Demurrer . LAYER-1723-2,14.505

But I think in the ordinary course of the Court we are proper to desire
two or three days . LAYER-1723-2,14.506

Two or three days is but a little time , especially where the Life of a
Man is concerned . LAYER-1723-2,14.507

Mr. Attorney took from <font> Wednesday <$$font> to <font> Saturday ,
<$$font> to consider of our Plea , LAYER-1723-2,14.508

we hope at least the same time shall be allowed to us to consider of
this Demurrer . LAYER-1723-2,14.509

I have in my hand the Arraignment of and Proceedings against <font>
Fitzharris , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,14.510

he was indulged several Days . LAYER-1723-2,14.511

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , I have brought the Book along
with me relating to <font> Fitzharris : <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,14.512

as to the Matter of having time to join in Demurrer , whether we are not
entituled to it by the Rules of the Court , I must submit to your
lordship . LAYER-1723-2,14.513

It is a Case of great Consequence ; LAYER-1723-2,14.514

and , as I take it , the constant Practice is , that a four Days Rule is
always given to join in Demurrer . LAYER-1723-2,14.515

This is always done , as I am informed , on the Crown side as well as
the Plea side . LAYER-1723-2,14.516

The Tenor of the Rule is either to join in Demurrer within four Days ,
or to wave the Plea ; LAYER-1723-2,14.517

but Mr. Attorney requires us to do it immediately .
LAYER-1723-2,14.518

In <font> Fitzharris's <$$font> Case the Attorney_General Demurred in
Court , LAYER-1723-2,14.519

and the Council on the other side refused to join in Demurrer
immediately , LAYER-1723-2,14.520

and they had , from <font> Wednesday <$$font> to <font> Saturday ,
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,14.521

We hope therefore there shall be a four days Rule for us upon four Days
, LAYER-1723-2,14.522

we hope at least your Lordship will indulge us with some time ; or if we
do immediately join in Demurrer , that we shall have some time to
prepare ourselves to argue it . LAYER-1723-2,14.523

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> How say you , Mr. <font> Harcourt ?
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,14.524

How is the Course of the Court ? LAYER-1723-2,14.525

Mr. <font> Harcourt . <$$font> My Lord , In Criminal Prosecutions for
Misdemeanours , two four Day Rules to plead are given , and a peremptory
Rule moved for , LAYER-1723-2,14.526

and then if there be a Demurrer , one four Days Rule to join in Demurrer
is given , and a peremptory Rule moved for : LAYER-1723-2,14.527

But in Capital Cases there is no Rule given , either to plead or join in
Demurrer ; LAYER-1723-2,14.528

all Proceedings in such Cases being at Bar , the Prisoner is oblig'd on
all occasions to answer immediately , LAYER-1723-2,14.529

nor can there be any instance shewn to the contrary .
LAYER-1723-2,14.530

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> The course of the Court is against you .
LAYER-1723-2,14.531

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> As to the Course of the Court , I
know no better Description of it , than that it is the uninterrupted
usage of the Court warranted by Reason , or at least not contradicted by
it . LAYER-1723-2,14.532

The Officer tells you that in Criminal Cases which are not Capital there
are Rules for four Days , and four Days to plead , and likewise a four
Days Rule to join in Demurrer ; LAYER-1723-2,14.533

and surely if <P_15> in a Criminal Case , which is not Capital , a Man
is indulged four Days , surely in a Criminal Case as this is , which is
Capital and doth touch a Man's Life , his posterity , and his Estate by
parity of Reason , the Indulgence ought to be more than four Days .
LAYER-1723-2,15.534

I beg leave to observe one thing in the Case of <font> Fitzharris
<$$font> , now in my hand . LAYER-1723-2,15.535

My Lord_Chief_Justice there asks the Prisoner ; Will you plead over ?
LAYER-1723-2,15.536

If you will , you may have any time in reason . LAYER-1723-2,15.537

Now , my Lord , we have pleaded over , LAYER-1723-2,15.538

we have pleaded Not guilty as to the Offence ; so that for that reason
we might have till <font> Hillary Term <$$font> next , because we have
forwarded them in their Journey already by Pleading Not guilty as to the
High Treason : LAYER-1723-2,15.539

And we hope therefore the Gentleman of the other side wo@ @n't contend
with us for two or three Days in a Case of this nature .
LAYER-1723-2,15.540

Mr. <font> Ketelbey <$$font> . My Lord , I only beg leave to mention
this single word , that we do@ @n't insist upon this for Delay , or to
put off the Tryal ; LAYER-1723-2,15.541

we have pleaded over to the Treason , LAYER-1723-2,15.542

and in case we should join in Demurrer , whatever time is taken up in
arguing it , can@ @not obstruct the Proceedings in order to the Trial :
LAYER-1723-2,15.543

Nay the Trial may be had before the Matters of the Demurrer be
determined . LAYER-1723-2,15.544

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> In case you should join in the Demurrer ?
LAYER-1723-2,15.545

What can you do else ? LAYER-1723-2,15.546

Mr. <font> Ketelbey <$$font> . I believe we shall .
LAYER-1723-2,15.547

If we had not thought our Plea would have stood a Demurrer , we had not
made use of it . LAYER-1723-2,15.548

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly <$$font> . My Lord , What he prays is
against the Rules of the Court ; LAYER-1723-2,15.549

in all Capital Cases there are no Rules given to plead or join in
Demurrer , LAYER-1723-2,15.550

but the Proceedings are all <font> Instanter <$$font> , the Prisoner
being present in person , LAYER-1723-2,15.551

and therefore , my Lord , there is nothing in what they ask .
LAYER-1723-2,15.552

When they put in a plea in Abatement here at the Bar , which can@ @not
be expected or thought of , it is reasonable that there should be some
time to consider of that , to see the nature of it , and consider what
to answer to it . LAYER-1723-2,15.553

We have demurr'd to their plea ; LAYER-1723-2,15.554

no doubt they had consider'd of their Plea whether it was a good Plea in
Law or not ; LAYER-1723-2,15.555

if it be not good , can they amend their Plea in Abatement ?
LAYER-1723-2,15.556

It was never allowed ; LAYER-1723-2,15.557

if they can make no alteration in that , what can they do ?
LAYER-1723-2,15.558

They can do nothing else but join in Demurrer , LAYER-1723-2,15.559

it is all they can do ; LAYER-1723-2,15.560

and when they have joined in Demurrer , we shall see if they have any
reason for further time . LAYER-1723-2,15.561

But as to what they say , that as to the sufficiency of the Plea , it
may be argued another time , and as they have pleaded over to the
Treason , there needs be no Delay as to the Tryal ; LAYER-1723-2,15.562

I would be glad to see whether by this they do not deprive the Crown of
the Election to proceed in such manner as shall be thought most
advantageous for the carrying on the prosecution : LAYER-1723-2,15.563

But is it adviseable to leave a Plea in Abatement to the whole
undetermined , and to try the Issue first ? LAYER-1723-2,15.564

I believe they can shew no such Instance , LAYER-1723-2,15.565

and therefore in all Capital Cases , as well as in Criminal , the Plea
in Abatement goes to the whole , to destroy the whole Indictment ,
LAYER-1723-2,15.566

and indeed ought to be determined before the Court goes on with the
Tryal . LAYER-1723-2,15.567

My Lord , we are surprized at what they mean by this , when they can do
nothing else but join in Demurrer , LAYER-1723-2,15.568

and therefore we hope they shall join immediately . LAYER-1723-2,15.569

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , what we insist upon is not a
new thing , LAYER-1723-2,15.570

the constant Practice in cases of this Nature has been , that if a
Demurrer is put in to the Prisoner's Plea , he must join in Demurrer
<font> instanter <$$font> . LAYER-1723-2,15.571

I believe the Gentlemen of the other side ca@ @n't shew one instance to
the contrary . LAYER-1723-2,15.572

The Prisoner can do nothing {TEXT:do_no_nothing} but join in Demurrer .
LAYER-1723-2,15.573

As to what has been said about our having time from <font> Wednesday
<$$font> to <font> Saturday <$$font> ; the reason was because <font>
Thursday <$$font> and <font> Friday <$$font> were no <font>
Westminster-Hall <$$font> Days , for which reason we could not have the
Prisoner brought up before this Day . LAYER-1723-2,15.574

The putting in a Demurrer to this Plea can be no surprise to the Council
for the Prisoner ; LAYER-1723-2,15.575

for yesterday we sent Copies of our Demurrer to them .
LAYER-1723-2,15.576

Mr. <font> Pember <$$font> , the , Prisoner's Clerk in Court , had a
Copy of it by Two of the Clock in the afternoon ; LAYER-1723-2,15.577

and the Prisoner himself had one about Four a Clock .
LAYER-1723-2,15.578

As to the Case of <font> Fitzharris <$$font> which has been cited , it
was a Plea look'd upon to contain things of very great difficulty ;
LAYER-1723-2,15.579

the time asked for there was not to join in Demurrer ,
LAYER-1723-2,15.580

but the time apply'd for was for settling the Plea ; LAYER-1723-2,15.581

but as soon as Mr. <font> Fitzharris <$$font> had pleaded , and the
Attorney_General had demurred to it , the Court order'd the Prisoner to
join in Demurrer <font> instanter <$$font> . LAYER-1723-2,15.582

As to what has been said , that we may proceed to Tryal on the Plea of
not Guilty before the Demurrer to the Plea in Abatement is determined ;
that is by no means advisable ; LAYER-1723-2,15.583

the consequence of that may be very <P_16> mischievous ;
LAYER-1723-2,16.584

for if the Court should be of Opinion that the Plea in Abatement is good
, after we have disclosed the whole Evidence against the Prisoner upon
the Tryal , tho' we obtained a Verdict for his Majesty ; the whole must
be set aside ; LAYER-1723-2,16.585

and therefore we hope your Lordship will not break into the common
method of Proceedings , but make the same Rule for the Prisoner as
always has been made in cases of the like nature , which is ; that he
shall join in Demurrer immediately . LAYER-1723-2,16.586

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , I agree with the Council for
the Prisoner ; that we are in a Case of Life , and that is a reason why
their Client should have all the indulgence the Law will allow him .
LAYER-1723-2,16.587

But I beg leave to observe that we are not now on a Question that
directly concerns the Merits of the Case , nor whether a Prisoner who is
to answer for his Life at this Bar , should have time to send for his
witnesses , or prepare for his Defence . LAYER-1723-2,16.588

That indeed might be of a different Consideration . LAYER-1723-2,16.589

But we are now barely upon a frivolous dilatory Plea , as frivolous a
Plea as ever was offer'd in any Case whatsoever ; LAYER-1723-2,16.590

and the Question is , whether they , who have prepar'd and put in this
dilatory Plea , shall have time given them to consider whether they will
join in Demurrer upon it or not . LAYER-1723-2,16.591

As to the Case of <font> Fitzharris , <$$font> whatever they have
infer'd from it , I think it rather turns against them .
LAYER-1723-2,16.592

Was that a Plea of <font> Misnomer ? <$$font> A Letter pretended to be
mistaken in a Name ; which I beg leave to say , when consider'd , will
appear to have been always so written in legal Proceedings ?
LAYER-1723-2,16.593

No , it was a Plea of the Pendency of an Impeachment for the same
Offence , sent up by the <font> House <$$font> of Commons to the <font>
House of Lords , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,16.594

and by consequence in that Case , the Prerogative of the Crown , the
Jurisdiction of the Lords , and the Privileges of the Commons , were
highly concern'd . LAYER-1723-2,16.595

This was a Question of as great weight , and perhaps of as great
Difficulty as could come before the Court , LAYER-1723-2,16.596

and therefore the Prisoner had time given him to plead that matter ;
LAYER-1723-2,16.597

but when the Attorney_General demurred to it , the Prisoner join'd in
Demurrer instantly : LAYER-1723-2,16.598

and as Mr. <font> Harcourt <$$font> acquaints your Lordship , the
Practice is , that there is no such Rule for proceeding upon Demurrers
in Capital Prosecutions as in other Cases ; LAYER-1723-2,16.599

and this appears by their never being set down in the Paper to be argued
, as Demurrers always are in other Causes . LAYER-1723-2,16.600

So it was in the Case of <font> Fitzharris <$$font> .
LAYER-1723-2,16.601

That was argued by four or five Council of a Side , without being set
down in the Paper . LAYER-1723-2,16.602

In the Case of the Prisoner , which is your present Consideration , more
hath been done for him , than was done for <font> Fitzharris <$$font> .
LAYER-1723-2,16.603

Here is not only a Demurrer given in by Mr. Attorney at the Bar ,
LAYER-1723-2,16.604

but the Prisoner's Attorney had a Copy of the Demurrer at Noon the day
before , LAYER-1723-2,16.605

and consequently they could not want notice that we intended to Demmurr
, nor be under any surprize from it . LAYER-1723-2,16.606

What then would they take time for ? LAYER-1723-2,16.607

Can they do any thing but join in Demurrer ? LAYER-1723-2,16.608

Can they amend in Capital Cases ? LAYER-1723-2,16.609

Or could they amend a Plea in Abatement in any Case ?
LAYER-1723-2,16.610

They know very well that they can@ @not . LAYER-1723-2,16.611

Can they withdraw their Plea ? LAYER-1723-2,16.612

I believe they can@ @not do that neither without the consent of Mr.
Attorney_General . LAYER-1723-2,16.613

If this be so , would they take time to consider whether they shall join
in Demurrer , when they have no choice , when it is impossible for them
to do any thing else . LAYER-1723-2,16.614

But , my Lord , the Method of Proceeding we are now insisting upon ,
hath been always taken in Capital Cases . LAYER-1723-2,16.615

I agree when the Question has concern'd the Merits of the Prisoner's
Case , or when he has been to prepare and consider of some matter which
has been , strictly speaking , his defence , time hath been allow'd ,
but not in other Instances . LAYER-1723-2,16.616

Where the Exception taken hath been to the Jurisdiction of the Court ,
and time has been desired to make it good , it hath been deny'd ; as in
the case of my Lord <font> Preston <$$font> , who was try'd before my
Lord_Chief_Justice Holt , and other Judges at the <font> Old-Baily
<$$font> . LAYER-1723-2,16.617

My Lord <font> Preston <$$font> insisted , that he was a Peer created by
Letters Patent of King <font> James <$$font> the Second , and
consequently that the Court at the <font> Old-Baily <$$font> had no
Jurisdiction to try him , LAYER-1723-2,16.618

and he pray'd time to produce his Letters Patent in order to prepare and
make good his Plea ; LAYER-1723-2,16.619

but the Court refus'd to give him time for that purpose .
LAYER-1723-2,16.620

And I believe it will be found , that in all instances where Pleas have
appear'd on the first view of them to be merely dilatory , <P_17> and
offer'd for no other Reason but to delay that Justice which ought to be
done to the Crown , the Judges have refused to assist the Prisoner with
any Time beyond the ordinary Rules of the Court . LAYER-1723-2,17.621

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> I shall not take up your Lordship's Time
much in this Case . LAYER-1723-2,17.622

My Lord , we think , in Civil Actions the Court on Motion would set this
Plea aside , LAYER-1723-2,17.623

but in a Case of Life it is receiv'd , LAYER-1723-2,17.624

and Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> has thought fit to demurr to it .
LAYER-1723-2,17.625

Is any Advantage lost , for the Prisoner to join in Demurrer instantly ?
LAYER-1723-2,17.626

I apprehend what they move for is to have time to join in Demurrer .
LAYER-1723-2,17.627

Are they not as ready to do that now , as if they had a Week or ten Days
time given them ? LAYER-1723-2,17.628

Is there any thing else can be done ? LAYER-1723-2,17.629

and is there any Occasion for Time to do that which must be done ?
LAYER-1723-2,17.630

and can@ @not they as well join in Demurrer now , as if they had more
Time to do it ? LAYER-1723-2,17.631

Certainly they may , my Lord , since by the Rules of the Court <paren>
as Mr. <font> Harcourt <$$font> informs your Lordship <$$paren> there
is no Rule given , but they are to join instantly . LAYER-1723-2,17.632

There is no Reason to allow them Time , since they can lose no Benefit
or Advantage by joining instantly . LAYER-1723-2,17.633

So then , as we apprehend , we are in the Course of the Court , and
there is no Reason why the Course of the Court should be alter'd in this
Case , we therefore hope that they shall join in Demurrer immediately .
LAYER-1723-2,17.634

Mr. <font> West . <$$font> My Lord , I think there is nothing in the
Exception of his Counsel not being ready to argue his Plea :
LAYER-1723-2,17.635

No doubt they consider'd of it before they brought it in ;
LAYER-1723-2,17.636

and when they had produced their Plea , Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font>
demurr'd to it . LAYER-1723-2,17.637

I ca@ @n't see why they should insist so much for Time , when they can
do nothing else but join in Demurrer ; LAYER-1723-2,17.638

therefore we hope that they shall instantly join in Demurrer .
LAYER-1723-2,17.639

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , I beg leave to set a Matter
of Fact right , that is as to the Case of <font> Fitz-Harris , <$$font>
which was mention'd as an Authority against us by Mr. <font> Attorney ,
<$$font> but in truth is not so ; LAYER-1723-2,17.640

for though <font> Fitz-Harris <$$font> his Counsel did join in Demurrer
immediately , <paren> or <font> instanter , <$$font> as 't@ @is call'd
<$$paren> yet that was not by the Coercion of the Court ,
LAYER-1723-2,17.641

but they voluntarily offer'd to join in Demurrer , upon an Opinion
<paren> as I presume <$$paren> of their own great Abilities and
Self-sufficiency in the Matter . LAYER-1723-2,17.642

But we have not that Opinion of our <font> extempore <$$font>
Performances , LAYER-1723-2,17.643

but desire time to consider of this Matter . LAYER-1723-2,17.644

As to my Lord <font> Preston@ @'s <$$font> Case , quoted by Mr. <font>
Sollicitor , <$$font> it is true the Court did not give him leave to
send for his Letters-Patent , because , as my Lord himself had opened
them , and the Truth was , his Letters-Patent were dated at St. <font>
Germains , <$$font> and granted by King <font> James <$$font> there ,
after his Abdication ; and it would have been the highest Indignity both
to the Court and the Government , to have such Letters-Patent pleaded ,
or insisted on ; LAYER-1723-2,17.645

and I believe no Gentleman at the Bar , then , or now , would have
signed such a Plea , which if allow'd would have implyed that the
Government was not well settled in their Majesties King <font> William
<$$font> and Queen <font> Mary , <$$font> and that King <font> James
<$$font> <paren> tho' at <font> St. Germains <$$font> <$$paren> had a
Right to Create Peers , and consequently was really King .
LAYER-1723-2,17.646

But if my Lord <font> Preston <$$font> had had Letters-Patent regularly
granted by King <font> James <$$font> or King <font> William , <$$font>
in his Chambers , can any one say they would not have given him leave to
send for them ? LAYER-1723-2,17.647

most certainly they would LAYER-1723-2,17.648

but it appeared they were dated at <font> St. Germains , <$$font> and
granted to him there ; LAYER-1723-2,17.649

that , with humble Submission , was the Reason why they would not
indulge him with Time , LAYER-1723-2,17.650

and that Precedent therefore , I hope , is of no Weight in this Case .
LAYER-1723-2,17.651

It is said , we are tyed down by our Plea ; we knew our own Strength
when we pleaded it , and therefore ought to be ready to argue it :
LAYER-1723-2,17.652

But if my Memory doth not fail me , <paren> and therefore I speak it
with some Doubt <$$paren> I believe there are Instances where even in a
Criminal Case a Plea hath been amended . LAYER-1723-2,17.653

I believe it was so done in the Case of my Lord <font> Banbury ,
<$$font> which was a Plea to the Jurisdiction of the Court .
LAYER-1723-2,17.654

My Lord , we shall desire but a very little Time , which I hope will be
granted us . LAYER-1723-2,17.655

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , as to <font> Fitz-Harris's
<$$font> Case , the Plea was amended there the first time it was brought
in by Mr. <font> Fitz-Harris <$$font> himself to the Bar ;
LAYER-1723-2,17.656

the Plea was brought in and read in Court LAYER-1723-2,17.657

after the Plea was read the Court assign'd him Counsel ,
LAYER-1723-2,17.658

and gave him from <font> Saturday <$$font> to <font> Wednesday <$$font>
to put the Plea in a regular and legal Method , LAYER-1723-2,17.659

and it was altered and brought in again on <font> Wednesday . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,17.660

As to what the <font> Attorney <$$font> says , that the Court compell'd
him to join in Demurrer instantly , the Words of the Book which I have
in my Hand are ; " We that are assigned Counsel for the Gentleman at the
Bar , we do@ @n't design to delay <P_18> the Proceedings ,
LAYER-1723-2,18.661

but do declare that we will join in Demurrer with them immediately . "
LAYER-1723-2,18.662

These are the Words of the Book ; so that it was the voluntary Act of
the Counsel , and they were not at all Compelled to it by the Court .
LAYER-1723-2,18.663

As to what Mr. <font> Harcourt <$$font> observes to be the Course of
the Court , and that we ca@ @n't shew one Instance to the contrary ; I
do@ @n't know whether they can shew one Instance for it , except in the
Case of <font> Fitz-Harris ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,18.664

if they can shew in any capital Case one Instance , we shall submit .
LAYER-1723-2,18.665

It is called a Frivolous Plea , the Variation of one Letter , and never
writ otherwise . LAYER-1723-2,18.666

Whether it is frivolous or not will appear when it comes before your
Lordship in Judgment : LAYER-1723-2,18.667

As to its never being wrote otherwise than with an <font> E , <$$font> I
do@ @n't believe they can find it in any Book either great or small
spelt so , unless they have met with it in <font> Instructor Clericalis
: <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,18.668

all the Books of Authority are otherwise ; LAYER-1723-2,18.669

I believe that one carries with it but little Weight .
LAYER-1723-2,18.670

As to my Lord <font> Preston@ @'s <$$font> Case , which Mr. <font>
Sollicitor <$$font> is pleased to cite against us , that the Court would
not allow him time to make out his Plea , Mr. <font> Hungerford
<$$font> hath given an ample Answer to that , and a true one as to the
Circumstances ; LAYER-1723-2,18.671

but if the Case of that Lord had been such as the Gentlemen of the other
side are pleased now to state it , What doth it prove but the contrary
to what the Court did in <font> Fitz-Harris's <$$font> Case ,
LAYER-1723-2,18.672

and therefore the most that can be made of it is one Authority against
another ; LAYER-1723-2,18.673

and where Authorities are equal , we hope the Indulgence of the Court
will interpose in favour of Life , and grant us such reasonable Time as
the nature of the thing requires , and not compel us instantly to join
in Demurrer . LAYER-1723-2,18.674

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , I beg leave to state one Fact
right , LAYER-1723-2,18.675

and that is as to <font> Fitz-Harris's <$$font> Case :
LAYER-1723-2,18.676

They say the Plea was put in , and afterwards amended ;
LAYER-1723-2,18.677

that is a Mistake ; LAYER-1723-2,18.678

the Fact was that his Wife brought a Plea into Court , and offer'd it to
the Court , and press'd it might be received ; LAYER-1723-2,18.679

but Mr. <font> Fitz-Harris <$$font> was advis'd to consider what he did
, LAYER-1723-2,18.680

and thereupon he took it back , LAYER-1723-2,18.681

and afterwards brought a Plea in , which was receiv'd ,
LAYER-1723-2,18.682

and after that it was never alter'd . LAYER-1723-2,18.683

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> I dare say it is the first time that ever
in a Capital Case , when a Plea in Abatement was pleaded , and the
<font> Attorney-General <$$font> thought fit to demurr to it , that the
Party desired Time to join in Demurrer . LAYER-1723-2,18.684

You are not entitled to any Time by the Course of the Court ,
LAYER-1723-2,18.685

you ca@ @n't shew any Instance to prove it : LAYER-1723-2,18.686

The Question then is , Whether you have given any Reason for us to
indulge you with Time , that never was granted in a Case of this Nature
. LAYER-1723-2,18.687

You have pleaded in Abatement ; LAYER-1723-2,18.688

you were enabled so to do by having a Copy of the indictment ;
LAYER-1723-2,18.689

you brought your Plea ready engross'd , LAYER-1723-2,18.690

and put it in . LAYER-1723-2,18.691

Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> not being aware of any such Plea , it
could not be expected he should be ready with a Demurrer in his Hand to
this Plea , LAYER-1723-2,18.692

and therefore he desired Time to consider of it . LAYER-1723-2,18.693

The next Day it could not be , nor the next after that , they being
Holy-Days ; LAYER-1723-2,18.694

but then the very first time that he had an Opportunity to come , he
comes LAYER-1723-2,18.695

and demurrs to your Plea : LAYER-1723-2,18.696

but you desire Time , LAYER-1723-2,18.697

and why should you not have Time when they had Time , to consider
whether you shall join in Demurrer . LAYER-1723-2,18.698

Do you want Time to consider whether you shall join in Demurrer , after
you have had Time to plead and to draw up your Plea , and have brought
it in to Court ? LAYER-1723-2,18.699

Why should you have Time ? LAYER-1723-2,18.700

Can you do any thing else but join in Demurrer ? LAYER-1723-2,18.701

You can do nothing else : LAYER-1723-2,18.702

and unless you can shew any Reason why the Court should indulge you , if
you do@ @n't think fit to join we must give Judgment against your Plea .
LAYER-1723-2,18.703

You tell us of the Case of <font> Fitz-Harris ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,18.704

that is as widely different from this Case as any thing can be .
LAYER-1723-2,18.705

It was a Case of great Difficulty , that required great Consideration ,
when a Party comes and informs this Court , and insists he is not within
the Jurisdiction of the Court . LAYER-1723-2,18.706

When a Matter is urged to us as a Question of Law , if we were not bound
as we are by Act of Parliament , we would certainly assign Counsel to
the Prisoner to plead a Matter of that Nature ; LAYER-1723-2,18.707

and when the Court in <font> Fits-Harris's <$$font> Case had assigned
him Counsel , were those Counsel to argue immediately ?
LAYER-1723-2,18.708

It was nothing but Justice to give them Time after they were assigned ,
to argue a Plea of that Nature ; a Plea in which the Prerogative of the
Crown , the Jurisdiction of the House of Lords , and the Rights of the
Commons was concerned . LAYER-1723-2,18.709

The Court wou'd not run hastily into the determining of that Matter ,
<P_19> without hearing it debated by Counsel , LAYER-1723-2,19.710

and therefore they gave the Counsel Time , upon which they might be
enabled to give a just Judgment . LAYER-1723-2,19.711

Is there any {TEXT:are} thing in this Case like it ?
LAYER-1723-2,19.712

You have pleaded in Abatement . LAYER-1723-2,19.713

Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> hath demurr'd to your Plea ,
LAYER-1723-2,19.714

and you desire we would give you Time to do that which you must do , or
do nothing at all . LAYER-1723-2,19.715

Is there any Pretence ? LAYER-1723-2,19.716

Could you in this Case come with any Colour or Pretence of Justice , and
desire of us to amend your Plea ? LAYER-1723-2,19.717

Is there any thing else you can do ? LAYER-1723-2,19.718

This is nothing but a pure dilatory Plea , LAYER-1723-2,19.719

and he puts in this Plea . LAYER-1723-2,19.720

The Question is whether it should be an <font> O <$$font> instead of an
<font> E <$$font> . LAYER-1723-2,19.721

You are not entitled to any thing of this Nature ; LAYER-1723-2,19.722

it is nothing but an affected Delay ; LAYER-1723-2,19.723

and it can@ @not be thought to be for any other Reason ;
LAYER-1723-2,19.724

therefore you must join in Demurrer immediately : LAYER-1723-2,19.725

if not , we must give Judgment against your Plea . LAYER-1723-2,19.726

Mr. <font> Jus. Powys . <$$font> My Lord_Chief_Justice hath given so
full and clear an Account of the Matter , that I am satisfied , and do
think you must instantly join in Demurrer . LAYER-1723-2,19.727

<font> Mr. Jus. Eyre . <$$font> I am of the same Opinion .
LAYER-1723-2,19.728

In Capital Cases the Party is obliged to plead <font> instanter ;
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,19.729

for the Proceedings are carried on at the Bar without giving Rules :
LAYER-1723-2,19.730

This is the constant Course ; LAYER-1723-2,19.731

and the Course and Practice must be the same , in regard to the Time for
joining in Demurrer : LAYER-1723-2,19.732

but the Court is still at liberty to allow further Time , if it be
necessary to the Justice of the Cause ; LAYER-1723-2,19.733

and if it could be of any Use to the Prisoner in the next Step he is to
make , I should not be against it : LAYER-1723-2,19.734

But as the Case now stands , that he has nothing to deliberate upon ,
that he can lay no new Matter before the Court , but is oblig'd to abide
by his Plea , and can neither withdraw nor amend it without Consent ,
but must necessarily join in Demurrer , and has no other Choice ; I
think it would be a manifest Delay of Justice to allow further Time ;
LAYER-1723-2,19.735

and am therefore of Opinion , that he ought to join in Demurrer
immediately . LAYER-1723-2,19.736

Mr. <font> Jus. Fortescue Aland . <$$font> I am of the same Opinion .
LAYER-1723-2,19.737

The Prisoner can have no Benefit by our giving him Time to join in
Demurrer , except it be to put off the Tryal : LAYER-1723-2,19.738

The Court makes a Difference in all Cases , both Civil and Criminal ,
between dilatory Pleas and other Pleas . LAYER-1723-2,19.739

An affected Delay is never to be suffer'd , more especially in a Capital
Case ; LAYER-1723-2,19.740

and here it is plain , that when the Counsel for the Prisoner brought in
this Plea that they had consider'd it before , and thought it of Service
to the Prisoner , and nothing more remains now than to join in Demurrer
. LAYER-1723-2,19.741

The <font> Attorney-General , <$$font> by his Demurrer , says it is not
a good Plea ; LAYER-1723-2,19.742

and the Prisoner has nothing further to say , but that it is a good Plea
; LAYER-1723-2,19.743

and if he does not think fit to say that we must give Judgment against
him . LAYER-1723-2,19.744

I remember in the Case of the King and <font> Gordon , <$$font> when the
Prisoner came to the Bar , having lapsed the Time of taking Exceptions ,
in order to quash the Indictment , he mov'd the Court for Time to plead
in Abatement ; but the Court refuted it , alledging they would give no
Opportunity for a dilatory Plea ; LAYER-1723-2,19.745

and I think there is the same Reason , if not stronger , in this Case ,
where the Prisoner has nothing to do but to join in Demurrer ; that is
to say , to submit to the Judgment of the Court , whether this be a good
Plea or not ; LAYER-1723-2,19.746

and that may be done immediately , as well as if the Prisoner had never
so much Time for it . LAYER-1723-2,19.747

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , I know not how consistent this
Rule of Court may be , that in a Capital Case of the highest Nature
whatsoever that I should not be allowed Time to join in Demurrer , when
in Criminal Cases of an inferior Nature there is a Four-@ @days Rule
given . LAYER-1723-2,19.748

The Counsel for the King were indulged from <font> wednesday <$$font> to
<font> Saturday : <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,19.749

I hope I shall have the same Indulgence on my Part , to consider whether
I shall join in Demurrer or not . LAYER-1723-2,19.750

I am so far from desiring to give any Delay , tho' I am satisfied how
maliciously this Prosecution is carried on , and am pretty well
acquainted with every Step taken in the Management in <font> Essex ;
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,19.751

and I am willing , rather than to continue to be thus hunted up and down
the World , to retract my Plea , and plead generally Not guilty .
LAYER-1723-2,19.752

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> If Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> consents
to it . LAYER-1723-2,19.753

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I am obliged to my Counsel for the Care they
have taken of me , LAYER-1723-2,19.754

and have here in my Hand a Joinder in Demurrer engrossed and signed by
them , and ready to deliver in ; LAYER-1723-2,19.755

but I wo@ @n't offer it , because I wo@ @n't give any Delay to the
Justice of the Court , LAYER-1723-2,19.756

<P_20>

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> He stands upon his Plea of Not Guilty
to the Indictment . LAYER-1723-2,20.758

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You have pleaded Not Guilty ;
LAYER-1723-2,20.759

you have likewise pleaded a <font> Misnomer , <$$font> which hath been
demurred to : LAYER-1723-2,20.760

your Plea therefore now must be as pleaded in chief , and as put in at
the time when it was first pleaded ; LAYER-1723-2,20.761

you do@ @n't desire you may plead the same Matter again this Day ?
LAYER-1723-2,20.762

Mr. <font> Hungerford <$$font> and Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> We
do not . LAYER-1723-2,20.763

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> If I understand the Prisoner right , he
pretends to be desirous that his Tryal may come on , LAYER-1723-2,20.764

and therefore he is willing to withdraw his Plea in Abatement , and
abide by his Plea of Not Guilty : LAYER-1723-2,20.765

'T@ @is what we desire likewise ; LAYER-1723-2,20.766

and I wish we could go on in this Case as we ought , in a decent Manner
, without having groundless Reflections continually made .
LAYER-1723-2,20.767

Something hath been said of the Maliciousness of this Prosecution , and
indirect Management , by some Body , 't@ @is not said whom , in the
County of <font> Essex . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,20.768

My Lord , I defy any Man to shew any single Step taken in carrying on
this Cause , but what is perfectly right and justifiable .
LAYER-1723-2,20.769

I wish , out of Charity , that the Prisoner would consider the
Circumstances he is in ; LAYER-1723-2,20.770

if he did , he would not say this Prosecution is carried on by Malice ;
LAYER-1723-2,20.771

for if I know any thing of the Evidence , I have no Reason to doubt but
at the proper time there will enough appear against him to convict him .
LAYER-1723-2,20.772

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I dare say the Prisoner did not
entertain a Thought of reflecting upon any of the Profession concern'd
in carrying on this Prosecution . LAYER-1723-2,20.773

But pray , my Lord , give me leave humbly to represent , that the Man's
Case is hard ; LAYER-1723-2,20.774

he tells you he is in Chains , LAYER-1723-2,20.775

and I see he is in great Pain even now ; LAYER-1723-2,20.776

and I earnestly wish that he were eas'd in that Matter .
LAYER-1723-2,20.777

I do not pronounce these Words out of any Affectation of Popularity , or
to captivate the Auditory , as was insinuated in the Beginning of this
Proceeding , but in mere Compassion I have to the Prisoner , and to all
Mankind , which Temper I have shewn thro' all the Stages of my Life .
LAYER-1723-2,20.778

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You have been told by the Court already
our Opinion , that it is not in our Power : LAYER-1723-2,20.779

We were told , and I perceive it is not denied , that he did once escape
after he was taken ; LAYER-1723-2,20.780

and if so for the better securing him he was put in Chains ,
LAYER-1723-2,20.781

Do you ask us to take those Chains off ? LAYER-1723-2,20.782

Can we do it ? LAYER-1723-2,20.783

Or should we do it ? LAYER-1723-2,20.784

If he should escape out of the <font> Tower , <$$font> shall not we be
guilty of that Escape ? LAYER-1723-2,20.785

The Circumstances of the Case ought and must govern .
LAYER-1723-2,20.786

He says he is Innocent , LAYER-1723-2,20.787

and I hope he is ; LAYER-1723-2,20.788

and if he be , he takes the properest Measures to knock his Chains off ,
LAYER-1723-2,20.789

let him make his Innocence appear ; and it will appear whether he is
Innocent or not , when we come to try the Cause . LAYER-1723-2,20.790

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> If I thought it was contrary to Law to take
off these Chains I shou'd not mention it . LAYER-1723-2,20.791

I desire to observe , that these Chains were not put on till after a
fourth or fifth Examination . LAYER-1723-2,20.792

As to the Escape out of the Messenger's Hands , he never shew'd me his
Warrant LAYER-1723-2,20.793

and I did not know any Authority he had to keep me .
LAYER-1723-2,20.794

As to escaping out of the <font> Tower , <$$font> it is not in my Power
, LAYER-1723-2,20.795

neither is it in my Inclination . LAYER-1723-2,20.796

I desire therefore to be eased of these Chains . LAYER-1723-2,20.797

And another thing I desire is , that I might have an Opportunity to see
my Relations , my Wife , that she might come to me .
LAYER-1723-2,20.798

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> That was granted in <font>
Fitz-Harris's <$$font> Case . LAYER-1723-2,20.799

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> As to the taking off the Chains you have
had the Opinion of the Court , LAYER-1723-2,20.800

we can@ @not , LAYER-1723-2,20.801

we ought not to do it , LAYER-1723-2,20.802

it is a Breach of our Duty ; LAYER-1723-2,20.803

as to the other Matter , he desires to see his Relations ,
LAYER-1723-2,20.804

what do you say to it ? LAYER-1723-2,20.805

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , as to <font> Fitz-Harris's
<$$font> Case , there was a great Deal of Caution us'd as to the Persons
permitted to see the Prisoner ; LAYER-1723-2,20.806

before they went in they were to be searched , LAYER-1723-2,20.807

and they were to be with him only in the Presence of the Keeper .
LAYER-1723-2,20.808

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> It is mentioned there , that the Wife
had misbehav'd herself , and that a particular Caution ought to be taken
with respect to her ; LAYER-1723-2,20.809

but the Access of a Wife to her Husband under such unfortunate
Circumstances was never deny'd , I believe , in any Case whatsoever .
LAYER-1723-2,20.810

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Upon a proper Application to the Court ,
the Court hath sometimes ordered that Persons named in their Rule may
have Access to the Prisoner in the Presence of the Jaylor , and not
otherwise , and that they should be <P_21> search'd before they come in
. LAYER-1723-2,21.811

If you think fit to desire it on those Terms , the Court will consider
of it . LAYER-1723-2,21.812

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , I must desire upon those Terms as
the Court thinks fit , and that my Sister may have Liberty to come with
my Wife . LAYER-1723-2,21.813

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Your Wife and Sister : It may be
reasonable for them to have Access to you , LAYER-1723-2,21.814

but they are not to be with you but in the Presence of the Jaylor .
LAYER-1723-2,21.815

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> My Lord , I beg leave to observe
, whether it is usual for the Court to make such Rule :
LAYER-1723-2,21.816

On the Tryal of Sir <font> John Friend , <$$font> there it was only
intimated by my <font> Lord_Chief_Justice Holt <$$font> ,
LAYER-1723-2,21.817

but the Court did not order it by making any Rule ; LAYER-1723-2,21.818

they know they may apply properly , LAYER-1723-2,21.819

and there may be Directions given to the Lieutenant of the <font> Tower
: <$$font> as to the Counsel , LAYER-1723-2,21.820

that is allow'd in the Act of Parliament ; LAYER-1723-2,21.821

and as the Court hath a Power to assign Councel , it is proper for the
Court to give Directions for them to be admitted at all Seasons , and at
all Times . LAYER-1723-2,21.822

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Why the Wife and the Sister ?
LAYER-1723-2,21.823

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Yes , my Lord , my Wife and Sister .
LAYER-1723-2,21.824

I do@ @n't put in a Number of Relations . LAYER-1723-2,21.825

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> I do think , Brother <font> Pengelly ,
<$$font> that the Court are trusted in a Matter of this Nature , and may
regularly give Directions with what proper Cautions they think fit .
LAYER-1723-2,21.826

Why , he says , he is deny'd the Comfort of his Wife ;
LAYER-1723-2,21.827

he desires that his Wife and sister may be admitted to come to him .
LAYER-1723-2,21.828

You say it hath been sometimes intimated , but not ordered ;
LAYER-1723-2,21.829

if it was intimated by us , and not comply'd with , I believe I should
make no Difficulty to order it , provided it be with a reasonable
Caution , and no Inconvenience in it . LAYER-1723-2,21.830

Whether is it the Wife or sister you desire ? LAYER-1723-2,21.831

I think one is enough , LAYER-1723-2,21.832

and she must submit to be search'd . LAYER-1723-2,21.833

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Before your Lordship makes any
Rule in this Case for the Prisoner , I beg that he may be oblig'd to
amend his Plea of Not Guilty , and that he may plead by the Name of
<font> Christopherus , <$$font> by which he is indicted .
LAYER-1723-2,21.834

You have been brought to the Bar , LAYER-1723-2,21.835

and have put in a Plea by the Name of <font> Christophorus ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,21.836

if you are in Earnest that you desire to wave your Plea in Abatement and
have it Withdrawn , you must change the Name wrote in the Commencement
of the Plea , and make it as it is in the Indictment , that there may be
no Embarrassment in the Proceedings in the End . LAYER-1723-2,21.837

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You consent to have it amended ?
LAYER-1723-2,21.838

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> The Prisoner at the Bar hath
consented to withdraw his Plea in Abatement ; LAYER-1723-2,21.839

and though the Plea were such that he might have prevail'd upon it , yet
after his pleading Not Guilty in general , there is not in the Course of
this Proceeding any Period of Time wherein he can avail himself with the
Matter of this Plea in Abatement ; LAYER-1723-2,21.840

and therefore we submit it to the Court , and to the King's Counsel
themselves , to put this Matter into such a Form , that the Prisoner may
come to a fair Tryal upon the Issue of Guilty or Not Guilty .
LAYER-1723-2,21.841

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I believe the Prisoner is willing to
come into the Method offer'd ; and though this Plea hath been called a
frivolous Plea , yet the Precaution taken by the Gentlemen of the other
Side seems to give a Sanction to it , and makes it not so frivolous as
hath been represented . LAYER-1723-2,21.842

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> What do you mean , Mr. <font> Ketelbey ?
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,21.843

Here is nothing ask'd of you : LAYER-1723-2,21.844

you do desire to wave and withdraw your Plea ; LAYER-1723-2,21.845

we desire to know , if you do , whether you will plead by the Name as it
is in the Indictment . LAYER-1723-2,21.846

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , we do . LAYER-1723-2,21.847

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> We desire the Plea of Not Guilty may be
amended , upon the Consent of the Prisoner . LAYER-1723-2,21.848

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> We offer now , let the Piece of
Parchment be entirely abolished , LAYER-1723-2,21.849

take it entirely out of the way , LAYER-1723-2,21.850

and we plead Not Guilty . LAYER-1723-2,21.851

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Your Plea must be now & <font> predict
Christopherus ductus hic ad barram , <$$font> &c. LAYER-1723-2,21.852

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> We submit it . LAYER-1723-2,21.853

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I desire to withdraw and retract the other
Plea , LAYER-1723-2,21.854

and do plead Not Guilty . LAYER-1723-2,21.855

<P_22>

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> No , it must be mended ,
LAYER-1723-2,22.857

you will hear how it is when it is struck out and amended ,
LAYER-1723-2,22.858

and then you will tell us whether it is mended according to your intent
or no . LAYER-1723-2,22.859

Cl. of the Cr. <font> Et predictus Christopherus Layer allocutus
existens per Cur' hic de alt' prodition' preodicts per Indictament
predict ei superius imposit' qualiter so velit inde acquietari , idem
christopherus Layer dicit quod ipse in nullo est inde culpabilis & inde
de bono & malo point se super Patriam . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,22.860

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Is this according to your Intention ?
LAYER-1723-2,22.861

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,22.862

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> My Lord , I believe it is usual
in these Cases for the Court to appoint a Time for the Tryal ,
LAYER-1723-2,22.863

the last Return but one in this Term is the 19th of <font> November
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,22.864

so if you please it may be the <font> quarto die post , <$$font> which I
think is <font> Wednesday <$$font> if that be suitable and convenient to
the Court . LAYER-1723-2,22.865

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> What say you to it ? LAYER-1723-2,22.866

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I desire your Lordship would give me a
longer Day to prepare for my Tryal . LAYER-1723-2,22.867

I have a great Number of Witnesses , twenty or more , most of them
People of the first Quality . LAYER-1723-2,22.868

I hope I shall have the common Processes of the Court to bring them here
; LAYER-1723-2,22.869

and , my Lord , another thing I desire is , that I may have a <font>
Habeas Corpus ad testificand' , <$$font> to bring my Lord <font> North
<$$font> and <font> Grey <$$font> and my Lord <font> Orrery <$$font> at
my Tryal . That , my Lord , you would please to give me as long a Day
as you can to prepare for my Tryal ; LAYER-1723-2,22.870

if your Lordship please it may be <font> Monday <$$font> the 26th ,
LAYER-1723-2,22.871

and then your Lordship will have a Day of Rest between .
LAYER-1723-2,22.872

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> That will be out of the Return .
LAYER-1723-2,22.873

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> They must appear ,
LAYER-1723-2,22.874

and then may be adjourned . LAYER-1723-2,22.875

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> It can@ @not be adjourned over beyond the
Return . LAYER-1723-2,22.876

Mr , <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , the Prisoner hath shewn that
he hath in no Respect affected Delay . LAYER-1723-2,22.877

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> It can@ @not be . LAYER-1723-2,22.878

- God forbid that we should deny the Prisoner to have a reasonable time
to prepare for his Defence ; LAYER-1723-2,22.879

it is three Weeks from hence ; LAYER-1723-2,22.880

you have been aware of it long before ; LAYER-1723-2,22.881

you have known the Indictment was found ; LAYER-1723-2,22.882

you have had a Copy of it ; LAYER-1723-2,22.883

you have known your Charge ; LAYER-1723-2,22.884

and is not all this Time enough ? LAYER-1723-2,22.885

Consider , the Term draws toward an End , and it interferes with the
common Business of the Term if we carry it to a further Day :
LAYER-1723-2,22.886

we do agree the <font> Venire , <$$font> to be return'd <font> Octab.
Martini , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,22.887

and the Tryal then must be the <font> quarto die post , <$$font> which
will be <font> Wednesday <$$font> the 21st . LAYER-1723-2,22.888

And it is proper for us to give you an Intimation now , not to expect
any further time , or the Jury to be adjourned ; LAYER-1723-2,22.889

do but consider what a Multitude must be brought up , 80 at least :
LAYER-1723-2,22.890

The Prisoner hath a Privilege to challenge 35 peremptorily , and after ,
for Cause , as many as he pleases ; so that a great Number must be
brought up ; LAYER-1723-2,22.891

and for them to be forc'd to attend here the 21st , and still the Tryal
to be put off , it will be a great Inconvenience and a great Charge ,
LAYER-1723-2,22.892

therefore that must be the Day , LAYER-1723-2,22.893

we shall not consider to put it off till any further Time .
LAYER-1723-2,22.894

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I beg leave for one Word more ;
LAYER-1723-2,22.895

I have a Witness that is to come from <font> Edinburgh , <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,22.896

and I can hardly have him here by the 21st . LAYER-1723-2,22.897

If I could but be indulged a few Days longer . LAYER-1723-2,22.898

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> We can@ @not do it , without making an
Error in the Proceedings . LAYER-1723-2,22.899

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Is there no other Return for a <font> Venire
<$$font> to be Returnable ? LAYER-1723-2,22.900

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> No , there is none but that , and the
last Return of the Term ; LAYER-1723-2,22.901

and it is impossible to try him that Day , without doing a manifest
Wrong and Injustice to the People of <font> England . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,22.902

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , where a Man's Life is at Stake ,
if I should not be indulg'd over till the last Day of the Term , for
want of a Witness I may be in danger of my Life : LAYER-1723-2,22.903

I hope therefore your Lordship will please to indulge me .
LAYER-1723-2,22.904

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You have had a great deal of Time already
, Time sufficient to bring your Witness from <font> Edinburgh , <$$font>
or any other Place , LAYER-1723-2,22.905

and we can@ @not do it . LAYER-1723-2,22.906

To put you off to the last Day of the Term , is to do a manifest Wrong
to the People of <font> England . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,22.907

<P_23>

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> The Reason why I mention it over and over
again is because I would not give your Lordship the Trouble to be turned
over to another Day , on troubling your Lordship with Affidavits .
LAYER-1723-2,23.909

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> In what you lay before us as Matter
proper for Consideration , we shall do what is just .
LAYER-1723-2,23.910

It is not proper for you to tell us what we have to do , and to make
Bargains with us . LAYER-1723-2,23.911

That is the Day of Tryal ; LAYER-1723-2,23.912

it must be on <font> Wednesday <$$font> the 21st : LAYER-1723-2,23.913

Your Counsel will tell you it is impossible to comply with your Request
, without doing the manifestest Injustice in the World .
LAYER-1723-2,23.914

Or else , whether to try you upon the 21st , or in two , or three , or
four Days after , I do@ @n't think the Consequence worth disputing ,
LAYER-1723-2,23.915

but we ca@ @n't do it without doing Wrong and Injustice to the People of
<font> England . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,23.916

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I hope I shall be indulged two or three Days
. LAYER-1723-2,23.917

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> We can say no more . LAYER-1723-2,23.918

The Time you have had for Preparation for your Tryal we think abundantly
sufficient to prepare your self , LAYER-1723-2,23.919

therefore we are of Opinion that the Tryal go on at that Day ,
LAYER-1723-2,23.920

and we order it accordingly . LAYER-1723-2,23.921

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Your Lordship will please to order a
Rule for his wife and Sister to come to him . LAYER-1723-2,23.922

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> No , not for his wife and Sister .
LAYER-1723-2,23.923

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , for a single Woman to come thro'
the Courts and the Guards , to be examined by her self , it@ @'s not so
proper , my Lord . LAYER-1723-2,23.924

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You shall have a Rule from the Court for
your Wife to come ; LAYER-1723-2,23.925

as for your Sister , we must leave that to the Direction from another
Place . LAYER-1723-2,23.926

We must not be too forward in granting Women to come ,
LAYER-1723-2,23.927

we remember an Escape occasion'd by a Woman coming thither .
LAYER-1723-2,23.928

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> There must be a Rule to bring him up at
the Day of his Tryal . LAYER-1723-2,23.929

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , as to having his <font>
Habeas corpus ad Testificand' <$$font> for my Lord <font> North <$$font>
and <font> Grey , <$$font> and my Lord <font> Orrery . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,23.930

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You must give Notice , and then move what
you Please . LAYER-1723-2,23.931

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> By what was said , I did understand ,
I must confess , that though the Rule was made for the Wife only , that
it might be in the Power of the Gentleman Jaylor to permit her Sister to
come with her . LAYER-1723-2,23.932

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> We give no Direction concerning it .
LAYER-1723-2,23.933

He will have a Rule from the Court that will be his Direction , unless
he receives any additional Direction from another Place ,
LAYER-1723-2,23.934

but the Court names his Wife only . LAYER-1723-2,23.935

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> There was another thing mentioned ,
that he may have Copies of his Papers that were seized .
LAYER-1723-2,23.936

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Give Notice for what you think fit ,
LAYER-1723-2,23.937

and move it . LAYER-1723-2,23.938

<heading>

<font> Die Mercurii <$$font> 21=o= <font> die Novembris <$$font> 1722 .
LAYER-1723-2,23.940

<$$heading>

THIS Day <font> Christopher Layer , <$$font> Esq; was brought to the Bar
, in Custody of the Lieutenant of the <font> Tower , <$$font> in
pursuance of the Rule of Court made for that Purpose , in order to his
Tryal . LAYER-1723-2,23.942

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> You <font> Christopher Layer , <$$font>
now Prisoner at the Bar , these Men which you shall hear called , and
personally appear , are to pass between our Soveraign Lord the King and
you , upon Tryal of your Life and Death : LAYER-1723-2,23.943

if you will Challenge them , or any of them , your time is to Challenge
them as they come to the Book to be Sworn , and before they be Sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,23.944

<font> Heneage Norton , <$$font> Esq; LAYER-1723-2,23.945

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , we desire that his Irons
may be taken off . LAYER-1723-2,23.946

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> The Irons must be taken off ;
LAYER-1723-2,23.947

we will not stir till the Irons are taken off . LAYER-1723-2,23.948

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I hope , my Lord , that the Irons shall be
now taken off . LAYER-1723-2,23.949

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> They shall be taken off .
LAYER-1723-2,23.950

<P_24>

Mr. <font> Hungerford <$$font> The poor Man hath been so opperss'd by
these Chains , that he was not able to prepare his Brief .
LAYER-1723-2,24.952

I had it not till late last Night ; LAYER-1723-2,24.953

and it is ten sheets of Paper . LAYER-1723-2,24.954

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Whose Fault is that ?
LAYER-1723-2,24.955

You have had Time enough . LAYER-1723-2,24.956

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> It is the Fault of the Irons , Mr.
<font> Attorney , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,24.957

the Brief was not brought to me till Eleven of the Clock last Night .
LAYER-1723-2,24.958

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> It was an Omission ; LAYER-1723-2,24.959

they should have been taken off before he came to the Bar .
LAYER-1723-2,24.960

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> There was Direction given for their
being taken off before ; LAYER-1723-2,24.961

how they came not to be taken off , I ca@ @n't tell .
LAYER-1723-2,24.962

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Are the Irons taken off ?
LAYER-1723-2,24.963

<font> Gent. Taylor . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,24.964

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Go on . LAYER-1723-2,24.965

<font> Cl. Of the Cr. Heneage Norton , <$$font> Esq;
LAYER-1723-2,24.966

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You Must call over all the Jury .
LAYER-1723-2,24.967

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I thought they would be all called
over once ; before any one is endeavoured to be sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,24.968

<font> Cl. Of the Cr. <$$font> They have been called over already .
LAYER-1723-2,24.969

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> When ? LAYER-1723-2,24.970

Not since the Court sat {TEXT:sate} , I am sure . LAYER-1723-2,24.971

I would know whether the Intention is , that all the Pannel be called
over before any one of them is sworn , or that the Pannel is to be
called over but once , and the Jurymen sworn as they then appear .
LAYER-1723-2,24.972

What I have observ'd is , the Clerk calls over the whole Pannel first ,
to see how many appear ; and then calls it over again , and swears them
as they answer to their Names , if not challenged . LAYER-1723-2,24.973

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> What you observe is what hath been done
at the <font> Old Bailey ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,24.974

there they call them over first , LAYER-1723-2,24.975

and then they call them over again , LAYER-1723-2,24.976

and as they appear they are sworn presently . LAYER-1723-2,24.977

But by the Course of the Court here they are called over before the
Court is sitting , LAYER-1723-2,24.978

and they mark those that appear . LAYER-1723-2,24.979

That is not sufficient ; LAYER-1723-2,24.980

but they are called over again in Court , LAYER-1723-2,24.981

and then their Appearance and Non-appearance being mark'd they do call
those over again that did appear ; LAYER-1723-2,24.982

and as one appears , if there is no Objection to him , he must be sworn
. LAYER-1723-2,24.983

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I have observed them to be called
over when no Body is by , in Civil Cases ; LAYER-1723-2,24.984

but in such a case as this , a Case of High Treason , where peremptory
Challenges are allow'd , it is some Guide to the Prisoner in making his
Challenges , to know before-hand who do and who do not appear .
LAYER-1723-2,24.985

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , with Submission , in all
Criminal Cases there is no other Method than calling over the Pannel
according as it is transmitted into Court . LAYER-1723-2,24.986

'T@ @is probable several of the Jurors who did not appear at their being
called over before the sitting of the Court , will now appear ;
LAYER-1723-2,24.987

and therefore what we pray is that the whole Pannel may be now called
over in the Order as it stands , not only those who answered to the
first Call , but those also who then made Default . LAYER-1723-2,24.988

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I ca@ @n't imagine what they mean .
LAYER-1723-2,24.989

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> This Debate arises from not understanding
one another : LAYER-1723-2,24.990

You have the Direction of the Court ; LAYER-1723-2,24.991

the Pannel is to be called over , LAYER-1723-2,24.992

if any Man doth not appear his Default is mark'd and recorded .
LAYER-1723-2,24.993

When any one doth appear , and he is not challenged , he is to be sworn
. LAYER-1723-2,24.994

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I came thro' the Hall just now ,
LAYER-1723-2,24.995

and there is such a Crowd that it is almost impossible for any one to
hear when they are called . LAYER-1723-2,24.996

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , I hope they shall be once called
over before they come to be sworn ; LAYER-1723-2,24.997

for as to their being called before , that was before I came ;
LAYER-1723-2,24.998

it will spend but a little time to read over 40 or 50 Names .
LAYER-1723-2,24.999

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Call them over . LAYER-1723-2,24.1000

I would not deny any thing that is desired in Reason by or on the
Prisoner's Behalf : LAYER-1723-2,24.1001

Consider what you are doing ; LAYER-1723-2,24.1002

the Prisoner hath had a Copy of the Pannel , LAYER-1723-2,24.1003

he hath examined it , and considered who are proper for him to challenge
peremptorily , LAYER-1723-2,24.1004

and he hath consider'd who they are that he may challenge with Cause .
LAYER-1723-2,24.1005

I ca@ @n't imagine ; it was never done in this World :
LAYER-1723-2,24.1006

We have ask'd our Officer : LAYER-1723-2,24.1007

They ought to call over all the Pannel ; LAYER-1723-2,24.1008

but if they do not appear , their Default is mark'd ;
LAYER-1723-2,24.1009

if they do appear , the Prisoner knows whether he likes them or not .
LAYER-1723-2,24.1010

<P_25>

Therefore when they come to the Bar , if not challenged , they must be
sworn . LAYER-1723-2,25.1012

Consider what this Demand is ; LAYER-1723-2,25.1013

we shall be an Hour calling them over the first time , that it may
appear to the Prisoner whether they appear or not ; LAYER-1723-2,25.1014

then afterwards you are to call them over again , and to have them
brought up again when they come to be sworn . LAYER-1723-2,25.1015

But if it ever hath been done , it is fit it should be done now ;
LAYER-1723-2,25.1016

but our Officer tells us it never was done , LAYER-1723-2,25.1017

and why should you insist upon it now ? LAYER-1723-2,25.1018

you have had all the Indulgence the Law allows you .
LAYER-1723-2,25.1019

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I have not had a Copy of the Pannel above
two Days before . LAYER-1723-2,25.1020

Here hath been in this Cause all the vile Practices -
LAYER-1723-2,25.1021

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You must keep within due and proper
Bounds . LAYER-1723-2,25.1022

You are come now , to be tried for an Offence you are charged withal ;
LAYER-1723-2,25.1023

but you are not to arraign and challenge every Body else ;
LAYER-1723-2,25.1024

you have no Right to do it . LAYER-1723-2,25.1025

If in proper time it appears you have been ill used , the Court will do
you Justice , and punish those that have been guilty of any Misbehaviour
. LAYER-1723-2,25.1026

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> My Lord , if they have any
Objection to the Jury , they are to challenge them peremptorily :
LAYER-1723-2,25.1027

When the Jury come to be sworn , then is their time ;
LAYER-1723-2,25.1028

they are not to entertain the Court with Speeches before .
LAYER-1723-2,25.1029

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> No , it is not proper .
LAYER-1723-2,25.1030

Consider how unreasonable it is for the Prisoner to arraign some Body's
Misbehaviour without naming him . LAYER-1723-2,25.1031

But in this Method he is insinuating Objections , which we ca@ @n't
examine whether they are true or false , on purpose to captivate People
; and it may be , mislead them in the Tryal of the Cause .
LAYER-1723-2,25.1032

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> As I came in , I observed that all the
Avenues to the Court are barricadoed up , and only a narrow Place left
on the Stone-steps , and a Guard kept there to keep out whom they do@
@n't think fit to let in . LAYER-1723-2,25.1033

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I know nothing of it ;
LAYER-1723-2,25.1034

and I dare say no Body will give any Countenance to the hindring either
Jury-men or Witnesses coming into Court , when their Attendance is
required here . LAYER-1723-2,25.1035

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I had much ado to get in my self .
LAYER-1723-2,25.1036

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> There shall be due Care taken , that any
of the Jury that appear , we will order Way to be made for them .
LAYER-1723-2,25.1037

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , I will take up but very
little of your Time in this matter ; LAYER-1723-2,25.1038

I find I was not understood before ; LAYER-1723-2,25.1039

that which I contend for is , that the Pannel be read through once in
the Prisoner's Presence , to see what Jury-men appear , before any
Jury-man is sworn . LAYER-1723-2,25.1040

The Prisoner hath a Right to challenge 35 peremptorily , or without
assigning any Cause at all . LAYER-1723-2,25.1041

Now , my Lord , this is a Favour , an Indulgence granted to him by Law ,
LAYER-1723-2,25.1042

and he is therefore entitled to it in Justice . LAYER-1723-2,25.1043

It is of great Use to the Prisoner , in order to enjoy the true Benefit
of this Indulgence that the Law gives him , that he knows who doth and
who doth not appear , for this Reason perhaps , if he did know that such
an one appears he will take him , and if he know that such an one
appears he will challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,25.1044

And if he know that such an one , who perhaps stands low in the Pannel ,
and of whom he has a good Opinion for being an honest Man , will appear
, he will challenge as many as he can of the preceding Persons , in
order to have him , that honest Man , of his Jury .
LAYER-1723-2,25.1045

And as to the Time the reading of the Pannel will take us , <paren> tho'
by the way it might have been over by this time <$$paren> I am sure your
Lordship and the Court will not regard what Proportion of Time you spare
us , to let the Prisoner enjoy the Benefit of the Law in this Case , and
to have a full Enjoyment of the Indulgence of the Act of Parliament in
its full Latitude , that he may know and judge <paren> as far as the Law
hath enabled him <$$paren> who is to pass upon him as to his Life and
Death . LAYER-1723-2,25.1046

I beg therefore , my Lord , that the whole Pannel may be called over
once before the Prisoner is put to challenge . LAYER-1723-2,25.1047

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , What we humbly move for is what is
every Day done at the <font> Old Bailey , <$$font> that they may be once
called over . LAYER-1723-2,25.1048

All I desire is what is done there , and by the same Reason ought to be
done here in the same Case where a Man's Life is concern'd .
LAYER-1723-2,25.1049

I humbly move it that they may be called over . LAYER-1723-2,25.1050

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> We shall grudge no Time to do the King
and you Justice . LAYER-1723-2,25.1051

It is dangerous to make a Precedent , an Innovation :
LAYER-1723-2,25.1052

But if you desire it , I do@ @n't find the King's Counsel object to it .
LAYER-1723-2,25.1053

<P_26>

Call over the Pannel . LAYER-1723-2,26.1055

You do@ @n't expect all should be brought into Court , but only to know
if they do appear ? LAYER-1723-2,26.1056

Mr. <font> Hungerford <$$font> and Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> No
, no . LAYER-1723-2,26.1057

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> The Prisoner hath a Sollicitor ;
LAYER-1723-2,26.1058

let some Body go down upon the Steps , the Sollicitor be present ,
LAYER-1723-2,26.1059

and then he will hear who do and who do not appear .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1060

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> We humbly thank your Lordship ;
LAYER-1723-2,26.1061

this is a real Indulgence , LAYER-1723-2,26.1062

and we humbly thank your Lordship for it . LAYER-1723-2,26.1063

<font> Cl. of the Cr. calls over the whole Pannel . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,26.1064

You the Prisoner at the Bar , these Men which , <font> &c. <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,26.1065

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> If your Lordship pleases to stay till
the Sollicitor comes in , because he went out to observe who did appear
, and who did not appear . LAYER-1723-2,26.1066

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Heneage Norton . <$$font> Have you ten Pounds a
Year Freehold and Copyhold , in the County of <font> Essex ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,26.1067

<font> Norton . <$$font> I have no Freehold , only Copyhold .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1068

<bracket> Then he was set aside . <$$bracket> LAYER-1723-2,26.1069

<font> John Wilks . <$$font> <bracket> Ask'd the same Question , as
were all the others who appear'd , before they were either challenged or
sworn . <$$bracket> LAYER-1723-2,26.1070

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,26.1071

<font> Mark Frost . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,26.1072

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,26.1073

<font> Thomas Clarke . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,26.1074

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I do@ @n't challenge him .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1075

<font> Cryer . Thomas Clarke . <$$font> Sworn . LAYER-1723-2,26.1076

<font> Henry Longbotham . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,26.1077

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I say , I think his Name is wrong spelt .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1078

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> We are not now upon Exceptions for
Mispelling . LAYER-1723-2,26.1079

If his Name is written as he is usually called , it is right .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1080

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> He says his Name is with an <font> o
<$$font> , LAYER-1723-2,26.1081

and it is written here with an <font> a <$$font> . LAYER-1723-2,26.1082

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Doth the Copy deliver'd to you agree with
the Pannel ; LAYER-1723-2,26.1083

if it doth , as long as it hath the same Sound , it will do .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1084

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> With humble Submission , in the Case of
<font> Francia <$$font> there it was allowed . LAYER-1723-2,26.1085

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , it is not the same Sound
<font> Longbothàm <$$font> and <font> Longbothòm , <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,26.1086

and in <font> Francia's <$$font> the Difference of a Letter was ,
allow'd to be a good Exception . LAYER-1723-2,26.1087

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You are by Law to have a Copy of the
Pannel deliver'd to you ; LAYER-1723-2,26.1088

if that Pannel varies from the other , it is a just Exception ;
LAYER-1723-2,26.1089

but if you object against a Jury-man because his Name is not right spelt
, and that hath the same Pronunciation , and he may be called sometimes
one and sometimes another , it is well enough . LAYER-1723-2,26.1090

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , as to this Objection ,
whether the <font> Longbotham <$$font> is right , or the <font>
Longbothom <$$font> whether it is with an <font> A <$$font> or , an
<font> O. <$$font> - LAYER-1723-2,26.1091

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> You mistake , LAYER-1723-2,26.1092

it is <font> Longbotham , <$$font> and not <font> Longbatham . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,26.1093

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> The last should be an <font> O <$$font>
instead of an <font> A , Longbothom . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,26.1094

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Therefore we will ask the Gentleman how
his Name is usually pronounced , whether it is not pronounced sometimes
<font> Longbothom <$$font> as well as <font> Longbotham . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,26.1095

Mr. <font> Longbotham . <$$font> Yes , My Lord , it is .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1096

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> He says he spells his Name with an <font> O
, <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,26.1097

and here it is with an <font> A <$$font> . LAYER-1723-2,26.1098

<font> Longbotham . <$$font> I always spell my Name with an <font> O ,
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,26.1099

but my Letters are generally directed to me with an <font> A <$$font> .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1100

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> He hath a Copy of the Pannel
deliver'd him by vertue of the Act of Parliament ; LAYER-1723-2,26.1101

if the Copy be not a true Copy , it is not right according to the
Direction of the Act . LAYER-1723-2,26.1102

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Right . LAYER-1723-2,26.1103

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> Now the Pannel which the Prisoner
hath is spelt with an <font> A , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,26.1104

and the Pannel of which this is a pretended Copy is , I take it , spelt
with an <font> O <$$font> . LAYER-1723-2,26.1105

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> No , they are both spelt alike .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1106

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You know it , Gentlemen , as well as can
be . LAYER-1723-2,26.1107

Do@ @n't let us spend Time where there is nothing in it ;
LAYER-1723-2,26.1108

we will hear what is proper for our Consideration .
LAYER-1723-2,26.1109

<P_27>

Suppose a Man is called and writ sometimes <font> Longbothom <$$font>
and sometimes <font> Longbotham <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,27.1111

and suppose he was called by either of these Names ,
LAYER-1723-2,27.1112

may he not therefore be called by one as well as the other ?
LAYER-1723-2,27.1113

Is that an Objection to say he writ with an <font> O , <$$font> but
People write to him with an <font> A ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,27.1114

there is nothing at all in it . LAYER-1723-2,27.1115

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Then I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,27.1116

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Isaac Buxton . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,27.1117

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,27.1118

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Richard Scott . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,27.1119

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,27.1120

<font> Cl. of the Cr. John Wormlayton . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,27.1121

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,27.1122

<font> Cl. of the Cr. John Andrews . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,27.1123

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I do@ @n't challenge him .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1124

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I challenge him for the King .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1125

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Thomas Waterhouse . Stephen Huff . John
Thorowgood . Christopher Bailey . <$$font> Challeng'd by the Prisoner
. LAYER-1723-2,27.1126

<font> Isaac Potter . <$$font> Sworn . LAYER-1723-2,27.1127

<font> Cl. of the Cr. William Lord . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,27.1128

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,27.1129

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Hezekiah Haynes . <$$font> Sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1130

<font> Thomas Heckford <$$font> jun. LAYER-1723-2,27.1131

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,27.1132

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Richard Waglett . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,27.1133

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I do@ @n't challenge him .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1134

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I challenge him for the King .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1135

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> is
pleased to challenge him for the King ; LAYER-1723-2,27.1136

we humbly insist on it that Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> is to shew his
Cause of Challenge immediately . LAYER-1723-2,27.1137

I own it has been otherwise in one or two late Instances ;
LAYER-1723-2,27.1138

but I submit it , if that Practice should prevail , whether the Act of
Parliament made on that Occasion would not be in Effect thereby
abrogated . LAYER-1723-2,27.1139

The Act is the 33 <font> Edward <$$font> I . LAYER-1723-2,27.1140

and the Words of it are : " If they that sue for the King will challenge
any Juror , they shall assign of their Challenge a Cause certain ,
LAYER-1723-2,27.1141

and the Truth of the same shall be inquir'd of according to the Custom
of the Court . " LAYER-1723-2,27.1142

Now , my Lord , I beg leave to observe upon this Pannel there are 100
and odd Persons , LAYER-1723-2,27.1143

if Mr. <font> Attorney <$$font> is not oblig'd to shew his Cause of
Challenge , when he challenges for the King , till all the Pannel is
gone through , this Act of Parliament will be of no Validity whatsoever
. LAYER-1723-2,27.1144

If there had been but a few returned <paren> 24 , or such a Number ,
<$$paren> then there might have been some Colour for going through the
Pannel before there was any Cause assigned for the Challenge ;
LAYER-1723-2,27.1145

but since this modern Practice has obtained to make so numerous a Pannel
, if they are not oblig'd to shew Cause till the Pannel is gone through
, that Law is intirely a dead Letter , and of no Significancy .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1146

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You know your Objection is of no Validity
; LAYER-1723-2,27.1147

you cite an Act of Parliament , LAYER-1723-2,27.1148

and you know the constant Practice is against you .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1149

Mr. <font> Jus. Eyre . <$$font> Though the Counsel for the King must
assign their Cause of Challenge , yet they are not oblig'd to do it till
the Pannel is gone thro' , and the Jury-men returned , who are not
challeng'd , are all sworn : LAYER-1723-2,27.1150

This is a Rule laid down in <font> Hale <$$font> 's Pleas of the Crown ,
LAYER-1723-2,27.1151

and has been always the constant Practice in Cases of this kind .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1152

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> What your Lordship directed in the
last Case is certainly precedented ; LAYER-1723-2,27.1153

but I would propose it as a Convenience that the <font> Attorney
<$$font> should , as he is every ways entitled , have the Precedence ,
and might challenge first , and then we will determine after him .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1154

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> No , we must not do that .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1155

<font> Cl. of the Cr. John Lowry . <$$font> Sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1156

<font> Cl. of the Cr. John How . <$$font> Set aside for want of
Freehold . LAYER-1723-2,27.1157

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Thomas Pratt . <$$font> sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1158

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Richard Rogers . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,27.1159

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I do@ @n't challenge him .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1160

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I challenge him for the King .
LAYER-1723-2,27.1161

<P_28>

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Edward Pierson . Thomas Bland . William
Spilltimber . Alexander Weller . Thomas Rand . John English . Joseph
Unwin . George Frye . <$$font> Challeng'd by the Prisoner .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1163

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Weston Stileman . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,28.1164

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I do@ @n't challenge him .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1165

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I challenge him for the King .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1166

<font> Cl. of the Cr. John Crush . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,28.1167

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I do@ @n't challenge him .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1168

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I challenge him for the King .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1169

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Thomas Howlett . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,28.1170

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,28.1171

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> I do@ @n't know this Method of
proceeding : LAYER-1723-2,28.1172

if the Prisoner makes any Challenge , it must be before he comes to the
Book to be sworn ; LAYER-1723-2,28.1173

but when he comes to lay his Hand upon the Book , he is too late to
challenge then . LAYER-1723-2,28.1174

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> When ever I make a full Stop and do@ @n't
say I challenge , you do . LAYER-1723-2,28.1175

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , the Prisoner is to declare
whether he challenges or not LAYER-1723-2,28.1176

afterwards the King's Counsel are to declare whether they challenge for
the King , LAYER-1723-2,28.1177

and the Jury-man is not to put his Hand on the Book till then .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1178

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> He ought not to put his Hand on the Book
till he is allowed a Jury-man ; that if the King or the Prisoner
challenge him , they may do it before he lay his Hand on the Book .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1179

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Joseph Capon . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,28.1180

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I do@ @n't challenge him .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1181

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I challenge him for the King .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1182

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> More have been challenged for the
King than hath been known in any publick Tryal in my Remembrance .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1183

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I am surpriz'd at this Observation ,
when the King has an undoubted Right of challenging whom he pleases ,
without shewing Cause till the Pannel is gone through .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1184

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> It is always done , LAYER-1723-2,28.1185

<font> Cl. of the Cr. John Clarke . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,28.1186

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,28.1187

<font> Cl. of the Cr. William Chandler . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,28.1188

Set aside for want of Freehold . LAYER-1723-2,28.1189

<font> Cl. of the Cr. William Burrowes . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,28.1190

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,28.1191

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Francis Aylett , <$$font> Sen. Sworn . <font>
LAYER-1723-2,28.1192

Cl. of the Cr. George Bailey . John Weekes . Thomas Ruggle .
<$$font> Challeng'd by the Prisoner . LAYER-1723-2,28.1193

The Prisoner spoke to the Jury-man . LAYER-1723-2,28.1194

Mr. <font> Sol._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , it hath been intimated to the
Prisoner once already , that he ought to propose his Questions to the
Court . LAYER-1723-2,28.1195

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You are to ask no Questions your self ,
LAYER-1723-2,28.1196

if you will tell us the Question , we will propose it .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1197

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Only to know how he spells his Name .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1198

<font> Cl. of the Cr. William May . Abraham Lake . <$$font>
Challeng'd by the Prisoner . LAYER-1723-2,28.1199

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , it will be of some little
use to know for certainty how many he hath challeng'd ;
LAYER-1723-2,28.1200

they differ here in the Computation . LAYER-1723-2,28.1201

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> He hath challeng'd 28 peremptorily .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1202

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Nathaniel Wessley . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,28.1203

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I do@ @n't challenge him ,
LAYER-1723-2,28.1204

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I challenge him for the King .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1205

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Benjamin Rutland . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,28.1206

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , I desire he may be asked whether
he doth not farm something under the King , or on the Forest .
LAYER-1723-2,28.1207

<P_29>

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> If it was of any Service to you it should
be done ; LAYER-1723-2,29.1209

but if it is so , it is no Objection . LAYER-1723-2,29.1210

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> The Objection was once made in the Case
of Sir <font> William Perkins . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,29.1211

It was recommended to the King's Counsel . LAYER-1723-2,29.1212

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> I deny it . LAYER-1723-2,29.1213

It was not recommended to the King's Counsel , LAYER-1723-2,29.1214

but the King's Counsel did not insist upon it . LAYER-1723-2,29.1215

Mr. <font> Jus. Fortescue Aland . <$$font> The Court in that Case
gave their Opinion , that to be a Servant to the King was no good Cause
of Challenge , LAYER-1723-2,29.1216

and my <font> Lord_Chief_Justice Holt <$$font> and <font> Treby <$$font>
were present , LAYER-1723-2,29.1217

and Mr. <font> Attorney_General <$$font> did not insist on the Jury-man
so challeng'd , LAYER-1723-2,29.1218

but wav'd the Matter without any Recommendation of the Court .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1219

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I know no other ways , than if Mr.
<font> Attorney <$$font> will do it , as it was done in that Case .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1220

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I know nothing of the Fact .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1221

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> What do you do , LAYER-1723-2,29.1222

do you challenge him or no ? LAYER-1723-2,29.1223

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,29.1224

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Alexander Marshall . Thomas Selby . <$$font>
Challenged by the Prisoner . LAYER-1723-2,29.1225

<font> Cl. of the Cr. John Milligande . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,29.1226

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , he is searching for a Paper
; LAYER-1723-2,29.1227

he challenges him for Cause . LAYER-1723-2,29.1228

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , what I have to offer is , that
this Mr. <font> Milligande <$$font> hath been heard to say , before he
came here , that I ought to be hang'd ; LAYER-1723-2,29.1229

and I apprehend that is good Cause for challenging him , if I make it
out . LAYER-1723-2,29.1230

<font> David Martin <$$font> call'd . LAYER-1723-2,29.1231

<font> Cryer . <$$font> You shall true Answer make , <font> &c.
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,29.1232

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> Do you know Mr. <font> Milligande ?
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,29.1233

<font> Martin . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,29.1234

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> What have you heard him declare
concerning the Prisoner at the Bar ? LAYER-1723-2,29.1235

<font> Martin . <$$font> I heard him in Conversation say , that he
hop'd he should be hang'd , LAYER-1723-2,29.1236

for he believ'd he was Guilty . LAYER-1723-2,29.1237

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> This Objection sure is right .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1238

<bracket> Mr. <font> Milligande <$$font> was not sworn . <$$bracket>
LAYER-1723-2,29.1239

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Robert Walker . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,29.1240

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,29.1241

<font> Cl. of the Cr. William Nicholson . <$$font> Sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1242

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , I have very near all my Challenges
, LAYER-1723-2,29.1243

I think they may go on as they are called , if Mr. <font> Attorney
<$$font> will challenge no more . LAYER-1723-2,29.1244

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> You may go on your own way ,
LAYER-1723-2,29.1245

I shall make no Bargains with you . LAYER-1723-2,29.1246

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> We do@ @n't offer any Bargain , but
only an Expedient to save the Time of the Court . LAYER-1723-2,29.1247

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Nicholas Freeman . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,29.1248

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,29.1249

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Christopher Hill . <$$font> Sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1250

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Stephen Wood . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,29.1251

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I think I have done all my Challenges .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1252

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> You have two more .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1253

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Let them take them then as they come .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1254

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I challenge him for the King .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1255

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Richard Bridge . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,29.1256

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I challenge him . LAYER-1723-2,29.1257

<font> John Bains <$$font> set aside by Consent , by reason of Infirmity
. LAYER-1723-2,29.1258

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Robert Barnard . <$$font> Sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1259

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Leonard Bennett . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,29.1260

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I do@ @n't challenge him .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1261

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I challenge him for the King .
LAYER-1723-2,29.1262

<font> Cl. of the Cr. William Sandford . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,29.1263

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , I have the same Objection to this
Gentleman as to the other , LAYER-1723-2,29.1264

he hath declared his Opinion before-hand , and that he must make a
Sacrifice of me . LAYER-1723-2,29.1265

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Call your Witness . LAYER-1723-2,29.1266

<P_30>

Mr. <font> Martin <$$font> Sworn . LAYER-1723-2,30.1268

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Mr. <font> Martin , <$$font> do you
know <font> William Sandford <$$font> of <font> Rumford ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,30.1269

<font> Martin . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,30.1270

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Have you had any Discourse with him
about the Prisoner at the Bar ? LAYER-1723-2,30.1271

<font> Martin . <$$font> He said , before he was summoned on the Jury ,
that if he was one of the Jury , he would be for hanging of him .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1272

<bracket> Set aside . <$$bracket> LAYER-1723-2,30.1273

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Thomas Waters . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,30.1274

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Sir , I apprehend I have challeng'd
Thirty_five , LAYER-1723-2,30.1275

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> You have one more .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1276

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I will challenge no more ,
LAYER-1723-2,30.1277

let them go on . LAYER-1723-2,30.1278

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Thomas Waters . <$$font> Sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1279

<font> Richard Gray . <$$font> Sworn . LAYER-1723-2,30.1280

<font> William Wheatly . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,30.1281

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I hope that what I am going to offer
is proper . LAYER-1723-2,30.1282

There is some little doubt how far he is gone in his Challenges ,
LAYER-1723-2,30.1283

it is said he hath one more , LAYER-1723-2,30.1284

if the Court would indulge us so far as to let the Persons challenged be
called over . LAYER-1723-2,30.1285

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> It is impossible that we should mistake
. LAYER-1723-2,30.1286

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> You say he hath one more .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1287

<font> Cl. of the Cr. <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,30.1288

<font> William Wheatly . <$$font> Sworn . LAYER-1723-2,30.1289

Then the twelve Jurors who were sworn were counted ,
LAYER-1723-2,30.1290

and their Names were as follows , <font> viz. Thomas Clark , <$$font>
Gent . <font> Isaac Potter , <$$font> Gent . <font> Hezekiah Haynes ,
<$$font> Gent . <font> John Lowry , <$$font> Gent . <font> Thomas
Pratt , <$$font> Gent . <font> Francis Aylett , <$$font> Gent . <font>
William Nicholson , <$$font> Esq; <font> Christopher Hill , <$$font>
Gent . <font> Robert Barnard , <$$font> Gent . <font> Thomas Waters ,
<$$font> Gent . <font> Richard Gray , <$$font> Gent . <font> William
Wheatly , <$$font> Gent . LAYER-1723-2,30.1291

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Cryer , <$$font> make Proclamation .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1292

<font> Cryer . <$$font> O yes . If any one can inform , <font> &c.
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,30.1293

<font> Cl. of the Cr. Christopher Layer , <$$font> hold up your Hand .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1294

Gentlemen of the Jury , look upon the Prisoner , LAYER-1723-2,30.1295

and hearken to his Cause . LAYER-1723-2,30.1296

He stands indicted by the Name of <font> Christopher Layer , <$$font>
late of the Parish of St. <font> Andrew's Holborn , <$$font> in the
County of <font> Middlesex , <$$font> Esq; For that he , <font> &c.
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,30.1297

Upon this Indictment he hath been lately Arraigned ,
LAYER-1723-2,30.1298

and thereunto hath pleaded Not Guilty , LAYER-1723-2,30.1299

and for his Tryal hath put himself upon God and the Country , which
Country you are . LAYER-1723-2,30.1300

Your Charge is to enquire whether he be Guilty of this High Treason , in
Manner and Form as he stands Indicted , or Not Guilty .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1301

If you find him Guilty , you shall enquire what Goods or Chattels ,
Lands or Tenements he had , at the Time of the said High Treason
committed , or at any Time since . LAYER-1723-2,30.1302

If you find him Not Guilty , you shall enquire whether he fled for it .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1303

If you find that he did fly for it , you shall enquire of his Goods and
Chattels , as if you had found him Guilty . LAYER-1723-2,30.1304

If you find him Not Guilty , and that he did not fly for it , say so ,
and no more , LAYER-1723-2,30.1305

and hear your Evidence . LAYER-1723-2,30.1306

Mr. <font> Wearg . <$$font> May it please your Lordship , and you
Gentlemen of the Jury , This is an Indictment against the Prisoner for
High Treason . LAYER-1723-2,30.1307

The Indictment sets forth , that he being a Subject of his present
Majesty King George , but not having the Fear of God in his Heart , nor
considering the Duty of his Allegiance , as a false Traitor against his
supreme , true , lawful , and undoubted Lord , contriving and to the
utmost of his Power intending to change , alter and subvert the
Government of this Kingdom , lawfully and happily Established under his
present Majesty , and to depose and deprive his said Majesty of his
Title , Honour , Royal State and Government of this Kingdom ; and to
advance to the Crown and Government of this Realm , the Person in the
Life of the late King James the Second pretending to be Prince of Wales
, and after the Decease of the Said King James pretending to be and
taking upon himself the Stile and Title of King of England , by the Name
of James the Third ; did upon the 25th Day of August , in the 9th Year
of his present Majesty's Reign , and at several other Days and Times ,
at Layton_Stone , in the County of Essex , falsely , maliciously , and
traiterously , compass , imagine , and intend to Depose our said
Sovereign Lord King George , from his Title , Regal State and Government
, and the said King to kill and bring to utter Destruction .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1308

The Indictment further sets forth , That he the said <font> Christopher
Layer , <$$font> to perfect and bring to Effect his Treason and
traiterous Purposes , on the said 25th Day of <font> August , <$$font>
and at several other Days and Times , at <font> Layton-Stone <$$font>
aforesaid , together with divers other false Traitors , to the Jury
unknown , did falsely , maliciously , and traitorously meet , consult ,
conspire and agree , to move and stir up an Insurrection and Rebellion
in this Kingdom , against our said Soveraign Lord the King .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1309

The Indictment further sets forth , That he the said <font> Christopher
Layer , <$$font> to perfect and compleat his Treason and traiterous
Purposes , on the said 25th of <font> August , <$$font> at <font>
Layton-Stone <$$font> aforesaid , with Force and Arms , did falsely ,
maliciously , and traiterously publish a certain malicious and seditious
Writing , containing in it self , and purporting to be , an Exhortation
and Promise of Rewards to the Subjects of his said Majesty , to perswade
and excite them to take up Arms , and levy War against our said
Soveraign King <font> George . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,30.1310

The Indictment further sets forth , That the said <font> Christopher
Layer , <$$font> together with other false Traitors , to the Jury
unknown , to compleat and bring to Effect his traiterous Purposes , on
the said 25th Day of <font> August , <$$font> at <font> Layton-Stone
<$$font> aforesaid , with Force and Arms , did falsely , maliciously ,
and traiterously Meet , Consult , Conspire and Agree , to exalt to the
Crown and Royal Dignity of this Realm the Person in the Life of the late
King <font> James <$$font> II pretending to be Prince of <font> Wales ,
<$$font> by means of an Armed Force and Troops of Soldiers , for that
Purpose to be raised and levied . LAYER-1723-2,30.1311

The Indictment further sets forth , That the said <font> Christopher
Layer , <$$font> to perfect his said Treason , on the said 25th Day of
<font> August <$$font> , at <font> Layton-Stone <$$font> aforesaid
maliciously and traiterously did raise , levy , and retain several Men ,
to the Jury unknown , to take up Arms and levy War within this Kingdom ,
against our said Soveraign Lord the King . That the said <font>
Christopher Layer , <$$font> to perfect his treasonable Purposes on the
said 25th Day of <font> August , <$$font> at <font> Layton-Stone
<$$font> aforesaid , together with divers other false Traitors , to the
Jury unknown , did falsely , maliciously and traiterously Meet ,
Conspire and Agree , to Take , Seize , Imprison and Detain in Custody
the Sacred Person of our said Soveraign Lord the King , against the Duty
of his Allegiance , against the Peace of the King , his Crown and
Dignity , and against the Form of the Statute in that Case made and
provided . LAYER-1723-2,30.1312

To this Indictment the Prisoner hath pleaded , Not Guilty .
LAYER-1723-2,30.1313

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> May it please your Lordship ,
and Gentlemen of the Jury ; the Prisoner at the Bar , Mr. <font> Layer
, <$$font> comes now to be Tryed before you , for a wicked and
detestable Conspiracy against the Person of his Majesty , and against
his Government ; and this , in favour of an Attainted and Abjured
Pretender ; a Pretender whom the Prisoner himself has abjured in Words ,
and ought to have renounced in his Heart . LAYER-1723-2,30.1314

The Indictment contains a Charge of High Treason against the Prisoner at
the Bar , for Compassing and Intending the Deposing the King , and also
his Death and Destruction . LAYER-1723-2,30.1315

The particular Facts laid to prove this traiterous Imagination and
Intent , and which the Prisoner put in Execution , in order to bring to
Effect his Treasonable Purposes , are five . LAYER-1723-2,30.1316

The First is ; That the Prisoner , with other Traitors did Consult ,
Conspire , and Agree to raise a General Insurrection and Rebellion in
this Nation , against his Majesty . The next ; That he did publish a
Seditious and Treasonable Declaration , containing Incitements , and
Promises of Rewards , whereby to excite and stir up his Majesty's
Subjects to take up Arms , and to levy War against his Majesty within
this Realm . And farther ; That he , with other Traitors , Conspired ,
Consulted and Agreed , by an armed Force , to Exalt , and bring the
Pretender to his Majesty's Crown , to the Throne of these Kingdoms , and
to put him into the Possession of the Government thereof . <P_32> That
he hath provided , levied , and retained several Persons , to take up
Arms , and to levy War against his Majesty within this Kingdom , for the
Executing these Traiterous Purposes . LAYER-1723-2,32.1317

The last Overt-Act alledged , and to finish this Conspiracy , is , That
he , with the other Traytors {TEXT:Taytors} , Consulted , Conspired ,
and Agreed to seize upon and to imprison the Sacred Person of His
Majesty . LAYER-1723-2,32.1318

Gentlemen , It is unnecessary , when these Facts are opened to you , to
acquaint you , that an Attempt of this Nature if it had succeeded ,
would have been the Subversion of the present Happy Establishment , and
the Protestant Succession , so often confirmed by the Consent of the
whole Nation , and the only Security of your Religious and Civil Rights
and Liberties ; LAYER-1723-2,32.1319

they would all have been exposed to the Arbitrary Power of a Popish
Faction , under the Tyranny of the Pretender . LAYER-1723-2,32.1320

Gentlemen , Having said this to shew the Nature of the Offence ; we
<paren> who are Counsel for his Majesty <$$paren> shall proceed to lay
before you the particular Evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar ;
LAYER-1723-2,32.1321

Gentlemen , we have been so fortunate as to discover , and shall produce
before you , the very Plan it self , upon which these Conspirators
proceeded , and which was to be put in Execution . LAYER-1723-2,32.1322

We shall produce the Plan under the Prisoner's own Hand-writing , and
shew his acting correspondent to that Plan , and in the Execution
thereof ; LAYER-1723-2,32.1323

this Plan is a Compleat Scheme of a Treasonable Insurrection , if that
may be called Compleat which tends to utter Destruction ;
LAYER-1723-2,32.1324

for if the several Parts therein contained had been executed , it would
have been a total Overturning of the Government and Constitution .
LAYER-1723-2,32.1325

But you may observe a Regularity going thro' the whole Scheme .
LAYER-1723-2,32.1326

The Place of Action , and the Scene where this Conspiracy was first to
be put in Execution , was in the City of <font> London ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,32.1327

and tho' in the Plan it self the Day is not mention'd , yet we shall
shew to you , by the Prisoner's own Declaration and Discovery , the Time
when it was to be executed ; LAYER-1723-2,32.1328

it was at the breaking up of the Camp of his Majesty's Forces in <font>
Hide-Park . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,32.1329

Gentlemen , The Plan contains a Disposition of several Officers , who
were appointed to their particular Stations , and were to be supply'd
with Men designed to be procured for the Execution of this Plan ;
LAYER-1723-2,32.1330

and , as the Conspirators hoped to debauch part of the Army , these
Officers were to be disposed at several Places , to receive the private
Men , who , to the Number of about Two_Hundred <paren> towards the
Evening of the Day agreed upon for Execution <$$paren> were to go singly
out of the Camp , without their Arms , that they might more easily pass
without Observation , and were to be collected together at a Place of
Rendezvous appointed them . LAYER-1723-2,32.1331

Gentlemen , From the Management of the Conspiracy , and the Method they
had taken to carry it on , and the Hopes they had entertained , the
Conspirators concluded , they should have that Number of two_hundred Men
ready in one Body , to be commanded by proper Officers , to make the
first Attempt , and the first Stand . LAYER-1723-2,32.1332

At the Place of Rendezvous they were to be supply'd with Muskets ready
loaded , and to receive their Arms , which were to be distributed to
them a little before the Hour of Nine ; at which Hour exactly , they
were to march directly to the <font> Tower <$$font> of <font> London ,
<$$font> <paren> as the Plan proposes , and as the Prisoner agreed and
declared <$$paren> where they might expect to be admitted , by the Help
and Assistance of their Friend , the Officer upon the Guard ;
LAYER-1723-2,32.1333

and as soon as they had enter'd , they were to shut up the <font> Tower
<$$font> Gates , and seize the Arms . LAYER-1723-2,32.1334

Their General was to make his Stand in Person at the <font>
Royal-Exchange ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,32.1335

at the same time , it is directed by the Plan , and was consulted upon ,
and agreed by the Prisoner himself , they were to attempt to arrest the
Persons of several Great Men ; LAYER-1723-2,32.1336

and although the Plan doth not name the Persons , yet the Prisoner hath
explain'd it fully , LAYER-1723-2,32.1337

and from his own Mouth we shall prove , who the particular Persons are ,
thus intended to be seized . LAYER-1723-2,32.1338

A Declaration was to be dispersed to excite People to come in to the
Rebels ; LAYER-1723-2,32.1339

The Gates of the City of <font> London <$$font> were to be shut up , and
Canon brought down against them : LAYER-1723-2,32.1340

They were then to set a Guard over the <font> Bank ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,32.1341

but in the first Place , they were to take out Money sufficient to pay
their Men , such as they hoped would appear in their Interest :
LAYER-1723-2,32.1342

Their several other Parties were to secure <P_33> the Artillery in the
<font> Camp , <$$font> the Guns in the <font> Privy-Garden , <$$font>
the Cannon and Ammunition near the <font> Horse-Guards <$$font> in St.
<font> James's Park . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,33.1343

These were the first Operations : LAYER-1723-2,33.1344

But to finish this Villainous and Execrable Design , at the Time the
<font> Tower <$$font> was seized , and the City in Arms they were to
send a Detachment to Seize the Person of His Majesty ;
LAYER-1723-2,33.1345

and this they express'd in their Plan to be , For the securing His
Person from the Mob . LAYER-1723-2,33.1346

But our King was to be delivered to their General at the <font> Tower ,
<$$font> and to be put under his Custody . LAYER-1723-2,33.1347

Thus the Life of His Majesty was to be in their Power .
LAYER-1723-2,33.1348

After this , these are several other Dispositions of Officers , and
other Persons , in order to Excite and Carry on the Rebellion :
LAYER-1723-2,33.1349

Some were to appear in <font> Tot-bil-Fields , <$$font> some in <font>
Southwark <$$font> who were to give Arms to the <font> Minters ;
<$$font> some at <font> Greenwich , <$$font> to engage the Watermen ,
and seize the Magazine and Powder there , and Others at other Places .
LAYER-1723-2,33.1350

Gentlemen , You will find in this Plan a Preparation to make an entire
Conquest of the Cities of <font> London <$$font> and <font> Westminster
; <$$font> upon which the Conspirators hop'd the rest of the Kingdom
would declare for the Pretender : LAYER-1723-2,33.1351

And there is one particular Provision in the Plan , That as they
proceeded here , and found Success , the General should immediately
dispatch Messengers into the several Counties of <font> England ,
<$$font> to give Intelligence of their Progress , and to persuade those
, who <font> they <$$font> look'd upon to be in their Interest , to
declare for the Pretender , and to rise in their respective Counties
with their Adherents . LAYER-1723-2,33.1352

This is the Plan upon which the Conspiracy is Carried on ;
LAYER-1723-2,33.1353

and , as we shall produce this Plan , which the Prisoner hath supplied
himself with , and written with his own Hand , we beg leave to insist
upon that , as strong Evidence against the Prisoner , upon the
Overt-Acts alledged in the Indictment , of his Consulting and Conspiring
to raise a Rebellion and Insurrection in the Nation , and to seize the
King's Person . LAYER-1723-2,33.1354

Gentlemen , Upon this Plan , which the Prisoner at the Bar had thus
furnish'd himself with , you will find , on the Examination of our
Witnesses , that he constantly acted ; he declared for , and promoted
the Execution of the principal Parts of it . LAYER-1723-2,33.1355

Gentlemen , The Witnesses we shall call , who were engaged with the
Prisoner at the Bar , in this Design , are <font> Stephen Lynch ,
<$$font> and <font> Matthew Plunkett <$$font> <paren> which last had
been a Serjeant in the Army <$$paren> with whom the Prisoner Consulted ,
and whom he engaged in this desperate Attempt ; LAYER-1723-2,33.1356

and we shall call some other Witnesses to confirm several Circumstances
in their Evidence . LAYER-1723-2,33.1357

Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> is a Person the Prisoner might have
reasonable Hopes of engaging in this Service : LAYER-1723-2,33.1358

He had been formerly acquainted with one Dr. <font> Murphey , <$$font>
who <paren> I am instructed <$$paren> was in the Rebellion that broke
out in the Beginning of His Majesty's Reign : LAYER-1723-2,33.1359

Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> having been abroad , and absent for some time
, return'd into <font> England <$$font> in <font> April <$$font> last :
LAYER-1723-2,33.1360

Upon his Return , <font> Dr. Murphey <$$font> his old Acquaintance ,
meets with him , LAYER-1723-2,33.1361

bids him welcome to <font> England , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,33.1362

and tell him that an Affair was going on by which he might make his
Fortune , LAYER-1723-2,33.1363

and advises him not to go out of <font> England : <$$font> That there
was an Intention to rise in favour of the Pretender , whom he called his
King , and he would take care to recommend Mr. <font> Lynch to <$$font>
a Person who had a great Part in that Affair . LAYER-1723-2,33.1364

Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> having suffered before , and run a great
Hazard , was unwilling immediately to enter into any Engagement ,
LAYER-1723-2,33.1365

but proposed , That if he could have sufficient Encouragement , and what
he expected as a Reward , he should be willing to stay .
LAYER-1723-2,33.1366

Some time after Dr. <font> Murphey <$$font> introduces <font> Lynch .
<$$font> to the Prisoner at the Bar : LAYER-1723-2,33.1367

The first time they met , I think , it was the Beginning of <font> June
<$$font> last , they went to the Prisoner's Lodgings , which were then
at the upper End of <font> Chancery-Lane ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,33.1368

and he being about to remove his Goods , desired them to go to a Tavern
hard by , the <font> Griffin <$$font> Tavern in <font> Holborn .
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,33.1369

To this Place the Prisoner at the Bar came , where Dr. <font> Murphey
<$$font> presented <font> Lynch <$$font> to Mr. Layer , as the
Gentleman Dr. <font> Murphey <$$font> had before recommended to him ;
LAYER-1723-2,33.1370

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> received Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> at that
time with great Civility , LAYER-1723-2,33.1371

and tells him that the Recommendation he , had received of <font> Lynch
<$$font> from Dr. <font> Murphey , <$$font> made him not to doubt of
his Integrity and Ability . LAYER-1723-2,33.1372

Then they entered {TEXT:entred} upon a Consultation as to the Carrying
on of this Design ; LAYER-1723-2,33.1373

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> introduced it with representing an Uneasiness
in the Nation in general , and how fair an Opportunity <P_34> there was
to bring about a Revolution : LAYER-1723-2,34.1374

But Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> tells him , that one of the First and
Principal Steps , was to seize upon a General , or other Great Man ,
<paren> which you will observe is one part of the Scheme <$$paren> ;
LAYER-1723-2,34.1375

and upon Dr. <font> Murphey's <$$font> Recommendation of him as a Fit
Man for that Service , <font> Layer <$$font> proposes to <font> Lynch
<$$font> to undertake it . LAYER-1723-2,34.1376

At this time <font> Lynch <$$font> acquainted <font> Layer <$$font> with
the Difficulties he had been in , and that an Affair of this Nature
would take up some time before it could be put in Execution ,
LAYER-1723-2,34.1377

and he could not well engage in it without some farther Encouragement ,
and a Reward in Money , in order that he might live easy and well while
he staid here . LAYER-1723-2,34.1378

Upon that , the Prisoner at the Bar promised him Supplies of Money for
his Subsistence , and Expences , what should be necessary , besides
future Rewards ; LAYER-1723-2,34.1379

and in pursuance of that Promise , <font> Layer <$$font> hath several
times supplied <font> Lynch <$$font> with Money , to engage him more
effectually in this Design , and to support him in it .
LAYER-1723-2,34.1380

By these Assurances <font> Lynch <$$font> was prevailed upon ,
LAYER-1723-2,34.1381

and then agreed to enter into this Conspiracy , and to take upon him the
Part therein , that should be signified to him . LAYER-1723-2,34.1382

Gentlemen , The Prisoner did not then make a full Discovery of the
Person that was to be seized ; LAYER-1723-2,34.1383

but they were to meet again , as they did , about the latter End of
<font> June , <$$font> at the same Tavern : LAYER-1723-2,34.1384

There the Prisoner disclosed to the Witness the particular Person who
was designed to be first seized . LAYER-1723-2,34.1385

He acquaints the Witness , that the Person he <paren> the Prisoner
<$$paren> intended at their former Meeting , and whom he designed the
Witness should seize , is the General of the Army , the Earl <font>
Cadogan ; <$$font> and <font> Lynch <$$font> was to find out such other
Persons as he could rely upon , for the assisting in , and effecting
that Enterprize ; whereunto <font> Lynch <$$font> agreed .
LAYER-1723-2,34.1386

<font> Layer <$$font> then acquainted him what Steps were already made
in the Conspiracy , and that they were to be headed and commanded by a
General , who had Wit and Courage and Resolution , and who was supported
by a great many Friends , who had full Power and Authority from the
Pretender <paren> whom he called King <$$paren> to act , and who was
Intrusted with a Commission as his General , and whose Orders <font>
Lynch <$$font> was to obey . LAYER-1723-2,34.1387

The Prisoner and <font> Lynch <$$font> had several other Meetings , some
at the <font> Griffin <$$font> Tavern , and others at the Prisoner's own
House in <font> Old Southampton Buildings , <$$font> where the Prisoner
always encouraged <font> Lynch <$$font> to persist in the Undertakings
by assuring him , that all Things went on well , and that the Design was
so well laid , that it could not probably miscarry : That they should be
assisted by a great many Officers , as soon as any Motion was made , and
that the Common Souldiers would declare upon the first Opportunity :
LAYER-1723-2,34.1388

and being ask'd by <font> Lynch , <$$font> whether they had no Foreign
Assistance to depend on ; the Prisoner answer'd , When we begin the
Business , we shall not want Relief , if requisite .
LAYER-1723-2,34.1389

At one of these Meetings the Prisoner revealed to the Witness , That ,
upon the Rising , the <font> Tower <$$font> would be delivered up to
them , by means of an Officer , who was to be upon the Guard thereon the
Day of Execution ; and that the People in the <font> Mint <$$font> in
<font> Southwark <$$font> would come in to them ; who , and all others
that should repair to their Party , should have Arms delivered to them ;
and that the whole Design should be put in Execution at the Breaking up
of the Camp , which would be the most proper Time for the speaking with
the Souldiers in the Army . LAYER-1723-2,34.1390

But at a Meeting they had , some time in <font> August , <$$font> at the
<font> Queen's Head <$$font> Tavern in <font> Great Queen's Street
<$$font> near <font> Lincolns-Inn_Fields , Lynch <$$font> complaining of
the Delay in putting their Design in Execution , and representing the
Danger of it , and withal pressing to know his intended General and
Commander , The Prisoner gave him great Encouragement , from the good
Prospect of their Affairs , and the Vigilance of the Noble-Man at the
Helm , who would lose no Opportunity , when a convenient Time should
offer ; LAYER-1723-2,34.1391

and promised the Witness , that he should be presented to this noble
Person in due time , from whom <font> Lynch <$$font> should receive his
Orders , or Commission for Executing his Part , and Entering
{TEXT:Entring} upon his Enterprize . LAYER-1723-2,34.1392

And accordingly , upon the twenty_fourth Day of <font> August , <$$font>
Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> invites <font> Lynch <$$font> to ride out of
Town with him the next Day to take the Air , which <font> Lynch <$$font>
comply'd with ; LAYER-1723-2,34.1393

and on the twenty_fifth of <font> August <$$font> in the Morning ,
<font> Lynch <$$font> went to the Prisoner's House , who appointed
<font> Lynch <$$font> to go before , and to stay without <font> Aldgate
. <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,34.1394

<P_35>

At that Time the Prisoner asked the Witness , whether he mounted with
Furniture or Pistols who answering , that he did not , but that he had a
Double-Barrel Fowling-Piece , which the Prisoner's Servant might carry ;
the Prisoner directed him to get his Piece ready loaden , because he
<font> <paren> Layer <$$paren> <$$font> should carry something with him
, which he would not lose for all the World . LAYER-1723-2,35.1396

<font> Lynch <$$font> and the Prisoner met without <font> Aldgate
<$$font> at eleven before Noon , LAYER-1723-2,35.1397

and the Prisoner's Servant carried the Gun , LAYER-1723-2,35.1398

and they rode together towards <font> Epping <$$font> in <font> Essex ,
<$$font> which was the Place they were going to . LAYER-1723-2,35.1399

Upon the Way as they proceeded , Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> told the
Witness , that they were going to the House of the Lord <font> North
<$$font> and <font> Gray , <$$font> where he would present <font> Lynch
<$$font> to his Lordship , as a particular Friend of his <paren> the
Prisoner's <$$paren> . LAYER-1723-2,35.1400

When they came to the <font> Green Man <$$font> at <font> Layton-Stone ,
<$$font> at the Entrance upon <font> Epping Forest , <$$font> the
Prisoner said , it might be best to eat something there , because they
should be too late for the Lord <font> North <$$font> and <font> Gray@
@'s <$$font> Dinners ; LAYER-1723-2,35.1401

and accordingly they stopt at this House to Dine . LAYER-1723-2,35.1402

Gentlemen , You will hear from the Witness , that at this Place , the
Prisoner and <font> Lynch <$$font> had another Consultation , wherein
there was a Repetition and Confirmation of the whole Design and
Conspiracy . LAYER-1723-2,35.1403

At this <font> Green Man , <$$font> in your County , Gentlemen , you
will find every principal Part of the Conspiracy , which was to be
executed , Consulted upon , and Agreed unto by them Both : The Time and
Manner of the Insurrection , the Preparations making for it , the
Assistance to be provided and expected from the Army , from many in the
City of <font> London , <$$font> and from the Generality of the Nation ,
as was then suggested The Seizing the Earl <font> Cadogan <$$font> as
the first Step , and the Surprizing the <font> Tower <$$font> in the
Manner mentioned in the Plan , by the Help of the Officer upon the Guard
; LAYER-1723-2,35.1404

and then they proceeded to Consider and Approve the most daring and
execrable Part of the Plan , which was then expresly repeated by the
Prisoner , The making a strong Detachment to Seize on His Majesty's
Person . LAYER-1723-2,35.1405

The Prisoner then declared his great Satisfaction , in having engaged a
Person of such Courage and Conduct as Mr. <font> Lynch , <$$font> in
the Attempt of Seizing the Earl <font> Cadogan ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,35.1406

and likewise named the several other Great Men , hinted at in the Scheme
, whose Persons were to be Seized , and of whom he had made up his
Collection in pursuance of the Plan ; LAYER-1723-2,35.1407

and then express'd his Wishes so to bring Matters to bear , that Mr.
<font> Lynch <$$font> might likewise have the sole Direction of
Apprehending the Persons of some of His Majesty's Ministers , the Lords
<font> Townshend <$$font> and <font> Carteret , <$$font> His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State , and Mr. <font> Walpole , <$$font>
First Lord Commissioner of the Treasury . LAYER-1723-2,35.1408

These Persons , most immediately intrusted in His Majesty's Service ,
were in the first Place to be Seized , in order to facilitate the Design
, and to make it successful . LAYER-1723-2,35.1409

By this means the Conspirators were to weaken His Majesty's Power of
Defending Himself , when they had deprived Him of His General , who was
to Command and Conduct His Army ; of His Two Secretaries , who were to
Maintain and Carry on His Intelligence ; and of the First Commissioner
of His Treasury , who was to take care for His Supply .
LAYER-1723-2,35.1410

At this Place these Things were debated and considered between them :
LAYER-1723-2,35.1411

Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> then again complained of the long Delay ,
LAYER-1723-2,35.1412

and wished that the Affair might be carried on with more Expedition :
LAYER-1723-2,35.1413

The Prisoner thought no Time so proper as the Breaking up of the Camp ,
when they might be supplied with Souldiers ; LAYER-1723-2,35.1414

yet he was willing to hear any Proposal from Mr. <font> Lynch ,
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,35.1415

and desir'd Mr. <font> Lynch , <$$font> that if he could think of any
speedier Method , or better Scheme , to let him know it :
LAYER-1723-2,35.1416

But the Witness was not capable to propose any way more proper , than
what had been agreed upon the Foot of the Plan , as it had been
explained by the Prisoner himself , LAYER-1723-2,35.1417

and therefore Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> acquiesced therein .
LAYER-1723-2,35.1418

Gentlemen , At that Time , and at the same Place , the Overt-Act laid in
the Indictment , of Publishing the treasonable Writing , was Committed ;
which was a Declaration framed in the Hand-writing of the Prisoner , to
be Published immediately on the first Breaking out of the Conspiracy ,
to Excite the King's Subjects to take up Arms , and to enter into a
Rebellion against Him ; LAYER-1723-2,35.1419

and that it might have an Influence on the Army , where their Hopes were
placed , it took notice , that the King's General was Seized , and in
their Custody . LAYER-1723-2,35.1420

<P_36>

In this Declaration particular Rewards are promised to the House and
Foot in the Army ; LAYER-1723-2,36.1422

different Allowances are made , To every Horse-man and Serjeant Three
Guineas ; Two Guineas to every Corporal and One Guinea to every Common
Soldier : LAYER-1723-2,36.1423

All had Promises of Encouragement , Favour , and future Reward .
LAYER-1723-2,36.1424

Gentlemen , After this was read , the Prisoner put this Declaration up
into his Pocket again ; LAYER-1723-2,36.1425

and afterwards <paren> as he acquainted the Witness <$$paren> he himself
made an Alteration therein ; it containing at first a General Invitation
to a Revolt , but was not directed in the Name of any particular Person
; LAYER-1723-2,36.1426

therefore the Prisoner thought fit afterwards to alter it , <paren> as
he inform'd <font> Lynch <$$font> <$$paren> and to make it in the Name
of the Pretender , as King . LAYER-1723-2,36.1427

Gentlemen , Though their Hopes and Expectations were founded on
Corrupting and Debauching the Army ; I mention it only , as it was their
Expectation and Design , without any Imputation on the Honour or
Fidelity of the Gentlemen of the Army : LAYER-1723-2,36.1428

But Persons who undertake an Affair of this Nature , are always forward
to expect that their Designs will be successful . LAYER-1723-2,36.1429

This , Gentlemen , which I have mentioned to you , which will be more
fully and particularly given in Evidence to you , against the Prisoner
at the Bar , was Transacted and Committed in the County of Essex .
LAYER-1723-2,36.1430

My Lord , This will be Evidence of Most of the Overt-Acts alledged in
the Indictment in the County of <font> Essex ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,36.1431

but we shall Confirm this Evidence by the Confession of the Prisoner ,
prov'd by Two Witnesses , in whose Presence he acknowledged the several
Facts , which will be charged upon him in the County of <font> Essex ,
<$$font> by the Testimony of Mr. <font> Lynch ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,36.1432

and shall make Proof of other Overt-Acts in the County of <font>
Middlesex ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,36.1433

for it was impossible a Design so extensive should be confined to one or
two particular Places within the same County : LAYER-1723-2,36.1434

Their Consultations must be transferr'd from Place to Place , as
Opportunity offered , and as they thought most conducive to the Purpose
they were engaged in . LAYER-1723-2,36.1435

But the Facts I have last mentioned , were transacted , Gentlemen , in
your County . LAYER-1723-2,36.1436

After the Prisoner and Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> had settled these
Affairs at the <font> Green Man , <$$font> they went to the House of my
Lord <font> North <$$font> and <font> Gray <$$font> at <font> Epping :
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,36.1437

They staid there all Night , LAYER-1723-2,36.1438

and dined there the next Day ; LAYER-1723-2,36.1439

the Witness was introduced and presented to his Lordship by <font> Layer
, <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,36.1440

and was civilly received and entertain'd ; LAYER-1723-2,36.1441

and the Prisoner at the Bar , as he and <font> Lynch <$$font> returned
home , asked the Witness how he lik'd his Lordship ,
LAYER-1723-2,36.1442

and assur'd Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> for his Encouragement , that he
had greatly recommended him <paren> the Witness <$$paren> to his
Lordship . LAYER-1723-2,36.1443

The Prisoner and <font> Lynch <$$font> met , a second time at the Lord
<font> North <$$font> and <font> Gray@ @'s <$$font> House , where <font>
Lynch <$$font> declared he would withdraw himself , if Things were not
put in Execution ; to which <font> Layer <$$font> reply'd , They would
be sooner put in Execution than <font> Lynch <$$font> imagined .
LAYER-1723-2,36.1444

Gentlemen , You may perceive , by this Evidence , the Prisoner's
Explanation of the whole Scheme , and his Execution of it , so far as
was in his Power ; tho , blessed be God , these , or any farther
Attempts of this kind , have not hitherto prevailed .
LAYER-1723-2,36.1445

The Prisoner proceeds farther ; LAYER-1723-2,36.1446

and the next Witness who will be produc'd against him , is one who had
been a Serjeant in the Army , <font> Matthew Plunkett .
LAYER-1723-2,36.1447

Plunkett <$$font> had been formerly acquainted with the Prisoner , and
done him a piece of Service ; LAYER-1723-2,36.1448

he was made use of to rescue some Goods , when they were taken in
Execution at the House where <font> Layer , <$$font> lodged , which was
the beginning of their Acquaintance : LAYER-1723-2,36.1449

This , with , some other Recommendations from Persons engaged in this
Design , induced the Prisoner at the Bar to make Offers to him , as you
will hear from the Witness . LAYER-1723-2,36.1450

In <font> June <$$font> 1722 , another Person of the same Name , one
<font> James Plunkett , <$$font> was directed by Mr. <font> Layer
<$$font> to go to this Serjeant <font> Plunkett , <$$font> and desire
him to meet <font> Layer <$$font> at the <font> Italian <$$font>
Coffee-house in <font> Russel-Court . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,36.1451

The Witness could not at that time , LAYER-1723-2,36.1452

at least did not think it proper to go to the Place appointed ;
LAYER-1723-2,36.1453

but a Day or two after , Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> meets him in <font>
Lincoln's-Inn_Fields , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,36.1454

and takes him aside under a Gate-way near <font> Turn-stile :
LAYER-1723-2,36.1455

Layer <$$font> then told <font> Plunkett , <$$font> he would inform Him
of a Matter that would be of great Advantage and Benefit to him ;
LAYER-1723-2,36.1456

there <font> Layer <$$font> <P_37> let him into this Conspiracy ,
LAYER-1723-2,37.1457

and engaged the Witness in it , not only by assurance and promise of
Reward , but by actual Reward and Money given him ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1458

and to induce and to encourage <font> Plunkett <$$font> the more ,
<font> Layer <$$font> acquainted him , that there were several Persons
of great Estates , who were resolved to rescue themselves , and the
Nation from the Calamities and Slavery that they then endured ; and that
they intended to bring about a Revolution , and restore their King the
Pretender ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1459

<font> Plunkett <$$font> objected , that the Pretender was a Papist ;
LAYER-1723-2,37.1460

but the Prisoner reply'd , there was no difference between a Papist and
a Lutheran King , and therefore , that ought to make no Impression upon
<font> Plunkett , <$$font> to hinder him in joyning to bring in a Papist
. LAYER-1723-2,37.1461

The Prisoner enquired of <font> Plunkett , <$$font> whether he had not
an Acquaintance in the Army , with some Officers , and with the common
Soldiers ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1462

and then engaged <font> Plunkett <$$font> to levy what Persons he could
in their Service ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1463

and when the Witness told <font> Layer , <$$font> he knew twenty or
thirty Serjeants in the Army , proper Persons to be apply'd to , the
Prisoner gave <font> Plunkett <$$font> Directions to make Application to
them , and to have them enroll'd ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1464

and at that Meeting the Prisoner gave the Witness Money for his
Encouragement ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1465

and as they had several other Meetings after this , to provide and levy
Men , the Direction and Employment given by <font> Layer <$$font> to the
Witness , was , to take care to find out their Lodgings , and to make
Lists of the Men , of their Names , and Places of Abode , that they
might be ready upon Notice . LAYER-1723-2,37.1466

The Prisoner not only employ'd <font> Plunkett <$$font> to procure , and
inroll as many as he could get ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1467

but gave him Money for one particular Person , one <font> Child ,
<$$font> who had serv'd in the Army , and who was recommended to <font>
Layer <$$font> by <font> Plunkett , <$$font> as a Person that had been
disoblig'd , by having been turn'd out of the Service ;
LAYER-1723-2,37.1468

<font> Layer <$$font> himself gave <font> Plunkett <$$font> half a
Guinea , for to give to this Person , to engage him in this Conspiracy ,
which <font> Plunkett <$$font> accordingly paid <font> Child ;
LAYER-1723-2,37.1469

Layer <$$font> likewise ordered Money at other times to be given to
<font> Plunkett , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,37.1470

and at one time particularly acquainted him , that the Prisoner had left
a Guinea with one <font> Jefferies <$$font> a Non-juring Parson , to
give to him , who had given <font> Plunkett <$$font> but half a Guinea .
LAYER-1723-2,37.1471

The Prisoner at the Bar , to encourage <font> Plunkett , <$$font>
acquainted him with the Persons , whom <font> Layer <$$font> expected to
join in this Conspiracy ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1472

and ask'd the Witness his Opinion of several , LAYER-1723-2,37.1473

the Witness will tell you the Names of the Persons , and what Answers he
gave ; particularly , that <font> Layer <$$font> ask'd him , what he
thought of the Lord <font> North <$$font> and <font> Gray , <$$font> for
an Officer to be at their Head ? LAYER-1723-2,37.1474

The Witness answer'd , though he had never serv'd under him , he look'd
upon his Lordship as a great Man . LAYER-1723-2,37.1475

They had Meetings at several times , when <font> Layer <$$font> inform'd
him , that things were in a great Forwardness , tho' it was not yet a
time to put their Design in Execution ; but it went on so well , that it
could not miscarry ; that the Duke of <font> Ormond <$$font> was to come
with a single Ship , with some Officers ; and that the Design had been
discovered to the <font> French <$$font> Embassador , who had given
Intelligence thereof to his Majesty , or else the Affair had been done
before that time . LAYER-1723-2,37.1476

This <font> Plunkett <$$font> was employ'd , from time to time , to
prepare Lists of , and to collect and inrol fit Persons to go on with
this Design ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1477

and particularly , a Number of Serjeants , about twenty_Five , being
dismiss'd from the Army , the Prisoner engaged <font> Plunkett <$$font>
to go immediately to those Persons , and take care to secure them .
LAYER-1723-2,37.1478

Gentlemen , These trayterous Consults , and Transactions , were in
<font> July <$$font> and <font> August <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,37.1479

and the Witness will acquaint you more fully with the several
Particulars . LAYER-1723-2,37.1480

There was one Encouragement , which the Prisoner gave to this Witness ,
which he did not mention to the other ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1481

he told <font> Plunkett , <$$font> there would be an Army of <font>
Dutch <$$font> to come over in Aid of his Majesty , but the Witness
should see a Number of half-pay Officers , especially those of the Name
of <font> Fitzgerald , <$$font> on the Side of his King <paren> the
Pretender <$$paren> that they could not doubt of Success .
LAYER-1723-2,37.1482

Gentlemen , Under these Encouragements and Promises , and with these
Rewards , both these Persons , the two Witnesses , were engaged by the
Prisoner , to enter into , and go on with this Conspiracy :
LAYER-1723-2,37.1483

The Prisoner met them apart from time to time ; LAYER-1723-2,37.1484

they concerted , LAYER-1723-2,37.1485

and carried on such Measures , as they thought proper to execute this
Design , upon the foot of the Plan , which hath been mentioned , and
will be produced to you . LAYER-1723-2,37.1486

After we have produced the Scheme , and likewise examined these two
Witnesses , who will give you an Account of the Progress which the
Prisoner made in <P_38> this Treason ; we shall give you other plain and
evident Proof , which will demonstrate the treasonable Intent of the
Prisoner at the Bar , and his Hopes of Success . LAYER-1723-2,38.1487

We shall prove that the Prisoner hath been at <font> Rome , <$$font> and
by his own Confession , that he had seen the Pretender , and had
Conferences with him . LAYER-1723-2,38.1488

We shall prove , that the Prisoner had Blank Promissory Notes , or
Receipts for Money , signed with the Pretender's own Hand , by the
assumed Title of <font> James Rex , <$$font> found amongst <font>
Layer's <$$font> Papers , which were remitted to him from <font> Rome ,
<$$font> and which he has acknowledged were sent over to him , for the
raising of Money to carry on the Cause of the Pretender :
LAYER-1723-2,38.1489

This is a strong Evidence of the Trust and Credit reposed in him to
execute this Conspiracy ; that the Prisoner is a Person fully intrusted
; LAYER-1723-2,38.1490

the Receipts are in Blank , LAYER-1723-2,38.1491

and the Prisoner had Power to raise Money on them , and to fill them up
with such Sums , as he thought proper and necessary .
LAYER-1723-2,38.1492

Gentlemen , on the Examination of our Witnesses , it will appear , that
Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> declared , he had expended great Sums of
Money in this Affair , and that he has made it an Excuse , why he had
not Money to supply some Demands , because he had disburs'd so much .
LAYER-1723-2,38.1493

This therefore was to be his full Power to raise Money , towards
bringing the Pretender to the Throne . LAYER-1723-2,38.1494

Besides these Receipts , he had furnish'd himself with Lists of the
Officers of the Army , in order to know the Situation and Condition of
the Army , and to consider what Advantage he could make by any of those
in the Lists : LAYER-1723-2,38.1495

He had provided himself with Lists of the Officers of the Tower , which
, we apprehend , was to render the Design of seizing the Tower , when
their Friend the Officer was on the Guard , more probable and hopeful .
LAYER-1723-2,38.1496

Besides this , we have Letters which will be produced , that pass'd
between Sir <font> William Ellis , <$$font> an Adherent of the
Pretender's at <font> Rome , <$$font> and Mr. <font> Layer , <$$font>
by the Name of <font> Fountaine , <$$font> <paren> a Name he went by
<$$paren> encouraging him to go on with this Design :
LAYER-1723-2,38.1497

We have the Cypher , and the Explanation of the Cant Words used in those
Letters . LAYER-1723-2,38.1498

In one Letter <font> Ellis <$$font> says , the best Method of carrying
on the Manufactory , <paren> which is the Insurrection <$$paren> is to
get good Workmen , <paren> by which is meant Soldiers <$$paren> and
particularly to gain some of the ablest of Mrs. <font> Barbara Smith's
, <$$font> <paren> by Mrs. <font> Barbara Smith <$$font> is signified
the Army <$$paren> and this would be very agreeable to all concern'd ,
particularly to Mr. <font> Atkins <$$font> <paren> which by their
Cypher or Key is a Name for the Pretender . <$$paren>
LAYER-1723-2,38.1499

And in another Letter , there is particular mention of Mr. <font>
Layer's <$$font> intended General ; LAYER-1723-2,38.1500

you will find in the Letter an Explanation of him , thus ; that he , who
the Prisoner in his Letter called <font> Simons , <$$font> and described
as a Tenant , though his Name was not then found in the Rentall , this
Writer believ'd , he should be called <font> Simmes , <$$font> and says
, he is of the <font> North , <$$font> a grey_hair'd ancient Man , for
whom his Friend has a particular Esteem and Value , as a very good
Tenant . LAYER-1723-2,38.1501

This is the Description , LAYER-1723-2,38.1502

and this is the Cant that pass'd between them ; LAYER-1723-2,38.1503

the Explanation you will apprehend , by the Cyphers that were found
amongst the Prisoner's Papers . LAYER-1723-2,38.1504

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> was not wanting in other Preparations for
this Attempt ; LAYER-1723-2,38.1505

for he had provided Arms in his own House , more than he could have
Occasion for , as a private Subject ; LAYER-1723-2,38.1506

he had several Musquets , and other Fire-Arms ; LAYER-1723-2,38.1507

he had forty or fifty Cartridges loaded with Bullets , ready made up for
so many Discharges , which might be delivered out to the People who
should come in to them : LAYER-1723-2,38.1508

If he had any use for such a Quantity , he will shew upon what Occasion
. LAYER-1723-2,38.1509

The Discovery of the Facts made by the Witnesses , occasioned the
apprehending Mr. <font> Layer , <$$font> in whose House these Arms were
likewise seized . LAYER-1723-2,38.1510

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> was so conscious of his own Guilt , that
after he was apprehended , he made his Escape out of the Custody of the
Messenger , in whose House he was placed ; he offered a great Reward to
Watermen to carry him off : LAYER-1723-2,38.1511

This is a Demonstration of his Guilt , from the Conviction of his own
Conscience . LAYER-1723-2,38.1512

Gentlemen , there are some other Matters and Papers , which it will be
proper to offer to your Consideration ; LAYER-1723-2,38.1513

and most of these particular Facts , which I have mentioned , or the
most material of them , have been confirm'd by Mr. <font> Layer's
<$$font> own Confession , which he made , upon his Examination before
the Lords of the Privy Council . LAYER-1723-2,38.1514

And when we have laid before you this Evidence , as according to my
Instructions we shall very fully , I do@ @n't doubt , but that you will
do your Duty as honest Men . LAYER-1723-2,38.1515

<P_39>

We do@ @n't apply to your Zeal , as you are Protestants and Englishmen ;
LAYER-1723-2,39.1517

but , upon the Weight of the Evidence , we shall appeal to your Justice
, to your Oaths ; and to your Consciences ; whether upon the whole Proof
to be laid before you ; you will not remain fully satisfied , that the
Prisoner at the Bar is guilty of the High-Treason , whereof he stands
Indicted , and then that you do find him so . LAYER-1723-2,39.1518

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> May it please your Lordship and you
Gentlemen of the Jury , I am Counsel on the same Side for his Majesty
against the Prisoner at the Bar , who stands indicted , for High Treason
, in compassing and imagining the Death of the King .
LAYER-1723-2,39.1519

The Preservation of the Life of the King is of that great Importance to
the Safety and Prosperity of his Subjects , that even Imaginations and
Intentions <paren> which are but Acts of the Heart <$$paren> to take it
away , manifested by Overt Acts are an Offence of the highest Nature
which the Law takes notice of ; LAYER-1723-2,39.1520

but as Imaginations and Intentions of Men are secret , and ca@ @n't be
discovered but by their Actions , there must be Proof of some Fact done
in order to carry such Intentions into Execution , to make the Offenders
guilty of Treason : LAYER-1723-2,39.1521

Therefore in this Indictment five several Overt Acts are laid ;
LAYER-1723-2,39.1522

the first is , that the Prisoner at the Bar proposed consulted and
agreed with divers Persons unknown to the Grand-Jury , to raise an
Insurrection and Rebellion within this Kingdom against his Majesty ; the
second , that he published a traiterous Writing , purporting an
Exhortation , Encouragement , and Promise of Rewards , to perswade his
Majesty's faithful Subjects to take up Arms against him ; the third ,
that he proposed , consulted and agreed to set the Pretender on the
Throne by armed Force ; the fourth , that he listed Men to levy War
against the King , and the fifth , that he proposed , consulted and
agreed to seize and imprison his Majesty's sacred Person .
LAYER-1723-2,39.1523

Gentlemen of the Jury , you will readily agree with me , that nothing
can be more dreadful to a true <font> Briton <$$font> who hath any
regard to himself or his Posterity , or Love to his Country , than the
fatal Consequences that must have inevitably attended such wicked
Designs , had they been carryed into Execution with Success :
LAYER-1723-2,39.1524

Suppose a Rebellion had been only rais'd , LAYER-1723-2,39.1525

what could any Man have expected from a Rebellion in the Heart of the
Kingdom , but Plunder and Rapine , and Murder , a total Suspension of
all Civil Right , and as long as the Storm had continued , a just but
terrible Apprehension of something yet worse to come :
LAYER-1723-2,39.1526

This would certainly have been the Case , tho' the Attempt should have
been disappointed at last . LAYER-1723-2,39.1527

But had it been attended with Success , had his Majesty's sacred Person
been seized and imprison'd , and had the Pretender been placed on the
Throne , what a Scene of Misery had open'd ! LAYER-1723-2,39.1528

A mild Administration govern'd by the Law of the Land under an excellent
Prince , and as just and merciful as ever wore the Crown , must have
given way to Arbitrary Power ; LAYER-1723-2,39.1529

all your Estates and Properties must have been at the Will of a provoked
and exasperated Usurper , LAYER-1723-2,39.1530

Liberty must have given Way to Slavery , and the best of Religions to
Popish Idolatry and Superstition , and this humanely speaking without
any Prospect or Hopes of Relief ; LAYER-1723-2,39.1531

nor would these dreadful Calamities have been confin'd within the Bounds
of the King's Dominions , LAYER-1723-2,39.1532

for should the present happy Establishment in his Majesty and his Royal
Family <paren> the chief Bulwark and Support of the Protestant Interest
<$$paren> be destroyed , the Protestant Religion in general must be
reduced to the lowest Ebb , if not totally extinguished .
LAYER-1723-2,39.1533

This is the Nature of the Crime , and these some of the fatal
Consequences that must have ensued , if the Designs charged upon the
Prisoner by the Indictment had took Effect . LAYER-1723-2,39.1534

But whether he is guilty of this great Offence , is what you Gentlemen
of the Jury are now to try . LAYER-1723-2,39.1535

My Lord , 't@ @is my part to open the Nature of the Evidence that we
shall produce to prove the several Overt Acts laid in the Indictment ,
LAYER-1723-2,39.1536

and in stating it to your Lordship and the Jury , I shall follow the
course of Time in which the Facts were done , that the Case may be more
easily apprehended , LAYER-1723-2,39.1537

and shall open nothing but what I believe will be clearly verifyed by
Proof . LAYER-1723-2,39.1538

This Prisoner at the Bar , tho' brought up to the Profession of the Law
, and a Practiser in it , went beyond Sea in the Year 1720 ,
LAYER-1723-2,39.1539

and at the Close of that Year according to our Stile , or the beginning
of the Year 1721 . arrived at <font> Rome , <$$font> where the
Pretender then was ; LAYER-1723-2,39.1540

while the Prisoner was there , he procured himself to be introduced to
the Pretender , LAYER-1723-2,39.1541

and had two private Conferences with him , in which <paren> but by what
Methods or Representations is best known to himself <$$paren> 't@ @is
plain he obtained the Pretender's good Opinion so far , that he thought
him a fit Person in whom a Confidence for carrying on any Designs
against his Majesty , and for setting <P_40> himself on the Throne ,
might be safely repos'd : LAYER-1723-2,40.1542

For this purpose a Correspondence was then settled between the Prisoner
and some Persons of Distinction about the Pretender ,
LAYER-1723-2,40.1543

and a Cypher of Names of Persons and Things was agreed on , in order to
carry this Correspondence on . LAYER-1723-2,40.1544

The Prisoner return'd to <font> England <$$font> about <font> July
<$$font> 1721 , after which he writ Letters to his Correspondent at
<font> Rome <$$font> , and Answers to them came from thence , whereby it
will appear , that the Prisoner had undertook a considerable Part in the
Design then carrying on to bring the Pretender in , LAYER-1723-2,40.1545

and altho' these Letters are in obscure and cant Terms and fictitious
Names , yet by the Help of the Cypher and from the Nature of the Letters
themselves , it will easily appear to a common Understanding for what
purpose they were writ : LAYER-1723-2,40.1546

This Cypher and Letters we shall prove to have been found among the
Prisoner's Papers , which were seiz'd soon after his Commitment ,
LAYER-1723-2,40.1547

and your Lordship and the Jury will see when they come to be read , that
notwithstanding the obscure Terms , and the mysterious Expressions
inserted to dazzle the Eye of the Reader , when compar'd with the Cypher
they will be so intelligible , that they will be a plain Evidence that a
Design was carrying on of raising a general Rebellion in favour of the
Pretender ; for which purpose a Scheme in Writing was prepared , which
we shall lay before your Lordship and the Gentlemen of the Jury , that
was likewise found among the Prisoner's Papers ; LAYER-1723-2,40.1548

and we shall prove it to be writ with his own Hand .
LAYER-1723-2,40.1549

Mr. <font> Serjeant Pengelly <$$font> opened the Nature of this Scheme
very fully , LAYER-1723-2,40.1550

I shall not trouble your Lordships with a Repetition of what he said ;
LAYER-1723-2,40.1551

when it comes to be read it will appear to be calculated for a general
Rising , LAYER-1723-2,40.1552

it will prove a form'd Design to seize the Tower , to seize Persons in
great Stations , to seize the Bank and then at last to seize the Person
of the King himself , and to seize his Royal Highness the Prince of
<font> Wales . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,40.1553

This we apprehend will be a strong Evidence of the Overt Acts laid in
the Indictment , LAYER-1723-2,40.1554

and will confirm the Testimonies of the Witnesses which we shall produce
. LAYER-1723-2,40.1555

There are two Witnesses we shall call to prove the Overt Acts laid in
the Indictment , LAYER-1723-2,40.1556

they have already been mentioned to your Lordship Mr. <font> Stephen
Lynch , <$$font> and Serjeant <font> Matthew Plunkett . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,40.1557

Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> will prove the several Overt <font> Acts
<$$font> laid in the Indictment , to have been committed by the Prisoner
in the County <font> of Essex , <$$font> where this Indictment was found
, as also Overt Acts of the same Nature committed by him in the County
of <font> Middlesex . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,40.1558

But as 't@ @is improper to fall directly upon the Proof of those Facts ,
without first proving some other Facts by way of Introduction , as how
the Acquaintance between Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> and the Prisoner at
the Bar began , and how they came to be so intimate as to enter into a
Design of this Nature , Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> will give your
Lordships and the Jury an Account , that there had been an Acquaintance
between this Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> and one Dr. <font> Murphey
<$$font> eight or nine Years ago , that they had agreed to join in the
Rebellion which was in the beginning of his Majesty's Reign ; after that
was over Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> went beyond Sea , and continued
there some time , and arrived in <font> England <$$font> in <font> April
<$$font> last , that their Acquaintance continued , and their Principles
were not altered ; LAYER-1723-2,40.1559

Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> meeting Dr. <font> Murphey , <$$font> Dr.
<font> Murphey <$$font> <paren> who hath been mentioned to your
Lordships on a late Occasion in this Court , and is not now to be found
, but had a great Acquaintance with the Prisoner at the Bar <$$paren>
told him he had something advantageous to communicate to him ,
LAYER-1723-2,40.1560

and appointed a Meeting next Morning at a Coffeehouse in <font> Cornhil
, <$$font> where they accordingly <font> met <$$font> and <font> Murphey
<$$font> then advised him not to go out of <font> England , <$$font>
because he had an Opportunity of making his Fortune , telling him there
would be a general Rising in Favour of the Pretender <paren> whom he
call'd King <$$paren> and that it was carry'd on by Gentlemen of Note
and Credit ; and if he would accept of the Service , he would recommend
him to one greatly concerned in that Affair ; LAYER-1723-2,40.1561

Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> after Consideration agreed to stay
LAYER-1723-2,40.1562

After several other Meetings between this Dr. <font> Murphey <$$font>
and Mr. <font> Lynch , <$$font> at which their Discourse generally
turned upon this intended Rising ; about the beginning of <font> June ,
<$$font> Dr. <font> Murphey <$$font> introduced Mr. <font> Lynch
<$$font> to the Prisoner as a Person fit to be entrusted in the intended
Enterprize ; LAYER-1723-2,40.1563

they went to the <font> Griffin <$$font> Tavern in <font> Holbourn ;
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,40.1564

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> there expressed the good Opinion he had of
Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> upon the Character he had received of him
from so good a Friend as this Dr. <font> Murphey . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,40.1565

They soon enter'd upon Business , LAYER-1723-2,40.1566

and the Prisoner after having made a Representation of the Uneasiness of
the Nation in general , and of the fair Opportunity there was to bring
about a Revolution , propos'd to Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> to seize
some General , to which the Witness agreed . LAYER-1723-2,40.1567

After this they had several <P_41> other Meetings , at which their
Discourse turn'd upon the same Subject of a general Rising in order to
set the Pretender on the Throne , LAYER-1723-2,41.1568

and at one of them the Prisoner declared he intended <font> Lynch
<$$font> should seize the Earl of <font> Cadogan , <$$font> and that the
Scheme was laid on a sound Foundation , having a great Man at the Head
of Affairs , who wanted neither Wit , Courage nor Resolution , and who
would be back'd by his Friends . LAYER-1723-2,41.1569

Several other Propositions were made by the Prisoner tending to the same
End ; to all which Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> agreed ,
LAYER-1723-2,41.1570

and they consulted how they might put those things in Execution .
LAYER-1723-2,41.1571

In <font> July <$$font> last Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> went into the
Countrey for fourteen or fifteen Days , LAYER-1723-2,41.1572

and after his Return in the beginning of <font> August , <$$font> in
Pursuance of what they had conceited , Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> and he
went to view the Earl of <font> Cadogan@ @'s <$$font> House , to see how
practicable that Design of seizing him at his House was .
LAYER-1723-2,41.1573

Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> thought it feasible , LAYER-1723-2,41.1574

but he grew uneasy at Delays , LAYER-1723-2,41.1575

and frequently told the Prisoner that his Circumstances would not permit
him to continue here at his own Expence ; LAYER-1723-2,41.1576

therefore to encourage him to stay , and persevere in the Design , Mr.
<font> Layer <$$font> gave him several Sums of Money .
LAYER-1723-2,41.1577

My Lord , Upon the 24th of <font> August <$$font> last , the Prisoner
and Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> agreed to ride out the next day to take
the Air ; LAYER-1723-2,41.1578

on the 25th according to Appointment <paren> which brings us now to the
Overt Acts in the County of <font> Essex <$$font> <$$paren> they rid out
together ; LAYER-1723-2,41.1579

the Prisoner thought it proper to ride with Arms , alledging that he had
things about him he would not lose for any thing in the World .
LAYER-1723-2,41.1580

Upon the Road he told Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> they would go to Lord
<font> North <$$font> and Grey's , with who the Prisoner had the Honour
to be well acquainted , and he would present <font> Lynch <$$font> to my
Lord as his particular Acquaintance . LAYER-1723-2,41.1581

It happened to be too late to get to Lord <font> North <$$font> and
<font> Grey's <$$font> by Dinner , whereupon they put in at the <font>
Gentel-Man <$$font> near <font> Epping-Forrest , <$$font> which ,
Gentlemen , is at <font> Layton-stone <$$font> in your county .
LAYER-1723-2,41.1582

Dinner not being ready at their coming thither , they entered
{TEXT:entred} into Conversation on the former Topicks ,
LAYER-1723-2,41.1583

and Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> desiring to give him some insight into
the Scheme that was formed , the whole subject matter of their former
Consultaions and Discourses were repeated about seizing Lord <font>
Cadogan , <$$font> seizing the Ministers of State , of getting part of
the Army to declare for them , and for seizing the King's Person ;
LAYER-1723-2,41.1584

and these things were then agreed to by them . LAYER-1723-2,41.1585

At this Place it was , that the Prisoner pulled out of his Pocket , and
shew'd to Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> the traiterous Writing laid in the
Indictment , which was a Declaration to encourage a general Rising ,
writ as the Witness believes in the Prisoner's own Hand ; and that Part
which contained the Promises of Rewards to be given to the Soldiers and
other Persons to encourage them to come into their Deigns was read by
the Witness , after which Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> took his Paper away
, and put it up in his Pocket again . LAYER-1723-2,41.1586

My Lord , when they had dined , they went on to Lord <font> North
<$$font> and <font> Grey's <$$font> House <paren> whom your Lordship
will hear mentioned by the Evidence as the Person thought on to be
General in this Undertaking ; <$$paren> LAYER-1723-2,41.1587

they staid there that Night , LAYER-1723-2,41.1588

and dined there next Day , LAYER-1723-2,41.1589

and afterwards they had a second Meeting at Lord <font> North <$$font>
and <font> Grey's . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,41.1590

Your Lordship , and the Jury will be pleased to observe , that this
Evidence will be a full and positive Proof by this Witness , that the
Overt Acts of publishing this traiterous Writing , encouraging Persons
to take up Arms against his Majesty , of the Consultations and Agreement
to levy War , to set the Pretender on the Throne , and to seize his
Majesty's Person , were done at the <font> Green-Man <$$font> in the
County of <font> Essex : <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,41.1591

And this will likewise be an Evidence , that all the Overt Acts laid in
the Indictment <paren> except publishing the traiterous Writing
<$$paren> were done in the County <font> of Middlesex . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,41.1592

My Lord , The next Witness we shall produce is <font> Matthew Plunkett ,
<$$font> formerly a Serjeant in some Regiment ; LAYER-1723-2,41.1593

he had been formerly acquainted with , and had been serviceable to the
Prisoner , LAYER-1723-2,41.1594

and was very well acquainted with one <font> James Plunkett , <$$font>
which <font> James Plunkett <$$font> was a great Acquaintance of the
Prisoner's . LAYER-1723-2,41.1595

This <font> James Plunkett <$$font> desired the Witness <font> Matthew
Plunkett <$$font> to meet the Prisoner in <font> July <$$font> last , at
the <font> Italian <$$font> Coffee-house in <font> Russel-Court ,
<$$font> which the Witness could not comply with ; LAYER-1723-2,41.1596

but the Witness met the Prisoner the <font> Sunday <$$font> following in
<font> Lincoln's-Inn-Fields , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,41.1597

they were together near an Hour , LAYER-1723-2,41.1598

the Prisoner gave him an Account of the intended general Rising ,
LAYER-1723-2,41.1599

and ask'd the Witness if he knew any old Serjeants or Soldiers who could
discipline a Mob , LAYER-1723-2,41.1600

agreed with him to procure such , LAYER-1723-2,41.1601

mentioned to him several Persons fit to be at the head of this
Enter-prize ; LAYER-1723-2,41.1602

and in order to make him diligent , he gave him at that time half a
Crown : LAYER-1723-2,41.1603

And Money was not only given him at that time , LAYER-1723-2,41.1604

but a Promise was <P_42> made to him of further Rewards .
LAYER-1723-2,42.1605

The Prisoner having occasion to go into the Country , one <font>
Jeffreys <$$font> a Non-juring Clergyman was sent to <font> Matthew
Plunkett <$$font> by <font> Layer <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,42.1606

<paren> and this Fact that I am going to open must not be barely
considered as an Act between <font> Jeffreys <$$font> and <font>
Plunkett , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,42.1607

but it will be brought directly home to the act of <font> Layer <$$font>
himself . <$$paren> LAYER-1723-2,42.1608

<font> Jeffreys <$$font> told <font> Plunkett <$$font> he came from the
Prisoner , and that he was employ'd by him to go to such as the Witness
was , who were old Serjeants , to get a Number of them together to
discipline the Mob , in order to the general Rising :
LAYER-1723-2,42.1609

The next Day they met again , LAYER-1723-2,42.1610

and had the like Discourse , LAYER-1723-2,42.1611

and <font> Jeffreys <$$font> gave <font> Matthew Plunkett <$$font> half
a Guinea ; LAYER-1723-2,42.1612

and what brings this home to the Prisoner is , that he told <font>
Plunkett <$$font> he had left a Guinea with the Non-jouring Parson to
give him , and talk'd with him on the same Subject that <font> Jeffreys
<$$font> had discours'd the Witness before . LAYER-1723-2,42.1613

But in fact <font> Jeffreys <$$font> did not give <font> Plunkett
<$$font> the Guinea , LAYER-1723-2,42.1614

he gave him but half a Guinea . LAYER-1723-2,42.1615

My Lord , After Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> went out of Town <font>
Plunkett <$$font> gave him an Account what Progress he had made in the
Affair . LAYER-1723-2,42.1616

<font> Plunkett <$$font> told him that he had got several old Soldiers
that would bear a part in this Business : LAYER-1723-2,42.1617

The Prisoner said he must take care to keep a List of their Names , and
the Places where they lived , that they might be in a Readiness when
they should have Occasion for them . LAYER-1723-2,42.1618

And on <font> Sunday <$$font> before the Prisoner was taken up , he told
this <font> Plunkett , <$$font> that a great many of his Countrymen were
turn'd out of the Guards , LAYER-1723-2,42.1619

and ask'd him if he knew where they lodg'd ; LAYER-1723-2,42.1620

and upon the Witness's Answer that he did not , the Prisoner directed
him to take a List of their Names and Places where they lodg'd , that he
might have them when Occasion required . So that here is Mr. <font>
Lynch <$$font> a positive Witness as to the Overt Acts in <font> Essex ,
<$$font> Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> and Mr. <font> Plunkett <$$font>
positive as to the Overt Act in <font> Middlesex , <$$font> and their
Testimony confirm'd by the Scheme under the Prisoner's own Hand , and
other Papers which we shall produce found among his Papers , which will
leave no room to doubt of the truth of their Evidence .
LAYER-1723-2,42.1621

Besides , my Lord , the Prisoner being seized in <font> September
<$$font> last , we shall give an Account when he was in Custody of a
Messenger lock'd up in a Room two pair of Stairs high , he made a shift
to make his Escape , got to the Water-side , and got a Sculler to carry
him over the River ; LAYER-1723-2,42.1622

he actually got over the River , LAYER-1723-2,42.1623

but he was retaken again in St. <font> George's-Fields , <$$font> and
brought back to the Messenger , LAYER-1723-2,42.1624

and offer'd very considerable Sums to the Persons who retook him to let
him go . LAYER-1723-2,42.1625

I believe it is hardly to be imagin'd , a Person perfectly Innocent
would venture to get out of a Room two Story high , and in the manner he
did , and offer to give such a Reward to the Persons who retook him to
let him get off ; LAYER-1723-2,42.1626

he must be conscious to himself that he was in very great Danger .
LAYER-1723-2,42.1627

There were likewise found in his House Arms more than necessary for his
Use , and which he has confess'd were to be used if there had been a
Rising . LAYER-1723-2,42.1628

My Lord , To corroborate the Testimony of the Witnesses , we shall lay
before your Lordship and the Gentlemen of the Jury , the several Papers
which were found , I may say , in Mr. <font> Layer's <$$font> Custody ;
LAYER-1723-2,42.1629

I do@ @n't say they were actually taken in his Custody ,
LAYER-1723-2,42.1630

but it will come to the same thing , LAYER-1723-2,42.1631

for he had delivered them in two Parcels to Mrs. <font> Mason <$$font>
the Witness , whom we shall produce , with Directions that She should
take particular Care of them , LAYER-1723-2,42.1632

and they were seized in her Custody not long after the Prisoner was
committed to the Custody of a messenger ; LAYER-1723-2,42.1633

She saw every one of them mark'd by the Persons who seiz'd them ,
LAYER-1723-2,42.1634

and mark'd them herself : LAYER-1723-2,42.1635

There are not only the Scheme and the Cyphers and Letters mentioned
before , but also ten promissory Notes subscribed by the Pretender ;
LAYER-1723-2,42.1636

these promissory Notes run , <font> Acknowledge to have receiv'd from
the Sum of which Sum I promise to repay with an Interest for it at the
Rate of per_Ann. <$$font> James <font> R. <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,42.1637

Can any Man imagine , if there was nothing else to explain them , that
these Notes were there for nothing ? LAYER-1723-2,42.1638

Every Body must believe that they were intended to be made use of to
carry on the Conspiracy ; LAYER-1723-2,42.1639

but we shall shew by the Prisoner's own Confession , that they were sent
over to him by Sir <font> William Ellis , <$$font> in order to be made
use of as occasion should serve , to promote these Designs in favour of
the Pretender . LAYER-1723-2,42.1640

Among these Papers several Lists were found , which will be produced ,
some of which contain the Number of the Officers and of the Soldiers in
the Guards , some the Names of other Officers and Soldiers , and some
the Number of the Officers belonging to the Tower .
LAYER-1723-2,42.1641

It must be owned , that in some of those <P_43> Lists , there are the
Names of several Persons of as great Honour , Loyalty and fidelity to
his Majesty , as any Subjects his Majesty hath ; LAYER-1723-2,43.1642

yet the procuring these Lists , could he for nothing but to get an
Information of the Number and Character of the Persons in his Majesty's
Service , to know the Strength of his Majesty's forces , that
intelligence might be given and Schemes framed accordingly , and that
there might be tampering with such as there Could be any Hopes of
bringing over into the Pretender's Interest : LAYER-1723-2,43.1643

If the Prisoner can put any other Construction upon his having these
Lists in his Custody , he will have an opportunity to do it .
LAYER-1723-2,43.1644

These things being proved , I apprehend there remains no doubt but that
the Prisoner will appear to be guilty of the Crime charged on him in
this Indictment : LAYER-1723-2,43.1645

But besides all this we shall prove his Confession by two Witnesses ,
Whereby he has confess'd every Overt Act laid in this Indictment , the
several Transactions that Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> and <font> Plunkett
<$$font> will give account of , and almost all the Facts that I have
mention'd before . LAYER-1723-2,43.1646

I shall conclude with this , Gentlemen of the Jury , that if we make out
these Facts as they have been opened , and according to my instructions
I have no reason to make the least Question of it , it must be left to
your Consideration whether the Prisoner at the Bar is guilty of the
Offence for which he stands Indicted or not : LAYER-1723-2,43.1647

If you shall be satisfyed by the Evidence that he is , I do not doubt
but you will do Justice , <paren> which is all that is desired of you
<$$paren> and find a Verdict for the King . LAYER-1723-2,43.1648

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> If your Lordship pleases , we will now
proceed to examine Witnesses , LAYER-1723-2,43.1649

and we desire that room may be made for the Witnesses to come into Court
. LAYER-1723-2,43.1650

Call Mr. <font> Stephen Lynch . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,43.1651

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> You must make way there .
LAYER-1723-2,43.1652

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , I humbly desire before this
Witness be sworn , that he may be examin'd upon a <font> Voyer_dire ,
<$$font> whether he hath not a Promise of Pardon , or some other Reward
for swearing against me . LAYER-1723-2,43.1653

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> Sir , you ca@ @n't ask him that Question .
LAYER-1723-2,43.1654

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I hope we shall beat Liberty , and
have a Right to enter into an Examination of this Matter .
LAYER-1723-2,43.1655

If a Man is represented to be in the same Circumstances with the
Prisoner , and the Prisoner led into the same Circumstances by the
Person proposed as a Witness , and afterwards by him involv'd in the
same Offence ; if the Person therefore proposed as a Witness , hath a
Promise of Pardon or some Reward , upon Condition that he would swear
against the Prisoner , he can@ @not by Law be a good Witness ;
LAYER-1723-2,43.1656

the Person propos'd as a Witness , must be a credible Witness ,
LAYER-1723-2,43.1657

must be a legal Witness ; LAYER-1723-2,43.1658

must be not convicted of Perjury or any other notorious Offence , a free
Witness that is not under restraint for the Offence he accuses another
of ; LAYER-1723-2,43.1659

and therefore we hope we have a Right of asking whether he acts under
the Influence of any Promise of Reward , or the Promise of a Pardon :
LAYER-1723-2,43.1660

And the Right we have of examining him to the Promise of a Reward or
Pardon , is supported by the Authority of my Lord_Chief_Justice <font>
Hale , <$$font> as reported by <font> Kelynge . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,43.1661

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> My Lord , I wou'd not take up your
Lordship's time , and submit the Weight of what Mr. <font> Hungerford
<$$font> has offered to your Consideration , LAYER-1723-2,43.1662

but we found our Right of asking this Question upon my
Lord_Chief_Justice <font> Hale@ @'s <$$font> express Declaration , set
forth at large in <font> Kelynge's <$$font> Reports <font> fol.
<$$font> 18 , which I have here in my Hand . LAYER-1723-2,43.1663

I must likewise beg Leave to observe to your Lordship , that this
Question was formerly ask'd in the Tryal of <font> Gordon <$$font> and
<font> Dorrell <$$font> to one <font> Adams , <$$font> that had been in
the same Conspiracy with those that were brought to Tryal for
High-Treason , and was then produced as a Witness against them ;
LAYER-1723-2,43.1664

the Book was then brought into Court , and the Quotation read before
your Lordship , LAYER-1723-2,43.1665

and according to my Notes of that Tryal , which I have here brought with
me for my Justification , <paren> I submit to your Lordship's Correction
if I do@ @n't state it right <$$paren> <font> Adams <$$font> was ask'd
that Question , tho' it was long objected to by the King's Counsel .
LAYER-1723-2,43.1666

The Distinction my Lord_Chief_Justice <font> Hale <$$font> made was this
. LAYER-1723-2,43.1667

Mr. <font> Jus. Eyre . <$$font> Read the whole Paragraph .
LAYER-1723-2,43.1668

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I will , my Lord .
LAYER-1723-2,43.1669

The Words are these : LAYER-1723-2,43.1670

" It was resolved that Some of those Persons equally culpable with the
<font> rest , <$$font> may be made use of as Witness against their
Fellows , and they are lawful Accusers or Wineries within the Statute I
<font> Ed. <$$font> VI. 12 . 5 <font> & <$$font> 6 <font> Ed.
<$$font> VI. <font> c. <$$font> II. <font> & <$$font> I <font> Ma.
<$$font> I . LAYER-1723-2,43.1671

and accordingly at the Tryal of these Men , some of them who were
Parties in the Treason were made use of against the rest :
LAYER-1723-2,43.1672

For lawful Witnesses within those Statutes are such as the Law alloweth
, LAYER-1723-2,43.1673

and the Law alloweth every one to be a Witness , <P_44> who is not
convicted or made infamous for some Crime ; LAYER-1723-2,44.1674

and if it were not so all Treasons would be safe , LAYER-1723-2,44.1675

and it would be impossible for one who conspires with never so many
Persons to make a Discovery to any purpose . " LAYER-1723-2,44.1676

I was aware of what was here laid down , LAYER-1723-2,44.1677

and therefore did submit Mr. <font> Hungerford's <$$font> Reason to
your Lordship's Consideration , LAYER-1723-2,44.1678

and did not insist farther upon it ; LAYER-1723-2,44.1679

the subsequent Words are these , LAYER-1723-2,44.1680

" But the Lord Chief Baron <font> Hale <$$font> said , That if one of
these culpable Persons be promised his Pardon , on Condition to give
Evidence against the rest , that disableth him to be a Witness against
the others , because he is bribed by saving his Life to be a Witness :
So that he takes a Difference where the Promise of Pardon is to him for
disclosing the Treason , and where it is for giving of Evidence .
LAYER-1723-2,44.1681

But some of the other Judges did not think , the Promise of Pardon , if
he gave Evidence , did disable him . LAYER-1723-2,44.1682

But they all advised that no such Promise should be made , or any
Threatnings used to them in case they did not give full Evidence . " So
that , my Lord , we have not only the Authority of that Book with us ,
but a solemn Precedent in this Court in point established upon a long
Debate , and grounded on that very Authority . LAYER-1723-2,44.1683

And when I moved this Matter at the Trial of <font> Dorrell , Gordon
<$$font> and <font> Kerr , <$$font> I then cited another instance where
it had been allowed by the Court , LAYER-1723-2,44.1684

and that was before Mr. Justice <font> Powell at Worcester <$$font>
Assizes , upon the Tryal of <font> Palmer <$$font> and <font> Symonds
<$$font> for the Murder of Mrs. <font> Palmer : <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,44.1685

There ; a third Person concerned in the Fact came in as a Witness
against the other two , LAYER-1723-2,44.1686

and after it had been argued by Counsel , and that learned Judge had
read upon the Bench , and considered this Authority , the Witness was at
last ask'd this Question upon a <font> Voyer_dire : <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,44.1687

And for the Truth of this Case as I reported it , I appeal'd to my Lord
<font> Lechmere , <$$font> then Attorney_General , and who had been one
of the Counsel at <font> Palmer's <$$font> Tryal . LAYER-1723-2,44.1688

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> My Lord , We hope if there is
any room for this Pretence which is insinuated , it only goes as to his
Credit , and does not disable him from being a Witness ,
LAYER-1723-2,44.1689

the Authorities produced are no more : LAYER-1723-2,44.1690

The Judges directed that no such Promise should be made ,
LAYER-1723-2,44.1691

but if such a Promise was made , they agreed it doth not disable him
from being a Witness , as was mentioned by my Lord Chief Baron <font>
Hale ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,44.1692

it is not like Money given , which is an actual Corruption ;
LAYER-1723-2,44.1693

the Promise of Pardon is a thing voluntary in it self :
LAYER-1723-2,44.1694

Who is the Promise to be made by ? LAYER-1723-2,44.1695

Is it in the Power of any Person but his Majesty to perform it ?
LAYER-1723-2,44.1696

If there is any thing in the Supposition , it is not proper to ask in
relation to it upon a <font> Voyer_dire <$$font> to prevent the Witness
from being sworn to give Evidence ; LAYER-1723-2,44.1697

but when he hath been sworn , if they think fit to ask the Question , he
may . LAYER-1723-2,44.1698

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> The asking the Witness this Question ,
as 't@ @is irregular , so if it was answered in the affirmative , wou'd
be of no Service to the Prisoner ; LAYER-1723-2,44.1699

for with Submission , it will not disable Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font>
from being a Witness . LAYER-1723-2,44.1700

Every Man is bound in Justice to give Evidence if required ,
LAYER-1723-2,44.1701

and a Promise to have a Pardon if he gives Evidence against the Prisoner
can be look'd on only to induce him to do that which by Law he ought to
do according to the Truth : LAYER-1723-2,44.1702

It does not import that he was to give a wrong or a false Evidence ,
LAYER-1723-2,44.1703

such a Question he can@ @not be oblig'd to answer .
LAYER-1723-2,44.1704

And the greatest Use the Prisoner could make of this , if such a Promise
was made to the Witness <paren> which is not admitted <$$paren> wou'd be
only against the Credit of the Witness , but not entirely take off his
Testimony ; LAYER-1723-2,44.1705

his Credit , as well as the Credit of all Witnesses , must be left to
the Consideration of the Jury . LAYER-1723-2,44.1706

As to the Opinion of my Lord Chief Baron <font> Hale <$$font> cited out
of <font> Kelynge , <$$font> the other Judges differ'd with him ,
LAYER-1723-2,44.1707

and therefore we hope Mr. <font> Lynch <$$font> shall be sworn .
LAYER-1723-2,44.1708

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> We who are Counsel for the King do@
@n't oppose the asking of this Question , out of any apprehension that
the Answer would come out against us , but for fear of overturning a
Point that hath been long settled . LAYER-1723-2,44.1709

As to the Book , which these Gentlemen cite to support their Objection ,
with Submission it is rather an Authority to over-rule it .
LAYER-1723-2,44.1710

The Opinion they found themselves upon is , that of my Lord Chief Baron
<font> Hale , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,44.1711

but the rest of the Judges were of Opinion against him ; so that we
apprehend the Authority is with us , and likewise the Reason of the
thing . LAYER-1723-2,44.1712

I take it that no Question is to be ask'd a Man upon a <font> Voyer_dire
, <$$font> but to a Fact that would take off his Testimony .
LAYER-1723-2,44.1713

Suppose then for Argument sake , that there was a Promise of Pardon made
to a Man upon Condition that he should give Evidence ;
LAYER-1723-2,44.1714

I apprehend that would not disable him from being a Witness , any more
than if the Condition had been that he should declare <P_45> the Truth ,
which it was his Duty to have done , although no such Promise had been
made : LAYER-1723-2,45.1715

And , surely the Promise of a Pardon upon a Condition to do that which
was his Duty before , wo@ @n't take off his Testimony .
LAYER-1723-2,45.1716

If they would ask the Witness whether he has accepted a Promise of a
Pardon upon Condition to give false Testimony , that is a Question , to
which with great Submission he is not bound to answer , because that
would be to examine him to accuse himself of a thing which is unlawful .
LAYER-1723-2,45.1717

For these Reasons , as well as upon account of the Authority they
produce , we apprehend there is no Force in the Objection .
LAYER-1723-2,45.1718

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> My Lord , I know not whether it
would not be laying too great a Weight upon the Objection , for so many
of the King's Counsel to answer to it , LAYER-1723-2,45.1719

for my part I think it would . LAYER-1723-2,45.1720

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I urge it thus far :
LAYER-1723-2,45.1721

Whatsoever Person is produc'd in a Court of Justice for a Witness , he
must appear to be utterly unconcern'd in point of Interest in the
Consequence of the Tryal . LAYER-1723-2,45.1722

If a Man produc'd as an Evidence to prove the Debt upon the Defendant ,
shall , upon being examined upon a <font> Voyer_dire , <$$font> disclose
that he is to have a part of the Money to be recovered , is not such
Person disabled from being a Witness at all ? LAYER-1723-2,45.1723

And is not a Promise of Pardon to the Witness , in case he convicts the
Criminal , a greater Byass than the Witness's having part of the Money
recovered ? LAYER-1723-2,45.1724

In a Civil Cause the Question is not whether the Witness be tempted to
swear a Truth or Selfhood , but whether the Witness doth not appear to
be so far concerned in Interest , that he ought not to be examined at
all . LAYER-1723-2,45.1725

And therefore I humbly insist that we ought to have an Account whether
the Witness <font> Lynch <$$font> hath the Promise of a Pardon , or any
Reward for that which he is to do here , <font> viz. <$$font> for the
Evidence he is to give against the Prisoner . LAYER-1723-2,45.1726

As to the Consequence of such an Enquiry , it is indifferent to me
whether it will disable him from being a Witness absolutely , or go to
his Credit only : LAYER-1723-2,45.1727

For if it should come out that he hath such a Promise , we suppose no
Jury or Man living will believe him , LAYER-1723-2,45.1728

and that is much the same as if he were not produc'd , though it seems
more agreeable to the practice in Civil Cases , that he should not be
admitted as a Witness at all . LAYER-1723-2,45.1729

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Mr. Sollicitor mistakes the Words of
the Book as I read them , LAYER-1723-2,45.1730

he is pleased to understand them as if all the rest of the Judges
differed in Opinion from my Lord Chief Baron <font> Hale ; <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,45.1731

but the Book does not say so , LAYER-1723-2,45.1732

't@ @is only that some of the other Judges were of Opinion that it did
not disable him , but all agreed that it went to his Credit ,
LAYER-1723-2,45.1733

and that was all I read in the Book ; LAYER-1723-2,45.1734

and I would not have offered it otherwise than as it was truly there ,
upon any Consideration whatsoever ; LAYER-1723-2,45.1735

but whether this Question be ask'd at first or last , so as we have an
Answer to it , I am contented . LAYER-1723-2,45.1736

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> You see the most you can make of it is ,
that it is an Objection to his Credit ; LAYER-1723-2,45.1737

and if it goes to his Credit , must he not be sworn , and his Credit
left to the Jury ? LAYER-1723-2,45.1738

He must be examin'd as a legal Witness ; LAYER-1723-2,45.1739

but if this Man , under Expectation and Promise of a Pardon , comes here
to swear that which is not true , and you would ask him to that , he is
not obliged to answer it . LAYER-1723-2,45.1740

No body is to discredit himself , but always to be taken to be innocent
till it appears other-wise . LAYER-1723-2,45.1741

It is expressed that he has a Promise of Pardon : LAYER-1723-2,45.1742

What to do ? LAYER-1723-2,45.1743

To give Evidence . LAYER-1723-2,45.1744

Give Evidence ! LAYER-1723-2,45.1745

Why shou'd he not ? LAYER-1723-2,45.1746

Is he not oblig'd to@ @'t ? LAYER-1723-2,45.1747

Suppose he gives Evidence according to the Truth , LAYER-1723-2,45.1748

he would be entitled as much to his Pardon , as if he gave Evidence of
that which is not true . LAYER-1723-2,45.1749

The most you can say is , he has a Promise of Pardon if he gives
Evidence ; LAYER-1723-2,45.1750

and can you conclude from thence that he can give no Evidence except a
false Evidence ? LAYER-1723-2,45.1751

If they who ask the Question insinuate any thing like that , it ought
not to have an Answer : LAYER-1723-2,45.1752

But if he hath a Promise of Pardon if he gives a true Evidence , it is
no Objection to his being a Witness , or to his Credit .
LAYER-1723-2,45.1753

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> My Lord , I humbly hope our Objections will
thus far prevail , and that we shall come at the Fact .
LAYER-1723-2,45.1754

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> When he is sworn you shall ask him what
Questions you please . LAYER-1723-2,45.1755

Mr. <font> Jus. Eyre . <$$font> The Objection which gives Occasion to
insist upon this Question , arises from the Influence which the Hopes of
Pardon may possibly have upon the Witness ; LAYER-1723-2,45.1756

and if this be a Reason for letting aside a Witness as incapable , no
Accomplice who discovers a Conspiracy can ever be allow'd to prove it
<P_46> Upon Oath , LAYER-1723-2,46.1757

for I believe , no Man ever yet made a Discovery but with the Hopes of
Pardon ; LAYER-1723-2,46.1758

and a Government is oblig'd in Honour to grant it , where the Consession
appears to be ingenuous and sincere : LAYER-1723-2,46.1759

And therefore if the Hope or Prospect of Pardon , which is all that can
be inferr'd from a Promise , should be an Objection to the Competency of
a Witness , no Government would be safe ; LAYER-1723-2,46.1760

for Treasonable Conspiracies might be form'd and carry'd on with
Impunity , when the Persons concern'd , from whom alone a full Discovery
can be had , are utterly incapable of proving the Fact , though they
give all possible Marks of their Sincerity and Truth .
LAYER-1723-2,46.1761

They have therefore been always allow'd to be Witnesses ;
LAYER-1723-2,46.1762

and I do@ @n't remember that ever any Objection was made to their
Competency , till the Case of the King and <font> Gordon , <$$font> when
the Counsel for the Prisoner would have ask'd the same Question which is
now proposed , but the Court did not think it proper before the Witness
was sworn ; LAYER-1723-2,46.1763

for no Person produced as a Witness can be examin'd to any Matter which
only affects his Credit , and is no Objection to his Competency , till
after he is sworn to give Evidence , and has been examin'd .
LAYER-1723-2,46.1764

Mr. <font> Jus. Powys . <$$font> Mr. <font> Hungerford <$$font>
would do well to remember the several Acts of Parliament made to give
Encouragement by a Reward of Forty Pounds for the apprehending and
convicting of every false Coiner , Highwayman and House-breaker
LAYER-1723-2,46.1765

and if a Criminal in those Offences shall come in , and discover and
convict two of his Accomplices , he shall be entitled to a Pardon ;
LAYER-1723-2,46.1766

and by the express Words of the 5th of Queen <font> Anne , <$$font>
shall have the Reward of Forty Pounds for each House-breaker ,
LAYER-1723-2,46.1767

and shall also himself be entitled to a Pardon ; so that the Parliament
thought it proper to give even Money as well as a Pardon to such
Discoverer . LAYER-1723-2,46.1768

Yet ever since the making of those Acts , the Persons so promised and
encouraged , have upon those Tryals been admitted as good Witnesses even
before a Pardon . LAYER-1723-2,46.1769

And indeed there can@ @not be too great Encouragement given to Criminals
to become honest , and to come in and impeach their Accomplices , it
being often impossible fully to discover those secret Confederacies ,
but by some of the Accomplices and Actors therein .
LAYER-1723-2,46.1770

The Law thinks these are fit witness , LAYER-1723-2,46.1771

and you will find it in the Book that Mr. <font> Ketelbey <$$font> hath
mentioned that they were thought fit to make Discoveries of those secret
Combinations , LAYER-1723-2,46.1772

I do@ @n't say to come in and give false Evidence , but to make a fair
Discovery . LAYER-1723-2,46.1773

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , We submit we shall ask the
Question whether he hath had any such Promise made ,
LAYER-1723-2,46.1774

let the Truth come out , and we shall be satisfied .
LAYER-1723-2,46.1775

Mr. <font> Jus. Fortescue Aland . <$$font> I was Counsel in the Case
of the King and <font> Gordon , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,46.1776

and I very well remember the Counsel of the other Side insisted the
Witness produc'd should be ask'd this Question on a <font> Voyer_dire ,
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,46.1777

his Name was <font> Mayer . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,46.1778

The Reason the Court gave that it was improper to ask this Question on a
<font> Voyer_dire , <$$font> was , that if he had this Promise , such
Promise was made either to speak the Truth , or to speak a Falsehood ;
LAYER-1723-2,46.1779

if it was to give a just and true Evidence , there was no Harm in it ;
LAYER-1723-2,46.1780

and if it was a Promise of Pardon for speaking that which was not <font>
true , <$$font> the Witness was not bound to answer that Question ,
LAYER-1723-2,46.1781

and consequently it can be of no Use whatsoever , LAYER-1723-2,46.1782

therefore the Witness must be sworn . LAYER-1723-2,46.1783

Mr. <font> Stephen Lynch <$$font> was sworn . LAYER-1723-2,46.1784

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> Do you know the Prisoner at the Bar ?
LAYER-1723-2,46.1785

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,46.1786

Mr. <font> Sol._Gen. <$$font> How long have you known him ?
LAYER-1723-2,46.1787

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I first knew him about the Month of <font> June
<$$font> last . LAYER-1723-2,46.1788

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> Pray give an Account to the Court and
the Jury by what Means you first became acquainted with him .
LAYER-1723-2,46.1789

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I became acquainted with him by Dr. <font>
Murphey : <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,46.1790

About the Month of <font> April <$$font> last I came into <font> England
<$$font> from <font> Flanders , <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,46.1791

at my Arrival in <font> England <$$font> I met with Dr. <font> Murphey
, <$$font> that was my Acquaintance several Years before , who met me
and told me he had some particular Business to tell me , and desired me
to meet him at <font> Cooper <$$font> 's Coffee-house in <font> Cornhill
, <$$font> where I met him ; LAYER-1723-2,46.1792

and he told me that material Things were acting in the Kingdom in order
to a Rising , and if I would be of the Party , he would recommend me to
a Gentleman that had the Management of it : LAYER-1723-2,46.1793

I ask'd Time to consider of it , LAYER-1723-2,46.1794

and in two or three Days time I told him that I was resolv'd to be of
the Party . LAYER-1723-2,46.1795

I frequently told him I was impatient to know <P_47> who the Gentleman
was that I was to be recommended to ; LAYER-1723-2,47.1796

about the Month of June he told me I should go with him to his Lodgings
, which were at the upper End of <font> Chancery-Lane , <$$font> right
over against the <font> White-Hart . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,47.1797

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> Whose Lodgings did you go to ?
LAYER-1723-2,47.1798

<font> Lynch . <$$font> The Lodgings of Mr. <font> Layer : <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,47.1799

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> was at home , LAYER-1723-2,47.1800

and desir'd us to go to the Gryffin Tavern in <font> Holborn <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,47.1801

and he would meet us there ; LAYER-1723-2,47.1802

we went , LAYER-1723-2,47.1803

and in a little while Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> came to us ,
LAYER-1723-2,47.1804

and then Dr. <font> Murphey <$$font> told him that I was the Gentleman
he had spoke to him of . LAYER-1723-2,47.1805

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> was glad of my Acquaintance ,
LAYER-1723-2,47.1806

and told me that he had had such a strong Recommendation of me , that he
was fully satisfyed in me ; LAYER-1723-2,47.1807

and then he held a Discourse about a Rising that was to be in the
Kingdom in favour of the Pretender , and that it would be back'd by a
great many of the Army and the Guards , and several other Gentlemen .
LAYER-1723-2,47.1808

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> The Overt Act is laid in <font> Essex
, <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,47.1809

and here is an Evidence given of an Overt Act in <font> Middlesex ;
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,47.1810

with Submission they can give no Evidence of an Overt Act in another
County , till they give Evidence of an Overt Act in <font> Essex ,
<$$font> where the Indictment is laid . LAYER-1723-2,47.1811

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> All they say of Matters in the County of
<font> Middlesex , <$$font> unless they give Evidence of Overt Acts in
the County of <font> Essex , <$$font> it signifies nothing .
LAYER-1723-2,47.1812

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , with Submission they ought
not to be suffer'd to give Evidence of any Overt Act in <font> Middlesex
, <$$font> before they give Evidence of some Overt Act in <font> Essex ;
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,47.1813

for the proving some Overt Act in <font> Essex <$$font> is the only
Thing which can entitle them to prove any Overt Act elsewhere .
LAYER-1723-2,47.1814

For by the Method they would go on in , the Jury may be captivated with
a Story of the <font> Gryffin <$$font> Tavern , and of Mr. <font>
Layer's <$$font> other Assignations and Actions in <font> Middlesex ,
<$$font> which can@ @not be imputed to him upon this Indictment until
some Treason be proved in <font> Essex : <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,47.1815

I hope therefore the King's Counsel shall receive your Lordship's
Directions to go on regularly , to begin to give an Account of the Overt
Acts in <font> Essex , <$$font> before they go into another County .
LAYER-1723-2,47.1816

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> Mr. <font> Hungerford , <$$font> you must
give them leave to go on in their own Method , of that that first
happen'd in <font> Middlesex , <$$font> and afterwards of what happen'd
in <font> Essex ; <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,47.1817

and if you dare not trust them and us , but will have your own Method ,
it would be to put us into Confusion . LAYER-1723-2,47.1818

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> My Lord , we insist upon it in point of
Law , that we are intitled to give Evidence of Overt Acts of the same
Species of Treason laid in the Indictment , though done in any County in
<font> England , <$$font> provided we also prove an Overt Act in the
County of <font> Essex ; <$$font> which we must do ,
LAYER-1723-2,47.1819

otherwise this will pass for nothing . LAYER-1723-2,47.1820

Mr. <font> Lynch , <$$font> go on , LAYER-1723-2,47.1821

and give my Lord and the Jury an Account of what Mr. <font> Layer
<$$font> said , when you were together at the <font> Griffin <$$font>
Tavern . LAYER-1723-2,47.1822

<font> Lynch . <$$font> The first thing he told me was , that he was
very glad to meet me , that he had had a good Recommendation of me from
Dr. <font> Murphey , <$$font> as being a Man he could confide in ;
LAYER-1723-2,47.1823

and beginning his Discourse of an Insurrection in the Kingdom , he told
me , that they were back'd with a great many of the Army and the Guards
; that there was a great many of the Nobility and Gentry of the Country
that would come in to 'em : LAYER-1723-2,47.1824

He told me then , that he wanted a Man of Resolution that would take
upon him the seizing of some Person of Note , as a General , or some
other great Man . LAYER-1723-2,47.1825

The Discourse run all upon the same thing . LAYER-1723-2,47.1826

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> Recollect as well as you can , the
Particulars Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> told you relating to this Design
. LAYER-1723-2,47.1827

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He told me the general Design of the Revolution
in the Kingdom , in favour of the Pretender , and that they were back'd
by a great many of the Army , and a great many of the Nobility and
Gentry LAYER-1723-2,47.1828

and then he told me he wanted a Man of Resolution , to undertake with
some others , to seize a great Man , as a General or some other great
Man : LAYER-1723-2,47.1829

At that Time I took upon my self to do it , LAYER-1723-2,47.1830

so at that time we discours'd no more . LAYER-1723-2,47.1831

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> How long were you together ?
LAYER-1723-2,47.1832

<font> Lynch . <$$font> About half an Hour . LAYER-1723-2,47.1833

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> When had you the next Meeting ?
LAYER-1723-2,47.1834

<font> Lynch . <$$font> A Day or two afterwards . LAYER-1723-2,47.1835

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> At what Place ? LAYER-1723-2,47.1836

<font> Lynch . <$$font> At the same Tavern , the <font> Griffin
<$$font> Tavern ; LAYER-1723-2,47.1837

when I came there I sent a Boy for Mr. <font> Layer , <$$font> as he
had ordered me to do when I wanted to see him . LAYER-1723-2,47.1838

<P_48>

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> When was your first Meeting ?
LAYER-1723-2,48.1840

<font> Lynch . <$$font> About the Month of <font> June . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,48.1841

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> And the 2d Meeting was two or three Days
after the first ? LAYER-1723-2,48.1842

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , my Lord . LAYER-1723-2,48.1843

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> At your parting , after the
first Meeting , what did Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> say to you ?
LAYER-1723-2,48.1844

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> told me , if I had
occasion to speak to him that I should not come to his Lodgings , but go
to a Tavern and send for him , which I did ; LAYER-1723-2,48.1845

I sent a Boy for him , LAYER-1723-2,48.1846

and he came to me . LAYER-1723-2,48.1847

Then talking over a Glass of Wine , he told me that he had pitched upon
me to seize the Earl of <font> Cadogan , <$$font> and that I shou'd
chuse as many Persons as I thought fit who wou'd answer the same Design
; and he being the principal Man in the Army , it wou'd discourage the
King's Party , and animate the Pretender's Party ; which as I said
before , I agreed to undertake , and to do the utmost of my Endeavours
to do it . LAYER-1723-2,48.1848

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Was you to do it alone ,
LAYER-1723-2,48.1849

or was you to have any Assistance ? LAYER-1723-2,48.1850

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , I was to have Assistance .
LAYER-1723-2,48.1851

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> What Assistance ?
LAYER-1723-2,48.1852

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Such that I shou'd chuse , such People that I
cou'd confide in . LAYER-1723-2,48.1853

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> Did you undertake it ?
LAYER-1723-2,48.1854

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , I did undertake it , and to pitch upon
such Persons as shou'd be proper to assist me in it .
LAYER-1723-2,48.1855

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> Was any thing said at that time
relating to any Person , who was to have the Conduct of the Design ?
LAYER-1723-2,48.1856

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He told me that there was some great Man that
did not want Wit , Courage or Resolution , and was at the head of this
Affair , who wou'd at a proper time give me an Order to effect something
further about it . LAYER-1723-2,48.1857

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> Had you any more Discourse with the
Prisoner about this Affair ? LAYER-1723-2,48.1858

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , we had several Discourses about it .
LAYER-1723-2,48.1859

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Tell my Lord and the Jury what more
Discourse you had , if you can remember . LAYER-1723-2,48.1860

<font> Lynch . <$$font> The chief Part I was to act was to seize the
Earl of <font> Cadogan , <$$font> with such Gentlemen as I should think
proper to answer the end of seizing him . LAYER-1723-2,48.1861

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> Was there any other Meeting ,
LAYER-1723-2,48.1862

and when LAYER-1723-2,48.1863

and how long after ? LAYER-1723-2,48.1864

<font> Lynch . <$$font> After that I came to a Tavern in <font>
Holbourn . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,48.1865

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> How long after ?
LAYER-1723-2,48.1866

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Some few Days ; LAYER-1723-2,48.1867

it was at the <font> Castle <$$font> Tavern in <font> Holbourn .
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,48.1868

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Who was with you at that Tavern ?
LAYER-1723-2,48.1869

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I came to the Tavern LAYER-1723-2,48.1870

and sent for Mr. <font> Layer . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,48.1871

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Did he come to you ?
LAYER-1723-2,48.1872

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , he came to me . LAYER-1723-2,48.1873

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> What Discourse had you with him at that
time ? LAYER-1723-2,48.1874

<font> Lynch . <$$font> We had no particular Discourse ,
LAYER-1723-2,48.1875

but , in general we talk'd about the Uneasiness of the Nation , and the
fair Opportunity there was to rise . LAYER-1723-2,48.1876

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Pray give an Account of what else pass'd
. LAYER-1723-2,48.1877

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I say , the same Discourse that we had had at
two Meetings before , he repeated , and said , now is a fair Opportunity
, the Uneasiness of the People being such , to bring about a Revolution
, since they would be back'd by the Army and the Guards , and several
other People . LAYER-1723-2,48.1878

Soon after that we parted . LAYER-1723-2,48.1879

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> When had you any other Meeting
? LAYER-1723-2,48.1880

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Some Meetings we had at Mr. <font> Layer's
<$$font> House in <font> Southampton-Buildings . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,48.1881

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> How long after ?
LAYER-1723-2,48.1882

<font> Lynch . <$$font> A few Days only . LAYER-1723-2,48.1883

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> At the several Meetings at his
House , what was the Subject of your Discourse ? LAYER-1723-2,48.1884

<font> Lynch . <$$font> It was always upon the same , about the Rising
and Uneasiness of the People , and the fair Opportunity of bringing
about a Revolution , of the Disposition of the Army and the Guards .
LAYER-1723-2,48.1885

<P_49>

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> Did he give you any
Encouragement ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1887

<font> Lynch , <$$font> After I met him at his House in <font>
Southampton-buildings , <$$font> I told him of my Uneasiness ; because
he had told me at the beginning , that these Things would be soon put in
Execution : LAYER-1723-2,49.1888

I told him , if they were delayed , I was afraid they wou'd not succeed
. LAYER-1723-2,49.1889

He then animated me , by telling me that there was no fear of its
succeeding ; and that I should not be discouraged , for there was a
Great Man , a Man of Wit and Conduct , that was at the Helm , and that
had the Management of the Scheme : That I should always keep a good
Heart ; and that Things went on very well . LAYER-1723-2,49.1890

Mr. <font> West . <$$font> Did he tell you in whose Favour this was to
be ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1891

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes ; in Favour of the Pretender .
LAYER-1723-2,49.1892

He mentioned him by the Name of King . LAYER-1723-2,49.1893

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> Do you know any thing about his
going into the Country ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1894

<font> Lynch . <$$font> After I met him at his House , he went into the
Country , LAYER-1723-2,49.1895

and staid sixteen or seventeen Days ; LAYER-1723-2,49.1896

at his Return , I went to see him , and expressing how uneasy I was
about the Delay . LAYER-1723-2,49.1897

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> About what Time was this ?
LAYER-1723-2,49.1898

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I believe it was in <font> July . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,49.1899

And then I told him again how uneasy I was at the Delay . To which he
answer'd , Keep a good Heart , LAYER-1723-2,49.1900

all Things go on very well . LAYER-1723-2,49.1901

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> Had you any Apprehensions that
all was to be done at home , or that you was to have any foreign
Assistance ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1902

<font> Lynch . <$$font> In my Discourse to him of the Uneasiness I was
under at the Delay , I asked him if he had any Promise of any Succour
from any Power Abroad ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1903

He told me , if we once made a Beginning , we should not want them :
LAYER-1723-2,49.1904

But did insinuate , that we should not want Encouragement from the Court
of <font> France . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,49.1905

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> When you expressed your Uneasiness at
the Delay , what did he say to encourage you ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1906

<font> Lynch . <$$font> The reason he told me was , that Things went on
very well , and would very soon be put in Execution .
LAYER-1723-2,49.1907

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> In what manner did you express your
Uneasiness ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1908

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Nothing but that I was uneasy , and I was
afraid that Things did go wrong . LAYER-1723-2,49.1909

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> What did you say , LAYER-1723-2,49.1910

did you say any thing relating to your own Circumstances ?
LAYER-1723-2,49.1911

<font> Lynch . <$$font> In the Beginning I told Dr. <font> Murphey ,
<$$font> because it would be a long while , some five or six Weeks ,
before I was to be introduced to Mr. <font> Layer's <$$font> Company ,
that I came on my own particular Business , and my Circumstances would
not permit me to be long here at my own Expence . LAYER-1723-2,49.1912

At the meeting with Mr. <font> Layer , <$$font> when I first made this
Complaint to him , Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> told me I should not want
for a small Matter , to maintain me in <font> England . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,49.1913

Accordingly Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> gave me some Money .
LAYER-1723-2,49.1914

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Do you remember how much that was ?
LAYER-1723-2,49.1915

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I can@ @not remember . LAYER-1723-2,49.1916

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Did he give you Money at any other Time
? LAYER-1723-2,49.1917

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> gave me some Money
the first Time , LAYER-1723-2,49.1918

and afterwards he sent me some Money by Dr. <font> Murphey . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,49.1919

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Did he give you any Money at any
other Time ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1920

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , the last Time I was with him I had more .
LAYER-1723-2,49.1921

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> How many Times had you Money of him ?
LAYER-1723-2,49.1922

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Five or six Times . LAYER-1723-2,49.1923

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Do you know what the Sums did amount to
together ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1924

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I ca@ @n't recollect ; LAYER-1723-2,49.1925

but I believe about eight or ten Guineas . LAYER-1723-2,49.1926

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> What was it given you for ?
LAYER-1723-2,49.1927

<font> Lynch . <$$font> To keep me in <font> England , <$$font> and to
assist in the intended Design of a Revolution . LAYER-1723-2,49.1928

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> After you went to him , upon his
Return out of the Country , do you remember the Discourse that pass'd
between you then ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1929

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes : After I came to his House , I expressed
my Uneasiness at the Delay : Upon which he encouraged me , giving me to
hope that Things went on very well , and our Design would effectually
take Place . LAYER-1723-2,49.1930

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Did you ask him any thing about
the Army ? LAYER-1723-2,49.1931

<P_50>

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I asked him if he had any Encouragement from
the Guards and the Army ? LAYER-1723-2,50.1933

He told me , Yes , he had ; that a great many of the Officers would not
engage themselves now , being well paid ; LAYER-1723-2,50.1934

but he said he had spoke with several Officers of the Guards , who had
allured him , that most of the common Soldiers would come in , as soon
as we made a Beginning . LAYER-1723-2,50.1935

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Did he mention any thing of the
Time ? LAYER-1723-2,50.1936

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> When you asked him if he had any
Encouragement from the Army , what did he say ? LAYER-1723-2,50.1937

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He told me , That he had Encouragement from a
great many of the Officers of the Army : That he had discoursed with
several Serjeants of the Guards , who told him that the common Soldiers
would be glad , after they had made a Beginning , to come in to 'em .
LAYER-1723-2,50.1938

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Did he give you any Reason for this ?
LAYER-1723-2,50.1939

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> told me , the
Serjeants told him so before they were encamped , and complained of
their ill Usage , and hard Usage from the subaltern Officers .
LAYER-1723-2,50.1940

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Was you acquainted with any Time
, or Day that was fixed ? LAYER-1723-2,50.1941

<font> Lynch . <$$font> There was no fix'd Time : LAYER-1723-2,50.1942

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> told me , it was to be on the rising of the
Camp because they could not talk with the Soldiers so well , while they
were encamped , as they could afterwards , when they were in their
Quarters . LAYER-1723-2,50.1943

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> Was there any Consultation of
viewing any one's House ? LAYER-1723-2,50.1944

<font> Lynch : <$$font> Afterwards , in Discourse he told me , that it
was fit to go and view the Earl of <font> Cadogan <$$font> 's House ; in
case it was necessary to seize the said Lord in his House .
LAYER-1723-2,50.1945

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre <$$font> Where is his House ?
LAYER-1723-2,50.1946

<font> Lynch . <$$font> In <font> Pickadilly . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,50.1947

Accordingly we appointed a Day to go ; LAYER-1723-2,50.1948

and I came to his Lodgings , LAYER-1723-2,50.1949

and we took Coach , LAYER-1723-2,50.1950

and away we went ; LAYER-1723-2,50.1951

and talking to him about it , he told me , he was very well acquainted
with my Lord <font> Cadogan , <$$font> and had some Business with him ,
about an Estate which his Lordship was about buying :
LAYER-1723-2,50.1952

We went to his House , LAYER-1723-2,50.1953

but my Lord was not to be spoke with , LAYER-1723-2,50.1954

or was not within , LAYER-1723-2,50.1955

I do@ @n't remember which , LAYER-1723-2,50.1956

but we were conducted into his House ; LAYER-1723-2,50.1957

we view'd the inner Part of the House , LAYER-1723-2,50.1958

afterwards we went into the Garden , LAYER-1723-2,50.1959

we viewed the lower Part of the Garden , LAYER-1723-2,50.1960

then we went out in the Yard , LAYER-1723-2,50.1961

and took a View of the Avenues round about the House .
LAYER-1723-2,50.1962

I do@ @n't remember exactly the Time , LAYER-1723-2,50.1963

but it was that Day that a Soldier should have been shot in <font>
Hyde-Park . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,50.1964

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> Had you any Discourse about the
Feasibleness of it ? LAYER-1723-2,50.1965

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , that it was easy to be done ; if we had
but some resolute Gentlemen to stand by us , that it was very feasible
to be done . LAYER-1723-2,50.1966

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> Had you any Talk at that Time
relating to the <font> Tower ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,50.1967

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He told me , the <font> Tower <$$font> would be
immediately surrender'd to the Party ; LAYER-1723-2,50.1968

on the Day the Plot was to be put in Execution , a certain Officer of
the Guards would take upon him to mount the Guards there , who would
facilitate the Delivery of the <font> Tower <$$font> to them .
LAYER-1723-2,50.1969

Mr. <font> Serj. Chesshyre . <$$font> Was there any Talk of the Mint
? LAYER-1723-2,50.1970

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , afterwards : He said there would be no
doubt of the Mint ; they would be glad to take the Opportunity to shake
off their Confinement : And that they would put Arms into their Hands ,
according as they repaired to their Party . LAYER-1723-2,50.1971

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> When did you see the Prisoner next after
the Time that you speak of , of viewing my Lord <font> Cadogan@ @'s
<$$font> House ? LAYER-1723-2,50.1972

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I saw him at his own House , and at several
Taverns in the City ; LAYER-1723-2,50.1973

and once he wrote to me , desiring me to come to his Lodging ;
LAYER-1723-2,50.1974

accordingly I went , LAYER-1723-2,50.1975

and when I came to his House , I met with a little Paper that was left
for me , directing me to go to the <font> Queen's-head <$$font> Tavern
in <font> Great Queen's-street , <$$font> near <font>
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields , <$$font> and to enquire there for one Mr. <font>
Wilson ; <$$font> which I did , LAYER-1723-2,50.1976

and I was conducted into a Room where they said Mr. <font> Wilson
<$$font> was , with Mr. <font> Layer , <$$font> and another Man , who
seem'd , by his Clothes , to be a Serjeant of the Guards .
LAYER-1723-2,50.1977

I do not know the Man . LAYER-1723-2,50.1978

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> What pass'd then ? LAYER-1723-2,50.1979

<font> Lynch . <$$font> We staid a little while there ,
LAYER-1723-2,50.1980

we talk'd over the Business , LAYER-1723-2,50.1981

and drank good Success to the Enterprize . LAYER-1723-2,50.1982

<P_51>

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Your Lordship will please to
take notice , That when he went to Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> 's Lodging
, he found a Letter there , directing him to go to the <font>
Queen's-Head-Tavern <$$font> , and enquire for one <font> Wilson
<$$font> ; that when he came there , <font> Wilson <$$font> was there ,
and Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> and another Man . LAYER-1723-2,51.1984

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> What passed at that Time ?
LAYER-1723-2,51.1985

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Nothing material . LAYER-1723-2,51.1986

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> You talk'd about drinking good Success
to the Enterprize : LAYER-1723-2,51.1987

Who drank that ? LAYER-1723-2,51.1988

<font> Lynch . <$$font> We all drank that . LAYER-1723-2,51.1989

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Did the Prisoner at the Bar drink it ?
LAYER-1723-2,51.1990

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , he did . LAYER-1723-2,51.1991

I told the Prisoner , when he went out , that I was mighty uneasy at the
Delay of this Affair . LAYER-1723-2,51.1992

He told me , I need not be uneasy , for every Thing went on well ; and
they had a Nobleman at the Helm , who had Authority from the Pretender ,
and would lose no Opportunity when a fit Time offered .
LAYER-1723-2,51.1993

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> What did he call the Pretender ?
LAYER-1723-2,51.1994

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He called him the King . LAYER-1723-2,51.1995

I was uneasy at the Delay , for fear of being discover'd .
LAYER-1723-2,51.1996

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> What Reason did he give you , why you
should not be uneasy ? LAYER-1723-2,51.1997

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Because their Designs were quickly to be put in
Execution ; and there was a Nobleman at the Helm who would put the
Design in Execution , as having full Power and Authority from the King
to act as he thought proper . LAYER-1723-2,51.1998

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Did you ask who that Nobleman was ?
LAYER-1723-2,51.1999

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes ; LAYER-1723-2,51.2000

but he never told me his Name , LAYER-1723-2,51.2001

but said , that I should , in a proper Time , be presented to him , and
receive my Commission and Orders from him to seize my Lord <font>
Cadogan <$$font> . LAYER-1723-2,51.2002

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> My Lord , we shall now gratify
the Prisoner's Counsel , with an account of what happened in <font>
Essex <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,51.2003

I hope they will not be impatient to hear that : LAYER-1723-2,51.2004

Therefore , pray acquaint my Lord , and the Jury , when you went out of
Town with Mr. <font> Layer . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,51.2005

<font> Lynch . <$$font> My Lord , I was at Mr. <font> Layer <$$font>
's House the Day when the Bishop of <font> Rochester <$$font> was sent
to the <font> Tower <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,51.2006

he ask'd me , if I would ride abroad with him the next Day to take the
Air ; LAYER-1723-2,51.2007

I consented to it , LAYER-1723-2,51.2008

and came the next Morning to his House ; LAYER-1723-2,51.2009

and Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> asked me , if I mounted with Furniture :
LAYER-1723-2,51.2010

I told him no ; but that I had a double Barrel Fowling-piece , which if
his Servant would carry , would do as well . LAYER-1723-2,51.2011

He then desired me to go and stay for him without <font> Aldgate
<$$font> , and get my Gun ready loaden , LAYER-1723-2,51.2012

for he had that about him which he would not lose for any thing in the
World . LAYER-1723-2,51.2013

I went LAYER-1723-2,51.2014

and staid till about ten or eleven a Clock , when Mr. <font> Layer
<$$font> met me , and gave the Gun to his Servant to carry .
LAYER-1723-2,51.2015

On the Road he told me , we were going to my Lord <font> North <$$font>
and <font> Gray <$$font> 's , whom he was very well acquainted with ,
and that he would recommend me to him as a Friend of his .
LAYER-1723-2,51.2016

When we got to the <font> Green Man <$$font> , he told me , we had
better go in and dine there , because Dinner-time would be over before
we could get to my Lord <font> North <$$font> and <$$font> Gray <$$font>
's . LAYER-1723-2,51.2017

Whilst Dinner was getting ready , we had several Discourses on the same
Subject , of the Uneasiness of the Nation , and its Inclination to a
Revolution , and how to bring it about ; upon which , he pulled a Paper
out of his Pocket , and gave it me to read the latter Part of it .
LAYER-1723-2,51.2018

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Can you remember what it
contained ? LAYER-1723-2,51.2019

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I remember some Lines of it ; which was , in
general , to invite the Nation to an Insurrection , and to shake off the
Calamities and Miseries they endured under the present Ministry .
LAYER-1723-2,51.2020

And it was mentioned in the said Paper , that the Earl of <font> Cadogan
<$$font> was actually in their Custody ; thereby encouraging the Army to
revolt , with an Offer of three Guineas to every Horseman and Serjeant ,
and two Guineas to every Corporal , and one Guinea to every common
Soldier , to be paid immediately on their joining the Party , and a
Promise of farther Preferment . LAYER-1723-2,51.2021

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Did you read this ?
LAYER-1723-2,51.2022

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I did , out of the Paper in Mr. <font> Layer
<$$font> 's Hand . LAYER-1723-2,51.2023

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Do you know whose Hand-writing it was ?
LAYER-1723-2,51.2024

<font> Lynch . <$$font> According to our Discourse , I thought it might
be his writing . LAYER-1723-2,51.2025

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> But he produced it ?
LAYER-1723-2,51.2026

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , my Lord , he produced it .
LAYER-1723-2,51.2027

<P_52>

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You say you imagine , from some Discourse
between you , that it was his Hand-writing ; LAYER-1723-2,52.2029

what Reason was there , in all his Discourse , that induced you to think
so ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2030

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He talk'd of it as being of his own making ;
LAYER-1723-2,52.2031

besides , there were several Interliniations , Dashings-out , and
Interliniations afterwards . LAYER-1723-2,52.2032

He was very well satisfied and easy as to me , LAYER-1723-2,52.2033

and said , he could wish that he could bring Matters about so , as that
I could have the sole Direction of seizing some of the Ministry , and
namely , my Lord Townshend , my Lord Carterett , and Mr. Walpole .
LAYER-1723-2,52.2034

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Was there any Discourse about seizing
the King ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2035

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He said , when the Design was put in Execution
, the Army would declare in their Favour , and they would send a strong
Guard to take care of the King's Person . LAYER-1723-2,52.2036

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> How to take care of the King's Person ?
LAYER-1723-2,52.2037

What was you to do ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2038

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Nothing but to secure the King's Person ;
LAYER-1723-2,52.2039

by what he told me , it was for the Publick Good of the Kingdom ; that
they did not mean , nor had they any Design on the King's Person , but
only to keep him in Security from any Insult . LAYER-1723-2,52.2040

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> What more passed at that Time ?
LAYER-1723-2,52.2041

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Nothing more in particular .
LAYER-1723-2,52.2042

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Had you any talk relating to the Army ?
LAYER-1723-2,52.2043

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I said before what related to the Army .
LAYER-1723-2,52.2044

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Was there any Discourse about a
Scheme or Plan ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2045

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He told me there was a Scheme laid on that Foot
, of which I told you the first Step was to seize the Earl of <font>
Cadogan <$$font> , and then , according as the Army came over , to take
care and seize the King's Person ; LAYER-1723-2,52.2046

and he thought the proper Time to put this in Execution , would be at
the Rising of the Camp in <font> Hyde-Park . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,52.2047

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Was there any Objection made to
this ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2048

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No ; I made no Objection , LAYER-1723-2,52.2049

only shew'd my Uneasiness at the long Delay . LAYER-1723-2,52.2050

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> When you so express'd your
Uneasiness , what did he say ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2051

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He told me , if I could think or propose any
Thing more proper , that I should do it . LAYER-1723-2,52.2052

After that we rode toward <font> Epping <$$font> , LAYER-1723-2,52.2053

and went to my Lord <font> North <$$font> and <font> Gray <$$font> 's ;
LAYER-1723-2,52.2054

and there Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> introduced me as his Friend .
LAYER-1723-2,52.2055

We staid there all Night , LAYER-1723-2,52.2056

and dined there the next Day . LAYER-1723-2,52.2057

In the Evening we came away in Company with another Gentleman that I did
not know ; LAYER-1723-2,52.2058

but we talk'd on the Road about the Situation of my Lord's House ;
LAYER-1723-2,52.2059

and Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> told me , he had recommended me to his
Lordship , as his particular Friend , LAYER-1723-2,52.2060

and ask'd me how I liked him . LAYER-1723-2,52.2061

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Did he ask you any Questions ?
LAYER-1723-2,52.2062

Do you remember what he called his Lordship ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2063

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I do@ @n't remember any other Name but <font>
My Lord . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,52.2064

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> When he ask'd your Opinion of
him , and how you liked him , did he describe him in any other manner ,
or only called him <font> My Lord ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,52.2065

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He only called him my Lord <font> North
<$$font> and <font> Gray <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,52.2066

he only ask'd me how I liked my Lord <font> North <$$font> and <font>
Gray . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,52.2067

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Liked his Lordship , for what ?
LAYER-1723-2,52.2068

<font> Lynch . <$$font> That was all . LAYER-1723-2,52.2069

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> Had you any Talk with him about the Person
that was to have the chief Command ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2070

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes ; LAYER-1723-2,52.2071

but he never named the Person . LAYER-1723-2,52.2072

Mr. <font> West . <$$font> Had you never any Discourse who was to
command the Party that was to seize my Lord <font> Cadogan ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,52.2073

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I was to command that Party .
LAYER-1723-2,52.2074

Mr. <font> West . <$$font> Was you any other time at my Lord <font>
North <$$font> and <font> Gray <$$font> 's ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2075

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes ; another time I went to my Lord <font>
North <$$font> and <font> Gray <$$font> 's , where I found Mr. <font>
Layer <$$font> , LAYER-1723-2,52.2076

and express'd to Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> the Uneasiness I was in at
the long Delay , and that I was afraid our Hopes would vanish ;
LAYER-1723-2,52.2077

and told him , if things were not soon put in Execution , I would
withdraw myself . LAYER-1723-2,52.2078

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> bid me not be uneasy , LAYER-1723-2,52.2079

Things might perhaps be sooner put in Execution than I imagined .
LAYER-1723-2,52.2080

Mr. <font> West . <$$font> Where was this ? LAYER-1723-2,52.2081

<font> Lynch . <$$font> At <font> Epping <$$font> , at my Lord <font>
North <$$font> and <font> Gray <$$font> 's . LAYER-1723-2,52.2082

Mr. <font> West . <$$font> Did you come home together ?
LAYER-1723-2,52.2083

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No ; I came home that Night :
LAYER-1723-2,52.2084

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> remained there . LAYER-1723-2,52.2085

<P_53>

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Did you see him some time
afterwards ? LAYER-1723-2,53.2087

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I met him at his own House , where I expressing
my Uneasiness as formerly , LAYER-1723-2,53.2088

he said , I should not be uneasy , LAYER-1723-2,53.2089

for Things would soon take effect ; LAYER-1723-2,53.2090

and bid me get my self ready to execute my Design , because they had
Notice the Camp would soon break up , which was the Time designed to put
Things in Execution ; LAYER-1723-2,53.2091

and at another Time he told me , that the Declaration which he had shewn
me at the <font> Green Man <$$font> , had mentioned no particular
Persons , but in general the Safety and Publick Good of the Kingdom :
LAYER-1723-2,53.2092

There was nothing mentioned of the Pretender in it , but that he had
thought fit to put it now in the Pretender's Name .
LAYER-1723-2,53.2093

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Who was you to receive your
particular Orders from , for the executing your Design ?
LAYER-1723-2,53.2094

<font> Lynch . <$$font> From that Nobleman , who was to act as General
in this Affair . LAYER-1723-2,53.2095

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Did you never hear from Mr.
<font> Layer <$$font> who that was ? LAYER-1723-2,53.2096

<font> Lynch <$$font> , {COM:sic_font_change} No ; I do@ @n't recollect
he was ever named by Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,53.2097

he told me , that the Declaration was afterwards put in the Name of the
Pretender . LAYER-1723-2,53.2098

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> What was it he recommended you
to my Lord <font> North <$$font> and <font> Gray <$$font> for ?
LAYER-1723-2,53.2099

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He recommended me to him as one of his
particular Friends . LAYER-1723-2,53.2100

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> What Discourse had you at that
Time ? LAYER-1723-2,53.2101

<font> Lynch . <$$font> We talk'd indifferently ; LAYER-1723-2,53.2102

we discours'd nothing of the Revolution at that Time :
LAYER-1723-2,53.2103

He told me he had given the Declaration to a Nonjuring-Minister to get
printed , and had given twenty Guineas for that Purpose .
LAYER-1723-2,53.2104

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> Was you acquainted before with my Lord
<font> North <$$font> and <font> Gray ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,53.2105

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No ; he introduced me as one of his Friends .
LAYER-1723-2,53.2106

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Did you know when Mr. <font>
Layer <$$font> was first taken up ? LAYER-1723-2,53.2107

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,53.2108

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> How long before that had you
been with him ? LAYER-1723-2,53.2109

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I ca@ @n't recollect the Time .
LAYER-1723-2,53.2110

I first became acquainted with Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> about <font>
June . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,53.2111

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> What passed the last time you
was with him , before he was taken up ; LAYER-1723-2,53.2112

was there any particular Conference between you ? LAYER-1723-2,53.2113

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I told you about the Declaration , and about my
Uneasiness , and that he told me Things would succeed sooner than I
thought for . LAYER-1723-2,53.2114

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> When you express'd your
Uneasiness , did he use any Vehemence of Expression , as to what Part he
would act ? LAYER-1723-2,53.2115

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He told me several times , when I was so
irresolute and uneasy , saith he , do@ @n't you be uneasy ;
LAYER-1723-2,53.2116

rather than all should fail , I will stir up and be a second <font>
Maffinello . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,53.2117

Mr. <font> West . <$$font> Had you any Conversation about the taking
up of any Person ? LAYER-1723-2,53.2118

<font> Lynch . <$$font> He only told me at that Time , that if the
Nobleman at the Head of Affairs should be taken up , every thing would
be quash'd . LAYER-1723-2,53.2119

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> That Nobleman was not taken up
at that Time then ? LAYER-1723-2,53.2120

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No . LAYER-1723-2,53.2121

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> What Recommendation had you to
my Lord <font> North <$$font> and <font> Gray ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,53.2122

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Only as a Friend of Mr. <font> Layer <$$font>
's , to pass away the Time in Summer . LAYER-1723-2,53.2123

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I presume they have done with giving
the Evidence , which they intend , of any Overt-Act in the County of
<font> Essex <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,53.2124

if they have , I would crave the Liberty to observe .
LAYER-1723-2,53.2125

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> We have not done ;
LAYER-1723-2,53.2126

if you have any thing to observe , it must be when we have gone thro'
our Evidence . LAYER-1723-2,53.2127

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> When they have given all their Evidence ,
then will be your proper time to object to the Evidence , and to shew
whether 't@ @is competent , or no . LAYER-1723-2,53.2128

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I do not press to make any Remarks
upon their whole Evidence ; LAYER-1723-2,53.2129

but if they have given all the Evidence they intend to give of any
Overt-Act in <font> Essex <$$font> , for on that depends the Fate of
this Gentleman at the Bar , I hope we are now <paren> before they shall
be permitted to give Evidence of any farther Overt-Act of Treason in
another County <$$paren> at Liberty to object , that the Transaction in
<font> Essex <$$font> is not an Overt-Act at all of the High-Treason
laid in this Indictment . LAYER-1723-2,53.2130

<P_54>

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> We have not done .
LAYER-1723-2,54.2132

When we have given our Evidence , then it will be proper for them to
make their Objections to the Whole . LAYER-1723-2,54.2133

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> I humbly offer it to your Lordship's
Consideration , whether it is right and proper to go on in such a Method
, and to take up the Time of the Court , when the Gentlemen on the other
Side say , they have done with giving Evidence as to any Overt-Act in
County of <font> Essex . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,54.2134

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> No ; we have not done with that
Evidence . LAYER-1723-2,54.2135

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I do@ @n't know whether your Lordship
will indulge us to ask the Witness a Question or two now .
LAYER-1723-2,54.2136

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> Propose your Questions , and we will tell
you . LAYER-1723-2,54.2137

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Whether he hath any Offer of Pardon
propos'd to him to induce him to give Evidence against the Prisoner at
the Bar ; which if he hath , we apprehend will invalidate his Evidence .
LAYER-1723-2,54.2138

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No , Sir ; I have no Promise of Pardon at all :
LAYER-1723-2,54.2139

I only do this out of Justice , to make what Reparation I can , and to
save the Blood of many People . LAYER-1723-2,54.2140

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I beg Leave to ask him a few more
Questions . LAYER-1723-2,54.2141

I think you say the first time you were introduced into this Gentleman's
Company , the Prisoner at the Bar was at the <font> Griffin-Tavern
<$$font> in <font> Holborn <$$font> , and that he then told you he had
great Designs in hand ; and that there was an Insurrection design'd ,
and they wanted a Person of Resolution to seize a General :
LAYER-1723-2,54.2142

This , you say , was the first Time that ever you saw the Prisoner at
the Bar . LAYER-1723-2,54.2143

How came you to have that Share of Confidence in a Man that you never
saw before ? LAYER-1723-2,54.2144

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I told you I was in Discourse with Dr. <font>
Murphey <$$font> a great many Days and Weeks before I saw Mr. <font>
Layer <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,54.2145

I told you how every Day I saw him , and always discours'd about the
Insurrection , and how he told me then that he would recommend me to a
Man that had the Management of the greatest Part in this Affair ; and I
ask'd every Day when I should be introduced to him :
LAYER-1723-2,54.2146

He told me , the Time was not come yet ; but when it was a proper time ,
he would introduce me . LAYER-1723-2,54.2147

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I think you gave that for a Reason ,
why you had that Confidence in him , because you had been recommended by
one Dr. <font> Murphey . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,54.2148

How came you to have that mighty Dependance on Dr. <font> Murphey ?
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,54.2149

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Because Dr. <font> Murphey <$$font> and I had
been acquainted several Years ago . LAYER-1723-2,54.2150

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I hope you was not in any wicked Design
with Dr. <font> Murphey <$$font> , and so much acquainted , as to
recommend you in a Case of Treason . LAYER-1723-2,54.2151

<font> Lynch . <$$font> There was a common Friendship between us .
LAYER-1723-2,54.2152

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> How came he to trust you ?
LAYER-1723-2,54.2153

Would you have trusted him in a Business of Treason ?
LAYER-1723-2,54.2154

<font> Lynch . <$$font> We have been concerned in Affairs together .
LAYER-1723-2,54.2155

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> How long was you at the <font> Green
Man <$$font> with Mr. <font> Layer ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,54.2156

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I ca@ @n't say exactly the Time .
LAYER-1723-2,54.2157

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I do@ @n't ask you exactly to a Minute
or two ; LAYER-1723-2,54.2158

but was you there an Hour , or two , or three Hours ?
LAYER-1723-2,54.2159

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I ca@ @n't say whether we were there an Hour or
two ; LAYER-1723-2,54.2160

but we had something dress'd for Dinner , LAYER-1723-2,54.2161

and the Matter was discours'd of by us before Dinner .
LAYER-1723-2,54.2162

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> When you first alighted from your
Horses , what Room was you shewn into ? LAYER-1723-2,54.2163

<font> Lynch . <$$font> We were shewn into a Room up one Pair of Stairs
on the right-hand , the first Room ? LAYER-1723-2,54.2164

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Was it towards the Street , or
backwards ? LAYER-1723-2,54.2165

<font> Lynch . <$$font> It look'd into the common Road .
LAYER-1723-2,54.2166

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Did you look out of the Window and see
a Person of your Acquaintance ? LAYER-1723-2,54.2167

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I saw two Gentlemen , LAYER-1723-2,54.2168

but did not know them . LAYER-1723-2,54.2169

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Did not you look out of the Window ,
and say , you saw a Gentleman of your Acquaintance ?
LAYER-1723-2,54.2170

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I said I saw two Gentlemen that I thought I had
seen before . LAYER-1723-2,54.2171

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Did not you go down to those Gentlemen
? LAYER-1723-2,54.2172

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No ; I did not go down to them .
LAYER-1723-2,54.2173

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Did not you go down to them ?
LAYER-1723-2,54.2174

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No . LAYER-1723-2,54.2175

<P_55>

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Did not you say to Mr. <font> Layer
<$$font> , in the Drawer's Presence ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2177

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No . LAYER-1723-2,55.2178

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did not you tell me that those Gentlemen
were your Acquaintance ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2179

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I told you , those two Gentlemen I had seen
before . LAYER-1723-2,55.2180

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> How long were we together at the <font>
Green-Man ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,55.2181

Were the Horses put up , or not ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2182

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I ca@ @n't tell . LAYER-1723-2,55.2183

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Was there any thing dress'd for our Dinner
but a Beef-stake ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2184

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No , nothing else . LAYER-1723-2,55.2185

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did not you go down Stairs , pretending you
went to those Gentlemen ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2186

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No , I did not tell you I went to those
Gentlemen . LAYER-1723-2,55.2187

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did you not go down Stairs ?
LAYER-1723-2,55.2188

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , I did ; LAYER-1723-2,55.2189

and came up again immediately . LAYER-1723-2,55.2190

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Was not Dinner on Table when you came up
again ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2191

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I went down twice before Dinner .
LAYER-1723-2,55.2192

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Then you must consequently leave me in the
Room . LAYER-1723-2,55.2193

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I went down to make Water .
LAYER-1723-2,55.2194

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> What did you {TEXT:yo} go down the second
time for ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2195

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Out of Curiosity . LAYER-1723-2,55.2196

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> How long did you stay ?
LAYER-1723-2,55.2197

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Not both times above two Minutes .
LAYER-1723-2,55.2198

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I was then alone , when you went down ?
LAYER-1723-2,55.2199

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,55.2200

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Was this Discourse before or after Dinner ?
LAYER-1723-2,55.2201

<font> Lynch . <$$font> It was before Dinner . LAYER-1723-2,55.2202

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> When you came up the second Time , was not
Dinner on the Table ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2203

<font> Lynch . <$$font> It was come up . LAYER-1723-2,55.2204

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> And yet the Discourse we had was before
Dinner ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2205

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Yes , it was before Dinner .
LAYER-1723-2,55.2206

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> How much Time might we spend before Dinner ,
half an Hour , or an Hour ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2207

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I do@ @n't remember ; LAYER-1723-2,55.2208

but it was a good while . LAYER-1723-2,55.2209

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Was not the double Barrel Gun in the Room ?
LAYER-1723-2,55.2210

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I do@ @n't know whether it was there , or
whether your Servant had it . LAYER-1723-2,55.2211

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> At the Time of Dinner , was my Servant , or
Drawer , in the Room ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2212

<font> Lynch . <$$font> Neither of them was in the Room .
LAYER-1723-2,55.2213

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> You say we were a good while , you and I ,
alone ; LAYER-1723-2,55.2214

pray , how long ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2215

<font> Lynch . <$$font> I can@ @not say positively how long .
LAYER-1723-2,55.2216

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> Have you any Copy of that Part of the
Paper he gave you to read , and which you read ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2217

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No . LAYER-1723-2,55.2218

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> Was the Whole of it of any Length ?
LAYER-1723-2,55.2219

<font> Lynch . <$$font> To the best of my Remembrance , it was a common
Sheet of Paper . LAYER-1723-2,55.2220

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> Did you read the Whole ?
LAYER-1723-2,55.2221

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No : He doubled it down , LAYER-1723-2,55.2222

and gave me the latter Part of it to read . LAYER-1723-2,55.2223

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Some Things you seem to remember ,
LAYER-1723-2,55.2224

and some Things you do@ @n't remember : LAYER-1723-2,55.2225

Was it printed , or written ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2226

<font> Lynch . <$$font> It was written . LAYER-1723-2,55.2227

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Did he not mention it to be the Prince
of <font> Orange <$$font> 's Declaration ? LAYER-1723-2,55.2228

<font> Lynch . <$$font> No , he did not . LAYER-1723-2,55.2229

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Was not the Paper blotted ?
LAYER-1723-2,55.2230

<font> Lynch . <$$font> In that I saw there were two or three Places
interlined . LAYER-1723-2,55.2231

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> My Lord , I think the Gentlemen did
say they had not done with their Evidence , with relation to an
Overt-Act in <font> Essex <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,55.2232

if they have not , they will do well to go on now : LAYER-1723-2,55.2233

But we hope they shall not go into Overt-Acts committed in any other
County , till they make the whole of their Proofs of an Overt-Act in
<font> Essex . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,55.2234

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> You have been told , they should proceed
in their own Method , LAYER-1723-2,55.2235

<P_56> and when they have done , you may make what Observations may be
of Service to your Client . LAYER-1723-2,56.2236

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> Relations of Fact arising in another
County , which have no Relation to the Fact arising in <font> Essex
<$$font> , we hope they shall not go into , to amuse or captivate the
Jury , the Court , and the Auditory . LAYER-1723-2,56.2237

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> Sure never any Thing was like this !
LAYER-1723-2,56.2238

It is our Province to give Directions , LAYER-1723-2,56.2239

and we think it not proper to interrupt the King's Counsel , but that
they should proceed in their own Method : LAYER-1723-2,56.2240

You shall be heard as long as you please , when you come to make your
Observations . LAYER-1723-2,56.2241

Mr. <font> Soll._Gen. <$$font> The Prisoner hath a Right to say any
thing that is proper , to the Court and the Jury , in his Defence ,
LAYER-1723-2,56.2242

but he must say it openly ; LAYER-1723-2,56.2243

he is not to talk privately with the Jury ; though I am sure they are
Gentlemen of so great Worth and Honour , as not to be influenced .
LAYER-1723-2,56.2244

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I dare say the Jury wo@ @n't be
influenced ; LAYER-1723-2,56.2245

but he talks to his Counsel so loud , that the Jury may easily hear
every Word he says . LAYER-1723-2,56.2246

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> He must not speak so loud .
LAYER-1723-2,56.2247

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> I just now heard him say , It was
strange to go on with Evidence that would not be to the Purpose .
LAYER-1723-2,56.2248

I heard him , as I sat {TEXT:sate} here ; LAYER-1723-2,56.2249

let him deny it if he can . LAYER-1723-2,56.2250

<font> Ld._Ch._Jus. <$$font> I hope you will not offer any thing of
that Kind , Mr. <font> Layer : <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,56.2251

You have a Right to discourse with your Counsel , LAYER-1723-2,56.2252

but you must do it in such a Manner as the Jury may not hear .
LAYER-1723-2,56.2253

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> Indeed , my Lord , he shall have no
Encouragement from us for any such Conduct . LAYER-1723-2,56.2254

<heading>

<font> Matthew Plunkett <$$font> sworn . LAYER-1723-2,56.2256

<$$heading>

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Tell my Lord and the Jury ,
whether you know the Prisoner at the Bar . LAYER-1723-2,56.2258

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes , I do know him . LAYER-1723-2,56.2259

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Will you tell my Lord and the
Jury , upon what Account , and by whose Means , you first became
acquainted ? LAYER-1723-2,56.2260

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> One Major <font> Barnewell <$$font> brought
me first acquainted with Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> ;
LAYER-1723-2,56.2261

he had an Execution in his House in <font> Great Queen's-street <$$font>
, LAYER-1723-2,56.2262

and this Major <font> Barnewell <$$font> came to me ,
LAYER-1723-2,56.2263

and desired me to get a Couple of Grenadiers . LAYER-1723-2,56.2264

I brought him two ; LAYER-1723-2,56.2265

we went to Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> 's House , LAYER-1723-2,56.2266

and his Clerk let us in at the Back-door , LAYER-1723-2,56.2267

and the Grenadiers turned the Officers out , LAYER-1723-2,56.2268

and Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> gave them a Crown , and a Glass of Brandy
. LAYER-1723-2,56.2269

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> When was this ?
LAYER-1723-2,56.2270

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> As near as I can guess , it is going on of
five Years . LAYER-1723-2,56.2271

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Tell my Lord and the Jury , what
Month in this last Year you renewed the Acquaintance , and who brought
you to him ? LAYER-1723-2,56.2272

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> The next Acquaintance I had afterwards , was
by Major <font> Barnewell <$$font> , who was arrested ,
LAYER-1723-2,56.2273

and he sent me with a Letter to his House , to desire him to relieve him
. LAYER-1723-2,56.2274

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Do you know any thing of one
<font> James Plunkett ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,56.2275

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes : He came to me from Mr. <font> Layer
<$$font> , in <font> July <$$font> last , to desire me to meet him ;
LAYER-1723-2,56.2276

but how this Counsellor <font> Layer <$$font> and this <font> James
Plunkett <$$font> came acquainted I do@ @n't know .
LAYER-1723-2,56.2277

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> What was he ?
LAYER-1723-2,56.2278

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I do@ @n't know what he is ;
LAYER-1723-2,56.2279

he is acquainted with Mr. <font> Layer . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,56.2280

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> What Profession is he of ?
LAYER-1723-2,56.2281

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I do@ @n't know ; nor how he lives , or gets
his Bread . LAYER-1723-2,56.2282

<font> L._Ch._Jus. <$$font> Go on . LAYER-1723-2,56.2283

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> paid the Charges
for Major <font> Barnewell <$$font> , LAYER-1723-2,56.2284

and brought him out of the <font> Marshalsea . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,56.2285

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> How long was this ago ?
LAYER-1723-2,56.2286

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> To the best of my Knowledge , four Years ago
. LAYER-1723-2,56.2287

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> He is giving an Account how he came to be
acquainted with Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,56.2288

the first Time was upon the Account of rescuing Mr. <font> Layer
<$$font> 's Goods ; LAYER-1723-2,56.2289

the other Time was by Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> 's redeeming Major
<font> Barnewell <$$font> out of the <font> Marshalsea <$$font> , and
paying his Debt : LAYER-1723-2,56.2290

Give an Account how you came last acquainted with him .
LAYER-1723-2,56.2291

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I being at Home , in my own Room .
LAYER-1723-2,56.2292

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> How long ago ? LAYER-1723-2,56.2293

<P_57>

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I believe , as near as I can guess , it was
last <font> July . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,57.2295

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> Give an Account of what happened
{TEXT:hapned} then . LAYER-1723-2,57.2296

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Now this <font> James Plunkett <$$font> came
into my Room , LAYER-1723-2,57.2297

sat down , LAYER-1723-2,57.2298

and he asked me how I did , LAYER-1723-2,57.2299

and said he was glad to see me ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2300

and he asked me , Are you not well acquainted in the Army ?
LAYER-1723-2,57.2301

Yes , saith I , I know a great many in the Army , both Officers and
common Soldiers . LAYER-1723-2,57.2302

Do you know , saith he , any of the Serjeants of the Guards ?
LAYER-1723-2,57.2303

I know some of 'em , said I . LAYER-1723-2,57.2304

He brought me out of the Room , because my Wife was there ,
LAYER-1723-2,57.2305

and then he opened his Mind to me : LAYER-1723-2,57.2306

Saith he , Do you know one Mr. <font> Layer ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,57.2307

<paren> I had forgot the Gentleman , being so slightly acquainted with
him ; <$$paren> LAYER-1723-2,57.2308

No , saith , I , I do@ @n't know him . LAYER-1723-2,57.2309

No matter , saith he , LAYER-1723-2,57.2310

I have appointed a Place for you to meet him at , at the <font> Italian
<$$font> Coffee-house in <font> Russel-Court <$$font> ;
LAYER-1723-2,57.2311

and at the End of this , Mr. <font> Plunkett <$$font> 's asking me to
keep Correspondence with them for the Pretender's Service .
LAYER-1723-2,57.2312

I did not go to the <font> Italian <$$font> Coffee-house , not being in
a proper Station , nor having Money for that Purpose :
LAYER-1723-2,57.2313

So I did not think proper to go to the <font> Italian <$$font>
Coffee-house ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2314

but the <font> Sunday <$$font> following I went to St. <font> Andrew
<$$font> 's Church , LAYER-1723-2,57.2315

and meeting with some Friends , they told me Dr. <font> Sacheverel
<$$font> preached there ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2316

and so they decoyed me to go and hear him preach there .
LAYER-1723-2,57.2317

When Service was over , to the best of my Knowledge , as I was going
Home , between twelve and one a Clock , I met Mr. <font> Layer <$$font>
accidentally in <font> Lincoln's-Inn-Fields <$$font> ;
LAYER-1723-2,57.2318

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> he look'd at me , LAYER-1723-2,57.2319

he was really a perfect Stranger to me , LAYER-1723-2,57.2320

for I did not know him again ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2321

saith he , Is not your Name <font> Plunkett ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,57.2322

Yes , saith I . LAYER-1723-2,57.2323

Was there not one with you t'@ @other Night , one <font> James Plunkett
? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,57.2324

Yes , Sir , says I . LAYER-1723-2,57.2325

Where did he desire you to go ? said he . LAYER-1723-2,57.2326

I answer'd , He desired me to go to the <font> Italian <$$font>
Coffee-house in <font> Russel-Court . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,57.2327

Saith he , 'T@ @is well enough : LAYER-1723-2,57.2328

Do you not know me ? LAYER-1723-2,57.2329

No , saith I , LAYER-1723-2,57.2330

you have the Advantage of me ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2331

I ask your Pardon , LAYER-1723-2,57.2332

for I do@ @n't remember you . LAYER-1723-2,57.2333

Do@ @n't you remember one <font> Layer ? <$$font> said he .
LAYER-1723-2,57.2334

Then I call'd to Mind that I knew the Gentleman . LAYER-1723-2,57.2335

Saith he , Will you walk on this Side ? LAYER-1723-2,57.2336

I walked back again towards <font> Little Turn-stile <$$font> ,
LAYER-1723-2,57.2337

and we struck up the Wall-side , LAYER-1723-2,57.2338

and just as we came under a great Coach-house Gate-way , we went in ,
LAYER-1723-2,57.2339

and in the Gate-way he talk'd to me ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2340

saith he , I am told that you are a very honest Man , and well-affected
so and so . LAYER-1723-2,57.2341

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> Well-affected , to whom ?
LAYER-1723-2,57.2342

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Well-affected as to the Business of the
Pretender . LAYER-1723-2,57.2343

At the same Time we had this Talk , he bid me not mention it to <font>
James Plunkett <$$font> , that I had seen him : LAYER-1723-2,57.2344

Then he ask'd me if I knew any Serjeants in the Guards ;
LAYER-1723-2,57.2345

for , saith he , I want such old Soldiers as you are your self , that
could discipline a Mob , LAYER-1723-2,57.2346

for we have other Men enough amongst us ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2347

but if we could get some old Soldiers , if that could be managed , they
would be finely rewarded . LAYER-1723-2,57.2348

But , Sir , saith I , the Pretender is a Papist . LAYER-1723-2,57.2349

Saith he , What Difference is there between a Papist King , and a <font>
Lutheran <$$font> King ? LAYER-1723-2,57.2350

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> He said he wanted such old Soldiers as you
; LAYER-1723-2,57.2351

for what ? LAYER-1723-2,57.2352

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He wanted them to discipline a Mob , and to
put them in Order . LAYER-1723-2,57.2353

Then we began to reason about the Pretender ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2354

Why , saith he , we had as good have a Papist for our King , as a <font>
Lutheran . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,57.2355

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> What did you object ?
LAYER-1723-2,57.2356

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I said he was a Papist .
LAYER-1723-2,57.2357

Says he , We had as good have a Papist for our King , as to have a
<font> Lutheran <$$font> , LAYER-1723-2,57.2358

I do@ @n't know what Difference there is ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2359

but as it was , the Nation was enslaved , LAYER-1723-2,57.2360

and the People were obliged to be Slaves . LAYER-1723-2,57.2361

I ask'd him , Sir , who is the Promoter of this , that may join us ?
LAYER-1723-2,57.2362

You see , says he , what Injustice is done to you , LAYER-1723-2,57.2363

you have served Abroad , LAYER-1723-2,57.2364

and others are put over your Head ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2365

you have had and found great Hardships . LAYER-1723-2,57.2366

I asked him who promoted this ? LAYER-1723-2,57.2367

He said the Lord <font> North <$$font> and <font> Grey <$$font> .
LAYER-1723-2,57.2368

Says I , He is a Peer of the Realm . LAYER-1723-2,57.2369

Saith he , He is a fine General . LAYER-1723-2,57.2370

And the Earl of <font> Strafford <$$font> he mentioned .
LAYER-1723-2,57.2371

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> Who did he say was a fine General ?
LAYER-1723-2,57.2372

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He said my Lord <font> North <$$font> and
<font> Grey <$$font> was a fine General ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2373

and ask'd me what I thought of him ? LAYER-1723-2,57.2374

I said I had never been under his Command , but I look'd upon him to be
a Great Man , and one of the Peers of the Land . LAYER-1723-2,57.2375

And then he mentioned my Lord <font> Strafford <$$font> ,
LAYER-1723-2,57.2376

What do you think of him ? LAYER-1723-2,57.2377

To which I made the like Answer . LAYER-1723-2,57.2378

And what do you think of General <font> Primrose ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,57.2379

I said I had lately seen him at <font> Chelsea <$$font> , passing by in
his Coach , but that he was an old Man ; LAYER-1723-2,57.2380

however , Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> said he was a brave General .
LAYER-1723-2,57.2381

Then he ask'd me what I thought of General <font> Webb ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,57.2382

I said I had heard of his Fame . LAYER-1723-2,57.2383

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> When he said my Lord <font>
North <$$font> and <font> Grey <$$font> was a fine General , <P_58> and
when you ask'd who promoted it , whether did Mr. <font> Layer <$$font>
tell you what their Design was to do ? LAYER-1723-2,58.2384

When Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> ask'd you , what do you think of this
Person , and the other Person , what were they to do ?
LAYER-1723-2,58.2385

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> To raise a Rebellion . LAYER-1723-2,58.2386

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengully . <$$font> Was that talk'd of at that Time
? LAYER-1723-2,58.2387

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Not at that Time . LAYER-1723-2,58.2388

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You said he wanted such old Soldiers as
you ; LAYER-1723-2,58.2389

for what Purpose ? LAYER-1723-2,58.2390

You say he wanted them to discipline a Mob , and put it in Order ?
LAYER-1723-2,58.2391

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes , my Lord . LAYER-1723-2,58.2392

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Did he tell you how many he wanted ?
LAYER-1723-2,58.2393

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> No ; he did not say how many .
LAYER-1723-2,58.2394

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Was there any thing said about
their Names at that Time ? LAYER-1723-2,58.2395

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> would have me
take a List of their Names , and to enrol them , that they might know
where they lodg'd , and where they quarter'd ; that so when he wanted
them , he might then send for them to be in Readiness .
LAYER-1723-2,58.2396

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Was there any Number he ask'd
you to get the Names of ? LAYER-1723-2,58.2397

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I said I knew a great many , and that I
could get twenty-five . LAYER-1723-2,58.2398

Saith he , you ought to have a List of their Names , where they lodge ,
that they may be in Readiness for a Call : LAYER-1723-2,58.2399

And saith he , This would have gone on some Time ago ,
LAYER-1723-2,58.2400

only some Body made Discovery of it to the <font> French <$$font>
Ambassador , LAYER-1723-2,58.2401

and he wrote to the Regent , LAYER-1723-2,58.2402

and so it was discovered to the King : LAYER-1723-2,58.2403

And saith he , The Duke of <font> Ormond <$$font> was to come in one
Ship , and General <font> Dillon <$$font> in another , and they would
bring their Numbers with them ; and then I should see that the Army
would not oppose them . LAYER-1723-2,58.2404

And when I parted from him , he gave me half a Crown to drink .
LAYER-1723-2,58.2405

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> What was that to do ?
LAYER-1723-2,58.2406

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> It was to encourage me .
LAYER-1723-2,58.2407

And he said he would send a Messenger to me ; LAYER-1723-2,58.2408

and in a Day or two afterwards there came a Messenger from him :
LAYER-1723-2,58.2409

I was not at home , LAYER-1723-2,58.2410

but he spoke with my Wife . LAYER-1723-2,58.2411

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Who was that ?
LAYER-1723-2,58.2412

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> The Un-juring Minister .
LAYER-1723-2,58.2413

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> What was his Name ?
LAYER-1723-2,58.2414

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> His Name was <font> Jeffreys . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,58.2415

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> You say you was not at home the first
Time ; LAYER-1723-2,58.2416

did he come again ? LAYER-1723-2,58.2417

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,58.2418

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> How long after ? LAYER-1723-2,58.2419

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> A matter of five or six days after .
LAYER-1723-2,58.2420

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Did you see him ? LAYER-1723-2,58.2421

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes , I saw him . LAYER-1723-2,58.2422

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> What pass'd between you ?
LAYER-1723-2,58.2423

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He ask'd me if I knew Mr. <font> Layer ?
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,58.2424

I told him I did . LAYER-1723-2,58.2425

He then@ @carried me to the <font> Castle <$$font> Tavern in <font>
Drury-lane <$$font> , where we drank two Pints of Wine , which he paid
for ; LAYER-1723-2,58.2426

after the Nonjuring Parson told me he came from <font> Layer <$$font> ,
who gave his Service , LAYER-1723-2,58.2427

and told me that he was employed by Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> to go to
such as I was , who were old Serjeants , to get a Parcel together to
discipline Citizens , and other Mob in the Country .
LAYER-1723-2,58.2428

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> What further pass'd between you and Mr.
<font> Jeffreys ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,58.2429

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I beg Leave to object to that Question
. LAYER-1723-2,58.2430

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> If I do@ @n't bring it home to Mr.
<font> Layer <$$font> , it will signify nothing . LAYER-1723-2,58.2431

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Mr. <font> Ketelbey <$$font> , you know
that many times in Discourse it is necessary to mention Introductions ,
to let in what is material : LAYER-1723-2,58.2432

Whatever pass'd between him and <font> Jeffreys <$$font> , do@ @n't
affect your Client . LAYER-1723-2,58.2433

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> It is a constant Rule , if a Man
speaks of a third Person's Transactions , it is declared as nothing ,
and commonly stop'd from being given in Evidence . LAYER-1723-2,58.2434

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> If they begin right , they will give
Evidence in such a Method as to be understood : LAYER-1723-2,58.2435

By declaring what passed between him and <font> Plunkett <$$font> , the
Evidence may be the better understood . LAYER-1723-2,58.2436

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> I do@ @n't doubt your Lordship's giving
Direction right ; LAYER-1723-2,58.2437

but I observe this , lest some of the Jury should not take it right .
LAYER-1723-2,58.2438

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Let the Evidence be given in such a
manner as may be understood ; LAYER-1723-2,58.2439

what is introductory goes for nothing , LAYER-1723-2,58.2440

but it is in order to explain the Evidence . LAYER-1723-2,58.2441

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> What pass'd between you and the
Nonjuring Parson , at the <font> Castle <$$font> Tavern ?
LAYER-1723-2,58.2442

<P_59>

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He talk'd to me of the same Subject ,
desiring me to get Men in Readiness ; LAYER-1723-2,59.2444

he told me , he had a great many Places to go to besides me with this
Errand , LAYER-1723-2,59.2445

and then we parted . LAYER-1723-2,59.2446

Another time he came to me , we went to an Alehouse , to the <font> Cock
<$$font> and <font> Bottle <$$font> in the <font> Strand <$$font> ,
where he gave me half a Guinea , and said , there is a Token ,
LAYER-1723-2,59.2447

Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> had sent it me to give me Encouragement .
LAYER-1723-2,59.2448

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> At that Time that Mr. <font>
Layer <$$font> said he would send a Messenger to you , did he mention
any thing of Money ? LAYER-1723-2,59.2449

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> said he would
send Money by the Messenger to me . LAYER-1723-2,59.2450

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> You say he told you , that he would send
you Money by the Messenger . LAYER-1723-2,59.2451

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He told me so . LAYER-1723-2,59.2452

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> Afterwards you say , one came to you as
from him , and encouraged you , and gave you half a Guinea .
LAYER-1723-2,59.2453

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He did : LAYER-1723-2,59.2454

I am upon my Oath before God and Man , LAYER-1723-2,59.2455

I will say nothing but the Truth . LAYER-1723-2,59.2456

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> Did you receive any Message from
<font> Jeffreys <$$font> to appoint a meeting with Mr. <font> Layer ?
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,59.2457

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Some Time afterwards I met Mr. <font> Layer
<$$font> , at eight a Clock , at the <font> Castle-Tavern <$$font>
{COM:font_change_around_"Castle"} in <font> Drury-lane <$$font> ;
LAYER-1723-2,59.2458

there was the Landlord , and Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> , who had two
Bottles of Wine , and some Bread and Cheese : LAYER-1723-2,59.2459

He would have had me eat , LAYER-1723-2,59.2460

but I told him I could not eat ; LAYER-1723-2,59.2461

but I drank of the Wine . LAYER-1723-2,59.2462

When he had discours'd with me about the Affair , to encourage me he
gave me a Crown ; LAYER-1723-2,59.2463

I went cross <font> Lincoln's-Inn-Fields <$$font> , LAYER-1723-2,59.2464

so went home . LAYER-1723-2,59.2465

Mr. <font> West . <$$font> What did he give you the Crown for ?
LAYER-1723-2,59.2466

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> To encourage to me to list Men for the
Pretender . LAYER-1723-2,59.2467

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Had you any Letter by the <font>
Penny-Post {TEXT:Peny-Post} ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,59.2468

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> That Morning Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> was
going to <font> Norfolk <$$font> , LAYER-1723-2,59.2469

<font> Plunkett <$$font> told me Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> was going
out of Town , and would be glad to see me . LAYER-1723-2,59.2470

I went to Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> , LAYER-1723-2,59.2471

and his Horses were at the Door ; LAYER-1723-2,59.2472

he desired me to walk up two Pair of Stairs forwards ,
LAYER-1723-2,59.2473

and by the same Token ordered his Servant to charge his Blunderbuss in
the Room . LAYER-1723-2,59.2474

Saith Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> , I have given a Guinea to the
Nonjuring Minister to give you , to do what Service you can ;
LAYER-1723-2,59.2475

and when I am Abroad , you may be sure I shall not be idle .
LAYER-1723-2,59.2476

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> Was any proposal made to any other Person
? LAYER-1723-2,59.2477

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I brought an old Soldier who had been in the
Service many Years . LAYER-1723-2,59.2478

Mr. <font> Reeve . <$$font> What was his Name ? LAYER-1723-2,59.2479

<font> Plunkett . John Child <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,59.2480

I brought him as thinking he might have been of Service to them .
LAYER-1723-2,59.2481

<font> Ld._Ch._Just. <$$font> What was it Mr. <font> Layer <$$font>
said when he was going into the Country ? LAYER-1723-2,59.2482

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He told me he would not be idle there .
LAYER-1723-2,59.2483

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> What did he desire of you ?
LAYER-1723-2,59.2484

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He desired me to see and get what Soldiers I
could for him : LAYER-1723-2,59.2485

I came to the Nonjuring-Minister , LAYER-1723-2,59.2486

and told him I had got twenty-five . LAYER-1723-2,59.2487

Then Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> ask'd me , why I did not bring a List of
them , that he might know where their Habitations were , and that they
might be in Readiness at the Time . LAYER-1723-2,59.2488

I disputed with Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> what would they do for Arms ?
LAYER-1723-2,59.2489

No fear of Arms , saith he ; LAYER-1723-2,59.2490

Arms will be provided for them . LAYER-1723-2,59.2491

After he return'd from the Country to the Town , this Mr. <font>
Plunkett <$$font> was the first Messenger that was sent to me ;
LAYER-1723-2,59.2492

he came LAYER-1723-2,59.2493

and told me Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> was come to Town ;
LAYER-1723-2,59.2494

and this Nonjuring-Parson sent me a Letter by the <font> Penny-Post
{TEXT:Peny-Post} <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,59.2495

Mr. <font> Child <$$font> was in my Room LAYER-1723-2,59.2496

and read it ; LAYER-1723-2,59.2497

the Contents were , <font> Mr. <$$font> Layer <font> is come to Town ,
LAYER-1723-2,59.2498

and would be very glad to see you : LAYER-1723-2,59.2499

No more , but your humble Servant <$$font> William Jeffreys .
LAYER-1723-2,59.2500

By this I knew his Name . LAYER-1723-2,59.2501

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> By this Letter he told you Mr. <font>
Layer <$$font> would be glad to see you ; LAYER-1723-2,59.2502

did you go to him ? LAYER-1723-2,59.2503

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes , I went to him . LAYER-1723-2,59.2504

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Where ? LAYER-1723-2,59.2505

to his own House ? LAYER-1723-2,59.2506

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes , to his own House .
LAYER-1723-2,59.2507

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> What passed between you and Mr. <font>
Layer <$$font> at that Time ? LAYER-1723-2,59.2508

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I remember at that Time , when I came to him
, he gave me a Guinea with his own Hand . LAYER-1723-2,59.2509

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Who gave it you ? LAYER-1723-2,59.2510

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> , after he came
from the Country , gave it me , LAYER-1723-2,59.2511

and I recommended Mr. <font> Child <$$font> to him .
LAYER-1723-2,59.2512

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> When you recommended Mr. <font>
Child <$$font> , what did <font> Layer <$$font> say ?
LAYER-1723-2,59.2513

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He said he had no Business for him .
LAYER-1723-2,59.2514

<P_60>

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> For what Purpose was <font>
Child <$$font> recommended to Mr. <font> Layer ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,60.2516

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I recommended him as an honest Man , as one
that was well-affected , as he desired me . LAYER-1723-2,60.2517

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Upon what Account did you
recommend him ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2518

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Upon the Account to be a Pretender's Man .
LAYER-1723-2,60.2519

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Did you ever receive any Money
to give to <font> Child ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,60.2520

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I receiv'd half a Guinea from Mr. <font>
Layer <$$font> to give to Mr. <font> Child . <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,60.2521

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> For what Purpose was it ?
LAYER-1723-2,60.2522

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> For to encourage him in the Service , to be
trusty to him , and to be a Pretender's Man . LAYER-1723-2,60.2523

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> By what Name did he call the
Pretender ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2524

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He called him the King .
LAYER-1723-2,60.2525

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Had you any Talk with him any
other Time ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2526

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> The <font> Sunday <$$font> before he was
taken up I was with him , LAYER-1723-2,60.2527

and he was talking and saying the King was as fine a Shooter as any in
<font> Europe . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,60.2528

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Whom did he mean by the King ?
LAYER-1723-2,60.2529

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> The Pretender , that he was as fine a
Shooter as any in <font> Europe <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,60.2530

he shot nineteen out of twenty . LAYER-1723-2,60.2531

I said , that was fine shooting . LAYER-1723-2,60.2532

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Where was this Discourse ?
LAYER-1723-2,60.2533

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> In his own Parlour . LAYER-1723-2,60.2534

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> Can you recollect any other Discourse
there was at that Time , besides that of shooting ?
LAYER-1723-2,60.2535

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes , there was ; LAYER-1723-2,60.2536

we talk'd of those Men that would do Service . LAYER-1723-2,60.2537

I ask'd him what Rewards those Men , that would do Service for their
King and Country , should have ; LAYER-1723-2,60.2538

he told me , that they , and their Families , were to be for ever taken
Care of . LAYER-1723-2,60.2539

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Was there any other Promise made
to you ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2540

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> There was no Promise ; LAYER-1723-2,60.2541

only he was the Man who said , if I would follow his Directions , he
would promote me ; that he would engage to do great Matters for me ; and
what I suffer'd in the Army , he would make me Amends for .
LAYER-1723-2,60.2542

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Had you any Discourse about the
Disposition of the Nation ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2543

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He said , that most of the Nation was tir'd
with the present Government ; LAYER-1723-2,60.2544

and he said , that King <font> George <$$font> was for ruining of the
Nation . LAYER-1723-2,60.2545

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Had you any Talk of any Persons
at Court ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2546

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes ; he said , what signified the
Government ; LAYER-1723-2,60.2547

there were but only eight or nine Upstarts that belong'd to King <font>
George <$$font> 's Court ; LAYER-1723-2,60.2548

that the ancient Peers of the Realm would not be run down ;
LAYER-1723-2,60.2549

for they should be made Slaves , if they did not prevent it .
LAYER-1723-2,60.2550

Mr. <font> Serj. Pengelly . <$$font> Had you any Discourse any other
Time about the <font> Dutch <$$font> or the <font> French ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,60.2551

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes ; I do remember that he said , here is a
<font> Dutch <$$font> Army come in upon this Nation ,
LAYER-1723-2,60.2552

and then the <font> French <$$font> Army will come in , and take our
Rights and Liberties from us : LAYER-1723-2,60.2553

You will keep a <font> Dutch <$$font> Army , LAYER-1723-2,60.2554

and it will be to make a War among our selves . LAYER-1723-2,60.2555

Mr. <font> Serj. Cheshyre . <$$font> What would he have to cure all
this ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2556

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> He told me , that when the Insurrection was
, there would be a great many Half-pay-Officers as I knew that would be
on the Pretender's Side , and especially those of the Names of <font>
Fitzgerald <$$font> ; LAYER-1723-2,60.2557

but I never knew any <font> Fitzgerald <$$font> Abroad .
LAYER-1723-2,60.2558

Mr. <font> Att._Gen. <$$font> We have done examining this Witness .
LAYER-1723-2,60.2559

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> You say your first Acquaintance with me was
in <font> Queen's-street <$$font> , and that Major <font> Barnwell
<$$font> desir'd you to assist me , there being an Execution in my House
; LAYER-1723-2,60.2560

was it not so ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2561

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,60.2562

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> At the same Time you called me Counsellor
<font> Layer ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,60.2563

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes ; I came to your House .
LAYER-1723-2,60.2564

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did I employ you ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2565

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Major <font> Barnwell <$$font> sent me to
get a Couple of Grenadiers , LAYER-1723-2,60.2566

and you ordered your Clerk to let them in at the Back-door ;
LAYER-1723-2,60.2567

and the two Grenadiers , which were confin'd in the <font> Savoy
<$$font> afterwards for it , drove the Officers out .
LAYER-1723-2,60.2568

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Was it the Landlord of the House@ @'s Goods
, or my Goods ? LAYER-1723-2,60.2569

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I can@ @not tell ; LAYER-1723-2,60.2570

how should I know whether they were yours , or his ?
LAYER-1723-2,60.2571

they were in your House . LAYER-1723-2,60.2572

<P_61>

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> You said it was about Five Years before I
saw you in <font> Lincolns-Inn-Fields . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2574

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> It was when the Army was broke ;
LAYER-1723-2,61.2575

and I came over from <font> Ireland . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2576

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Well , you say , Five Years afterwards I met
you in <font> Lincolns-Inn-Fields <$$font> , and gave you half an crown
{TEXT:Half-a-Crown} to drink . LAYER-1723-2,61.2577

I told you my Lord <font> North and Grey <$$font> was to be General :
That my Lord <font> Strafford <$$font> was concern'd in it .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2578

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> No ; you told me they were Promoters of it .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2579

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Promoters of what ? LAYER-1723-2,61.2580

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Of this Conspiracy . LAYER-1723-2,61.2581

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> So you did not know me ;
LAYER-1723-2,61.2582

nor did I know you . LAYER-1723-2,61.2583

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes , you knew me ; LAYER-1723-2,61.2584

therefore , Sir , said I , you have an Advantage against me ;
LAYER-1723-2,61.2585

for I do@ @n't know you . LAYER-1723-2,61.2586

Afterwards we met one another by Accident . LAYER-1723-2,61.2587

Says you , Do@ @n't tell <font> Plunkett <$$font> you met me .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2588

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> What <font> Plunkett ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,61.2589

<font> Plunkett . James Plunkett . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2590

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Where lives <font> James Plunkett ?
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2591

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I do@ @n't know : LAYER-1723-2,61.2592

However , that@ @'s not material . LAYER-1723-2,61.2593

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did not you come to my House some time after
this ; and desire me to lend you 13 <font> s. <$$font> upon Account of
being Bail in an Action in the <font> Marshal <$$font> 's Court ?
LAYER-1723-2,61.2594

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> That was Two Months after :
LAYER-1723-2,61.2595

There was a Soldier which was arrested by a <font> Marshal's-Court
<$$font> {TEXT:font_change_around_"Marshal"} Writ .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2596

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> And I lent you 13 <font> s. <$$font> in
order to discharge him ? LAYER-1723-2,61.2597

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes , you did . LAYER-1723-2,61.2598

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did not you afterwards ask me for some Money
on Account of Sir <font> Daniel Carroll ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2599

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> No . LAYER-1723-2,61.2600

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did not you make a Demand on Sir <font>
Daniel ? <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2601

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> No : I told you my Affairs with Sir <font>
Daniel . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2602

You said you would not meddle your self , but you would write to him .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2603

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did you not bring a Paper , and say , Sir
<font> Daniel <$$font> had agreed to pay you 20 <font> l. <font> when
he receiv'd his Pay ? LAYER-1723-2,61.2604

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> No ; I brought no Papers to you .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2605

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did not you tell me , it would be the
greatest Kindness in the World to you to advance 20 <font> s. <$$font>
for you ? LAYER-1723-2,61.2606

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> I never ask'd you in the Course of my Life .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2607

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> Did you never borrow any Money of me ?
LAYER-1723-2,61.2608

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> No ; I never borrowed any Money of you ,
otherwise than to get Men listed for the Pretender .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2609

<font> Prisoner . <$$font> I shall shew that you are a little mistaken
by_and_by . LAYER-1723-2,61.2610

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> You said , you was decoy'd to Church
? LAYER-1723-2,61.2611

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Decoy'd ! LAYER-1723-2,61.2612

I said it was out of my Way , when my own Parish Church was nearer .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2613

Mr. <font> Hungerford . <$$font> What , do you use to go to Church ?
LAYER-1723-2,61.2614

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Yes . LAYER-1723-2,61.2615

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> You say , the first Time you saw this
<font> James Plunkett <$$font> , he came to you when your Wife was in
the Room ? LAYER-1723-2,61.2616

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> The first Time I saw him , was , when Mr.
<font> Layer <$$font> releas'd Major <font> Barnewell <$$font> out of
the <font> Marshalsea . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2617

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> When <font> James Plunkett <$$font>
came to your House , he took you by the Arm , LAYER-1723-2,61.2618

and told you , he came from Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> ;
LAYER-1723-2,61.2619

Did he tell you that first Time , he came from Mr. <font> Layer ?
<$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2620

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> Upon my Oath he did . LAYER-1723-2,61.2621

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> What Discourse had you the first Time ?
LAYER-1723-2,61.2622

Did he only ask you to go and meet Mr. <font> Layer ? <$$font>
LAYER-1723-2,61.2623

<font> Plunkett <$$font> He came to me , LAYER-1723-2,61.2624

and desired me to meet Mr. <font> Layer <$$font> at the <font> Italian
<$$font> Coffee-House in <font> Russel-Court <$$font> .
LAYER-1723-2,61.2625

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> Did <font> James Plunkett <$$font> talk
to you about listing Men for the Pretender the first Time he saw you ?
LAYER-1723-2,61.2626

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> No ; he only was sent on an Errand from Mr.
<font> Layer . <$$font> LAYER-1723-2,61.2627

Mr. <font> Ketelbey . <$$font> And then you came to the Nonjuring
Parson : The Unjuring Parson , as you call him . LAYER-1723-2,61.2628

What Discourse had you with him ? LAYER-1723-2,61.2629

<font> Plunkett . <$$font> The same Discourse pass'd between us about
listing Men . LAYER-1723-2,61.2630

