<BEGIN_leathes-1913-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

Chapter I LEATHES-1913-2,1.4

What is Education ? LEATHES-1913-2,1.5

<$$heading>

Forty years have passed since Forster led us out of Egypt ;
LEATHES-1913-2,1.7

and where is the promised land ? LEATHES-1913-2,1.8

Nearer , we trust ; though not ready for immediate possession .
LEATHES-1913-2,1.9

We are told of a new policy , of a national system of education ;
LEATHES-1913-2,1.10

no doubt a new policy is needed , LEATHES-1913-2,1.11

and could now be framed ; LEATHES-1913-2,1.12

but it is not the purpose of this treatise to define a policy .
LEATHES-1913-2,1.13

Policies must be framed by those who are responsible for their execution
; LEATHES-1913-2,1.14

they must , however , be expressed in words before they can be achieved
. LEATHES-1913-2,1.15

Education is an ambiguous term , of which we shall hear more and more ,
till we get education right ; LEATHES-1913-2,1.16

it is not inopportune to enquire what education is , where it begins and
ends , and what part of it can be controlled by public policy .
LEATHES-1913-2,1.17

The Latin word , <font> educare <$$font> , means to bring up , to rear ,
to foster . LEATHES-1913-2,1.18

In Latin a wet-nurse educates a baby , LEATHES-1913-2,1.19

the sea educates a fish , LEATHES-1913-2,1.20

the earth educates a beast , LEATHES-1913-2,1.21

the air educates a bird , LEATHES-1913-2,1.22

the rain educates a flower . LEATHES-1913-2,1.23

Language has a sense of ancestry ; LEATHES-1913-2,1.24

it does not repudiate its origins . LEATHES-1913-2,1.25

The Latin sense is still the true sense . LEATHES-1913-2,1.26

The term education may <P_2> be narrowed in its common usage ,
LEATHES-1913-2,2.27

but it draws dignity from its wider meaning . LEATHES-1913-2,2.28

Education <paren> in the full sense <$$paren> is the process by which an
individual is adjusted to his whole ambit of existence ;
LEATHES-1913-2,2.29

the whole being is the subject of education ; LEATHES-1913-2,2.30

and the whole of life is its end . LEATHES-1913-2,2.31

As the living soul pursues its orderly development external forces
starve or nourish , invigorate or cramp , distort or favour , the
ductile and expansive growth . LEATHES-1913-2,2.32

Studies supply food and exercise ; LEATHES-1913-2,2.33

they are the material , the apparatus of education , not itself .
LEATHES-1913-2,2.34

In whatever circumstances the individual may be reared he will get an
education . LEATHES-1913-2,2.35

His parents will mould him for good or evil ; LEATHES-1913-2,2.36

the air he breathes , the light that falls upon him , the food he eats ,
the pursuits he follows , will each have a share in his making or
marring . LEATHES-1913-2,2.37

His fellows will school him ; LEATHES-1913-2,2.38

his elders will discipline him ; LEATHES-1913-2,2.39

life and his world will teach him . LEATHES-1913-2,2.40

The whole tradition of the society into which he is born will leave its
mark upon his being . LEATHES-1913-2,2.41

The street Arab {TEXT:arab} has his education , as the Balliol scholar
his ; LEATHES-1913-2,2.42

neither is perfectly trained for the world in which he will have to live
; LEATHES-1913-2,2.43

but each acquires aptitudes for his own sphere . LEATHES-1913-2,2.44

There is thus a large part of education , and that not the least
important , which public policy can@ @not control . LEATHES-1913-2,2.45

The State can do little to direct , though it can do something to
restrain , or inhibit , the action of the parents ; LEATHES-1913-2,2.46

the State can@ @not alter the ways of children when they meet together ;
LEATHES-1913-2,2.47

the State can@ @not impose new <P_3> methods upon industry ;
LEATHES-1913-2,3.48

the State can@ @not change the tradition of the people , which grows
from generation to generation , intolerant of direct command ,
expressive of the common spirit . LEATHES-1913-2,3.49

From birth to death education will proceed , with or without state
systems . LEATHES-1913-2,3.50

State systems will succeed if they adapt themselves to the surrounding
life , if they work with it rather than against it , utilising the
benignant elements to defeat the malign . LEATHES-1913-2,3.51

During the first years of life , the parents , with the traditions that
they inherit , are the principal force in education .
LEATHES-1913-2,3.52

Towards the formation of character , the first five years after birth
are of paramount importance . LEATHES-1913-2,3.53

Moreover , the parents have the earliest and the best chances ;
LEATHES-1913-2,3.54

the schoolmaster follows after to remedy parental error , to make good
parental neglect . LEATHES-1913-2,3.55

On the parents public policy can@ @not work directly ;
LEATHES-1913-2,3.56

but the children whom we educate will become parents in their turn .
LEATHES-1913-2,3.57

In this way , as in others , we are still gathering the fruits of thirty
years ago ; LEATHES-1913-2,3.58

and our grandchildren will endure the regimen prepared by us .
LEATHES-1913-2,3.59

After the schoolmaster has received the child parental education
continues to operate , if only by defect ; LEATHES-1913-2,3.60

if there be wisdom the school and the home should work in cordial
alliance . LEATHES-1913-2,3.61

No technical training , no professional zeal , can replace the
understanding , the patience , the hopefulness of parental love ,
rejoicing with the growth of the child , triumphing with its successes ,
bringing courage to its failures . LEATHES-1913-2,3.62

The child that <P_4> has a good home will receive fuller recognition as
an individual than any school can give . LEATHES-1913-2,4.63

Throughout the years of tutelage school and home share responsibility ;
LEATHES-1913-2,4.64

for failures the school alone can@ @not be fairly blamed - even apart
from those caused by original sin . LEATHES-1913-2,4.65

But , as things are , for the great majority the school education from
five or so to thirteen or fourteen is the only thoughtful and systematic
education provided . LEATHES-1913-2,4.66

The parents may be willing LEATHES-1913-2,4.67

but they are seldom wise ; LEATHES-1913-2,4.68

the schoolmaster also is but a man , LEATHES-1913-2,4.69

yet the craft of his trade assists him to redress parental shortcomings
. LEATHES-1913-2,4.70

The State has come by insensible degrees to take , through the
schoolmaster , more and more care for the growing generation .
LEATHES-1913-2,4.71

The need for instruction was earliest perceived ; first by the Churches
, then by the State . LEATHES-1913-2,4.72

So important was instruction at that time , so signal its defect , that
it usurped the name of education ; LEATHES-1913-2,4.73

we still speak of education when we mean instruction - the whole for the
part . LEATHES-1913-2,4.74

To test the results of the instruction provided , examinations were set
up . LEATHES-1913-2,4.75

High marks were taken as an indubitable index of success ;
LEATHES-1913-2,4.76

few thought of questioning the record ; LEATHES-1913-2,4.77

it was even accepted as a basis for state payment , which was called
payment by results . LEATHES-1913-2,4.78

But , in every good school , there are by-products which are not shown
in the examination table . LEATHES-1913-2,4.79

The body may be trained to health and dexterity , LEATHES-1913-2,4.80

good habits , tastes , and prejudices , may be ingrafted ,
LEATHES-1913-2,4.81

a love of good work may be created , LEATHES-1913-2,4.82

character may be developed , LEATHES-1913-2,4.83

the citizen <P_5> may be fitted for civilised society ,
LEATHES-1913-2,5.84

the intelligence may be quickened LEATHES-1913-2,5.85

and the understanding may be informed . LEATHES-1913-2,5.86

So long as our minds were fixed solely on instruction , so long as they
were dominated by the examination test , these by-products suffered some
neglect . LEATHES-1913-2,5.87

But we have now come to value school instruction quite as much for its
wholesome discipline as for the information which it imparts ;
LEATHES-1913-2,5.88

we judge a school by its tone not less than by its examination results .
LEATHES-1913-2,5.89

To have been at a good school is a voucher of good training .
LEATHES-1913-2,5.90

There has been a change in the spirit by which schools are directed .
LEATHES-1913-2,5.91

Education is a preparation for life . LEATHES-1913-2,5.92

In that preparation society , the whole environment , life itself , are
factors which we can@ @not influence . LEATHES-1913-2,5.93

The home is all-important , LEATHES-1913-2,5.94

but we can@ @not directly influence the home . LEATHES-1913-2,5.95

The public share in education begins where these moulding forces cease
to operate , where they fall short . LEATHES-1913-2,5.96

What the State can do well to equip the young for life , what it can do
better than other agencies , what the State can do and other agencies
can@ @not , what it can do to make up for the default of other agencies
, that is the public share in education . LEATHES-1913-2,5.97

The inspector judges a school by examination , by the methods and skill
of the masters , by the appearance , the tone , the intelligence of the
pupils . LEATHES-1913-2,5.98

The business man judges a school by the aptitude of its pupils for
commercial and industrial tasks . LEATHES-1913-2,5.99

But the nation should judge its schools by the fitness of their pupils
for life , of which business is a part , but only a part .
LEATHES-1913-2,5.100

If <P_6> our citizens are unfit for the necessary , for the higher , for
the highest functions of life , some blame must fall to all of us as
citizens , LEATHES-1913-2,6.101

for we all have a share in the result . LEATHES-1913-2,6.102

The main principles of elementary education have now been mastered ,
though practice may still lag behind ; LEATHES-1913-2,6.103

the blunders of the eighties and the nineties have been shaken off ;
LEATHES-1913-2,6.104

the State can now move forward cautiously and slowly to build on the
foundations established . LEATHES-1913-2,6.105

One great cause of the initial disappointments of elementary education
was the lack of a sound theory ; LEATHES-1913-2,6.106

another was the lack of a sound tradition ; LEATHES-1913-2,6.107

a third was the lack of a trained staff . LEATHES-1913-2,6.108

The advance of the State must still be conditioned by these factors .
LEATHES-1913-2,6.109

Higher elementary schools , trade schools , technical schools , extended
secondary schooling - all these depend on sound theory , sound tradition
, and a skilled staff . LEATHES-1913-2,6.110

The theory , as well as the rest , can only be perfected by experience ;
LEATHES-1913-2,6.111

the ladder of learning - I would rather say the ladder of education -
can@ @not be perfected in another year , in a decade , in a generation .
LEATHES-1913-2,6.112

Education is a process , LEATHES-1913-2,6.113

purposeful education is an art , LEATHES-1913-2,6.114

but when men speak of education , they are prone to think of buildings ,
of curricula , of systems . LEATHES-1913-2,6.115

They call up to mind Boards of Managers , three_hundred Local
Authorities with their inspectors , a Minister at Whitehall , with
a_thousand clerks and two or three_hundred more inspectors , a thumping
vote , a heavy rate . LEATHES-1913-2,6.116

They think of subjects , and examinations , and grants , <P_7> and
salaries , and pensions , and scholarships ; a National Union of
Teachers , an Incorporated Association of Headmasters .
LEATHES-1913-2,7.117

They think of forms to fill up , and schedules , and codes , and rules .
LEATHES-1913-2,7.118

But all these things are not education ; LEATHES-1913-2,7.119

they are not even part of education ; LEATHES-1913-2,7.120

they are administrative machinery . LEATHES-1913-2,7.121

Public education can@ @not go forward without administrative machinery ;
LEATHES-1913-2,7.122

but the machinery is not the education . LEATHES-1913-2,7.123

There is an art of education ; LEATHES-1913-2,7.124

it is practised by a teacher on a class , on the several members of a
class . LEATHES-1913-2,7.125

An art can@ @not be reduced to a system ; though it can be assisted by a
system . LEATHES-1913-2,7.126

A good system is helpful ; LEATHES-1913-2,7.127

a bad system is a stumbling block ; LEATHES-1913-2,7.128

but even a good system derives all its virtue from the persons who work
it . LEATHES-1913-2,7.129

A tradition counts for more than a system ; LEATHES-1913-2,7.130

the tradition shapes and influences the teachers ; LEATHES-1913-2,7.131

it works by spirit and not by rule ; LEATHES-1913-2,7.132

but in the long run teaching , like other arts , is vested in a living
being . LEATHES-1913-2,7.133

The highly trained master may have missed the art ; LEATHES-1913-2,7.134

the humble unqualified assistant may possess it . LEATHES-1913-2,7.135

The art of education requires liberty for its exercise .
LEATHES-1913-2,7.136

If it were our sole object to produce masterpieces , we might claim
complete liberty for the art . LEATHES-1913-2,7.137

But full liberty of experiment can@ @not be permitted where human beings
are the raw material . LEATHES-1913-2,7.138

Moreover , what is a masterpiece of education ? LEATHES-1913-2,7.139

Is it a perfect man , LEATHES-1913-2,7.140

is it a perfect school ? LEATHES-1913-2,7.141

Is the perfect school calculated to produce the perfect man ,
LEATHES-1913-2,7.142

or does the perfect man need more liberty of self-development than the
perfect school can allow ? LEATHES-1913-2,7.143

And who is the <P_8> judge of masterpieces , LEATHES-1913-2,8.144

and by what canons can he judge ? LEATHES-1913-2,8.145

The full results of education are not seen for many years ;
LEATHES-1913-2,8.146

judging only by immediate results we may feel that this batch is better
than the last , LEATHES-1913-2,8.147

but the causes of improvement can only be conjectured ;
LEATHES-1913-2,8.148

they can@ @not be ascertained by proof . LEATHES-1913-2,8.149

Authoritative experiment is impossible . LEATHES-1913-2,8.150

The same experiment can@ @not be tried twice on the same class ,
LEATHES-1913-2,8.151

two different experiments can@ @not be tried on the same class .
LEATHES-1913-2,8.152

For in the interval time has been moving , LEATHES-1913-2,8.153

and the class is no longer the same class ; LEATHES-1913-2,8.154

the pupils have grown , and changed in growth . LEATHES-1913-2,8.155

The art of education is not a science ; LEATHES-1913-2,8.156

it has nothing of the science . LEATHES-1913-2,8.157

It must proceed by experience , by common sense , by happy conjecture ,
by intuitive interpretation of rough observations , by <font> a priori
<$$font> reasoning from inexact premisses . LEATHES-1913-2,8.158

It is probable that many various methods would lead to equally good
results ; LEATHES-1913-2,8.159

but each successful method must have a unity and a harmony of its own ,
which can be perceived , though it can never be adequately described in
words . LEATHES-1913-2,8.160

Some rules , some system , must be laid down by authority , because
public money is brought to account , because human beings are under
treatment ; LEATHES-1913-2,8.161

but a large field must be left to the discretion of the schoolmaster .
LEATHES-1913-2,8.162

Rules should be few , systems elastic ; LEATHES-1913-2,8.163

guidance , criticism , and consultation may supplement the rules ;
LEATHES-1913-2,8.164

but the teststone of administration is the choice and training and
direction of executants - in education , as elsewhere .
LEATHES-1913-2,8.165

<P_9>

Both as an art and as a part of life , education must not be afraid to
harmonise opposites , to face any and every dilemma .
LEATHES-1913-2,9.167

The State needs , above all , that the lowest level shall be raised .
LEATHES-1913-2,9.168

Education must therefore work to the average ; LEATHES-1913-2,9.169

the boy or girl of better parts stands less in need of active
instruction than those of inferior gifts . LEATHES-1913-2,9.170

The less nature and the home has done for the scholar , the more the
schoolmaster has to do . LEATHES-1913-2,9.171

How great the difference may be , only the experienced schoolmaster can
say . LEATHES-1913-2,9.172

On the other hand , the clever boy , the exceptional boy , the boy of
genius , must not be sacrificed to the dullards . LEATHES-1913-2,9.173

In class-teaching , while the backward are receiving their due , the
gifted may be repressed , kept to monotonous tasks that do not stretch
their powers ; LEATHES-1913-2,9.174

they may become disgusted with all study , LEATHES-1913-2,9.175

or they may be drilled to lifeless uniformity . LEATHES-1913-2,9.176

To feed the slow , without starving the quick , that is the great
dilemma of education ; LEATHES-1913-2,9.177

but a practical man is never afraid of a dilemma ; LEATHES-1913-2,9.178

if it must be solved , he assumes that it can be solved ,
LEATHES-1913-2,9.179

and proceeds to solve it . LEATHES-1913-2,9.180

This dilemma must be solved - in school , day by day , and case by case
; LEATHES-1913-2,9.181

for , if we need a higher level of general instruction and intelligence
, we also need a constant supply of vigour and ability ;
LEATHES-1913-2,9.182

we must take care that we do not maim a boy or a youth of genius .
LEATHES-1913-2,9.183

Public education has four main sides , physical , moral , intellectual ,
and spiritual . LEATHES-1913-2,9.184

These four sections are closely interconnected , LEATHES-1913-2,9.185

but they can <P_10> in theory , though not in practice , be separated .
LEATHES-1913-2,10.186

To the physical side of education I have addressed some observations
below . LEATHES-1913-2,10.187

There is much ground to be made up here , and a great harvest to be
gathered . LEATHES-1913-2,10.188

Moral education is closely associated with physical and intellectual ;
LEATHES-1913-2,10.189

it is not neglected , LEATHES-1913-2,10.190

it has perhaps never been neglected in schools . LEATHES-1913-2,10.191

No worthy schoolmaster could find himself before a class , and feel no
anxiety for their moral welfare . LEATHES-1913-2,10.192

If moral education has suffered , it has suffered from a too rigorous
discipline , from the too absorbing claims of lessons .
LEATHES-1913-2,10.193

In any case the what of morals is little in dispute ;
LEATHES-1913-2,10.194

the how of moral education is above all a question of practical and
personal discretion . LEATHES-1913-2,10.195

No sensible person would think of teaching morals to a class by
generalities ; LEATHES-1913-2,10.196

and the morals of school children require no difficult casuistry .
LEATHES-1913-2,10.197

They can learn self-control in their own lives , which is better than
academic lessons on the evils of drink . LEATHES-1913-2,10.198

They can learn justice , honour , and mercy in their dealings with their
fellows ; which is better than much economic precept , theory , and
doctrine . LEATHES-1913-2,10.199

The tone of a good home is worth more than any direct moral teaching ;
LEATHES-1913-2,10.200

and the tone of a good school is the best substitute that can be found ;
LEATHES-1913-2,10.201

it is also the best support for good parental influence .
LEATHES-1913-2,10.202

The spiritual side of education is difficult beyond all others .
LEATHES-1913-2,10.203

It aims at faith rather than dogma , at aspirations rather than a code ,
at an atmosphere rather than positive instruction .
LEATHES-1913-2,10.204

It <P_11> has its social aspect which should be seen in the common life
of a school ; LEATHES-1913-2,11.205

but , if individuality must be studied in every part of education , here
it must be approached not only with urgency but with reverence .
LEATHES-1913-2,11.206

Though conduct expresses the spiritual condition , works are but the
symptom of spiritual health ; LEATHES-1913-2,11.207

morality divorced from the spiritual impulse has always been found to
miss compelling force , to lack life and vigour . LEATHES-1913-2,11.208

Morals can be taught by reference to self-advantage ;
LEATHES-1913-2,11.209

they can be justified , though only imperfectly , by an appeal to the
intellect ; LEATHES-1913-2,11.210

they can be fortified by fostering the love of approbation and the
social sense ; LEATHES-1913-2,11.211

the love of beauty and fitness is a powerful aid to the teacher ;
LEATHES-1913-2,11.212

but ultimately sound morality is a healthful condition of the soul .
LEATHES-1913-2,11.213

It would be an impertinence to suggest methods to the teacher ;
LEATHES-1913-2,11.214

if things are right with himself , he will find his own methods , his
own avenues of spiritual approach . LEATHES-1913-2,11.215

Intellectual education is too narrow a term . LEATHES-1913-2,11.216

The intellect , the understanding , the intelligence should be active in
all the lesson work of schools . LEATHES-1913-2,11.217

But habit , memory , instinct , receptive observation , acquired
dexterity , also enter largely into all scholastic accomplishments .
LEATHES-1913-2,11.218

The intelligence should always be awake , to guard against the blunders
of routine , to combine , compare , and construct ,
LEATHES-1913-2,11.219

but it can@ @not think out every case anew . LEATHES-1913-2,11.220

Much must be taken on authority , LEATHES-1913-2,11.221

much must be acquired by practice , as in all handwork ,
LEATHES-1913-2,11.222

much must become instinctive by <P_12> use , as in learning the native
language or another and in the processes of arithmetic ,
LEATHES-1913-2,12.223

some things must be committed to memory as in geography or chemistry .
LEATHES-1913-2,12.224

The intelligence and the memory must work together ;
LEATHES-1913-2,12.225

neither should be overtaxed . LEATHES-1913-2,12.226

Here is demanded the supreme exercise of the schoolmaster's discretion .
LEATHES-1913-2,12.227

It is for him to say what the memory must do , including in memory
practice and use , and what the intelligence must be encouraged to
undertake . LEATHES-1913-2,12.228

It is for him to say what tasks the intelligence of each successive age
, of every several child , is fit to handle . LEATHES-1913-2,12.229

The development of different sides of the nature differs much in
different children . LEATHES-1913-2,12.230

But he must be on his guard against the temptation to work chiefly
through the memory , a temptation specially urgent with a large class .
LEATHES-1913-2,12.231

Children learn readily by memory , LEATHES-1913-2,12.232

and , by loading the memory , results can be more speedily obtained .
LEATHES-1913-2,12.233

It is more difficult to work through the imagination , the intelligence
, the understanding , LEATHES-1913-2,12.234

but these are at least equally important ; LEATHES-1913-2,12.235

they are the instruments of ultimate success . LEATHES-1913-2,12.236

Again , many things may be taught , LEATHES-1913-2,12.237

many things should be studied , LEATHES-1913-2,12.238

but not all things that should be studied need be remembered .
LEATHES-1913-2,12.239

The good memory is the selective memory , which retains what it needs ,
what it desires , and dismisses the rest . LEATHES-1913-2,12.240

The mind , like the body , is a digestive organ ; LEATHES-1913-2,12.241

it requires bulk for its nutriment ; LEATHES-1913-2,12.242

it can@ @not digest all that it receives . LEATHES-1913-2,12.243

Therefore , much should be taught , or otherwise brought to notice ;
LEATHES-1913-2,12.244

but the scholar should be praised who remembers <P_13> the salient and
governing points , who grasps the interconnexions .
LEATHES-1913-2,13.245

To take an example of intelligence and memory . The multiplication
table must be learnt by heart ; LEATHES-1913-2,13.246

it must be repeated till its data come at call without effort .
LEATHES-1913-2,13.247

But the multiplication table should also be studied intelligently ;
LEATHES-1913-2,13.248

the scholars should be encouraged to break up the numbers and combine
them afresh ; to study their properties and test the assertions of the
table . LEATHES-1913-2,13.249

You can@ @not prove that twice two make four ; LEATHES-1913-2,13.250

that is a matter of definition , of the meaning of words .
LEATHES-1913-2,13.251

But you can test the definitions of the multiplication table , and show
that they are consistent with each other . LEATHES-1913-2,13.252

At what age the memory , at what age the intelligence should do what
work , is a question for the schoolmaster . LEATHES-1913-2,13.253

The development differs in each child , LEATHES-1913-2,13.254

but I suspect that intelligence commonly develops earlier than is
supposed , and is often atrophied for want of exercise .
LEATHES-1913-2,13.255

The selective memory is wronged when tables of dates are set to be
learnt by heart . LEATHES-1913-2,13.256

History begins to be known when much has been heard and forgotten and
the salient facts begin to stand out . LEATHES-1913-2,13.257

At this point the order of events begins to show as inevitable .
LEATHES-1913-2,13.258

No one who knew anything about the French Revolution and its sequel
could suppose that the battle of Waterloo preceded the execution of the
French king . LEATHES-1913-2,13.259

When the events begin to take form and order , then knowledge of dates
may be exacted . LEATHES-1913-2,13.260

But it is better to know dates by knowing what the <P_14> order of
events must be , than to know the order of the events by an unmeaning
sequence of numbers . LEATHES-1913-2,14.261

I met a distinguished man who told me with satisfaction that he had
learnt his dates of English History as a boy by <font> memoria technica
, <$$font> and had retained them ever since . LEATHES-1913-2,14.262

I wondered in silence what good they might be to him .
LEATHES-1913-2,14.263

And this leads me to the constructive memory , which is not imagination
, nor understanding , nor reasoning , but has something of all three .
LEATHES-1913-2,14.264

By the constructive memory learning grows to knowledge .
LEATHES-1913-2,14.265

There is one knowledge of the elementary schoolboy ,
LEATHES-1913-2,14.266

there is another knowledge of the secondary schoolboy , another of the
University Honours man , yet another of the man of learning .
LEATHES-1913-2,14.267

But each should be built up into a whole ; so far as it can be .
LEATHES-1913-2,14.268

Each should be a microcosm planned in due proportion and to scale .
LEATHES-1913-2,14.269

Each should be a complete edifice ; LEATHES-1913-2,14.270

but each should resemble one of those buildings , where the stones are
left projecting at the edges for other buildings to be attached .
LEATHES-1913-2,14.271

The elementary schoolboy , above all , needs a solid though contracted
nucleus of knowledge , coherent , interconnected , and complete in
itself ; LEATHES-1913-2,14.272

but he also needs avenues by which to advance , capacities and impulses
to learn , to go on learning , and to build his further learning into
his knowledge . LEATHES-1913-2,14.273

If you watch a young child with alert intelligence , well taught ,
encouraged to learn and to ask questions , brought up in an atmosphere
of knowledge , you can see the constructive memory at work .
LEATHES-1913-2,14.274

You can see the child piecing together <P_15> its bits of information ,
bridging gaps , establishing new lines of communication , preparing a
framework {TEXT:frame-work} into which every fresh fact can be fitted as
it is acquired . LEATHES-1913-2,15.275

Things new and old are compared and adjusted ; LEATHES-1913-2,15.276

often you will be surprised to see how the germane illustration springs
from the mind when it is needed . LEATHES-1913-2,15.277

That is the process which should be encouraged at school ;
LEATHES-1913-2,15.278

unfortunately there are so many for whom school is the only place where
it can be encouraged . LEATHES-1913-2,15.279

For whatever purpose learning be desired , whether for life or for
business , it is worth little in itself , LEATHES-1913-2,15.280

but knowledge is worth much . LEATHES-1913-2,15.281

Learning is the mere acquisition of information ; LEATHES-1913-2,15.282

when information acquired is rounded to a whole , when it is
incorporated in the character , when it illuminates the mind , when it
strengthens the understanding , when it fortifies the judgement , when
it becomes an instrument to serve rather than a burden to be carried ,
then learning becomes knowledge . LEATHES-1913-2,15.283

Learning is a simple thing ; LEATHES-1913-2,15.284

it proceeds step by step . LEATHES-1913-2,15.285

You may learn all the words in a dictionary ; LEATHES-1913-2,15.286

you may learn all the inflexions of all the words in a language ,
LEATHES-1913-2,15.287

you may learn all the rules of syntax . LEATHES-1913-2,15.288

Each of those processes is a simple process . LEATHES-1913-2,15.289

But to grasp the whole meaning of the most lucid author , to explain the
whole of your own meaning on any subject - that is a very complicated
process , involving many simultaneous processes of thought .
LEATHES-1913-2,15.290

Again , you may have great learning , say in anatomy ,
LEATHES-1913-2,15.291

but , <P_16> to form any clear conception of the function and meaning of
the body , you must go far beyond anatomy , LEATHES-1913-2,16.292

you must go far beyond the separate and consecutive statements in any
treatise of physiology , LEATHES-1913-2,16.293

you must have in your mind at one and the same time the functions of the
heart , the lungs , the brain , the digestive organs , the nervous
system , the muscles , half a_hundred things besides .
LEATHES-1913-2,16.294

Until you can form such an elaborate conception in your mind you can@
@not have any true knowledge of the body , as a living , breathing ,
working organism . LEATHES-1913-2,16.295

This complexity of life and thought makes language an imperfect
instrument for the expression of the mind . LEATHES-1913-2,16.296

You can think of many things at the same time . LEATHES-1913-2,16.297

But you can only speak of one thing at a time . LEATHES-1913-2,16.298

If one person is to understand another , the thing stated must be very
simple , LEATHES-1913-2,16.299

or else the hearer must know a great deal more than is said .
LEATHES-1913-2,16.300

What the instructor says can never illuminate the mind , unless the mind
receives , shapes , and fits together the information provided .
LEATHES-1913-2,16.301

Instruction can only proceed by the written or spoken word ;
LEATHES-1913-2,16.302

the instructor is a hodman with bricks . LEATHES-1913-2,16.303

The pupil is the bricklayer who may , if he has a gift for the craft ,
combine the bricks into a solid and coherent and symmetrical edifice ,
with a central hall , staircases , chambers , passages , cellars , and
roof gardens . LEATHES-1913-2,16.304

In this work the materials are supplied by books and teachers ;
LEATHES-1913-2,16.305

but the pupil must do his own construction ; LEATHES-1913-2,16.306

the building must be his own ; LEATHES-1913-2,16.307

at most a plan , a model , and a few <P_17> hints can be given .
LEATHES-1913-2,17.308

It is better that construction should go forward all the time , than
that the ground should be cumbered with superfluous material .
LEATHES-1913-2,17.309

Compared with the building of knowledge , reasoning is a simple process
. LEATHES-1913-2,17.310

You can only follow one line of reasoning at a time .
LEATHES-1913-2,17.311

Every matter which is worth understanding at all must be approached by
many different trains of reasoning . LEATHES-1913-2,17.312

You can set out , if you have time , all these different trains of
reasoning , one after another . LEATHES-1913-2,17.313

But you can only reach your final conclusion by combining all these
trains of reasoning into one . LEATHES-1913-2,17.314

And that involves an instinctive process of fitting together , of
valuation , of estimation . LEATHES-1913-2,17.315

The power of recognising and estimating values we call judgement .
LEATHES-1913-2,17.316

Knowledge informs judgement , LEATHES-1913-2,17.317

but it can@ @not create it . LEATHES-1913-2,17.318

When knowledge and judgement meet together , we have wisdom .
LEATHES-1913-2,17.319

And it is the highest and rarest function of education , aided by and
working upon experience , to produce wisdom . LEATHES-1913-2,17.320

An engineer who is going to build a bridge begins by forming a general
concept of the task he has to perform . LEATHES-1913-2,17.321

He then forms particular concepts of all the parts , great and small ;
LEATHES-1913-2,17.322

he works out all the dimensions , weights , stresses , tensions ,
strengths ; LEATHES-1913-2,17.323

he guesses all the exceptional circumstances that his bridge may have to
encounter ; LEATHES-1913-2,17.324

he may put down all these things severally in his calculations and
specifications , and make drawings of all the parts .
LEATHES-1913-2,17.325

But at some time or other , and from time to time , he <P_18> must
conceive his bridge as a single whole . LEATHES-1913-2,18.326

When he does that , he must have every one of all his minor calculations
operative in his mind , though not , perhaps , in his consciousness .
LEATHES-1913-2,18.327

If all his parts are right , he has learning ; LEATHES-1913-2,18.328

if his bridge is right as a bridge he has knowledge ;
LEATHES-1913-2,18.329

if he has rightly estimated all the circumstances that can@ @not be
calculated , he has judgement ; LEATHES-1913-2,18.330

if his bridge is a good bridge , it testifies to his possession of
wisdom , as a bridge-builder . LEATHES-1913-2,18.331

Now instruction can only proceed by the way of learning .
LEATHES-1913-2,18.332

That does not mean that it should proceed solely or mainly by the way of
teaching . LEATHES-1913-2,18.333

It is widely recognised nowadays , that what a child or young person can
be taught is of little importance compared with that which it can and
will teach itself , with the requisite assistance and encouragement .
LEATHES-1913-2,18.334

Almost all normal children are born with a lively and keen desire for
knowledge . LEATHES-1913-2,18.335

It is our business to foster and develop that natural curiosity , to
guide it , and by feeding it to stimulate it . LEATHES-1913-2,18.336

Teaching has far too often the effect of deadening and wearying the
impulse to learn . LEATHES-1913-2,18.337

If you can once get a child into the right frame of mind and keep it in
that frame of mind it will learn for itself far more than it can ever be
taught , and with great advantage both to the mind and to the character
. LEATHES-1913-2,18.338

Schooling , which is a convenient word to indicate both the teaching and
the learning of the young , must proceed by subjects .
LEATHES-1913-2,18.339

But , if learning is ever to develop into knowledge , the <P_19>
barriers between subjects should not be allowed to remain rigid and
permanent . LEATHES-1913-2,19.340

Knowledge is a whole ; LEATHES-1913-2,19.341

it can only for temporary convenience be divided into parts .
LEATHES-1913-2,19.342

The two great subjects of instruction may be classified as Science and
History . LEATHES-1913-2,19.343

The term History , properly conceived , includes everything that has to
do with man as a living and spiritual being . LEATHES-1913-2,19.344

Language is the handmaid of history , LEATHES-1913-2,19.345

the most part of literature is only history made beautiful by
imagination and art . LEATHES-1913-2,19.346

Science is a convenient term to include all our knowledge of the
material world , and of the material basis of life .
LEATHES-1913-2,19.347

Mathematics are the handmaidens of Science . LEATHES-1913-2,19.348

In themselves , no doubt , they afford a valuable mental discipline .
LEATHES-1913-2,19.349

But it should always be remembered that , in education at any rate ,
Mathematics have no fruit , unless their bearing upon the practical
things of life is made clear . LEATHES-1913-2,19.350

It is easy enough to link up Mathematics with Science .
LEATHES-1913-2,19.351

In Physics at any rate the connexion is ready-made .
LEATHES-1913-2,19.352

Probably nowadays the meaning of Mathematics is made clear to the young
. LEATHES-1913-2,19.353

But I remember when I was at school I was invited to perform tricks with
algebraical symbols . LEATHES-1913-2,19.354

I liked the game LEATHES-1913-2,19.355

and even attained some trifling proficiency . LEATHES-1913-2,19.356

But it was not till many years afterwards , not indeed until I had
forgotten most of the rules of the game , that I understood what algebra
really meant . LEATHES-1913-2,19.357

Similarly with geometry . LEATHES-1913-2,19.358

Euclid flattered my growing mind , LEATHES-1913-2,19.359

it was something for my puppy teeth to worry , LEATHES-1913-2,19.360

but I feel sure that I never understood that <P_20> geometry was an art
invented to facilitate the measuring of the earth's surface .
LEATHES-1913-2,20.361

Later on , cos , sin , and tan , used to follow predestined paths ,
which I was able by rule of thumb to forecast with varying success .
LEATHES-1913-2,20.362

It never occurred to me , it was never suggested to me , that cos , sin
, and tan , had any bearing on the actual world in which I lived .
LEATHES-1913-2,20.363

All this , no doubt , has been mended . LEATHES-1913-2,20.364

But the moral remains . LEATHES-1913-2,20.365

Algebra , geometry , trigonometry , are paths of learning , each of
which can be followed without reference to knowledge .
LEATHES-1913-2,20.366

But if knowledge is our aim - not learning for its own sake - the
relation of each set of observations to the world at large should be
indicated on every possible opportunity . LEATHES-1913-2,20.367

The gap between History and Science is more difficult to fill .
LEATHES-1913-2,20.368

But there is one subject of instruction which bridges the gulf .
LEATHES-1913-2,20.369

That is Geography . LEATHES-1913-2,20.370

Here Science and History meet . LEATHES-1913-2,20.371

The world is a physical complex , whose various aspects are elucidated
by many sciences ; such as Geometry , Geology , Physics , Chemistry .
LEATHES-1913-2,20.372

The world is also the playground of man ; the playground of living man ,
in his nations , his empires , his competing communities .
LEATHES-1913-2,20.373

It has also been the playground of men and nations long since dead .
LEATHES-1913-2,20.374

I have never had occasion to teach Geography , as an independent subject
. LEATHES-1913-2,20.375

But if I were teaching , say , the Geography of the Balkan Peninsula , I
should speak of the relics of Mycenean civilisation , of Minos and his
empire , of Athens and Sparta , Thermopylae , Salamis , Alexander ; of
the Byzantine Empire and its <P_21> invaders : of Slavs , Illyrians ,
Albanians , and all the motley folk who have been , first and last ,
poured into that ancient bottle . LEATHES-1913-2,21.376

That would not prevent me from talking about coast-lines and harbours ,
rivers and mountains and watersheds , valleys and islands and plains .
LEATHES-1913-2,21.377

Nor would the solid reality of these material features prevent me from
peopling my topography with Centaurs , Oreads , Naiads , Pan and old
Silenus : LEATHES-1913-2,21.378

nor should I feel that I was detracting from the serious dignity of my
task if I spoke of the voyage of Jason and the Argo , of Theseus and the
Minotaur , of the siege of Troy and the wanderings of Odysseus .
LEATHES-1913-2,21.379

On the contrary , the Balkan mountains , in my thinking , would be
invested with greater reality if I spoke of Olympus , the seat of the
Gods , and the struggle to heap Pelion upon Ossa .
LEATHES-1913-2,21.380

The Dardanelles are the more real because Leander swam across them ,
because Xerxes bridged them : the Bosporus because Jason threaded it ;
LEATHES-1913-2,21.381

the position of Thermopylae , Euboea , Athens , and the Isthmus of
Corinth , will be fixed in the learner's mind once for all if he
understands how and why the battle of Salamis was fought .
LEATHES-1913-2,21.382

Geography is the meeting-ground of those two great branches of knowledge
which I classify as History and Science - the knowledge of man , and the
knowledge of things . LEATHES-1913-2,21.383

I hope that Geography is taught in this way ; LEATHES-1913-2,21.384

but I do not feel sure . LEATHES-1913-2,21.385

This view of the unity of knowledge brings me into conflict with the
specialists - not with all <P_22> specialists , but with those
specialists who have lost sight of knowledge in their enthusiasm for
learning . LEATHES-1913-2,22.386

It is inevitable that learned men should lean to specialisation .
LEATHES-1913-2,22.387

The friends of education should resist their unfortunate bias , so far
as education is concerned . LEATHES-1913-2,22.388

I am wholly in favour of variety in education . LEATHES-1913-2,22.389

I would give all special talents ample room for development .
LEATHES-1913-2,22.390

But I would never forget that knowledge is a whole ;
LEATHES-1913-2,22.391

you can@ @not without grave sacrifice confine attention only to a part .
LEATHES-1913-2,22.392

The specialist who is only a specialist is , for that reason , not so
good a specialist . LEATHES-1913-2,22.393

One specialist grumbles because I insist on mathematics ; another
specialist because I conceive literature and history as needful to a
liberal education . LEATHES-1913-2,22.394

After all , the object of education is to make a whole , not a lopsided
man . LEATHES-1913-2,22.395

Though a lopsided man may succeed in business , he will not be a success
in his own more important personal life . LEATHES-1913-2,22.396

Knowledge is not only a commercial asset ; LEATHES-1913-2,22.397

it is a precious and enduring possession , that gives interest to the
most trivial task or occurrence . LEATHES-1913-2,22.398

That knowledge is best worth having which we have built up for ourselves
by toil . LEATHES-1913-2,22.399

Such toil it is the fashion to call and to make painful ,
LEATHES-1913-2,22.400

but I would prefer to see it joyful . LEATHES-1913-2,22.401

Our best work is not painful ; LEATHES-1913-2,22.402

it absorbs and enfolds us ; LEATHES-1913-2,22.403

it is accompanied by no feeling of effort or labour .
LEATHES-1913-2,22.404

We must garner the crop ourselves ; LEATHES-1913-2,22.405

but , if our harvest is to be abundant , we must get the seed from those
in whom learning has matured into knowledge , and knowledge into wisdom
. LEATHES-1913-2,22.406

If we <P_23> are pursuing the natural sciences , Nature herself is our
mistress ; LEATHES-1913-2,23.407

and her wisdom is inexhaustible . LEATHES-1913-2,23.408

But it is fit that the high-priests of Nature should be wise , as well
as learned . LEATHES-1913-2,23.409

If it is the knowledge of man that we seek , we must frequent not so
much the learned as the wise . LEATHES-1913-2,23.410

The knowledge of man is not attained by treatises , text-books ,
statistics , card indexes , or encyclopaedias ; LEATHES-1913-2,23.411

it is attained by insight working upon knowledge , LEATHES-1913-2,23.412

and the great men are those whose insight is the keenest and most
illuminating . LEATHES-1913-2,23.413

It is better to read Thucydides , Herodotus , and Demosthenes than to
read Grote ; LEATHES-1913-2,23.414

it is better to read Tacitus and Cicero than Mommsen ;
LEATHES-1913-2,23.415

it is better to read Shakespeare , Bacon , Hobbes , Halifax ,
Bolingbroke , Burke , Carlyle , Ruskin , than the best of all the
excellent text-books which historical science has provided for us .
LEATHES-1913-2,23.416

On the other hand , it is better to read Maitland than to read Doomsday
Book . LEATHES-1913-2,23.417

The text-books are useful ; LEATHES-1913-2,23.418

the original authorities are useful ; LEATHES-1913-2,23.419

but the root of the matter is in the minds and the words of the wise men
. LEATHES-1913-2,23.420

Whether we study the ancients or the moderns is of little consequence .
LEATHES-1913-2,23.421

It is important that we should study them in the right way .
LEATHES-1913-2,23.422

And that right way can@ @not be found unless language , literature , and
history are made to contribute to one whole of historical knowledge ;
and unless that half-whole is amplified , illuminated , explained , by
that other half-whole of knowledge , which we call Science .
LEATHES-1913-2,23.423

I have now got beyond the elementary school , beyond the secondary
school , even beyond the <P_24> University . LEATHES-1913-2,24.424

But , in so far as it is the end of education to produce knowledge ,
these principles have their bearing upon education at every stage .
LEATHES-1913-2,24.425

There have been friends of education who believed that man could be made
perfect by schooling . LEATHES-1913-2,24.426

I do not see how such a belief could survive any practical experience of
education or of life . LEATHES-1913-2,24.427

Schooling can only have a limited effect on the majority ;
LEATHES-1913-2,24.428

it does most for those of regular and orderly talent ;
LEATHES-1913-2,24.429

on certain wayward and dynamic spirits its influence may be actually bad
. LEATHES-1913-2,24.430

Yet I believe that on the whole public education can improve mankind ;
though its full effect can@ @not be seen until the third or fourth
generation . LEATHES-1913-2,24.431

We are only just beginning to learn how much , can be done , not perhaps
with the best , nor perhaps with the worst , but with the average .
LEATHES-1913-2,24.432

Public education is still in its infancy . LEATHES-1913-2,24.433

Elementary education has been improved , LEATHES-1913-2,24.434

but far greater improvement is still possible . LEATHES-1913-2,24.435

In secondary education much remains to be done - far short of perfection
. LEATHES-1913-2,24.436

The tradition of our Public Schools implants the love of health and
honour , but not that of knowledge and beauty . LEATHES-1913-2,24.437

This one-sided tradition the Public Schools share with the nation ;
LEATHES-1913-2,24.438

in fact it would be difficult to decide whether the schools had educated
the nation to thick-skulled self-satisfaction , or the nation had made
the schools to suit itself . LEATHES-1913-2,24.439

Yet the love of knowledge and beauty does not exclude the <P_25>
possession of manly qualities ; LEATHES-1913-2,25.440

they can@ @not truly flourish apart . LEATHES-1913-2,25.441

The system of the Public Schools does not make up for any shortcomings
of their tradition . LEATHES-1913-2,25.442

When the boys learnt nothing but Latin and Greek and Mathematics , their
field of culture was compact and many-sided , a complete microcosm .
LEATHES-1913-2,25.443

Now subject has been added to subject , specialism to specialism , until
unity , comprehension , and harmony are lost to sight .
LEATHES-1913-2,25.444

The new secondary system which it is proposed to create may borrow from
the Public Schools their tradition of manliness , strength , and
self-government ; LEATHES-1913-2,25.445

it will need a new tradition to foster the love of knowledge .
LEATHES-1913-2,25.446

This purpose will be aided if admission to such new or enlarged schools
is strictly confined to those who have shown fitness and the desire to
learn ; if those who fail to fulfil their early promise are sternly
dismissed . LEATHES-1913-2,25.447

" We teach Latin and Greek , " said an Eton Master , " to boys who
should be carting muck . " LEATHES-1913-2,25.448

A certain class of rich people can@ @not be prevented from offering
pearls to their children ; LEATHES-1913-2,25.449

they do not know that they are pearls . LEATHES-1913-2,25.450

" Pearls for the lover of pearls " should be the motto of the new
secondary system . LEATHES-1913-2,25.451

This will assist to prevent a too rapid increase of secondary machinery
; which is undesirable for lack of competent and well-trained masters .
LEATHES-1913-2,25.452

Good secondary schoolmasters are already scarce ; LEATHES-1913-2,25.453

you can@ @not have good schools with bad masters ; LEATHES-1913-2,25.454

and bad schools are little better and more expensive than none at all .
LEATHES-1913-2,25.455

Moreover , there is no <P_26> kindness in encouraging a boy to remain at
school when he might be earning his livelihood , unless there is some
fair certainty that he will profit by the education ; unless he
possesses the requisite health , vigour , and character , as well as
suitable brains . LEATHES-1913-2,26.456

Extension of secondary schools is good , LEATHES-1913-2,26.457

but it is on all grounds desirable that it should not proceed too fast .
LEATHES-1913-2,26.458

A fruit tree that makes too much wood makes little else ;
LEATHES-1913-2,26.459

the fruit of a national system is not bricks , mortar , salaries , and a
curriculum , but a good education ; LEATHES-1913-2,26.460

the harvest depends first upon the staff , next upon the fitness of the
pupils , greatly also upon the tradition ; LEATHES-1913-2,26.461

the system operates upon and through the other three .
LEATHES-1913-2,26.462

The Universities are a public institution ; LEATHES-1913-2,26.463

but , so long as they govern themselves tolerably , I should prefer that
they were left free . LEATHES-1913-2,26.464

The State has enough to do . LEATHES-1913-2,26.465

The old Universities have opened their gates ; LEATHES-1913-2,26.466

they have admitted the sciences , history , modern languages , to an
equality with the ancient studies . LEATHES-1913-2,26.467

But they have not entirely assimilated the new material .
LEATHES-1913-2,26.468

Subjects are recognised with profuse liberality , but not the unity of
knowledge . LEATHES-1913-2,26.469

On this matter I have said enough below ; LEATHES-1913-2,26.470

but I would here point out that the spirit of University study will
depend upon the objects that are chiefly in view .
LEATHES-1913-2,26.471

If learning and research are the principal aim , high specialisation
will result ; LEATHES-1913-2,26.472

but learning and research should not be the sole purpose of an
University , of whose students a great majority are not fitted and do
not desire <P_27> to become learned men . LEATHES-1913-2,27.473

If professional preparation is the end of the University , courses will
take a more practical form ; LEATHES-1913-2,27.474

specialisation will be restricted among the students ;
LEATHES-1913-2,27.475

and that part of education which fits for business will come into
prominence . LEATHES-1913-2,27.476

If education is the chief object of an University , then the unity and
interconnexions of knowledge will stand foremost with the framers of any
scheme . LEATHES-1913-2,27.477

The recognition of new studies has been partly due to professional needs
, but much more to the love of learned men for their own specialities .
LEATHES-1913-2,27.478

The needs of education have suffered a comparative if not a complete
neglect . LEATHES-1913-2,27.479

Yet it is quite safe to say that the most part of students come to the
University to be prepared for life , not for any branch of learned work
, nor for any particular profession . LEATHES-1913-2,27.480

Among professions , one has been strangely overlooked ,
LEATHES-1913-2,27.481

and that is the teaching profession . LEATHES-1913-2,27.482

A schoolmaster should not be a specialist ; LEATHES-1913-2,27.483

his bent should lead him to join up rather than to fence off the several
paths of knowledge . LEATHES-1913-2,27.484

Moreover , only a very large school can afford to have separate teachers
of history , separate teachers of languages , separate teachers of
mathematics , separate teachers of science : LEATHES-1913-2,27.485

none , I think , has hitherto afforded to have separate teachers of
English . LEATHES-1913-2,27.486

And yet the university schemes , and especially the examinations for
degrees , turn out such specialists by the hundred ; not fitted for any
profession , not specially fitted for life , and certainly not
well-equipped for teaching . LEATHES-1913-2,27.487

<P_28>

Apart from the needs of the teaching profession - for the civil service
, for commerce , for industry , for politics , for the bar , and above
all for life <paren> if there be some who can afford to frame their
education for life itself <$$paren> we want , as a rule , men well
trained and of wide knowledge , rather than men of learning .
LEATHES-1913-2,28.489

For professions such as medicine and engineering a wider basis of
knowledge is required than the ordinary university course guarantees .
LEATHES-1913-2,28.490

And , if the teaching profession is taken into account , the need for
some wider training than most Honour Schools provide appears to me
nothing short of overwhelming . LEATHES-1913-2,28.491

This theme I have attempted to develop below . LEATHES-1913-2,28.492

The newer Universities have the same specialist bent .
LEATHES-1913-2,28.493

They suffer from the more imperfect previous preparation of their
students ; LEATHES-1913-2,28.494

they have to think more about professional ends . LEATHES-1913-2,28.495

But the one professional end for which they do not appear to provide in
their ordinary courses is the education of teachers for elementary and
secondary schools . LEATHES-1913-2,28.496

The improvement and extension of secondary teaching will benefit the
Universities greatly ; LEATHES-1913-2,28.497

but a wider university education in modern humanities will do even more
to improve the elementary and secondary schools . LEATHES-1913-2,28.498

I do not believe that learning would suffer from such reforms .
LEATHES-1913-2,28.499

The rivalry of subjects loads the examination schedules with unnecessary
items , which is bad among other things for learning ;
LEATHES-1913-2,28.500

if all men of learning recognised a <P_29> common duty to education ,
perhaps some of this rivalry would disappear . LEATHES-1913-2,29.501

There is one subject of first importance , which has not yet received
full separate university recognition - Geography .
LEATHES-1913-2,29.502

At present , the friends of Geography seem to be working towards an
Honours School in Geography . LEATHES-1913-2,29.503

But would it not be much better for Geography and all allied subjects
that Geography should have its full share in the Historical School , in
the Science School , and in any school of modern humanities that may be
established , than that it should have its own examinations and live on
the borderland of Science and History , poaching on both and assisted by
neither ? LEATHES-1913-2,29.504

However , if Geography gave its name to the new unifying subject , I
should not object to that name ; though I think History would better
serve the purpose . LEATHES-1913-2,29.505

The unity of knowledge is a great principle ; LEATHES-1913-2,29.506

the unity of education is another . LEATHES-1913-2,29.507

Whatever link is weak , from the parent to the Professor , impairs the
efficiency of the whole . LEATHES-1913-2,29.508

Some may say : " The results of education are illusory .
LEATHES-1913-2,29.509

They are all implicit in the egg ; LEATHES-1913-2,29.510

heredity is everything ; LEATHES-1913-2,29.511

if you want to improve mankind , promote the study of Eugenics .
LEATHES-1913-2,29.512

Education works only for a generation ; LEATHES-1913-2,29.513

Eugenics work for the permanent improvement of the race . "
LEATHES-1913-2,29.514

Heredity is important , LEATHES-1913-2,29.515

environment is important , LEATHES-1913-2,29.516

who shall say how much is due to either in any particular case , or even
upon an average ? LEATHES-1913-2,29.517

If heredity is important , tradition is also important ,
LEATHES-1913-2,29.518

<P_30>

and education influences tradition . LEATHES-1913-2,30.520

If heredity is the memory of the unconscious mind , tradition is the
heredity of the conscious mind . LEATHES-1913-2,30.521

To allot shares to inheritance and education is the more difficult
because education and heredity often work together .
LEATHES-1913-2,30.522

The child of good parents gets the advantage not only of their blood but
of their precept , atmosphere , and example . LEATHES-1913-2,30.523

It is the more difficult because education and heredity sometimes work
in opposition . LEATHES-1913-2,30.524

The child who was born to be an engineer is brought up to be a solicitor
. LEATHES-1913-2,30.525

It is the more difficult because we often do not know what the operative
education of any conspicuous man actually was . LEATHES-1913-2,30.526

We marvel at the spontaneous manifestations of a Giotto , a Shakespeare
, a Napoleon ; LEATHES-1913-2,30.527

but it may be that the education that each received was the education
that suited him best . LEATHES-1913-2,30.528

It is impossible to dissect the grown man and say : this comes by his
blood , this by his education . LEATHES-1913-2,30.529

It is best to put aside men of genius and other exceptions , and
sorrowfully admit that , although tradition helps to make them ,
purposeful education is more likely to hurt them than to help them .
LEATHES-1913-2,30.530

If Shakespeare had gone to an elementary school , and thence by the
ladder of education to a secondary school , and so to the University ,
he might have written the works of Francis Bacon , LEATHES-1913-2,30.531

but he would not have written the plays , which speak from first to last
of untrammelled development . LEATHES-1913-2,30.532

Shakespeare , like Cobbett , needed no schoolmaster to teach him English
. LEATHES-1913-2,30.533

No schoolmaster had any important share in the <P_31> making of that
mind . LEATHES-1913-2,31.534

A schoolmaster might , perhaps , have spoiled it ; LEATHES-1913-2,31.535

no schoolmaster could have improved it . LEATHES-1913-2,31.536

If Shakespeare had not known how to read and write he would have taught
himself . LEATHES-1913-2,31.537

If he had not access to books , he would have stolen them , as perhaps
he stole the deer . LEATHES-1913-2,31.538

It is lucky he left school when he did , lucky for him , lucky for us ,
and lucky for the schoolmaster . LEATHES-1913-2,31.539

Drunk with his own learning , he flouts the schoolmaster .
LEATHES-1913-2,31.540

Giulio Romano , a beautiful name ; LEATHES-1913-2,31.541

what matter when he lived ? LEATHES-1913-2,31.542

Aristotle said a fine thing ; LEATHES-1913-2,31.543

Hector would have quoted it had he known it ; LEATHES-1913-2,31.544

the pace was too good to enquire whether he did . LEATHES-1913-2,31.545

Is it Delphos , or Delphi , or Delos ? LEATHES-1913-2,31.546

The schoolmaster may care , not the poet . LEATHES-1913-2,31.547

Bohemia , a romantic place ; LEATHES-1913-2,31.548

all romantic places have sea-coasts and bears . LEATHES-1913-2,31.549

What has romance to do with topography ? LEATHES-1913-2,31.550

But , taking ordinary men , for whom schemes of education are devised ,
it seems probable that the gifts they receive at birth are on an average
not greater in importance than the ply that education subsequently gives
. LEATHES-1913-2,31.551

Some are less malleable than others , LEATHES-1913-2,31.552

but on the whole mankind is a ductile race . LEATHES-1913-2,31.553

It owes at least its prejudices , its conventions , and a large part of
its virtues and its vices , to tradition and imitation .
LEATHES-1913-2,31.554

The more stubborn the material , the firmer the impress carried .
LEATHES-1913-2,31.555

Where public education is the only purposeful education bestowed , we
must make the most of our single opportunity . LEATHES-1913-2,31.556

If public education improved the average by only five per_cent. , it
would repay its cost three times <P_32> over , besides making the world
a more comfortable place to live in . LEATHES-1913-2,32.557

Moreover , education is a going concern , with prestige , momentum , and
goodwill ; LEATHES-1913-2,32.558

the future may be with Eugenics ; LEATHES-1913-2,32.559

the present is with education . LEATHES-1913-2,32.560

Education without religion seems to me impossible ; the religion of all
sensible men , the religion that sensible men do not gratuitously define
. LEATHES-1913-2,32.561

In the present state of public opinion education with religion seems
equally impossible . LEATHES-1913-2,32.562

This is a practical question LEATHES-1913-2,32.563

and falls to the province of responsible and practical men to solve .
LEATHES-1913-2,32.564

It is also one of those practical questions which I am not called upon
to handle . LEATHES-1913-2,32.565

I doubt if such problems can be settled on paper .
LEATHES-1913-2,32.566

I began with a question : what is education ? LEATHES-1913-2,32.567

Education is a process in which the whole human environment is concerned
- a process of preparation for life . LEATHES-1913-2,32.568

That part of preparation for life , whether physical , moral , spiritual
, or intellectual , which the State can better undertake than other
agencies , belongs to the arts and not to the sciences ; though an art
may borrow from a science , as from medicine . LEATHES-1913-2,32.569

Education is a whole , LEATHES-1913-2,32.570

and whether the State conclude its training of the children at fourteen
, at sixteen , at nineteen , or at twenty-three , the education designed
to terminate at each age should aim - in things of the mind - at a
coherent nucleus of knowledge , which is capable thereafter of
indefinite extension . LEATHES-1913-2,32.571

An art does not profit <P_33> greatly from catchwords or maxims ;
LEATHES-1913-2,33.572

but , if a single catchword is admissible , it would be this : the best
teacher is he who best assists the student to teach himself .
LEATHES-1913-2,33.573

Education is also a whole in this sense , that parents , teachers ,
schoolmasters , examiners , professors , administrators , are all
working to a common end , and if any fail or be misled the whole cause
suffers . LEATHES-1913-2,33.574

To supplement the imperfect definition , I give my little book .
LEATHES-1913-2,33.575

<P_34>

<heading>

Chapter II LEATHES-1913-2,34.578

Education and business LEATHES-1913-2,34.579

<$$heading>

If education is a preparation for life , it must be a preparation for
business . LEATHES-1913-2,34.581

For business is the larger part of life , though not perhaps the more
important part of life , and certainly not the whole .
LEATHES-1913-2,34.582

Education is necessary ; LEATHES-1913-2,34.583

it has always existed , LEATHES-1913-2,34.584

it will always exist , though its form may vary from age to age .
LEATHES-1913-2,34.585

It is for us to consider what form it should assume to suit our present
purposes ; our purposes of life , and among those purposes our purposes
of business . LEATHES-1913-2,34.586

There have been saints and sages who contemned business .
LEATHES-1913-2,34.587

They might better have attempted to improve it . LEATHES-1913-2,34.588

St. Francis and St. Dominic instituted Orders of poor Friars , who
individually and collectively , were to possess no wealth .
LEATHES-1913-2,34.589

But those Orders could not have existed had not inferior orders of men
lived and laboured , who gave alms to support the physical being of the
poor Friars . LEATHES-1913-2,34.590

Like the orchids , which are rooted in sun and air , the Friars drew
their nutriment from faith , hope , and charity ; LEATHES-1913-2,34.591

but even an orchid requires some material prop . LEATHES-1913-2,34.592

After a time , business took its moral and material revenge upon the
despisers of business . LEATHES-1913-2,34.593

The <P_35> Orders of St. Francis and St. Dominic found means to
possess property , collectively if not individually ,
LEATHES-1913-2,35.594

and thus took toll , not only by alms , from the business community .
LEATHES-1913-2,35.595

But this defection from their original principle ruined the Orders .
LEATHES-1913-2,35.596

They set out to despise business ; LEATHES-1913-2,35.597

they ceased to despise it ; LEATHES-1913-2,35.598

inevitably , they became the parasites of business ;
LEATHES-1913-2,35.599

at last , business shook off and destroyed its parasites .
LEATHES-1913-2,35.600

Education , as at present organised , does not profess to be an enemy of
business . LEATHES-1913-2,35.601

Indeed , if it has a single , conspicuous fault , it is that it copies ,
though it can hardly exaggerate , the faults of business .
LEATHES-1913-2,35.602

Business creeps near the ground ; LEATHES-1913-2,35.603

education often fails to rise above it . LEATHES-1913-2,35.604

Business is constantly concerned with ways and means ;
LEATHES-1913-2,35.605

education is constantly concerned with machinery ; LEATHES-1913-2,35.606

it runs to wood and leaves , LEATHES-1913-2,35.607

and produces the less fruit . LEATHES-1913-2,35.608

Business estimates success by results , as presented in the entries of a
ledger , and the pages of a bank-book . LEATHES-1913-2,35.609

Education estimates results by figures in a report or by figures in an
examination table . LEATHES-1913-2,35.610

Business minds its own business , LEATHES-1913-2,35.611

and never takes account of the life of the nation as a whole .
LEATHES-1913-2,35.612

Education looks at the school , the college , the University , the
subject , the standard , the examination , the institution ;
LEATHES-1913-2,35.613

it seldom rises to a general view . LEATHES-1913-2,35.614

Business grinds the bones of the individual to make its bread ;
LEATHES-1913-2,35.615

education feeds its victims by fifties , sixties , or seventies , in a
well-lighted and well-ventilated cave . LEATHES-1913-2,35.616

Business sacrifices liberty to order : LEATHES-1913-2,35.617

so also does education . LEATHES-1913-2,35.618

The order attained in such <P_36> case is not easily distinguishable
from chaos , unless you are familiar with the contours .
LEATHES-1913-2,36.619

But , although education does not profess to despise business , it is in
every grade imperfectly designed as a preparation for business .
LEATHES-1913-2,36.620

There has been improvement - greatest in the elementary schools ;
LEATHES-1913-2,36.621

but more improvement is needed . LEATHES-1913-2,36.622

Education used to be natural , automatic , instinctive ;
LEATHES-1913-2,36.623

it has become self-conscious . LEATHES-1913-2,36.624

Education used to be individualistic ; LEATHES-1913-2,36.625

it has become socialistic . LEATHES-1913-2,36.626

The immediate result is a greater consumption of energy ; with a loss of
efficiency in many directions . LEATHES-1913-2,36.627

Probably , unless our European community is destroyed by some convulsion
, the loss of efficiency will in course of time be compensated .
LEATHES-1913-2,36.628

The process of compensation is likely to be slow and expensive ,
LEATHES-1913-2,36.629

but it may be hastened if we try to get an idea of the ends which
self-conscious education is intended to subserve .
LEATHES-1913-2,36.630

Let us look back to the processes of natural , traditional education in
an agricultural village a_hundred years ago . LEATHES-1913-2,36.631

The boy was born in a miserable hut , where sooner or later a_dozen like
him might see the light , and several might survive .
LEATHES-1913-2,36.632

He was nursed by his mother , and then weaned . LEATHES-1913-2,36.633

Food and clothing were scanty , but not unsuitable ;
LEATHES-1913-2,36.634

fresh air and exercise were abundant . LEATHES-1913-2,36.635

Discipline was enforced by stern and primitive methods ;
LEATHES-1913-2,36.636

reading and writing were not taught ; LEATHES-1913-2,36.637

but the youngster got to know the names , the appearance , the character
, the position of two or three_hundred people ; LEATHES-1913-2,36.638

he got to know every hedge , every tree , <P_37> every field , every
domestic animal for a mile round ; LEATHES-1913-2,37.639

he lived in intimate , though not in friendly relations , with fish ,
and bird , and beast ; LEATHES-1913-2,37.640

he knew his little world , in and out . LEATHES-1913-2,37.641

As soon as he was old enough to take responsibility he was turned on to
scare birds , to lead and drive stock and help in the fields ;
LEATHES-1913-2,37.642

eventually he was taught the mysteries {TEXT:misteries} of digging ,
planting , ploughing , and sowing , hedging , thatching , and ditching ,
the care and control of animals , till he became an expert agricultural
labourer . LEATHES-1913-2,37.643

Let no townsman fancy that the trade of an agricultural labourer is an
unskilled trade ; LEATHES-1913-2,37.644

it is the most skilled and most varied of all skilled trades ,
LEATHES-1913-2,37.645

and in its learning a greater mass of coherent knowledge is acquired
than is picked up in the factory , the workshop , the school , or the
gutter , or in all of them , one after the other .
LEATHES-1913-2,37.646

