<BEGIN_lefevre-1843-2>

<P_1,3>

<heading>

CHAPTER I LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.4

<$$heading>

The goal was reached , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.6

and the race was won . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.7

I bore my blushing honours thick upon me ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.8

yet I felt as serious as if I had taken a degree in Divinity , whereas I
had been only dubbed a Doctor of Physic . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.9

What made me so sad , as I gazed upon the receding shores of " Auld
Reekie ? " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.10

What had produced so striking a change in my disposition ?
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.11

Why had pleasure ceased to please ? LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.12

I had attained the object of long and arduous pursuit ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.13

possession gave me no pleasure , because pursuit was at an end .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,3.14

There were more serious causes for <P_1,4> the melancholy which beset me
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.15

I was embarking upon the wide world , upon the sea of life , without
compass to guide , or sail to waft , or ballast to steady my boat .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.16

A pulmonic complaint , aggravated by the accession of a typhus fever ,
had reduced my frame to the shadow of itself . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.17

The knowledge which the study , rather than the practice , of my
profession had afforded me , was just sufficient to allow me , in the
nervous state in which I was , to conjure up every unhappy idea as to
the nature of my complaint . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.18

Each pain and ache , every uncomfortable sensation which I experienced ,
seemed to indicate the last stage of consumption .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.19

I was continually feeling my pulse , taking a deep inspiration to
discover whether I had any pain in my chest , attentive to every little
symptom which might tend to strengthen the opinion which I had formed of
my case . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.20

I had two objects to attain , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.21

and their mutual accomplishment was necessary to my existence .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.22

I had to regain my own health , and to procure the means of so doing by
endeavouring to restore the health of - others . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.23

I was much in the same dilemma as many of my colleagues , who find that
in order to get practice they must first get a wife , but to get a wife
they must first get practice . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.24

My medical advisers positively insisted upon my wintering in a warmer
climate . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.25

All were agreed upon one point , viz. that I could not survive another
winter in Edinburgh . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.26

All were not agreed , that I could survive another winter any where else
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,4.27

<P_1,5>

What was to be done with me ? was the question . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.29

- Go to a warmer climate , was the answer . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.30

Where ? LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.31

To Lisbon , to Naples , to Madeira , to the South of France - all as
readily prescribed for me , as if it were only a dose of Iceland moss .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.32

All the enthusiasm of youth would only allow me to listen to such
suggestions as hopeless . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.33

I must do justice , however , to the kind friends who thus counselled me
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.34

They were sincere in their dealings , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.35

and when they advised me to attach myself as medical attendant to some
family about to migrate to a warmer climate , they gave me letters of
introduction to influential people in England , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.36

and stated the nature of my case as pathetically as I could have done it
myself . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.37

It was not at the commencement of my career that I found the world
ungrateful or unkind . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.38

It was necessary in my present circumstances to possess such
introductory letters as would serve as testimonials of character , and
not such merely as secure a dinner at a fortnight's notice ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.39

and I found that I had such , addressed to people residing in any of the
places which I might choose for my winter's residence .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.40

I had my diploma in my pocket and certificates from the medical officers
of the Royal Infirmary , as to the manner in which I had performed my
duty during my residence in that institution . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.41

Upon opening my pocket book I found letters to Dr. - , physician to the
British factory at Lisbon . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.42

These I put aside . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.43

I had letters to Dr. Coindet at Geneva , and to Professor
{TEXT:Professsor} Balbi at Turin ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,5.44

<P_1,6>

this was too northern to think of for the present ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.46

but I might find them of use in the course of my travels .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.47

It is singular what effect the reperusal of these documents had upon me
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.48

The ploughman , who after a hard morning's work sits under a tree at
noon , and opens his wallet , does not feel himself more refreshed as he
proceeds with his meal , than I felt my spirits revive as I continued my
epistolary repast . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.49

I had also several letters to English merchants at Naples from my
friends in Leith . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.50

These were precious jewels , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.51

and offered the greatest temptation , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.52

but like the golden apples were only to be looked at .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.53

To have accomplished this - to have reached Naples - to have been
allowed to visit Virgil's tomb , would have almost reconciled me to my
own at this ardent period of life . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.54

I had many other letters to foreign parts , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.55

but the home service was at present of the greatest consequence ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.56

and the various introductory epistles addressed to the medical men in
London were the sheet-anchors of my hope . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.57

An introduction to the good folks in Padua or Naples could serve me but
little , unless I could find some good folks at home who would take me
in their suite . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.58

I grew dull again , as I came to the conclusion of my last letter ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.59

and putting it aside , walked up and down the deck in despair , passing
from one extreme to the other instead of avoiding both .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.60

The Castle Hill was still in view , as I gazed towards the shore ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,6.61

and a provoking wind was <P_1,7> about to tear me from the place where I
had spent so many happy months . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.62

Indeed , I was very sad . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.63

Hitherto all had been as fiction or a fairy dream ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.64

for such is the study of the profession when compared with its practice
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.65

All my wants had been supplied from sources which could not have failed
me . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.66

Now I was to rely upon my own endeavours , and to supply my own wants by
my own exertions . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.67

I had , it is true , a passport in my diploma , which was addressed
<font> omnibus et singulis <$$font> , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.68

but it no where desired the authorities to aid and assist the bearer
thereof to proceed on his journey . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.69

India promised me but little pleasure , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.70

for I had not forgotten to apply for a situation in the Company's
service , when a warm climate was recommended to me .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.71

It had been promised to me upon my first application ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.72

but I despised what was so easily procured . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.73

I put it in the rear-guard of Lisbon . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.74

I had indeed no very exalted idea of the pagoda tree ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.75

and although I was assured that two men would run before me to flap away
the flies , and many more such temptations were held out to me , still
willingly would I have sacrificed them all for one year more of " Auld
Reekie . " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.76

Again I had sudden twinges in my chest ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.77

my hands got warm ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.78

my face became flushed from sitting in the sun . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.79

I could never reach India , I thought , in my present state !
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.80

Such were the cogitations of the first two days after I quitted
Edinburgh . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.81

Nothing amused me ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,7.82

the same objects which upon my former trips had afforded me so much
pleasure , and even called forth <P_1,8> my muse , were now unlike
themselves . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.83

It is a mistake to suppose that inanimate things must be always the same
; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.84

they are just as we wish to see them ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.85

and as no one is to-day as he was yesterday , so nothing bears the same
character or wears the same appearance at all times and at all seasons .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.86

As we proceeded on our voyage , however , the sea , which to me had
always been a restorative , braced me wonderfully ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.87

my spirits revived with my increasing appetite ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.88

and when we arrived at Wapping after eight days' beating about , my
companions told me that they should hardly have recognised me ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.89

scarcely indeed could I recognise myself . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.90

Almost as soon as I found myself in London , and moreover , in the city
, I felt that inward impulse , which is generated in the metropolis , of
proceeding immediately to business . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.91

I had forgotten my consumption ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.92

I had forgotten the cause of finding myself where I was , in being
myself there . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.93

Imagination gave place to calculation . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.94

I have two strings to my bow , thought I to myself .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.95

I have the choice of going to India , the which is certain .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.96

I have the hopes of being appointed to some family travelling to the
South to pass the winter , the which is uncertain .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.97

It was in the pursuit of certainty , however , that I found myself about
six o'clock on a fine summer's evening strolling towards Thavies Inn ,
Holborn . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.98

I never hated London so much in my life . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.99

I entered the old Inn where my friends resided , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,8.100

and was informed by a dirty looking wench who opened the door , that the
young ladies were gone with their <P_1,9> mamma to take a walk in the
country . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.101

I waited long for their return ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.102

at length the whole party arrived , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.103

and the first inquiry satisfied me that my presentiment of being still a
long distance from India was correct . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.104

The salutations and greetings were not precisely of a nature to
encourage or please me . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.105

How well you look ! LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.106

Well we are glad to see you , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.107

but why have you left Edinburgh ? LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.108

I can never call you doctor , you look so young .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.109

Well , what are your plans ? LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.110

I was confounded at such irrelevant questions , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.111

but , overcoming the mortifications of the spirit , I proceeded to make
inquiries with regard to my Indian affairs . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.112

- " O dear , yes ! Dr. C- will put you in the way , I dare say .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.113

It is very easily done ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.114

what makes you wish to go to India ? " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.115

I soon perceived that the promises and assurances , which looked so
clear upon paper , took another turn by word of mouth .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.116

Indeed my good friend had almost forgotten all about the matter ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.117

and was quite surprised that I should think so much about it , when the
certainty of my succeeding in my application , as expressed in his
letter , had been one of the chief causes of my quitting Edinburgh so
early in the season . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.118

The doctor , who was to do my business for me , was actually in
attendance upon the family at the time , so that the opportunity was
favourable . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.119

He was a celebrated character , who had spent half his time and all his
fortune in chemical pursuits . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,9.120

He had not succeeded , however , in extracting sunbeams <P_1,10> from
cucumbers , nor gold from strawberry roots ; though he had been for
years occupied in attempting to accomplish the latter object .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.121

I was introduced to him in full form , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.122

and when I had detailed my case to him much as a patient would have
explained the symptoms of a complaint , he replied very good_naturedly ,
" Oh to be sure , very easy . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.123

Call upon my nephew in Broad Street , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.124

and he will put you in the way of it immediately . "
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.125

There was no doubt of their relationship , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.126

they had been cast in the same mould , morally and physically .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.127

Dr. C- could find no gold in strawberry roots ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.128

his nephew could find no contagion in plague . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.129

His moral evidence to the contrary was so strong , that he would not
believe the evidence of his other senses , as he honestly declared
before the House of Commons . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.130

The uncle , on the contrary , fully believed that there existed gold in
strawberry roots , though his senses never assisted him in the pursuit .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.131

<font> " Arcades ambo . " <$$font> Uncle and nephew .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.132

The latter received me in his dressing-gown , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.133

and when I informed him of the nature of my visit , and delivered his
uncle's message to him , he replied that he had no interest whatever in
the India Board , but that if I got an appointment , he would examine me
previous to my departure for India , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.134

for he was examiner to the Board . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.135

He would prove to me as he had done to the House of Commons , by
argument at least , if not by noses , that neither plague nor typhus was
contagious . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.136

I opened the eyes of astonishment , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.137

but my ears were closed to conviction , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,10.138

for I was in <P_1,11> my individual person a proof at least of the
contrary , having lately suffered by fever from attending upon fever
patients . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.139

He recommended me to call upon Mr. A- at the India House , to inquire
if there were a vacancy , and to show him my testimonials .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.140

I wished the doctor good morning , perfectly convinced that we should
not meet again . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.141

To conclude my India affairs . I called the following morning on Mr.
A- at the India House ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.142

he looked at me with a frown of perfect contempt ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.143

and when I informed him that I came recommended by Dr. - , he raised
his voice to a Bombay pitch , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.144

and informed me , he could only receive applications through a director
, and that the old fool knew so perfectly well , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.145

and returning to his ledger , spared me the civility of a good morning .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.146

I can@ @not say that I was much disappointed . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.147

I was prepared for the result . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.148

I had more strings to my bow , and more irons in the fire ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.149

and as I could do nothing in the East , I proceeded to try my luck in
the West_Indies . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.150

Among numerous letters with which I was provided , I had an introductory
one to a celebrated doctor who wore a slouch hat , and had endeavoured
to pick up a good deal of practice in the neighbourhood of Soho Square .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.151

No doubt the reader is already in Dr. Eady's portico ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.152

and I must leave him there , unless he choose to follow me ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.153

for I protest that I was never there myself . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.154

The gentleman I allude to was of a different stamp , although far less
famed than Dr. Eady ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,11.155

he was himself a West_Indian , <P_1,12> and a native of Jamaica .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.156

As I hate presenting an introductory letter , I left it with my address
, the servant telling me that his master would be at home the following
morning before ten o'clock . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.157

I presented myself at that hour . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.158

The doctor reminded me of a knight-errant in the Black Forest .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.159

He was tall , lank , and lean , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.160

had large whiskers , eyes sunk in their orbits , a wildish expression ,
and a rough cracked voice . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.161

He was seated at his breakfast table in Dean Street , in a large
comfortless house , and in an equally comfortless parlour - a black
japan tea-board much the worse for wear , a queen's metal tea-pot , and
a loaf of stale bread before him ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.162

for it was Sunday , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.163

and no rolls are allowed to be baked on the Sabbath day .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.164

The doctor was seated at his breakfast table , I say , reading the
Observer Newspaper . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.165

Lifting his eyes from the columns , he greeted me by reading a paragraph
from the same paper upon the utility of public executions .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.166

He then quoted some Greek and Latin authors , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.167

and asked me if I did not think that private hanging would have a much
more salutary effect in repressing vice . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.168

We discussed the point at some length <paren> a singular introductory
topic <$$paren> , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.169

and both agreed that public executions had lost much of their effect
from their frequency . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.170

Soon changing the topic , however , and proceeding to private affairs ,
he addressed me upon the subject of my introductory letter to him ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.171

and promised to give me such recommendatory letters to Jamaica as would
answer all my purposes . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,12.172

<P_1,13>

There are some characters with whom I can never assimilate .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.174

I can@ @not easily overcome a certain prejudice caused by first
impressions , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.175

and the more I endeavour to do so , the less I succeed .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.176

I am an instance in myself of the atomic theory .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.177

I can only unite in definite proportions , without which there is no
combination . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.178

I could not harmonise with my West India friend ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.179

there was no affinity in our compositions , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.180

and we could never form a sympathetic friendship .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.181

I must stick to Europe , thought I to myself , as I lounged along the
alleys which lead from Gerard Street to Long Acre , after having made my
bow , and retired with the promise of calling again .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.182

These East and West India complexions are too tawny for my taste ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.183

and I felt in my pocket for some more introductory letters .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.184

It happened by chance that I took out one addressed to a Scotchman in -
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.185

Chance shall I call it ? call that <font> chance <$$font> which was the
foundation and corner-stone of all my subsequent career ? " call God's
good providence a lucky hit ? " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.186

I had many letters yet undelivered , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.187

and the truth is , I awaited the printing of my doctorial card , which I
was anxious to deliver with them . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.188

I will deliver this letter said I to myself ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.189

I have a certain presentiment that this may be of service ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.190

and I hurried on to the address . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.191

I was ushered into a small dirty parlour , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.192

and had hardly time to pace its dimensions when I was re-ushered into
the study . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,13.193

A thin , spare , comical looking man received me , with one eye shut ,
with a cock in the other , and a twist in <P_1,14> the corner of his
mouth . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.194

I never saw any thing less medical in my life in appearance ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.195

for instead of seeing a figure all in black , a uniform appropriate to
the profession , I found this inhabitant of the West End manor dressed
in a long loose coat , and a red cravat tied loosely round his neck .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.196

He was skimming over my introductory epistle , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.197

and turning to me - " Well , and so you would be for going abroad ? "
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.198

I replied in the affirmative , provided I could find some means of
franking myself . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.199

" That@ @'s not so easy , " he replied ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.200

" families do not take medical men with them now-a-days ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.201

for they find enough of them every where , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.202

and it is a horrid bore to be bothered with a stranger . "
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.203

There was , I thought , a particularly ugly cast in his eyes as he made
this speech . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.204

" I know a gentleman , " continued he , " who is going to Spain ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.205

but he wants no doctor . " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.206

In a moment I seized the idea , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.207

and replied , I have some thoughts of going to Lisbon , where I have
friends . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.208

He made no direct reply , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.209

but I thought there was a more amiable turn in his other eye .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.210

" Where are you to be found ? " he continued ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.211

I gave him the address of my West India friend .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.212

" What , is he one of your cronies , the old fool ? "
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.213

and cocking both eyes , he shook me by the hand LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.214

and told me to call again in a day or two if I passed that way .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.215

I observed that he had scribbled my address on a piece of paper , which
I thought looked well . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.216

From Pall Mall East I descended a little in the aristocratic scale ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,14.217

and made my next assault upon a <P_1,15> dapper little doctor who lived
in Bloomsbury Square , to whom I had very strong recommendatory letters
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.218

He was the very antipodes of my Scotch friend ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.219

he wore powder and silk stockings , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.220

and though not very far advanced in his professional course , was , what
is styled in medical parlance , a " rising character . "
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.221

He was under the special protection of an old practitioner , who was
putting him by degrees into his shoes , which became daily more easy to
their new wearer . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.222

He was still upon his legs , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.223

and had not even launched his <font> voiture expectante <$$font> ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.224

yet the profession looked upon him as a rising man .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.225

He was established on the neutral ground , or half way between the city
and the west-end ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.226

and there is a very sensible medical line of demarcation .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.227

All is city from Bedford Row eastward . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.228

The neutral ground lies between Bedford Row , which it includes ,
together with the squares to the right , as far down as Charing Cross .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.229

All the rest is west . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.230

North and south were not marked in the medical chart at that time .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.231

Now the neutral ground is very thick set with doctors .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.232

It is aspiring ground , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.233

and the public judge much of a man's talents by the way in which he
seems to thrive himself . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.234

The city is decidedly plebeian , the neutral ground aspiring , the
west-end aristocratic . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.235

When young physicians commence in the city , they take a lodging in
Fenchurch Street , where they generally reside two years upon their
private means , if they have the means of residing there so long .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.236

They take no fee during this period , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,15.237

but talk very much of their practice increasing , as soon as they
<P_1,16> have taken one , which is about the beginning of the third year
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.238

They talk of having doubled their practice the fourth year , which means
that they have taken two fees , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.239

and they change their lodgings LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.240

and remove to Bucklersbury . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.241

Here they remain stationary for some time , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.242

and if they do not succeed , put their diplomas into their pockets ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.243

and go into the country to practice as apothecaries .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.244

If they succeed , however , and get enough to pay their washerwomen ,
they take part of a house in Broad Street , from whence they remove to
the neutral ground and become rising men . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.245

To return , however , to little Dr. - , who occupied the middle space ,
or was an aspiring character . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.246

I found him also , at breakfast , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.247

and he was very jocular , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.248

had retained a great many of his patron's anecdotes ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.249

and invented a few of his own . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.250

I found his jokes less stale than his eggs ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.251

but who can procure a fresh egg in London ? LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.252

After dispatching both , however , he told me he would do all in his
power to further my wishes , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.253

and begged me to call upon him the following day , as he had something
in view . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.254

This was very pleasant to my feelings , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.255

and I could not help drawing a comparison between the characters of the
men to whom I had already applied , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.256

and it was certainly in his favour . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.257

Upon revisiting him - I should perhaps say , redunning him - he asked me
if it were worth my while to go to Nice with the Dowager Lady E- .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.258

I replied , I thought it would be a very <font> nice <$$font> trip , and
was what I particularly thought would suit my case .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,16.259

<P_1,17>

He gave me his card , with a note addressed to a fashionable apothecary
in L- C- Street , who would converse with me upon the subject .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.261

God be praised ! said I to myself , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.262

this is coming to the point . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.263

The others have <font> promised <$$font> me a great deal ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.264

but this man <font> performs . <$$font> LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.265

I was prepossessed in his favour at first sight .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.266

As I hurried along to deliver the card and the address , I halted for a
moment as I suddenly recollected that I had forgotten a very important
part , viz. the sum I should ask for my services .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.267

I retraced my steps a few paces , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.268

and after due consideration , decided modestly upon a_thousand pounds .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.269

I am but young , I thought , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.270

and it will be an introduction . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.271

There are disagreeables in all professions , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.272

for I smelt the shop as I entered it . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.273

The Galen himself was writing in his ledger when I delivered him the
card and letter . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.274

He looked upon me with contempt , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.275

and told me the situation was not vacant . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.276

Lady - was already half way to Nice ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.277

and without taking off his hat , or wishing me good morning , continued
to write in his book . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.278

At first , I thought my friend the doctor had really played me a trick ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.279

but knowing that to be impossible , I vented all my rage upon the
apothecary . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.280

I had delivered letters to three physicians , and to a first_rate
West-End {TEXT:west-end} surgeon , all of whom had received me most
politely ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.281

and was I to be treated thus cavalierly by an apothecary in L- C- Street
; I who was a doctor , too ? LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.282

I felt no inclination to proceed further in this direction ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,17.283

but it occurred to me as I passed by his <P_1,18> door , that I had not
seen my old teacher . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.284

I determined , therefore , to call upon him , and state my views to him
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.285

A few more letters , I thought , would do me no harm ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.286

they were at all events equivalent to certificates of good conduct .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.287

He received me with his usual kindness , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.288

and . forgetting , as he always did , my name , asked me from whence I
came last . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.289

I am just returned from Edinburgh . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.290

" Oh , true , " he replied ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.291

" I hear that you took an active part in the debates of the Medical
Society , and supported the doctrines of the Borough school .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.292

What are the prevailing doctrines now in Edinburgh ?
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.293

I remember , that when I was there , I found very few who were
thoroughly acquainted with John Hunter , although he was a Scotchman .
" LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.294

He is my Magnus Apollo , I exclaimed LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.295

and was continuing my - , when Charles the servant opened the door for a
third time <paren> a hint to patients who bother the doctor too long
about their complaints <$$paren> . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.296

" Stop , " said he , as I was retreating , abashed by the proceedings of
the footman : LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.297

" You are not a patient . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.298

What are your plans ? " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.299

I detailed them as concisely as possible , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.300

and as concisely did he scribble me four letters to his medical friends
, begging them , if in their power , to further my views .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.301

" God bless you , " he said , shaking my hand , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.302

" if these wo@ @n't do , come again . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.303

Charles , show the next gentleman up stairs ; " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.304

and I went down , without being " shown " down .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.305

It was not till a week afterwards that I could deliver the letters in
<font> propriâ personâ <$$font> . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,18.306

This was accomplished , <P_1,19> however , upon my return to town ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.307

but it was necessary that I should explain the object of my application
to each individually , to whom these letters were addressed .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.308

This was not so easy a matter as it would have been previously ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.309

for my health was now much restored , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.310

and I began to grow stout again , so that when I talked of health and
consumption , I only excited the smiles of the conscript fathers .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.311

There was one exception to this , however : LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.312

Dr. Warren told me , " Yours is a case for a warm climate ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.313

that membrane is weak ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.314

when you are older it will be stronger . " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.315

If I do not die first , thought I to myself . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.316

His opinion has been fully realised , however , unless the certainty of
not being consumptive at present comes under the nosological definition
- " delusive hopes of recovery . " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.317

All , however , were excessively polite to me , which made me more
venomous still against the apothecary . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.318

In waiting the result of all these applications , I began to be afraid
that I was like the hare , with many friends . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.319

I received a letter one morning from my West_Indian acquaintance ,
inviting me to join him at the Italian Opera . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.320

I did so , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.321

for I was glad of the opportunity ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.322

I had never been there before . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.323

I was most grievously disappointed . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.324

It was between the acts of Il flauto Magico that the doctor turned round
to me , and asked me if I would undertake his practice for a fortnight .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.325

He wished to go to Seven Oaks , where many of his patients resided ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,19.326

and if I would attend his dispensary , and visit the few patients
<P_1,20> who remained in town , he would gladly leave them under my care
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.327

In a few days I was installed in the Doctor's chair ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.328

and was myself become a doctor <font> de facto . <$$font>
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.329

It required more tact to manage the dispensary pupils than the
dispensary patients . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.330

I found some of these said pupils my seniors in more than age , and very
inquisitive . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.331

A good face upon difficulties , and carry all with a high hand :
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.332

I was an advocate for decided practice , as it is styled - a decided
practitioner ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.333

and there is no more certain way of imposing upon people , than by
impressing upon them this idea - LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.334

say that a man is a decided practitioner , it is enough .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.335

Nobody will inquire in what sense - <font> bad <$$font> or good - this
word " decided " is to be taken . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.336

I bled , purged , and blistered decidedly , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.337

and the cases being of an inflammatory character , as upon Gil Blas's
debut {TEXT:debût} , it happened to be decidedly <font> good <$$font>
practice . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.338

I never shall forget the joy which I felt when I fingered the first
guinea . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.339

It was a genuine coin , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.340

for it was at this time , and a most memorable period it was , that I
took my maiden fee . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.341

The old <font> unreformed guinea <$$font> , none of your sovereigns
wrapped up with a shilling , as you see them now-a-days .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.342

It was pure and without alloy , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.343

and often did I finger it over in my pocket , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.344

and sighing involuntarily , said to myself , How many more shall I
receive in the career which is now opening to me ?
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.345

A conscientious hectic flushed across my face ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.346

it was the first and last time that I ever felt embarrassed at receiving
a fee . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,20.347

I was in a <P_1,21> few days afterwards presented with a second one ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.348

it came quite as a thing of course . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.349

I thought it tardy in its arrival . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.350

These are the only two fees which I took at that period in London .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.351

In awaiting a third , I was summoned to the surgeon who had not inquired
after me since my first application to him , so that I despaired of
success in that quarter . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.352

" Well , " says he , " have you found any thing to suit you ? "
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.353

I replied in the negative . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.354

" You wish to go to Lisbon ? " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.355

Provided I can find nothing better , I shall pass the winter with my
uncle , who resides there , I replied . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.356

" The gentleman I spoke to you about , the other day , is going to Spain
; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.357

and though he is not anxious to take a medical man with him , yet I
think you might contrive to go together . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.358

Call upon me , on Sunday , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.359

and we will talk again upon the matter . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.360

I shall see Lord - in the mean time . " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.361

Lord ! LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.362

how the sound of " lord " resounded in my ears - physician to a lord !
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.363

In a few days all was arranged , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.364

and I was to be introduced to his lordship as travelling physician ,
previous to our departure for the continent . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.365

Lord , physician , and continent were three words which I could not have
supposed to bear any relation to each other as regarded myself .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.366

I had still a fortnight before me , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.367

for his lordship had migrated into the country ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,21.368

and as I was not to see him till his return , I thought I could not do
better than take a few finishing lessons in the French language ,
knowing just as much as boys do when they leave school , <P_1,22> where
they had a French master once a week . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,22.369

It happened that M. Racine , professor of the language , lived in the
same street as myself . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,22.370

The worthy professor told me , honestly , that as my stay would be so
short in England , he could not do me any service ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,22.371

and declined the undertaking . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,22.372

Should I have acted as honestly , had M. Racine applied to me for a
fortnight's doctoring for some chronic complaint ?
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,22.373

<P_1,23>

<heading>

CHAP. II . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,23.376

<$$heading>

In the month of September , 1819 , I was introduced to his lordship ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,23.378

and I shall never forget the impression that my patient made upon me .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,23.379

I saw all the features of consumption traced upon his face ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,23.380

and I must have expressed this by my own <paren> one of the most
treacherous ever allotted to man <$$paren> , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,23.381

for as soon as we left the room , the surgeon said to me , " I see you
think it is all over with him . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,23.382

You are right , I am afraid ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,23.383

but still he may live some time . " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,23.384

If I had none of those bashful fearful feelings , which some anticipate
in their first introduction to those of a superior rank , still I had
very different <P_1,24> sentiments after this interview from those which
I had previously entertained . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.385

I found his lordship mild and condescending , affable in his manners ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.386

and he wore an agreeable smile upon his face which was at the same time
captivating and dignified . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.387

I thought that I could trace even in the lengthened mien and haggard
appearance no ordinary marks of intellect . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.388

There was something , however , restless about him ; an agitation of
mind , evinced by his bodily movements ; and a certain decision in his
tone , which , perhaps , bordered upon obstinacy .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.389

His was a mind which evidently could not remain a moment unoccupied .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.390

There was no approach to a state of rest . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.391

Such was my first impression , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.392

and it was a true one . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.393

This was the feature in the composition which alone brought us into
contact , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.394

for the feverish brain had destroyed the outward man ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.395

and was now gnawing the vitals . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.396

It was arranged that I should leave the party in London , and proceed
<font> solus <$$font> to Dover , where they would join me the following
day . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.397

I got to Dover , and into the heart of the town , without perceiving it
; so dense was the fog at six o'clock in the morning in the month of
September . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.398

I went to bed ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.399

it was Sunday morning ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.400

and when I had refreshed myself with a little broken sleep , and with a
good breakfast , I began to reflect upon the nature of things in general
, and my own affairs in particular . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.401

My first idea was naturally to commence my journal .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.402

I began by philosophising upon my present situation .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.403

It was certainly a new one to me . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,24.404

I was placed in circumstances , which I could hardly , in the
probability of <P_1,25> events , ever have anticipated .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.405

When I began seriously to reflect , therefore , how I came to be so , it
produced a mental excitement , which those only can understand , who ,
like myself , have suddenly passed into such opposite states ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.406

nor can even they appreciate it , unless , at the same age , they have
possessed the same enthusiasm as myself . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.407

I had lately recovered from an alarming illness ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.408

and my nerves still vibrated under its effects .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.409

I had quitted Edinburgh under disadvantageous circumstances , having
been obliged to resign an official situation in the Infirmary , which ,
at that period of my medical career , promised to be most conducive to
my success . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.410

Upon quitting Scotland , I knew not whither I was going , nor what means
I should find to carry into effect , what was then indeed the one thing
needful ; viz. the restoration of my health . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.411

My funds were not ample , hardly sufficient indeed to take me to Lisbon
, could I find no other port , where I might drop my anchor .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.412

I was far from being destitute , it is true , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.413

but my pride would not allow me to apply to friends for pecuniary
assistance . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.414

I had received letters from my father , who was in France , authorising
me to draw upon him for a_hundred pounds ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.415

but the last time that we parted , we had an altercation upon that
subject , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.416

and I had almost resolved never to apply again to that source .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.417

It was an impious resolution , begotten in pride , and reared in
ingratitude . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.418

Such were my feelings , two months previous , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.419

and they were wrought to excess by the little power my fever left me to
resist them . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,25.420

How differently did <P_1,26> I find myself situated at the present
moment . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.421

I was at once turning my professional studies to account , and putting
into my pocket what I had been putting into my head .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.422

I was about to work out my temporal subsistence ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.423

and how easy , how amiable did the task appear !
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.424

The same excess of feeling , which once depressed me beyond what was
absolutely probable , now raised me above all possibility ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.425

for no one ever so little reduced to practice the golden rule of Horace
- <font> " Aequam servare mentem . " <$$font> LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.426

I imagined myself , therefore , at once launched into fashionable life ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.427

and was travelling physician to an English nobleman , about to set out
upon his travels . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.428

How sweetly smooth did the future appear to me ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.429

my success I considered certain . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.430

I had the first interest , which would protect and patronise me in
future . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.431

I imagined myself already practising in St. James's , my carriage
waiting at the door , until I had dismissed my morning patients .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.432

These , and similarly extravagant misconceptions of my real situation ,
worked upon my imagination , always prone to look forward to a brilliant
future - always paying the price of its ardour in the disappointment of
the present . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.433

How different did the thing really appear , when placed in its true
colours . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.434

- What was I , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.435

and what was I about to do ? LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,26.436

A youth , who with some hundred more of his companions , had got a
medical diploma , and , by a lucky concatenation of events , was allowed
to accompany a family to the South of France , who might repay
themselves for the inconveniences such a guest might cause them <P_1,27>
by some trifling services which he might render them !
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.437

The family did not send for me till the following day , when I was
summoned to attend them . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.438

I was rather mortified , when I heard that they had arrived the previous
evening , without immediately sending for me . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.439

Why should his Lordship miss an opportunity of availing himself of my
services ? LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.440

It appeared to me rather <font> infra dig . <$$font>
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.441

Nay , two or three other circumstances piqued me a little ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.442

and I determined to keep up the dignity of my cloth .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.443

Time and experience put all things to rights . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.444

We embarked the same day , in a small craft . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.445

The wind blew fresh , and almost in our teeth , so that we were seven
hours in crossing ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.446

and physician , as well as patient , suffered cruelly from sea-sickness
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.447

As it was dark before we got into the harbour , I was only aware of it
by the instantaneous cessation of uneasy symptoms .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.448

Never do I recollect such a transition from pain to pleasure , as I
experienced , when the vessel doubled the platform at Calais .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.449

I was upon French ground , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.450

and all was new to me , but not so new as I had anticipated .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.451

We went to Dessin's LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.452

and had a French dinner of odds and ends . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.453

Not a leg of beef upon the table , as the invalid Mathews observes ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.454

and " You see your dinner , Sir . " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.455

There was a <font> ne_plus_ultra <$$font> of all dainties , <font> an
omelette aux confitures {TEXT:comfitures} . <$$font>
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.456

Were I asked , what in life had made the most indelible impression upon
my senses , I should reply without hesitation , <font> An omelette aux
comfitures ! <$$font> LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.457

I commenced practice this evening , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,27.458

and prescribed <P_1,28> a composing draught for his Lordship , which ,
perhaps , was never taken . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.459

The following morning we started for Paris . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.460

Two carriages were waiting in the yard , with the horses , ready .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.461

" You will take charge of the calash , " said his Lordship , pointing it
out to me , as he and her Ladyship mounted the chariot .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.462

Dignity of the cloth , I replied , mentally , as I found myself seated
by the <font> femme_de_chambre . <$$font> LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.463

I was sulky during half of the first stage ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.464

I grew better towards dinner time , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.465

and in the evening was as happy as ever I remember to have been .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.466

We proceeded by slow journies , seldom starting before eleven , nor
travelling after dinner , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.467

for my patient was in too weak a state to allow of forced marches .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.468

This gave me an opportunity of seeing every thing to advantage .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.469

The every thing was in reality nothing , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.470

but I did not believe so then . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.471

On the sixth day we arrived at Paris ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.472

and I had been requested , before I left England , to consult with Dr.
M- , upon his Lordship's case . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.473

I never shall forget the first consultation . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.474

Being the junior physician , I had to write the prescription .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.475

I thought it would never end : LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.476

it occupied one side of a sheet of foolscap . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.477

It reminded me of Dr. Paris's apothecary , who shot out all the arrows
which he could , in hopes that some might hit . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.478

Lady - took it up LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.479

and laughed , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.480

" What is all this to do ? " she asked me . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.481

" To do his Lordship good , my Lady . " LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.482

The prescription was made up , and the physician fee'd .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.483

I found this consultation a much less formidable thing than I had
imagined . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,28.484

We were both agreed as to the nature of <P_1,29> the case , which I
thought did me credit at the time - a case of galloping consumption !
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.485

It was rather disinterested , on my part , that I should have
endeavoured to abridge , rather than prolong , our stay in Paris ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.486

but the season was advancing , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.487

and it was on the sixth day after we arrived that we found ourselves
again upon the wing . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.488

Quitting the city by the barrier of the Invalids , we halted at Estampes
for the night . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.489

'T@ @was a cold , dreary evening , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.490

and we were not very comfortably lodged . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.491

The frequent coughing of my patient , who slept in an adjoining room ,
discomposed me very much , so that I rose , and rapping at his door ,
gained admittance . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.492

Her Ladyship smiled at my alarm , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.493

and assured me it was nothing at all , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.494

for such fits were very frequent . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.495

I persuaded her to get him to take a little poppy syrup , which seemed
to soothe him for the rest of the night . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.496

We reached Orleans the following evening ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.497

and its fine cathedral , though unfinished , as most of those
continental edifices are , excited all my architectural admiration .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.498

I know not how it is , that these sanctuaries , so many of them remain
unfinished ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.499

but I hardly recollect having seen one , either in France or Germany ,
which can be called complete . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.500

Raised to the honour of the Supreme Being , the means should have been
found of completing the offering ; whereas , it would seem that the
curse of Babel was upon them for their presumptuous destination .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.501

The monument of Joan of Arc , the celebrated maid of Orlanes , stands in
the market-place , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,29.502

and has received <P_1,30> the last touch of the artist ; whereas , the
temple of God still remains but half achieved . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.503

We passed along the banks of the Loire , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.504

and arrived at Tours on the fifth day , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.505

and made it a halting_place . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.506

I was anxious to apply some leeches to my patient , a practice which had
been continued at certain intervals for a long period of his complaint ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.507

and I wished him to remain quiet for a day or two afterwards .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.508

I met with an adventure here , which redounds to the honesty or
ignorance of the inhabitants . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.509

We lodged in the suburbs of this pretty town , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.510

and his Lordship requested me to take a draft to the banker's for
a_hundred pounds , endorsed by himself , and rolled up in one of
Hammersley's letters . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.511

I put them in my coat pocket , taking the courier with me to bring the
cash home . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.512

I proceeded over the long handsome bridge of Tours to the banker's ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.513

and delivered the letter , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.514

but upon asking for the money , I was requested to produce the draft .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.515

I pointed to the letter which I had just handed over .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.516

This , however , they informed me was no demand for money , unless
accompanied by a bill , endorsed by his Lordship .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.517

I flattered myself that some mistake must have occurred , and that his
Lordship had forgotten to give me the real document ,
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.518

and I repaced my steps hastily to the inn . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.519

I found , to my dismay , that the bill had been rolled up in
Hammersley's letter , and that I must have pulled it out of my pocket .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.520

Judge , therefore , of my confusion at finding myself in this
predicament . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.521

I was quite distracted , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,30.522

nor could I be consoled by <P_1,31> the kind manner in which the parties
treated it , assuring me that it was not the first hundred pounds which
had been lost . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.523

I retraced my steps , trembling with agitation as I passed along ,
looking into every hole and corner of the street .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.524

I had some faint recollection of having pulled out my handkerchief at
the corner of the bridge . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.525

To this point I hurried , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.526

and seeing an old apple-woman seated at her stall , I addressed myself
to her . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.527

I inquired if she had seen any thing fall out of my pocket about an hour
before , as I passed over the bridge , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.528

for I recollected to have seen her there ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.529

she replied in the negative . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.530

My hopes vanished - LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.531

they were founded upon the old apple-woman . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.532

I continued my search , however , in the nooks formed by each abutment
of the bridge , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.533

and when about half the way over , my ears were saluted by the voice of
a little urchin , who , running up to me , told me his mamma wished to
speak to me . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.534

Every thing is a reprieve to a mind which is in a state of doubt and
uncertainty . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.535

The boy's voice was like that of a cherub to me :
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.536

hope is never long absent from the human breast .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.537

I listened to him LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.538

and followed him to his mother . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.539

I could make nothing out of her talk which was likely to encourage me .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.540

It ran much thus : LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.541

her lad had seen another lad , whose mother had seen a walnut woman ,
whose lad had picked up a piece of paper in some part of the town , and
given it to his mother , who had taken it home , not knowing what it was
. LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,31.542

Notwithstanding this <font> embrouillement <$$font> , after an hour or
two's diplomatic inquiry , conducted by the courier , to whom I promised
<P_1,32> a handsome reward , we came to the house in a distant part of
the city , where we found several women employed in cracking walnuts ;
the oil of this fruit being a considerable branch of commerce in this
part of France . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.543

As soon as we entered the room , the woman who had found the draft arose
from her seat , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.544

and , saluting us , exclaimed , <font> " Je devine , Messieurs , ce que
vous venez chercher ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.545

il n'est plus ici . " <$$font> LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.546

She then entered into a long detail , how she came by it , and what she
had done with it . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.547

A council of war had been held in her quarter , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.548

and it was decided , as the safest plan , to take the paper to the
banker , where she had deposited it , and whither she accompanied me .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.549

We found all in order ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.550

and , rewarding her with a Louis , I returned to the inn in ecstasy .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.551

My first impression was , that it was a proof of national honesty ; my
second , that the woman was not aware of the value of the prize , nor
how to turn it to account . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.552

The first impression was a kind of instinctive idea ;
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.553

the second was engendered by reading Tom Jones ; LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.554

and I concluded the woman to be in much the same situation as the old
beggar , who , when he found out the value of the notes , which he so
honestly gave up , cursed his father for not having given him an early
education , and taught him at least to read . LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.555

Truth lies at the bottom of a well , LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.556

and lucky is he who discovers it after a long and laborious search .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.557

On leaving Tours , we quitted the banks of the Loire , which the great
beauty of the weather had rendered doubly interesting .
LEFEVRE-1843-2,1,32.558

