<BEGIN_liddon-1889-2>

<P_1>

<heading>

I . LIDDON-1889-2,1.4

<font> Mary our Model in Praising God . <$$font> LIDDON-1889-2,1.5

St. Luke I . 46 - 48 . {COM:epigraph_omitted} LIDDON-1889-2,1.6

<$$heading>

No fact is more attested by wide experience , and few facts are more
pregnant with significance and warning , than the tendency of the human
mind to lose its hold of the sense and power of language , especially of
religious language , after constantly repeating it . LIDDON-1889-2,1.8

Words , although sacred , and designed for universal use by the Highest
of all authorities , and richly endowed with spiritual power , do yet
become to us , through the process of constant usage , barren and
unfruitful , unless an effort be made from time to time to recover and
reassert in the human mind their original sense and import .
LIDDON-1889-2,1.9

So it is even with that most sacred Prayer which our Lord Himself
prescribed for the use of His disciples . LIDDON-1889-2,1.10

Neither the associations of ages , nor <P_2> the varied experiences of
our own souls , which have gathered round the several petitions of the
Lord's Prayer , will avail to save us from saying it in a thoughtless
and formal way , unless we constantly remind ourselves of what it means
; of what it has meant to millions , of what it might mean to ourselves
. LIDDON-1889-2,2.11

And as this is true of words which our Lord Himself bids us use , so it
is no less true of other inspired words , which His Church has selected
from the Sacred Records , as being especially suited for constant
employment in public worship . LIDDON-1889-2,2.12

It holds good of those psalms which , like the ninety-fifth or the
hundredth , or the seven psalms of Penitence , have been chosen for
frequent use on account of their spiritual intensity ; and even of those
three hymns in which the earliest saints of the New Testament heralded
the Birth of the Divine Redeemer - the song of Zacharias , or the
Benedictus ; the song of Simeon , or the Nunc Dimittis ; and the song of
Mary , or the Magnificat . LIDDON-1889-2,2.13

In view of this tendency to lose our hold on the sense of language which
on account of its excellence we repeat most frequently , it may be well
to devote the Sunday afternoons of the present month , to such
consideration as time will permit , of the familiar , but <P_3> not
always well-understood words of the first in order and the greatest of
Christian , hymns - the Magnificat . LIDDON-1889-2,3.14

<heading> I . <$$heading> There is no mistaking the prominence assigned
in the English Prayer-book , as in many older Prayer-books of the
Christian Church , to the Hymn of Mary . LIDDON-1889-2,3.15

It is the centre and heart of our Evening Service . LIDDON-1889-2,3.16

All else leads up to it , LIDDON-1889-2,3.17

or expands it , LIDDON-1889-2,3.18

or radiates from it . LIDDON-1889-2,3.19

We mount upwards to it by successive steps ; by confession of the sins
which disqualify the soul of man for true communion with God ; by the
great prayer which makes all communion with God easy and natural ; by
psalms which express the longings of the human heart for some nearer
contact with God , or which sadly deplore whatever may hinder it , or
which joyfully anticipate its realization . LIDDON-1889-2,3.20

We mount yet a step higher as we listen to some Lesson from the Old
Testament , which , whether it be history or prophecy , narrative or
moral teaching , poetry or prose , everywhere and always speaks of Jesus
Christ , to those who have ears to hear ; suggesting Him as the contrast
to the human failures , or as the crown of the human excellences which
it describes ; or announcing Him as <P_4> the Heavenly Visitant Who ,
by-and-by , will still man's fears and warrant his hopes .
LIDDON-1889-2,4.21

Now , as of old , unless there be a veil {TEXT:vail} over the heart in
the reading of the Old Testament , the Great Teacher accompanies us
through its pages , LIDDON-1889-2,4.22

and , beginning at Moses and all the Prophets , expounds to us in all
the Scriptures the things concerning Himself . LIDDON-1889-2,4.23

And thus we approach the Hymn which proclaims that all for which
Psalmists and Prophets have yearned has in very truth and deed come to
be . LIDDON-1889-2,4.24

Mary might seem evening by evening to stand in the church of her Divine
Son , while in strains which we shall consider , she celebrates an event
compared with which all else in human history is insignificant indeed .
LIDDON-1889-2,4.25

As from her thankful heart the incense of praise ascends to the Eternal
Throne , first in one and then another incense-wreath , each having its
own beauty of tint and form , we reflect that the hardest questions of
man's mind have been answered , and that the deepest yearnings of his
heart have been satisfied . LIDDON-1889-2,4.26

The Only Begotten Son has come down from heaven to be born of a human
Mother , to die at the hands of His creatures , and to rise again .
LIDDON-1889-2,4.27

After this all else might seem , in some sense must seem , pale and poor
; LIDDON-1889-2,4.28

but it is this great truth , set <P_5> forth or latent in every line of
the Magnificat which carries us on to the end of the Evening Service ;
through the Second Lesson , in which the Incarnate God speaks to us
Himself or by the lips of His Apostles ; to the Nunc Dimittis , in which
we take leave of His message with thankful joy ; to the Creed , in which
we brace ourselves for the toils and pains of life by a new profession
of our faith in Him ; to the concluding prayers , in which His
omnipotent Intercession is at once the warrant of our praying at all ,
and of the confidence that we shall be heard , not for our merits , but
for His . LIDDON-1889-2,5.29

It may seem strange that , from time to time , persons who have felt no
difficulty about the use of the old Hebrew psalms in Christian worship ,
have been disposed to take offence at the public use of the Magnificat ,
or , indeed , of all the Christian hymns which are preserved for us in
St. Luke's Gospel . LIDDON-1889-2,5.30

Such a feeling , however , found expression shortly after the Book of
Common Prayer had come into use . LIDDON-1889-2,5.31

It was maintained that unless we could all be in the exact circumstances
of Zacharias at the birth <P_6> of the Baptist , or of Simeon after
seeing our Lord in the Temple , or of Mary at the Visitation , we had no
adequate reason for singing their hymns . LIDDON-1889-2,6.32

This amounts to saying that no hymn or psalm is to be Used by any other
person than its composer , unless the circumstances of the composer can
be exactly reproduced in the case of the man or the Church which sings
his hymn . LIDDON-1889-2,6.33

Not to enquire how this rule would apply to modern and uninspired
compositions which are largely in use among us , we may observe that it
would forbid any use whatever of the Psalter itself in public or private
devotion - a use to which , however , oddly enough , those old objectors
who have been referred to , do not seem to have objected .
LIDDON-1889-2,6.34

For every psalm was composed in a special set of circumstances , some of
which can , while some can@ @not , be ascertained ; LIDDON-1889-2,6.35

and yet it does not seem to have been argued that , because we can@ @not
make these circumstances our own , we are precluded from using the
psalms . LIDDON-1889-2,6.36

We are none of us in the position of David persecuted by a jealous
sovereign , or insulted and rebelled against <P_7> by a favourite son ,
or bringing the ark to the sanctuary of Zion , or ordering a royal
household according to the Divine Law . LIDDON-1889-2,7.37

The glories of Solomon , the conquest and humiliation of Rehoboam , the
repulse of Sennacherib , the ruin and desolation of Jerusalem by the
Babylonian conqueror , the sadness of the captives weeping by the waters
of Babylon , the laying the corner-stone of the new temple after the
exile , - these , and many other like subjects or events , are the
occasions of psalms , which yet we use at this day to express the fears
, or hopes , or resolves , or aspirations of our own souls .
LIDDON-1889-2,7.38

Clearly , if such a difference of circumstances does not forbid the
recitation of Hebrew psalms , it can@ @not preclude us from using New
Testament hymns ; which , as Richard Hooker has said , " concern us so
much more than the songs of David , as the Gospel toucheth us more than
the Law , the New Testament than the Old . " LIDDON-1889-2,7.39

But in truth , whether it be Jewish psalm or Christian hymn , we
Christians use them because their inspiration lifts them above the
limits of the time , the place , the events which witnessed their
composition . LIDDON-1889-2,7.40

As a work of natural genius , <P_8> whether it be poem , or speech , or
painting , or statue , has that in it which detaches it from the study
of the poet , the audience of the speaker , the workroom of the artist ,
and makes it belong to all times and countries ; so much more do words
that are supernaturally inspired carry with them the certificate of an
universal applicability , which is independent of places , and events ,
and epochs , and authorship , and , indeed , of everything save His Mind
from Whom they proceed , and that heart and understanding of His
creatures which needs and welcomes them . LIDDON-1889-2,8.41

The Magnificat , then , is the Hymn of the Incarnation .
LIDDON-1889-2,8.42

It was uttered in circumstances the like of which had never before , and
have never since , surrounded any human being whatever .
LIDDON-1889-2,8.43

Mary had been told at Nazareth by a heavenly messenger that she was to
be the Mother of Him in Whom all God's best promises to Israel and to
the human race were to be fulfilled . LIDDON-1889-2,8.44

And she was to be His Mother , not in the ordinary way of nature , but ,
as became His pre-existing glory , and as was needed in order to cut off
the entail of evil which came down from the first father of our race ,
in a new and supernatural way . LIDDON-1889-2,8.45

" The Holy Ghost " - so ran the prediction - " shall come upon thee ,
LIDDON-1889-2,8.46

and <P_9> the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee :
LIDDON-1889-2,9.47

therefore also that Holy Thing Which shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son of God . " LIDDON-1889-2,9.48

Mary knew that she was to be the Mother of the Divine Messiah , when she
traversed the land from Nazareth to a country house some few miles from
Jerusalem , on a visit to her cousin Elisabeth , the future mother of
the Baptist , LIDDON-1889-2,9.49

It was their meeting which was the immediate occasion of the Magnificat
, LIDDON-1889-2,9.50

Elisabeth had no sooner heard from the lips of Mary the wonted
salutation , of " Peace be to thee ! " with which religious Jews
greeted each other after a long absence , than , under the influence of
the holy spirit of prophecy which filled her soul , she broke out into
words which mark the high significance of Mary's destiny scarcely less
clearly than does Mary's own Magnificat . LIDDON-1889-2,9.51

" She spake with a loud voice , LIDDON-1889-2,9.52

and said , Blessed art thou among women , LIDDON-1889-2,9.53

and blessed is the fruit of thy womb . LIDDON-1889-2,9.54

And whence is this to me , that the Mother of my Lord should come to me
? " LIDDON-1889-2,9.55

The Mother of my Lord ! LIDDON-1889-2,9.56

Elisabeth was the elder woman , LIDDON-1889-2,9.57

and , as the wife of Zacharias , she was in a higher social position
than Mary ; LIDDON-1889-2,9.58

but few things in religious history are more beautiful than her ready
and unstinted recognition <P_10> of the loftier vocation of her younger
relative . LIDDON-1889-2,10.59

Her next sentence was at once a blessing and a prophecy ;
LIDDON-1889-2,10.60

but they touched a secret spring in the illuminated soul of Mary ,
LIDDON-1889-2,10.61

and she forthwith uttered her hymn of praise . LIDDON-1889-2,10.62

She uttered it , as might seem , in a single jet ; LIDDON-1889-2,10.63

but as it passed from her lips , as is usual with eastern poetry , it
fell , not of set design , but by an instinct of intrinsic fitness ,
into divisions of unequal length , which we moderns should call strophes
. LIDDON-1889-2,10.64

Mary begins by offering up to God , with the whole strength and resource
of her spiritual being , that praise which she knows to be His due at
all times , and especially in view of the signal privilege and honour
that has been vouchsafed to her - LIDDON-1889-2,10.65

" My soul doth magnify the Lord . LIDDON-1889-2,10.66

And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour . LIDDON-1889-2,10.67

For He hath regarded the low estate of His handmaiden . "
LIDDON-1889-2,10.68

Then , in a second strophe , she dwells for a moment on the singular and
gracious distinction whereby she has been chosen to be the Mother of the
Incarnate Son - LIDDON-1889-2,10.69

" For behold , from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed .
LIDDON-1889-2,10.70

For He That is mighty hath done to me great things ; LIDDON-1889-2,10.71

And holy is His Name . LIDDON-1889-2,10.72

And His mercy is on them that fear Him throughout all generations . "
LIDDON-1889-2,10.73

<P_11>

But during these moments of thankful exultation her vision has widened
to embrace new horizons , LIDDON-1889-2,11.75

and , in a third strophe , she sets forth some relations of the Birth of
her Son to the action of God's Providence in the history of human
nations and human lives - LIDDON-1889-2,11.76

" He hath showed strength with His Arm ; LIDDON-1889-2,11.77

He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts .
LIDDON-1889-2,11.78

He hath put down princes from their thrones , LIDDON-1889-2,11.79

And hath exalted men of low degree . LIDDON-1889-2,11.80

He hath filled the hungry with good things ; LIDDON-1889-2,11.81

And the rich He hath sent empty away . " LIDDON-1889-2,11.82

Once more , in a concluding strophe , she traces the great gift which ,
through her , has been bestowed on the race of man , up to its sources
in the Compassion and the Faithfulness of God . LIDDON-1889-2,11.83

" He remembering His Mercy Hath holpen His servant Israel ; As He
promised to our forefathers , Abraham and his seed , for ever . "
LIDDON-1889-2,11.84

It has more than once been suggested that such a Hymn as this is not the
kind of response which it would be natural for us to make in reply to
such a congratulation as Elisabeth's ; LIDDON-1889-2,11.85

and it is hinted <P_12> that the composition may be really due to some
later writer , whether the Evangelist or another . LIDDON-1889-2,12.86

Upon this we may remark that " natural " is a term of varying import ;
and that what is natural to one person , or people , or age , is far
from being natural to another . LIDDON-1889-2,12.87

We have only to look around us in order to discover that persons of
different temperaments meet similar occasions very differently .
LIDDON-1889-2,12.88

One man is reserved and sparing of his words , LIDDON-1889-2,12.89

another is effusive ; LIDDON-1889-2,12.90

this man checks his feelings , LIDDON-1889-2,12.91

that man indulges them ; LIDDON-1889-2,12.92

one is as literal and prosaic as may be , LIDDON-1889-2,12.93

another almost inevitably expresses himself in the language of poetry .
LIDDON-1889-2,12.94

Then the Eastern and Western nations differ now in these respects as
they have always differed . LIDDON-1889-2,12.95

To many an Arab at this hour it is perfectly natural to discuss an
everyday occurrence in words which have the form and rhythm of a
poetical composition . LIDDON-1889-2,12.96

That which an European would put into a sentence , the Arab will expand
into what is virtually a poem , with rhythmic rise and fall , and
refrains and repetitions , and appeals to all kinds of higher
considerations , not perhaps foreign to the subject , but not necessary
to its due discussion . LIDDON-1889-2,12.97

No Englishman who had just lost his king and his friend would forthwith
break out into an <P_13> effusion such as that in which David laments
the death of Saul and Jonathan on Mount Gilboa ; LIDDON-1889-2,13.98

but in David , as in many another Eastern , ancient or modern - apart
from any question of inspiration - it was almost a matter of course to
do so . LIDDON-1889-2,13.99

And Mary , instinct with the spirit of prophecy , answers Elisabeth's
congratulations in a burst of inspired poetry , based on older words
which she has known from infancy , and which she so transfigures as to
make them express the fact which fills her grateful soul with wonder and
joy . LIDDON-1889-2,13.100

To measure her utterance by the prosaic rules of our Western temperament
, is to forget the most obvious laws of equitable criticism .
LIDDON-1889-2,13.101

Nor , we may confidently add , is there any real ground for the
assertion that Mary's Magnificat was the work of any other than Mary .
LIDDON-1889-2,13.102

Like the songs of Zacharias and Simeon , it is something more than a
psalm , and something less than a complete Christian hymn .
LIDDON-1889-2,13.103

A Christian poet , living after the Resurrection of Christ , would
surely have said more ; LIDDON-1889-2,13.104

a Hebrew psalmist would have said less than Mary . LIDDON-1889-2,13.105

In this Hymn of hers we observe a consciousness of nearness to the
fulfilment of the great promises , to which there is <P_14> no parallel
even in the latest of the psalms ; LIDDON-1889-2,14.106

and yet even Mary does not speak of the Promised One as an Evangelist or
an Apostle would have spoken of Him , by His Human Name , and with
distinct reference to the mysteries of His Life and Death and
Resurrection . LIDDON-1889-2,14.107

Her Hymn was a native product of one particular moment of transition in
sacred religious history , and of no other ; when the twilight of the
ancient dispensation was melting , but had not yet melted , into the
full daylight of the new . LIDDON-1889-2,14.108

Certainly the Magnificat is an inspired Psalm ; LIDDON-1889-2,14.109

it belongs to the highest degree of inspiration , LIDDON-1889-2,14.110

and yet it does not claim an absolute originality .
LIDDON-1889-2,14.111

It is , in truth , modelled very largely , although not altogether , on
an older Psalm , which Hannah had sung many a century before at the door
of the tabernacle in Shiloh , when she brought to it her infant son
Samuel , as she said , to " lend him to the Lord as long as he liveth .
" LIDDON-1889-2,14.112

Hannah's history had an especial place in the heart and thoughts of
every Jewish woman . Not only because she was the mother of the great
and austere prophet , who may claim in some respects <P_15> an
unrivalled importance in the history of the people of Revelation , but
also and because her deferred hopes , her bitter disappointments , the
rough misunderstanding to which she was exposed even at the hands of the
gentle and weak old man who then held the office of high priest in
Israel , have a human pathos that is all their own .
LIDDON-1889-2,15.113

At last her longings were fulfilled , LIDDON-1889-2,15.114

and when , in accordance with the terms of her vow , she consecrated her
son as a Nazarite to the lifelong service of God , her thankful heart
found vent in a Hymn of Praise , in repeating which many a Jewish mother
and maiden from that time forth associated herself with the sorrows and
the joys of Hannah . LIDDON-1889-2,15.115

Listen to Hannah first and then to Mary , and you will perceive how
closely their hymns are related to each other . LIDDON-1889-2,15.116

Each of these inspired women finds her joy in God ; LIDDON-1889-2,15.117

each traces God's Hand in the exaltation of the humble and in the
humiliation of the proud ; LIDDON-1889-2,15.118

each closes her song by dwelling on God's fulfilment of His promises .
LIDDON-1889-2,15.119

Mary , we see plainly , has reproduced the very ideas , the order of
ideas , nay , sometimes the very phrases , of the older hymn ;
LIDDON-1889-2,15.120

but she has made them subservient to a truth which was seen , if at all
, very <P_16> dimly , across the ages , by the older songstress , and
which is close and clear to herself . LIDDON-1889-2,16.121

When Strauss observes that if the Virgin's Hymn had been inspired from
on high we might expect in it more of originality , it is not out of
place to reflect that God the Holy Ghost is not bound to adopt the exact
standard of originality which may approve itself to a modern literary
man of a sceptical turn of mind . LIDDON-1889-2,16.122

Originality does not consist always and only in the production of new
material , new thoughts , new phrases ; LIDDON-1889-2,16.123

the truest originality may display itself when old ideas and old phrases
are enlisted in the service of some newly proclaimed truth .
LIDDON-1889-2,16.124

When , in her inspired Magnificat , Mary draws so largely upon the
ancient Hymn of Hannah , she is only doing what inspired souls had done
again and again before her . LIDDON-1889-2,16.125

We can@ @not read the Bible carefully , without noting how Psalmist
borrows from Psalmist , Prophet from Prophet , nay , it even might seem
, one Evangelist from another ; the first object with all the sacred
writers being not the creation or the vindication of a poor reputation
<P_17> for one species of originality , but the clear exhibition of
truth through the employment of those precise words and thoughts which
are best able to do it justice . LIDDON-1889-2,17.126

<heading> II . <$$heading> The first strophe of Mary's Hymn is a burst
of praise . LIDDON-1889-2,17.127

And we may note here three matters for consideration .
LIDDON-1889-2,17.128

1. There is , to begin with , the fact that in the order of Mary's
thoughts the praise of God comes first . LIDDON-1889-2,17.129

To give God His due is not , with Mary , an afterthought ;
LIDDON-1889-2,17.130

it is not appended to something relating to her friends or to herself .
LIDDON-1889-2,17.131

In Mary's soul God takes precedence of all besides .
LIDDON-1889-2,17.132

And therefore , in her Hymn , the praise of God takes the lead of all
other topics . LIDDON-1889-2,17.133

This , be it observed , is the case , although her Hymn is also an
answer to the congratulations of a near relative . LIDDON-1889-2,17.134

She is replying to Elizabeth , LIDDON-1889-2,17.135

but she instinctively , inevitably , turns the eye of her soul upwards .
LIDDON-1889-2,17.136

She addresses her first words to God . LIDDON-1889-2,17.137

Now let us consider what would , in all probability , have been our own
course of procedure . LIDDON-1889-2,17.138

You have achieved , let us suppose , some considerable <P_18> success ,
LIDDON-1889-2,18.139

or you have escaped some disaster , LIDDON-1889-2,18.140

or some position or distinction has been conferred on you .
LIDDON-1889-2,18.141

Friends surround you with congratulations ; some of them conventional
and perfunctory ; many of them , let us be assured , sincere .
LIDDON-1889-2,18.142

Your friends paraphrase , after an earthly fashion , the words of
Elisabeth to Mary . LIDDON-1889-2,18.143

They tell you that your success , your escape , your distinction , is a
gain and a joy to them . LIDDON-1889-2,18.144

They associate themselves , by the expression of a warm and intimate
sympathy , with your satisfaction and delight ; LIDDON-1889-2,18.145

they are honoured , LIDDON-1889-2,18.146

they are decorated , LIDDON-1889-2,18.147

they have succeeded and been distinguished , because you , their friend
, have won distinction and success . LIDDON-1889-2,18.148

How do you reply ? LIDDON-1889-2,18.149

You begin by thanking them for their kindness . LIDDON-1889-2,18.150

To succeed in a world where no friends are left to express their joy ,
would be success robbed of two-thirds of its value .
LIDDON-1889-2,18.151

The old sometimes observe , pathetically , that success and honours have
come to them too late . LIDDON-1889-2,18.152

And so you tell your friends with perfect sincerity that their
congratulations are more precious to you than anything that has been
done by or done to yourself , and that your first thought on this
auspicious occasion is the satisfaction which you have given them .
LIDDON-1889-2,18.153

The first verse of your <P_19> real Magnificat , if it were written out
, might perhaps run thus : LIDDON-1889-2,19.154

" My soul doth magnify the kindness and sympathy of my friends ,
LIDDON-1889-2,19.155

and my spirit hath rejoiced in the pleasure which they have enjoyed on
my account . " LIDDON-1889-2,19.156

Or , it may be , you give your first thoughts to yourself .
LIDDON-1889-2,19.157

You do not wish to say too much about yourself , LIDDON-1889-2,19.158

but at the same time you will not affect a false modesty .
LIDDON-1889-2,19.159

You can@ @not deny - that is the form which a sense of personal merit
takes when tempered with some misgivings as to the wisdom of expressing
it - you can@ @not deny that it is a great satisfaction to you that
efforts , long persevered in without success , have at last succeeded ;
that merits , which it might have seemed were entirely overlooked , have
at last been recognized . LIDDON-1889-2,19.160

You do not wish to dwell too much on the subject ; LIDDON-1889-2,19.161

but , on the other hand , your conviction of what is the fact , and what
you call a " proper pride , " compels you to say thus much .
LIDDON-1889-2,19.162

With this view you would make the first verse of your Magnificat
something of this sort ; LIDDON-1889-2,19.163

" My soul doth magnify myself , LIDDON-1889-2,19.164

and my spirit hath rejoiced in the efforts or merits which have at
length been rewarded as they deserve . " LIDDON-1889-2,19.165

But you are a Christian , or at least a Theist . LIDDON-1889-2,19.166

You remember that , after all , there is such a Being <P_20> as God .
LIDDON-1889-2,20.167

If the truth is to be told , you do not feel Him to be very near to you
, LIDDON-1889-2,20.168

but you do not wish to forget Him altogether . LIDDON-1889-2,20.169

If He exists , - and you believe that He does exist , - He must have
something to do with everything that goes on . LIDDON-1889-2,20.170

It is only right that you should recognize this . LIDDON-1889-2,20.171

You recognize it somewhat tardily , and as a matter to be touched on
lightly ; because , in fact , God is less real to you than you are to
yourself , or than your friends are . LIDDON-1889-2,20.172

You would not ignore God ; LIDDON-1889-2,20.173

still less would you deny His existence . LIDDON-1889-2,20.174

But you think of Him , in many of your moods of mind , as an idea or
conception rather than as a living Being ; a conception from which man's
mind can really subtract something , or to which it can add something ,
as the ages pass . LIDDON-1889-2,20.175

You do not think of Him as of One Who is entirely independent of you ,
but Who is also as near to you as are the influences which you can
measure and the creatures which you can touch , about which you talk to
other men , or of which you read in the newspapers .
LIDDON-1889-2,20.176

He is there ; but on a somewhat distant and dim horizon of your thought
. LIDDON-1889-2,20.177

He is there , LIDDON-1889-2,20.178

and something must be said about Him ; LIDDON-1889-2,20.179

but that something must befit your very thin and precarious idea of what
He is . LIDDON-1889-2,20.180

And so at last , you say your <P_21> Magnificat after a third fashion :
LIDDON-1889-2,21.181

" A sense of intellectual fitness leads me to magnify the Lord ;
LIDDON-1889-2,21.182

and I experience a satisfaction in admitting that now , as at other
times , something may be due to a higher Power than myself . "
LIDDON-1889-2,21.183

How pathetically is all this in contrast with Mary !
LIDDON-1889-2,21.184

No doubt , to Mary , the joy of Elizabeth was a real joy ;
LIDDON-1889-2,21.185

and she can@ @not but have known that by lineage and training she
herself had been prepared for her own high destiny .
LIDDON-1889-2,21.186

But her first thought is of Him from Whose goodness all else proceeds ;
both the warm hearts , and kindness of friends , and the gifts , whether
of nature or of grace , which she had herself received .
LIDDON-1889-2,21.187

God must claim her first acknowledgments . LIDDON-1889-2,21.188

Before Him she is as nothing ; LIDDON-1889-2,21.189

and yet He , in His condescending Mercy , had deigned to visit her , as
none of His creatures had been visited before . LIDDON-1889-2,21.190

She can only think of the contrast between her nothingness and His
Magnificence . LIDDON-1889-2,21.191

If she glances for a moment at herself , it is to wonder that she should
have been noticed at all by her Creator . LIDDON-1889-2,21.192

" He hath regarded " - not the humility , not the lowly temper ;
LIDDON-1889-2,21.193

these graces were undoubtedly hers in a very eminent degree ,
LIDDON-1889-2,21.194

but she is not thinking of them ; LIDDON-1889-2,21.195

the original word will not lend itself to such a sense .
LIDDON-1889-2,21.196

- " He hath regarded <P_22> the low condition of His handmaiden . "
LIDDON-1889-2,22.197

Because the contrast between Him and herself is thus present to her ;
because she is convinced that she has exerted no claim on Him , and that
whatever she has received has come from Him ; she must begin with praise
- LIDDON-1889-2,22.198

" My soul doth magnify the Lord , LIDDON-1889-2,22.199

And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour . " LIDDON-1889-2,22.200

2. Then Mary praises God with all the faculties and resources of her
spiritual being . LIDDON-1889-2,22.201

" My soul doth magnify , " LIDDON-1889-2,22.202

" my spirit hath rejoiced . " LIDDON-1889-2,22.203

" Soul " and " spirit " are not two different names for the same thing .
LIDDON-1889-2,22.204

When St. Paul prays that the " whole spirit and soul and body of the
Thessalonian Christians may be preserved blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ , " he does not use two words where one would have
sufficed . LIDDON-1889-2,22.205

No doubt , alike in Biblical and popular language , both soul and spirit
are sometimes used alone for the whole immaterial part of man ; as when
our Lord asks , " What shall it profit a man , if he shall gain <P_23>
the whole world , and lose his own soul ? " or when the Preacher says "
that the spirit shall return to God Who gave it . "
LIDDON-1889-2,23.206

But when , as here , the words occur together , in more or less obvious
contrast with each other , they stand for the lower and higher parts of
that invisible half of man which accompanies his body , yet is distinct
from it . LIDDON-1889-2,23.207

Soul is nearer to the bodily nature ; spirit nearer to the nature of God
. LIDDON-1889-2,23.208

Soul in man is analogous to the higher life of the animals ;
LIDDON-1889-2,23.209

the animals have in them nothing that corresponds to spirit .
LIDDON-1889-2,23.210

Soul receives impressions both from the external world and from spirit :
LIDDON-1889-2,23.211

and so , as here , it utters through the bodily organs that thought or
emotion which has previously been present to spirit .
LIDDON-1889-2,23.212

Soul is the seat of passion , of imagination , of impulse ;
LIDDON-1889-2,23.213

spirit , while , as we see in this Hymn , it is , like pure thought ,
capable of sublime joys all its own , is specially the seat of the
self-measuring and reflective reason , of memory , of deliberate and
imperative will . LIDDON-1889-2,23.214

Soul , it is plain , lives not far from the frontier of the things of
time and sense ; LIDDON-1889-2,23.215

spirit <P_24> belongs to a sphere on which the things of time and sense
need not , and often do not , intrude . LIDDON-1889-2,24.216

Between them soul and spirit include the whole incorporeal nature of man
, with all its powers ; LIDDON-1889-2,24.217

and Mary summons them all , the highest and the lowest , the faculties
which traverse the world of sense , and the faculties which live among
the highest and most abstract truths , to the solemn work of praise .
LIDDON-1889-2,24.218

Her " soul " must magnify the Lord , because , as she sings , her "
spirit " has rejoiced in God her Saviour . LIDDON-1889-2,24.219

Is there not here also a lesson to be learnt from Mary ?
LIDDON-1889-2,24.220

Some men appear to think that a single power of the soul may be told off
, like a domestic servant or a soldier , when sent on a particular
errand , to discharge the duty of praise . LIDDON-1889-2,24.221

One man bids his fancy engage in the work ; and another his affections ;
and another his reasoned sense of the fitness of things ; and another
his instinct of beauty , turned towards the higher horizons .
LIDDON-1889-2,24.222

Nay ! LIDDON-1889-2,24.223

it might sometimes seem as though no mental or spiritual faculty was
bidden to engage in praise at all ; LIDDON-1889-2,24.224

and Christians who make a serious effort to pray , and would be shocked
at the neglect to do so , leave the duty of praising the great Creator
to their neighbours , to the choir , to the choristers , or , it might
almost <P_25> seem , to the organ . LIDDON-1889-2,25.225

And yet what a demand on all the faculties of our being is made by one
simple and oft-repeated act of praise , such as , for instance , the
Gloria Patri ! LIDDON-1889-2,25.226

We say it before we begin the Psalms ; LIDDON-1889-2,25.227

we repeat it at the end of each Psalm and each Canticle , excepting the
Te Deum . LIDDON-1889-2,25.228

It consists only of two verses , LIDDON-1889-2,25.229

and yet what infinite spheres does it bid us traverse !
LIDDON-1889-2,25.230

Our souls rise first to the Three Almighty Incomprehensible Subsistences
within the Being of the Godhead - LIDDON-1889-2,25.231

" Glory be to the Father , and to the Son , and to the Holy Ghost .
LIDDON-1889-2,25.232

" And then , remembering that the Eternal Three have ever been and ever
will be what They are , our thought reaches backwards into an unbegun ,
and forwards into an unending eternity , while seeking for an instant to
touch the present , which , as we touch it , has already mingled with
the past - LIDDON-1889-2,25.233

" As it was in the beginning , is now , and ever shall be , world
without end . " LIDDON-1889-2,25.234

If any of us should have cause to think that we have paid but scant
attention and embarked little or no spiritual effort in this
oft-repeated act of praise , let us bethink ourselves of the import of
Mary's words . LIDDON-1889-2,25.235

She would summon the whole mental and moral nature to the work of praise
; a work in which , as in a vast orchestra , each mental faculty has its
place , and <P_26> may bring its due and needed contribution to swell
the harmony of the mighty whole . LIDDON-1889-2,26.236

No variety of emotion is so poor and lowly that it can@ @not utter
something in honour of the Creator ; LIDDON-1889-2,26.237

no power or resource of thought is so great that it is humbled by
joining in the tribute which is due from all finite minds to the
Infinite . LIDDON-1889-2,26.238

The old exhortation to the Temple choir may be paraphrased as addressed
to the faculties of the Christian soul - LIDDON-1889-2,26.239

" Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet , LIDDON-1889-2,26.240

Praise Him upon the lute and harp . LIDDON-1889-2,26.241

Praise Him in the cymbals and dances : LIDDON-1889-2,26.242

Praise Him upon the strings and pipe . LIDDON-1889-2,26.243

Praise Him upon the well-tuned cymbals : LIDDON-1889-2,26.244

Praise Him upon the loud cymbals . LIDDON-1889-2,26.245

Let everything that hath breath Praise the Lord . "
LIDDON-1889-2,26.246

3. Lastly , observe the title under which Mary praises God . " My
Saviour . " LIDDON-1889-2,26.247

" My spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour . " LIDDON-1889-2,26.248

This designation , as you would know , although associated by Christian
faith , in an especial manner , with our Lord Jesus Christ , is much
older than the New Testament . LIDDON-1889-2,26.249

It grew naturally out of Israel's faith in God's especial and protecting
Providence . LIDDON-1889-2,26.250

" It is Thou that savest us from our enemies , " was the voice of the
chosen people from age to age . LIDDON-1889-2,26.251

<P_27>

But the enemies were generally political foes , LIDDON-1889-2,27.253

and the salvation was victory in the field or deliverance from bondage .
LIDDON-1889-2,27.254

This outward and temporal salvation was , indeed , also a religious
salvation . LIDDON-1889-2,27.255

Israel was the people of God ; LIDDON-1889-2,27.256

the defeat of Israel was the defeat of the cause of God ;
LIDDON-1889-2,27.257

the victory or salvation of Israel was the victory or the triumph of
that cause . LIDDON-1889-2,27.258

But it is probable that a new impulse was given to this more spiritual
meaning by what would have seemed to pious Jews the profane assumption
of the title of Saviour by the pagan kings , who , after the death of
Alexander the Great , founded dynasties in Syria and in Egypt .
LIDDON-1889-2,27.259

If henceforth the God of Israel was to be addressed as Saviour , it must
be in a lofty and spiritual sense ; LIDDON-1889-2,27.260

and thus Mary praises God as the Saviour , not of her country from
temporal ruin , but of her own soul from eternal death .
LIDDON-1889-2,27.261

The expression can@ @not be explained by the clause , " He hath regarded
the low estate of His handmaiden ; " which , while it assigns the motive
for Mary's praise , does not explain the title she gives to God .
LIDDON-1889-2,27.262

The honour put on her by the Incarnation might be described by many
other names . LIDDON-1889-2,27.263

But high office is one thing , personal <P_28> salvation another ;
LIDDON-1889-2,28.264

and if Mary calls God her Saviour , it is for reasons independent of the
rank and duties which He has assigned to her . LIDDON-1889-2,28.265

Let us reflect on the meaning of this expression on Mary's lips .
LIDDON-1889-2,28.266

Unique as was her office , magnificent as was the endowment of grace
bestowed on her , singular as were her humility , her purity , her
likeness to the Most Holy , she has and she needs a Saviour .
LIDDON-1889-2,28.267

She does not stand outside that universal law , that " all have sinned ,
and come short of the glory of God . " LIDDON-1889-2,28.268

Hers is not a soul which finds its way to the courts of heaven without
recourse to that One " Name under heaven given among men , whereby we
must be saved . " LIDDON-1889-2,28.269

There is , in fact , no intermediate position in the kingdom of grace
between the Saviour and the saved ; no neutral post , in which nothing
is received and from which nothing is bestowed . LIDDON-1889-2,28.270

There is one Saviour , LIDDON-1889-2,28.271

and all others are simply saved , be their place in the spheres of glory
what it may , and whatever the graces that may have been here bestowed
on them . LIDDON-1889-2,28.272

Mary owed , and owes what she was on earth , what she is in heaven , no
less entirely to the merits and the Precious Blood of her Divine Son ,
than does the humblest Christian among us at this hour ;
LIDDON-1889-2,28.273

and she <P_29> offers the best praises that her soul can offer to God ,
not as manifested first or only in the awful attributes of Knowledge or
Power , but as her Saviour . LIDDON-1889-2,29.274

And in this , too , most assuredly she is a model for us .
LIDDON-1889-2,29.275

It is well indeed that we should think deeply and often on other aspects
of the Divine Nature , each one of which is a fitting object of adoring
praise . LIDDON-1889-2,29.276

It is meet and right that we should give thanks to God for the great
glory of His Power , His Intelligence , His Love . LIDDON-1889-2,29.277

But the sense of natural gratitude which He has put in our hearts bids
us remember that " God commendeth His love to us , in that , while we
were yet sinners , Christ died for us . " LIDDON-1889-2,29.278

There is much else for which we may praise God ; LIDDON-1889-2,29.279

we must bless Him " for our creation , preservation , and all the
blessings of this life , " LIDDON-1889-2,29.280

But if we know what indeed we are , and what has been done and may yet
be done for us , we shall do more than thank Him for these fruits of His
bounty . LIDDON-1889-2,29.281

We shall bless Him , above all , for His " inestimable love in the
Redemption of the world through , our Lord Jesus Christ ; for the means
of grace , and for the hope of glory , " which , through that Redemption
, He has bestowed on us . LIDDON-1889-2,29.282

<P_30>

<heading> II . <font> Privileges of the Virgin Mother . <$$font>
LIDDON-1889-2,30.284

St. Luke I . 48 - 50 . {COM:epigraph_omitted} LIDDON-1889-2,30.285

<$$heading>

Last Sunday we left Mary , at the end of the first strophe of her Hymn ,
beginning to disclose the motive that had inspired the burst of praise
with which she had replied to the salutation of Elisabeth .
LIDDON-1889-2,30.287

All the powers of her spiritual nature , ranging from the heights of
pure thought to the depths of passionate emotion , were engaged , like
the variously accomplished members of a great choir , in chanting the
glory of the Eternal Being ; especially in His character of the Saviour
of herself and of the whole race of mankind . LIDDON-1889-2,30.288

But the fact which immediately prompts her song is that He , in Whose
sight every <P_31> creature is manifest , and Whose eyes are in every
place , beholding the evil and the good , has deigned to cast on her a
look of profound significance . LIDDON-1889-2,31.289

" He hath regarded the low estate of His handmaiden . "
LIDDON-1889-2,31.290

The blood of David flows in her veins . LIDDON-1889-2,31.291

But for some generations the royal race has lived in seclusion , among
the poor ; cherishing the secret of its high descent , but resigning
itself to the destiny which God , in His Justice and His Love , had for
the time assigned to it . LIDDON-1889-2,31.292

The low social estate of Mary was , in her eyes , associated with a low
spiritual estate ; a condition which could pretend to no excellence or
merit in the eyes of God . LIDDON-1889-2,31.293

Nevertheless , He had " looked upon her , " after such a fashion , that
she must needs break out into thankfulness and praise .
LIDDON-1889-2,31.294

It may be that her memory was haunted by some words of a later Psalmist
, describing an event which , like the Annunciation , though in an
immeasurably lower sense , was the reversal of a great humiliation .
LIDDON-1889-2,31.295

" He taketh the simple out of the dust , LIDDON-1889-2,31.296

And lifteth the poor out of the mire ; That He may set him with the
princes , Even with the princes of His people . " LIDDON-1889-2,31.297

She thinks of herself as of the handmaiden , or , <P_32> more exactly ,
the bondwoman of God ; a slave who was simply His property , who could
plead no personal rights in arrest of His Will . LIDDON-1889-2,32.298

And yet what had He not done for her ? LIDDON-1889-2,32.299

Before she goes further she must , out of sheer gratitude , own His
bounty ; LIDDON-1889-2,32.300

and this she does in the second strophe of her Hymn , in which one
remarkable result of the high honour conferred on her , the Source to
which it is due , and the sense in which a kindred distinction may be
shared by all the true servants of God , are successively touched on .
LIDDON-1889-2,32.301

" For behold , from henceforth All generations shall call me blessed .
LIDDON-1889-2,32.302

For He That is mighty Hath done to me great things ;
LIDDON-1889-2,32.303

And holy is His Name . LIDDON-1889-2,32.304

And His mercy is on them that fear Him Throughout all generations . "
LIDDON-1889-2,32.305

1. Mary places her finger first of all on one very startling
consequence of the honour assigned to her as Mother of the Divine
Redeemer . LIDDON-1889-2,32.306

She would <P_33> live for ever in the memory of mankind .
LIDDON-1889-2,33.307

Elisabeth had said , " Blessed art thou among women ; "
LIDDON-1889-2,33.308

and Mary , so far from deprecating this high estimate of her privilege ,
goes considerably beyond it . LIDDON-1889-2,33.309

" Behold , " she exclaims , " from henceforth all generations shall call
me blessed . " LIDDON-1889-2,33.310

Undoubtedly there are in the Hebrew Scriptures sentences which Mary ,
when thus speaking , may have had in her mind . LIDDON-1889-2,33.311

Thus , at the birth of Asher , his mother Leah exclaimed , " Happy am I
, LIDDON-1889-2,33.312

for the daughters will call me blessed ; " LIDDON-1889-2,33.313

and the child's name Asher , " the happy , " expresses the feeling of
his mother . LIDDON-1889-2,33.314

And in the Book of Proverbs the children of the virtuous woman arise up
LIDDON-1889-2,33.315

and call her blessed ; LIDDON-1889-2,33.316

and Malachi predicts a day when all nations would recognize the
blessedness of Israel as having been the people of God .
LIDDON-1889-2,33.317

But there is nothing in these sayings which is really comparable to
Mary's unique prophecy about herself ; in which she anticipates the
judgment , not of some , but of all the generations of living men .
LIDDON-1889-2,33.318

" All generations shall call me blessed . " LIDDON-1889-2,33.319

That which , at first sight , must strike us in this language is its
boldness . LIDDON-1889-2,33.320

Mary is sure of that <P_34> which , in ordinary experience , seems to
lie beyond the range of probable conjecture . LIDDON-1889-2,34.321

She is sure of the future . LIDDON-1889-2,34.322

Average human common sense , looking out upon the future , declares that
nothing is probable except the unforeseen . LIDDON-1889-2,34.323

But Mary , too , surveys the future , LIDDON-1889-2,34.324

and she has no hesitation in foretelling the terms in which distant ages
will speak of herself . LIDDON-1889-2,34.325

" Behold , " she cries , " from henceforth all generations shall call me
blessed . " LIDDON-1889-2,34.326

She is sure , first of all , that she will be remembered .
LIDDON-1889-2,34.327

Let us reflect what this means . LIDDON-1889-2,34.328

In every generation of men , only a small minority of the dead is
remembered at all . LIDDON-1889-2,34.329

A name commonly lives in a family for two or three generations at most .
LIDDON-1889-2,34.330

If a man is known to a wider circle , it may cherish his memory for a
few years . LIDDON-1889-2,34.331

But the circle dies , LIDDON-1889-2,34.332

and the man is forgotten . LIDDON-1889-2,34.333

There are , of course , some few memories that survive : rulers of
peoples , leaders of political parties , discoverers in art or science ,
masters in literature . LIDDON-1889-2,34.334

But you can almost count them on your fingers ; LIDDON-1889-2,34.335

and their names , too , when a century has gone by , are often enough on
their way to pass into general oblivion , even though they should linger
in the notebooks of students and on the shelves of libraries .
LIDDON-1889-2,34.336

As a rule , all quickly disappear . LIDDON-1889-2,34.337

A <P_35> human life drops like a pebble into the ocean of Eternity ;
LIDDON-1889-2,35.338

for a few moments there are ripples on the surface , growing fainter as
the circles widen , LIDDON-1889-2,35.339

and then , so far as this world is concerned , the life which has passed
from sight is as forgotten as though it had never been lived .
LIDDON-1889-2,35.340

" Men fade like leaves , LIDDON-1889-2,35.341

they drop away Beneath the forest shade : LIDDON-1889-2,35.342

Others again succeed ; LIDDON-1889-2,35.343

but they Are in oblivion laid . ' LIDDON-1889-2,35.344

So spake the sire of Grecian song ; LIDDON-1889-2,35.345

Through each succeeding age , The words are caught and borne along By
poet , saint , and sage . " LIDDON-1889-2,35.346

This , I say , is the rule ; LIDDON-1889-2,35.347

but Mary is confident that she will be an exception to it .
LIDDON-1889-2,35.348

She is , to all seeming , but a poor Syrian peasant-girl .
LIDDON-1889-2,35.349

And yet she dares to predict that this ordinary law of forgetfulness of
the dead will be suspended in her favour . LIDDON-1889-2,35.350

Remember that , as yet , nothing has happened outwardly to warrant her
confidence . LIDDON-1889-2,35.351

No Apostle has yet been called to the service of her Son ;
LIDDON-1889-2,35.352

no miracle has been worked by Him ; LIDDON-1889-2,35.353

no one has yet heard of His Resurrection or of His Sermon on the Mount ;
LIDDON-1889-2,35.354

nay , He is still invisible ; LIDDON-1889-2,35.355

He has scarcely laid aside the glory which He had with the Father before
the <P_36> world was ; LIDDON-1889-2,36.356

He has not yet entered by birth into the world of sense .
LIDDON-1889-2,36.357

Mary has only the angel's promise to fall back upon .
LIDDON-1889-2,36.358

Yet she sees in it a warrant that she will live in the memories of men
to the furthest limits of time . LIDDON-1889-2,36.359

But Mary not only knows that she will be always remembered ;
LIDDON-1889-2,36.360

she declares that she will be congratulated on her blessedness as long
as her memory shall endure among men . LIDDON-1889-2,36.361

Let us reflect here , that when a memory does survive , it often
survives only to be associated with a very different judgment from that
which was once accorded to it . LIDDON-1889-2,36.362

A time comes when all who knew a living man or woman have passed away ;
when the dead can only be studied in documents , in such documents as
may be still procurable . LIDDON-1889-2,36.363

And then a reputation is forthwith cast into the crucible of criticism ,
which constantly , under the guise of historical impartiality ,
ministers to the passions or to the prejudices of the age .
LIDDON-1889-2,36.364

Criticism , indeed , is sometimes just ; LIDDON-1889-2,36.365

it destroys unworthy idols , LIDDON-1889-2,36.366

and it redresses the injustice of contemporaries . LIDDON-1889-2,36.367

But it is a very uncertain guide to absolute truth ;
LIDDON-1889-2,36.368

and it often illustrates by its capricious activity the point on which I
am insisting ; LIDDON-1889-2,36.369

it shows how transient may be an earthly reputation ,
LIDDON-1889-2,36.370

Scarcely any two writers <P_37> who have discussed him , during the
seventy years that have passed since his death , have agreed as to the
merits or demerits of the first Napoleon . LIDDON-1889-2,37.371

And if , to come nearer to our present subject , we recall the names of
women who have figured on the scene of human history - Hatapsu ,
Semiramis , Zenobia , the Countess Matilda , Catharine of Medici ,
Elizabeth of England , Mary Stuart , Maria Theresa , Catharine II. -
how various have been the world's judgments about them !
LIDDON-1889-2,37.372

But of such a vacillation respecting herself Mary has no apprehension
whatever . LIDDON-1889-2,37.373

Filled with the spirit of prophecy , she looks down the long procession
of the coming ages , with their incessant vicissitudes of races and
opinions , LIDDON-1889-2,37.374

and she knows that her name will ever carry with it associations which
must secure for it a universal welcome . LIDDON-1889-2,37.375

" From henceforth all generations shall call me blessed . "
LIDDON-1889-2,37.376

And is she not right ? LIDDON-1889-2,37.377

Nearly nineteen centuries have passed since she spoke ;
LIDDON-1889-2,37.378

and what man of average information , interested only in the concerns
which affect our race , has not heard of the Virgin Mary ?
LIDDON-1889-2,37.379

A man can@ @not help hearing of her ; so conspicuously does she loom in
the pages of human history . LIDDON-1889-2,37.380

True enough it is that around the solid records in the Gospels
respecting her , religious imagination has been especially busy .
LIDDON-1889-2,37.381

<P_38>

Early in the history of Christendom there were documents , which the
early Church rejected as apocryphal , and in which Mary's birth and
infancy , and the exceptional distinctions supposed to have been
accorded to her after her death , are described with a freedom which
might have passed as poetry if only it had not been treated as sacred
prose . LIDDON-1889-2,38.383

Into this subject it is not consistent with our present purpose to enter
. LIDDON-1889-2,38.384

Suffice it to say , that whatever the exaggerations and fables which
have thus gathered around the name of Mary , they can@ @not obscure the
greatness which is assigned to her in the pages of the Gospel , while in
their wildest forms they should remind us to the place which she herself
claimed to occupy , and has occupied ever since her death , in the minds
of man . LIDDON-1889-2,38.385

Compare Mary , from this point of view , with some of the great ladies
who were nearly or exactly her contemporaries . LIDDON-1889-2,38.386

While Mary was fetching water day by day from the well of Nazareth , or
gathering <P_39> wood and wild fruits on the hill above the village ,
these stately dames , surrounded by a crowd of slaves , swept proudly
through the halls of the Caesar . LIDDON-1889-2,39.387

But , if we except a professed student of history here or there , what
do men know about them now ? LIDDON-1889-2,39.388

What do you know of Livia , who parted from an honourable husband that
she might be the wife of Augustus ; or of Julia , the ill-used daughter
of Augustus and wife of Tiberius ; or of Octavia , the sister of
Augustus , whom Antony divorced that he might wed Cleopatra ; or of
Antonia , the high-minded daughter of Octavia , who lived , they say ,
to be poisoned by her grandson Caligula ; or - somewhat later - of such
empresses as Messalina , Agrippina , Poppoea , - better perhaps
unmentioned in a Christian church - who are associated with the courts
of Claudius and Nero . LIDDON-1889-2,39.389

The names of these ladies were once as familiar to the vast population
of the Empire as are those of the members of our own royal family to
ourselves . LIDDON-1889-2,39.390

For a few years they filled the thoughts , and - by their crimes or
their misfortunes - they supplied materials for the gossip , of the
world . LIDDON-1889-2,39.391

Now they are , for all practical purposes , forgotten ; while the lowly
maiden who was living unknown in a remote province of the vast Empire
that was ruled by their nearest <P_40> relatives , is at this hour more
borne in mind by civilized men than any other member of her sex who ever
lived . LIDDON-1889-2,40.392

<heading> II . <$$heading> But what is the justification of this
astonishing confidence on the part of Mary that she will be remembered
as blessed to the utmost limits of time ? LIDDON-1889-2,40.393

It is not anything that she has personally achieved .
LIDDON-1889-2,40.394

It is not any grace or excellence peculiar to her mind or character .
LIDDON-1889-2,40.395

That she was personally endowed with graces of the highest excellence
and beauty we may be well assured : LIDDON-1889-2,40.396

in coming among us , the Eternal Son would , by His Spirit , make ready
a fitting temple prepared for Himself . LIDDON-1889-2,40.397

But Mary dwells on nothing of this kind ; on nothing personal to herself
. LIDDON-1889-2,40.398

She only knows that she has been the recipient of an astonishing
privilege , conferred on her by the free bounty of her Creator .
LIDDON-1889-2,40.399

" He That is mighty hath done to me great things ; LIDDON-1889-2,40.400

and holy is His Name . " LIDDON-1889-2,40.401

She refers , of course to what was implied in the message of the Angel
Gabriel at the Annunciation : LIDDON-1889-2,40.402

" Hail , thou that are highly favoured , LIDDON-1889-2,40.403

the Lord is with thee : LIDDON-1889-2,40.404

blessed art thou among women . {COM:ellipsis} LIDDON-1889-2,40.405

<P_41>

Fear not , Mary : LIDDON-1889-2,41.407

for thou hast found favour with God . {COM:ellipsis}
LIDDON-1889-2,41.408

Thou shalt bring forth a Son , LIDDON-1889-2,41.409

and shall call his Name Jesus . LIDDON-1889-2,41.410

He shall be great , LIDDON-1889-2,41.411

and shall be called the Son of the Highest : LIDDON-1889-2,41.412

and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of His father David :
LIDDON-1889-2,41.413

and He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever ;
LIDDON-1889-2,41.414

and of His kingdom there shall be no end . " LIDDON-1889-2,41.415

And in answer to Mary's expression of wonder the Angel added , " The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee , LIDDON-1889-2,41.416

and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee :
LIDDON-1889-2,41.417

therefore also that Holy Thing Which shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son of God . " LIDDON-1889-2,41.418

Mary had received these assurances in submissive faith .
LIDDON-1889-2,41.419

" Behold the handmaid of the Lord ; LIDDON-1889-2,41.420

be it unto me according to thy word . " LIDDON-1889-2,41.421

And they were the warrant of the confidence which she expresses , that "
all generations shall call me blessed . " LIDDON-1889-2,41.422

How , indeed , could it be otherwise , if she was to be the Mother of
the superhuman Heir of David's throne and promises ? if He Who was to
be born of her was , in virtue of the supernatural conditions of His
Birth , to be recognized as the Son of God ? LIDDON-1889-2,41.423

Nothing that she had done or could have done , nothing that she was or
could have been , could have merited this extraordinary distinction ;
LIDDON-1889-2,41.424

and Mary is bent upon <P_42> ascribing it unreservedly to God .
LIDDON-1889-2,42.425

" He That is Mighty hath done great things to me . "
LIDDON-1889-2,42.426

Be careful to observe that Mary dwells here , not on her person , but on
her office in the economy of the Incarnation . LIDDON-1889-2,42.427

Not once in the Magnificat does she let fall a single word which points
to a sense of personal desert or excellence ; LIDDON-1889-2,42.428

her joy is that " He That is Mighty hath done great things to me . "
LIDDON-1889-2,42.429

And she adds , " Holy is His Name . " LIDDON-1889-2,42.430

She does not understand why she should have been singled out for such
high honour ; LIDDON-1889-2,42.431

but she is sure that , since He wills it , all is well .
LIDDON-1889-2,42.432

For His Name , which is to her apprehension inseparable from , since it
unveils his Nature , is Holy . LIDDON-1889-2,42.433

Holiness is the rule and measure of that which He ordains .
LIDDON-1889-2,42.434

Elisabeth had wondered , " Whence is this to me , that the Mother of my
Lord should come to me ? " LIDDON-1889-2,42.435

Mary does not repudiate the honour ; LIDDON-1889-2,42.436

to have done so would have been to make little of God's bounty .
LIDDON-1889-2,42.437

But she insists that she is whatever she is by the grace and favour of
God , LIDDON-1889-2,42.438

and in this respect is on a level with all His creatures .
LIDDON-1889-2,42.439

In all this is she not an example to a age like ours , which has no very
robust faith in the Presence and the gifts of God , but does pay
exceptional homage to the merits or accomplishments of individual <P_43>
men ? LIDDON-1889-2,43.440

Even the modern Church of Christ has not wholly escaped the disposition
to think less of a sacred office than of the man who holds it ; to dwell
lightly on the gift or the commission which is common to the holder with
all his brethren , and to devote exceptional attention to anything that
is strictly peculiar to the man , and that may be supposed to be the
product of his own industry or character . LIDDON-1889-2,43.441

It may well be that we of the clergy have not always been sufficiently
on our guard against a tendency to disparage the ministerial character
which Christ has given us in comparison with some fancied or real
endowments which we dream of as our own . LIDDON-1889-2,43.442

Any such mistake is tacitly rebuked by Mary in her Magnificat .
LIDDON-1889-2,43.443

She never leads us to think of what she personally is ;
LIDDON-1889-2,43.444

but we do not for a moment forget that she is by office the Mother of
the Divine Redeemer . LIDDON-1889-2,43.445

Indeed , when we review the terms in which she refers to her surpassing
privilege , it is impossible not to be struck with their guarded and
reserved tone . LIDDON-1889-2,43.446

" He hath regarded the low estate of His handmaiden ; "
LIDDON-1889-2,43.447

" He That is mighty hath done to me great things " LIDDON-1889-2,43.448

We wonder , perhaps , that she is not more explicit ; that , knowing
what she knows of her extraordinary place in the order of <P_44> Divine
Providence , she does not say more about it ; does not , at least in
outline , describe what it is . LIDDON-1889-2,44.449

" He That is mighty hath done to me great things . "
LIDDON-1889-2,44.450

An ordinary Christian might say as much , we think , after recovering
from a dangerous illness , or after a spiritual change , which had
altered profoundly all his views and purposes in life .
LIDDON-1889-2,44.451

Mary is designated as Mother of the Eternal Son ; LIDDON-1889-2,44.452

she is , as the poet says with literal truth , " favoured beyond
archangel's dream ; " LIDDON-1889-2,44.453

and yet she might seem to desire to draw a veil over her prerogatives ,
by phrases which , while implying , in her mouth , something
extraordinary , convey no definite idea of what it is .
LIDDON-1889-2,44.454

Can we venture in any way to account for this ? LIDDON-1889-2,44.455

