<BEGIN_lind-1753-1>

<P_240>

<heading>

Chap. V . LIND-1753-1,240.4

<font> The cure of the disease , and its symptoms . <$$font>
LIND-1753-1,240.5

<$$heading>

If proper precautions were taken for the prevention of this disease ,
and the rules which have been laid down for that purpose were complied
with , we should seldom have occasion to meet with it in a high degree
either at sea or land . LIND-1753-1,240.7

It is indeed difficult to persuade some to practise , when in health ,
what is necessary to preserve so valuable a blessing .
LIND-1753-1,240.8

All mankind have not the benefit of a pure wholesome {TEXT:wholsome} air
, warm dry lodgings , with proper conveniences to guard against the
inclemency of different weather and seasons . LIND-1753-1,240.9

Many are also of necessity obliged to live upon such gross food as is
not properly adapted to their digestive powers , to their constitution ,
and the exercise they use , so that from thence they may be apt to
contract this evil . LIND-1753-1,240.10

It is proper therefore to prescribe the cure for it , as well as the
prevention . LIND-1753-1,240.11

Indeed the general method of it , and the best remedies , have already
been taken notice of in the former chapter . LIND-1753-1,240.12

Experience shews , that the cure of the adventitious scurvy is very
<P_241> simple , <font> viz. <$$font> a pure dry air , with the use of
green herbage or wholsome vegetables , almost of any sort ; which for
the most part prove effectual . LIND-1753-1,241.13

Hence the first step to be taken towards its removal , when contracted
either at sea or land , is change of air . LIND-1753-1,241.14

We are upon this occasion informed by several authors , of an odd custom
. practised in some parts of <font> Norway <$$font> for the recovery of
scorbutic people . LIND-1753-1,241.15

They expose them in a neighbouring desart island in the summer-season ,
where they live chiefly on cloud-berries ; LIND-1753-1,241.16

and it is remarked , that , by eating plentifully of these berries ,
together with the change of air , they are restored to perfect health in
a very short time . LIND-1753-1,241.17

In that country , the fruits gathered by the diseased themselves , are
reputed of the greatest virtue . LIND-1753-1,241.18

It no doubt is the case , as by this means the patient breathes the
salutary country-air in the open fields . LIND-1753-1,241.19

Thus a free and pure country-air , with such moderate exercise as at the
same time conduces to the agreeable amusement of the mind , is requisite
. LIND-1753-1,241.20

Their food should be of light and easy digestion . LIND-1753-1,241.21

The most proper is , broths or soops made with fresh meat ,
LIND-1753-1,241.22

and plenty of vegetables , <font> viz. <$$font> cabbage , coleworts ,
leeks , onions , <font> &c. <$$font> fresh and well-baked wheat bread
must be given <P_242> them . LIND-1753-1,242.23

Salads of any kind are beneficial ; but especially the mild saponaceous
herbs , dandelion , sorrel , endive , lettuce , fumitory , and purslain
. To which may be added , scurvy-grass , cresses , or any of the warmer
species of plants , in order to correct the cooling qualities of some of
the former ; as experience shews the best cures are performed by a due
mixture of the hotter and colder vegetables . LIND-1753-1,242.24

Summer-fruits of all sorts are here in a manner specific , <font> viz.
<$$font> oranges , lemons , citrons , apples , <font> &c. <$$font>
LIND-1753-1,242.25

For drink , good sound beer , cyder , or Rhenish wine , are to be
prescribed . LIND-1753-1,242.26

Thus , we have numberless instances of people , after long voyages , by
a vegetable diet and good air , miraculously as it were , recovered from
deplorable scurvies , without the assistance of many medicines . For
which indeed there is no great occasion ; provided the green herbage and
fresh broths keep the belly lax , and pass freely by urine , sweat , or
perspiration . LIND-1753-1,242.27

But when otherwise , it will be necessary to open the belly , every
other day or so , by a decoction of tamarinds and prunes , adding some
diuretic salts ; and upon the intermediate days , to sweat the patient
in a morning with camphorated boluses of theriac , and warm draughts of
<font> decoct <P_243> lign. <$$font> ; LIND-1753-1,243.28

and , as has been usual in some of our hospitals , give twelve or
fifteen grains of <font> pil. Scillit. Pharm. Edin. <$$font> twice
or thrice through the day . LIND-1753-1,243.29

But it is here to be observed , that though the recovery of such persons
seems promising and speedy at first , yet it requires a much longer
continuance of the vegetable diet , and a proper regimen , to perfect it
, than is commonly imagined . LIND-1753-1,243.30

There are many instances of seamen who have been sent from the hospitals
, after having been three weeks or a month on shore , to their
respective ships , who in all appearance were in perfect health ; yet ,
in a short time after being on board , relapsed , and became highly
scorbutic . LIND-1753-1,243.31

It were to be wished , that either a longer continuance was allowed such
men at the hospital , or that their cure was rendered more perfect by a
sweating course . LIND-1753-1,243.32

It is indeed frequently experienced , that people once deeply infected ,
are extremely apt to relapse into symptoms of this disease , in
different periods of their life afterwards . LIND-1753-1,243.33

There are likewise some particular constitutions , who , from the
peculiar tendency and disposition of their humours to the scorbutic
corruption , are , from much slighter causes , more liable than others
to fall into the scurvy . LIND-1753-1,243.34

In such cases , <P_244> these people , in order to purify their blood
from this deep-seated scorbutic taint or tendency , besides the diet and
regimen before recommended , should also have recourse to other
medicinal helps ; some of the best of which have been already mentioned
in the foregoing chapter . LIND-1753-1,244.35

But in this place I shall more particularly deliver , <font> 1st
<$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , The method proper to
remove a scorbutic habit of body , whether acquired by a deep infection
, or constitutional . <font> 2dly <$$font>
{COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , The different treatment of
scorbutic patients , adapted to the various symptoms of their disease ;
when the urgency of such symptoms requires a particular attention ; but
especially when the general method of cure can@ @not be complied with .
LIND-1753-1,244.36

<font> 3dly <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , I shall
observe what remedies have been recommended upon good authority , and
are used in different countries . And , <font> 4thly <$$font>
{COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , Conclude with some necessary
cautions and observations . LIND-1753-1,244.37

To begin with the <font> first <$$font> of these : In order thoroughly
to subdue a scorbutic taint , the physical intentions must be , to keep
the outlets and emunctories of the body open and clear , for the gentle
evacuation of the scorbutic acrimony <P_245> <font> <paren> viz.
<$$font> the belly , urinary passages , and excretory ducts of the skin
<$$paren> : LIND-1753-1,245.38

mean_while , the remaining mass of humours is rendered mild , soft , and
balsamic , by proper antiscorbutic food and medicine .
LIND-1753-1,245.39

And it is to be remarked , that all the above evacuations are most
successfully promoted , when the medicines for these intentions are
joined with antiscorbutics . LIND-1753-1,245.40

Here milk of all sorts , where it agrees with the constitution , is
beneficial ; as being a truly vegetable chyle , an emulsion prepared of
the most succulent wholsome herbs : LIND-1753-1,245.41

but whey , by reason of its more diuretic and cleansing quality , is
rather preferable . LIND-1753-1,245.42

And upon this occasion the <font> sal polychrest. <$$font> will be
found a very useful addition , as it is a mild purgative , an excellent
diuretic ; and when taken in a smull quantity , well diluted , evacuates
plentifully , either by perspiration or urine , according as its
operation is directed to the skin or kidneys , by exercise , lying in
bed , or keeping the body warmer or cooler . LIND-1753-1,245.43

Goats , of all animals , afford the richest whey , possessed of the
greatest antiscorbutic virtues . LIND-1753-1,245.44

It contains a most noble , restorative , vegetable balsam , which in a
singular manner sweetens and corrects the scorbutic acrimony .
LIND-1753-1,245.45

<P_246>

The <font> succi scorbutici <$$font> of the <font> Edinburgh <$$font>
and <font> London pharmacopaeia's <$$font> , where the volatile acrimony
of the hotter species of plants is qualified by a due quantity of the
juice of <font> Seville <$$font> oranges , are likewise proper in their
season . LIND-1753-1,246.47

They will be experienced yet more serviceable , when made farther
diuretic and cleansing , by being clarified with whey .
LIND-1753-1,246.48

Besides taking them in this manner through the day , the patient ought
to be sweated in a morning , twice or thrice a-week , by draughts of the
said juices mixed with sack-whey . LIND-1753-1,246.49

This method can@ @not be sufficiently recommended . LIND-1753-1,246.50

It is an evacuation , which , of all others , scorbutic persons bear the
best , and from which they find the greatest benefit ; what nature
pointed out to the northern <font> Indians <$$font> for the cure of this
their endemic evil , and which experience confirms to be a most
efficacious remedy . LIND-1753-1,246.51

It is practised with remarkable success by the surgeons at the Cape of
<font> Good Hope <$$font> , who have the greatest opportunity of
treating scorbutic seamen ; LIND-1753-1,246.52

is recommended by the first and best writers on this disease
LIND-1753-1,246.53

<P_247>

and seems to have been the most usual way of their giving these juices .
LIND-1753-1,247.55

There are , besides , other herbs , whose juices are here of eminent
virtue . LIND-1753-1,247.56

Such especially , from their saponaceous and mild aperient quality , are
<font> dens leonis <$$font> and <font> fumaria . <$$font>
LIND-1753-1,247.57

And an antiscorbutic inferior to none , is the juice of the tender
sprouting tops of green wheat , in the months of <font> June <$$font>
and <font> July <$$font> , mixed with the juice of <font> Seville
<$$font> oranges . LIND-1753-1,247.58

But , during all these courses , scorbutic habits will find great
benefit by warm baths , <paren> provided there be no danger from a
haemorrhage <$$paren> , in which the aromatic and fragrant plants have
been infused , <font> viz. <$$font> rosemary , marjoram , thyme ,
<font> &c. <$$font> : LIND-1753-1,247.59

and these are preferable to the usual manner of sweating them in stoves
or bagnios . LIND-1753-1,247.60

In the winter-time , for the cure of this disease , genuine spruce_beer
, with lemon and orange juice , is to be prescribed ; or an
antiscorbutic ale by infusion of wormwood , <font> rad. raphani
<$$font> , mustard-seed , and the like , made gently laxative by
addition of senna . LIND-1753-1,247.61

It must be drank {COM:sic} when pretty fresh or new .
LIND-1753-1,247.62

But the spring is the most favourable season for a perfect recovery from
a scorbutic habit . LIND-1753-1,247.63

<P_248>

Having said this much on the cure of the disease in general , I come ,
<font> secondly <$$font> , to observe what is proper to be done for the
relief and removal of its most urgent symptoms . LIND-1753-1,248.65

When first the patient complains of an itching and spunginess of the
gums , with loose teeth , aluminous medicines will be found most
serviceable in putting a stop to the beginning laxity of these parts .
LIND-1753-1,248.66

But , upon the putrefaction increasing , a gargle is to be used of
barley-water , and <font> mel rosat. <$$font> acidulated with some of
the mineral acids . LIND-1753-1,248.67

The <font> sp. <$$font> or <font> elix. vitriol <$$font> is generally
prescribed ; LIND-1753-1,248.68

but some have imagined <font> sp. salis <$$font> less hurtful to the
teeth . LIND-1753-1,248.69

The quantity of the acid must be proportioned to the greater or lesser
degree of putrefaction in the parts . LIND-1753-1,248.70

The <font> fungus <$$font> must be often removed , or , if needful , cut
away ; and , by frequent gargarising , the mouth kept as clean as
possible . LIND-1753-1,248.71

Where the ulcers appear deep and spreading , they are to be checked with
a touch of <font> ol. vitriol <$$font> , either by itself , or diluted
, according as the patient bears it . LIND-1753-1,248.72

In a spontaneous salivation ; or , as is much oftener the case , when a
copious spitting has unfortunately been induced by some mercurial
medicine , where immediate danger is apprehended , <P_249> speedy
revulsion must be made from the salivary glands , by epispastics applied
to different parts of the body , sinapisms to the soles of the feet and
hams ; and by opening the belly with glysters , and such gentle
purgatives as operate only in the first passages . LIND-1753-1,249.73

But the <font> impetus <$$font> of the blood , and colliquated humours ,
is here to be determined , particularly to the pores of the skin : a
defect of perspiration , generally attended with a stricture and spasm
on the <font> cutis <$$font> in scorbutic habits , being the true cause
why the force of the mercury so powerfully falls upon the salivary
glands . LIND-1753-1,249.74

For this purpose , boluses of theriac , with camphire , and <font> flor.
sulph. <$$font> are to be given , and repeated every four or six hours
, in order to force a sweat ; which proves the best means of abating the
strength of the salivation , and rescuing the patient from the danger of
being choked by it . LIND-1753-1,249.75

Gargles at the same time must be used , with <font> oxym. scill.
<$$font> to attenuate the thick and viscous <font> saliva . <$$font>
LIND-1753-1,249.76

When by this management the most threatening danger is prevented , there
generally continues , for a considerable time , a troublesome salivation
, with great putrefaction in the mouth ; which it is very difficult to
put a stop to . LIND-1753-1,249.77

It may however be palliated <P_250> by keeping the belly and urinary
passages open with glysters , or by diuretic and gentle physic ;
avoiding all strong cathartics , or whatever may farther promote the
dissolution of the blood . LIND-1753-1,250.78

Inviscating and glutinous medicines are sometimes serviceable , <font>
viz. gum Arabic , ichthyocolla , &c. <$$font> dissolved in common
drink . LIND-1753-1,250.79

Astringent gargarisms of alum , and a decoction of the <font> cortex
quercûs <$$font> , are indispensably necessary : as also the <font>
cort. peruv. <$$font> and <font> elixir vitriol. <$$font> taken
inwardly . LIND-1753-1,250.80

Mean_while , the strength of the patient must carefully be supported by
warm mulled wines , <font> &c. <$$font> LIND-1753-1,250.81

Such persons , when much exhausted , are to be confined altogether to a
milk and vegetable diet . LIND-1753-1,250.82

When the legs are swelled and oedematous , gentle frictions are to be
used at first , with warm flannel , or woollen cloths charged with the
fumes of <font> benzoin. <$$font> and amber , or any other of the
aromatic gums ; provided the swelling be small , soft , and not very
painful ; rolling up afterwards with an easy bandage from below upwards
. LIND-1753-1,250.83

But if the legs are much swelled , stiff , and painful , they must be
fomented with a warm discutient fomentation ; which will afford some
momentary relief , without putting a stop to the progress of the <P_251>
swelling : LIND-1753-1,251.84

or what I have found preferable , is the steam of the fomentation
received by the member well covered round with a blanket or cloths .
LIND-1753-1,251.85

And this operation must be repeated night and morning .
LIND-1753-1,251.86

It is generally followed with remarkable suppleness and ease in the
stiff , painful , and contracted joints . LIND-1753-1,251.87

Upon this occasion , I have indeed often prescribed the steam of warm
water only , with the addition of a little vinegar , or crude <font> sal
ammoniac . <$$font> LIND-1753-1,251.88

After receiving the fume on their joints closely covered up for half an
hour , they are to be anointed with <font> ol. palmae . <$$font>
LIND-1753-1,251.89

If such swellings are not removed soon after being put upon a vegetable
diet , the limb should be sweated by burning of spirits , or with bags
of warm salt . LIND-1753-1,251.90

Ulcers on the legs , or any other part of the body , require pretty much
the same treatment , <font> viz. <$$font> very gentle compression , in
order to keep under the <font> fungus <$$font> , and such antiseptic
applications as have been recommended for the putrid gums , <font> viz.
mel rosat. <$$font> acidulated with <font> sp. vitriol. ung.
Aegyptiac. &c. <$$font> LIND-1753-1,251.91

But nothing will avail where the patient can@ @not have vegetables or
fruits . LIND-1753-1,251.92

In dangerous hemorrhages from these ulcers , or from the gums , nose ,
<font> &c. <$$font> the mineral <P_252> acids , <font> viz. sp.
<$$font> or <font> el. vitriol. <$$font> are to be given , and often
repeated , in small quantities at a time , so that they may more
certainly and easily enter the lacteals , and get into the blood ;
together with small doses of the <font> cort. peruv. <$$font> when it
agrees with the stomach . LIND-1753-1,252.93

These likewise , with red wine , are the principal medicines to be
relied upon in their putrid and colliquative fevers .
LIND-1753-1,252.94

For pain of the limbs , in the small of the back , and breast , and
universally in most of their pains , whether fixed or wandering , the
<font> oxym. Scill. <$$font> is to be administered in a warm
diaphoretic mixture ; where wine must supply the place of a spirituous
cordial : LIND-1753-1,252.95

and the patient , upon going to bed , should , by warm draughts of
water-gruel , with vinegar , or , in place of the latter , the <font>
acetum theriacale <$$font> , endeavour to force a sweat .
LIND-1753-1,252.96

But most of these complaints yield readily to the general method of cure
, LIND-1753-1,252.97

and can only be palliated until that is undergone . LIND-1753-1,252.98

<P_253>

There remain two symptoms of this disease , which are , of all others ,
the most obstinate to remove , even though the patient enjoys the
benefit of the purest air , with the most proper <P_254> antiscorbutic
food and medicines . LIND-1753-1,254.100

These are the scorbutic dysentery in some ; and in others a hard bound
cough , accompanied with <font> dyspnoea <$$font> , pain and disorder in
the breast . LIND-1753-1,254.101

This last <P_255> often ends in a consumption : while the former , or
flux , is very troublesome to stop , and sometimes also proves fatal .
LIND-1753-1,255.102

<P_256>

Scorbutic diarrhoeas at sea are not suddenly to be stopt ; as the
acrimonious humour must <P_257> some way or other be discharged ;
LIND-1753-1,257.104

and it may as well pass off by the guts as by any other outlet .
LIND-1753-1,257.105

They , however , are to be moderated . LIND-1753-1,257.106

The tone of the intestines must be strengthened : LIND-1753-1,257.107

mean_while , the peccant humour is gently evacuated by small doses of
rhubarb , occasionally repeated ; to which a little <font> theriac.
<$$font> or <font> diascord. <$$font> is always to be joined , with a
view to keep up perspiration ; an important point . LIND-1753-1,257.108

For this purpose , <font> decoctum fracastor. <$$font> or boluses of
<font> diascord. <$$font> with other warm diaphoretic and strengthening
medicines , are principally to be given ; and <font> opium <$$font> more
freely , in extreme cases . LIND-1753-1,257.109

Mean_while , the patient is supported with strong rough red wine ,
diluted , and a glutinous subastringent diet . LIND-1753-1,257.110

I have sometimes given four or five grains of crude alum in a <font>
diascord. <$$font> bolus , where the blood was evacuated in great
quantity ; LIND-1753-1,257.111

and when it passed the stomach without ruffling , it generally did
service . LIND-1753-1,257.112

In this last case , <font> tinct. rosar. <$$font> well acidulated ,
and other styptics , are necessary . LIND-1753-1,257.113

I know no peculiar treatment proper in the scorbutic dysentery ,
different from what has been recommended by authors on that disease ,
farther than that the use of greens , and especially of the austere and
acid fruits , is to be permitted . LIND-1753-1,257.114

<P_258>

I am informed by Mr <font> Christie <$$font> , formerly surgeon to the
naval hospital at <font> Port-Mahon <$$font> , that , after trial of
many medicines , he found an infusion of <font> ipecacuan. <$$font> in
brandy , given in small quantities , often repeated , the most effectual
remedy to remove it . LIND-1753-1,258.116

Rhubarb-purges , stomachic bark-bitters , <font> elixir vitriol.
<$$font> or the use of some light steel mineral water , will serve to
perfect a recovery here ; as in all other scorbutic cases , where the
patient has been much exhausted by colliquative evacuations and
haemorrhages , usual in this disease . LIND-1753-1,258.117

For scorbutic pectoral disorders , blistering and issues are proper at
land ; as also riding on horseback in the country-air ; an entire milk
and vegetable diet ; keeping the breast open by expectorants .
LIND-1753-1,258.118

Such are <font> oxym. scillit. gum. ammoniac. <$$font> and <font>
bals. copaiv. <$$font> LIND-1753-1,258.119

When the scorbutic taint has been entirely subdued , it sometimes leaves
behind it other disorders ; which require the same treatment as is
proper for them when proceeding from other causes ; together with a
mixture of antiscorbutic medicines for farther security .
LIND-1753-1,258.120

Besides the consumptive disposition now mentioned , a dropsical habit is
now and then contracted ; LIND-1753-1,258.121

or , what is more frequent , the legs remain <P_259> swelled ,
oedematous , and ulcerated . LIND-1753-1,259.122

In this last case , if the ulcers have been of long standing ,
sufficient provision being made for healing them up , by purging , and
issues near the part , an electuary of the prepared crude antimony may
be given , with the addition of aethiops_mineral ; and at the same time
an antiscorbutic diet-drink used : LIND-1753-1,259.123

or , provided they are obstinate , and the gums sufficiently hardened ,
the patient may undergo a slow and gentle course of mercury .
LIND-1753-1,259.124

In scorbutic habits , I generally kill the mercury with a small quantity
of <font> bals. sulph. tereb. <$$font> LIND-1753-1,259.125

and find it succeeds {TEXT:succeed} well , where the intention is not to
raise a copious salivation . LIND-1753-1,259.126

A bottle of decoction of the woods must be drank every day at the same
time . LIND-1753-1,259.127

This , by promoting a diaphoresis , will assist the operation of the
mercury , and determine the dissolved humours more particularly to the
cutaneous secretion . LIND-1753-1,259.128

After this course , a few grains of <font> sulph. aur. antim.
<$$font> will perhaps be necessary evening and morning , or Dr <font>
Plummer <$$font> 's medicine , and the continuance of the decoction of
woods ; which in all probability will complete the cure .
LIND-1753-1,259.129

Those that are troubled , after having been <P_260> afflicted in the
scurvy , with numbness and pain in their joints , or chronic rheumatic
pains , must practise riding , swallow a spoonful of unbeat mustard-seed
once or twice a-day , or undergo the mercurial course as above directed
, and be well sweated . LIND-1753-1,260.130

It may be now proper to observe , in the <font> third <$$font> place ,
what other remedies have been recommended for this disease , and are
reputed in different countries . LIND-1753-1,260.131

I elsewhere took notice of the <font> pinus antiscorbutica <$$font> ,
the spruce shrub , and their virtues . LIND-1753-1,260.132

The learned <font> Boerhaave <$$font> is said to have prescribed , for
the most part , new churned milk . LIND-1753-1,260.133

<font> Cort. winteran. <$$font> first came into repute , from the good
effects it was supposed to have had in Captain <font> Winter <$$font> 's
crew , belonging to Sir <font> Francis Drake <$$font> 's squadron .
LIND-1753-1,260.134

There is a remarkable observation given us by <font> Bernard Below
<$$font> , of the great virtue of <font> herba vermicularis <$$font> ,
wall-pepper , in this disease . LIND-1753-1,260.135

He boiled eight handfuls of the herb in eight pints of old ale , to half
the quantity , in a close vessel . LIND-1753-1,260.136

Of this a warm draught , <font> viz. <$$font> three or four ounces ,
was taken every morning , or every other <P_261> morning , on an empty
stomach , as the patient bore it : which had the happy effect to cure
almost all the soldiers of the army afflicted in this disease ;
excepting a few , who , by the severity of the preceeding winter , were
reduced into a condition past recovery . LIND-1753-1,261.137

He remarked , that those who were vomited easily and most plentifully by
the medicine , soonest recovered . LIND-1753-1,261.138

He made use of this decoction , with the addition of alum and <font> mel
rosat. <$$font> by way of gargle for the gums , which were in all
affected and putrid ; LIND-1753-1,261.139

and by this simple remedy cured above fifty , who had the tendons in the
ham contracted , applying the boiled herb warm to the part .
LIND-1753-1,261.140

He bathed their ulcers with the same decoction , LIND-1753-1,261.141

and applied the warm herb to them in like manner . LIND-1753-1,261.142

There is an instance given by <font> Etmuller <$$font> , of the soldiers
in a besieged garrison greatly over-run with this disease , who were all
perfectly cured by <font> ruta muraria <$$font> , white maiden hair .
LIND-1753-1,261.143

<font> Chelidonium minus <$$font> , pilewort , or little celandine , for
its supposed great virtues , has by the <font> Germans <$$font> been
called <font> schorboct rout. <$$font> LIND-1753-1,261.144

But the <P_262> <font> Danes <$$font> esteem most <font> trifolium
palustre <$$font> , marsh trefoil ; which they administer sometimes by
itself , at other times with the addition of scurvy-grass .
LIND-1753-1,262.145

We are informed , that the <font> Swedes <$$font> , ever since the
surprising recovery of their troops , when afflicted with this malady ,
by the use of a decoction of fir-tops , esteem it altogether specific in
the scurvy . LIND-1753-1,262.146

In <font> Groenland <$$font> , where this disease is extremely frequent
, we are told by a gentleman who twice visited the country , that the
natives make use of scurvy-grass and sorrel together ; <P_263> and that
these two herbs , put with barley or oats in broths made of fowls , or
the flesh of rein-deer , have an effect to recover the diseased most
surprisingly in a short time , even after having lost the use of their
limbs . LIND-1753-1,263.147

The <font> Norway <$$font> cure affords the only one well-attested
instance , of this distemper being successfully removed by what would
seem so different <P_264> from the nature of vegetables , as a fossil or
earth . LIND-1753-1,264.148

It is related by authors of undoubted credit , particularly by <font>
Petraeus <$$font> , who practised at that place ; LIND-1753-1,264.149

and seems to have been known before <font> Eugalenus <$$font> had
confounded most other diseases with the true scurvy ; as it is taken
notice of in the year 1624 by <font> Sennertus <$$font> , when <font>
Eugalenus <$$font> 's writings , in all probability , might not have
reached <font> Norway . <$$font> LIND-1753-1,264.150

It is a reddish or blackish earth , dug up nigh <font> Bergen <$$font> ;
of which , from half a dram to a dram is the dose ; LIND-1753-1,264.151

and operating by sweat , it is said to cure the patient in a short time
. LIND-1753-1,264.152

I mentioned two very bad scorbutic cases which lately occurred in <font>
Fife . <$$font> LIND-1753-1,264.153

The surgeon , upon seeing the patients , inquired what had been their
ordinary food , and whether they commonly eat any green herbs or
vegetables ? LIND-1753-1,264.154

One of them , a fisherman , replied That he lived upon bread , dried and
salted fish which was all he could afford ; and sometimes salt beef , of
which last he was very fond . LIND-1753-1,264.155

The surgeon desired them to abstain from their former diet ; in place of
which , they were to <P_265> make two good meals a-day upon a vegetable
soup {TEXT:soop} , prepared of coleworts and other green garden-stuff ;
and to eat water-cresses by way of salad . LIND-1753-1,265.156

He besides prescribed a fomentation for their legs , LIND-1753-1,265.157

and gave them a dose or two of very gentle physic . By which means they
both recovered ; LIND-1753-1,265.158

and one of them soon after , overjoyed upon being restored to the use of
his limbs , walked several miles to return the gentleman thanks for his
salutary advice . LIND-1753-1,265.159

I shall now conclude what I have to say on this head , with the
following cautions and observations . LIND-1753-1,265.160

<font> 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} <$$font> , As to
evacuations : It is to be observed , that this disease , especially when
advanced , by no means bears bleeding ; even although the most acute
pains upon the membranes , a high degree of fever , and dangerous
haemorrhages , would seem to indicate it . LIND-1753-1,265.161

The patient generally dies soon after the operation .
LIND-1753-1,265.162

Nor does it bear strong cathartics , which are often injudiciously
administered in its commencement ; many of which only farther promote
the colliquation and acrimony of the blood and humours .
LIND-1753-1,265.163

The belly must at all times be kept open , but chiefly by such laxative
food , when green vegetables can@ @not be obtained , as <P_266> may
answer this purpose , <font> viz. <$$font> barley and currants , stewed
prunes , <font> &c. <$$font> ; or with a decoction of tamarinds and
<font> cremor tartar . <$$font> a morsel of lenitive electuary ,
sea-water , and the like . LIND-1753-1,266.164

From blisters there is danger of a gangrene . LIND-1753-1,266.165

As to vomits ; though I never have had any great experience of their
effects ; yet , by the observation of others , squill-vomits have been
found serviceable . LIND-1753-1,266.166

<font> 2dly <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , Persons in the
advanced stages of this disease , are not , without great caution and
prudence , to be exposed to a sudden change of air ; or brought up from
lying a-bed below in the hold of a ship , to the fresh air , in order to
their being landed . LIND-1753-1,266.167

On this occasion , though seemingly pretty hearty , they are to be given
a glass of generous wine , well acidulated with lemon or orange juice ;
which is likewise the best cordial in their fainting-fits .
LIND-1753-1,266.168

When they drop down seemingly dead , it were to be wished , that some
methods were tried for their recovery ; as putting them into a warm bed
; using of strong stimulants , and frictions ; blowing into the lungs ,
<font> anus , &c. <$$font> LIND-1753-1,266.169

<font> 3dly <$$font> {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} , After a long
abstinence from greens and fruits , scorbutic persons should be treated
like one almost starved to death ; that is , not <P_267> permitted for a
few days to eat voraciously , or surfeit themselves with them ;
LIND-1753-1,267.170

otherwise they are apt to fall into a dysentery , which often proves
mortal . LIND-1753-1,267.171

<font> Lastly <$$font> , There are but few medicines carried out in a
sea-chest , which are here of service . LIND-1753-1,267.172

Those of the fossil or mineral kind , such as steel , antimony , and
especially mercury , do manifest harm . LIND-1753-1,267.173

Opiates occasion an unaccountable lowness and dejection of spirits ,
with an oppression on the breast . LIND-1753-1,267.174

When they are absolutely necessary , as in fluxes , they must be given
always of the warmest kind ; LIND-1753-1,267.175

and agree best , when , before or during their operation , a stool is
procured : after which the patient is to be refreshed with wine .
LIND-1753-1,267.176

Where the breast was much affected , I always gave them in a draught of
squill-mixture ; LIND-1753-1,267.177

or , in case the stools were not very frequent , I added a few grains of
vitriolated tartar to the opiate bolus , in order to procure a discharge
that way . LIND-1753-1,267.178

After trial of many medicines in the sea-invoice , there are but two I
can principally recommend . LIND-1753-1,267.179

The first is the <font> cort. peruv. <$$font> infused in wine .
LIND-1753-1,267.180

I gave at the same time a decoction of <font> lign. guajac. <$$font>
<paren> of which there is great plenty in ships <$$paren> , <P_268> with
the addition of <font> rad. glycyrrh. <$$font> which prevented the
heartburn that the decoction otherwise occasioned . LIND-1753-1,268.181

The bark did not always agree with the stomach ; LIND-1753-1,268.182

but where it did , I observed a more favourable appearance upon the gums
and ulcers , by its checking the putrefaction : LIND-1753-1,268.183

and in two instances where a gangrenous disposition was induced by too
tight a roller , the suppuration next day was more laudable .
LIND-1753-1,268.184

It was of use in salivations and haemorrhages , but rather hurtful in
fluxes . LIND-1753-1,268.185

Warm draughts of the decoction gave always relief , if the patient
sweated ; in which case the bark also agreed better .
LIND-1753-1,268.186

But another , and more excellent medicine , is the <font> oxym. scill.
<$$font> from which I have experienced extreme good effects .
LIND-1753-1,268.187

It generally kept the belly open , LIND-1753-1,268.188

and promoted the secretion of urine ; by both evacuations discharging
the acrimonious humours . LIND-1753-1,268.189

It gave relief in many of their complaints , particularly those of the
breast , which scorbutic people are seldom free from .
LIND-1753-1,268.190

I had formerly gathered a great quantity of this root when at <font>
Minorca <$$font> ; LIND-1753-1,268.191

and having made the <font> oxym. scillit. <$$font> gave it to most of
our patients in the year 1747 , at the rate of one ounce , or an ounce
and a half , in the space of <P_269> twenty-four hours , with remarkable
ease of their complaints . LIND-1753-1,269.192

<P_270_letter_by_another_author_omitted>

<P_271_letter_by_another_author_omitted>

<P_272>

<heading>

Chap. VI . LIND-1753-1,272.197

<font> The theory of the disease . <$$font> LIND-1753-1,272.198

<$$heading>

In order to understand the true state and condition of the body under
this disease , some things must necessarily be premised from the known
and established laws of the animal oeconomy . LIND-1753-1,272.200

An animal body is composed of solid and fluid parts ;
LIND-1753-1,272.201

and these consist of such various and heterogeneous principles , as
render it of <P_273> all substances , the most liable to corruption and
putrefaction . LIND-1753-1,273.202

Such indeed is the state and condition of every living animal , as to be
threatened with this , from the mechanism of its own frame , and the
necessary laws of circulation by which it subsists .
LIND-1753-1,273.203

For by the uninterrupted circulation of its fluids , their violent
attrition , and mutual actions on each other , and their containing
vessels , the whole mass of humours is apt to degenerate from its sweet
, mild , and healthful condition , into various degrees of acrimony and
corruption . LIND-1753-1,273.204

Parts of the solids themselves , continually abraded by the repeated
force of the circulating fluids , are again returned into their channels
. LIND-1753-1,273.205

Hence the necessity of throwing out of the body , by different outlets ,
these acrimonious and putrescent juices , rendered thus unfit for the
animal uses and functions , together with the abraded particles of the
solids . LIND-1753-1,273.206

And a daily supply of food , or fresh nourishment , is required to
recruit this constant waste , both of the solid and fluid parts .
LIND-1753-1,273.207

Thus the bodies of all animals are in a constant state of change and
renovation , by which they are preserved from death and putrefaction .
LIND-1753-1,273.208

There are two evacuations chiefly by which the blood is freed from these
putrescent noxious <P_274> humours , <font> viz. <$$font> urine , and
insensible perspiration . LIND-1753-1,274.209

Not but that there are many other secretions necessary to health :
LIND-1753-1,274.210

yet they are rather more properly adapted to other singular and peculiar
uses ; except that of stool , which in some cases may be substituted as
a vent to these corrupted humours , upon the defect of either of the
other two . LIND-1753-1,274.211

It would seem , that , by the urinary passages , the rancescent oils and
the acrid salts of the blood , together with the earthy recrements broke
off from the solids , are daily washed away , and expelled out of the
body . LIND-1753-1,274.212

But the most considerable of all the evacuations , is that by insensible
perspiration ; which <font> Sanctorius <$$font> found in <font> Italy
<$$font> to be equal to five eighths of the meat and drink taken into
the body . LIND-1753-1,274.213

Most of the observations made by that author will be found true ; as
they have been confirmed by repeated experiments , by Dr <font> Keil
<$$font> in <font> England <$$font> , the learned <font> Degorter
<$$font> in <font> Holland <$$font> and others ; making a proper
allowance for the different climates they lived in , their different
ages , ways of life , and constitutions . Upon which subject , I shall
here observe , <P_275> that , considering how often animals , as well as
plants , as appears by many experiments , are in an absorbing and
bibulous condition , the exact quantity perspired can@ @not at all times
be justly determined , without knowing the quantity imbibed .
LIND-1753-1,275.214

Upon this consideration , however , it will appear , that in many cases
it often exceeds the quantity assigned by <font> Sanctorius . <$$font>
LIND-1753-1,275.215

It is indeed , beyond doubt , the most copious evacuation of the whole
body : LIND-1753-1,275.216

and though it is sometimes in greater or lesser quantities , as
influenced by various causes ; yet it can never be partially suppressed
long , LIND-1753-1,275.217

much less can it be entirely obstructed , without the greatest detriment
to health . LIND-1753-1,275.218

For should its defect for a short time be supplied by some more copious
and increased evacuation , as it sometimes is by that of urine or stool
; yet towards perfect health , the integrity of all the animal functions
, more especially the natural evacuations , are requisite : there being
somewhat thrown out of the body by each , which can@ @not so
conveniently pass another way ; LIND-1753-1,275.219

as <font> Sanctorius <$$font> rightly observes , of any other evacuation
substituted for this , " It diminishes <P_276> the quantity ,
LIND-1753-1,276.220

but leaves behind it the ill quality " . LIND-1753-1,276.221

It may be proper farther to remark , that this being the last and most
elaborated action of animal digestion , the body is hereby freed from
what is consequently the most subtile and putrescent of the animal
humours . LIND-1753-1,276.222

And it is certain these excrementitious humours naturally destined for
this evacuation , when retained long in the body , are capable of
acquiring the most poisonous and noxious qualities , and a very high
degree of putrefaction ; becoming extremely acrid and corrosive : and do
then give rise to various diseases , according to the habit or
constitution of the person , <font> viz. <$$font> the state of the
solids and fluids at that time , or the influence and determination of
other causes . LIND-1753-1,276.223

Moreover , not only due and constant evacuations of what may be rendered
thus so extremely pernicious to the body , are requisite towards the
health and life of animals ; LIND-1753-1,276.224

but a fresh and daily supply of a soft and mild liquor , such as the
chyle , is farther necessary to correct and prevent the constant natural
putrescent tendency of the humours , and to sweeten and <P_277> dilute
the acrimony which they daily and hourly contract from the action of the
body , and by life itself . LIND-1753-1,277.225

It appears , that animals starved to death , do not perish from want of
blood , or an insufficient quantity of other juices , but from the
corrupt and putrid state of them . LIND-1753-1,277.226

It would be foreign to my purpose , to observe what various degrees and
kinds of putrefaction may be induced in the human body by other means ,
<paren> <font> viz. <$$font> by putrid ferments , or putrid substances
of any kind , contagious poisons , and acrimony of different sorts ,
either taken inwardly , or outwardly applied <$$paren> ; as the
scorbutic putrefaction , it will appear , is purely the natural effect
of animal heat and motion caused by the action of the body .
LIND-1753-1,277.227

How long life may be preserved during this putrefaction of the animal ,
or what degree of corruption in the humours may subsist during life , it
is not easy to determine ; though , beyond all doubt , such an
alcalescent state or acrimony in the blood as is described by some
authors , is not consistent with life . LIND-1753-1,277.228

Alcaline and putrid substances are very different . LIND-1753-1,277.229

This being premised , I come now to observe the effects upon the human
body of the several causes which are remarked to give rise to the
<P_278> scurvy . LIND-1753-1,278.230

<font> First <$$font> , An intense degree of cold , such as we have
sometimes during severe winters in our own country , but especially such
as the crews felt who wintered at <font> Spitzbergen <$$font> and <font>
Greenland <$$font> , and is common in the winters in <font> Groenland
<$$font> and <font> Iceland <$$font> , is experienced to be among the
predisposing causes to this disease . LIND-1753-1,278.231

The obvious effect of cold on the human body is , to constringe the
whole external habit , to dry and corrugate the skin ;
LIND-1753-1,278.232

and all statical experiments prove , that cold obstructs or dimishes
insensible perspiration . LIND-1753-1,278.233

<font> Degorter <$$font> observed , that , <font> caeteris paribus
<$$font> , the perspiration was always less , the greater degree of cold
there appeared to be from the thermometer . LIND-1753-1,278.234

<font> Sanctorius <$$font> , who lived in a country where the winters
are seldom long and severe , gives us a very just aphorism , if rightly
understood on this subject . LIND-1753-1,278.235

It is , That , during a cold constitution of air , the robust <paren> or
such as have strong elastic fibres , and a dense blood , by which a
great degree of heat overcoming the force of the external cold , is soon
generated in them , especially by muscular motion or exercise <$$paren>
<P_279> may be made to perspire much more than at other times .
LIND-1753-1,279.236

But in weak persons , or those that use no exercise , and universally in
all who can@ @not bring themselves into a degree of heat exceeding that
of the atmosphere , perspiration will be lessened , according to the
different degrees of cold to which their body is exposed ; and which ,
when very intense , entirely stops this necessary evacuation .
LIND-1753-1,279.237

Hence such as use exercise , and keep warm , during cold winters , are
not so subject to scorbutic complaints , as those who are weak , and use
none . LIND-1753-1,279.238

But it must be remarked , that cold joined with driness and purity in
the air , by keeping up a due degree of tension in the solids , is not
naturally productive of this disease . LIND-1753-1,279.239

It may indeed be supposed , that when the cold becomes very intense , as
in the winter in <font> Greenland <$$font> , the vital or animal heat of
the body may be so overcome by it , that the digestive faculties <paren>
as in a person starving with cold <$$paren> are chilled and enervated ;
and the solids being overbraced by so high a degree of cold , may at
last lose their tone or elasticity . LIND-1753-1,279.240

In this case , the constitution becoming gradually habituated to an
overcharge of what physicians call the <font> serosa <P_280> colluvies
<$$font> , by a long obstructed perspiration ; instead of coughs ,
stitches , pleurisies , and the like disorders of the inflammatory kind
, usual in such seasons from too tense fibres , the scorbutic <font>
diathesis <$$font> may more naturally be contracted , especially if such
food only is used as must contribute to form the disease .
LIND-1753-1,280.241

But this , though probable , can@ @not be ascertained from fact ;
because , as I observed elsewhere , these northern countries , above all
others , are continually pestered with fogs , even during their severest
frosts . LIND-1753-1,280.242

And by all faithful and accurate observations made on this disease ,
moisture is experienced to be the principal and main predisposing cause
to it . LIND-1753-1,280.243

This indeed of itself is sufficient to dispose the constitution to the
scurvy in any climate , even the warmest . LIND-1753-1,280.244

It is observable , that , in warm climates , the crews of ships at sea
are liable to this malady , when the hot weather , by which the fibres
of the body are much relaxed , is succeeded by great and incessant rains
usual in these latitudes , or when the season proves very unconstant .
LIND-1753-1,280.245

The disease is there likewise much owing to the great length of these
southern voyages . LIND-1753-1,280.246

But , otherwise , it is not near so frequent a calamity as in <P_281>
colder climates ; the bad effects of moisture being rendered much more
pernicious when combined with cold . LIND-1753-1,281.247

A cold and <font> moist <$$font> constitution of the atmosphere ,
together with wet lodgings , damp beds , cloaths , and other
inconveniences which poor people necessarily suffer at such seasons , is
the most frequent and strongest disposing cause to it .
LIND-1753-1,281.248

And , upon the whole , it is to be remarked , that whatever shuts up the
pores of the skin , and impedes or lessens perspiration , which moisture
or dampness effectually does , and that more strongly with the addition
of cold , is chiefly productive of this disease . LIND-1753-1,281.249

<font> Sanctorius <$$font> , in several places , describes such a
scorbutic constitution of air , and its effects , as is often met with
at sea : LIND-1753-1,281.250

" Too cold , windy , or wet air , lessens perspiration " .
LIND-1753-1,281.251

He had before enumerated almost all the causes which obstruct this
evacuation , and occasion the disease , <font> viz. <$$font> " <font>
aër frigidus , coenosus , et humidus , natatio in frigida <$$font> ,
gross viscid food , and a neglect of exercise " ; LIND-1753-1,281.252

and observes the consequence of perspiration being obstructed by such a
moist gross air : LIND-1753-1,281.253

" It converts <P_282> the matter of transpiration into an <font> ichor
<$$font> ; which being retained , induces a cachexy " .
LIND-1753-1,282.254

He very justly afterwards points {TEXT:paints} out the scorbutic cachexy
, when describing the effects of humidity , or of such an indisposition
of air as produces the scurvy : LIND-1753-1,282.255

" Here perspiration is stopt , the passages of it clogged ,
LIND-1753-1,282.256

the fibres are relaxed ; LIND-1753-1,282.257

and the transpiration retained , proves hurtful , LIND-1753-1,282.258

and induces a sensible weight in the body " . LIND-1753-1,282.259

This he found by statical experiments to be the fact .
LIND-1753-1,282.260

But , for the better understanding of these excellent aphorisms , it may
be proper to observe , that , upon the state of the atmosphere , the
strength and weakness of the fibres of our body in a great measure
depend . LIND-1753-1,282.261

Too moist an air not only stops up the pores of the skin ,
LIND-1753-1,282.262

but weakens and relaxes the whole system of solids .
LIND-1753-1,282.263

Hence , during a rainy cloudy season , all the members of the body feel
heavy , LIND-1753-1,282.264

the appetite is diminished , LIND-1753-1,282.265

the pulse of the heart and arteries is more feeble , LIND-1753-1,282.266

and every one is sensible of a languor of strength , and a lowness of
spirits . LIND-1753-1,282.267

Farther , moisture , by weakening the spring and elasticity of the air ,
renders <P_283> it unfit for the many salutary purposes obtained by
respiration . LIND-1753-1,283.268

Such an air not being able to overcome sufficiently the contractile
force of the pulmonary fibres resisting the dilatation of the lungs ,
the blood is not here sufficiently comminuted and broken , nor that
<font> lentor <$$font> removed which it had contracted in its slow
returning motion through the veins . LIND-1753-1,283.269

From the impaired action also of this <font> viscus <$$font> , the last
and most important office of animal digestion upon chyle , that of
sanguification , is not duly performed . LIND-1753-1,283.270

As we always find , that those who have their lungs faulty , can never
be properly nourished ; so indeed there can be no good digestion without
pure air . LIND-1753-1,283.271

This is necessary ; as it mixes with the aliment in the mouth , has free
access to the stomach , and through the whole intestinal tube , where it
is a very active cause of digestion ; but chiefly as it assists the
lungs in performing that function of assimilating and converting the
crude chyle into blood . LIND-1753-1,283.272

Hence , during a moist constitution of the air , improper food , or such
as affords a too viscous and tenacious chyle , can never rightly be
converted into this vital juice , for the support and nourishment of the
body . LIND-1753-1,283.273

But , further , persons in such situations where <P_284> they are
continually exposed to moist air , in damp lodgings , in wet cloaths ,
beddings , <font> &c. <$$font> are found to absorb great quantities of
the surrounding moisture . LIND-1753-1,284.274

And these obstructed and imbibed humours becoming more and more acrid ,
this serous <font> colluvies <$$font> , in length of time , turns putrid
in the human body . LIND-1753-1,284.275

All animal substances have naturally a tendency to corruption in too
moist an air . LIND-1753-1,284.276

<P_285>

I come next to observe the other concurring causes which have so great
an influence in disposing to this disease ; such as laziness and
indolence of disposition , and from thence a neglect of using proper
exercise , or a sedentary and inactive life . LIND-1753-1,285.278

Every one , from experience , must be sensible how much exercise
contributes to the health of the body , as well as to chearfulness of
mind . LIND-1753-1,285.279

It is necessary to keep up that due degree of firmness and tension in
the solids , upon which the strength and soundness of a constitution
depend : and which is acquired by such motions as increase the mutual
action of the vessels on their contents , and each other .
LIND-1753-1,285.280

But the whole process of animal digestion , as well as all the
secretions , depend upon this strength and firmness of the vessels and
<font> viscera . <$$font> LIND-1753-1,285.281

Whenever the tone of these is relaxed and weakened , which is most
effectually done by keeping the body long at rest , or by neglect of due
exercise , there must follow a deficiency in the vigour and strength of
the powers of digestion ; so that they will not be sufficient to concoct
and elaborate the aliment , especially if it is of a too crude and
viscid nature . LIND-1753-1,285.282

And the whole system of solids being thus relaxed , <P_286> by reason of
a deficiency of their action and efficacy , the chyle can@ @not be
properly assimilated , nor the heterogeneous mass of fluids intimately
mixed and blended : so that the body here is not duly nourished , nor
the secretions rightly performed ; especially that of perspiration ,
which exercise powerfully promotes . LIND-1753-1,286.283

Hence the scorbutic <font> diathesis <$$font> , want of proper digestion
, weak and relaxed fibres , with a stoppage of perspiration .
LIND-1753-1,286.284

The same state of things will likewise occur in those who have been much
weakened by a preceding {TEXT:preceeding} fit of sickness ; with this
additional cause , that , besides the weakened tone of the solids , and
of all the powers of digestion , there is often left in the constitution
after fevers , an acrimonious state of the juices . LIND-1753-1,286.285

Here such a diet is necessary to prevent the scurvy , as is adapted to
the weakness of the organs , as requires the gentlest action of the
<font> viscera <$$font> to concoct and assimilate it , and the smallest
force to forward it in its passage , and is of a quality proper to
correct the acrimonious disposition of the humours .
LIND-1753-1,286.286

These being the predisposing causes of this disease , it plainly appears
, that the effects produced by them , are , a relaxation of the tone of
<P_287> the animal fibres , a weakening of the powers of digestion ,
together with a stoppage of perspiration . LIND-1753-1,287.287

This last particular may receive confirmation , by observing , that some
of the passions of the mind , as fear and sorrow , which have been
assigned as causes of the scurvy , and are almost constantly its effects
, act with the same remarkable influence on perspiration , as they were
found to have on this disease in Lord <font> Anson <$$font> 's crew .
LIND-1753-1,287.288

But as the mechanical effects of these passions upon the human body
would require too long a discussion for this place , I shall refer it to
the authors who have expressly treated of them . LIND-1753-1,287.289

I proceed to observe what farther effects are produced by what has been
assigned as the occasional cause of this disease , <font> viz. <$$font>
a gross and viscid diet in such circumstances as have been described ,
and the want of fresh greens or vegetables , which are found so
effectually to check the scorbutic virulence . LIND-1753-1,287.290

I imagine it would be unnecessary to insist <P_288> long in shewing how
, in the unavoidable hardships that sometimes attend seamen in long
voyages , or the besieged shut up in towns ; as likewise in times of
scarcity or famine , or when people at any time use putrid flesh or fish
, mouldy bread , or unwholsome waters ; how , I say , from such
corrupted substances , the scorbutic taint might probably be induced in
the body . LIND-1753-1,288.291

The aliment is never so far diverted of its original qualities by
digestion , as not to carry some of them along with it into the blood .
LIND-1753-1,288.292

I am indeed inclined to believe , that where the predisposing causes
already mentioned are wanting , such putrid and corrupt aliment would
occasion other diseases different from the scurvy . LIND-1753-1,288.293

Though it may tend to increase it , and often concurs with other causes
at sea to render it highly virulent ; yet it is certain , the scurvy
appears most frequently where such food has no share in breeding it ,
however generally it has been accused ; its most common occasional cause
being the gross viscid diet before described . LIND-1753-1,288.294

