<BEGIN_lingard-1823-2>

<P_7,342>

<heading>

Chap. IV . LINGARD-1823-2,7,342.4

Elizabeth . LINGARD-1823-2,7,342.5

<$$heading>

Whatever opinion men might entertain of the legitimacy of Elizabeth ,
she ascended the throne without opposition . LINGARD-1823-2,7,342.7

Mary had expired about noon : LINGARD-1823-2,7,342.8

and in a short time the commons received a message to attend at the bar
of the house of lords . LINGARD-1823-2,7,342.9

On their arrival the important <P_7,343> event was announced by
archbishop Heath , the lord chancellor . LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.10

God , he said , had taken to his mercy their late sovereign the lady
Mary , and had given them another in the person of her royal sister the
lady Elizabeth . LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.11

Of the right of Elizabeth there could be no doubt .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.12

It had been decided by the statute of the thirty-first of Henry VIII. :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.13

and nothing remained for the two houses but to discharge their duty , by
recognising the accession of the new sovereign .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.14

Her title was immediately proclaimed , first in Westminster Hall , and
again at Temple Bar , in presence of the lord mayor , the aldermen , and
the companies of the city . LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.15

From the palace a deputation of the council repaired to Hatfield , the
residence of the new queen . LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.16

She received them courteously , LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.17

and to their congratulations replied in a formal and studied discourse .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.18

She was struck with amazement , when she considered herself and the
dignity to which she had been called . LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.19

Her shoulders were too weak to support the burden :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.20

but it was her duty to submit to the will of God , and to seek the aid
of wise and faithful advisers . LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.21

For this purpose she would in a few days appoint a new council .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.22

It was her intention to retain several of those who had been inured to
business under her father , brother , and sister :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,343.23

and , if the others were not employed , she would <P_7,344> have them to
believe , that it was not through distrust of their ability or will to
serve her , but through a wish to avoid that indecision and delay ,
which so often arose from the jarring opinions of a multitude of
advisers . LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.24

This answer had been suggested by the man to whom she had already given
her confidence , sir William Cecil , formerly secretary to Edward VI .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.25

Having obtained a pardon in the last reign , for his share in the
treason of Northumberland , he had sought , by feigning an attachment to
the catholic faith , to worm himself into the good graces of Mary .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.26

But that queen , though cardinal Pole professed to be his friend ,
always doubted his sincerity : LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.27

her reserve , joined to her increasing infirmities , taught him to
divert his devotion from " the setting to the rising sun : "
LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.28

and Elizabeth accepted with joy and gratitude the services of so able
and experienced a statesman . LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.29

Cecil was appointed secretary : LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.30

and the queen with his aid named the members of her council .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.31

Of the advisers of Mary she retained those , who were distinguished for
their capacity , or formidable by their influence :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.32

and to these she added eight others , who had deserved that honour by
their former attachment to her in her troubles , or owed it to their
connexion with the secretary by consanguinity or friendship .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,344.33

It <P_7,345> was remarked , that all the old counsellors professed
themselves catholics , all the new , protestants : that the former
comprised several , who , in the last reign , had proved most active
champions of the ancient faith ; the latter some , who had suffered
imprisonment or exile for their adherence to the reformed doctrines .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,345.34

In a body composed of such discordant elements , much harmony could not
be expected : LINGARD-1823-2,7,345.35

but this counsel was rather for shew than real use :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,345.36

there was another and secret cabinet , consisting of Cecil and his
particular friends , who possessed the ear of the queen , and controlled
through her every department in the state . LINGARD-1823-2,7,345.37

One of the first cares of the new government was to notify to foreign
courts the death of Mary , and the succession of Elizabeth " by
hereditary right , and the consent of the nation . "
LINGARD-1823-2,7,345.38

The instructions sent to the ambassadors varied according to the
presumed disposition of the courts at which they resided .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,345.39

The emperor Ferdinand <P_7,346> and Philip of Spain were assured of the
intention of the queen , to maintain and strengthen the existing
alliance between the house of Austria and the English crown :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,346.40

to the king of Denmark , the duke of Holstein , and the Lutheran princes
of Germany , a confidential communication was made of her attachment to
the reformed faith , and of her wish to cement an union among all its
professors : LINGARD-1823-2,7,346.41

and Carne , the resident at Rome , was ordered to acquaint the pontiff ,
that she had succeeded to her sister , and had determined to offer no
violence to the consciences of her subjects , whatever might be their
religious creed . LINGARD-1823-2,7,346.42

It was the misfortune of Paul , who had passed his eightieth year , that
he adopted opinions with the credulity , and maintained them with the
pertinacity , of old age . LINGARD-1823-2,7,346.43

His ear had been pre-occupied by the diligence of the French ambassador
, who suggested that to admit the succession of Elizabeth , would be to
approve the pretended marriage of her parents , Henry VIII. and Anne
Boleyn ; to annul the decisions of Clement VII. and Paul III. ; to
prejudge the claim of the true and legitimate heir , Mary , queen of
Scots ; and to offend the king of France , who had determined to support
the right of his daughter-in-law with all the power of his realm .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,346.44

When Carne performed his commission , Paul replied , that he was unable
<P_7,347> to comprehend the hereditary right of one who was not born in
lawful wedlock : that the queen of Scots claimed the crown as the
nearest legitimate descendant of Henry VII. : but that , if Elizabeth
were willing to submit the controversy to his arbitration , she should
receive from him every indulgence which justice could allow .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.45

The reader will recollect that , during the reign of her sister ,
Elizabeth had professed herself a convert to the ancient faith .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.46

The catholics were willing to believe that her conformity arose from
conviction : LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.47

the protestants , while they lamented her apostacy , persuaded
themselves that she feigned sentiments which she did not feel .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.48

It is probable that in her own mind she was indifferent to either form
of worship : LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.49

but the moment she ascended the throne , a catholic competitor appeared
: LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.50

Mary Stuart , at the command of her father-in-law , assumed the title of
queen of England , LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.51

and quartered the English arms with those of Scotland and France :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.52

and the answer of the pontiff proved , what was already known , that on
catholic principles , Elizabeth had no " hereditary right to the crown .
" LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.53

The new ministers , whose prospects depended on the change , urged their
mistress to put down a religion which proclaimed her a bastard , and to
support the reformed doctrines , which alone could give stability to her
throne . LINGARD-1823-2,7,347.54

After some <P_7,348> hesitation Elizabeth complied :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,348.55

but the caution of Cecil checked the precipitancy of the zealots , who
condemned every delay as an additional offence to God :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,348.56

and a resolution was adopted to suppress all knowledge of the intended
measure , till every precaution had been taken to ensure its success .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,348.57

With this view the following plan was submitted to the approbation of
the queen : 1=o=. to forbid all manner of sermons , that the preachers
might not excite their hearers to resistance : 2=o=. to intimidate the
clergy by prosecutions under the statutes of praemunire and other penal
laws : 3=o=. to debase in the eyes of the people all who had been in
authority under the late queen , by rigorous inquiries into their
conduct , and by bringing them , whenever it were possible , under the
lash of the law : 4=o=. to remove the present magistrates , and to
appoint others , " meaner in substance and younger in years , " but
better affected to the reformed doctrines : 5=o=. to name a secret
committee of divines , who should revise and correct the liturgy
published by Edward VI. : and lastly , to communicate the plan to no
other persons than Parr , the late marquess of Northampton , the earls
of Bedford and Pembroke , and the lord <P_7,349> John Gray , till the
time should arrive , when it must be laid before the whole council .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.58

Hitherto Elizabeth , by the ambiguity of her conduct , had contrived to
balance the hopes and fears of the two parties .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.59

She continued to assist , and occasionally to communicate , at mass :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.60

she buried her sister with all the solemnities of the catholic ritual ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.61

and she ordered a solemn dirge , and a mass of requiem for the soul of
the emperor Charles V . LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.62

But if these things served to lessen the apprehensions of the catholics
, there was also much to flatter the expectations of the gospellers .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.63

The prisoners for religion were discharged on their own recognisances to
appear whenever they should be called : LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.64

the reformed divines returned from exile , LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.65

and appeared openly at court : LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.66

and Oglethorpe , bishop of Carlisle , preparing to say mass in the royal
chapel , received an order , which he refused to obey , not to elevate
the host in the royal presence . LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.67

By degrees the secret was suffered to transpire .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,349.68

The bishops saw with surprise that White , of Winchester , had been
imprisoned for his sermon at the funeral of queen Mary , and that Bonner
of London , was called upon to account <P_7,350> for the different fines
which had been levied in his courts during the last reign .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.69

Archbishop Heath either received a hint , LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.70

or deemed it prudent , to resign the seals , which , with the title of
lord keeper , were transferred to sir Nicholas Bacon .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.71

But that which cleared away every doubt , was a proclamation ,
forbidding the clergy to preach , and ordering the established worship
to be observed " until consultation might be had in parliament by the
queen and the three estates . " LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.72

Alarmed by this clause , the bishops assembled in London ,
LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.73

and consulted whether they could in conscience officiate at the
coronation of a princess , who , it was probable , would object to some
part of the service , as ungodly and superstitious , and who , if she
did not refuse to take , certainly meant to violate , that part of the
oath , which bound the sovereign to maintain the liberties of the
established church . LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.74

The question was put , LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.75

and was unanimously resolved in the negative . LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.76

This unexpected determination of the prelates created considerable
embarrassment . LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.77

Much importance was still attached to the rite of coronation .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.78

It was thought necessary that the ceremony should be performed before
the queen met her parliament ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,350.79

and it was feared that the <P_7,351> people would not consider it valid
, unless it were performed by a prelate of the establishment .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.80

Many expedients were devised to remove or surmount the difficulty :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.81

and at last the bishop of Carlisle separated himself from his colleagues
. LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.82

But if he was prevailed upon to crown the queen , she on her part was
compelled to take the accustomed oath , and to conform to all the rites
of the catholic pontifical . LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.83

No expense was spared by the court or by the citizens :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.84

but the absence of the prelates threw an unusual gloom over the ceremony
. LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.85

Their example was imitated by the duke of Feria , the Spanish ambassador
, who was invited but refused to attend . LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.86

Cecil had now completed every arrangement preparatory to the meeting of
parliament . LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.87

Five new peers , of protestant principles , had been added to the upper
house : LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.88

in the lower , a majority had been secured by the expedient of sending
to the sheriffs a list of court candidates , out of whom the members
were to be chosen ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,351.89

and the committee of reformed divines , who had secretly assembled in
the house of sir Thomas Smith , had moulded the book of common prayer
<P_7,352> into a less objectionable form . LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.90

On the twenty-fifth of January the queen assisted in state at a solemn
high mass , which was followed by a sermon from Dr. Cox , a reformed
preacher . LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.91

The lord keeper then opened the parliament in her presence .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.92

He first drew a melancholy picture of the state of the realm under queen
Mary , LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.93

and next exhibited the cheering prospect of the blessings which awaited
it under the new sovereign . LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.94

She had called the two houses together , that they might consult
respecting an uniform order of religion ; might remove abuses and
enormities ; and might provide for the safety of the state against its
foreign and domestic enemies . LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.95

They were not , however , to suppose that their concurrence was
necessary for these purposes - LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.96

the queen could have effected them , if she had so pleased , of her own
authority - LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.97

but " she rather sought contentation by assent , and surety by advice ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.98

and was willing to require of her loving subjects nothing which they
were not contented freely and frankly to offer . "
LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.99

Before the commons proceeded to any business of importance , they voted
" an humble but earnest address to the queen , that she would vouchsafe
to accept some match capable of supplying heirs to her majesty's royal
virtues and dominions . " LINGARD-1823-2,7,352.100

It was presented by the <P_7,353> speaker , attended by thirty members .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.101

There was , perhaps , no subject on which Elizabeth could less brook the
officious interference of others ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.102

but on this occasion policy taught her to bridle her resentment ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.103

and she replied , that , though during the last reign she had many
powerful inducements to marry , she had , nevertheless , preferred , and
still continued to prefer , a single life . LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.104

What might hereafter happen , she could not foresee :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.105

if she took a husband , her object would be the welfare of her people ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.106

if she did not , God would provide a successor .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.107

For herself , she should be content to have it inscribed on her tomb ,
that she had reigned and died a maiden queen . LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.108

But whatever she thought of the matter , she was pleased with the manner
of their address ; because it did not , as it ought not , presume to
point out either the person or the place . LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.109

It was not for them " to draw her love to their liking , or to frame her
will by their fantasy . LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.110

Theirs it was to beg , not to prescribe ; to obey , not to bind . "
LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.111

She would therefore , take their coming in good part , and dismiss them
with her thanks , not for their petition , but for their intention .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.112

For reasons , which are not obvious , the ministers had determined to
avoid all discussion respecting the legitimacy of the queen , or the
attainder of her mother . LINGARD-1823-2,7,353.113

Both the act declaring <P_7,354> the marriage of Henry with Anne Boleyn
to have been void from the beginning , and that convicting the latter of
incest , adultery , and treason , were allowed to remain uncontradicted
in the statute book . LINGARD-1823-2,7,354.114

But in favour of the queen it was enacted , that she was heir in blood
to her mother : that she was rightly , lineally , and lawfully descended
of the blood royal of the realm : that to her , and to the heirs of her
body " lawfully to be begotten , " the crown , with its appurtenances ,
belonged as rightfully as it ever did to her father , brother , and
sister : that the act of the 35th of Henry VIII. limiting the
succession , still remained in force : and that to dispute the queen's
title , or to imagine her death or deposition , or that of the heirs of
her body , should be punishable , if the offence was committed in words
, with forfeiture of goods and chattels , and lands , for life ; if by
writing , printing , or any overt acts , with the penalties of high
treason . LINGARD-1823-2,7,354.115

But the subject which principally occupied the attention of parliament
was the alteration of religion . LINGARD-1823-2,7,354.116

With this view , the statutes passed in the late reign for the support
of the ancient faith were repealed , LINGARD-1823-2,7,354.117

and the acts of Henry VIII. in derogation of the papal authority , and
of Edward VI. in favour of the reformed service , were in a great
measure revived . LINGARD-1823-2,7,354.118

It was enacted that the book of common prayer , with certain <P_7,355>
additions and emendations , should alone be used by the ministers in all
churches , under the penalties of forfeiture , deprivation , and death :
that the spiritual authority of every foreign prelate within the realm
should be utterly abolished : that the jurisdiction necessary for the
correction of errors , heresies , schisms , and abuses , should be
annexed to the crown ; with the power of delegating such jurisdiction to
any person or persons whatsoever , at the pleasure of the sovereign :
that the penalty of asserting the papal authority should ascend , on the
repetition of the offence , from the forfeiture of real and personal
property , to perpetual imprisonment ; and from perpetual imprisonment
to death , as it was inflicted in cases of high treason : and that all
clergymen taking orders , or in possession of livings ; all magistrates
and inferior officers having fees or wages from the crown ; all laymen
suing out the livery of their lands , or about to do homage to the queen
, should under pain of deprivation and incapacity take an oath ,
declaring her to be supreme governor in all ecclesiastical and spiritual
things or causes as well as temporal , and renouncing all foreign
ecclesiastical <P_7,356> or spiritual jurisdiction or authority
whatsoever within the realm . LINGARD-1823-2,7,355.119

On the part of the clergy , these bills experienced a most vigorous but
fruitless opposition . LINGARD-1823-2,7,355.120

The convocation presented to the house of lords , a declaration of its
belief in the real presence , transubstantiation , the sacrifice of the
mass , and the supremacy of the pope ; with a protestation , that to
decide on doctrine , sacraments , and discipline , belonged , not to any
lay assembly , but to the lawful pastors of the church .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,355.121

Both universities subscribed the confession of the convocation :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,355.122

and the bishops unanimously seized every opportunity to speak , and to
vote against the measure . LINGARD-1823-2,7,355.123

To dissolve or neutralize this opposition , an ingenious expedient was
devised . LINGARD-1823-2,7,355.124

Five bishops and three doctors on the one side , and eight reformed
divines on the other , received the royal command , to dispute in public
on certain controverted points . LINGARD-1823-2,7,355.125

Bacon , the lord keeper , was commissioned to act as moderator ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,355.126

and the debates of the two houses were suspended , <P_7,357> that the
members might have leisure to attend to the controversy .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.127

It had been ordered that on each day the catholics should begin , and
the reformers should answer : LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.128

but on the second morning the prelates objected to an arrangement ,
which gave so palpable an advantage to their adversaries :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.129

and , when Bacon refused to listen to their remonstrances , declared
that the conference was at an end . LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.130

The council immediately committed the bishops of Winchester and Lincoln
to the Tower , LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.131

and bound the other six disputants in their own recognisances to make
their appearance daily , till judgment should be pronounced .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.132

It was pretended that they had deserved this severity by their
disobedience : LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.133

but the real object was , by the imprisonment of the two prelates , and
the fear of the punishment which threatened the others , to silence the
opposition in the house of lords . LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.134

The bill in favour of the new book of common prayer was now read a last
time , LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.135

and was carried by a majority of three . LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.136

Nine spiritual and nine temporal peers voted against it .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,357.137

<P_7,358>

Soon after the dissolution , Elizabeth sent for the bishops ,
LINGARD-1823-2,7,358.139

required them to conform to the new statutes ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,358.140

and , on their refusal , drove them from her presence with expressions
of contempt and resentment . LINGARD-1823-2,7,358.141

It was still hoped that their obstinacy would yield to the rigour of the
law . LINGARD-1823-2,7,358.142

The oath of supremacy was tendered to each in succession ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,358.143

but all , with the exception of Kitchin of Landaff , sacrificed their
situations and their liberty to the dictates of their conscience .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,358.144

The example was copied by the majority of the dignified clergy , and the
chief members of the universities : LINGARD-1823-2,7,358.145

but among the lower order of churchmen , there were many who took the
oath , some through partiality for the reformed doctrines , some through
the dread of poverty , and others with the hope of seeing in a short
time another religious revolution . LINGARD-1823-2,7,358.146

With the aid of commissions , injunctions , and visitations , the church
was gradually purged of the nonjuring clergy ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,358.147

but their absence was inadequately supplied <P_7,359> by the jurors and
the reformed preachers ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,359.148

and a new order of ministers was established , consisting of mechanics ,
who obtained a licence to read the service in the church , but were
forbidden to administer the sacrament . LINGARD-1823-2,7,359.149

At the head of the reformed hierarchy was placed Dr. Matthew Parker ,
formerly chaplain to Anne Boleyn , and dean of Lincoln in the reign of
Edward VI . LINGARD-1823-2,7,359.150

But several months elapsed before either the archbishop or his
colleagues could enter on the exercise of their functions : several
others before they could obtain the possession of their temporalties
{COM:sic} . LINGARD-1823-2,7,359.151

The first impediment arose from the refusal of the catholic prelates to
consecrate the new metropolitan , who was obliged to receive that rite
from Barlow and Scory , two bishops who had conformed under Edward VI.
: the second from the rapacity of the ministers , who employed the
interval to enrich themselves and their dependants .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,359.152

It might perhaps have been thought that the church could afford but a
scanty gleaning after the spoliations {TEXT:spoilations} of former
reigns : LINGARD-1823-2,7,359.153

but an act had been passed in the late parliament , annexing to the
crown the first fruits , tenths , and rectories , which had been
resigned by Mary , and authorizing the queen , during the vacancies of
the different sees , to exchange them for an equivalent in episcopal
lands . LINGARD-1823-2,7,359.154

Had such exchanges been fairly made , <P_7,360> there would have been
less reason to complain : LINGARD-1823-2,7,360.155

but the quantum of compensation depended on the equity or avarice of men
, who were interested to give a nominal but fallacious equivalent ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,360.156

and the bishops elect , aware of the probable result , offered , in lieu
of all exchange , a yearly present of one_thousand pounds .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,360.157

But the offer was refused : LINGARD-1823-2,7,360.158

and when the new incumbents entered on their respective bishoprics ,
they found that the best portion of the landed property had been torn
away , to reward the real or pretended services of the courtiers and
their dependants . LINGARD-1823-2,7,360.159

While the ministry were thus employed in the alteration of religion at
home , their attention was also directed to an important negociation
abroad . LINGARD-1823-2,7,360.160

During the last summer the three belligerent powers , England , France ,
and Spain , alike exhausted by the war , had sent their respective
commissioners to the abbey of Cercamps : LINGARD-1823-2,7,360.161

but the conferences were interrupted by the obstinacy of Philip , who
refused to accede to any terms that did not secure to the queen of
England the restoration of Calais , and to Philibert of Savoy , that of
his hereditary dominions . LINGARD-1823-2,7,360.162

On the death of Mary , the earl of Arundel , leaving his colleagues ,
the bishop of Ely and Dr. Wotton , at the court of Brussels , returned
to England : LINGARD-1823-2,7,360.163

and the French king seized the opportunity to open a clandestine
correspondence with Elizabeth , <P_7,361> through the agency of the lord
Gray , a prisoner of war , and of Guido Cavalcanti , a gentleman of
Florence . LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.164

His object was to detach the queen from her confederacy with Philip :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.165

but the English ministers , aware that to separate from Spain , would be
to throw their mistress on the mercy of France , ordered the lord Howard
of Effingham to join the resident ambassadors , and to attend , in
conjunction with the Spanish envoys , the new conferences at Cateau
Cambresis . LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.166

The disputes between Spain and France were speedily arranged :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.167

and to cement the friendship between the two crowns , it was stipulated
that Philip should marry the daughter , Philibert the sister of Henry .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.168

Faithful , however , to his engagements , the Spanish monarch refused to
sign the treaty , till the English cabinet should be satisfied :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.169

and he even offered to continue the war for six years , provided
Elizabeth would bind herself not to conclude a separate peace during
that period . LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.170

Cecil and his colleagues found themselves in a most perplexing dilemma .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.171

On the one hand , to surrender the claim to Calais would expose them to
the hatred of the nation : LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.172

on the other , the poverty of the exchequer , the want of disciplined
troops , and above all , the unsettled state of religion , forbade them
to protract the war . LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.173

The ambassadors were finally instructed to obtain the best terms in
their power ; but to conclude a peace , whatever sacrifices it might
cost . LINGARD-1823-2,7,361.174

With the aid of the <P_7,362> Spanish negociators , they debated every
point , LINGARD-1823-2,7,362.175

gradually receded from one demand to another ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,362.176

and ultimately subscribed to the conditions dictated by their
adversaries . LINGARD-1823-2,7,362.177

The restoration of Calais formed the prominent article in the treaty .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,362.178

It was agreed that the most christian king should retain possession
during the next eight years ; that at the expiration of the term he
should restore the town with its dependencies to Elizabeth , under the
penalty of 500,000 crowns ; and that he should deliver , as security for
that sum , the persons of four French noblemen , and the bonds of eight
foreign merchants . LINGARD-1823-2,7,362.179

This article was meant to cover the honour of the queen , and to amuse
the expectations of the people : LINGARD-1823-2,7,362.180

whatever expectation it might excite , was extinguished by the following
provision , that if Henry , or the king and queen of Scotland , should
make any attempt by arms directly or indirectly against the territories
or subjects of Elizabeth ; or Elizabeth against the territories or
subjects of the other contracting parties , the former should from that
moment forfeit all right to the retention , the latter , her claim to
the restoration of the town . LINGARD-1823-2,7,362.181

It was evident that at the expiration of eight years , French ingenuity
would easily discover some real or pretended infraction of the treaty ,
on which the king might ground his refusal to restore the place .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,362.182

This <P_7,363> consequence was foreseen by the public :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.183

the terms were condemned as prejudicial and disgraceful :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.184

and the ministers , to divert the indignation of the people , ordered
the lord Wentworth , the governor of Calais , and Chamberlayne and
Hurlestone , captains of the castle and the Risbank , to be brought to
trial on charges of cowardice and treason . LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.185

The former was acquitted by his peers : LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.186

the latter were found guilty and condemned . LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.187

But the trials had served the purpose of the court :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.188

and the sentence was never carried into execution .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.189

During the negociation no mention was made of one cause of offence ,
which had sunk deeply into the breast of Elizabeth .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.190

Ever since her accession she had , as heiress to the rights of her
predecessor , styled herself queen of France . LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.191

The title was ridiculous , in as much as by the fundamental laws of that
kingdom no female could inherit the crown : LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.192

but it had previously been adopted by Mary , LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.193

and was considered the best expedient by which the queen could transmit
this ancient , but useless bauble to her successors .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.194

Henry of France did not complain : LINGARD-1823-2,7,363.195

but to retaliate , as he pretended , though there can be no doubt that
he acted seriously , he <P_7,364> caused his daughter-in-law to adopt
occasionally the style of queen of England and Ireland .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.196

This assumption not only wounded the pride , LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.197

it alarmed the jealousy of Elizabeth : LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.198

it proved to her , that in the estimation of Henry she was a bastard :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.199

and it taught her to apprehend that , on some future occasion , Mary
Stuart might dispute with her the right to the English crown .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.200

She had , however , the prudence to suppress her feelings .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.201

She concluded a treaty of peace with Mary at Cateau Cambresis ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.202

engaged to afford no aid nor asylum to the Scottish rebels ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.203

and swore on the gospels faithfully to observe these conditions .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.204

But Cecil had at the same time a very different object in contemplation
. LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.205

He knew that the Scottish reformers had taken up arms in opposition to
the queen regent , LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.206

and he resolved to foment their discontent , and to support their
rebellion . LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.207

By enabling them to triumph over the authority of their sovereign ,
Elizabeth might wrest from the Scottish queen a renunciation of her
claim : LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.208

the French influence in Scotland would be annihilated :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.209

the new worship would be established : LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.210

and the Scottish crown might probably be transferred from the head of
Mary to that of a Protestant branch of the house of Stuart .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.211

In private he carried his views even farther ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,364.212

and revealed to his confidential friends his hope that by the marriage
of the <P_7,365> new sovereign with the English queen , the two realms
might be incorporated into one powerful and protestant kingdom .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,365.213

In the pursuit of such magnificent objects , it would indeed be
necessary to violate the peace which had been so lately ratified , and
to aid rebellious subjects against the legitimate authority of their
sovereign : LINGARD-1823-2,7,365.214

but in the political creed of the secretary , the end was held to
sanctify the means ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,365.215

and his conduct during the war of the reformation in Scotland will
develop {TEXT:develope} those maxims of state , which during the greater
part of Elizabeth's reign prevailed in the English council .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,365.216

Previously , however , it will be necessary to lay before the reader the
origin of the contest between the Scottish lords and their sovereign .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,365.217

Of all the European churches there was perhaps not one better prepared
to receive the seed of the new gospel than that of Scotland .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,365.218

During a long course of years the highest dignities had , with few
exceptions , been possessed by the illegitimate or younger sons of the
<P_7,366> most powerful families , men who , without learning or
morality themselves , paid little attention to the learning or morality
of their inferiors . LINGARD-1823-2,7,366.219

The pride of the clergy , their negligence in the discharge of their
functions , and the rigour with which they exacted their dues , had
become favourite subjects of popular censure : LINGARD-1823-2,7,366.220

and when the new preachers appeared , they dexterously availed
themselves of the humour of the time , LINGARD-1823-2,7,366.221

and seasoned their discourses against the doctrines , with invectives
against the vices , of the churchmen . LINGARD-1823-2,7,366.222

Both the prelates , and the earl of Arran , the governor of the kingdom
, were alarmed . LINGARD-1823-2,7,366.223

The former assembled in convocation , LINGARD-1823-2,7,366.224

and enacted several canons , which had for their object to regulate the
morals of the clergy , to enforce the duty of public instruction , and
to repress abuses in the collection of the clerical dues .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,366.225

Arran , in two successive parliaments , revived the old statutes against
the teachers of heretical doctrines ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,366.226

and strengthened them with the addition of new penalties .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,366.227

But the transfer of the regency from Arran to the <P_7,367> queen mother
allowed the reformers time to breathe . LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.228

During the struggle the lords , by whom they were favoured , had
attached themselves to her interests ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.229

and they now expected forbearance , if not protection , from her
gratitude . LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.230

The number of the missionaries was increased by the arrival of several
preachers , who fled from the persecution in England :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.231

and the return of John Knox from Geneva , gave a new impulse to their
zeal . LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.232

The enthusiasm of this apostle , the severity of his manner , his rude
but commanding eloquence , soon raised him to a high pre-eminence above
his fellows . LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.233

At his suggestion , the chief of the converts assembled in Mearns ,
LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.234

and subscribed a covenant , by which they bound themselves to renounce
for ever the communion of the established church , and to maintain what
they held to be the true doctrine of the gospel .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.235

But his boldness was met with threats of vengeance :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.236

and preferring the duty of watching over the infant church to the glory
of martyrdom , he hastened back to Geneva , whence by letters he
supplied the neophytes with ghostly counsel , resolving their doubts ,
chastising their timidity , and inflaming their zeal .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.237

One thing he most earnestly inculcated , the distinction between civil
and religious obedience . LINGARD-1823-2,7,367.238

The former was due in civil matters to the civil magistrate : the latter
to God alone : whence he drew this important inference , that , in
defiance of the legislature and the sovereign , <P_7,368> it was their
duty to extirpate idolatry wherever they found it , to establish the
gospel , and in defence of their proceedings to oppose force to force .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,368.239

This doctrine , the parent of sedition and civil war , was gratefully
received , and practically adopted . LINGARD-1823-2,7,368.240

The proselytes , inflamed by the lessons of their teacher , and the
scriptural denunciations against idolatry , abolished , wherever they
had power , the worship established by law , LINGARD-1823-2,7,368.241

expelled the clergy , LINGARD-1823-2,7,368.242

dissolved the monasteries , LINGARD-1823-2,7,368.243

and gave the ornaments of the churches , often the churches themselves ,
to the flames . LINGARD-1823-2,7,368.244

It was with pain that the queen regent viewed these illegal proceedings
. LINGARD-1823-2,7,368.245

But she dared not oppose or punish at a time , when the approaching
marriage of her daughter to the dauphin of France admonished her to win
by condescension , <P_7,369> rather than alienate by severity .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.246

Her efforts were successful : LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.247

both parties joined in gratifying her wishes : LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.248

and the estates not only consented to the marriage ,
LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.249

but named a deputation to assist at the ceremony .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.250

Mary Stuart had just completed her fifteenth year .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.251

She was married to Francis , a prince of nearly the same age , in the
cathedral of Paris : LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.252

he was immediately saluted by his consort , with the title of
king-dauphin : LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.253

and to cement the union of the two nations , the natives of each were by
legislative acts naturalized in the other . LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.254

The reformers had been fully aware , that by consenting to the union of
their young sovereign with the heir apparent of the French monarchy ,
they should yield a considerable advantage to the catholics :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.255

and therefore , to compound the matter with their consciences , they had
, previously to the opening of the parliament , entered into a new
religious covenant . LINGARD-1823-2,7,369.256

The subscribers , with the earls of Argyle , Morton , and Glencairn at
their head , assuming the title of " the congregation of the Lord , "
bound themselves to strive to the death in the cause of their master ,
to procure and maintain faithful ministers of the gospel , to defend
them , the whole congregation , and every member thereof , to the whole
of their power , and at the hazard of their lives : to forsake the
congregation of Satan <paren> the established <P_7,370> church <$$paren>
, and to declare themselves manifest enemies to it , to its abominations
, and its idolatry . LINGARD-1823-2,7,370.257

When the purport of this covenant became known , it was considered by
the opposite party as a declaration of war . LINGARD-1823-2,7,370.258

The archbishop of St. Andrew's , as if he sought to probe the sincerity
of the subscribers , urged the execution of the laws made or revived
under the administration of his brother , the late governor :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,370.259

and Walter Milne , originally a friar , but for many years a preacher of
the new doctrines , suffered at the stake . LINGARD-1823-2,7,370.260

His fate , instead of intimidating , aroused the zeal of the reformers .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,370.261

They rose in their demands : LINGARD-1823-2,7,370.262

their opponents were equally importunate ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,370.263

and all the efforts of the regent to pacify and conciliate the two
parties , proved ineffectual . LINGARD-1823-2,7,370.264

At her request the archbishop convened a national council , by which the
canons lately made were confirmed , and an abstract of doctrine was
published in explanation of the tenets misrepresented by the
missionaries . LINGARD-1823-2,7,370.265

But <P_7,371> the lords of the congregation did not wait for the result
of the council . LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.266

They established the new service in Perth : LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.267

and the queen immediately summoned three of the preachers to answer at
Stirling , for this new violation of the law . LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.268

They refused to appear ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.269

and on the appointed day were , according to the forms of the Scottish
judicature , condemned as outlaws , with a notification that all who
might hereafter aid or protect them , should be treated as rebels .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.270

Knox had long ago left Geneva : LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.271

but had been detained six weeks at Dieppe , by a fruitless attempt to
procure from Elizabeth a licence to travel through her dominions .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.272

He , however , reached Perth a few days before judgment was pronounced
against the preachers . LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.273

When the intelligence arrived , he hastened to the pulpit :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.274

the indignation which glowed in his breast , was soon communicated to
his hearers : LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.275

and the crowd , maddened by his invectives , defaced the ornaments of
the church , LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.276

demolished the magnificent fabric of the charter house , with several
other convents , LINGARD-1823-2,7,371.277

and threw into the flames , whatever had been contaminated in their eyes
, by its <P_7,372> use in the established worship .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.278

In the language of the saints , Perth was said to be " reformed . "
LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.279

The regent , accompanied by the earl of Arran , who had assumed the
French title of duke of Chastelherault , and the earl of Huntley ,
advanced towards Perth : LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.280

and the congregationists assembled in force to oppose her progress .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.281

No blood was shed . LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.282

As often as the armies met in the field , they were separated by a
temporary suspension of hostilities . LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.283

Projects of pacification were repeatedly proposed , adopted , broken and
renewed . LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.284

But on every occasion the advantage was on the part of the
congregationists . LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.285

Their zeal refused to be bound by any compact , which might interfere
with their consciences : LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.286

wherever they came , they resumed their missionary labours , with the
gospel in one hand , and the firebrand in the other :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.287

and Crail , Anstruther , Scone , Stirling , Cambuskenneth , and
Linlithgow , were purged from the pollutions of popery .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.288

As they advanced , the capital opened its gates :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,372.289

the regent sought an asylum in the <P_7,373> castle of Dunbar :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.290

and the cause of the royalists appeared desperate .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.291

But Scottish warfare was always marked with sudden alternations of
misfortune and success . LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.292

The adherents of the opposite parties generally acted independently of
their chiefs : LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.293

they joined or abandoned the army at their pleasure ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.294

and , it often happened that those who to-day could boast of a decided
superiority , were compelled on the morrow to flee with diminished
forces before a more powerful adversary . LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.295

So it was on the present occasion . LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.296

For some days , the war was carried on by adverse proclamations :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.297

in the mean time the force of the insurgents dwindled away ,
LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.298

that of the regent increased : LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.299

she hastily marched towards Edinburgh : LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.300

" the saints " trembled before the congregation of Satan :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.301

a capitulation was signed : LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.302

and Edinburgh was again occupied by the royalists .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,373.303

There was in these proceedings of the Scots , <P_7,374> as much perhaps
of worldly policy as of religious fanaticism . LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.304

While Knox animated the zealots with promises of supernatural aid ,
Cecil had kept alive the hopes of the more cautious with the prospect of
support from the English queen . LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.305

Their first proceedings had answered his expectations :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.306

but their subsequent retreat from the capital , and the military
preparations on the coast of France , convinced him , that they must
make their peace with Mary , unless they were powerfully supported by
Elizabeth . LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.307

He applied to her in their favour : LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.308

to his surprise and distress he found her irresolute .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.309

The queen hated the principles of Knox , and the fanaticism of his
disciples : LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.310

she deemed it unworthy of a crowned head to foment rebellion among the
subjects of a neighbouring and friendly sovereign :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.311

and she respected the oaths which she had so recently taken , to
preserve the peace with the queen of Scots , and to refuse an asylum to
all Scottish rebels and traitors . LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.312

But the sophistry of Cecil had prepared answers to every objection .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.313

The queen of England , had , he maintained , a better right to the
superiority over Scotland , than Mary had to the possession of the
Scottish crown : LINGARD-1823-2,7,374.314

it was not a question between subjects and their natural prince , in
which a foreign power had no right to interfere ; but between vassals
and the mesne lord , in which the superior was bound in <P_7,375> honour
and conscience to defend the liberties of the former against the tyranny
of the latter . LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.315

In the present case , however , self-preservation , a principle
paramount to every other motive , concurred with the duty of Elizabeth .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.316

The French king looked on the queen as illegitimate ,
LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.317

and esteemed his own wife the rightful heir to the English crown .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.318

Were he permitted to retain a footing in Scotland , Elizabeth could
never enjoy security . LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.319

Were he expelled by her aid , she would attach the Scots to her
interests , LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.320

and might despise the efforts of her enemies . LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.321

This appeal to her apprehensions and jealousy , extorted from the queen
a reluctant and qualified assent . LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.322

To deceive the public , the earl of Northumberland , sir James Sadler ,
and sir James Croft , were appointed to reform the disorders in the
Scottish marches . LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.323

But the religion of Northumberland , who was a catholic , rendered him
unfit to be intrusted with the real object of the commission .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.324

His colleagues alone were admitted into the secret .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,375.325

They received instructions to urge the Scots to the resumption of
hostilities ; to supply them with money ; to promise them every kind of
aid , which could be furnished without a manifest breach of the peace
<P_7,376> between the two queens ; and to induce them , if it were
possible to depose Mary , and transfer the crown to the house of
Hamilton . LINGARD-1823-2,7,376.326

The duke of Chastelherault , indeed , the head of that house , had
hitherto been faithful to the cause of his sovereign :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,376.327

but his weakness , inconstancy , and ambition were well known :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,376.328

there could be no doubt that his allegiance would yield to the
temptation of a crown for his descendants ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,376.329

and with that view it was resolved to hasten the return to Scotland of
his eldest son , now called the earl of Arran .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,376.330

Arran , who had lately imbibed the new doctrines , <P_7,377> served in
the French army as colonel of the Scottish guards ,
LINGARD-1823-2,7,377.331

and , in that capacity was considered an honourable hostage for the
loyalty of his father . LINGARD-1823-2,7,377.332

Henry II. had summoned him to attend his duty at the intended marriages
of the French princesses to the king of Spain , and the duke of Savoy :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,377.333

but Arran , having sent an apology for his absence , suddenly
disappeared , at the suggestion , it was believed , and with the aid of
Throckmorton , the English ambassador . LINGARD-1823-2,7,377.334

It was in vain that the police endeavoured to trace the footsteps of the
fugitive : LINGARD-1823-2,7,377.335

Throckmorton's agents accompanied or followed him to Geneva , whence he
wrote a letter expressive of his gratitude to the queen of England .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,377.336

From Geneva he came in great privacy to London ;
LINGARD-1823-2,7,377.337

was admitted to a secret <P_7,378> interview with Elizabeth , and to
several conferences with Cecil ; LINGARD-1823-2,7,378.338

and then continued his journey in disguise , under the assumed name of
Beaufort till , with the assistance of Sadler and Croft , he reached his
father's castle of Hamilton . LINGARD-1823-2,7,378.339

Previously to his arrival , the English commissioners , had successfully
laboured to rekindle the flames of civil war . LINGARD-1823-2,7,378.340

They had represented to the lords of the congregation the justice of
their cause , which had for its object , " to extirpe idolatrie , and
delyuer their country from foreign gouernment : " the advantage they
might derive from the willingness of the Queen of England to afford them
assistance ; and the folly of postponing the attempt , till the regent
should have acquired a decided superiority by the aid of her brother of
the house of Guise . LINGARD-1823-2,7,378.341

At the same time the report , that it was intended to annex Scotland as
a province to France , made a deep impression on the public mind :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,378.342

a promise of neutrality was obtained from the duke of Chastelherault :
LINGARD-1823-2,7,378.343

and several catholic lords engaged to draw their swords in defence of
the liberties of their country . LINGARD-1823-2,7,378.344

A resolution was now taken to rise in arms , and to justify the measure
by charging the regent with two breaches of the capitulation of
Edinburgh : 1=o=. by having ordered mass to be celebrated in Holyrood
house ; and 2=o=. by having received reinforcements from France .
LINGARD-1823-2,7,378.345

At this moment , Arran , whose arrival had been <P_379> hitherto
concealed , made himself known . LINGARD-1823-2,379.346

He was received with honours not due to a subject .
LINGARD-1823-2,379.347

His unexpected appearance , the report that he was the destined husband
of the queen of England , and the seasonable distribution of
two_thousand pounds , advanced by Sadler , elevated the hopes of the
associated lords . LINGARD-1823-2,379.348

On the other hand , the queen regent assumed a tone of confidence and
superiority . {TEXT:,} LINGARD-1823-2,379.349

She offered peace , on the basis of real liberty of conscience ;
LINGARD-1823-2,379.350

and summoned her opponents to meet La Brosse and the bishop of Amiens ,
who had been furnished with full powers for that purpose .
LINGARD-1823-2,379.351

But at the same time she informed them of her resolution and ability to
maintain the rights of her daughter ; LINGARD-1823-2,379.352

ordered the town and harbour of Leith to be fortified ;
LINGARD-1823-2,379.353

and boasted of the veterans who had lately arrived under Octaviano , a
Milanese adventurer , and of the still more numerous force which she
expected under her brother , the marquess d'Elboeuf .
LINGARD-1823-2,379.354

Her offer was , however , rejected : LINGARD-1823-2,379.355

the duke openly joined the congregation ; LINGARD-1823-2,379.356

and the abbeys of Paislow , Kilwinning , and <P_380> Dunfermlin , were
dissolved . LINGARD-1823-2,380.357

But the impatience of Sadler and Croft wished for open hostilities .
LINGARD-1823-2,380.358

They complained of the sluggishness of the confederates :
LINGARD-1823-2,380.359

and Knox , to aid their efforts , forged a letter from France to the
lord James , prior of St. Andrew's , painting in the most vivid colours
the danger of further procrastination . LINGARD-1823-2,380.360

At length the insurgents moved in considerable force towards Edinburgh ,
while the royalists retired within their intrenchments at Leith .
LINGARD-1823-2,380.361

In the capital two councils were formed , the one under the presidency
of Chastelherault , for the dispatch of political business , the other
under that of Knox , for the regulation of spiritual concerns .
LINGARD-1823-2,380.362

The first pronounced it expedient , the second lawful , to take from the
regent the exercise of her authority : LINGARD-1823-2,380.363

her deprivation was proclaimed by sound of trumpet :
LINGARD-1823-2,380.364

and she herself , as well as her aiders and abettors , were declared
enemies to the country . LINGARD-1823-2,380.365

This was the first step towards the accomplishment of the plan devised
by Cecil : LINGARD-1823-2,380.366

the second , if no reverse had followed , would have been to disown the
authority of the sovereign . LINGARD-1823-2,380.367

<P_381>

The queen regent was still supported by the earl of Huntley , lord
chancellor , by the earls Marischal and Bothwell , and by most of the
bishops . LINGARD-1823-2,381.369

Her force amounted to between two and three_thousand veterans , Scots
and Frenchmen , whose superior discipline and experience rendered them
more than a match for the bravery and enthusiasm of the ten_thousand men
, led by the chiefs of the congregation , the duke , the lord James ,
and the earls of Arran , Glencairn , Cassilis , Monteith , and Eglinton
. LINGARD-1823-2,381.370

In an attack on the intrenchments at Leith , the latter were repulsed
with some loss . LINGARD-1823-2,381.371

Instead of condoling , Sadler and Croft rejoiced at their misfortune .
LINGARD-1823-2,381.372

" The affray , " they exclaimed , " is begun : LINGARD-1823-2,381.373

blood has at last flowed , LINGARD-1823-2,381.374

and it will be long before it can be staunched . "
LINGARD-1823-2,381.375

But in Knox and Cecil it created a well-founded doubt of the ultimate
result . LINGARD-1823-2,381.376

Knox , in the most urgent terms , demanded the aid of two_thousand
English troops : LINGARD-1823-2,381.377

and , anticipating the objection which might be drawn from the existence
of peace between the two crowns , suggested that they should serve as
volunteers , in apparent opposition to the will of their sovereign ,
<P_382> and under a sentence of outlawry and treason .
LINGARD-1823-2,382.378

But Cecil though he knew the " the Scots could clyme no wall ; " dared
not recommend so hypocritical a measure . LINGARD-1823-2,382.379

He served a mistress , who , to use his own expression , " if today she
was more than man , would to-morrow be less than woman . "
LINGARD-1823-2,382.380

Elizabeth was imperious , but inconstant ; jealous of her own safety ,
but also jealous of her reputation : willing to injure , by every means
in her power , a rival queen , but unwilling to be considered by the
world as the abettor of insurrection and treason .
LINGARD-1823-2,382.381

Hitherto she had been induced to approve of his connexion with the Scots
: LINGARD-1823-2,382.382

but it had required all the arts of the minister , all the intrigues of
his confidential friends , to keep her steady to his purpose .
LINGARD-1823-2,382.383

Among these friends , the most useful was Throckmorton , the ambassador
in France , who by transmitting reports often apocryphal , almost always
exaggerated , and by suggesting as from himself to Cecil that advice ,
which Cecil dared not openly tender to the queen , had succeeded in
confirming her jealousy , and keeping alive her apprehensions .
LINGARD-1823-2,382.384

Now he solicited and obtained the permission to return <P_383> home ,
ostensibly to visit his wife , who lay dangerously ill , in reality to
communicate to his sovereign secrets , which he dared not commit to
paper . LINGARD-1823-2,383.385

What these secrets were , we shall afterwards learn .
LINGARD-1823-2,383.386

The result of his representations was , that the queen , on the ground "
that it was true , that whensoever the French should make an end with
Scotland , they would begin with England , " authorized Cecil to aid the
lords of the congregation with advice and money .
LINGARD-1823-2,383.387

For his greater security , she signed the warrant :
LINGARD-1823-2,383.388

and the few counsellors , who were in the secret , witnessed her
signature . LINGARD-1823-2,383.389

The next posts , however , brought the most perplexing intelligence .
LINGARD-1823-2,383.390

The Scots had attacked the enemy near Restalrig .
LINGARD-1823-2,383.391

They were received with equal courage and superior skill ;
LINGARD-1823-2,383.392

and after a sharp skirmish , had fled into the city .
LINGARD-1823-2,383.393

Though their loss did not exceed a_hundred men ; though Knox had
summoned them to the church , to hear the " promises of God ; " though
the royalists had returned to their intrenchments at <P_384> Leith ; yet
a sudden panic diffused itself through the capital :
LINGARD-1823-2,384.394

the pulpit of the apostle was deserted ; LINGARD-1823-2,384.395

the leaders shared in the consternation with their followers ;
LINGARD-1823-2,384.396

and before midnight the road to Linlithgow was covered with fugitives of
every description . LINGARD-1823-2,384.397

The darkness added to their terrors : LINGARD-1823-2,384.398

they persuaded themselves that the French gens d'armes were pursuing at
their heels ; LINGARD-1823-2,384.399

nor did they slacken their speed till they had reached Stirling , a
distance of thirty miles . LINGARD-1823-2,384.400

Both saints and warriors were overwhelmed with shame and despondency :
LINGARD-1823-2,384.401

but Knox displayed his wonted confidence , LINGARD-1823-2,384.402

and resumed the sermon which had been interrupted by their flight from
Edinburgh . LINGARD-1823-2,384.403

Why , he asked , had the army of God quailed before the uncircumcised
Philistines ? LINGARD-1823-2,384.404

It was on account of their sins ; of the ambition of this chieftain ; of
the avarice of another ; of the lewdness of a third , and of the
presumption and pusillanimity of all . LINGARD-1823-2,384.405

But let them only turn to the Lord ; let them acknowledge their
sinfulness and insufficiency ; and the tribes of Israel would again
prevail over the recreant Benjamites ; LINGARD-1823-2,384.406

the eternal truth of the eternal God would triumph over the efforts of
idolatry and superstition . LINGARD-1823-2,384.407

His eloquence rekindled the fanaticism and the hopes of his hearers :
LINGARD-1823-2,384.408

and the lords , though from the highest to the lowest they had
individually smarted under the lash of his invective , tolerated the
<P_383> boldness of the apostle for the benefit of that influence which
he exercised over their followers . LINGARD-1823-2,383.409

This intelligence , though it checked the exultation , invigorated the
efforts , of Cecil . LINGARD-1823-2,383.410

After a struggle of two days his influence in the English cabinet
prevailed . LINGARD-1823-2,383.411

The Scots were urged to proceed with their enterprise :
LINGARD-1823-2,383.412

they received promises of money to pay , and of officers to discipline ,
their forces : LINGARD-1823-2,383.413

and were assured that a fleet should be equipped to intercept all
communication between Leith and France ; and that an army should be
stationed on the borders , to avail itself of the first favourable
opportunity to espouse their cause . LINGARD-1823-2,383.414

In return it was required that they should send to London an accredited
agent with a petition for support , that the queen might afterwards have
some instrument to produce in justification of her conduct .
LINGARD-1823-2,383.415

The person chosen for this office was the younger Maitland , of
Lethington , a statesman of great abilities , who had been secretary to
the queen regent , but lately deserting to the congregationists , had
betrayed to them the secrets of his mistress . LINGARD-1823-2,383.416

Maitland came clandestinely to London ; LINGARD-1823-2,383.417

presented to Elizabeth a <P_384> petition , which had been previously
composed by Cecil and approved by herself ; LINGARD-1823-2,384.418

and , when she asked him for a pledge of the fidelity of his employers ,
offered her the selection of six out of twelve hostages , the children
of the first families in Scotland . LINGARD-1823-2,384.419

It chanced that one morning , at an early hour , Maitland was seen to
enter the lodgings of Throckmorton . LINGARD-1823-2,384.420

The circumstance awakened the suspicion of Gilles de Noailles , the
French <P_385> ambassador , who immediately demanded , both from the
queen and from the council , an explanation of the warlike preparations
in the river and in the northern counties . LINGARD-1823-2,385.421

Elizabeth assured him of her determination to maintain the peace of
Cateau : LINGARD-1823-2,385.422

and as a proof of her sincerity , wished that the curse of heaven might
light on the head of that prince , who should be the first to violate it
. LINGARD-1823-2,385.423

The council replied , that Francis and Mary , by assuming the style and
arms of England , had furnished ample ground for apprehension : and that
while the French monarch continued to recruit his forces , both at home
and in Scotland , they should be wanting in their duty , if they did not
advise the queen to prepare for the defence of her own dominions .
LINGARD-1823-2,385.424

Noailles , however , was not deceived . LINGARD-1823-2,385.425

He denounced the hostile intention of the English cabinet to his
sovereign , and to the queen regent of Scotland .
LINGARD-1823-2,385.426

The associated lords , encouraged by the sermons of Knox , and the
assurances of Cecil , had called a general meeting at Stirling .
LINGARD-1823-2,385.427

But Stirling was suddenly taken by a detachment from the garrison of
Leith . LINGARD-1823-2,385.428

Thence the royalists penetrated into Fifeshire , burning the houses ,
and ravaging the lands of their adversaries . LINGARD-1823-2,385.429

The flames spread to Kinghorn , Kirkcaldy , and Dysart .
LINGARD-1823-2,385.430

Arran and the lord James were compelled to shrink from the approach of a
superior <P_388> enemy ; LINGARD-1823-2,388.431

and the repeated promises of succour from England , by daily adding to
their disappointment , added to their distress . LINGARD-1823-2,388.432

At length the royalists , followed at a distance by Arran , directed
their march to St. Andrew's ; LINGARD-1823-2,388.433

and were winding round the promontory of Kingcraig , when a fleet in the
offing was descried advancing with crowded sails towards the shore .
LINGARD-1823-2,388.434

