<BEGIN_long-1866-1>

<P_2,76>

<heading>

Chapter VII . LONG-1866-1,2,76.4

The Second Slave War in Sicily . LONG-1866-1,2,76.5

B. C. 105 - 99 . LONG-1866-1,2,76.6

<$$heading>

The chief authority for the second slave war in Sicily is Diodorus ,
whose narrative is very sober and circumstantial . LONG-1866-1,2,76.8

He connects the origin of this insurrection with the execution by the
governor P. Licinius Nerva of the senate's order <paren> chap. iii.
<$$paren> made on the occasion of the answer of king Nicomedes II. to
the demand for soldiers to assist the Romans . LONG-1866-1,2,76.9

Diodorus was a native of Sicily , LONG-1866-1,2,76.10

and he may have had good opportunities of getting information about both
the slave wars . LONG-1866-1,2,76.11

It is certain that he took some pains with this part of his general
history . LONG-1866-1,2,76.12

Dion Cassius says nothing about the order of the senate ,
LONG-1866-1,2,76.13

but he makes another and a very improbable statement in his own peculiar
style . LONG-1866-1,2,76.14

P. Licinius Nerva hearing that the slaves were not fairly treated in
some matters , or being moved by a desire of gain , for he was not above
taking a bribe , sent round notice to all the slaves who had any cause
of complaint against their masters , LONG-1866-1,2,76.15

and promised that he would relieve them . LONG-1866-1,2,76.16

The slaves came in great numbers , some to complain of their wrongs ,
and others to make charges against their masters , LONG-1866-1,2,76.17

for they all thought that the time was arrived for safely accomplishing
what they wished . LONG-1866-1,2,76.18

The masters combined to resist the slaves LONG-1866-1,2,76.19

and did not yield . LONG-1866-1,2,76.20

Nerva being afraid of both parties , and seeing that he might be in
danger from those who were defeated in the appeal to him , refused to
listen to any of the slaves . LONG-1866-1,2,76.21

He sent them away with some assurance or comfort that they should suffer
no wrong for the future , or with the hope that when they were dispersed
, <P_2,77> they could make no further disturbance . LONG-1866-1,2,77.22

But the slaves now feared their masters against whom they had made
charges , LONG-1866-1,2,77.23

and forming themselves into bands they turned to robbery .
LONG-1866-1,2,77.24

Whatever truth may be hid under this statement of the origin of the
insurrection we can@ @not determine . LONG-1866-1,2,77.25

The following is the more simple and probable story of Diodorus .
LONG-1866-1,2,77.26

When the senate had passed the decree that no ally of the Romans should
be kept in slavery and that the governors of the provinces should look
after this matter , the governor of Sicily P. Licinius Nerva released
many men from servitude after inquiring into their case .
LONG-1866-1,2,77.27

In a few days more than eight_hundred men were declared free .
LONG-1866-1,2,77.28

This gave all the slaves in Sicily hopes of recovering their freedom ,
though the grounds on which a few were released could not apply to all .
LONG-1866-1,2,77.29

Those slave-owners who had influence urged the governor to stop his
proceedings ; LONG-1866-1,2,77.30

and either because he was bribed , or for other better reasons , Nerva
put a stop to all further investigation into the cases of those who
claimed their freedom , LONG-1866-1,2,77.31

and told the men to go back to their masters . LONG-1866-1,2,77.32

Upon this the slaves left Syracuse , where we must suppose that the
governor was then residing , LONG-1866-1,2,77.33

and flying to the asylum of the Palici began to think of revolt .
LONG-1866-1,2,77.34

The lake of the Palici is a small pond , once probably a volcanic crater
, in the interior of Sicily and west of Leontini , sacred to the
Sicilian deities named Palici . LONG-1866-1,2,77.35

The lake is now the Lago di Naftia . LONG-1866-1,2,77.36

There was here a consecrated piece of ground with a temple , to which
slaves used to fly when they were badly used , LONG-1866-1,2,77.37

and the masters could not forcibly take them away . LONG-1866-1,2,77.38

Accordingly runaway slaves stayed there , LONG-1866-1,2,77.39

and were of course maintained by the guardians of the temple , until the
masters came to reasonable terms with the slaves and confirmed the
agreement by a solemn oath , which no master was ever known to have
violated . LONG-1866-1,2,77.40

The fear of the deities of the place secured the performance of the oath
; LONG-1866-1,2,77.41

for divine vengeance soon followed an act of perjury .
LONG-1866-1,2,77.42

Some perjurers had been deprived of their sight on the spot .
LONG-1866-1,2,77.43

Thus superstition had its uses . LONG-1866-1,2,77.44

The rising began with thirty slaves belonging to two brothers who were
rich . LONG-1866-1,2,77.45

The insurgents were headed by a slave named Oarius .
LONG-1866-1,2,77.46

The men murdered their masters by <P_2,78> night in their sleep ,
LONG-1866-1,2,78.47

and then went to the neighbouring plantations to stir up the other
slaves . LONG-1866-1,2,78.48

In this first night the number of the insurgents was increased to
one_hundred_and_twenty . LONG-1866-1,2,78.49

They seized a strong place , which they made still more secure ,
LONG-1866-1,2,78.50

and they gained an accession of eighty armed men . LONG-1866-1,2,78.51

Nerva was soon on the spot , LONG-1866-1,2,78.52

but as he was not strong enough to take the place , he employed C.
Titinius Gadaeus to deceive the slaves . LONG-1866-1,2,78.53

This fellow had been condemned to death two years before ,
LONG-1866-1,2,78.54

but he escaped LONG-1866-1,2,78.55

and became a robber . LONG-1866-1,2,78.56

He had killed many free men , LONG-1866-1,2,78.57

but harmed none of the slaves . LONG-1866-1,2,78.58

Nerva promised Titinius a pardon , if he would help him in his designs .
LONG-1866-1,2,78.59

The robber , with some slaves whom he could trust , came up to the place
professing his wish to join the rebels . LONG-1866-1,2,78.60

He was let in , chosen the leader of the slaves , LONG-1866-1,2,78.61

and he betrayed them . LONG-1866-1,2,78.62

Some of the insurgents fought till they were killed ,
LONG-1866-1,2,78.63

and others threw themselves down the precipices . LONG-1866-1,2,78.64

This was the end of the first rising . LONG-1866-1,2,78.65

As soon as the soldiers of Nerva had returned to their homes , news came
that the slaves of a Roman Eques P. Clonius had murdered their master
and were forming a large body of insurgents . LONG-1866-1,2,78.66

The governor misled by advice and having his men dispersed gave the
slaves time to strengthen themselves . LONG-1866-1,2,78.67

However with such force as he could collect he set out ,
LONG-1866-1,2,78.68

crossed a river which Diodorus names Alba , LONG-1866-1,2,78.69

and passing by the rebels who were posted on a hill named Caprianus he
came to Heraclea , a town on the south coast near the mouth of the river
Halycus <paren> Platani <$$paren> . LONG-1866-1,2,78.70

The river Alba is not mentioned , I believe , by any other writer ,
LONG-1866-1,2,78.71

but it is very probably the river Allava in the Antonine Itinerary .
LONG-1866-1,2,78.72

If the governor crossed this river before reaching Heraclea , it must be
a stream east of Heraclea , LONG-1866-1,2,78.73

but some geographers have identified the Allava with a river west of
Heraclea . LONG-1866-1,2,78.74

As the governor did not attack the slaves , they thought that he was
afraid , LONG-1866-1,2,78.75

and they stirred up others to join them , LONG-1866-1,2,78.76

and soon mustered two_thousand . LONG-1866-1,2,78.77

The governor , who still shut himself up in Heraclea , hearing of this
increase of the insurgents appointed M. Titinius to command six_hundred
men taken from the garrison of Henna . LONG-1866-1,2,78.78

Titinius attacked the slaves , LONG-1866-1,2,78.79

but they had the advantage of numbers and position .
LONG-1866-1,2,78.80

Many <P_2,79> of the men of Titinius were killed , LONG-1866-1,2,79.81

and the rest threw away their arms , which the rebels picked up .
LONG-1866-1,2,79.82

This success brought on a general rising , LONG-1866-1,2,79.83

and in a few days there were above six_thousand slaves in arms .
LONG-1866-1,2,79.84

The rebels elected for their king a slave named Salvius , who was
supposed to be skilled in divination . LONG-1866-1,2,79.85

He had also been accustomed to accompany the women in their Bacchic
ceremonials . LONG-1866-1,2,79.86

The king kept his men away from the towns for fear of their being
corrupted by idleness and luxury . LONG-1866-1,2,79.87

He made three divisions of his troops with a commander for each ,
LONG-1866-1,2,79.88

and he ordered them to scour the country and meet at a certain place and
time . LONG-1866-1,2,79.89

Salvius was thus supplied with beasts and horses , LONG-1866-1,2,79.90

and he was able to muster above two_thousand mounted men , and
twenty_thousand foot soldiers trained to military exercise .
LONG-1866-1,2,79.91

With this force Salvius suddenly fell on the strong town of Morgantine
or Morgantia . LONG-1866-1,2,79.92

The situation of this place is not certainly known , LONG-1866-1,2,79.93

but it was probably somewhere in the valley of the Symaethus <paren>
Simeto <$$paren> . LONG-1866-1,2,79.94

The governor advanced by night to the relief of the place with about
ten_thousand men , Italian Greeks and Sicilians . LONG-1866-1,2,79.95

Finding the rebels engaged about Morgantia he attacked their camp ,
which was guarded by a few rebels , and filled with captured women and
booty . LONG-1866-1,2,79.96

He easily got possession of the camp LONG-1866-1,2,79.97

and then moved on to Morgantia . LONG-1866-1,2,79.98

But the rebels , who were in a strong position , attacked the governor
with great fury , LONG-1866-1,2,79.99

and his army was routed . LONG-1866-1,2,79.100

Salvius made proclamation that no enemy should be killed , if he threw
down his arms . LONG-1866-1,2,79.101

This stratagem was successful . LONG-1866-1,2,79.102

The governor's men threw away their weapons , LONG-1866-1,2,79.103

and Salvius not only recovered his camp , LONG-1866-1,2,79.104

but got a great supply of arms . LONG-1866-1,2,79.105

The governor lost about six_hundred men , LONG-1866-1,2,79.106

and four_thousand were made prisoners . LONG-1866-1,2,79.107

This success brought Salvius many fresh recruits , LONG-1866-1,2,79.108

and he was now master of all the open country . LONG-1866-1,2,79.109

He again began the siege of Morgantia , LONG-1866-1,2,79.110

and made proclamation that he would give liberty to all the slaves in it
. LONG-1866-1,2,79.111

But the masters in Morgantia made the same promise to their slaves , if
they would fight in defence of the town , LONG-1866-1,2,79.112

and the slaves accepted the offer of their masters ,
LONG-1866-1,2,79.113

and bravely repelled the rebels . LONG-1866-1,2,79.114

The Roman governor however revoked the promise of freedom which had
<P_2,80> been made to the slaves of Morgantia , LONG-1866-1,2,80.115

and many of them went over to the insurgents . LONG-1866-1,2,80.116

There was also a rising of the slaves in the west part of the island ,
about Segeste and Lilybaeum <paren> Marsala <$$paren> , and other
neighbouring parts . LONG-1866-1,2,80.117

The leader was Athenion , a Cilician born , and the bailiff of two rich
brothers . LONG-1866-1,2,80.118

He was a man of courage LONG-1866-1,2,80.119

and could read the stars . LONG-1866-1,2,80.120

He first persuaded the slaves who were under him , about two_hundred ,
to rise , and then the slaves on adjoining farms . LONG-1866-1,2,80.121

In five days he had above a_thousand men . LONG-1866-1,2,80.122

Athenion was chosen king LONG-1866-1,2,80.123

and he assumed the diadem . LONG-1866-1,2,80.124

His conduct was different from that of all the other rebels .
LONG-1866-1,2,80.125

He made soldiers only of the best of his men . LONG-1866-1,2,80.126

He compelled the rest to remain at their work and supply the wants of
the fighters . LONG-1866-1,2,80.127

He pretended to learn from the stars that he should be king of all
Sicily , LONG-1866-1,2,80.128

and he told his men that they must spare the land with the animals and
the produce on it , LONG-1866-1,2,80.129

for every thing was theirs . LONG-1866-1,2,80.130

When he had got together above ten_thousand men , he began the siege of
Lilybaeum , LONG-1866-1,2,80.131

but as he made no progress in the siege he determined to withdraw ,
LONG-1866-1,2,80.132

and he told his men that he was obeying the command of the gods , who
said that if they persisted in the siege , they would have bad luck .
LONG-1866-1,2,80.133

While Athenion was preparing to retire , some vessels arrived at
Lilybaeum bringing a picked body of Mauri , who had been sent to relieve
the town under a commander named Gomon . LONG-1866-1,2,80.134

As Athenion's soldiers were making their retreat by night , Gomon and
his Mauri suddenly fell upon them , LONG-1866-1,2,80.135

and killed and wounded many of the rebels , who were amazed at the
accuracy of Athenion's predictions . LONG-1866-1,2,80.136

Sicily was in a most wretched condition . LONG-1866-1,2,80.137

It was overrun by revolted slaves , and plundered by the poor freemen ,
who had no means of subsistence , LONG-1866-1,2,80.138

for the insurrection had deranged all regular industry .
LONG-1866-1,2,80.139

These people formed bands LONG-1866-1,2,80.140

and spread all over the country : LONG-1866-1,2,80.141

they drove off the cattle , LONG-1866-1,2,80.142

robbed the granaries , LONG-1866-1,2,80.143

and murdered all who came in their way , both free and slave , that
there might be none to give evidence against them .
LONG-1866-1,2,80.144

There was anarchy literally , LONG-1866-1,2,80.145

for the Romans did not maintain the authority of the law ,
LONG-1866-1,2,80.146

and every man did just what he liked . LONG-1866-1,2,80.147

Those , who were once the rich and <P_2,81> the chief persons in the
towns , lost all that they had in the country , LONG-1866-1,2,81.148

and they were compelled to submit to the insolence of the free poor .
LONG-1866-1,2,81.149

The slaves were in possession of all the lands of their former masters ,
whose bad treatment they did not forget , LONG-1866-1,2,81.150

and though they had got more than ever they expected , they were not
satisfied . LONG-1866-1,2,81.151

The slaves in the towns were all disposed to revolt ,
LONG-1866-1,2,81.152

and though they could be kept in check by the combination of the masters
, they were a cause of continual uneasiness and alarm to them .
LONG-1866-1,2,81.153

Salvius after his failure on Morgantia overran the country as far as the
rich corn plains of Leontini <paren> Lentini <$$paren> , which are north
of Syracuse . LONG-1866-1,2,81.154

He had now thirty_thousand good soldiers . LONG-1866-1,2,81.155

As a thanksgiving for his success he sacrificed to the Palici
LONG-1866-1,2,81.156

and dedicated to them a purple robe . LONG-1866-1,2,81.157

He assumed the name of Tryphon , the same name as that of the man who
had usurped the throne of Syria in B. C. 142 ; LONG-1866-1,2,81.158

and in this he followed the example of the slave king Eunous , who took
the name of Antiochus <paren> vol. i. , {TEXT:vol.,_i.} p. 120
<$$paren> . LONG-1866-1,2,81.159

No reason is given by Diodorus for Tryphon leaving the east side of the
island and establishing himself in the west , LONG-1866-1,2,81.160

but we may conjecture that as he had failed before Morgantia , and there
were on the east side of Sicily the large cities Messana , Catana ,
Syracuse , and others , the new king did not feel quite safe there .
LONG-1866-1,2,81.161

Tryphon having moved westward , summoned Athenion to come to him , as a
king would summon one of his generals . LONG-1866-1,2,81.162

It was expected that this order would make a division between the rebel
chiefs , and so the insurrection would be easily broken .
LONG-1866-1,2,81.163

But Fortune , a goddess who played a great part in Roman history , made
the two leaders agree , as if she were purposely increasing the slave
power . LONG-1866-1,2,81.164

Tryphon came to Triocala with all his force , LONG-1866-1,2,81.165

and Athenion joined him with three_thousand men , having sent the rest
to overrun the country and stir up the slaves to revolt .
LONG-1866-1,2,81.166

But Tryphon , suspecting that Athenion would take some opportunity to
attack him , put his general in prison . LONG-1866-1,2,81.167

Triocala , which Tryphon chose for his royal residence , was naturally a
strong place . LONG-1866-1,2,81.168

It was so called , as people said , but perhaps they did not say true ,
because it possessed three good things , abundance of excellent water ,
a territory rich <P_2,82> in wine , oil , and grain , and perfect
security , LONG-1866-1,2,82.169

for it was a large impregnable rock . LONG-1866-1,2,82.170

Tryphon surrounded the place with a wall eight stadia in circuit , and a
deep ditch . LONG-1866-1,2,82.171

He filled the town with abundant supplies , LONG-1866-1,2,82.172

and built for himself a palace , and a large Agora or public place for
the use of the citizens . LONG-1866-1,2,82.173

If he formed a council of the wisest men , as Diodorus reports , he
acted like a wise man himself ; LONG-1866-1,2,82.174

but if he also assumed the purple robe of royalty , as we are told , and
went abroad preceded by lictors with axes , and in every thing aped a
king , we must suppose that he was a vain silly fellow :
LONG-1866-1,2,82.175

for though the outward signs of power dazzle and delude mankind , and so
far are useful to kings , they are not worth much unless power has a
sure foundation , LONG-1866-1,2,82.176

and Tryphon could hardly yet believe that he had established a royal
dynasty . LONG-1866-1,2,82.177

In the interior about twelve miles from Sciacca , the site of the hot
springs of Selinus , there is a place named Calatabellotta , a town of
Saracen origin , as the name shows . LONG-1866-1,2,82.178

The position of Triocala is supposed to be near Calatabellotta ,
LONG-1866-1,2,82.179

and if it be true that there was an old church here which had the name
Triocala , that is some confirmation of the conjecture ;
LONG-1866-1,2,82.180

but there is no direct evidence which enables us to determine the
position of Tryphon's royal residence . LONG-1866-1,2,82.181

The Roman Senate sent L. Licinius Lucullus into Sicily with an army of
fourteen_thousand Romans and Italians , besides eight_hundred Bithynians
, Thessalians , and Acarnanians , and six_hundred men from Lucania
commanded by Cleptius , a skilful and brave man . LONG-1866-1,2,82.182

There were also six_hundred other soldiers , LONG-1866-1,2,82.183

and so the whole force was sixteen_thousand , or seventeen_thousand as
Diodorus has it , by some error in some of the numbers .
LONG-1866-1,2,82.184

This force was sufficient to crush a servile insurrection if the men had
been good for any thing , LONG-1866-1,2,82.185

but Rome now felt her weakness in a matter where all nations suffer who
are always at war . LONG-1866-1,2,82.186

She wanted men . LONG-1866-1,2,82.187

When the news came to Rome , says Diodorus , of many thousand slaves
having risen in Sicily , the Romans were in great trouble ,
LONG-1866-1,2,82.188

for they had lost near sixty_thousand of their best soldiers in the
fight with the Cimbri in Gallia , LONG-1866-1,2,82.189

and they had no reserves of well-tried soldiers . LONG-1866-1,2,82.190

Diodorus is here evidently alluding to the defeat of Mallius Maximus
<P_2,83> and Caepio in B. C. 105 , LONG-1866-1,2,83.191

and he means that the Sicilian insurrection began soon after .
LONG-1866-1,2,83.192

This is consistent with his narrative about Tryphon's movements and the
fortification of Triocala by the slave king . LONG-1866-1,2,83.193

As Lucullus was succeeded by C. Servilius , and Servilius was succeeded
in B. C. 101 by Aquillius , the year in which Lucullus was sent to
Sicily was B. C. 103 , if Lucullus and Servilius each had his year of
command , as we must assume . LONG-1866-1,2,83.194

But the allusion to the defeat of Mallius Maximus and Caepio shows that
the island was in a state of insurrection two years before ,
LONG-1866-1,2,83.195

and the Romans had done nothing effectual to put it down .
LONG-1866-1,2,83.196

Tryphon took Athenion out of prison to advise with him about the war .
LONG-1866-1,2,83.197

The king thought of standing a siege in Triocala , LONG-1866-1,2,83.198

but Athenion persuaded him not to shut himself up to be blockaded , but
to fight in the open field , LONG-1866-1,2,83.199

and the advice was good . LONG-1866-1,2,83.200

The rebel king posted himself near a place named Scirthaea with
forty_thousand men , about twelve stadia from the Roman camp .
LONG-1866-1,2,83.201

The battle was well contested , LONG-1866-1,2,83.202

and there was great loss on both sides . LONG-1866-1,2,83.203

Athenion with two_hundred picked horsemen about him covered the ground
with the dead bodies of the enemy , till at last he was disabled by
wounds , LONG-1866-1,2,83.204

and then the rebels turned their backs , LONG-1866-1,2,83.205

and Tryphon fled with them . LONG-1866-1,2,83.206

Athenion lay as if he were dead , LONG-1866-1,2,83.207

and made his escape from the field when night came .
LONG-1866-1,2,83.208

The Romans had a decisive victory LONG-1866-1,2,83.209

and killed twenty_thousand of the rebels , exactly half their force .
LONG-1866-1,2,83.210

The rest escaped during the night to Triocala , LONG-1866-1,2,83.211

and it would have been easy , says Diodorus , for Lucullus to have
pursued and killed all the rebels . LONG-1866-1,2,83.212

But the loss of the Romans also may have been very large ,
LONG-1866-1,2,83.213

and Diodorus , or the authority that he followed , could have only a
feeble conception of the difficulty after a hard day's fight of
slaughtering twenty_thousand men who were retreating in the dark through
a country which they knew better than the Romans . LONG-1866-1,2,83.214

The rebels were so dispirited by this defeat that many of them thought
of returning to their masters and submitting , LONG-1866-1,2,83.215

but the opinion of the braver part prevailed , who resolved to fight to
the last rather than surrender . LONG-1866-1,2,83.216

Lucullus did not appear before Triocala until the ninth day after the
battle . LONG-1866-1,2,83.217

He began the siege , LONG-1866-1,2,83.218

but retired after suffering some <P_2,84> loss , LONG-1866-1,2,84.219

and the rebels recovered their courage . LONG-1866-1,2,84.220

Lucullus was blamed for not doing all that he ought to have done ,
either through want of activity or because he was bribed .
LONG-1866-1,2,84.221

It is not easy to suggest how he was bribed , LONG-1866-1,2,84.222

but it is very easy to believe that his sixteen_thousand men reduced in
numbers by a hard-fought battle were not a match for the rebels .
LONG-1866-1,2,84.223

However he was prosecuted on his return to Rome . LONG-1866-1,2,84.224

The charge against him was Peculatus or the unlawful appropriation of
public property , as some authorities say . LONG-1866-1,2,84.225

But a more serious offence is implied in a fragment of Diodorus , where
it is said that when C. Servilius had crossed the straits to supersede
him , Lucullus disbanded his men , and burnt his military material ,
with the intention of depriving his successor of the means of carrying
on the war . LONG-1866-1,2,84.226

Such treason , which would be impossible in any well-regulated state ,
is almost incredible even in the Roman Commonwealth at that time ;
LONG-1866-1,2,84.227

but if it is possible , it could only happen in a government where place
depends on a popular vote . LONG-1866-1,2,84.228

However we must conclude that Lucullus merited some punishment for his
conduct in Sicily , or that party spirit and popular clamour were strong
against him . LONG-1866-1,2,84.229

Lucullus was married to a sister of Q. Metellus Numidicus , consul B.
C. 109 , LONG-1866-1,2,84.230

but Metellus refused to say any thing in favour of his brother-in-law .
LONG-1866-1,2,84.231

The prosecutor was an augur named Servilius . LONG-1866-1,2,84.232

Lucullus retired from Rome into exile . LONG-1866-1,2,84.233

Metellus himself left Rome in B. C. 100 , LONG-1866-1,2,84.234

and therefore Lucullus was either prosecuted in that year before
Metellus went away , LONG-1866-1,2,84.235

or the prosecution took place after the return of Metellus to Rome ,
which was in B. C. 99 . LONG-1866-1,2,84.236

Caius Servilius , as Diodorus names him , succeeded Lucullus in Sicily .
LONG-1866-1,2,84.237

Tryphon died , LONG-1866-1,2,84.238

and Athenion taking his place prosecuted the war . LONG-1866-1,2,84.239

He besieged cities LONG-1866-1,2,84.240

and overran the country with impunity , LONG-1866-1,2,84.241

for Servilius did nothing . LONG-1866-1,2,84.242

Florus states that Athenion took the camp of Servilius , an expression
which has no exact meaning . LONG-1866-1,2,84.243

He also speaks of Lucullus' camp having been taken ,
LONG-1866-1,2,84.244

but he mentions it after the capture of Servilius' camp .
LONG-1866-1,2,84.245

The name of Tryphon is not mentioned by Florus . LONG-1866-1,2,84.246

His brief narrative of the second Sicilian slave war is contained in a
few sentences , such as historical epitomators write who have a
rhetorical turn . LONG-1866-1,2,84.247

We <P_2,85> may probably refer to the year of Servilius the attack of
Athenion on Messana . LONG-1866-1,2,85.248

The inhabitants of this town , which is naturally strong , brought into
it all their moveables from the surrounding country ,
LONG-1866-1,2,85.249

and thought that they were quite safe . LONG-1866-1,2,85.250

But Athenion surprised the Messenians as they were celebrating a
festival in the suburbs , LONG-1866-1,2,85.251

killed many of them , LONG-1866-1,2,85.252

and very nearly took the town . LONG-1866-1,2,85.253

He then occupied a strong place named Macella , LONG-1866-1,2,85.254

and ravaged the territory of Messana . LONG-1866-1,2,85.255

Servilius , so far as we know , did nothing , LONG-1866-1,2,85.256

and when he returned to Rome he had the same fate as Lucullus .
LONG-1866-1,2,85.257

In the next year Marius was consul for the fifth time with M'Aquillius
{COM:sic} for his colleague , who is incorrectly named Caius in
Diodorus' text . LONG-1866-1,2,85.258

We thus determine accurately this year of the slave insurrection to be
B. C. 101 , LONG-1866-1,2,85.259

for Aquillius was sent to Sicily , LONG-1866-1,2,85.260

and he stayed there till he finished the war . LONG-1866-1,2,85.261

Aquillius defeated the slaves in a great battle , in which he engaged in
single combat with Athenion and killed him . LONG-1866-1,2,85.262

Aquillius himself was wounded in the head . LONG-1866-1,2,85.263

After this defeat there were still ten_thousand slaves in arms ,
LONG-1866-1,2,85.264

but they fled to the strongholds in the island , which Aquillius took by
blockade . LONG-1866-1,2,85.265

There remained now only one_thousand rebels headed by a man named
Satyrus , LONG-1866-1,2,85.266

and Aquillius was preparing to attack them , when they surrendered .
LONG-1866-1,2,85.267

Aquillius took the men to Rome , where they were employed in fighting
with wild beasts to amuse the people , probably on the occasion of the
triumph of Aquillius , who had an ovation for his Sicilian victories .
LONG-1866-1,2,85.268

But some say that the prisoners made a glorious end ,
LONG-1866-1,2,85.269

for instead of fighting with the beasts , they turned on one another
with their arms till only one was left , whom Satyrus despatched and
then heroically killed himself . LONG-1866-1,2,85.270

" This , " says Diodorus , " was the tragical end of the Sicilian slave
war , after it had lasted near four years . " LONG-1866-1,2,85.271

When Diodorus says that the war lasted near four years , perhaps he
reckoned the commencement from the government of Lucullus in B. C. 103
; LONG-1866-1,2,85.272

for if Lucullus and Servilius had each a year in Sicily , and Manius
Aquillius finished the war in his proconsulship , we have four years of
war without including Nerva's administration of Sicily , which would be
in the year B. C. 104 . LONG-1866-1,2,85.273

Accordingly the slave war ended in B. C. 100 , unless <P_2,86> it was
in the second year of Aquillius' proconsulship that Satyrus surrendered
. LONG-1866-1,2,86.274

In Livy's Epitome <paren> 69 <$$paren> the termination of the slave war
is placed after the return of Metellus from exile in B. C. 99 ,
LONG-1866-1,2,86.275

and accordingly the slave war could not be ended earlier than this year
, if we may trust this evidence . LONG-1866-1,2,86.276

There is a passage of Posidonius , quoted by Athenaeus , in which it is
said that there was a rising of the slaves in Attica during the second
slave war in Sicily . LONG-1866-1,2,86.277

Orosius <paren> vol. i. , p. 122 <$$paren> has recorded a slave
revolt in Attica during the first Sicilian servile war .
LONG-1866-1,2,86.278

It is possible that Orosius has made a mistake about the time ,
LONG-1866-1,2,86.279

or there may have been two risings in Attica . LONG-1866-1,2,86.280

These slaves worked in the silver-mines in fetters LONG-1866-1,2,86.281

and had a hard lot . LONG-1866-1,2,86.282

Having killed their overseers they seized the citadel at Sunium
LONG-1866-1,2,86.283

and ravaged Attica for some time . LONG-1866-1,2,86.284

Caecilius of Calacte in Sicily , a rhetorician of the time of Augustus ,
wrote a work on the slave wars in Sicily , LONG-1866-1,2,86.285

and Athenaeus appears to quote him as the authority for the assertion
that above a_million slaves perished in these insurrections .
LONG-1866-1,2,86.286

Such extravagant numbers can@ @not be accepted as any thing else than
the expression of the fact that in these wars Sicily lost a great part
of the men whose labour enriched the island . LONG-1866-1,2,86.287

Caecilius , who was a contemporary of Diodorus , could not know more of
these rebellions than Diodorus did . LONG-1866-1,2,86.288

We shall hear little more about Sicily till we come to speak of the
famous prosecution of Verres the governor of Sicily by Cicero .
LONG-1866-1,2,86.289

The island recovered in some degree from the effects of this second
servile war before Verres plundered it . LONG-1866-1,2,86.290

An honourable governor was fortunately sent to Sicily after the
suppression of the revolt by Aquillius . LONG-1866-1,2,86.291

Diodorus names him Lucius Asyllius , which does not appear to be a
genuine Roman name . LONG-1866-1,2,86.292

Freinsheim assumes the true name to be L. Sempronius Asellio ,
LONG-1866-1,2,86.293

but I know no proof of this ; LONG-1866-1,2,86.294

and so we must be content with a short record of an honest governor ,
whose name can@ @not be ascertained . LONG-1866-1,2,86.295

This man found Sicily in a state of ruin , LONG-1866-1,2,86.296

and restored prosperity by his prudent administration , in which
Diodorus seems to think that he imitated the jurist Q. Mucius Scaevola
, who had administered <P_2,87> wisely and equitably the province of
Asia . LONG-1866-1,2,87.297

This Scaevola was governor of Asia in B. C. 94 , LONG-1866-1,2,87.298

and therefore Asellio , or whatever was his real name , was governor
after this date , according to the opinion of Diodorus .
LONG-1866-1,2,87.299

The governor of Sicily took with him as legatus and adviser Caius Longus
, his best friend , and an honest man . LONG-1866-1,2,87.300

He also was assisted by a Roman Eques , named only Publius by Diodorus ,
who was the chief of all the Roman Equites who resided in Syracuse ,
rich , generous , and of excellent character . LONG-1866-1,2,87.301

The governor resided close to his two friends , whose assistance he had
in restoring the administration of justice and in the general
improvement of the province . LONG-1866-1,2,87.302

He attempted to stop malicious informers and pettifoggers who make law
an instrument of oppression ; LONG-1866-1,2,87.303

and he took care to protect those who particularly require the
protection of the law , women and orphans . LONG-1866-1,2,87.304

It had been the custom of former governors , in accordance with Roman
practice , to appoint trustees and guardians for orphan children and for
women who had no kinsmen to protect their interests .
LONG-1866-1,2,87.305

The governor declared himself the guardian of all such women and
children , LONG-1866-1,2,87.306

and by his own inquiry and care he settled all disputed matters in which
they were interested , LONG-1866-1,2,87.307

and gave them relief against the oppression of unjust men .
LONG-1866-1,2,87.308

This declaration contained a principle which , if it was new in Sicily ,
was a great improvement . LONG-1866-1,2,87.309

The governor , who held in his hands the civil and military authority as
the representative of the Roman people , constituted his court the
general guardian of those who by reason of their age or sex required a
guardian . LONG-1866-1,2,87.310

We can hardly suppose that the court affected to look directly after the
administration of the estates of so many persons who might live far from
Syracuse , LONG-1866-1,2,87.311

but it assumed the power of calling to account all persons who in any
way managed or meddled in the affairs of orphans , and of women who had
no male kinsmen to protect them . LONG-1866-1,2,87.312

<P_2,88>

<heading>

Chapter VIII . LONG-1866-1,2,88.315

L. Licinius Crassus and M. Antonius . LONG-1866-1,2,88.316

<$$heading>

The great men of Rome were soldiers , lawyers , and orators , men
actively engaged in public affairs , not retired students or
philosophers . LONG-1866-1,2,88.318

The orators were not those who were only distinguished as speakers in
the Senate . LONG-1866-1,2,88.319

A Roman orator's great fame was acquired by popular harangues , by
speeches made either in the prosecution or defence of men charged
criminally , and on occasions when important questions of property were
in litigation . LONG-1866-1,2,88.320

The two most distinguished orators of this time were L. Licinius
Crassus and M. Antonius , both of whom have often been mentioned .
LONG-1866-1,2,88.321

Crassus , who came forward as a speaker when he was a very young man
<paren> vol. i. , p. 320 <$$paren> , was Quaestor probably in B. C.
109 , and in Asia , where he devoted himself still further to oratorical
studies under Metrodorus of Scepsis , a rhetorician of the Academy , of
whom Crassus had a high opinion . LONG-1866-1,2,88.322

Among the Romans a man did not attain to oratorical eminence without
long and laborious study . LONG-1866-1,2,88.323

It was not considered sufficient to speak much and often ,
LONG-1866-1,2,88.324

for though a man may thus acquire confidence and facility , his
confidence may have no sure foundation of knowledge ,
LONG-1866-1,2,88.325

and his facility may be a mere readiness in pouring out words , a
quality in which any sharp-tongued woman will excel him .
LONG-1866-1,2,88.326

It was the opinion of Crassus that men were deceived by the saying that
we learn to speak by speaking : LONG-1866-1,2,88.327

for most men in this way practise only their voice , and not even that
according to any principle ; LONG-1866-1,2,88.328

they practise their strength also LONG-1866-1,2,88.329

and acquire volubility of tongue , LONG-1866-1,2,88.330

and they are pleased with their abundant flow of words .
LONG-1866-1,2,88.331

But the true saying is , that by speaking <P_2,89> badly men very easily
learn to speak badly . LONG-1866-1,2,89.332

Speaking without preparation is useful , LONG-1866-1,2,89.333

but it is better to think well on the matter first and then to speak
with due preparation , and more exactness . LONG-1866-1,2,89.334

But the chief thing is to write much , LONG-1866-1,2,89.335

and that is a kind of labour which most people shun .
LONG-1866-1,2,89.336

Oratory accordingly has its rules and principles , LONG-1866-1,2,89.337

and it requires the discipline of training , that a man may avoid faults
and acquire the power of instructing , pleasing , and finally of
convincing , which is the purpose of the orator's art .
LONG-1866-1,2,89.338

The first teacher of Crassus was L. Caelius Antipater the historian ,
who was a good writer , considering the time when he lived , and a very
excellent lawyer . LONG-1866-1,2,89.339

He had many pupils . LONG-1866-1,2,89.340

Crassus himself entered so early on his oratorical career that , as he
said himself , he had not often been a hearer of the learned men of his
time , LONG-1866-1,2,89.341

for he was always employed in the Forum , except during his absence from
Rome as quaestor . LONG-1866-1,2,89.342

But he availed himself of this opportunity , as we have seen ,
LONG-1866-1,2,89.343

and he learned to speak Greek so well , that you might have supposed
that he knew no other language . LONG-1866-1,2,89.344

But though Crassus could speak Greek , he did not affect to write Greek
. LONG-1866-1,2,89.345

He read the best Greek orators LONG-1866-1,2,89.346

and translated them into Latin when he was a young man ,
LONG-1866-1,2,89.347

and thus he learned to find appropriate words to express the meaning of
the original , LONG-1866-1,2,89.348

and sometimes he made new words in imitation of the Greek ,
LONG-1866-1,2,89.349

but he took care that they were such words as were fit for his purpose .
LONG-1866-1,2,89.350

Bishop Burnet observes in the preface to his translation of More's
Utopia that " the French took no ill method , when they intended to
reform and beautify their language , in setting their best writers on
work to translate the Greek and Latin authors into it . "
LONG-1866-1,2,89.351

These old French translators , of whom Amyot the translator of Plutarch
is one of the best , both improved their own language by these
translations , LONG-1866-1,2,89.352

and opened to their countrymen a new source of pleasure and improvement
by enabling them to read the works of antiquity . LONG-1866-1,2,89.353

North's translation of Amyot's version of Plutarch's Lives is one of the
best specimens of English style in the early part of the seventeenth
century . LONG-1866-1,2,89.354

On his return from Asia Crassus went through Macedonia <P_2,90> to
Athens , where he carefully read with Charmadas the Gorgias of Plato ,
in which dialogue he most admired that Plato while ridiculing orators
showed himself to be the greatest of orators . LONG-1866-1,2,90.355

He heard other philosophers and rhetoricians at Athens ,
LONG-1866-1,2,90.356

and he would have stayed longer , if he had not been vexed because the
Athenians would not repeat for his pleasure the mysteries , which had
been celebrated two days before the arrival of Crassus at Athens .
LONG-1866-1,2,90.357

M. Antonius used to read Greek authors as well as Latin in his
retirement at Misenum , LONG-1866-1,2,90.358

for he had little time at Rome . LONG-1866-1,2,90.359

He did not read for the direct purpose of improving himself in oratory ,
but for amusement . LONG-1866-1,2,90.360

He said that when he walked about in the sun , though he walked for
another purpose , still the natural consequence was that his complexion
got some colour , LONG-1866-1,2,90.361

and so he felt that his language was coloured by what he read .
LONG-1866-1,2,90.362

He also said that he could only understand those Greek writings , which
the writers intended to be understood by every body .
LONG-1866-1,2,90.363

When he met with the philosophers , who treated of virtue , justice ,
honesty <paren> in the Roman sense <$$paren> , pleasure , and the like ,
he found that he was only misled by the titles : LONG-1866-1,2,90.364

he could not understand a single word , so crabbed and concise were
these discussions . LONG-1866-1,2,90.365

He never attempted to read the Greek poets , LONG-1866-1,2,90.366

for they wrote almost in a different language . LONG-1866-1,2,90.367

His pleasure was in reading the historians or orators , or those who
wrote as if they wished to be understood by men like himself , who were
not among the very learned . LONG-1866-1,2,90.368

It was a common opinion , says Cicero , when he was a boy that L.
Crassus knew no more than what he acquired in his early education , and
that M. Antonius was altogether without learning .
LONG-1866-1,2,90.369

But Cicero even in his youth refuted these assertions on the authority
of his father , of C. Aculeo the husband of his mother's sister , and
of his uncle L. Cicero , who accompanied Antonius to Cilicia , and
often spoke to his nephew about the pursuits and acquirements of this
great orator . LONG-1866-1,2,90.370

Cicero , his brother Quintus , and his cousins , the sons of Aculeo ,
followed a course of instruction which was recommended by Crassus , and
under the same teachers that Crassus <P_2,91> had ; LONG-1866-1,2,91.371

and so Cicero had the opportunity of knowing , and even as a boy could
judge how well Crassus spoke Greek ; LONG-1866-1,2,91.372

and he used to observe that he would put such questions to Cicero's
teachers , and in his conversation make such remarks as showed that
nothing was new or strange to him . LONG-1866-1,2,91.373

Antonius also had opportunities of improving himself during his
quaestorship in Asia <paren> B. C. 113 <$$paren> , and again when he
had the province of Cilicia <paren> B. C. 103 <$$paren> .
LONG-1866-1,2,91.374

He visited Athens on his way to Cilicia , LONG-1866-1,2,91.375

and had daily conversation with the most learned men there .
LONG-1866-1,2,91.376

He had also the same opportunities at Rhodes . LONG-1866-1,2,91.377

Cicero , when he was a very young man , knew Antonius ,
LONG-1866-1,2,91.378

and often used to put questions to him , so far as proper respect to so
distinguished a man would allow . LONG-1866-1,2,91.379

Cicero in his treatise on the Orator , the best of all his writings ,
attempted to expound the opinions of Crassus and Antonius about the
principles of their art , and to preserve as far as he could the memory
of these two illustrious Romans . LONG-1866-1,2,91.380

This would hardly have been necessary , he says , if these orators could
have been estimated by their writings ; LONG-1866-1,2,91.381

but Crassus wrote little , LONG-1866-1,2,91.382

or at least very little of his writings had been preserved ,
LONG-1866-1,2,91.383

and that little was written when Crassus was a young man .
LONG-1866-1,2,91.384

Antonius wrote nothing except a short treatise on oratory of no value ,
LONG-1866-1,2,91.385

and he was sorry that ever he wrote it . LONG-1866-1,2,91.386

Cicero retained a lively remembrance of these great orators ,
LONG-1866-1,2,91.387

and he thought it his duty to make their fame imperishable , as far as
he could . LONG-1866-1,2,91.388

If he had been writing about the orators Servius Galba <paren> vol. i.
, p. 22 <$$paren> or C. Carbo , he says that he might have invented ,
if he chose , LONG-1866-1,2,91.389

for there was nobody living who could contradict him ;
LONG-1866-1,2,91.390

but when he wrote of Crassus and Antonius , he was writing of orators
whom many of his readers had often heard . LONG-1866-1,2,91.391

The style of these two men was very different . LONG-1866-1,2,91.392

Crassus was dignified , LONG-1866-1,2,91.393

and yet he could be humorous and witty . LONG-1866-1,2,91.394

His language was studiously elegant , LONG-1866-1,2,91.395

but there was no appearance of effort . LONG-1866-1,2,91.396

His sentences were short . LONG-1866-1,2,91.397

He stated a case clearly , LONG-1866-1,2,91.398

and when he was arguing a legal question or treating of principles of
equity , he was fertile in argument and in discovering points of
similarity . LONG-1866-1,2,91.399

He had little action , little variety in his tone ; LONG-1866-1,2,91.400

he never moved about as some <P_2,92> orators did , LONG-1866-1,2,92.401

and seldom stamped his foot . LONG-1866-1,2,92.402

But sometimes his language was vehement , LONG-1866-1,2,92.403

and expressed passion and indignation . LONG-1866-1,2,92.404

Cicero informs us that he was a very ornate speaker , and yet he spoke
with great brevity ; LONG-1866-1,2,92.405

and this is a rare combination . LONG-1866-1,2,92.406

In sharp answers and repartee he had no equal , LONG-1866-1,2,92.407

and he knew how to deal with a witness and to draw him on to make
admissions . LONG-1866-1,2,92.408

A man named Silus had given evidence against Piso the client of Crassus
: LONG-1866-1,2,92.409

it was hearsay evidence , which the Romans allowed , but they did not
overvalue it . LONG-1866-1,2,92.410

Crassus in his cross-examination of Silus said to him : It is possible ,
Silus , that the man from whom you say that you heard this said it in a
passion . LONG-1866-1,2,92.411

Silus assented . LONG-1866-1,2,92.412

It is possible too , continued Crassus , that you may have misunderstood
him . LONG-1866-1,2,92.413

Silus admitted this by such a ready nod of his head as to put himself
altogether in the hands of Crassus . LONG-1866-1,2,92.414

It is possible too , said Crassus , that you never heard at all what you
say that you did hear . LONG-1866-1,2,92.415

This unexpected conclusion brought on a burst of laughter which put an
end to the evidence of Silus . LONG-1866-1,2,92.416

Crassus was engaged in all kinds of cases , LONG-1866-1,2,92.417

and , as we have seen , very soon attained the highest rank among the
orators of Rome . LONG-1866-1,2,92.418

Most of the short fragments of his speeches are from orations delivered
in the senate and in public assemblies ; LONG-1866-1,2,92.419

and this was the kind of oratory in which he excelled .
LONG-1866-1,2,92.420

Antonius was a forensic orator , LONG-1866-1,2,92.421

and perhaps there has never been his equal . LONG-1866-1,2,92.422

When he spoke , he had all his matter at command , LONG-1866-1,2,92.423

and he put every thing in the right place , where it would be most
effective . LONG-1866-1,2,92.424

He had a very great memory , and no appearance of preparation .
LONG-1866-1,2,92.425

His style was not exactly what could be called the most elegant ,
LONG-1866-1,2,92.426

but in the selection of his words , their position and combination in a
period , he had always in view a principle and some reference to art ,
which indeed was much more apparent in the embellishment and the turn of
the thought than in the expression . LONG-1866-1,2,92.427

Besides these great qualities , his action was peculiarly his own ;
LONG-1866-1,2,92.428

and if we distribute action into gesture and voice , we may say that his
gesture was not that which merely expressed what words might say ,
LONG-1866-1,2,92.429

but it was in perfect harmony with the thought - the hands , the motion
<P_2,93> of the shoulders and sides , the stamping of the foot , the
stationary attitude , the gait , and every movement .
LONG-1866-1,2,93.430

His voice was steady and uniform , but naturally rather harsh .
LONG-1866-1,2,93.431

This accomplished advocate was powerful , vehement , passionate ; always
well prepared and fortified in every part of his case .
LONG-1866-1,2,93.432

Vigorous , acute , and perfectly clear , he would dwell on the strong
points of his case : LONG-1866-1,2,93.433

when he was hard pressed by his opponent , he would retire with a good
grace , LONG-1866-1,2,93.434

but he followed up every advantage with energy ; LONG-1866-1,2,93.435

he could inspire terror , move compassion , and employ all the endless
variety of speech without ever wearying his hearers .
LONG-1866-1,2,93.436

Antonius tells us himself , or Cicero tells us for him , how he used to
manage a case . LONG-1866-1,2,93.437

He concludes with a remark which may be useful : LONG-1866-1,2,93.438

an advocate should ever be on his guard , LONG-1866-1,2,93.439

and Antonius was particularly anxious on this head , not so much to
attempt to strengthen his case , as to take care that he did not injure
it . LONG-1866-1,2,93.440

A man must of course try to do both , LONG-1866-1,2,93.441

but it is much more disgraceful to an advocate to damage his case than
not to improve it . <paren> De Orat. ii. 72 . <$$paren>
LONG-1866-1,2,93.442

Crassus and Antonius were sometimes opposed , as in the case of C.
Sergius Orata . LONG-1866-1,2,93.443

M. Marius Gratidianus had sold to Orata a house which he had bought
from Orata a few years before . LONG-1866-1,2,93.444

This house was subject to a Servitus , as the Romans named it , which
means that the enjoyment of the ownership of the property was limited by
a right which the owner of some adjacent property had with respect to
the house of Marius , such , for instance , as a right to the passage of
the rain-water through the premises of Marius , or any other right which
comes under the head of Servitus . LONG-1866-1,2,93.445

Marius had not mentioned this Servitus in the conditions of sale ,
LONG-1866-1,2,93.446

and Orata brought an action against him for damages , probably .
LONG-1866-1,2,93.447

Crassus was the advocate of Orata , LONG-1866-1,2,93.448

and Antonius was for Marius . LONG-1866-1,2,93.449

It was purely a legal question . LONG-1866-1,2,93.450

Crassus maintained the strict legal right of Orata ; that as the vendor
had not mentioned this Servitus , which impaired the value of the
property sold , he was bound to make compensation .
LONG-1866-1,2,93.451

Antonius in reply urged what the Romans called ' aequitas ' or fair
dealing : LONG-1866-1,2,93.452

this Servitus was not unknown to Orata , LONG-1866-1,2,93.453

for he had first sold the house to Marius , LONG-1866-1,2,93.454

and there was therefore no <P_2,94> occasion for Marius to mention it ,
LONG-1866-1,2,94.455

and Orata was not deceived , LONG-1866-1,2,94.456

for he knew that the property was subject to a Servitus .
LONG-1866-1,2,94.457

The question was whether the letter of the law should prevail or the
meaning of the rule of law . LONG-1866-1,2,94.458

Antonius had the right side to defend . LONG-1866-1,2,94.459

It was the rule of law that no defect should be concealed from the buyer
of a thing , LONG-1866-1,2,94.460

and here there was no concealment , LONG-1866-1,2,94.461

for the purchaser Orata knew that the property was subject to a Servitus
. LONG-1866-1,2,94.462

Still there was something to say on the side of the literal
interpretation of the rule , that all defects in a thing known to the
seller should be declared to the purchaser . LONG-1866-1,2,94.463

But when we look to the purpose of the suit , whether it was to rescind
the contract or to claim damages , we are at a loss to know what kind of
an argument Crassus would make , LONG-1866-1,2,94.464

for his client had suffered no damage by the informality in the terms of
sale . LONG-1866-1,2,94.465

This is an instance of the kind of questions that arose sometimes even
among so practical a people as the Romans . LONG-1866-1,2,94.466

Roman usage separated the office of ' jurisconsultus ' or lawyer from
that of ' orator ' or advocate . LONG-1866-1,2,94.467

The lawyer was often no speaker , LONG-1866-1,2,94.468

and the speaker often knew little of law , though he knew enough to
argue a legal question , or at least he was able to master so much of
the law as each case required . LONG-1866-1,2,94.469

It was the orator's business to deal with direct evidence and to
establish facts , or where the evidence was defective , to draw probable
conclusions . LONG-1866-1,2,94.470

The application of the law when the facts were ascertained would not
generally be difficult , LONG-1866-1,2,94.471

for most questions , however complicated they seem , may be reduced to a
simple form ; LONG-1866-1,2,94.472

and as the wise know , it is not so much the uncertainty of law that we
have to complain of , as the difficulty of establishing the facts to
which the law may be applied . LONG-1866-1,2,94.473

Orata was a man fond of good living and a friend of Crassus , who had
also a taste for luxury , LONG-1866-1,2,94.474

and possessed a splendid house on the Palatine hill .
LONG-1866-1,2,94.475

In order to be less dependent on the winds and waves , Orata had made
salt ponds for various kinds of fish , LONG-1866-1,2,94.476

and whatever the weather was , his table was always well supplied .
LONG-1866-1,2,94.477

He had also erected spacious and lofty buildings on the shores of the
salt lagoon <P_2,95> named the Lucrine Lake , for the purpose of
breeding oysters . LONG-1866-1,2,95.478

But the lagoon was public property and let to a Publicanus or public
contractor , named Considius , who complained of Orata's encroachments
on the lagoon , and brought an action against him .
LONG-1866-1,2,95.479

Crassus was on this occasion the advocate of his friend Orata .
LONG-1866-1,2,95.480

There is a fragment of Diodorus on the increase of luxury at Rome ,
which may be fitly introduced here , though we are not quite certain
what chronological place it occupied in his history .
LONG-1866-1,2,95.481

He begins with speaking of those old times , such as people now-a-days
talk of , when the Romans had good principles and good habits , by which
they slowly increased in power till they attained the most glorious and
extensive dominion that any nation ever had . LONG-1866-1,2,95.482

But in more recent times , after subduing most nations and enjoying long
peace , they changed their old frugal habits for a pestilent rivalry .
LONG-1866-1,2,95.483

As the wars ceased , the young men fell into habits of luxury and
intemperance , LONG-1866-1,2,95.484

and wealth supplied them with the means of gratifying their desires .
LONG-1866-1,2,95.485

Men began to prefer the costly to the simple , and an indolent life to
the study of the military art . LONG-1866-1,2,95.486

A man was considered fortunate by the vulgar not for possessing merit ,
but for enjoying through life the pleasures that he liked best .
LONG-1866-1,2,95.487

Accordingly expensive dinners became the fashion , and rare scents , and
rich coverings for couches with patterns of flowers , and furniture
ornamented with silver and ivory and all other costly materials , on
which the artist's most elaborate skill was displayed .
LONG-1866-1,2,95.488

Wines which gave a moderate degree of satisfaction to the taste were
rejected , LONG-1866-1,2,95.489

and only Falernian and Chian , and other wines of equal quality were
used . LONG-1866-1,2,95.490

Of fish too and other things for the table those which had the highest
repute for pleasing the palate were freely consumed .
LONG-1866-1,2,95.491

The young men used to go about the Forum wearing clothes remarkable for
their softness , so thin that the form could be seen through them , and
in fineness like women's dresses . LONG-1866-1,2,95.492

Now as there was a demand for every thing that contributed to enjoyment
and pestilent display , the prices of all such things rose to an
incredible height . LONG-1866-1,2,95.493

A jar of wine was sold for a_hundred denarii , and a jar of salt fish
from the Euxine at four_hundred . LONG-1866-1,2,95.494

Such cooks as <P_2,96> excelled in the art of preparing dishes sold for
four talents ; LONG-1866-1,2,96.495

and slaves remarkable for their beauty were purchased at the price of
many talents . LONG-1866-1,2,96.496

The picture is naturally drawn , and true for all time .
LONG-1866-1,2,96.497

When a nation is in the enjoyment of peace and is growing rich , the
corruption of manners inevitably follows . LONG-1866-1,2,96.498

But the prosperity of Rome had a less stable foundation than that of
modern states , in which wealth is founded on industry , and on the
inventive powers by which the labour of man is made more productive .
LONG-1866-1,2,96.499

Yet even in modern states , where the opportunities of growing rich by
successful enterprise and industry far exceed all the means which the
Romans had at their command , society does not escape the evil which is
ever mixed with that which we call good . LONG-1866-1,2,96.500

The luxurious habits of the rich are seen and known :
LONG-1866-1,2,96.501

wealth is coveted by coarse and sensual men because it supplies the
means of pleasure ; LONG-1866-1,2,96.502

and those who can@ @not grow rich honestly attempt to accomplish their
end by extravagant speculations and by fraud . LONG-1866-1,2,96.503

The few who by ability , self-denial , and hard labour win their way to
wealth , often foolishly aspire to establish a family which shall not
exist by the same virtues which the founder practised , but shall be
supported in idleness by the produce of the ancestor's labour .
LONG-1866-1,2,96.504

The young are proud of the place to which a father's ability has raised
them . LONG-1866-1,2,96.505

They have done nothing to serve mankind , or even to serve themselves ,
LONG-1866-1,2,96.506

and they spend in riot and intemperance that which another has earned .
LONG-1866-1,2,96.507

The mischief does not end here . LONG-1866-1,2,96.508

Their companions , whose fathers have been less successful in gaining
wealth or have had nobler objects in view , imitate the bad example .
LONG-1866-1,2,96.509

They wish to do as the rich do : LONG-1866-1,2,96.510

they would enjoy before they have laboured ; LONG-1866-1,2,96.511

and so kicking against the law by which society exists , they bring ruin
on themselves and often on others . LONG-1866-1,2,96.512

Thus even the wealthiest and most fortunate of our modern societies
consist of one set of men , who have laboured for their own good and
that of their country , and of another set , who will not labour , but
are mean enough to live on those who have done the work .
LONG-1866-1,2,96.513

Thus society is cursed with a number of pestilent fellows , devourers of
substance , lazy , mean , and ever on the watch to get by <P_2,97>
borrowing , by begging , or by fraud , that which others have got by
labour . LONG-1866-1,2,97.514

The evil increases till it breaks out in crime , and even threatens
revolution . LONG-1866-1,2,97.515

The evil is manifest . LONG-1866-1,2,97.516

The remedy is a return to plainer ways of living , to a simpler life ;
and an inexorable resolution on the part of those , whom knaves disturb
, to crush them by any severity that is necessary to clear the world of
those who prey upon it . LONG-1866-1,2,97.517

<P_2,98>

<heading>

Chapter IX . LONG-1866-1,2,98.520

The Lex Servilia of C. Servilius Glaucia . LONG-1866-1,2,98.521

<$$heading>

The date of this Lex can@ @not be accurately ascertained , because we
can@ @not determine in what year C. Servilius Glaucia was tribune .
LONG-1866-1,2,98.523

Glaucia was praetor in the sixth consulship of Marius B. C. 100 , in
which year he lost his life in a riot . LONG-1866-1,2,98.524

As the Lex Servilia of Caepio was enacted in B. C. 106 <paren> p. 3
<$$paren> , and the Lex Servilia of Glaucia was later , we must place it
between B. C. 106 and B. C. 100 . LONG-1866-1,2,98.525

It has sometimes been assigned to B. C. 100 , LONG-1866-1,2,98.526

but in that year Glaucia was praetor , LONG-1866-1,2,98.527

and , as Klenze remarks , it was usual up to the time of Sulla for
popular measures to be enacted by the Comitia Tributa and to be proposed
only by tribunes . LONG-1866-1,2,98.528

Glaucia is enumerated by Cicero among the " seditiosi " or disturbers of
the public peace . LONG-1866-1,2,98.529

He was the greatest knave ever known , if we accept Cicero's opinion ,
who compares him to the Athenian Hyperbolus , a man who has a bad
character in the contemporary Attic writers . LONG-1866-1,2,98.530

Glaucia was very sharp and cunning , and witty enough to make his
hearers laugh . LONG-1866-1,2,98.531

With these qualifications he rose from the lowest condition to the
praetorship , LONG-1866-1,2,98.532

and he would have been elected consul for the next year , if there had
not been two obstacles or perhaps only one . LONG-1866-1,2,98.533

There was a law , the Lex Villia , which prevented a man from being a
candidate while he held an office , LONG-1866-1,2,98.534

but this law had been violated repeatedly in the case of C. Marius ,
LONG-1866-1,2,98.535

and it might have been violated again , if the career of Glaucia had not
been cut short in his praetorship . LONG-1866-1,2,98.536

He had gained the favour of the common sort by qualities which they
could appreciate , LONG-1866-1,2,98.537

and he had secured the support <P_2,99> of the equestrian order by
carrying a law which restored to them the judicial office and the
consequent political influence of which the Equites had been deprived by
the Lex Servilia of Caepio . LONG-1866-1,2,99.538

Such a man was qualified to rise in a corrupted state , where office is
conferred by the popular vote . LONG-1866-1,2,99.539

His cunning and his jokes , his low origin and his coarseness would have
floated him into power by the suffrage of his admiring fellow-citizens .
LONG-1866-1,2,99.540

The fragments of the Lex Servilia have been put together , restored and
explained by C. A. C. Klenze , Berlin , 1825 . LONG-1866-1,2,99.541

The tablet , of which the present fragments are part , contained on one
side the Lex Servilia , and on the other the Lex Thoria <paren> vol. i.
, p. 355 <$$paren> . LONG-1866-1,2,99.542

Bluhme examined the existing fragments of this bronze tablet at Naples ,
and Klenze those at Vienna . LONG-1866-1,2,99.543

Both agree that the whole tablet was originally made and adapted to
receive the Servilia Lex only , and that the Thoria was afterwards
written on the back of the bronze . LONG-1866-1,2,99.544

The face , on which the Servilia is cut , is smoothed and polished :
LONG-1866-1,2,99.545

the back is rough like those bronzes which are written only on one side
. LONG-1866-1,2,99.546

The letters of the Servilia are well formed and regular :
LONG-1866-1,2,99.547

those of the Thoria are very irregular , some large and others small ,
LONG-1866-1,2,99.548

and the lines are generally oblique and unequal . LONG-1866-1,2,99.549

This is not the only example of a bronze tablet written on both sides .
LONG-1866-1,2,99.550

With the aid of Klenze's valuable restoration of the text of the
Servilia and his notes we now know something of the Servilia Lex of
Glaucia , and of the constitution of the courts for the trial of the
offence named Repetundae <paren> vol. i. , p. 25 <$$paren> .
LONG-1866-1,2,99.551

The first Lex on Pecuniae Repetundae was that of L. Calpurnius Piso ,
LONG-1866-1,2,99.552

the next was that of M. Junius , LONG-1866-1,2,99.553

and the third was that of C. Servilius Glaucia . LONG-1866-1,2,99.554

In the fragments of the Servilia Lex no laws are mentioned except the
Calpurnia and the Junia , LONG-1866-1,2,99.555

and we know nothing at all about the Junia . LONG-1866-1,2,99.556

The Servilia was followed by the law of M'Acilius Glabrio , then by the
Cornelia of the Dictator L. Cornelius Sulla , and last of all by the
Julia enacted in the first consulship of C. Julius Caesar B. C. 59 .
LONG-1866-1,2,99.557

All these Leges dealt with a matter which was a fruitful cause of
discord in the declining Roman state . LONG-1866-1,2,99.558

