<BEGIN_loudon-1806-2>

<P_253>

<heading>

Book I . LOUDON-1806-2,253.4

Part V . LOUDON-1806-2,253.5

Useful or culinary gardening . LOUDON-1806-2,253.6

Introduction . LOUDON-1806-2,253.7

<$$heading>

Horticulture may be subdivided into culinary or useful gardening ,
including the production of fruits and vegetables for the kitchen ;
ornamental gardening , including the production of vegetables for show ,
beauty , and amusement , as parterres or flower gardens , or instruction
, as in botanic gardening ; and , nursery gardening , which comprehends
every thing relating to propagating and rearing either trees , shrubs ,
or plants . LOUDON-1806-2,253.9

Culinary gardening , the branch to be here considered , is separated
from Agriculture on the one hand , only by the difference in the
implements used for cultivation ; and from Ornamental and Nursery
gardening on the other , by the difference <P_254> between the objects
in view . LOUDON-1806-2,254.10

All the operations of this mode of cultivating the earth being manual ,
on a limited scale , and more interesting to individuals , it is thence
calculated to effect the highest degree of vegetable produce from a
given surface . LOUDON-1806-2,254.11

Culinary productions being more or less requisite for every state of
society , as well as for every family , are peculiarly so for the
wealthy and independent ; LOUDON-1806-2,254.12

and thus , in ages of general ignorance and barbarism , gardening might
exist in considerable perfection from the encouragement given to it by
the chiefs or nobles . LOUDON-1806-2,254.13

Hence it has been generally better understood than agriculture ,
LOUDON-1806-2,254.14

and hence also agriculture has derived many of its greatest improvements
from gardening . LOUDON-1806-2,254.15

The theory of gardening , like every other branch of husbandry , is
derived from the study of nature ; either simply , as from the
observation of the three kingdoms ; or abstractedly , from chemical or
mechanical experiments . LOUDON-1806-2,254.16

Having made some remarks on these subjects in the general introduction
to husbandry , I shall , without farther preamble , proceed to glance
over some of the principal topics in this branch of it : - without a
full and practical knowledge of which , I am well convinced , it is
impossible for a designer to understand the art of laying out a kitchen
garden . LOUDON-1806-2,254.17

<P_255>

The remarks offered will be included under the following heads : 1. Of
the cultivation of the soil . 2. Of the culture of herbaceous
vegetables . 3. Of the culture of fruit trees and fruit shrubs . 4.
Of the culture of culinary exotics . 5. Of forcing vegetables into a
state of growth , so as to produce fruit at particular or unnatural
seasons . 6. Of the construction of hot-houses , hot-walls , pits ,
hot-beds , and mushroom-houses . 7. Of the other buildings requisite
for a kitchen garden . 8. Of the formation of orchards ; and , 9. Of
the general formation of a garden . LOUDON-1806-2,255.19

<P_256>

<heading>

Chapter I . LOUDON-1806-2,256.22

Of the cultivation of the soil . LOUDON-1806-2,256.23

<$$heading>

Without making any remarks on draining , clearing of incumbrances , or
any of the first improvements of the soil , I proceed to pulverization ,
which in horticulture is performed chiefly by the spade , with the
occasional assistance of the mattock . LOUDON-1806-2,256.25

On the surface , it is performed by the hoe and the rake , as in
destroying weeds , or in stirring the earth about the roots of young
vegetables . LOUDON-1806-2,256.26

Pulverization is also much promoted by frost , as in ground laid up in
ridges ; and by the alternate effects of heat and rain , as in that dug
or trenched during the summer months . LOUDON-1806-2,256.27

In manuring garden grounds , composts are preferable , or at least
putrescent manure in the last stage of decomposition ;
LOUDON-1806-2,256.28

when rank or new , it never fails to give a peculiar and disagreeable
taste both to the roots and leaves of culinary vegetables .
LOUDON-1806-2,256.29

This every one must have experienced in early potatoes , or such as are
raised on what are called <font> lazybeds <$$font> .
LOUDON-1806-2,256.30

It is to be regretted for the sake of agriculture , that kitchen gardens
require so large a proportion of manure . LOUDON-1806-2,256.31

The scheme of cultivating <P_257> most of the summer crops of greens and
roots in the fields , and of resting the soil , as to be afterwards
proposed , it is thought will tend to counteract this evil .
LOUDON-1806-2,257.32

In many places where peat moss abounds , considerable advantage may be
obtained by mixing a quantity of that material with the stable dung used
for making up hotbeds . LOUDON-1806-2,257.33

Resting or refreshing garden soil is a species of cultivation which is
performed two ways . LOUDON-1806-2,257.34

The first is , by sowing a certain portion every year with corn and
grass seeds , letting it remain under the last for three or more years ,
and then breaking it up again . LOUDON-1806-2,257.35

This is a very beneficial plan , LOUDON-1806-2,257.36

and is advantageously practised by most market-gardeners , who use the
corn or grass so raised for their cattle . LOUDON-1806-2,257.37

In gentlemen's gardens , care should be taken never to let the grass run
to seed , as is sometimes done in the market-garden ;
LOUDON-1806-2,257.38

but in other respects the general practice should be performed in the
same manner . LOUDON-1806-2,257.39

By sowing and laying down a certain quantity annually , a similar
quantity may be broken up : LOUDON-1806-2,257.40

this will consequently afford so much fresh soil every year , upon which
such crops as answer best on new land , as onions , carrots , and indeed
most garden crops , may be raised . LOUDON-1806-2,257.41

The second mode was invented by Mr. Walter Nicol , who <P_258> may be
ranked among the best culinary gardeners that Scotland ever produced .
LOUDON-1806-2,258.42

It is excellently adapted for producing the same effect as above ,
LOUDON-1806-2,258.43

and should be used jointly with it ; by which means a large portion of
fresh surface soil would every year be obtained . LOUDON-1806-2,258.44

As this practice is not much known in England , I shall give the
directions for performing it in Mr. Nicol's own words .
LOUDON-1806-2,258.45

" Take three crops off the first surface , LOUDON-1806-2,258.46

then trench three spit deep , by which the bottom and top is reversed ,
and the middle remains in the middle ; LOUDON-1806-2,258.47

take three crops of this surface , LOUDON-1806-2,258.48

and then trench two spit deep , by which the top becomes the middle and
the middle the top ; LOUDON-1806-2,258.49

take also three crops off this surface , LOUDON-1806-2,258.50

and then trench three spit deep , whereby that which was last the middle
, and now the top , becomes the bottom ; and that which is now the
bottom , and was the surface at first , now becomes surface again ,
after having rested six years . LOUDON-1806-2,258.51

Proceed in this manner alternately ; the one time trenching two spit
deep , and the other three ; by which means the surface will always be
changed , and will rest six years and produce three .
LOUDON-1806-2,258.52

Hence will there always be new soil on the garden for the production of
wholesome vegetables ; LOUDON-1806-2,258.53

and hence also will much less manure be required than when the soil is
shallow and the same surface constantly in crop . "
LOUDON-1806-2,258.54

Rotation is the species of cultivation next in importance .
LOUDON-1806-2,258.55

In managing it , the vegetables cultivated should be divided <P_259>
into classes according to their respective <font> natures <$$font> ,
<font> modes of culture <$$font> , and <font> duration <$$font> .
LOUDON-1806-2,259.56

With respect to <font> natures <$$font> , they may be divided into , 1.
Such as have ramose roots , as the cabbage , cauliflower , brocoli , &c.
2. Such as have fusiform roots , as the carrot , beet , parsnip , &c.
3. Such as are squamose , as the onion , leek , eschalot , &c. 4.
Such as are fibrous , as the lettuce , endive , &c. 5. Such as are
tuberose , as the potatoe , Jerusalem artichoke , &c.
LOUDON-1806-2,259.57

They may be also divided into such as partake of two of these divisions
, as the fusiform and fibrous , exemplified in the bean , pea ,
kidney-bean , spinach , &c. &c. LOUDON-1806-2,259.58

Some crops require to be cultivated in large quantities , as pease ,
turnips , onions ; others in small portions , as most salads and
pot-herbs . LOUDON-1806-2,259.59

Some require very rich soil , and generally manure previously to
planting or sowing , as celery , cauliflower , and leeks ;
LOUDON-1806-2,259.60

others require a tolerably rich soil , LOUDON-1806-2,259.61

but are much injured by manure immediately previous to their insertion ,
as carrot , beet , and most esculent roots of fusiform shapes .
LOUDON-1806-2,259.62

With respect to <font> modes of culture <$$font> , culinary vegetables
may be divided into , 1. Such as are sown upon the surface broadcast ,
as onions , turnips , spinach , &c. 2. Such as are sown or planted on
the surface , but in drills , as pease , beans , and potatoes . 3.
Such as are placed in hollow trenches , as celery , and sometimes
artichokes . 4. Such as are sown or raised on beds or ridges , as
asparagus , sea-cale , and frequently early crops of pease , &c.
LOUDON-1806-2,259.63

5. Some require <P_260> the soil to be often pulverized while growing ,
as potatoes , pease , and most drill crops ; LOUDON-1806-2,260.64

others admit of it but in a small degree , as onions , leeks , carrots ,
&c. LOUDON-1806-2,260.65

Some are occasionally and often materially injured by it , as
strawberries . LOUDON-1806-2,260.66

With respect to <font> duration <$$font> , some are sown and removed
within three months , as early crops of turnips , radishes , brassica
plants , for removal , &c. LOUDON-1806-2,260.67

others continue double that time , as onions and potatoes ; others
treble , as frequently brocoli , and cabbages ; LOUDON-1806-2,260.68

some continue two seasons , as parsley , fennel , &c. ; others for
several years , as strawberries , asparagus , artichokes , &c.
LOUDON-1806-2,260.69

A judicious gardener , by studying the above , and other divisions which
might be made , will thence contrive a proper succession of crops :
LOUDON-1806-2,260.70

thus celery , by being planted in hollow trenches , pulverizes the soil
in a high degree ; LOUDON-1806-2,260.71

by requiring a considerable quantity of manure , it enriches it ;
LOUDON-1806-2,260.72

both which properties are necessary for the production of plants of
large ramose or fasiculate roots , which penetrate deep into the soil ,
such as artichokes , scorzonera , asparagus , &c. LOUDON-1806-2,260.73

Again , these crops by remaining long on the soil afford , when removed
, an excellent situation for such as are more transitory , as pease ,
potatoes , &c. LOUDON-1806-2,260.74

Every experienced gardener knows that it is of the utmost importance to
study a proper rotation of crops ; LOUDON-1806-2,260.75

for the same thing happens in gardening as in agriculture ,
LOUDON-1806-2,260.76

whenever two or three of the same kind , or of the same natures , follow
<P_261> each other , they never fail to degenerate both in quantity and
quality . LOUDON-1806-2,261.77

The destruction of weeds is performed upon the same principles as in
agriculture ; LOUDON-1806-2,261.78

the only difference is in the application of labour , which here is
always manual , and is either by the spade , hoe , rake , weeding-iron ,
or by the hand . LOUDON-1806-2,261.79

But in gardening , if attention be paid to the fermenting of putrescent
manure , and spreading and exposing other composts before they are used
, and never letting any weeds perfect their seeds , there will be
comparatively little occasion for the operation . LOUDON-1806-2,261.80

These things , however , and particularly the preventing of weeds from
flowering , are too little attended to by most gardeners .
LOUDON-1806-2,261.81

It is true that , after all , the birds and the wind will continue to
distribute these enemies to cultivation ; LOUDON-1806-2,261.82

but their effects are as nothing when compared with those of
ill-fermented stable manure , and the seeds of such weeds as are
produced in the garden . LOUDON-1806-2,261.83

The destruction of vermin is an important branch of cultivation , that
in gardening , as in agriculture , is not well understood .
LOUDON-1806-2,261.84

Some are , after all that has been tried , best destroyed by gathering
with the hand as soon as they begin to appear , as the caterpillar tribe
; others by plentiful steaming , dew , or watering , as the aphis ;
others by tobacco smoke , as <P_262> the thripes ; others by
compositions of various kinds , such as soap-suds and sulphur ,
lime-water , &c. as the coccus , phalaena , &c. LOUDON-1806-2,262.85

Some are caught by artifice , as wasps , flies , mice , &c ;
LOUDON-1806-2,262.86

others are devoured by the introduction of other animals , as the grub
by the rook , the snail or worm by the duck or gull , &c.
LOUDON-1806-2,262.87

Blight is most probably produced by insects , LOUDON-1806-2,262.88

or is rather a collection of small insects ; LOUDON-1806-2,262.89

sometimes it is removed by changing the situation of vegetables , and
removing them to a more open exposure ; at other times by placing them
in a more invigorating soil ; and very commonly by placing them in a
higher situation . LOUDON-1806-2,262.90

Honey-dew is an exudation from vegetables , which frequently breeds an
immense collection of small insects upon their surface ;
LOUDON-1806-2,262.91

a more invigorating soil is often a complete cure for this malady ,
particularly where it attacks young trees . LOUDON-1806-2,262.92

Watering , in horticulture , is generally performed by the hand , and
either with the common watering pot , the syringe , or the forcing
engine . LOUDON-1806-2,262.93

In many cases I think it possible to accomplish it by a practice similar
to irrigation , or by sub-flooding . LOUDON-1806-2,262.94

The last may be done by having a stratum of gravel <P_263> under the
whole garden ; which , by means of a trench surrounding it <paren> or ,
if upon a slope , at the upper side of it <$$paren> , might be saturated
with water , which would soon be absorbed by the incumbent surface
containing the vegetables under cultivation . LOUDON-1806-2,263.95

The first by having pipes , open cuts , or rather small wooden troughs ,
which might conduct it upon the surface of every quarter of the garden .
LOUDON-1806-2,263.96

There it might distribute itself in the intervals between beds or drills
, and over the general surface of broadcast crops .
LOUDON-1806-2,263.97

The former method could be put in practice at any period of the summer
or spring ; the latter chiefly in moist weather , or in the night season
. LOUDON-1806-2,263.98

Watering is beneficial in three ways : first , in prompting or exciting
vegetation , as in new-sown seeds , or newly transplanted vegetables ;
secondly , in promoting vegetation , as in watering crops or trees ; and
thirdly , in destroying insects , as the aphis or red spider , and some
species of coccus , &c. LOUDON-1806-2,263.99

Pruning is a branch of cultivation highly requisite in horticulture ,
particularly in what regards the culture of trees and shrubs .
LOUDON-1806-2,263.100

It is used either to promote , to retard , or to modify growth .
LOUDON-1806-2,263.101

Pruning may be used either to promote the growth of wood , leaves , or
fruit , or to retard them . LOUDON-1806-2,263.102

With respect to the modification of trees and shrubs , it is applied to
many sorts to bring them into convenient shapes for being cultivated
with care ; as to gooseberries , raspberries , shrubs in pots , &c. ;
<P_264> and to others , to make them accord with peculiar situations ,
as often occurs in connexion with training in the management of
wall-trees . LOUDON-1806-2,264.103

These different objects of pruning are to be effected from a general
acquaintance with the vegetable economy , and a particular knowledge of
the individuals to be pruned . LOUDON-1806-2,264.104

With respect to general laws , the common effect of pruning <font> that
part of trees above ground only <$$font> , is to produce more vigorous
annual growths ; and in respect to fruit , commonly a smaller number ,
but those of greater magnitude . LOUDON-1806-2,264.105

The common effect of pruning <font> the roots of trees only <$$font> ,
is the contrary , LOUDON-1806-2,264.106

and generally causes them to produce smaller and less vigorous annual
shoots , but more fruit . LOUDON-1806-2,264.107

Much pruning , either of the tops or roots , makes them produce smaller
and more numerous ramifications ; which , as they are unable to run out
to any great distance in quest of food , either from the air or the
earth , do consequently form a spherical bush above ground , as may be
seen in pollards ; and a globular mass of roots under it , as may be
seen by taking up any tree which has been frequently removed .
LOUDON-1806-2,264.108

In general also , the extremities of shoots or branches bent downwards ,
and the extremities of roots bent upwards , check vegetation
LOUDON-1806-2,264.109

and tend to produce fruit ; while an opposite practice has contrary
effects . LOUDON-1806-2,264.110

With regard to individual trees , there are some sorts which only
produce their fruit from the young wood of the preceding year , as the
vine , the fig , and the raspberry . LOUDON-1806-2,264.111

There are others which produce them from two <P_265> years shoots only ,
as the peach and nectarine . LOUDON-1806-2,265.112

Others produce them chiefly from <font> studs <$$font> , or <font> spurs
<$$font> , as the apple , pear , and plum . Some by both these modes ,
as the apricot and gooseberry . Others almost entirely from studs and
knotty joints , as the red and white currants , &c.
LOUDON-1806-2,265.113

Some trees require most of their young wood to be cut off , as the
currant ; others very little of it , as the peach , and most pears ;
LOUDON-1806-2,265.114

others are materially injured by being much pruned , as the cherry ,
plum , and most stone fruit . LOUDON-1806-2,265.115

Some bear any degree of it , as the apple and several kinds of pears .
LOUDON-1806-2,265.116

Training by fixtures is properly a branch of pruning .
LOUDON-1806-2,265.117

It is used for two purposes ; either to protect exotics or tender fruit
trees from the wind ; to improve their climate , by spreading them
regularly upon a wall , or to support climbing or trailing plants .
LOUDON-1806-2,265.118

The first method is generally performed either by spreading the branches
, horizontally and parallel to each other , upon an upright rail , as in
common espaliers , or by spreading them upon a horizontal rail , as in
table espaliers . LOUDON-1806-2,265.119

In some cases it is also done upon an inclined rail , or upon circular
or basket ones . LOUDON-1806-2,265.120

Training to improve the climate is chiefly against a wall ,
LOUDON-1806-2,265.121

and is either performed in the <font> fan <$$font> , or <font>
horizontal <$$font> manner . LOUDON-1806-2,265.122

The fan manner is calculated for soonest covering the wall ,
LOUDON-1806-2,265.123

and is also most proper for such kinds as do not abound in superfluous
wood , as the cherry , peach , and <P_266> apricot .
LOUDON-1806-2,266.124

The horizontal manner fills the wall more completely , though it is
longer in accomplishing it ; LOUDON-1806-2,266.125

and is best calculated for such as run much to wood , as do many pears
and apples . LOUDON-1806-2,266.126

In training to support climbing plants , nature should be imitated as
nearly as possible . LOUDON-1806-2,266.127

With such kinds as twine round other trees or supports , or fasten
themselves to walls , nothing more is necessary , than to put these on
similar objects within their reach ; LOUDON-1806-2,266.128

but with others , which support themselves by claspers or tendrils , it
is requisite to fasten them by art when these tendrils fail .
LOUDON-1806-2,266.129

In nature , they fail commonly the second year ; LOUDON-1806-2,266.130

and then the whole twining shrub or climber falls down ,
LOUDON-1806-2,266.131

or hangs by its last made tendrils in such a way that its shoots are
bent , twisted , or inclined in every direction . LOUDON-1806-2,266.132

This is the case with vines , passion-flowers , and many others ,
LOUDON-1806-2,266.133

and readily suggests the advantage of training these sorts in a twisted
or serpentine direction . LOUDON-1806-2,266.134

Indeed , nothing can be more unnatural than to train them erect , as is
generally done where vines are planted against the back walls of
hot-houses . LOUDON-1806-2,266.135

When trained upon a trellis under the sloping glass , they are in a more
natural situation , LOUDON-1806-2,266.136

and are more likely to send out shoots or to <font> break <$$font>
<paren> as gardeners term it <$$paren> at every joint ;
LOUDON-1806-2,266.137

but still experience has proved the immense advantage of training in a
serpentine direction in every situation . LOUDON-1806-2,266.138

In many hot-houses in England , and in the greater number in Scotland ,
nearly two-thirds of the crop which might be produced annually are lost
for <P_267> want of attention to this circumstance .
LOUDON-1806-2,267.139

It requires no arguments to support a practice so evidently natural ,
and uniformly attended with such good effects whenever it has been tried
; LOUDON-1806-2,267.140

and as it can never do harm , every gardener ought to adopt it .
LOUDON-1806-2,267.141

Great advantage may be taken of the same principle in training other
trees ; LOUDON-1806-2,267.142

whenever the sap is constrained by twisting a shoot or branch , it is
sure at those places most bent , or at the most angular parts of each
curve , to send out a shoot . LOUDON-1806-2,267.143

This was taken advantage of , LOUDON-1806-2,267.144

and is excellently illustrated , by Mr. Hitt in his Treatise on Fruit
Trees ; LOUDON-1806-2,267.145

and had this and several other old treatises not been too much neglected
, the late Mr. Forsyth's would not have been rendered necessary .
LOUDON-1806-2,267.146

In training trees , few gardeners understand or avail themselves of the
advantages which might be taken from this general law in the vegetable
economy , that the extreme branches bent downward , or the extreme roots
turned upward and exposed to the air , throw the tree more or less into
fruit . LOUDON-1806-2,267.147

I have lately seen it done in two instances by accident , where the
effect was astonishing . LOUDON-1806-2,267.148

The first was at Tynningham , where some pear-trees which never bore
well , but grew vigorously , attained <P_268> the top of the wall , and
were turned down upon the other side . LOUDON-1806-2,268.149

This has been done two or three years , LOUDON-1806-2,268.150

and every year those branches so turned down have borne immense
quantities of fruit , LOUDON-1806-2,268.151

and the other parts of the tree have begun to bear better .
LOUDON-1806-2,268.152

Were every other branch turned downward in this manner , either by
bringing them over to the other side of the wall , or turning them
downward upon the same side , the whole tree would soon become fruitful
. LOUDON-1806-2,268.153

The second instance was at Palatine House , where vines were grown in a
pit , and trained from the top of the back wall , under the sloping
rafters , to the lowest part of the front glass , and uniformly produced
extraordinary crops of grapes , with a less than usual quantity of
shoots . LOUDON-1806-2,268.154

The good effects arising from the same principle may be seen in most
gardens in a greater or less degree , at the corners of walls or
espaliers , or around doors or other openings . LOUDON-1806-2,268.155

Where trees are trained upon houses , it may be very frequently seen ;
the bends and twists , and downward training of the shoots , occasioned
by the doors and windows , chimnies and projections , always producing
this effect ; LOUDON-1806-2,268.156

and hence we often find trees in these situations afford more fruit than
those in gardens . LOUDON-1806-2,268.157

The excellent effects of cutting the roots of trees either at some
distance or near the chief stem , and also the effects of cutting the
stem itself , in order to throw them into fruit , have been fully
recorded by former writers on horticulture , LOUDON-1806-2,268.158

and have <P_269> been recently practised with complete effect by an
excellent gardener at Woodhall . LOUDON-1806-2,269.159

Ablaqueation , or laying bare the roots of trees , is a species of
cultivation nearly allied to pruning , LOUDON-1806-2,269.160

and has the same tendency as the practice above mentioned .
LOUDON-1806-2,269.161

I pass over many important particulars in this department of cultivation
, LOUDON-1806-2,269.162

and omit some branches altogether . LOUDON-1806-2,269.163

<heading>

Chapter II . LOUDON-1806-2,269.165

Of the culture of herbaceous vegetables . LOUDON-1806-2,269.166

<$$heading>

These may be divided into three classes , viz. 1. The annual or
biennial ; 2. {TEXT:2:} The perennial ; and , 3. Salads and pot-herbs
. LOUDON-1806-2,269.168

The first class occupies the chief part of a garden ;
LOUDON-1806-2,269.169

the two others occupy comparatively little space .
LOUDON-1806-2,269.170

To enlarge on the modes of culture applicable to the individuals of each
class would in this place be improper , and indeed useless in a work of
this nature , where only such hints are offered as may be interesting
<P_270> to gentlemen , or may tend to enlarge the ideas of the
naturalist or amateur in gardening . LOUDON-1806-2,270.171

What I have here to remark upon is , the important advantages to be
obtained from cultivating the summer or late crops of the first class ,
annual and biennial kitchen crops , in the fields .
LOUDON-1806-2,270.172

The advantages are , 1. More wholesome and better flavoured vegetables
, arising from the freshness of the soil and the open exposure .
LOUDON-1806-2,270.173

2. The expence attending their culture is less , it being performed by
agricultural implements , and consequently requiring little manual
labour , and also less manure than in gardening . LOUDON-1806-2,270.174

3. Less manure being necessary in the garden , consequently more can be
spared for agricultural purposes . LOUDON-1806-2,270.175

Manure used in agriculture doubles itself every year ; whereas that used
in gardens makes scarcely any returns : LOUDON-1806-2,270.176

the advantage therefore of employing as much of it as possible in
agriculture is evident . LOUDON-1806-2,270.177

4. The last advantage consists in reducing the quantity of land
destined for a garden ; which , when this practice is to be followed ,
need never be so large as they commonly are . LOUDON-1806-2,270.178

The garden crops which may be best raised in the fields are all or most
of those which are not sown before the middle of February in England ,
and the first of March in Scotland , and which are removed before those
periods in the next year . LOUDON-1806-2,270.179

Of this class are the principal crops of pease , beans , turnips ,
<P_271> carrots , parsnips , potatoes , onions , brocoli , and several
others , which will grow perfectly well in the field , and with the same
or similar culture as the turnip of potatoe husbandry .
LOUDON-1806-2,271.180

In all well regulated home or family farms there is every year a certain
portion of ground allotted for turnips , potatoes , or other drill crops
; LOUDON-1806-2,271.181

now that allotment has only to be increased , and part of it used for
the culture of these garden vegetables . LOUDON-1806-2,271.182

When they were full grown , or when the turnips were to be eaten off by
sheep , or otherwise removed from the rest of the field , that part of
it under this culture could easily be inclosed by hurdles , which would
preserve every thing safe during the winter . LOUDON-1806-2,271.183

In spring it would no longer be necessary , LOUDON-1806-2,271.184

and then the hurdles or temporary fence might be taken away , and the
ground ploughed and sown with oats or barley , and grass seeds , &c.
according to the nature of the rotation followed by the farmer .
LOUDON-1806-2,271.185

<P_272>

<heading>

Chapter III . LOUDON-1806-2,272.188

Of the culture of fruit trees and fruit shrubs . LOUDON-1806-2,272.189

<$$heading>

This is one of the most comprehensive and difficult branches of
horticulture : LOUDON-1806-2,272.191

it may be subdivided as follows ; viz. 1. The culture of wall fruits ;
2. The culture of espaliers ; 3. The culture of standards ; 4. The
culture of the lesser fruits , or fruit shrubs . LOUDON-1806-2,272.192

1. The culture of wall fruits . LOUDON-1806-2,272.193

- The first object of attention here is the construction , situation ,
and height of the walls , and general dimensions of the borders ;
LOUDON-1806-2,272.194

but as these naturally belong to the general formation of a garden , I
shall pass over it to the formation of the soil . LOUDON-1806-2,272.195

With regard to depth : in dry situations , it may be three feet for most
kinds ; LOUDON-1806-2,272.196

but in many cases two feet will be preferable ; LOUDON-1806-2,272.197

in such as are moist , eighteen or twenty inches is most proper , the
bottom being paved or imbedded with a composition of loam and gravel ,
or rubbish of masonry , and forming a declivity southwards .
LOUDON-1806-2,272.198

The propriety of a shallow border on moist soils , and indeed in general
, I have lately experienced in several striking cases , particularly
<P_273> at Knowlesly ; LOUDON-1806-2,273.199

and it agrees also with what Mr. Hitt recommends and practised in
making borders for fruit trees ; several of which , when the subsoil was
gravel or rock , were not above one foot in depth ;
LOUDON-1806-2,273.200

and these he always found produced the largest crops , and by much the
best flavoured fruit . LOUDON-1806-2,273.201

The quality of the soil must vary according to the kind of tree to be
planted . LOUDON-1806-2,273.202

In general , it may be sufficient to observe here , that pears , plums ,
and apples , require rather a strong loam ; cherries , apricots , figs ,
and vines a lighter ; and peaches and nectarines a kind of medium
between them ; though , upon the whole , daily experience proves that
all these sorts will prosper in the same soil , if other circumstances
are favourable . LOUDON-1806-2,273.203

In Dr. Monro's garden , at Slateford cottage , excellent crops of
grapes , and indeed of most fruits , are produced from a strong clay ;
LOUDON-1806-2,273.204

and in hundreds of places in Surrey equally good crops are produced from
soils chiefly composed of sand and gravel . LOUDON-1806-2,273.205

Apples and plums seem to prosper best in argillaceous soil , as may be
observed both in the Clydsdale and Herefordshire orchards ; though there
are some kinds that prosper much better in a light one , as the paradise
and oslin pippin and the drap-d'or plum . LOUDON-1806-2,273.206

<P_274>

The next object is the choice of proper kinds and good plants from the
nursery . LOUDON-1806-2,274.208

Upon the different kinds a great variety of opinions prevail .
LOUDON-1806-2,274.209

The kinds which generally prosper best in England may be found in Mr.
Forsyth's Treatise , and those in Scotland in Mr. Nicol's .
LOUDON-1806-2,274.210

A good practice for gentlemen who are unacquainted with a great variety
, is to observe those sorts which do best in the neighbouring gardens ;
and also to attend to the opinions of the most eminent nurserymen , who
from their general sale of these trees , and intercourse with practical
gardeners , are always well acquainted with the kinds most in repute .
LOUDON-1806-2,274.211

When the trees are planted , each may be numbered so as to preserve the
name of the kind . LOUDON-1806-2,274.212

This number may either be marked on lead or copper and nailed to the
wall , painted on the wall , or registered by various other devices .
LOUDON-1806-2,274.213

With respect to good plants , every gardener knows the leading signs of
health and vigour ; viz. fullness , and well-formed buds in the
extremities of the shoots . LOUDON-1806-2,274.214

The next object in the culture of wall fruit is their general management
, which is too extensive and common-place to admit of any remarks here .
LOUDON-1806-2,274.215

<P_275>

2. The culture of espaliers may be considered under heads similar to
those above . LOUDON-1806-2,275.217

The remarks there made are all applicable here , except what relates to
the depth of soil ; LOUDON-1806-2,275.218

for here several reasons concur to shew , that this ought in fewer cases
to be less than twenty inches or two feet deep . LOUDON-1806-2,275.219

The <font> construction <$$font> of espalier rails is perfectly simple ;
LOUDON-1806-2,275.220

they should be fixed in masonry , LOUDON-1806-2,275.221

and their parts under_ground should either be charred on the surface or
pitched , unless the whole be made of larch wood , in which case both
pitch and paint are unnecessary . LOUDON-1806-2,275.222

Espalier rails painted white have a harsh glaring effect in gardens ;
LOUDON-1806-2,275.223

in all cases , therefore , they ought to be painted of some <font> quiet
<$$font> colour , as brown , grey , or green . LOUDON-1806-2,275.224

They are generally placed parallel to the walks on one side , as on
those walks which surround the garden ; or on both ends , as on those
which cross through it . LOUDON-1806-2,275.225

In both cases when the proper proportions are adopted , they have an
excellent effect , especially in the cross walks .
LOUDON-1806-2,275.226

3. The culture of standards . LOUDON-1806-2,275.227

When these are placed irregularly throughout the garden , which is
seldom an advisable practice , nothing can be said respecting the soil ,
as they must give way in that article to the general crops .
LOUDON-1806-2,275.228

But the best way of using standards <paren> under which I comprehend all
unfastened trees <$$paren> is either in rows , as gooseberries commonly
are , along the borders ; - in quarters by themselves ; - or in <P_276>
orchards . LOUDON-1806-2,276.229

Standards for borders in the kitchen garden should always be kept low ,
in order that they may shade the crops on each side as little as
possible . LOUDON-1806-2,276.230

But perhaps the best way is to have quarters for this kind of standards
- to have them grafted on paradise or quince stocks , by which means
they come sooner into fruit ; LOUDON-1806-2,276.231

and by the time those in the orchard or on the walls are in a full
bearing state , these quarters are fit to be thrown out :
LOUDON-1806-2,276.232

and if requisite another quarter could be planted to succeed them .
LOUDON-1806-2,276.233

In this way , when a new garden was made , a tolerable supply of fruit
might be had every year after the third ; it being well known , that
apples on paradise stocks , and pears on quince stocks , will frequently
bear the second year after grafting , and very generally the third :
LOUDON-1806-2,276.234

and as those to be planted in the quarters would be three or four years
old before they were removed from the nursery , they would commence
bearing immediately . LOUDON-1806-2,276.235

Standards for orchards ought generally to be of the tall or high kind ,
and always grafted upon crab stocks . LOUDON-1806-2,276.236

- See orchards . LOUDON-1806-2,276.237

4. The cultivation of small fruits , as gooseberries , currants ,
raspberries , &c. is commonly known . LOUDON-1806-2,276.238

In the cultivation of red and white currants much depends upon pruning .
LOUDON-1806-2,276.239

They should be allowed to produce only from studs ;
LOUDON-1806-2,276.240

and from <P_277> these , after the bush is four years old , the young
wood should be wholly cut away every winter . LOUDON-1806-2,277.241

This however is only applicable to standard currants , where large fruit
is wanted ; LOUDON-1806-2,277.242

when currants are grown upon walls , and the object is to preserve fruit
upon the tree from the currant season til the middle of winter , as is
done in some places , the mode is to have fruit rather smaller , and to
have the tree large , and so much covered with fruit as to admit of few
shoots . LOUDON-1806-2,277.243

The former practice is excellently carried on at Duddingston , and the
latter at Archerfield . LOUDON-1806-2,277.244

<heading>

Chapter IV . LOUDON-1806-2,277.246

Of the culture of culinary exotics . LOUDON-1806-2,277.247

<$$heading>

Among plants or fruits which in this country require artificial climates
, the pine first deserves attention . LOUDON-1806-2,277.249

Much has been written respecting its culture , LOUDON-1806-2,277.250

and much still remains to be done . LOUDON-1806-2,277.251

The largest fruit and most uniform crop that I have ever seen was at
Kelham House . LOUDON-1806-2,277.252

The soil in which they are <P_278> grown is a stronger loam than is
recommended by Speechly and Nicol , or used by any gardener as far as my
observation has extended ; from which , and several other particulars in
management which I observed when there , it is probable some real
improvement is effected in the culture of this excellent fruit .
LOUDON-1806-2,278.253

But for this I beg to refer to the Treatise which Mr. Griffin proposes
to publish . LOUDON-1806-2,278.254

- In the next chapter some farther observations will occur .
LOUDON-1806-2,278.255

The general culture of the vine need not here occupy our attention
<P_279> <paren> see Chap. III. <$$paren> ; LOUDON-1806-2,279.256

but some effects which may be produced by particular modes of culture ,
though they are perfectly simple , and result from laws in the vegetable
economy well known to every practical naturalist , may deserve to be
mentioned . LOUDON-1806-2,279.257

The first is , that when put into a hot and rather poor soil , as lime
rubbish , brick-bats , and stiff vegetable mould , the growth will be
limited , and the tendency to produce fruit greatly increased .
LOUDON-1806-2,279.258

Hence vines of this kind may be cultivated like currant bushes , either
in the open air , - under a frame or hand-glass , - or in pots which may
be forced in a hot-house or conservatory , or placed when in fruit in
the drawing-room , &c. LOUDON-1806-2,279.259

A soil of an opposite kind , <font> free <$$font> , <font> porous
<$$font> , and <font> deep <$$font> , such as rough sand and light loam
kept moist , will encourage the growth of wood , and greatly lessen the
tendency to produce fruit . LOUDON-1806-2,279.260

Hence the advantage which may be taken of this in nursery gardening ,
where raising vines is an object , and hence also the advantage which
may be occasionally taken from it in filling a large house with one
plant . LOUDON-1806-2,279.261

It is true , it would lessen the production of fruit for a year or two
at first ; LOUDON-1806-2,279.262

but whenever the house was sufficiently covered with shoots , by
removing part of the sand and free soil , adding some of a richer and
more hot nature , and giving less water , the whole tree may be thrown
<P_280> into any degree of fruitfulness . LOUDON-1806-2,280.263

Let me add here , that these two opposite effects of different soils
afford excellent ideas for improving the soil of borders , either in the
open air or hot-houses , and either with a view to make the trees
produce more <font> wood <$$font> or more <font> fruit <$$font> .
LOUDON-1806-2,280.264

It is particularly adapted for vines and stone fruits ;
LOUDON-1806-2,280.265

for cutting the roots of these , and especially of vines , is generally
less successful , LOUDON-1806-2,280.266

and is always attended with greater risk , than on other trees :
LOUDON-1806-2,280.267

of this I had lately a striking proof , by the shameful conduct of a
gardener when about to leave his situation . LOUDON-1806-2,280.268

Other particulars respecting the culture , training , pruning , and
management of the vine might be mentioned , were it suitable to this
work . LOUDON-1806-2,280.269

In every topic or particular of vegetable culture there are numerous and
important effects which may be produced by the simplest means , if we
but advert to nature , from which the most important precepts in this
branch of knowledge are obtained . LOUDON-1806-2,280.270

But it is long before mankind , especially the practical part of them ,
can throw off the shackles of habit and prejudice ;
LOUDON-1806-2,280.271

and thence any thing of a remarkable nature which is produced in these
arts is commonly discovered or effected by accident .
LOUDON-1806-2,280.272

It is then either told to the world as a wonder or singularity - wrapt
up under a dark receipt , like a quack medicine - or concealed , as an
invaluable secret until a suitable reward be offered to the inventor .
LOUDON-1806-2,280.273

So contracted and imperfect are the general ideas of husbandry in this
island , that even public bodies of the first importance have <P_281>
been imposed on by these quack cultivators , both by men bringing
forward practices recorded by old writers , and by others recommending
things of no real use . LOUDON-1806-2,281.274

Melons and cucumbers next demand attention . LOUDON-1806-2,281.275

- They are generally grown upon hot-beds , or in pits , which will be
noticed in the next chapter . LOUDON-1806-2,281.276

Considerable art and constant attention are requisite to have them early
. LOUDON-1806-2,281.277

Much depends upon the steadiness of temperature and kindly moisture of
the atmosphere in the bed , and much also upon the soil employed .
LOUDON-1806-2,281.278

Considerable improvements might be made in the culture of these fruits ,
by adopting in certain cases the same general principles which have been
noticed above in treating of the vine , and particularly in late crops .
LOUDON-1806-2,281.279

In hot-houses , cucumbers may be preserved in a bearing state during the
whole winter , as is practised at Knowlsely and several other places .
LOUDON-1806-2,281.280

The culture of the passiflora quadrangularis , or apple bearing
passion-flower , is nearly that of the vine . LOUDON-1806-2,281.281

The chief difference is , that it requires to be preserved in a growing
temperature during the whole year . LOUDON-1806-2,281.282

This is easily effected , by planting them in pine stoves or hot-houses
. LOUDON-1806-2,281.283

One plant bears an immense quantity of fruit ; LOUDON-1806-2,281.284

and as these are of an agreeable taste and flavour , and have a
beautiful and uncommon appearance , one or two plants will have a good
effect if introduced into hot-houses . LOUDON-1806-2,281.285

That number , however , is abundantly sufficient for any family ; as it
<P_282> is still far inferior to the other exotic fruits that have been
mentioned . LOUDON-1806-2,282.286

They may be seen in great plenty at Harewood Hall , and the botanic
garden of Liverpool . LOUDON-1806-2,282.287

The cactus opuntia is said to produce a fruit little inferior to the
pine_apple . LOUDON-1806-2,282.288

It may easily be raised by a similar culture , but with a greater degree
of dry bottom heat . LOUDON-1806-2,282.289

It certainly demands a trial from the curious epicure .
LOUDON-1806-2,282.290

- See Justice's British Gardener . LOUDON-1806-2,282.291

As Oranges are generally cultivated for show , they are referred to
ornamental gardening . LOUDON-1806-2,282.292

The best directions will be found in " The Retired Gardener , "
LOUDON-1806-2,282.293

and the best fruit and trees in this country may be seen in the garden
at Woodhall . LOUDON-1806-2,282.294

There , every species of oranges , lemons , limes , shaddocks , &c. are
cultivated in a variety of ways ; and , with a degree of success ,
hitherto unparalleled in this kingdom . LOUDON-1806-2,282.295

<P_283>

<heading>

Chapter V . LOUDON-1806-2,283.298

Of forcing vegetables into a state of growth or fruit at particular or
unnatural seasons . LOUDON-1806-2,283.299

<$$heading>

This is effected either by operations upon the vegetable when in its
natural climate , upon the soil in which it grows , or by removing it
into an artificial climate . LOUDON-1806-2,283.301

1. Forcing , by operating upon the vegetable or the soil , is done in
various ways , and from different known facts in the economy of plants .
LOUDON-1806-2,283.302

The simplest mode of forcing is by sowing or planting at an uncommon
season ; that is , either later or earlier than usual .
LOUDON-1806-2,283.303

The next is , by placing the vegetable in <font> a warm and dry or cold
and moist situation <$$font> , or in a hot or cold soil ; by which it
either comes into perfection later or earlier than if placed in the
medium between these two extremes . LOUDON-1806-2,283.304

The essences of every vegetable are its flowers and fruit ;
LOUDON-1806-2,283.305

and every individual species grows , or has a continual tendency to grow
, until it produce these in perfection . LOUDON-1806-2,283.306

Annuals in general do this the same season in which they are sown ;
<P_284> perennials , the second or third season , and once every year
afterwards ; LOUDON-1806-2,284.307

trees and shrubs frequently do not show flowers for several years after
they are sown ; LOUDON-1806-2,284.308

but when once they have begun , they do so regularly every summer
afterwards . LOUDON-1806-2,284.309

Now by taking proper advantage of these known facts , considerable
effects may be produced , both in the way of forcing vegetables , and
rendering them more useful . LOUDON-1806-2,284.310

Thus , by preventing <font> annuals <$$font> from coming into flower the
first year , which can easily be done by removals or cutting them over
near the surface , they will live , unless in too cold a climate , till
next season ; LOUDON-1806-2,284.311

and if the same operation be performed on them the second year , they
will live for a third : and so on , sometimes for a number of years ; in
almost every case for two , and often for three or four years .
LOUDON-1806-2,284.312

In this way , by mowing tares or barley , two or three green crops may
be obtained in one season , and a very early one be produced the next .
LOUDON-1806-2,284.313

By the same means annual rye grass is made to last two or three seasons
; LOUDON-1806-2,284.314

and on good soils is frequently , by being pastured afterwards , made
perennial . LOUDON-1806-2,284.315

In the kitchen garden , <font> plants <$$font> of cabbage , savoys ,
greens , &c. which are annuals , are frequently preserved the first
season under one foot high , LOUDON-1806-2,284.316

and by being planted in autumn , or immediately before winter , produce
either a late crop that season , or a very early one the next .
LOUDON-1806-2,284.317

Parsley also may be made to last some years , by being cut over before
it begins to bloom , &c. LOUDON-1806-2,284.318

In perennials by cutting over the artichoke , sea-cale , or asparagus ,
early <P_285> in the season , a late autumnal or winter crop may be
produced ; LOUDON-1806-2,285.319

and if we take all the blossoms from a strawberry-plant in April , it
will produce excellent fruit in November following .
LOUDON-1806-2,285.320

In trees and shrubs , by depriving them of their leaves and flowers in
spring , or the beginning of summer , they will produce these at
different periods , according to their nature , from August to February
; LOUDON-1806-2,285.321

and if protected from the inclemency of the weather at these seasons ,
would produce fruit . LOUDON-1806-2,285.322

This is easily done with raspberries , currants , gooseberries , and
strawberries , as they come into fruit <paren> as I have found on trial
<$$paren> in October and November , and do therefore require little
covering . LOUDON-1806-2,285.323

But with most other fruit trees the period is later ;
LOUDON-1806-2,285.324

and not only is a covering requisite , LOUDON-1806-2,285.325

but the tree is often so materially injured as to be good for little
during some years afterwards ; LOUDON-1806-2,285.326

and sometimes it dies altogether at the time . LOUDON-1806-2,285.327

Another method of <font> forcing <$$font> or producing fruits or
vegetables at uncommon seasons is by preservation .
LOUDON-1806-2,285.328

Thus currants , some species of green gooseberries , cherries , &c. may
be preserved until Christmas , by being covered with mats or cloths ,
either thrown over the bushes and borne up by them , or fixed on proper
frames made for the purpose . LOUDON-1806-2,285.329

Roots are preserved in sand or earth , as carrots , potatoes , &c. &c
LOUDON-1806-2,285.330

<P_286>

2. Forcing , by removing vegetables into an artificial climate , is
performed by means of glass-houses , or glass-cases , heated either by
fuel fire , the heat of steam , or the heat of putrefaction or
fermentation . LOUDON-1806-2,286.332

In every case , the great art lies in imitating natural climates as to
light , dew , rain , heat , air , wind , &c. - LOUDON-1806-2,286.333

For the modes of accomplishing this object , see the next chapter .
LOUDON-1806-2,286.334

<heading>

Chapter VI . LOUDON-1806-2,286.336

Of the construction of hot-houses , hot-walls , pits , hot-beds , and
mushroom-houses . LOUDON-1806-2,286.337

<$$heading>

That the construction of hot-houses is very imperfectly understood among
those who are generally employed to erect them , will appear evident to
any one who shall investigate the subject in the slightest manner .
LOUDON-1806-2,286.339

Nor will this appear surprising , when we consider how very recently
they have become general in gentlemen's gardens . LOUDON-1806-2,286.340

It is presumed that there were few green-houses in England before Mr.
Evelyn erected his conservatory <P_287> at his seat near London .
LOUDON-1806-2,287.341

Now the same general form was implicitly followed till within these few
years past : not indeed exactly the same construction ;
LOUDON-1806-2,287.342

for certain iron pipes , which Mr. Evelyn ingeniously , but rather
unsuccessfully , introduced for the purpose of supplying heated air ,
have been rejected ; LOUDON-1806-2,287.343

and this has been done evidently without that enquiry into their
intended use , which was due to every scheme devised by that great man .
LOUDON-1806-2,287.344

Mr. James Justice , of Crighton near Edinburgh , erected the first
pine-stove in Scotland ; LOUDON-1806-2,287.345

and if we observe the plan of this hot-house , as given in <font>
Justice's British Gardener <$$font> , we shall observe little or no
difference , either in the principles of construction or external
appearance , between it and those in general use at the present day .
LOUDON-1806-2,287.346

With respect to books on hot-houses , there has never yet been published
any thing in the way of inquiry into the principles of their
construction and general management . LOUDON-1806-2,287.347

Mr. Evelyn , in describing his conservatory , gives two or three hints
respecting the properties and management of air which are deserving of
attention . LOUDON-1806-2,287.348

But in the several books of designs that have been published , not a
sentence is to be found respecting the principles , or even the
properties , of the designs recommended . LOUDON-1806-2,287.349

<P_288>

Indeed , these designs are impracticable , and such as could not answer
the purposes of horticulture : the natural consequence that ever follows
hot-houses designed by mere architects or builders .
LOUDON-1806-2,288.351

The plans given and recommended by <font> Steel <$$font> , <font>
Abercromby <$$font> , <font> Speechly <$$font> , and others , answer
better ; LOUDON-1806-2,288.352

but they contain no deviation from general practice , to entitle them to
claim the merit of making improvements in their construction .
LOUDON-1806-2,288.353

Indeed , it evidently appears , from the writings of these men , that
they were unable to think accurately on the subject .
LOUDON-1806-2,288.354

The same remarks are applicable to the designs lately published by Mr.
Nicol in his <font> Forcing Gardener <$$font> ; LOUDON-1806-2,288.355

but it is with pleasure I remark , that these designs , though exactly
upon the same principles with those mentioned above , are perhaps upon
the whole better adapted for the purposes of forcing .
LOUDON-1806-2,288.356

To Dr. Anderson the public have been indebted on many occasions ;
LOUDON-1806-2,288.357

and horticulturists are eminently so , for the many ingenious hints
contained in the account of his patent hot-house .
LOUDON-1806-2,288.358

This small volume is certainly of more real importance than all the
designs or books on the subject that have preceded it .
LOUDON-1806-2,288.359

But though in some of the warmest counties of England the Doctor's
hot-house may perhaps succeed for a year or two after it is erected , it
is the humble opinion of the author that it will never come into general
use . LOUDON-1806-2,288.360

<P_289>

In different parts of the island there are , and have long been ,
peculiarities in the construction of some hot-houses , which , had they
been understood and attended to by planners , would long ere now have
made a material difference in the general design and erection of these
edifices . LOUDON-1806-2,289.362

At Abercairnie , near Crieff in Perthshire , heated air introduced by a
vacuity around the furnace has long been used to heat a peach-house .
LOUDON-1806-2,289.363

Now though the manner in which this is effected is extremely simple ,
yet the end is answered in a considerable degree , and a tolerable
saving of fuel produced . LOUDON-1806-2,289.364

I am also informed , that heated air was in the same manner introduced
into a hot-house in the neighbourhood of Manchester near forty years ago
; LOUDON-1806-2,289.365

and as it is probable that there may be some other cases in England
which have not yet come under my observation , it is likely , however
strange it may seem , that the practice may be traced as far back as Mr.
Evelyn's time . LOUDON-1806-2,289.366

I only mention this to shew how very little men generally think upon
what they hear or see , and how prone they are to persevere in old
common practice . LOUDON-1806-2,289.367

This improvement by heated air , having escaped the attention of
planners <paren> who must have seen or heard of some of the instances
mentioned , but who evidently have not understood its nature <$$paren>
would have been lost to the public had not a Mr. Stewart , gardener at
Woodlands , brought it boldly forward to public notice in his patent
hot-house . LOUDON-1806-2,289.368

Mr. Stewart deserves much credit for this ; LOUDON-1806-2,289.369

and it is to be hoped he will find such a demand for his <P_290> kind of
patent hot-house as amply to recompense his talents and industry .
LOUDON-1806-2,290.370

Reflecting upon these various improvements , in connection with a great
number of experiments and observations made at Dalry , I conceived the
plan recommended in my treatise on hot-houses , for heating them ;
LOUDON-1806-2,290.371

and by thinking on the subject in a free and unprejudiced manner , and
studying the nature of heat , I conceived the idea of an inner roofing ,
an invention of immense use in their management . LOUDON-1806-2,290.372

These improvements were first tried experimentally upon an old hot-house
in Broughton Park Nursery , Edinburgh ; where , although several things
were ill executed , still the effect was so astonishing , as to
encourage me to prosecute the ideas I had conceived .
LOUDON-1806-2,290.373

I have now , after considerable practice in designing , and seeing them
constructed fixed on improvements which appear to me much superior to
any adopted , or at present known in Great Britain .
LOUDON-1806-2,290.374

They are perfectly simple and practicable , LOUDON-1806-2,290.375

and will not only save much fuel , but greatly lessen the risk of
over-heating or over-cooling the house , LOUDON-1806-2,290.376

and will also require much less attendance <P_291> from the gardener ,
and none at all in the night season , as is frequently the case with
those in general use . LOUDON-1806-2,291.377

In England these improvements may be seen at Palatine House , Trigger
Hall , &c. In Wales , at Havod , where ten large hot-houses are
altering according to the author's mode . LOUDON-1806-2,291.378

In Scotland , at Mr. Smith's , Leith Walk , Broughton Park Nursery ,
Macheny , Glenfuir , and several other places . LOUDON-1806-2,291.379

To enter fully into them in this work is unnecessary ;
LOUDON-1806-2,291.380

but a few general hints are what the nature of my purpose demands ,
LOUDON-1806-2,291.381

and they shall therefore be given as concisely as possible .
LOUDON-1806-2,291.382

1. Hot-houses . LOUDON-1806-2,291.383

The chief agents in vegetation , and which demand attention in the
construction of hot-houses , are <font> heat <$$font> , <font> soil
<$$font> , <font> air <$$font> , <font> light <$$font> , <font> water
<$$font> , and <font> wind <$$font> , or motion . LOUDON-1806-2,291.384

<font> Heat <$$font> is generally produced by fuel , which is consumed
in a furnace , and the heat and smoke conducted through the house in a
flue or horizontal chimney . LOUDON-1806-2,291.385

It has occasionally been done with steam , either alone , or jointly
with fire ; LOUDON-1806-2,291.386

but this is much too expensive for general use ; LOUDON-1806-2,291.387

the only advantage which attends it is , that a house at any distance
from the boiler may be raised to the same height as one close to it : an
advantage of little use in gardening , though in heating houses or rooms
from a kitchen range , &c. it might be of service .
LOUDON-1806-2,291.388

Heat may occasionally be communicated by fermentible or putrescent
matters , such as dung , litter , leaves , moss , or other vegetables
fit only for <P_292> being changed into manure . LOUDON-1806-2,292.389

In some cases , it may also be generated by the sun , <paren> as in Dr.
Anderson's patent hot-houses , <$$paren> and preserved in proper
compartments , though probably in very few situations .
LOUDON-1806-2,292.390

All modes may occasionally be employed , or taken advantage of , in
particular circumstances ; LOUDON-1806-2,292.391

but that by fuel , furnaces , and flues , is the only plan capable of
being put in general practice with advantage . LOUDON-1806-2,292.392

The greatest difficulty that occurs with heat is its management , so as
to retain and regulate its degree agreeably to the nature of the climate
to be imitated . LOUDON-1806-2,292.393

It is retained partly by having the house made as nearly air-tight as
possible , and partly by an inner curtain invented by the author , which
is let down during night immediately under the glass , and which , by
preventing the heated air of the house from coming in contact with the
glass , permits only a very small quantity to escape .
LOUDON-1806-2,292.394

It is preserved at the proper <font> regulation <$$font> chiefly by this
curtain , which , as it retains the proper temperature , does not
require the heat to be greatly raised at the beginning of night in order
that it may not be too low in the morning , as is the case in all
hot-houses where a curtain is not in use . LOUDON-1806-2,292.395

For be it observed here , that though the house be perfectly air-tight ,
yet as glass from its porous nature is easily permeable by either heat
or cold , and consequently as heated air always ascends to the top of
the house , it must be continually given out to the atmosphere through
the roof as well as sides of every glass hot-house .
LOUDON-1806-2,292.396

And this is the sole <P_293> reason why hot-houses with glass on all
sides are so difficult to manage without this improvement .
LOUDON-1806-2,293.397

<font> Soil <$$font> is obtained either by inclosing a portion of the
ground surface , and preparing it in a proper manner ; or by placing it
in pots or boxes , which may be removed or altered at pleasure .
LOUDON-1806-2,293.398

<font> Air <$$font> , it is almost unnecessary to observe , is inclosed
, LOUDON-1806-2,293.399

and can be excluded , and fresh air admitted , either wholly or to mix
with it , by having apertures at different places , which may be opened
or shut at pleasure . LOUDON-1806-2,293.400

<font> Light <$$font> is admitted by constructing all or part of the
roof , or even the sides and the roof together , of glass frames .
LOUDON-1806-2,293.401

<font> Water <$$font> as such , that is in its fluid state , is easily
given to the plants by pouring it on the ground only ;
LOUDON-1806-2,293.402

as rain , it is given by the syringe , or engine , or watering-pot ; and
as dew , by pouring it upon hot masonry , such as the flues , by which
it first ascends as steam , and then descends , on parting with its
caloric , as dew . LOUDON-1806-2,293.403

<font> Wind <$$font> , which has two effects , that of putting the
plants in <font> motion <$$font> , and <font> removing stagnated air
<$$font> , is produced by admitting a <P_294> current of external air .
LOUDON-1806-2,294.404

As this can only be done with propriety when the external air is nearly
of the same temperature as that of the house , it is evident that
vegetables grown in hot-houses must be great part of the year without
this invigorating motion . LOUDON-1806-2,294.405

I have attempted by several methods to produce a motion of the air of
the house alone , by means of ventilators of different kinds , and which
might produce wind , or a breeze , to exotics at all seasons of the year
. LOUDON-1806-2,294.406

I have hitherto , however , been unsuccessful , except in some
particular houses where a good deal of room could be obtained ;
LOUDON-1806-2,294.407

and then wind may be produced by putting in motion several large boards
, which may be fastened on one side , by hinges , either to the backwall
, front glass , or roof . LOUDON-1806-2,294.408

After these general remarks on culinary hot-houses , a few observations
shall be added on the particular kinds . LOUDON-1806-2,294.409

These arrange themselves into three classes : 1. Those for peaches ,
nectarines , cherries , figs , &c. 2. Those for vines . 3. Those for
pines . LOUDON-1806-2,294.410

1. Those for peaches and similar trees , where the climate is cold ,
are with propriety placed against walls , and formed of glass on one
side : LOUDON-1806-2,294.411

but where it is moderate , as in most parts of England , a house formed
of glass on all sides , and with the trees planted and allowed to grow
irregularly as standards , will {COM:figure_omitted} <P_295> be found
preferable and more beautiful ; the most decisive proofs of which I have
given from facts which took place at Dalry . LOUDON-1806-2,295.412

See the Treatise on Hot-houses , page 186 . LOUDON-1806-2,295.413

2. Those for <font> vines <$$font> may be of any form , and large or
small according to the period at which they are intended to be brought
into fruit . LOUDON-1806-2,295.414

A double roofed house , with an inner roofing , will always be found
most economical for a general crop . LOUDON-1806-2,295.415

Vines clothed with foliage , and enlivened by bunches of fruit , are so
beautiful and accommodating , that they should be introduced into every
kind of glass-house in a greater or lesser degree .
LOUDON-1806-2,295.416

3. <font> Pines <$$font> are commonly grown at an immense expense ,
incurred chiefly by the tanner's bark and leaves , which require such
frequent renewals , and occasion so much labour in moving and replacing
the plants , &c. LOUDON-1806-2,295.417

This , with the risk which always attends heat added by fermentible
substances , has discouraged many from growing them .
LOUDON-1806-2,295.418

In the treatise already mentioned , I have described and delineated a
plan which would almost entirely remove these objections .
LOUDON-1806-2,295.419

I am now happy in being able to refer to a house constructed by me upon
the exact principles , viz. the pinery at Prinknash ;
LOUDON-1806-2,295.420

I shall here only refer to Plate 11 . fig. 3 , which is a section
illustrative of the mode adopted , and may serve to impress the plan
upon the memory of the reader . LOUDON-1806-2,295.421

A A A are the smoke flues ; B the air flue ; C a <P_296> large vacuity
of heated air ; D the rubble stone vacuity ; E walk in the centre ; F
earth in which the plants grow ; G steam and air tubes ; H inner roofing
; I surface of the ground , &c. LOUDON-1806-2,296.422

See the <font> plan <$$font> , <font> sections <$$font> , and a full
description in the " treatise . " LOUDON-1806-2,296.423

