<BEGIN_lyell-1830-1>

<P_1,75>

<heading>

Chapter V . LYELL-1830-1,1,75.4

Review of the causes which have retarded the progress of Geology -
LYELL-1830-1,1,75.5

Effects of prepossessions in regard to the duration of past time -
LYELL-1830-1,1,75.6

Of prejudices arising from our peculiar position as inhabitants of the
land - LYELL-1830-1,1,75.7

Of those occasioned by our not seeing subterranean changes now in
progress - LYELL-1830-1,1,75.8

All these causes combine to make the former course of Nature appear
different from the present - LYELL-1830-1,1,75.9

Several objections to the assumption , that existing causes have
produced the former changes of the earth's surface removed by modern
discoveries . LYELL-1830-1,1,75.10

<$$heading>

We have seen that , during the progress of geology , there have been
great fluctuations of opinion respecting the nature of the causes to
which all former changes of the earth's surface are referrible .
LYELL-1830-1,1,75.12

The first observers conceived that the monuments which the geologist
endeavours to decipher , relate to a period when the physical
constitution of the earth differed entirely from the present , and that
, even after the creation of living beings , there have been causes in
action distinct in kind or degree from those now forming part of the
economy of nature . LYELL-1830-1,1,75.13

These views have been gradually modified , and some of them entirely
abandoned in proportion as observations have been multiplied , and the
signs of former mutations more skilfully interpreted .
LYELL-1830-1,1,75.14

Many appearances , which for a long time were regarded as indicating
mysterious and extraordinary agency , are finally recognized as the
necessary result of the laws now governing the material world ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,75.15

and the discovery of this unlooked_for conformity has induced some
geologists to infer that there has never been any interruption to the
same uniform order of physical events . LYELL-1830-1,1,75.16

The same assemblage of general causes , they conceive , may have been
sufficient to produce , by their various combinations , the endless
diversity of effects , of which the shell of the earth has preserved the
memorials , LYELL-1830-1,1,75.17

and , consistently with these principles , the recurrence of analogous
changes is expected by them in time to come . LYELL-1830-1,1,75.18

Whether we coincide or not in this doctrine , we must admit that the
gradual progress of opinion concerning the succession of phenomena in
remote eras , resembles in a singular manner that <P_1,76> which
accompanies the growing intelligence of every people , in regard to the
economy of nature in modern times . LYELL-1830-1,1,76.19

In an early stage of advancement , when a great number of natural
appearances are unintelligible , an eclipse , an earthquake , a flood ,
or the approach of a comet , with many other occurrences afterwards
found to belong to the regular course of events , are regarded as
prodigies . LYELL-1830-1,1,76.20

The same delusion prevails as to moral phenomena , LYELL-1830-1,1,76.21

and many of these are ascribed to the intervention of demons , ghosts ,
witches , and other immaterial and supernatural agents .
LYELL-1830-1,1,76.22

By degrees , many of the enigmas of the moral and physical world are
explained , LYELL-1830-1,1,76.23

and , instead of being due to extrinsic and irregular causes , they are
found to depend on fixed and invariable laws . LYELL-1830-1,1,76.24

The philosopher at last becomes convinced of the undeviating uniformity
of secondary causes , LYELL-1830-1,1,76.25

and , guided by his faith in this principle , he determines the
probability of accounts transmitted to him of former occurrences ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,76.26

and often rejects the fabulous tales of former ages , on the ground of
their being irreconcilable with the experience of more enlightened ages
. LYELL-1830-1,1,76.27

As a belief in want of conformity in the physical constitution of the
earth , in ancient and modern times , was for a long time universally
prevalent , and that too amongst men who were convinced that the order
of nature is <font> now <$$font> uniform , and has continued so for
several thousand years ; every circumstance which could have influenced
their minds and given an undue bias to their opinions deserves
particular attention . LYELL-1830-1,1,76.28

Now the reader may easily satisfy himself , that , however undeviating
the course of nature may have been from the earliest epochs , it was
impossible for the first cultivators of geology to come to such a
conclusion , so long as they were under a delusion as to the age of the
world , and the date of the first creation of animate beings .
LYELL-1830-1,1,76.29

However fantastical some theories of the sixteenth century may now
appear to us , - however unworthy of men of great talent and sound
judgment , we may rest assured that , if the same misconceptions now
prevailed in regard to the memorials of human transactions , it would
give rise to a similar train of absurdities . LYELL-1830-1,1,76.30

Let us imagine , for example , that Champollion , and the French and
Tuscan literati now engaged in exploring the antiquities of Egypt , had
visited that country with a firm belief that the banks of the Nile were
never peopled by the human <P_1,77> race before the beginning of the
nineteenth {TEXT:nineteeenth} century , and that their faith in this
dogma was as difficult to shake as the opinion of our ancestors , that
the earth was never the abode of living beings until the creation of the
present continents , and of the species now existing , - it is easy to
perceive what extravagant systems they would frame , while under the
influence of this delusion , to account for the monuments discovered in
Egypt . LYELL-1830-1,1,77.31

The sight of the pyramids , obelisks , colossal statues , and ruined
temples , would fill them with such astonishment , that for a time they
would be as men spell-bound - wholly incapacitated to reason with
sobriety . LYELL-1830-1,1,77.32

They might incline at first to refer the construction of such stupendous
works to some superhuman powers of a primeval world .
LYELL-1830-1,1,77.33

A system might be invented resembling that so gravely advanced by
Manetho , who relates that a dynasty of gods originally ruled in Egypt ,
of whom Vulcan , the first monarch , reigned nine_thousand years .
LYELL-1830-1,1,77.34

After them came Hercules and other demi-gods , who were at last
succeeded by human kings . LYELL-1830-1,1,77.35

When some fanciful speculations of this kind had amused the imagination
for a time , some vast repository of mummies would be discovered
LYELL-1830-1,1,77.36

and would immediately undeceive those antiquaries who enjoyed an
opportunity of personally examining them , LYELL-1830-1,1,77.37

but the prejudices of others at a distance , who were not eye-witnesses
of the whole phenomena , would not be so easily overcome .
LYELL-1830-1,1,77.38

The concurrent report of many travellers would indeed render it
necessary for them to accommodate ancient theories to some of the new
facts , LYELL-1830-1,1,77.39

and much wit and ingenuity would be required to modify and defend their
old positions . LYELL-1830-1,1,77.40

Each new invention would violate a greater number of known analogies ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,77.41

for if a theory be required to embrace some false principle , it becomes
more visionary in proportion as facts are multiplied , as would be the
case if geometers were now required to form an astronomical system on
the assumption of the immobility of the earth . LYELL-1830-1,1,77.42

Amongst other fanciful conjectures concerning the history of Egypt , we
may suppose some of the following to be started . LYELL-1830-1,1,77.43

' As the banks of the Nile have been so recently colonized , the curious
substances called mummies could never in reality have belonged to men .
LYELL-1830-1,1,77.44

They may have been generated by some <font> plastic virtue <$$font>
residing in the interior of the earth , LYELL-1830-1,1,77.45

or they may <P_1,78> be abortions of nature produced by her incipient
efforts in the work of creation . LYELL-1830-1,1,78.46

For if deformed beings are sometimes born even now , when the scheme of
the universe is fully developed {TEXT:devoloped} , many more may have
been " sent before their time , scarce half made up , " when the planet
itself was in the embryo state . LYELL-1830-1,1,78.47

But if these notions appear to derogate from the perfection of the
Divine attributes , and if these mummies be in all their parts true
representations of the human form , may we not refer them to the future
rather than the past ? LYELL-1830-1,1,78.48

May we not be looking into the womb of nature , and not her grave ?
LYELL-1830-1,1,78.49

may not these images be like the shades of the unborn in Virgil's
Elysium - the archetypes of men not yet called into existence ? '
LYELL-1830-1,1,78.50

These speculations , if advocated by eloquent writers , would not fail
to attract many zealous votaries , LYELL-1830-1,1,78.51

for they would relieve men from the painful necessity of renouncing
preconceived opinions . LYELL-1830-1,1,78.52

Incredible as such scepticism may appear , it would be rivalled by many
systems of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries , and among others by
that of the learned Falloppio , who regarded the tusks of fossil
elephants as earthy concretions , and the vases of Monte Testaceo , near
Rome , as works of nature , and not of art . LYELL-1830-1,1,78.53

But when one generation had passed away , and another not compromised to
the support of antiquated dogmas had succeeded , they would review the
evidence afforded by mummies more impartially , LYELL-1830-1,1,78.54

and would no longer controvert the preliminary question , that human
beings had lived in Egypt before the nineteenth century : so that when
a_hundred years perhaps had been lost , the industry and talents of the
philosopher would be at last directed to the elucidation of points of
real historical importance . LYELL-1830-1,1,78.55

But we have adverted to one only of many prejudices with which the
earlier geologists had to contend . LYELL-1830-1,1,78.56

Even when they conceded that the earth had been peopled with animate
beings at an earlier period than was at first supposed , they had no
conception that the quantity of time bore so great a proportion to the
historical era as is now generally conceded . LYELL-1830-1,1,78.57

How fatal every error as to the quantity of time must prove to the
introduction of rational views concerning the state of things in former
ages , may be conceived by supposing that the annals of the civil and
military transactions of a great nation were perused under the
impression that they occurred in a period of one_hundred <P_1,79>
instead of two_thousand years . LYELL-1830-1,1,79.58

Such a portion of history would immediately assume the air of a romance
; LYELL-1830-1,1,79.59

the events would seem devoid of credibility , and inconsistent with the
present course of human affairs , LYELL-1830-1,1,79.60

A crowd of incidents would follow each other in thick succession .
LYELL-1830-1,1,79.61

Armies and fleets would appear to be assembled only to be destroyed ,
and cities built merely to fall in ruins . LYELL-1830-1,1,79.62

There would be the most violent transitions from foreign or intestine
war to periods of profound peace , LYELL-1830-1,1,79.63

and the works effected during the years of disorder or tranquillity
would be alike superhuman in magnitude . LYELL-1830-1,1,79.64

He who should study the monuments of the natural world under the
influence of a similar infatuation , must draw a no less exaggerated
picture of the energy and violence of causes , LYELL-1830-1,1,79.65

and must experience the same insurmountable difficulty in reconciling
the former and present state of nature . LYELL-1830-1,1,79.66

If we could behold in one view all the volcanic cones thrown up in
Iceland , Italy , Sicily , and other parts of Europe , during the last
five_thousand years , and could see the lavas which have flowed during
the same period ; the dislocations , subsidences and elevations caused
by earthquakes ; the lands added to various deltas , or devoured by the
sea , together with the effects of devastation by floods , and imagine
that all these events had happened in one year , we must form most
exalted ideas of the activity of the agents , and the suddenness of the
revolutions . LYELL-1830-1,1,79.67

Were an equal amount of change to pass before our eyes in the next year
, could we avoid the conclusion that some great crisis of nature was at
hand ? LYELL-1830-1,1,79.68

If geologists , therefore , have misinterpreted the signs of a
succession of events , so as to conclude that centuries were implied
where the characters imported thousands of years , and thousands of
years where the language of nature signified millions , they could not ,
if they reasoned logically from such false premises , come to any other
conclusion , than that the system of the natural world had undergone a
complete revolution . LYELL-1830-1,1,79.69

We should be warranted in ascribing the erection of the great pyramid to
superhuman power , if we were convinced that it was raised in one day ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,79.70

and if we imagine , in the same manner , a mountain chain to have been
elevated , during an equally small fraction of the time which was really
occupied in upheaving it , we might then be justified in inferring ,
that <P_1,80> the subterranean movements were once far more energetic
than in our own times . LYELL-1830-1,1,80.71

We know that one earthquake may raise the coast of Chili for a_hundred
miles to the average height of about five feet . LYELL-1830-1,1,80.72

A repetition of two_thousand shocks of equal violence might produce a
mountain chain one_hundred miles long , and ten_thousand feet high .
LYELL-1830-1,1,80.73

Now , should one only of these convulsions happen in a century , it
would be consistent with the order of events experienced by the Chilians
from the earliest times ; LYELL-1830-1,1,80.74

but if the whole of them were to occur in the next hundred years , the
entire district must be depopulated , LYELL-1830-1,1,80.75

scarcely any animals or plants could survive , LYELL-1830-1,1,80.76

and the surface would be one confused heap of ruin and desolation .
LYELL-1830-1,1,80.77

One consequence of undervaluing greatly the quantity of past time is the
apparent coincidence which it occasions of events necessarily
disconnected , or which are so unusual , that it would be inconsistent
with all calculation of chances to suppose them to happen at one and the
same time . LYELL-1830-1,1,80.78

When the unlooked_for association of such rare phenomena is witnessed in
the present course of nature , it scarcely ever fails to excite a
suspicion of the preternatural in those minds which are not firmly
convinced of the uniform agency of secondary causes ; - as if the death
of some individual in whose fate they are interested , happens to be
accompanied by the appearance of a luminous meteor , or a comet , or the
shock of an earthquake . LYELL-1830-1,1,80.79

It would be only necessary to multiply such coincidences indefinitely ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,80.80

and the mind of every philosopher would be disturbed .
LYELL-1830-1,1,80.81

Now it would be difficult to exaggerate the number of physical events ,
many of them most rare and unconnected in their nature , which were
imagined by the Woodwardian hypothesis to have happened in the course of
a few months ; LYELL-1830-1,1,80.82

and numerous other examples might be found of popular geological
theories , which require us to imagine that a long succession of events
happened in a brief and almost momentary period . LYELL-1830-1,1,80.83

The sources of prejudice hitherto considered may be deemed as in a great
degree peculiar to the infancy of the science , LYELL-1830-1,1,80.84

but others are common to the first cultivators of geology and to
ourselves , LYELL-1830-1,1,80.85

and are all singularly calculated to produce the same deception , and to
strengthen our belief that the course of nature in the earlier ages
differed widely from that now established . LYELL-1830-1,1,80.86

Although we can@ @not fully explain all these circumstances , <P_1,81>
without assuming some things as proved , which it will be the object of
another part of this work to demonstrate , we must briefly allude to
them in this place . LYELL-1830-1,1,81.87

The first and greatest difficulty , then , consists in our habitual
unconsciousness that our position as observers is essentially
unfavourable , when we endeavour to estimate the magnitude of the
changes now in progress . LYELL-1830-1,1,81.88

In consequence of our inattention to this subject , we are liable to the
greatest mistakes in contrasting the present with former states of the
globe . LYELL-1830-1,1,81.89

We inhabit about a fourth part of the surface ; LYELL-1830-1,1,81.90

and that portion is almost exclusively the theatre of decay and not of
reproduction . LYELL-1830-1,1,81.91

We know , indeed , that new deposits are annually formed in seas and
lakes , and that every year some new igneous rocks are produced in the
bowels of the earth , LYELL-1830-1,1,81.92

but we can@ @not watch the progress of their formation ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,81.93

and , as they are only present to our minds by the aid of reflection ,
it requires an effort both of the reason and the imagination to
appreciate duly their importance . LYELL-1830-1,1,81.94

It is , therefore , not surprising that we imperfectly estimate the
result of operations invisible to us ; and that , when analogous results
of some former epoch are presented to our inspection , we can@ @not
recognise the analogy . LYELL-1830-1,1,81.95

He who has observed the quarrying of stone from a rock , and has seen it
shipped for some distant port , and then endeavours to conceive what
kind of edifice will be raised by the materials , is in the same
predicament as a geologist , who , while he is confined to the land ,
sees the decomposition of rocks , and the transportation of matter by
rivers to the sea , and then endeavours to picture to himself the new
strata which Nature is building beneath the waters .
LYELL-1830-1,1,81.96

Nor is his position less unfavourable when , beholding a volcanic
eruption , he tries to conceive what changes the column of lava has
produced , in its passage upwards , on the intersected strata ; or what
form the melted matter may assume at great depths on cooling down ; or
what may be the extent of the subterranean rivers and reservoirs of
liquid matter far beneath the surface . LYELL-1830-1,1,81.97

It should , therefore , be remembered , that the task imposed on those
who study the earth's history requires no ordinary share of discretion ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,81.98

for we are precluded from collating the corresponding parts of a system
existing at two different periods . LYELL-1830-1,1,81.99

If we were inhabitants of another element - if the great ocean were our
domain , instead of the narrow limits of the land , our difficulties
would be considerably lessened ; <P_1,82> while , on the other hand ,
there can be little doubt , although the reader may , perhaps , smile at
the bare suggestion of such an idea , that an amphibious being , who
should possess our faculties , would still more easily arrive at sound
theoretical opinions in geology , since he might behold , on the one
hand , the decomposition of rocks in the atmosphere , and the
transportation of matter by running water ; and , on the other , examine
the deposition of sediment in the sea , and the imbedding of animal
remains in new strata . LYELL-1830-1,1,82.100

He might ascertain , by direct observation , the action of a mountain
torrent , as well as of a marine current ; LYELL-1830-1,1,82.101

might compare the products of volcanos on the land with those poured out
beneath the waters ; LYELL-1830-1,1,82.102

and might mark , on the one hand , the growth of the forest , and on the
other that of the coral reef . LYELL-1830-1,1,82.103

Yet , even with these advantages , he would be liable to fall into the
greatest errors when endeavouring to reason on rocks of subterranean
origin . LYELL-1830-1,1,82.104

He would seek in vain , within the sphere of his observation , for any
direct analogy to the process of their formation , LYELL-1830-1,1,82.105

and would therefore be in danger of attributing them , wherever they are
upraised to view , to some " primeval state of nature . "
LYELL-1830-1,1,82.106

But if we may be allowed so far to indulge the imagination , as to
suppose a being , entirely confined to the nether world - some " dusky
melancholy sprite , " like Umbriel , who could " flit on sooty pinions
to the central earth , " but who was never permitted to " sully the fair
face of light , " and emerge into the regions of water and of air ; and
if this being should busy himself in investigating the structure of the
globe , he might frame theories the exact converse of those usually
adopted by human philosophers . LYELL-1830-1,1,82.107

He might infer that the stratified rocks , containing shells and other
organic remains , were the oldest of created things , belonging to some
original and nascent state of the planet . LYELL-1830-1,1,82.108

" Of these masses , " he might say , " whether they consist of loose
incoherent sand , soft clay , or solid rock , none have been formed in
modern times . LYELL-1830-1,1,82.109

Every year some part of them are broken and shattered by earthquakes ,
or melted up by volcanic fire ; LYELL-1830-1,1,82.110

and , when they cool down slowly from a state of fusion , they assume a
crystalline form , perfectly distinct from those inexplicable rocks
which are so regularly bedded , and contain stones full of curious
impressions and fantastic markings . LYELL-1830-1,1,82.111

This process can@ @not have been carried on for an indefinite time ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,82.112

for in that case all the stratified rocks would long ere <P_1,83> this
have been fused and crystallized . LYELL-1830-1,1,83.113

It is therefore probable that the whole planet once consisted of these
curiously-@ @bedded formations , at a time when the volcanic fire had
not yet been brought into activity . LYELL-1830-1,1,83.114

Since that period there seems to have been a gradual development of heat
, LYELL-1830-1,1,83.115

and this augmentation we may expect to continue till the whole globe
shall be in a state of fluidity and incandescence . "
LYELL-1830-1,1,83.116

Such might be the system of the Gnome at the very same time that the
followers of Leibnitz , reasoning on what they saw on the outer surface
, would be teaching the doctrine of gradual refrigeration , and averring
that the earth had begun its career as a fiery comet , and would
hereafter become a frozen icy mass . LYELL-1830-1,1,83.117

The tenets of the schools of the nether and of the upper world would be
directly opposed to each other , LYELL-1830-1,1,83.118

for both would partake of the prejudices inevitably resulting from the
continual contemplation of one class of phenomena to the exclusion of
another . LYELL-1830-1,1,83.119

Man observes the annual decomposition of crystalline and igneous rocks ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,83.120

and may sometimes see their conversion into stratified deposits ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,83.121

but he can@ @not witness the reconversion of the sedimentary into the
crystalline by subterranean fire . LYELL-1830-1,1,83.122

He is in the habit of regarding all the sedimentary rocks as more recent
than the unstratified , for the same reason that we may suppose him to
fall into the opposite error if he saw the origin of the igneous class
only . LYELL-1830-1,1,83.123

It is only by becoming sensible of our natural disadvantages that we
shall be roused to exertion , and prompted to seek out opportunities of
discovering the operations now in progress , such as do not present
themselves readily to view . LYELL-1830-1,1,83.124

We are called upon , in our researches into the state of the earth , as
in our endeavours to comprehend the mechanism of the heavens , to invent
means for overcoming the limited range of our vision .
LYELL-1830-1,1,83.125

We are perpetually required to bring , as far as possible , within the
sphere of observation , things to which the eye , unassisted by art ,
could never obtain access . LYELL-1830-1,1,83.126

It was not an impossible contingency that astronomers might have been
placed , at some period , in a situation much resembling that in which
the geologist seems to stand at present . LYELL-1830-1,1,83.127

If the Italians , for example , in the early part of the twelfth century
, had discovered at Amalphi , instead of the pandects of Justinian ,
some ancient manuscripts filled with astronomical observations relating
to a period of three_thousand years , and made by some ancient geometers
<P_1,84> who possessed optical instruments as perfect as any in modern
Europe , they would probably , on consulting these memorials , have come
to a conclusion that there had been a great revolution in the solar and
sidereal systems . LYELL-1830-1,1,84.128

" Many primary and secondary planets , " they might say , " are
enumerated in these tables , which exist no longer .
LYELL-1830-1,1,84.129

Their positions are assigned with such precision , that we may assure
ourselves that there is nothing in their place at present but the blue
ether . LYELL-1830-1,1,84.130

Where one star is visible to us , these documents represent several
thousands . LYELL-1830-1,1,84.131

Some of those which are now single , consisted then of two separate
bodies , often distinguished by different colours , and revolving
periodically round a common centre of gravity . LYELL-1830-1,1,84.132

There is no analogy to them in the universe at present ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,84.133

for they were neither fixed stars nor planets , LYELL-1830-1,1,84.134

but stood in the mutual relation of sun and planet to each other .
LYELL-1830-1,1,84.135

We must conclude , therefore , that there has occurred , at no distant
period , a tremendous catastrophe , whereby thousands of worlds have
been annihilated at once , and some heavenly bodies absorbed into the
substance of others . " LYELL-1830-1,1,84.136

When such doctrines had prevailed for ages , the discovery of one of the
worlds , supposed to have been lost , by aid of the first rude telescope
, would not dissipate the delusion , LYELL-1830-1,1,84.137

for the whole burden of proof would now be thrown on those who insisted
on the stability of the system from the beginning of time ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,84.138

and these philosophers would be required to demonstrate the existence of
<font> all <$$font> the worlds said to have been annihilated .
LYELL-1830-1,1,84.139

Such popular prejudices would be most unfavourable to the advancement of
astronomy ; LYELL-1830-1,1,84.140

for , instead of persevering in the attempt to improve their instruments
, and laboriously to make and record observations , the greater number
would despair of verifying the continued existence of the heavenly
bodies not visible to the naked eye . LYELL-1830-1,1,84.141

Instead of confessing the extent of their ignorance , and striving to
remove it by bringing to light new facts , they would be engaged in the
indolent employment of framing imaginary theories concerning
catastrophes and mighty revolutions in the system of the universe .
LYELL-1830-1,1,84.142

For more than two centuries the shelly strata of the Subapennine hills
afforded matter of speculation to the early geologists of Italy ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,84.143

and few of them had any suspicion that similar deposits were then
forming in the neighbouring sea . LYELL-1830-1,1,84.144

They were as unconscious of the continued action of causes still
producing <P_1,85> similar effects , as the astronomers , in the case
supposed by us , of the existence of certain heavenly bodies still
giving and reflecting light , and performing their movements as in the
olden time . LYELL-1830-1,1,85.145

Some imagined that the strata , so rich in organic remains , instead of
being due to secondary agents , had been so created in the beginning of
things by the fiat of the Almighty ; LYELL-1830-1,1,85.146

and others ascribed the imbedded fossil bodies to some plastic power
which resided in the earth in the early ages of the world .
LYELL-1830-1,1,85.147

At length Donati explored the bed of the Adriatic ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,85.148

and found the closest resemblance between the new deposits there forming
, and those which constituted hills above a_thousand feet high in
various parts of the peninsula . LYELL-1830-1,1,85.149

He ascertained that certain genera of living testacea were grouped
together at the bottom of the sea in precisely the same manner as were
their fossil analogues in the strata of the hills , and that some
species were common to the recent and fossil world .
LYELL-1830-1,1,85.150

Beds of shells , moreover , in the Adriatic , were becoming incrusted
with calcareous rock ; LYELL-1830-1,1,85.151

and others were recently enclosed in deposits of sand and clay ,
precisely as fossil shells were found in the hills .
LYELL-1830-1,1,85.152

This splendid discovery of the identity of modern and ancient submarine
operations was not made without the aid of artificial instruments ,
which , like the telescope , brought phenomena into view not otherwise
within the sphere of human observation . LYELL-1830-1,1,85.153

In like manner , in the Vicentin , a great series of volcanic and marine
sedimentary rocks were examined in the early part of the last century ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,85.154

but no geologist suspected , before the time of Arduino , that these
were partly composed of ancient submarine lavas . LYELL-1830-1,1,85.155

If , when these enquiries were first made , geologists had been told
that the mode of formation of such rocks might be fully elucidated by
the study of processes then going on in certain parts of the
Mediterranean , they would have been as incredulous as geometers would
have been before the time of Newton , if any one had informed them that
, by making experiments on the motion of bodies on the earth , they
might discover the laws which regulated the movements of distant planets
. LYELL-1830-1,1,85.156

The establishment , from time to time , of numerous points of
identification , drew at length from geologists a reluctant admission ,
that there was more correspondence between the physical constitution of
the globe , and more uniformity in the laws regulating <P_1,86> the
changes of its surface , from the most remote eras to the present , than
they at first imagined . LYELL-1830-1,1,86.157

If , in this state of the science , they still despaired of reconciling
every class of geological phenomena to the operations of ordinary causes
, even by straining analogy to the utmost limits of credibility , we
might have expected , that the balance of probability at least would now
have been presumed to incline towards the identity of the causes .
LYELL-1830-1,1,86.158

But , after repeated experience of the failure of attempts to speculate
on different classes of geological phenomena , as belonging to a
distinct order of things , each new sect persevered systematically in
the principles adopted by their predecessors . LYELL-1830-1,1,86.159

They invariably began , as each new problem presented itself , whether
relating to the animate or inanimate world , to assume in their theories
, that the economy of nature was formerly governed by rules quite
independent of those now established . LYELL-1830-1,1,86.160

Whether they endeavoured to account for the origin of certain igneous
rocks , or to explain the forces which elevated hills or excavated
valleys , or the causes which led to the extinction of certain races of
animals , they first presupposed an original and dissimilar order of
nature ; LYELL-1830-1,1,86.161

and when at length they approximated , or entirely came round to an
opposite opinion , it was always with the feeling , that they conceded
what they were justified <font> à_priori <$$font> in deeming improbable
. LYELL-1830-1,1,86.162

In a word , the same men who , as natural philosophers , would have been
greatly surprised to find any deviation from the usual course of Nature
<font> in their own time <$$font> , were equally surprised , as
geologists , not to find such deviations at every period of the past .
LYELL-1830-1,1,86.163

The Huttonians were conscious that no check could be given to the utmost
licence of conjecture in speculating on the causes of geological
phenomena , unless we can assume invariable constancy in the order of
Nature . LYELL-1830-1,1,86.164

But when they asserted this uniformity without any limitation as to time
, they were considered , by the majority of their contemporaries , to
have been carried too far , especially as they applied the same
principle to the laws of the organic , as well as of the inanimate world
. LYELL-1830-1,1,86.165

<P_1,87>

We shall first advert briefly to many difficulties which formerly
appeared insurmountable , but which , in the last forty years , have
been partially or entirely removed by the progress of science ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,87.167

and shall afterwards consider the objections that still remain to the
doctrine of absolute uniformity . LYELL-1830-1,1,87.168

In the first place , it was necessary for the supporters of this
doctrine to take for granted incalculable periods of time , in order to
explain the formation of sedimentary strata by causes now in diurnal
action . LYELL-1830-1,1,87.169

The time which they required theoretically , is now granted , as it were
, LYELL-1830-1,1,87.170

or has become absolutely requisite , to account for another class of
phenomena brought to light by more recent investigations .
LYELL-1830-1,1,87.171

It must always have been evident to unbiassed minds , that successive
strata , containing , in regular order of superposition , distinct beds
of shells and corals , arranged in families as they grow at the bottom
of the sea , could only have been formed by slow and insensible degrees
in a great lapse of ages ; LYELL-1830-1,1,87.172

yet , until organic remains were minutely examined and specifically
determined , it was rarely possible to prove that the series of deposits
met with in one country was not formed simultaneously with that found in
another . LYELL-1830-1,1,87.173

But we are now able to determine , in numerous instances , the relative
dates of sedimentary rocks in distant regions , and to show , by their
organic remains , that they were not of contemporary origin , but formed
in succession . LYELL-1830-1,1,87.174

We often find , that where an interruption in the consecutive formation
in one district is indicated by a sudden transition from one assemblage
of fossil species to another , the chasm is filled up , in some other
district , by other important groups of strata . LYELL-1830-1,1,87.175

The more attentively we study the European continent , the greater we
find the extension of the whole series of geological formations .
LYELL-1830-1,1,87.176

No sooner does the calendar appear to be completed , and the signs of a
succession of physical events arranged in chronological order , than we
are called upon to intercalate , as it were , some new periods of vast
duration . LYELL-1830-1,1,87.177

A geologist , whose observations have been confined to England , is
accustomed to consider the superior and newer groups of marine strata in
our island as modern , LYELL-1830-1,1,87.178

and such they are , comparatively speaking ; LYELL-1830-1,1,87.179

but when he has travelled through the Italian peninsula and in Sicily ,
and has seen strata of more recent origin forming mountains several
<P_1,88> thousand feet high , and has marked a long series both of
volcanic and submarine operations , all newer than any of the regular
strata which enter largely into the physical structure of Great Britain
, he returns with more exalted conceptions of the antiquity of some of
those modern deposits , than he before entertained of the oldest of the
British series . LYELL-1830-1,1,88.180

We can@ @not reflect on the concessions thus extorted from us , in
regard to the duration of past time , without foreseeing that the period
may arrive when part of the Huttonian theory will be combated on the
ground of its departing too far from the assumption of uniformity in the
order of nature . LYELL-1830-1,1,88.181

On a closer investigation of extinct volcanos , we find proofs that they
broke out at successive eras , and that the eruptions of one group were
often concluded long before others had commenced their activity .
LYELL-1830-1,1,88.182

Some were burning when one class of organic beings were in existence ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,88.183

others came into action when different races of animals and plants
existed , - LYELL-1830-1,1,88.184

it follows , therefore , that the convulsions caused by subterranean
movements , which are merely another portion of the volcanic phenomena ,
occurred also in succession , LYELL-1830-1,1,88.185

and their effects must be divided into separate sums , and assigned to
separate periods of time ; LYELL-1830-1,1,88.186

and this is not all : - LYELL-1830-1,1,88.187

when we examine the volcanic products , whether they be lavas which
flowed out under water or upon dry land , we find that intervals of time
, often of great length , intervened between their formation , and that
the effects of one eruption were not greater in amount than that which
now results during ordinary volcanic convulsions .
LYELL-1830-1,1,88.188

The accompanying or preceding earthquakes , therefore , may be
considered to have been also successive , and to have been in like
manner interrupted by intervals of time , and not to have exceeded in
violence those now experienced in the ordinary course of nature .
LYELL-1830-1,1,88.189

Already , therefore , may we regard the doctrine of the sudden elevation
of whole continents by paroxysmal eruptions as invalidated ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,88.190

and there was the greatest inconsistency in the adoption of such a tenet
by the Huttonians , who were anxious to reconcile former changes to the
present economy of the world . LYELL-1830-1,1,88.191

It was contrary to analogy to suppose , that Nature had been at any
former epoch parsimonious of time and prodigal of violence - to imagine
that one district was not at rest while another was convulsed - that the
disturbing forces were not kept under subjection , so as never <P_1,89>
to carry simultaneous havoc and desolation over the whole earth , or
even over one great region . LYELL-1830-1,1,89.192

If it could have been shown , that a certain combination of
circumstances would at some future period produce a crisis in the
subterranean action , we should certainly have had no right to oppose
our experience for the last three_thousand years as an argument against
the probability of such occurrences in past ages ; LYELL-1830-1,1,89.193

but it is not pretended that such a combination can be foreseen .
LYELL-1830-1,1,89.194

In speculating on catastrophes by water , we may certainly anticipate
great floods in future , LYELL-1830-1,1,89.195

and we may therefore presume that they have happened again and again in
past times . LYELL-1830-1,1,89.196

The existence of enormous seas of fresh-water , such as the
North_American lakes , the largest of which is elevated more than
six_hundred feet above the level of the ocean , and is in parts
twelve_hundred feet deep , is alone sufficient to assure us , that the
time will come , however distant , when a deluge will lay waste a
considerable part of the American continent . LYELL-1830-1,1,89.197

No hypothetical agency is required to cause the sudden escape of the
confined waters . LYELL-1830-1,1,89.198

Such changes of level , and opening of fissures , as have accompanied
earthquakes since the commencement of the present century , or such
excavation of ravines as the receding cataract of Niagara is now
effecting , might breach the barriers . LYELL-1830-1,1,89.199

Notwithstanding , therefore , that we have not witnessed within the last
three_thousand years the devastation by deluge of a large continent ,
yet , as we may predict the future occurrence of such catastrophes , we
are authorized to regard them as part of the present order of Nature ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,89.200

and they may be introduced into geological speculations respecting the
past , provided we do not imagine them to have been more frequent or
general than we expect them to be in time to come .
LYELL-1830-1,1,89.201

The great contrast in the aspect of the older and newer rocks , in their
texture , structure , and in the derangement of the strata , appeared
formerly one of the strongest grounds for presuming that the causes to
which they owed their origin were perfectly dissimilar from those now in
operation . LYELL-1830-1,1,89.202

But this incongruity may now be regarded as the natural result of
subsequent modifications , since the difference of relative age is
demonstrated to have been so immense , that , however slow and
insensible the change , it must have become important in the <P_1,90>
course of so many ages . LYELL-1830-1,1,90.203

In addition to volcanic heat , to which the Vulcanists formerly
attributed too much influence , we must allow for the effect of
mechanical pressure , of chemical affinity , of percolation by mineral
waters , of permeation by elastic fluids , and the action , perhaps , of
many other forces less understood , such as electricity and magnetism .
LYELL-1830-1,1,90.204

In regard to the signs of upraising and sinking , of fracture and
contortion in rocks , it is evident that newer strata can@ @not be
shaken by earthquakes , unless the subjacent rocks are also affected ;
so that the contrast in the relative degree of disturbance in the more
ancient and the newer strata , is one of many proofs that the
convulsions have happened in different eras , and the fact confirms the
uniformity of the action of subterranean forces , instead of their
greater violence in the primeval ages . LYELL-1830-1,1,90.205

The popular doctrine of universal formations , or the unlimited
geographical extent of strata , distinguished by similar mineral
characters , appeared for a long time to present insurmountable
objections to the supposition , that the earth's crust had been formed
by causes now acting . LYELL-1830-1,1,90.206

If it had merely been assumed , that rocks originating from fusion by
subterranean fire presented in all parts of the globe a perfect
correspondence in their mineral composition , the assumption would not
have been extravagant ; LYELL-1830-1,1,90.207

for , as the elementary substances that enter largely into the
composition of rocks are few in number , they may be expected to arrange
themselves invariably in the same forms , whenever the elementary
particles are freely exposed to the action of chemical affinities .
LYELL-1830-1,1,90.208

But when it was imagined that sedimentary mixtures , including animal
and vegetable remains , and evidently formed in the beds of ancient seas
, were of homogeneous nature throughout a whole hemisphere , or even
farther , the dogma precluded at once all hope of recognizing the
slightest analogy between the ancient and modern causes of decay and
reproduction . LYELL-1830-1,1,90.209

For we know that existing rivers carry down from different
mountain-chains sediment of distinct colours and composition ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,90.210

where the chains are near the sea , coarse sand and gravel is swept in ;
where they are distant , the finest mud . LYELL-1830-1,1,90.211

We know , also , that the matter introduced by springs into lakes and
seas is very diversified in mineral composition ; LYELL-1830-1,1,90.212

in short , contemporaneous strata now in the progress of formation are
greatly varied in their <P_1,91> composition , LYELL-1830-1,1,91.213

and could never afford formations of homogeneous mineral ingredients
co-extensive with the greater part of the earth's surface .
LYELL-1830-1,1,91.214

This theory , however , is as inapplicable to the effects of those
operations to which the formation of the earth's crust is due , as to
the effects of existing causes . LYELL-1830-1,1,91.215

The first investigators of sedimentary rocks had never reflected on the
great areas occupied by modern deltas of large rivers ; still less on
the much greater areas over which marine currents , preying alike on
river-deltas , and continuous lines of sea-coast , might be diffusing
homogeneous mixtures . LYELL-1830-1,1,91.216

They were ignorant of the vast spaces over which calcareous and other
mineral springs abound upon the land and in the sea , especially in and
near volcanic regions , and of the quantity of matter discharged by them
. LYELL-1830-1,1,91.217

When , therefore , they ascertained the extent of the geographical
distribution of certain groups of ancient strata - when they traced them
continuously from one extremity of Europe to the other , and found them
flanking , throughout their entire range , great mountain-chains , they
were astonished at so unexpected a discovery ; LYELL-1830-1,1,91.218

and , considering themselves at liberty to disregard all modern analogy
, they indulged in the sweeping generalization , that the law of
continuity prevailed throughout strata of contemporaneous origin over
the whole planet . LYELL-1830-1,1,91.219

The difficulty of dissipating this delusion was extreme , because some
rocks , formed under similar circumstances at different epochs , present
the same external characters , and often the same internal composition ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,91.220

and all these were assumed to be contemporaneous until the contrary
could be shown , which , in the absence of evidence derived from direct
superposition , and in the scarcity of organic remains , was often
impossible . LYELL-1830-1,1,91.221

Innumerable other false generalizations have been derived from the same
source ; such , for instance , as the former universality of the ocean ,
now disproved by the discovery of the remains of terrestrial vegetation
, contemporary with every successive race of marine animals ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,91.222

but we shall dwell no longer on exploded errors , but proceed at once to
contend against weightier objections , which will require more attentive
consideration . LYELL-1830-1,1,91.223

<P_1,92>

<heading>

Chapter VI . LYELL-1830-1,1,92.226

Proofs that the climate of the Northern hemisphere was formerly hotter -
LYELL-1830-1,1,92.227

Direct proofs from the organic remains of the Sicilian and Italian
strata - LYELL-1830-1,1,92.228

Proofs from analogy derived from extinct Quadrupeds -
LYELL-1830-1,1,92.229

Imbedding of Animals in Icebergs - LYELL-1830-1,1,92.230

Siberian Mammoths - LYELL-1830-1,1,92.231

Evidence in regard to temperature , from the fossil remains of tertiary
and secondary rocks - LYELL-1830-1,1,92.232

From the Plants of the Coal formation . LYELL-1830-1,1,92.233

<$$heading>

That the climate of the northern hemisphere has undergone an important
change , and that its mean annual temperature must once have resembled
that now experienced within the tropic , was the opinion of some of the
first naturalists who investigated the contents of ancient strata .
LYELL-1830-1,1,92.235

Their conjecture became more probable when the shells and corals of the
secondary rocks were more carefully examined , LYELL-1830-1,1,92.236

for these organic remains were found to be intimately connected by
generic affinity with species now living in warmer latitudes .
LYELL-1830-1,1,92.237

At a later period , many reptiles , such as turtles , tortoises , and
large saurian animals , were discovered in the European strata in great
abundance ; LYELL-1830-1,1,92.238

and they supplied new and powerful arguments , from analogy , in support
of the doctrine , that the heat of the climate had been great when our
secondary formations were deposited . LYELL-1830-1,1,92.239

Lastly , when the botanist turned his attention to the specific
determination of fossil plants , the evidence acquired the fullest
confirmation , LYELL-1830-1,1,92.240

for the flora of a country is peculiarly influenced by temperature ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,92.241

and the ancient vegetation of the earth might , more readily than the
forms of animals , have afforded conflicting proofs , had the popular
theory been without foundation . LYELL-1830-1,1,92.242

When the examination of animal and vegetable remains was extended to
rocks in the most northern parts of Europe and North America , and even
to the Arctic regions , indications of the same revolution in climate
were discovered . LYELL-1830-1,1,92.243

It can@ @not be said , that in this , as in many other departments of
geology we have investigated the phenomena of former <P_1,93> eras , and
neglected those of the present state of things . LYELL-1830-1,1,93.244

On the contrary , since the first agitation of this interesting question
, the accessions to our knowledge of living animals and plants have been
immense , LYELL-1830-1,1,93.245

and have far surpassed all the data previously obtained for generalizing
, concerning the relation of certain types of organization to particular
climates . LYELL-1830-1,1,93.246

The tropical and temperate zones of South America and of Australia have
been explored ; LYELL-1830-1,1,93.247

and , on close comparison , it has been found , that scarcely any of the
species of the animate creation in these extensive continents are
identical with those inhabiting the old world . LYELL-1830-1,1,93.248

Yet the zoologist and botanist , well acquainted with the geographical
distribution of organic beings in other parts of the globe , would have
been able , if distinct groups of species had been presented to them
from these regions , to recognise those which had been collected from
latitudes within , and those which were brought from without the tropics
. LYELL-1830-1,1,93.249

Before we attempt to explain the probable causes of great vicissitudes
of temperature on the earth's surface , we shall take a rapid view of
some of the principal data which appear to warrant , to the utmost
extent , the popular opinions now entertained on the subject .
LYELL-1830-1,1,93.250

To insist on the soundness of the inference , is the more necessary ,
because some zoologists have of late undertaken to vindicate the
uniformity of the laws of nature , not by accounting for former
fluctuations in climate , but by denying the value of the evidence on
this subject . LYELL-1830-1,1,93.251

It is not merely by reasoning from analogy that we are led to infer a
diminution of temperature in the climate of Europe ;
LYELL-1830-1,1,93.252

there are direct proofs in confirmation of the same doctrine , in the
only countries hitherto investigated by expert geologists where we could
expect to meet with direct proofs . LYELL-1830-1,1,93.253

It is not in England or Northern France , but around the borders of the
Mediterranean , from the South of Spain to Calabria , and in the islands
of the Mediterranean , that we must look for conclusive evidence on this
question ; LYELL-1830-1,1,93.254

for it is not in strata , where the <P_1,94> organic remains belong to
extinct species , but where living species abound in a fossil state ,
that a theory of climate can be subjected to the experimentum crucis .
LYELL-1830-1,1,94.255

In Sicily , Ischia , and Calabria , where the fossil testacea of the
more recent strata belong almost entirely to species now known to
inhabit the Mediterranean , the conchologist remarks , that individuals
in the inland deposits exceed in their average size their living
analogues . LYELL-1830-1,1,94.256

Yet no doubt can be entertained , on the ground of such difference in
their dimensions , of their specific identity , because the living
individuals attain sometimes , though rarely , the average size of the
fossils ; LYELL-1830-1,1,94.257

and so perfect is the preservation of the latter , that they retain , in
some instances , their colour , which affords an additional element of
comparison . LYELL-1830-1,1,94.258

As we proceed northwards in the Italian peninsula , and pass from the
region of active , to that of extinct volcanos - from districts now
violently convulsed from time to time , to those which are comparatively
undisturbed by earthquakes , we find the assemblage of fossil shells ,
in the modern <paren> Subapennine <$$paren> strata , to depart somewhat
more widely from the type of the neighbouring seas .
LYELL-1830-1,1,94.259

The proportion of species , identifiable with those now living in the
Mediterranean , is still considerable ; LYELL-1830-1,1,94.260

but it no longer predominates , as in the South of Italy , over the
unknown species . LYELL-1830-1,1,94.261

Although occurring in localities which are removed several degrees
farther from the equator <paren> as at Sienna , Parma , Asti , &c.
<$$paren> , the shells yield clear indications of a hotter climate .
LYELL-1830-1,1,94.262

Many of them are common to the Subapennine hills , to the Mediterranean
, and to the Indian Ocean . LYELL-1830-1,1,94.263

Those in the fossil state , and their living analogues from the tropics
, correspond in size ; whereas the individuals of the same species from
the Mediterranean are dwarfish and <P_1,95> degenerate , and stunted in
their growth , for want of conditions which the Indian Ocean still
supplies . LYELL-1830-1,1,95.264

This evidence amounts to demonstration , LYELL-1830-1,1,95.265

and is not neutralized by any facts of a conflicting character ; such ,
for instance , as the association , in the same group , of individuals
referrible to species now confined to arctic regions .
LYELL-1830-1,1,95.266

On the contrary , whenever any of the fossil {TEXT:fossils} shells are
identified with living species foreign to the Mediterranean , it is not
in the Northern Ocean , but between the tropics , that they must be
sought . LYELL-1830-1,1,95.267

On the other hand , the associated unknown species belong , for the most
part , to genera which are either exclusively limited to equinoctial
regions , or are now most largely developed there .
LYELL-1830-1,1,95.268

Of the former , the genus Pleurotoma is a remarkable example ; of the
latter , the genus Cypraea . LYELL-1830-1,1,95.269

When we proceed to the central and northern parts of Europe , far from
the modern theatres of volcanic action , and where there is no evidence
of considerable inequalities of the earth's surface having been produced
since the present species <P_1,96> were in existence , our opportunities
are necessarily more limited of procuring evidence from the contents of
marine strata . LYELL-1830-1,1,96.270

It is only in lacustrine deposits , or in ancient riverbeds , or in the
sand and gravel of land-floods , or the stalagmite of ancient caverns
once inhabited by wild beasts , that we can obtain access to proofs of
the changes which animal life underwent during those periods when the
marine strata already adverted to were deposited farther to the south .
LYELL-1830-1,1,96.271

As far , however , as proofs from analogy can be depended upon , nothing
can be more striking than the harmony of the testimony derived from the
last-mentioned sources . LYELL-1830-1,1,96.272

We often find , in such situations , the remains of extinct species of
quadrupeds , such as the elephant , rhinoceros , hippopotamus , hyaena ,
and tiger , which belong to genera now confined to warmer regions .
LYELL-1830-1,1,96.273

Some of the accompanying fossil species , which are identifiable with
those now living , belong to animals which inhabit the same latitudes at
present . LYELL-1830-1,1,96.274

It seems , therefore , fair to infer , that the same change of climate
which has caused certain Indian species of testacea to become rare , or
to degenerate in size , or to disappear from the Mediterranean , and
certain genera of the Subapennine hills , now exclusively tropical , to
retain no longer any representatives in the adjoining seas , has also
contributed to the annihilation of certain genera of land-mammifera ,
which inhabited the continents at about the same epoch .
LYELL-1830-1,1,96.275

The mammoth <paren> Elephas primigenius <$$paren> , and other extinct
animals of the same era , may not have required the same temperature as
their living congeners within the tropics ; LYELL-1830-1,1,96.276

but we may infer , that the climate was milder <P_1,97> than that now
experienced in some of the regions once inhabited by them , because , in
Northern Russia , where their bones are found in immense numbers , it
would be difficult , if not impossible , for such animals to obtain
subsistence at present , during an arctic winter .
LYELL-1830-1,1,97.277

It has been said , that as the modern northern animals migrate , the
Siberian elephant may also have shifted his place during the inclemency
of the season , LYELL-1830-1,1,97.278

but this conjecture seems forced , even in regard to the elephant , and
still more so , when applied to the Siberian rhinoceros , found in the
frozen gravel of that country ; as animals of this genus are heavy and
slow in their motions , and can hardly be supposed to have accomplished
great periodical migrations to southern latitudes .
LYELL-1830-1,1,97.279

That the mammoth , however , continued for a long time to exist in
Siberia after the winters had become extremely cold , is demonstrable ,
since their bones are found in icebergs , and in the frozen gravel , in
such abundance as could only have been supplied by many successive
generations . LYELL-1830-1,1,97.280

So many skeletons could not have belonged to herds which lived at one
time in the district , even if those northern countries had once been
clothed with vegetation as luxuriant as that of an Indian jungle .
LYELL-1830-1,1,97.281

But , if we suppose the change to have been extremely slow , and to have
consisted , not so much in a diminution of the mean annual temperature ,
as in an alteration from what has been termed an " insular " to an "
excessive " climate , from one in which the temperature of winter and
summer were nearly equalized to one wherein the seasons were violently
contrasted , we may , perhaps , explain the phenomenon .
LYELL-1830-1,1,97.282

Siberia and other arctic regions , after having possessed for ages a
more uniform temperature , may , after certain changes in the form of
the arctic land , have become occasionally exposed <P_1,98> to extremely
severe winters . LYELL-1830-1,1,98.283

When these first occurred at distant intervals , the drift snow would
fill the valleys , LYELL-1830-1,1,98.284

and herds of herbivorous quadrupeds would be surprised and buried in a
frozen mass , as often happens to cattle and human beings , overwhelmed
, in the Alpine valleys of Switzerland , by avalanches .
LYELL-1830-1,1,98.285

When valleys have become filled with ice , as those of Spitzbergen , the
contraction of the mass causes innumerable deep rents , such as are seen
in the mer_de_glace on Mont Blanc . LYELL-1830-1,1,98.286

These deep crevices usually become filled with loose snow ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,98.287

but sometimes a thin covering is drifted across the mouth of the chasm ,
capable of sustaining a certain weight . LYELL-1830-1,1,98.288

Such treacherous bridges are liable to give way when heavy animals are
crossing , which are then precipitated at once into the body of a
glacier , which slowly descends to the sea , and becomes a floating
iceberg . LYELL-1830-1,1,98.289

As bears , foxes , and deer now abound in Spitzbergen , we may
confidently assume that the imbedding of animal remains in the glaciers
of that island must be an event of almost annual occurrence .
LYELL-1830-1,1,98.290

The conversion of drift snow into permanent glaciers and icebergs , when
it happens to become covered over with alluvial matter , transported by
torrents and floods , is by no means a rare phenomenon in the arctic
regions . LYELL-1830-1,1,98.291

During a series of milder seasons intervening <P_1,99> between the
severe winters , the mammoths may have recovered their numbers ,
LYELL-1830-1,1,99.292

and the rhinoceroses may have multiplied again , so that the repetition
of such catastrophes may have been indefinite . LYELL-1830-1,1,99.293

The increasing cold , and greater frequency of inclement winters , would
at last thin their numbers , LYELL-1830-1,1,99.294

and their final extirpation would be consummated by the rapid
augmentation of other herbivorous quadrupeds , more fitted for the new
climate . LYELL-1830-1,1,99.295

That the greater part of the elephants lived in Siberia after it had
become subject to intense cold , is confirmed , among other reasons , by
the state of the ivory , which has been so largely exported in commerce
. LYELL-1830-1,1,99.296

Its perfect preservation indicates , that from the period when the
individuals died , their remains were either buried in a frozen soil ,
or at least were not exposed to decay in a warm atmosphere .
LYELL-1830-1,1,99.297

The same conclusion may be deduced from the clothing of the mammoth , of
which the entire carcase was discovered by Mr. Adams on the shores of
the frozen ocean , near the mouth of the river Lena , inclosed in a mass
of ice . LYELL-1830-1,1,99.298

The skin of that individual was covered with long hair and with thick
wool , about an inch in length . LYELL-1830-1,1,99.299

Bishop Heber informs us , that along the lower range of the Himalaya
mountains , in the north-eastern borders of the Delhi territory ,
between lat. 29@ @=o= and 30@ @=o= , he saw an Indian elephant covered
with shaggy hair . LYELL-1830-1,1,99.300

In that region , where , within a short space , a nearly tropical , and
a cold climate meet , dogs and horses become covered , in the course of
a winter or two , with shaggy hair , LYELL-1830-1,1,99.301

and many other species become , in as short a time , clothed with the
same fine short shawl-wool , which distinguishes the indigenous species
of the country . LYELL-1830-1,1,99.302

Lions , tigers , hyaenas , are there found with elks , chamois , and
other species of genera usually abundant in colder latitudes .
LYELL-1830-1,1,99.303

