<BEGIN_macaulay-1849-2>

<P_1,37>

More than a_hundred_and_sixty years have now elapsed since the English
people have by force subverted a government . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,37.3

During the hundred_and_sixty years which preceded the union of the Roses
, nine Kings reigned in England . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,37.4

Six of these nine Kings were deposed . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,37.5

Five lost their lives as well as their crowns . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,37.6

It is evident , therefore , that any comparison between our ancient and
our modern polity must lead to most erroneous conclusions , unless large
allowance be made for the effect of that restraint which resistance and
the fear of resistance constantly imposed on the Plantagenets .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,37.7

As our ancestors had against tyranny a most important security which we
want , they might safely dispense with some securities to which we
justly attach the highest importance . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,37.8

As we can@ @not , without the risk of evils from which the imagination
recoils , employ physical force as a check on misgovernment , it is
evidently our wisdom <P_1,38> to keep all the constitutional checks on
misgovernment in the highest state of efficiency , to watch with
jealousy the first beginnings of encroachment , and never to suffer
irregularities , even when harmless in themselves , to pass unchallenged
, lest they acquire the force of precedents . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,38.9

Four_hundred years ago such minute vigilance might well seem unnecessary
. MACAULAY-1849-2,1,38.10

A nation of hardy archers and spearmen might , with small risk to its
liberties , connive at some illegal acts on the part of a prince whose
general administration was good , and whose throne was not defended by a
single company of regular soldiers . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,38.11

Under this system , rude as it may appear when compared with those
elaborate constitutions of which the last seventy years have been
fruitful , the English long enjoyed a large measure of freedom and
happiness . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,38.12

Though , during the feeble reign of Henry the Sixth , the state was torn
, first by factions , and at length by civil war ; though Edward the
Fourth was a prince of dissolute and imperious character ; though
Richard the Third has generally been represented as a monster of
depravity ; though the exactions of Henry the Seventh caused great
repining ; it is certain that our ancestors , under those Kings , were
far better governed than the Belgians under Philip , surnamed the Good ,
or the French under that Lewis who was styled the Father of his people .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,38.13

Even while the wars of the Roses were actually raging , our country
appears to have been in a happier condition than the neighbouring realms
during years of profound peace . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,38.14

Comines was one of the most enlightened statesmen of his time .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,38.15

He had seen all the richest and most highly civilised parts of the
Continent . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,38.16

He had lived in the opulent towns of Flanders , the Manchesters and
Liverpools of the fifteenth century . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,38.17

He had visited Florence , recently adorned by the magnificence of
Lorenzo , and Venice , <P_1,39> not yet humbled by the Confederates of
Cambray . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.18

This eminent man deliberately pronounced England to be the best governed
country of which he had any knowledge . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.19

Her constitution he emphatically designated as a just and holy thing ,
which , while it protected the people , really strengthened the hands of
a prince who respected it . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.20

In no other country , he said , were men so effectually secured from
wrong . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.21

The calamities produced by our intestine wars seemed to him to be
confined to the nobles and the fighting men , and to leave no traces
such as he had been accustomed to see elsewhere , no ruined dwellings ,
no depopulated cities . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.22

It was not only by the efficiency of the restraints imposed on the royal
prerogative that England was advantageously distinguished from most of
the neighbouring countries . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.23

A peculiarity equally important , though less noticed , was the relation
in which the nobility stood here to the commonalty .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.24

There was a strong hereditary aristocracy : MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.25

but it was of all hereditary aristocracies the least insolent and
exclusive . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.26

It had none of the invidious character of a caste .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.27

It was constantly receiving members from the people , and constantly
sending down members to mingle with the people .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.28

Any gentleman might become a peer . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.29

The younger son of a peer was but a gentleman . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.30

Grandsons of peers yielded precedence to newly made knights .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.31

The dignity of knighthood was not beyond the reach of any man who could
by diligence and thrift realise a good estate , or who could attract
notice by his valour in a battle or a siege . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.32

It was regarded as no disparagement for the daughter of a Duke , nay of
a royal Duke , to espouse a distinguished commoner .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.33

Thus , Sir John Howard married the daughter of Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.34

Sir Richard Pole married the Countess of Salisbury , daughter of George
Duke of Clarence . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,39.35

<P_1,40>

Good blood was indeed held in high respect : MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.37

but between good blood and the privileges of peerage there was , most
fortunately for our country , no necessary connection .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.38

Pedigrees as long , and scutcheons as old , were to be found out of the
House of Lords as in it . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.39

There were new men who bore the highest titles .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.40

There were untitled men well known to be descended from knights who had
broken the Saxon ranks at Hastings , and scaled the walls of Jerusalem .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.41

There were Bohuns , Mowbrays , De_Veres , nay , kinsmen of the House of
Plantagenet , with no higher addition than that of Esquire , and with no
civil privileges beyond those enjoyed by every farmer and shopkeeper .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.42

There was therefore here no line like that which in some other countries
divided the patrician from the plebeian . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.43

The yeoman was not inclined to murmur at dignities to which his own
children might rise . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.44

The grandee was not inclined to insult a class into which his own
children must descend . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.45

After the wars of York and Lancaster , the links which connected the
nobility and the commonalty became closer and more numerous than ever .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.46

The extent of the destruction which had fallen on the old aristocracy
may be inferred from a single circumstance . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.47

In the year 1451 Henry the Sixth summoned fifty-three temporal Lords to
parliament . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.48

The temporal Lords summoned by Henry the Seventh to the parliament of
1485 were only twenty-nine , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.49

and of these several had recently been elevated to the peerage .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.50

During the following century the ranks of the nobility were largely
recruited from among the gentry . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.51

The constitution of the House of Commons tended greatly to promote the
salutary intermixture of classes . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.52

The knight of the shire was the connecting link between the baron and
the shopkeeper . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,40.53

On the same benches on which sat {TEXT:sate} the goldsmiths , <P_1,41>
drapers , and grocers , who had been returned to parliament by the
commercial towns , sat {TEXT:sate} also members who , in any other
country , would have been called noblemen , hereditary lords of manors ,
entitled to hold courts and to bear coat armour , and able to trace back
an honourable descent through many generations .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.54

Some of them were younger sons and brothers of lords .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.55

Others could boast of even royal blood . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.56

At length the eldest son of an Earl of Bedford , called in courtesy by
the second title of his father , offered himself as candidate for a seat
in the House of Commons , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.57

and his example was followed by others . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.58

Seated in that house , the heirs of the great peers naturally became as
zealous for its privileges as any of the humble burgesses with whom they
were mingled . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.59

Thus our democracy was , from an early period , the most aristocratic ,
and our aristocracy the most democratic in the world ; a peculiarity
which has lasted down to the present day , and which has produced many
important moral and political effects . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.60

The government of Henry the Seventh , of his son , and of his
grandchildren was , on the whole , more arbitrary than that of the
Plantagenets . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.61

Personal character may in some degree explain the difference ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.62

for courage and force of will were common to all the men and women of
the House of Tudor . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.63

They exercised their power during a period of a_hundred_and_twenty years
, always with vigour , often with violence , sometimes with cruelty .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.64

They , in imitation of the dynasty which had preceded them ,
occasionally invaded the rights of the subject , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.65

occasionally exacted taxes under the name of loans and gifts ,
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.66

and occasionally dispensed with penal statutes : MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.67

nay , though they never presumed to enact any permanent law by their own
authority , they occasionally took upon themselves , when Parliament was
not sitting , to meet temporary exigencies by temporary edicts .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,41.68

It was , however , <P_1,42> impossible for the Tudors to carry
oppression beyond a certain point : MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.69

for they had no armed force , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.70

and they were surrounded by an armed people . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.71

Their palace was guarded by a few domestics , whom the array of a single
shire , or of a single ward of London , could with ease have overpowered
. MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.72

These haughty princes were therefore under a restraint stronger than any
which mere law can impose , under a restraint which did not , indeed ,
prevent them from sometimes treating an individual in an arbitrary and
even in a barbarous manner , but which effectually secured the nation
against general and long continued oppression . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.73

They might safely be tyrants within the precinct of the court :
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.74

but it was necessary for them to watch with constant anxiety the temper
of the country . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.75

Henry the Eighth , for example , encountered no opposition when he
wished to send Buckingham and Surrey , Anne Boleyn and Lady Salisbury ,
to the scaffold . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.76

But when , without the consent of Parliament , he demanded of his
subjects a contribution amounting to one sixth of their goods , he soon
found it necessary to retract . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.77

The cry of hundreds of thousands was that they were English and not
French , freemen and not slaves . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.78

In Kent the royal commissioners fled for their lives .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.79

In Suffolk four_thousand men appeared in arms . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.80

The King's lieutenants in that county vainly exerted themselves to raise
an army . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.81

Those who did not join in the insurrection declared that they would not
fight against their brethren in such a quarrel .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.82

Henry , proud and selfwilled as he was , shrank , not without reason ,
from a conflict with the roused spirit of the nation .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.83

He had before his eyes the fate of his predecessors who had perished at
Berkeley and Pomfret . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.84

He not only cancelled his illegal commissions ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.85

he not only granted a general pardon to all the male-contents ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.86

but he publicly and solemnly apologised for his infraction of the laws .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,42.87

<P_1,43>

His conduct , on this occasion , well illustrates the whole policy of
his house . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.89

The temper of the princes of that line was hot , and their spirit high :
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.90

but they understood the character of the nation which they governed ,
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.91

and never once , like some of their predecessors , and some of their
successors , carried obstinacy to a fatal point .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.92

The discretion of the Tudors was such , that their power , though it was
often resisted , was never subverted . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.93

The reign of every one of them was disturbed by formidable discontents :
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.94

but the government was always able either to soothe the mutineers , or
to conquer and punish them . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.95

Sometimes , by timely concessions , it succeeded in averting civil
hostilities ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.96

but in general it stood firm , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.97

and called for help on the nation . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.98

The nation obeyed the call , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.99

rallied round the sovereign , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.100

and enabled him to quell the disaffected minority .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.101

Thus , from the age of Henry the Third to the age of Elizabeth , England
grew and flourished under a polity which contained the germ of our
present institutions , and which , though not very exactly defined , or
very exactly observed , was yet effectually prevented from degenerating
into despotism , by the awe in which the governors stood of the spirit
and strength of the governed . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.102

But such a polity is suited only to a particular stage in the progress
of society . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.103

The same causes which produce a division of labour in the peaceful arts
must at length make war a distinct science and a distinct trade .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.104

A time arrives when the use of arms begins to occupy the entire
attention of a separate class . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.105

It soon appears that peasants and burghers , however brave , are unable
to stand their ground against veteran soldiers , whose whole life is a
preparation for the day of battle , whose nerves have been braced by
long familiarity with danger , and whose movements have all the
precision of clockwork . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,43.106

<P_1,44>

It is found that the defence of nations can no longer be safely
entrusted to warriors taken from the plough or the loom for a campaign
of forty days . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.108

If any state forms a great regular army , the bordering states must
imitate the example , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.109

or must submit to a foreign yoke . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.110

But , where a great regular army exists , limited monarchy , such as it
was in the middle ages , can exist no longer . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.111

The sovereign is at once emancipated from what had been the chief
restraint on his power ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.112

and he inevitably becomes absolute , unless he is subjected to checks
such as would be superfluous in a society where all are soldiers
occasionally , and none permanently . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.113

With the danger came also the means of escape .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.114

In the monarchies of the middle ages the power of the sword belonged to
the prince ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.115

but the power of the purse belonged to the nation ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.116

and the progress of civilisation , as it made the sword of the prince
more and more formidable to the nation , made the purse of the nation
more and more necessary to the prince . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.117

His hereditary revenues would no longer suffice , even for the expenses
of civil government . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.118

It was utterly impossible that , without a regular and extensive system
of taxation , he could keep in constant efficiency a great body of
disciplined troops . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.119

The policy which the parliamentary assemblies of Europe ought to have
adopted was to take their stand firmly on their constitutional right to
give or withhold money , and resolutely to refuse funds for the support
of armies , till ample securities had been provided against despotism .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.120

This wise policy was followed in our country alone .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.121

In the neighbouring kingdoms great military establishments were formed ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.122

no new safeguards for public liberty were devised ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.123

and the consequence was , that the old parliamentary institutions
everywhere ceased to exist . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,44.124

In France , where they had <P_1,45> always been feeble , they languished
, MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.125

and at length died of mere weakness . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.126

In Spain , where they had been as strong as in any part of Europe , they
struggled fiercely for life , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.127

but struggled too late . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.128

The mechanics of Toledo and Valladolid vainly defended the privileges of
the Castilian Cortes against the veteran battalions of Charles the Fifth
. MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.129

As vainly , in the next generation , did the citizens of Saragossa stand
up against Philip the Second , for the old constitution of Aragon .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.130

One after another , the great national councils of the continental
monarchies , councils once scarcely less proud and powerful than those
which sat {TEXT:sate} at Westminster , sank into utter insignificance .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.131

If they met , they met merely as our Convocation now meets , to go
through some venerable forms . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.132

In England events took a different course . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.133

This singular felicity she owed chiefly to her insular situation .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.134

Before the end of the fifteenth century great military establishments
were indispensable to the dignity , and even to the safety , of the
French and Castilian monarchies . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.135

If either of those two powers had disarmed , it would soon have been
compelled to submit to the dictation of the other .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.136

But England , protected by the sea against invasion , and rarely engaged
in warlike operations on the Continent , was not , as yet , under the
necessity of employing regular troops . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.137

The sixteenth century , the seventeenth century , found her still
without a standing army . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.138

At the commencement of the seventeenth century political science had
made considerable progress . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.139

The fate of the Spanish Cortes and of the French States_General had
given solemn warning to our Parliaments ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.140

and our Parliaments , fully aware of the nature and magnitude of the
danger , adopted , in good time , a system of tactics which , after a
contest protracted through three generations , was at length successful
. MACAULAY-1849-2,1,45.141

<P_1,46>

Almost every writer who has treated of that contest has been desirous to
show that his own party was the party which was struggling to preserve
the old constitution unaltered . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.143

The truth however is that the old constitution could not be preserved
unaltered . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.144

A law , beyond the control of human wisdom , had decreed that there
should no longer be governments of that peculiar class which , in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries , had been common throughout Europe .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.145

The question , therefore , was not whether our polity should undergo a
change , but what the nature of the change should be .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.146

The introduction of a new and mighty force had disturbed the old
equilibrium , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.147

and had turned one limited monarchy after another into an absolute
monarchy . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.148

What had happened elsewhere would assuredly have happened here , unless
the balance had been redressed by a great transfer of power from the
crown to the parliament . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.149

Our princes were about to have at their command means of coercion such
as no Plantagenet or Tudor had ever possessed .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.150

They must inevitably have become despots , unless they had been , at the
same time , placed under restraints to which no Plantagenet or Tudor had
ever been subject . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.151

It seems certain , therefore , that , had none but political causes been
at work , the seventeenth century would not have passed away without a
fierce conflict between our Kings and their Parliaments .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.152

But other causes of perhaps greater potency contributed to produce the
same effect . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.153

While the government of the Tudors was in its highest vigour an event
took place which has coloured the destinies of all Christian nations ,
and in an especial manner the destinies of England .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.154

Twice during the middle ages the mind of Europe had risen up against the
domination of Rome . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.155

The first insurrection broke out in the south of France .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,46.156

The energy of Innocent the Third , the zeal <P_1,47> of the young orders
of Francis and Dominic , and the ferocity of the Crusaders whom the
priesthood let loose on an unwarlike population , crushed the
Albigensian churches . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.157

The second reformation had its origin in England ,
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.158

and spread to Bohemia . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.159

The Council of Constance , by removing some ecclesiastical disorders
which had given scandal to Christendom , and the princes of Europe , by
unsparingly using fire and sword against the heretics , succeeded in
arresting and turning back the movement . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.160

Nor is this much to be lamented . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.161

The sympathies of a Protestant , it is true , will naturally be on the
side of the Albigensians and of the Lollards . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.162

Yet an enlightened and temperate Protestant will perhaps be disposed to
doubt whether the success , either of the Albigensians or of the
Lollards , would , on the whole , have promoted the happiness and virtue
of mankind . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.163

Corrupt as the Church of Rome was , there is reason to believe that , if
that Church had been overthrown in the twelfth or even in the fourteenth
century , the vacant space would have been occupied by some system more
corrupt still . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.164

There was then , through the greater part of Europe , very little
knowledge ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.165

and that little was confined to the clergy . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.166

Not one man in five_hundred could have spelled his way through a psalm .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.167

Books were few and costly . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.168

The art of printing was unknown . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.169

Copies of the Bible , inferior in beauty and clearness to those which
every cottager may now command , sold for prices which many priests
could not afford to give . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.170

It was obviously impossible that the laity should search the Scriptures
for themselves . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.171

It is probable therefore , that , as soon as they had put off one
spiritual yoke , they would have put on another , and that the power
lately exercised by the clergy of the Church of Rome would have passed
to a far worse class of teachers . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,47.172

The sixteenth century was comparatively a time of <P_1,48> light .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.173

Yet even in the sixteenth century a considerable number of those who
quitted the old religion followed the first confident and plausible
guide who offered himself , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.174

and were soon led into errors far more serious than those which they had
renounced . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.175

Thus Matthias and Kniperdoling , apostles of lust , robbery , and murder
, were able for a time to rule great cities . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.176

In a darker age such false prophets might have founded empires ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.177

and Christianity might have been distorted into a cruel and licentious
superstition , more noxious , not only than Popery , but even than
Islamism . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.178

About a_hundred years after the rising of the Council of Constance ,
that great change emphatically called the Reformation began .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.179

The fulness of time was now come . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.180

The clergy were no longer the sole or the chief depositories of
knowledge . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.181

The invention of printing had furnished the assailants of the Church
with a mighty weapon which had been wanting to their predecessors .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.182

The study of the ancient writers , the rapid development of the powers
of the modern languages , the unprecedented activity which was displayed
in every department of literature , the political state of Europe , the
vices of the Roman court , the exactions of the Roman chancery , the
jealousy with which the wealth and privileges of the clergy were
naturally regarded by laymen , the jealousy with which the Italian
ascendency was naturally regarded by men born on our side of the Alps ,
all these things gave to the teachers of the new theology an advantage
which they perfectly understood how to use . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.183

Those who hold that the influence of the Church of Rome in the dark ages
was , on the whole , beneficial to mankind may yet with perfect
consistency regard the Reformation as an inestimable blessing .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.184

The leading strings , which preserve and uphold the infant , would
impede the fullgrown man . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,48.185

And so the very means by which the human mind is , in one stage of
<P_1,49> its progress , supported and propelled , may , in another stage
, be mere hindrances . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.186

There is a season in the life both of an individual and of a society ,
at which submission and faith , such as at a later period would be
justly called servility and credulity , are useful qualities .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.187

The child who teachably and undoubtingly listens to the instructions of
his elders is likely to improve rapidly . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.188

But the man who should receive with childlike docility every assertion
and dogma uttered by another man no wiser than himself would become
contemptible . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.189

It is the same with communities . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.190

The childhood of the European nations was passed under the tutelage of
the clergy . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.191

The ascendency of the sacerdotal order was long the ascendency which
naturally and properly belongs to intellectual superiority .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.192

The priests , with all their faults , were by far the wisest portion of
society . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.193

It was , therefore , on the whole , good that they should be respected
and obeyed . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.194

The encroachments of the ecclesiastical power on the province of the
civil power produced much more happiness than misery , while the
ecclesiastical power was in the hands of the only class that had studied
history , philosophy , and public law , and while the civil power was in
the hands of savage chiefs , who could not read their own grants and
edicts . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.195

But a change took place . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.196

Knowledge gradually spread among laymen . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.197

At the commencement of the sixteenth century many of them were in every
intellectual attainment fully equal to the most enlightened of their
spiritual pastors . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.198

Thenceforward that dominion , which , during the dark ages , had been ,
in spite of many abuses , a legitimate and salutary guardianship ,
became an unjust and noxious tyranny . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,49.199

From the time when the barbarians overran the Western Empire to the time
of the revival of letters , the influence of the Church of Rome had been
<P_1,50> generally favourable to science , to civilisation , and to good
government . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.200

But , during the last three centuries , to stunt the growth of the human
mind has been her chief object . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.201

Throughout Christendom , whatever advance has been made in knowledge ,
in freedom , in wealth , and in the arts of life , has been made in
spite of her , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.202

and has everywhere been in inverse proportion to her power .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.203

The loveliest and most fertile provinces of Europe have , under her rule
, been sunk in poverty , in political servitude , and in intellectual
torpor , while Protestant countries , once proverbial for sterility and
barbarism , have been turned by skill and industry into gardens , and
can boast of a long list of heroes and statesmen , philosophers and
poets . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.204

Whoever , knowing what Italy and Scotland naturally are , and what ,
four_hundred years ago , they actually were , shall now compare the
country round Rome with the country round Edinburgh , will be able to
form some judgment as to the tendency of Papal domination .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.205

The descent of Spain , once the first among monarchies , to the lowest
depths of degradation , the elevation of Holland , in spite of many
natural disadvantages , to a position such as no commonwealth so small
has ever reached , teach the same lesson . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.206

Whoever passes in Germany from a Roman_Catholic to a Protestant
principality , in Switzerland from a Roman_Catholic to a Protestant
canton , in Ireland from a Roman_Catholic to a Protestant county , finds
that he has passed from a lower to a higher grade of civilisation .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.207

On the other side of the Atlantic the same law prevails .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.208

The Protestants of the United States have left far behind them the
Roman_Catholics of Mexico , Peru , and Brazil .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.209

The Roman_Catholics of Lower Canada remain inert , while the whole
continent round them is in a ferment with Protestant activity and
enterprise . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,50.210

The French have doubtless shown an energy and an intelligence which ,
even when misdirected , have justly entitled them to <P_1,51> be called
a great people . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.211

But this apparent exception , when examined , will be found to confirm
the rule ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.212

for in no country that is called Roman_Catholic , has the Roman_Catholic
Church , during several generations , possessed so little authority as
in France . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.213

The literature of France is justly held in high esteem throughout the
world . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.214

But if we deduct from that literature all that belongs to four parties
which have been , on different grounds , in rebellion against the Papal
domination , all that belongs to the Protestants , all that belongs to
the assertors of the Gallican liberties , all that belongs to the
Jansenists , and all that belongs to the philosophers , how much will be
left ? MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.215

It is difficult to say whether England owes more to the Roman_Catholic
religion or to the Reformation . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.216

For the amalgamation of races and for the abolition of villenage , she
is chiefly indebted to the influence which the priesthood in the middle
ages exercised over the laity . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.217

For political and intellectual freedom , and for all the blessings which
political and intellectual freedom have brought in their train , she is
chiefly indebted to the great rebellion of the laity against the
priesthood . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.218

The struggle between the old and the new theology in our country was
long , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.219

and the event sometimes seemed doubtful . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.220

There were two extreme parties , prepared to act with violence or to
suffer with stubborn resolution . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.221

Between them lay , during a considerable time , a middle party , which
blended , very illogically , but by no means unnaturally , lessons
learned in the nursery with the sermons of the modern evangelists , and
, while clinging with fondness to old observances , yet detested abuses
with which those observances were closely connected .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,51.222

Men in such a frame of mind were willing to obey , almost with
thankfulness , the dictation of an able ruler who spared them the
<P_1,52> trouble of judging for themselves , and , raising a firm and
commanding voice above the uproar of controversy , told them how to
worship and what to believe . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.223

It is not strange , therefore , that the Tudors should have been able to
exercise a great influence on ecclesiastical affairs ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.224

nor is it strange that their influence should , for the most part , have
been exercised with a view to their own interest .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.225

Henry the Eighth attempted to constitute an Anglican Church differing
from the Roman_Catholic Church on the point of the supremacy , and on
that point alone . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.226

His success in this attempt was extraordinary .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.227

The force of his character , the singularly favourable situation in
which he stood with respect to foreign powers , the immense wealth which
the spoliation of the abbeys placed at his disposal , and the support of
that class which still halted between two opinions , enabled him to bid
defiance to both the extreme parties , to burn as heretics those who
avowed the tenets of the Reformers , and to hang as traitors those who
owned the authority of the Pope . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.228

But Henry's system died with him . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.229

Had his life been prolonged , he would have found it difficult to
maintain a position assailed with equal fury by all who were zealous
either for the new or for the old opinions . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.230

The ministers who held the royal prerogatives in trust for his infant
son could not venture to persist in so hazardous a policy ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.231

nor could Elizabeth venture to return to it . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.232

It was necessary to make a choice . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.233

The government must either submit to Rome , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.234

or must obtain the aid of the Protestants . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.235

The government and the Protestants had only one thing in common , hatred
of the Papal power . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.236

The English Reformers were eager to go as far as their brethren on the
Continent . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,52.237

They unanimously condemned as Antichristian numerous dogmas and
practices to which Henry had stubbornly adhered , and which <P_1,53>
Elizabeth reluctantly abandoned . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.238

Many felt a strong repugnance even to things indifferent which had
formed part of the polity or ritual of the mystical Babylon .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.239

Thus Bishop Hooper , who died manfully at Gloucester for his religion ,
long refused to wear the episcopal vestments . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.240

Bishop Ridley , a martyr of still greater renown , pulled down the
ancient altars of his diocese , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.241

and ordered the Eucharist to be administered in the middle of churches ,
at tables which the Papists irreverently termed oyster boards .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.242

Bishop Jewel pronounced the clerical garb to be a stage dress , a fool's
coat , a relique of the Amorites , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.243

and promised that he would spare no labour to extirpate such degrading
absurdities . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.244

Archbishop Grindal long hesitated about accepting a mitre from dislike
of what he regarded as the mummery of consecration .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.245

Bishop Parkhurst uttered a fervent prayer that the Church of England
would propose to herself the Church of Zurich as the absolute pattern of
a Christian community . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.246

Bishop Ponet was of opinion that the word Bishop should be abandoned to
the Papists , and that the chief officers of the purified church should
be called Superintendents . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.247

When it is considered that none of these prelates belonged to the
extreme section of the Protestant party , it can@ @not be doubted that ,
if the general sense of that party had been followed , the work of
reform would have been carried on as unsparingly in England as in
Scotland . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.248

But , as the government needed the support of the Protestants , so the
Protestants needed the protection of the government .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.249

Much was therefore given up on both sides : MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.250

an union was effected ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.251

and the fruit of that union was the Church of England .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,53.252

To the peculiarities of this great institution , and to the strong
passions which it has called forth in the minds both of friends and of
enemies , are to be <P_1,54> attributed many of the most important
events which have , since the Reformation , taken place in our country ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.253

nor can the secular history of England be at all understood by us ,
unless we study it in constant connection with the history of her
ecclesiastical polity . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.254

The man who took the chief part in settling the conditions of the
alliance which produced the Anglican Church was Archbishop Cranmer .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.255

He was the representative of both the parties which , at that time ,
needed each other's assistance . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.256

He was at once a divine and a courtier . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.257

In his character of divine he was perfectly ready to go as far in the
way of change as any Swiss or Scottish Reformer .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.258

In his character of courtier he was desirous to preserve that
organisation which had , during many ages , admirably served the
purposes of the Bishops of Rome , and might be expected now to serve
equally well the purposes of the English Kings and of their ministers .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.259

His temper and his understanding eminently fitted him to act as mediator
. MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.260

Saintly in his professions , unscrupulous in his dealings , zealous for
nothing , bold in speculation , a coward and a timeserver in action , a
placable enemy and a lukewarm friend , he was in every way qualified to
arrange the terms of the coalition between the religious and the worldly
enemies of Popery . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.261

To this day the constitution , the doctrines , and the services of the
Church , retain the visible marks of the compromise from which she
sprang . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.262

She occupies a middle position between the Churches of Rome and Geneva .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.263

Her doctrinal confessions and discourses , composed by Protestants , set
forth principles of theology in which Calvin or Knox would have found
scarcely a word to disapprove . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,54.264

Her prayers and thanksgivings , derived from the ancient Breviaries ,
are very generally such that Cardinal Fisher or <P_1,55> Cardinal Pole
might have heartily joined in them . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.265

A controversialist who puts an Arminian sense on her Articles and
Homilies will be pronounced by candid men to be as unreasonable as a
controversialist who denies that the doctrine of baptismal regeneration
can be discovered in her Liturgy . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.266

The Church of Rome held that episcopacy was of divine institution , and
that certain supernatural graces of a high order had been transmitted by
the imposition of hands through fifty generations , from the Eleven who
received their commission on the Galilean mount , to the bishops who met
at Trent . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.267

A large body of Protestants , on the other hand , regarded prelacy as
positively unlawful , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.268

and persuaded themselves that they found a very different form of
ecclesiastical government prescribed in Scripture .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.269

The founders of the Anglican Church took a middle course .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.270

They retained episcopacy ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.271

but they did not declare it to be an institution essential to the
welfare of a Christian society , or to the efficacy of the sacraments .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.272

Cranmer , indeed , on one important occasion , plainly avowed his
conviction that , in the primitive times , there was no distinction
between bishops and priests , and that the laying on of hands was
altogether superfluous . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.273

Among the Presbyterians the conduct of public worship is , to a great
extent , left to the minister . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.274

Their prayers , therefore , are not exactly the same in any two
assemblies on the same day , or on any two days in the same assembly .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.275

In one parish they are fervent , eloquent , and full of meaning .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.276

In the next parish they may be languid or absurd .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.277

The priests of the Roman_Catholic Church , on the other hand , have ,
during many generations , daily chanted the same ancient confessions ,
supplications , and thanksgivings , in India and Lithuania , in Ireland
and Peru . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,55.278

The service , being in a dead language , is intelligible <P_1,56> only
to the learned ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.279

and the great majority of the congregation may be said to assist as
spectators rather than as auditors . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.280

Here , again , the Church of England took a middle course .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.281

She copied the Roman_Catholic forms of prayer , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.282

but translated them into the vulgar tongue , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.283

and invited the illiterate multitude to join its voice to that of the
minister . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.284

In every part of her system the same policy may be traced .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.285

Utterly rejecting the doctrine of transubstantiation , and condemning as
idolatrous all adoration paid to the sacramental bread and wine , she
yet , to the disgust of the Puritan , required her children to receive
the memorials of divine love , meekly kneeling upon their knees .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.286

Discarding many rich vestments which surrounded the altars of the
ancient faith , she yet retained , to the horror of weak minds , a robe
of white linen , typical of the purity which belonged to her as the
mystical spouse of Christ . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.287

Discarding a crowd of pantomimic gestures which , in the Roman_Catholic
worship , are substituted for intelligible words , she yet shocked many
rigid Protestants by marking the infant just sprinkled from the font
with the sign of the cross . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.288

The Roman_Catholic addressed his prayers to a multitude of Saints ,
among whom were numbered many men of doubtful , and some of hateful ,
character . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.289

The Puritan refused the addition of Saint even to the apostle of the
Gentiles , and to the disciple whom Jesus loved .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.290

The Church of England , though she asked for the intercession of no
created being , still set apart days for the commemoration of some who
had done and suffered great things for the faith .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.291

She retained confirmation and ordination as edifying rites ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.292

but she degraded them from the rank of sacraments .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.293

Shrift was no part of her system . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.294

Yet she gently invited the dying penitent to confess his sins to a
divine , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,56.295

and empowered her ministers to soothe the departing soul by an
absolution which <P_1,57> breathes the very spirit of the old religion .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.296

In general it may be said that she appeals more to the understanding ,
and less to the senses and the imagination , than the Church of Rome ,
and that she appeals less to the understanding , and more to the senses
and imagination , than the Protestant Churches of Scotland , France ,
and Switzerland . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.297

Nothing , however , so strongly distinguished the Church of England from
other Churches as the relation in which she stood to the monarchy .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.298

The King was her head . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.299

The limits of the authority which he possessed , as such , were not
traced , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.300

and indeed have never yet been traced , with precision .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.301

The laws which declared him supreme in ecclesiastical matters were drawn
rudely and in general terms . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.302

If , for the purpose of ascertaining the sense of those laws , we
examine the books and lives of those who founded the English Church ,
our perplexity will be increased . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.303

For the founders of the English Church wrote and acted in an age of
violent intellectual fermentation , and of constant action and reaction
. MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.304

They therefore often contradicted each other , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.305

and sometimes contradicted themselves . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.306

That the King was , under Christ , sole head of the Church , was a
doctrine which they all with one voice affirmed :
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.307

but those words had very different significations in different mouths ,
and in the same mouth at different conjunctures .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.308

Sometimes an authority which would have satisfied Hildebrand was
ascribed to the sovereign : MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.309

then it dwindled down to an authority little more than that which had
been claimed by many ancient English princes who had been in constant
communion with the Church of Rome . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.310

What Henry and his favourite counsellors meant , at one time , by the
supremacy , was certainly nothing less than the whole power of the keys
. MACAULAY-1849-2,1,57.311

The King was to be the Pope of his kingdom , the vicar of God , the
expositor of Catholic verity , the channel of <P_1,58> sacramental
graces . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.312

He arrogated to himself the right of deciding dogmatically what was
orthodox doctrine and what was heresy , of drawing up and imposing
confessions of faith , and of giving religious instruction to his people
. MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.313

He proclaimed that all jurisdiction , spiritual as well as temporal ,
was derived from him alone , and that it was in his power to confer
episcopal authority , and to take it away . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.314

He actually ordered his seal to be put to commissions by which bishops
were appointed , who were to exercise their functions as his deputies ,
and during his pleasure . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.315

According to this system , as expounded by Cranmer , the King was the
spiritual as well as the temporal chief of the nation .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.316

In both capacities His Highness must have lieutenants .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.317

As he appointed civil officers to keep his seal , to collect his
revenues , and to dispense justice in his name , so he appointed divines
of various ranks to preach the gospel , and to administer the sacraments
. MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.318

It was unnecessary that there should be any imposition of hands .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.319

The King , - such was the opinion of Cranmer given in the plainest words
, - might , in virtue of authority derived from God , make a priest ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.320

and the priest so made needed no ordination whatever .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.321

These opinions the Archbishop , in spite of the opposition of less
courtly divines , followed out to every legitimate consequence .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.322

He held that his own spiritual functions , like the secular functions of
the Chancellor and Treasurer , were at once determined by a demise of
the crown . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.323

When Henry died , therefore , the Primate and his suffragans took out
fresh commissions , empowering them to ordain and to govern the Church
till the new sovereign should think fit to order otherwise .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,58.324

When it was objected that a power to bind and to loose , altogether
distinct from temporal power , had been given by our Lord to his
apostles , some theologians of this school replied that the power to
bind and to <P_1,59> loose had descended , not to the clergy , but to
the whole body of Christian men , and ought to be exercised by the chief
magistrate as the representative of the society .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,59.325

When it was objected that Saint Paul had spoken of certain persons whom
the Holy Ghost had made overseers and shepherds of the faithful , it was
answered that King Henry was the very overseer , the very shepherd ,
whom the Holy Ghost had appointed , and to whom the expressions of Saint
Paul applied . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,59.326

These high pretensions gave scandal to Protestants as well as to
Catholics ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,59.327

and the scandal was greatly increased when the supremacy , which Mary
had resigned back to the Pope , was again annexed to the crown , on the
accession of Elizabeth . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,59.328

It seemed monstrous that a woman should be the chief bishop of a Church
in which an apostle had forbidden her even to let her voice be heard .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,59.329

The Queen , therefore , found it necessary expressly to disclaim that
sacerdotal character which her father had assumed , and which ,
according to Cranmer , had been inseparably joined , by divine ordinance
, to the regal function . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,59.330

When the Anglican confession of faith was revised in her reign , the
supremacy was explained in a manner somewhat different from that which
had been fashionable at the court of Henry . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,59.331

Cranmer had declared , in emphatic terms , that God had immediately
committed to Christian princes the whole cure of all their subjects , as
well concerning the administration of God's word for the cure of souls ,
as concerning the administration of things political .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,59.332

The thirty-seventh article of religion , framed under Elizabeth ,
declares , in terms as emphatic , that the ministering of God's <P_1,60>
word does not belong to princes . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.333

The Queen , however , still had over the Church a visitatorial power of
vast and undefined extent . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.334

She was entrusted by Parliament with the office of restraining and
punishing heresy and every sort of ecclesiastical abuse ,
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.335

and was permitted to delegate her authority to commissioners .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.336

The Bishops were little more than her ministers .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.337

Rather than grant to the civil magistrate the absolute power of
nominating spiritual pastors , the Church of Rome , in the eleventh
century , set all Europe on fire . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.338

Rather than grant to the civil magistrate the absolute power of
nominating spiritual pastors , the ministers of the Church of Scotland ,
in our time , resigned their livings by hundreds .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.339

The Church of England had no such scruples . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.340

By the royal authority alone her prelates were appointed .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.341

By the royal authority alone her Convocations were summoned , regulated
, prorogued , and dissolved . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.342

Without the royal sanction her canons had no force .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.343

One of the articles of her faith was that without the royal consent no
ecclesiastical council could lawfully assemble .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.344

From all her judicatures an appeal lay , in the last resort , to the
sovereign , even when the question was whether an opinion ought to be
accounted heretical , or whether the administration of a sacrament had
been valid . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.345

Nor did the Church grudge this extensive power to our princes .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.346

By them she had been called into existence , nursed through a feeble
infancy , guarded from Papists on one side and from Puritans on the
other , protected against Parliaments which bore her no good will , and
avenged on literary assailants whom she found it hard to answer .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.347

Thus gratitude , hope , fear , common attachments , common enmities ,
bound her to the throne . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.348

All her traditions , all her tastes , were monarchical .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.349

Loyalty became a point of professional honour among her clergy , the
peculiar badge which distinguished them at once from Calvinists and from
Papists . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,60.350

Both the <P_1,61> Calvinists and the Papists , widely as they differed
in other respects , regarded with extreme jealousy all encroachments of
the temporal power on the domain of the spiritual power .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.351

Both Calvinists and Papists maintained that subjects might justifiably
draw the sword against ungodly rulers . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.352

In France Calvinists resisted Charles the Ninth :
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.353

Papists resisted Henry the Fourth : MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.354

both Papists and Calvinists resisted Henry the Third .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.355

In Scotland Calvinists led Mary captive . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.356

On the north of the Trent Papists took arms against the English throne .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.357

The Church of England meantime condemned both Calvinists and Papists ,
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.358

and loudly boasted that no duty was more constantly or earnestly
inculcated by her than that of submission to princes .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.359

The advantages which the crown derived from this close alliance with the
Established Church were great ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.360

but they were not without serious drawbacks . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.361

The compromise arranged by Cranmer had from the first been considered by
a large body of Protestants as a scheme for serving two masters , as an
attempt to unite the worship of the Lord with the worship of Baal .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.362

In the days of Edward the Sixth the scruples of this party had
repeatedly thrown great difficulties in the way of the government .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.363

When Elizabeth came to the throne , those difficulties were much
increased . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.364

Violence naturally engenders violence . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.365

The spirit of Protestantism was therefore far fiercer and more
intolerant after the cruelties of Mary than before them .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.366

Many persons who were warmly attached to the new opinions had , during
the evil days , taken refuge in Switzerland and Germany .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.367

They had been hospitably received by their brethren in the faith ,
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.368

had sat {TEXT:sate} at the feet of the great doctors of Strasburg ,
Zurich , and Geneva , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,61.369

and had been , during some years , accustomed to a more simple worship ,
and to a more democratical form of church government , than <P_1,62>
England had yet seen . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.370

These men returned to their country , convinced that the reform which
had been effected under King Edward had been far less searching and
extensive than the interests of pure religion required .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.371

But it was in vain that they attempted to obtain any concession from
Elizabeth . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.372

Indeed her system , wherever it differed from her brother's , seemed to
them to differ for the worse . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.373

They were little disposed to submit , in matters of faith , to any human
authority . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.374

They had recently , in reliance on their own interpretation of Scripture
, risen up against a Church strong in immemorial antiquity and catholic
consent . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.375

It was by no common exertion of intellectual energy that they had thrown
off the yoke of that gorgeous and imperial superstition ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.376

and it was vain to expect that , immediately after such an emancipation
, they would patiently submit to a new spiritual tyranny .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.377

Long accustomed , when the priest lifted up the host , to bow down with
their faces to the earth , as before a present God , they had learned to
treat the mass as an idolatrous mummery . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.378

Long accustomed to regard the Pope as the successor of the chief of the
apostles , as the bearer of the keys of earth and heaven , they had
learned to regard him as the Beast , the Antichrist , the Man of Sin .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.379

It was not to be expected that they would immediately transfer to an
upstart authority the homage which they had withdrawn from the Vatican ;
that they would submit their private judgment to the authority of a
Church founded on private judgment alone ; that they would be afraid to
dissent from teachers who themselves dissented from what had lately been
the universal faith of western Christendom . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,62.380

It is easy to conceive the indignation which must have been felt by bold
and inquisitive spirits , glorying in newly acquired freedom , when an
institution younger by many years than themselves , an institution which
had , under their <P_1,63> own eyes , gradually received its form from
the passions and interests of a court , began to mimic the lofty style
of Rome . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.381

Since these men could not be convinced , it was determined that they
should be persecuted . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.382

Persecution produced its natural effect on them .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.383

It found them a sect : MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.384

it made them a faction . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.385

To their hatred of the Church was now added hatred of the Crown .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.386

The two sentiments were intermingled ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.387

and each embittered the other . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.388

The opinions of the Puritan concerning the relation of ruler and subject
were widely different from those which were inculcated in the Homilies .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.389

His favourite divines had , both by precept and by example , encouraged
resistance to tyrants and persecutors . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.390

His fellow Calvinists in France , in Holland , and in Scotland , were in
arms against idolatrous and cruel princes . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.391

His notions , too , respecting the government of the state took a tinge
from his notions respecting the government of the Church .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.392

Some of the sarcasms which were popularly thrown on episcopacy might ,
without much difficulty , be turned against royalty ;
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.393

and many of the arguments which were used to prove that spiritual power
was best lodged in a synod seemed to lead to the conclusion that
temporal power was best lodged in a parliament .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.394

Thus , as the priest of the Established Church was , from interest ,
from principle , and from passion , zealous for the royal prerogatives ,
the Puritan was , from interest , from principle , and from passion ,
hostile to them . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.395

The power of the discontented sectaries was great .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.396

They were found in every rank ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.397

but they were strongest among the mercantile classes in the towns , and
among the small proprietors in the country . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.398

Early in the reign of Elizabeth they began to return a majority of the
House of Commons . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,63.399

And doubtless , had our ancestors been then at liberty to fix their
attention <P_1,64> entirely on domestic questions , the strife between
the Crown and the Parliament would instantly have commenced .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.400

But that was no season for internal dissensions .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.401

It might , indeed , well be doubted whether the firmest union among all
the orders of the state could avert the common danger by which all were
threatened . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.402

Roman_Catholic Europe and reformed Europe were struggling for death or
life . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.403

France , divided against herself , had , for a time , ceased to be of
any account in Christendom . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.404

The English Government was at the head of the Protestant interest ,
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.405

and , while persecuting Presbyterians at home , extended a powerful
protection to Presbyterian Churches abroad . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.406

At the head of the opposite party was the mightiest prince of the age ,
a prince who ruled Spain , Portugal , Italy , the Netherlands , the East
and the West_Indies , whose armies repeatedly marched to Paris , and
whose fleets kept the coasts of Devonshire and Sussex in alarm .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.407

It long seemed probable that Englishmen would have to fight desperately
on English ground for their religion and independence .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.408

Nor were they ever for a moment free from apprehensions of some great
treason at home . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.409

For in that age it had become a point of conscience and of honour with
many men of generous natures to sacrifice their country to their
religion . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.410

A succession of dark plots , formed by Roman_Catholics against the life
of the Queen and the existence of the nation , kept society in constant
alarm . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.411

Whatever might be the faults of Elizabeth , it was plain that , to speak
humanly , the fate of the realm and of all reformed Churches was staked
on the security of her person and on the success of her administration .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.412

To strengthen her hands was , therefore , the first duty of a patriot
and a Protestant ; MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.413

and that duty was well performed . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,64.414

The Puritans , even in the depths of the prisons to which she had sent
them , prayed , and with no simulated fervour , that she might be kept
from <P_1,65> the dagger of the assassin , that rebellion might be put
down under her feet , and that her arms might be victorious by sea and
land . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,65.415

One of the most stubborn of the stubborn sect , immediately after his
hand had been lopped off for an offence into which he had been hurried
by his intemperate zeal , waved his hat with the hand which was still
left him , MACAULAY-1849-2,1,65.416

and shouted " God save the Queen ! " MACAULAY-1849-2,1,65.417

The sentiment with which these men regarded her has descended to their
posterity . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,65.418

The Nonconformists , rigorously as she treated them , have , as a body ,
always venerated her memory . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,65.419

During the greater part of her reign , therefore , the Puritans in the
House of Commons , though sometimes mutinous , felt no disposition to
array themselves in systematic opposition to the government .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,65.420

But , when the defeat of the Armada , the successful resistance of the
United Provinces to the Spanish power , the firm establishment of Henry
the Fourth on the throne of France , and the death of Philip the Second
, had secured the State and the Church against all danger from abroad ,
an obstinate struggle , destined to last during several generations ,
instantly began at home . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,65.421

It was in the Parliament of 1601 that the opposition which had , during
forty years , been silently gathering and husbanding strength , fought
its first great battle and won its first victory .
MACAULAY-1849-2,1,65.422

The ground was well chosen . MACAULAY-1849-2,1,65.423

