<BEGIN_macaulay-1833-2>

<P_8,251>

Whoever wishes to be well acquainted with the morbid anatomy of
governments , whoever wishes to know how great states may be made feeble
and wretched , should study the history of Spain .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,251.3

The empire of Philip the Second was undoubtedly one of the most powerful
and splendid that ever existed in the world . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,251.4

In Europe , he ruled Spain , Portugal , the Netherlands on both sides of
the Rhine , Franche Comt√© , Roussillon , the Milanese , and the Two
Sicilies . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,251.5

Tuscany , Parma , and the other small states of Italy , were as
completely dependent on him as the Nizam and the Rajah of Berar now are
on the East India Company . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,251.6

In Asia , the King of Spain was master of the Philippines and of all
those rich settlements which the Portuguese had made on the coasts of
Malabar and Coromandel , in the Peninsula of Malacca , and in the Spice
Islands of the Eastern Archipelago . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,251.7

In America , his dominions extended on each side of the equator into the
temperate zone . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,251.8

There is reason to believe that his annual revenue amounted , in the
season of his greatest power , to a <P_8,252> sum near ten times as
large as that which England yielded to Elizabeth .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.9

He had a standing army of fifty_thousand excellent troops , at a time
when England had not a single battalion in constant pay .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.10

His ordinary naval force consisted of a_hundred_and_forty galleys .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.11

He held , what no other prince in modern times has held , the dominion
both of the land and of the sea . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.12

During the greater part of his reign , he was supreme on both elements .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.13

His soldiers marched up to the capital of France ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.14

his ships menaced the shores of England . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.15

It is no exaggeration to say that , during several years , his power
over Europe was greater than even that of Napoleon .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.16

The influence of the French conqueror never extended beyond low-water
mark . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.17

The narrowest strait was to his power what it was of old believed that a
running stream was to the sorceries of a witch .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.18

While his army entered every metropolis from Moscow to Lisbon , the
English fleets blockaded every port from Dantzic to Trieste .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.19

Sicily , Sardinia , Majorca , Guernsey , enjoyed security through the
whole course of a war which endangered every throne on the Continent .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.20

The victorious and imperial nation which had filled its museums with the
spoils of Antwerp , of Florence , and of Rome , was suffering painfully
from the want of luxuries which use had made necessaries .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.21

While pillars and arches were rising to commemorate the French conquests
, the conquerors were trying to manufacture coffee out of succory and
sugar out of beet-root . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.22

The influence of Philip on the Continent was as great as that of
Napoleon . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.23

The Emperor of Germany was his kinsman . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.24

France , torn by religious dissensions , was never a formidable opponent
, MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.25

and was sometimes a dependent ally . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.26

At the same time , Spain had what Napoleon desired in vain , ships ,
colonies , and commerce . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,252.27

She long monopolised the trade of America <P_8,253> and of the Indian
Ocean . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.28

All the gold of the West , and all the spices of the East , were
received and distributed by her . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.29

During many years of war , her commerce was interrupted only by the
predatory enterprises of a few roving privateers .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.30

Even after the defeat of the Armada , English statesmen continued to
look with great dread on the maritime power of Philip .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.31

" The King of Spain , " said the Lord Keeper to the two Houses in 1593 ,
" since he hath usurped upon the kingdom of Portugal , hath thereby
grown mighty by gaining the East_Indies : so as , how great soever he
was before , he is now thereby manifestly more great : ...
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.32

He keepeth a navy armed to impeach all trade of merchandise from England
to Gascoigne and Guienne , which he attempted to do this last vintage ;
so as he is now become as a frontier enemy to all the west of England ,
as well as all the south parts , as Sussex , Hampshire , and the Isle of
Wight . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.33

Yea , by means of his interest in St. Maloes , a port full of shipping
for the war , he is a dangerous neighbour to the Queen's isles of Jersey
and Guernsey , ancient possessions of this crown , and never conquered
in the greatest wars with France . " MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.34

The ascendency which Spain then had in Europe was , in one sense , well
deserved . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.35

It was an ascendency which had been gained by unquestioned superiority
in all the arts of policy and of war . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.36

In the sixteenth century , Italy was not more decidedly the land of the
fine arts , Germany was not more decidedly the land of bold theological
speculation , than Spain was the land of statesmen and of soldiers .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.37

The character which Virgil has ascribed to his countrymen might have
been claimed by the grave and haughty chiefs , who surrounded the throne
of Ferdinand the Catholic , and of his immediate successors .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,253.38

That majestic art , " regere imperio populos , " <P_8,254> was not
better understood by the Romans in the proudest days of their republic ,
than by Gonsalvo and Ximenes , Cortes and Alva .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.39

The skill of the Spanish diplomatists was renowned throughout Europe .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.40

In England the name of Gondomar is still remembered .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.41

The sovereign nation was unrivalled both in regular and irregular
warfare . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.42

The impetuous chivalry of France , the serried phalanx of Switzerland ,
were alike found wanting when brought face to face with the Spanish
infantry . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.43

In the wars of the New World , where something different from ordinary
strategy was required in the general and something different from
ordinary discipline in the soldier , where it was every day necessary to
meet by some new expedient the varying tactics of a barbarous enemy ,
the Spanish adventurers sprung from the common people , displayed a
fertility of resource , and a talent for negotiation and command , to
which history scarcely affords a parallel . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.44

The Castilian of those times was to the Italian what the Roman , in the
days of the greatness of Rome , was to the Greek .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.45

The conqueror had less ingenuity , less taste , less delicacy of
perception than the conquered ; but far more pride , firmness , and
courage , a more solemn demeanour , a stronger sense of honour .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.46

The subject had more subtlety in speculation , the ruler more energy in
action . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.47

The vices of the former were those of a coward ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.48

the vices of the latter were those of a tyrant .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.49

It may be added , that the Spaniard , like the Roman , did not disdain
to study the arts and the language of those whom he oppressed .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.50

A revolution took place in the literature of Spain , not unlike that
revolution which , as Horace tells us , took place in the poetry of
Latium : MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.51

" Capta ferum victorem cepit . " MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.52

The slave took prisoner the enslaver . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,254.53

The old Castilian ballads gave place to sonnets in the style of Petrarch
, and <P_8,255> to heroic poems in the stanza of Ariosto , as the
national songs of Rome were driven out by imitations of Theocritus , and
translations from Menander . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.54

In no modern society , not even in England during the reign of Elizabeth
, has there been so great a number of men eminent at once in literature
and in the pursuits of active life , as Spain produced during the
sixteenth century . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.55

Almost every distinguished writer was also distinguished as a soldier or
a politician . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.56

Boscan bore arms with high reputation . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.57

Garcilaso de Vega , the author of the sweetest and most graceful
pastoral poem of modern times , after a short but splendid military
career , fell sword in hand at the head of a storming party .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.58

Alonzo de Ercilla bore a conspicuous part in that war of Arauco , which
he afterwards celebrated in one of the best heroic poems that Spain has
produced . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.59

Hurtado de Mendoza , whose poems have been compared to those of Horace ,
and whose charming little novel is evidently the model of Gil Blas , has
been handed down to us by history as one of the sternest of those iron
proconsuls who were employed by the House of Austria to crush the
lingering public spirit of Italy . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.60

Lope sailed in the Armada ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.61

Cervantes was wounded at Lepanto . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.62

It is curious to consider with how much awe our ancestors in those times
regarded a Spaniard . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.63

He was , in their apprehension , a kind of daemon , horribly malevolent
, but withal most sagacious and powerful . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.64

" They be verye wyse and politicke , " says an honest Englishman , in a
memorial addressed to Mary , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.65

" and can , thorowe ther wysdome , reform and brydell theyr owne natures
for a tyme , and applye their conditions to the maners of those men with
whom they meddell gladlye by friendshippe ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.66

whose mischievous maners a man shall never knowe untyll he come under
ther subjection : MACAULAY-1833-2,8,255.67

but then shall he parfectlye parceyve <P_8,256> and fele them : which
thynge I praye God England never do : MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.68

for in dissimulations untyll they have ther purposes , and afterwards in
oppression and tyrannye , when they can obtayne them , they do exceed
all other nations upon the earthe . " MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.69

This is just such language as Arminius would have used about the Romans
, or as an Indian statesman of our times might use about the English .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.70

It is the language of a man burning with hatred , but cowed by those
whom he hates ; and painfully sensible of their superiority , not only
in power , but in intelligence . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.71

But how art thou fallen from heaven , O Lucifer , son of the morning !
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.72

How art thou cut down to the ground , that didst weaken the nations !
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.73

If we overleap a_hundred years , and look at Spain towards the close of
the seventeenth century , what a change do we find !
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.74

The contrast is as great as that which the Rome of Gallienus and
Honorius presents to the Rome of Marius and Caesar .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.75

Foreign conquest had begun to eat into every part of that gigantic
monarchy on which the sun never set . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.76

Holland was gone , and Portugal , and Artois , and Roussillon , and
Franche Comt√© . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.77

In the East , the empire founded by the Dutch far surpassed in wealth
and splendour that which their old tyrants still retained .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.78

In the West , England had seized , and still held , settlements in the
midst of the Mexican sea . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.79

The mere loss of territory was , however , of little moment .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.80

The reluctant obedience of distant provinces generally costs more than
it is worth . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.81

Empires which branch out widely are often more flourishing for a little
timely pruning . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.82

Adrian acted judiciously when he abandoned the conquests of Trajan ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.83

and England was never so rich , so great , so formidable to foreign
princes , so absolutely mistress of the sea , as since the loss of her
American colonies . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,256.84

The Spanish empire was still , in outward appearance , <P_8,257> great
and magnificent . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.85

The European dominions subject to the last feeble Prince of the House of
Austria were far more extensive than those of Louis the Fourteenth .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.86

The American dependencies of the Castilian crown still extended far to
the North of Cancer and far to the South of Capricorn .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.87

But within this immense body there was an incurable decay , an utter
want of tone , an utter prostration of strength .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.88

An ingenious and diligent population , eminently skilled in arts and
manufactures , had been driven into exile by stupid and remorseless
bigots . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.89

The glory of the Spanish pencil had departed with Velasquez and Murillo
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.90

The splendid age of Spanish literature had closed with Solis and
Calderon . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.91

During the seventeenth century many states had formed great military
establishments . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.92

But the Spanish army , so formidable under the command of Alva and
Farnese , had dwindled away to a few thousand men , ill paid and ill
disciplined . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.93

England , Holland , and France had great navies .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.94

But the Spanish navy was scarcely equal to the tenth part of that mighty
force which , in the time of Philip the Second , had been the terror of
the Atlantic and the Mediterranean . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.95

The arsenals were deserted . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.96

The magazines were unprovided . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.97

The frontier fortresses were ungarrisoned . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.98

The police was utterly inefficient for the protection of the people .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.99

Murders were committed in the face of day with perfect impunity .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.100

Bravoes and discarded serving-men , with swords at their sides ,
swaggered every day through the most public streets and squares of the
capital , disturbing the public peace , and setting at defiance the
ministers of justice . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.101

The finances were in frightful disorder . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.102

The people paid much . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.103

The government received little . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,257.104

The American viceroys and the farmers of the revenue became rich , while
the merchants broke , while the peasantry starved , while the
body-servants of the <P_8,258> sovereign remained unpaid , while the
soldiers of the royal guard repaired daily to the doors of convents ,
and battled there with the crowd of beggars for a porringer of broth and
a morsel of bread . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.105

Every remedy which was tried aggravated the disease .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.106

The currency was altered ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.107

and this frantic measure produced its never-failing effects .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.108

It destroyed all credit , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.109

and increased the misery which it was intended to relieve .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.110

The American gold , to use the words of Ortiz , was to the necessities
of the state but as a drop of water to the lips of a man raging with
thirst . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.111

Heaps of unopened despatches accumulated in the offices , while the
Ministers were concerting with bedchamber-women and Jesuits the means of
tripping up each other . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.112

Every foreign power could plunder and insult with impunity the heir of
Charles the Fifth . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.113

Into such a state had the mighty kingdom of Spain fallen , while one of
its smallest dependencies , a country not so large as the province of
Estremadura or Andalusia , situated under an inclement sky , and
preserved only by artificial means from the inroads of the ocean , had
become a power of the first class , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.114

and treated on terms of equality with the courts of London and
Versailles . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.115

The manner in which Lord Mahon explains the financial situation of Spain
by no means satisfies us . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.116

" It will be found , " says he , " that those individuals deriving their
chief income from mines , whose yearly produce is uncertain and varying
, and seems rather to spring from fortune than to follow industry , are
usually careless , unthrifty , and irregular in their expenditure .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.117

The example of Spain might tempt us to apply the same remark to states .
" MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.118

Lord Mahon would find it difficult , we suspect , to make out his
analogy . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.119

Nothing could be more uncertain and varying than the gains and losses of
those who were in the habit of putting into the state lotteries .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,258.120

But <P_8,259> no part of the public income was more certain than that
which was derived from the lotteries . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.121

We believe that this case is very similar to that of the American mines
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.122

Some veins of ore exceeded expectation ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.123

some fell below it . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.124

Some of the private speculators drew blanks , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.125

and others gained prizes . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.126

But the revenue of the state depended , not on any particular vein , but
on the whole annual produce of two great continents .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.127

This annual produce seems to have been almost constantly on the increase
during the seventeenth century . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.128

The Mexican mines were , through the reigns of Philip the Fourth and
Charles the Second , in a steady course of improvement ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.129

and in South America , though the district of Potosi was not so
productive as formerly , other places more than made up for the
deficiency . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.130

We very much doubt whether Lord Mahon can prove that the income which
the Spanish government derived from the mines of America fluctuated more
than the income derived from the internal taxes of Spain itself .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.131

All the causes of the decay of Spain resolve themselves into one cause ,
bad government . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.132

The valour , the intelligence , the energy which at the close of the
fifteenth and the beginning of the sixteenth century , had made the
Spaniards the first nation in the world , were the fruits of the old
institution of Castile and Arragon , institutions eminently favourable
to public liberty . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.133

Those institutions the first Princes of the House of Austria attacked
and almost wholly destroyed . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.134

Their successors expiated the crime . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.135

The effects of a change from good government to bad government are not
fully felt for some time after the change has taken place .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.136

The talents and the virtues which a good constitution generates may for
a time survive that constitution . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,259.137

Thus the reigns of princes who have established absolute monarchy on the
ruins of popular forms of government often shine in history <P_8,260>
with a peculiar brilliancy . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.138

But when a generation or two has passed away , then comes signally to
pass that which was written by Montesquieu , that despotic governments
resemble those savages who cut down the tree in order to get at the
fruit . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.139

During the first years of tyranny , is reaped the harvest sown during
the last years of liberty . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.140

Thus the Augustan age was rich in great minds formed in the generation
of Cicero and Caesar . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.141

The fruits of the policy of Augustus were reserved for posterity .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.142

Philip the Second was the heir of the Cortes and of the Justiza Mayor ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.143

and they left him a nation which seemed able to conquer all the world .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.144

What Philip left to his successors is well known .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.145

The shock which the great religious schism of the sixteenth century gave
to Europe , was scarcely felt in Spain . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.146

In England , Germany , Holland , France , Denmark , Switzerland , Sweden
, that shock had produced , with some temporary evil , much durable good
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.147

The principles of the Reformation had triumphed in some of those
countries . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.148

The Catholic Church had maintained its ascendency in others .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.149

But though the event had not been the same in all , all had been
agitated by the conflict . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.150

Even in France , in Southern Germany , and in the Catholic Cantons of
Switzerland , the public mind had been stirred to its inmost depths .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.151

The hold of ancient prejudice had been somewhat loosened .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.152

The Church of Rome , warned by the danger which she had narrowly escaped
, had , in those parts of her dominion , assumed a milder and more
liberal character . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.153

She sometimes condescended to submit her high pretensions to the
scrutiny of reason , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.154

and availed herself more sparingly than in former times of the aid of
the secular arm . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.155

Even when persecution was employed , it was not persecution in the worst
and most frightful shape . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,260.156

The severities of Louis the Fourteenth , odious as they were , can@ @not
be <P_8,261> compared with those which , at the first dawn of the
Reformation , had been inflicted on the heretics in many parts of Europe
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.157

The only effect which the Reformation had produced in Spain had been to
make the Inquisition more vigilant and the commonalty more bigoted .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.158

The times of refreshing came to all neighbouring countries .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.159

One people alone remained , like the fleece of the Hebrew warrior , dry
in the midst of that benignant and fertilising dew .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.160

While other nations were putting away childish things , the Spaniard
still thought as a child MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.161

and understood as a child . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.162

Among the men of the seventeenth century , he was the man of the
fifteenth century or of a still darker period , delighted to behold an
<font> Auto_da_fe <$$font> , and ready to volunteer on a Crusade .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.163

The evils produced by a bad government and a bad religion , seemed to
have attained their greatest height during the last years of the
seventeenth century . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.164

While the kingdom was in this deplorable state , the King , Charles ,
second of the name , was hastening to an early grave .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.165

His days had been few and evil . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.166

He had been unfortunate in all his wars , in every part of his internal
administration , and in all his domestic relations .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.167

His first wife , whom he tenderly loved , died very young .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.168

His second wife exercised great influence over him ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.169

but seems to have been regarded by him rather with fear than with love .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.170

He was childless ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.171

and his constitution was so completely shattered that , at little more
than thirty years of age , he had given up all hopes of posterity .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.172

His mind was even more distempered than his body .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.173

He was sometimes sunk in listless melancholy , and sometimes harassed by
the wildest and most extravagant fancies . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.174

He was not , however , wholly destitute of the feelings which became his
station . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,261.175

His sufferings were aggravated by the thought that his own <P_8,262>
dissolution might not improbably be followed by the dissolution of his
empire . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.176

Several princes laid claim to the succession .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.177

The King's eldest sister had married Louis the Fourteenth .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.178

The Dauphin would , therefore , in the common course of inheritance ,
have succeeded to the crown . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.179

But the Infanta had , at the time of her espousals , solemnly renounced
, in her own name , and in that of her posterity , all claim to the
succession . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.180

This renunciation had been confirmed in due form by the Cortes .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.181

A younger sister of the King had been the first wife of Leopold ,
Emperor of Germany . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.182

She too had at her marriage renounced her claims to the Spanish crown ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.183

but the Cortes had not sanctioned the renunciation ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.184

and it was therefore considered as invalid by the Spanish jurists .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.185

The fruit of this marriage was a daughter , who had espoused the Elector
of Bavaria . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.186

The Electoral Prince of Bavaria inherited her claim to the throne of
Spain . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.187

The Emperor Leopold was son of a daughter of Philip the Third ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.188

and was therefore first cousin to Charles . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.189

No renunciation whatever had been exacted from his mother at the time of
her marriage . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.190

The question was certainly very complicated . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.191

That claim which , according to the ordinary rules of inheritance , was
the strongest , had been barred by a contract executed in the most
binding form . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.192

The claim of the Electoral Prince of Bavaria was weaker .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.193

But so also was the contract which bound him not to prosecute his claim
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.194

The only party against whom no instrument of renunciation could be
produced was the party who , in respect of blood , had the weakest claim
of all . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,262.195

As it was clear that great alarm would be excited throughout Europe if
either the Emperor or the Dauphin should become King of Spain , each of
those Princes offered to waive his pretensions in favour of <P_8,263>
his second son ; the Emperor , in favour of the Archduke Charles , the
Dauphin , in favour of Philip Duke of Anjou . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.196

Soon after the peace of Ryswick , William the Third and Louis the
Fourteenth determined to settle the question of the succession without
consulting either Charles or the Emperor . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.197

France , England , and Holland , became parties to a treaty by which it
was stipulated that the Electoral Prince of Bavaria should succeed to
Spain , the Indies , and the Netherlands . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.198

The Imperial family were to be bought off with the Milanese ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.199

and the Dauphin was to have the Two Sicilies .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.200

The great object of the King of Spain and of all his counsellors was to
avert the dismemberment of the monarchy . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.201

In the hope of attaining this end , Charles determined to name a
successor . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.202

A will was accordingly framed by which the crown was bequeathed to the
Bavarian Prince . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.203

Unhappily , this will had scarcely been signed when the Prince died .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.204

The question was again unsettled , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.205

and presented greater difficulties than before .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.206

A new Treaty of Partition was concluded between France , England , and
Holland . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.207

It was agreed that Spain , the Indies , and the Netherlands , should
descend to the Archduke Charles . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.208

In return for this great concession made by the Bourbons to a rival
house , it was agreed that France should have the Milanese , or an
equivalent in a more commodious situation . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.209

The equivalent in view was the province of Lorraine .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.210

Arbuthnot , some years later , ridiculed the Partition Treaty with
exquisite humour and ingenuity . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,263.211

Everybody must remember his description of the paroxysm of rage into
which poor old Lord Strutt fell , on hearing that his runaway servant
Nick Frog , his clothier John Bull , and his old enemy Lewis Baboon ,
had come with quadrants , poles , and inkhorns , <P_8,264> to survey his
estate , and to draw his will for him . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.212

Lord Mahon speaks of the arrangement with grave severity .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.213

He calls it , " an iniquitous compact , concluded without the slightest
reference to the welfare of the states so readily parcelled and allotted
; insulting to the pride of Spain , and tending to strip that country of
its hard-won conquests . " MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.214

The most serious part of this charge would apply to half the treaties
which have been concluded in Europe quite as strongly as to the
Partition Treaty . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.215

What regard was shown in the treaty of the Pyrenees to the welfare of
the people of Dunkirk and Roussillon , in the treaty of Nimeguen to the
welfare of the people of Franche Comt√© , in the treaty of Utrecht to the
welfare of the people of Flanders , in the treaty of 1735 to the welfare
of the people of Tuscany ? MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.216

All Europe remembers , and our latest posterity will , we fear , have
reason to remember how coolly , at the last great pacification of
Christendom , the people of Poland , of Norway , of Belgium , and of
Lombardy , were allotted to masters whom they abhorred .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.217

The statesmen who negotiated the Partition Treaty were not so far beyond
their age and ours in wisdom and virtue as to trouble themselves much
about the happiness of the people whom they were apportioning among
foreign rulers . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.218

But it will be difficult to prove that the stipulations which Lord Mahon
condemns were in any respect unfavourable to the happiness of those who
were to be transferred to new sovereigns . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.219

The Neapolitans would certainly have lost nothing by being given to the
Dauphin , or to the Great Turk . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.220

Addison , who visited Naples about the time at which the Partition
Treaty was signed , has left us a frightful description of the
misgovernment under which that part of the Spanish Empire groaned .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.221

As to the people of Lorraine , an union with France would have been the
happiest event which could have befallen them .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,264.222

Louis <P_8,265> was already their sovereign for all purposes of cruelty
and exaction . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.223

He had kept their country during many years in his own hands .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.224

At the peace of Ryswick , indeed , their Duke had been allowed to return
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.225

But the conditions which had been imposed on him made him a mere vassal
of France . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.226

We can@ @not admit that the Treaty of Partition was objectionable
because it " tended to strip Spain of hard-won conquests . "
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.227

The inheritance was so vast , and the claimants so mighty , that without
some dismemberment it was scarcely possible to make a peaceable
arrangement . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.228

If any dismemberment was to take place , the best way of effecting it
surely was to separate from the monarchy those provinces which were at a
great distance from Spain , which were not Spanish in manners , in
language , or in feelings , which were both worse governed and less
valuable than the old kingdoms of Castile and Arragon , and which ,
having always been governed by foreigners , would not be likely to feel
acutely the humiliation of being turned over from one master to another
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.229

That England and Holland had a right to interfere is plain .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.230

The question of the Spanish succession was not an internal question ,
but an European question . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.231

And this Lord Mahon admits . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.232

He thinks that , when the evil had been done , and a French Prince was
reigning at the Escurial , England and Holland were justified in
attempting , not merely to strip Spain of its remote dependencies , but
to conquer Spain itself ; that they were justified in attempting to put
, not merely the passive Flemings and Italians , but the reluctant
Castilians and Asturians , under the dominion of a stranger .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.233

The danger against which the Partition Treaty was intended to guard was
precisely the same danger which afterwards was made the ground of war .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,265.234

It will be difficult to prove that a danger which was sufficient
<P_8,266> to justify the war was insufficient to justify the provisions
of the treaty . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.235

If , as Lord Mahon contends , it was better that Spain should be
subjugated by main force than that she should be governed by a Bourbon ,
it was surely better that she should be deprived of Sicily and the
Milanese than that she should be governed by a Bourbon .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.236

Whether the treaty was judiciously framed is quite another question .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.237

We disapprove of the stipulations . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.238

But we disapprove of them , not because we think them bad , but because
we think that there was no chance of their being executed .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.239

Louis was the most faithless of politicians . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.240

He hated the Dutch . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.241

He hated the Government which the Revolution had established in England
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.242

He had every disposition to quarrel with his new allies .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.243

It was quite certain that he would not observe his engagements , if it
should be for his interest to violate them . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.244

Even if it should be for his interest to observe them , it might well be
doubted whether the strongest and clearest interest would induce a man
so haughty and self-willed to cooperate heartily with two governments
which had always been the objects of his scorn and aversion .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.245

When intelligence of the second Partition Treaty arrived at Madrid , it
roused to momentary energy the languishing ruler of a languishing state
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.246

The Spanish ambassador at the court of London was directed to
remonstrate with the government of William ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.247

and his remonstrances were so insolent that he was commanded to leave
England . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.248

Charles retaliated by dismissing the English and Dutch ambassadors .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.249

The French King , though the chief author of the Partition Treaty ,
succeeded in turning the whole wrath of Charles and of the Spanish
people from himself , and in directing it against the two maritime
powers . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.250

Those powers had now no agent at Madrid . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,266.251

Their perfidious ally was at liberty to carry on his <P_8,267> intrigues
unchecked ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.252

and he fully availed himself of this advantage .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.253

A long contest was maintained with varying success by the factions which
surrounded the miserable King . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.254

On the side of the Imperial family was the Queen , herself a Princess of
that family . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.255

With her were allied the confessor of the King , and most of the
ministers . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.256

On the other side were two of the most dexterous politicians of that age
, Cardinal Porto Carrero , Archbishop of Toledo , and Harcourt , the
ambassador of Louis . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.257

Harcourt was a noble specimen of the French aristocracy in the days of
its highest splendour , a finished gentleman , a brave soldier , and a
skilful diplomatist . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.258

His courteous and insinuating manners , his Parisian vivacity tempered
with Castilian gravity , made him the favourite of the whole court .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.259

He became intimate with the grandees . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.260

He caressed the clergy . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.261

He dazzled the multitude by his magnificent style of living .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.262

The prejudices which the people of Madrid had conceived against the
French character , the vindictive feelings generated during centuries of
national rivalry , gradually yielded to his arts ; while the Austrian
ambassador , a surly , pompous , niggardly German , made himself and his
country more and more unpopular every day . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.263

Harcourt won over the court and the city : MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.264

Porto Carrero managed the King . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.265

Never were knave and dupe better suited to each other .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.266

Charles was sick , nervous , and extravagantly superstitious .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.267

Porto Carrero had learned in the exercise of his profession the art of
exciting and soothing such minds ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.268

and he employed that art with the calm and demure cruelty which is the
characteristic of wicked and ambitious priests .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.269

He first supplanted the confessor . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,267.270

The state of the poor King , during the conflict between his two
<P_8,268> spiritual advisers , was horrible . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.271

At one time he was induced to believe that his malady was the same with
that of the wretches described in the New Testament , who dwelt among
the tombs , whom no chains could bind , and whom no man dared to
approach . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.272

At another time a sorceress who lived in the mountains of the Asturias
was consulted about his malady . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.273

Several persons were accused of having bewitched him .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.274

Porto Carrero recommended the appalling rite of exorcism , which was
actually performed . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.275

The ceremony made the poor King more nervous and miserable than ever .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.276

But it served the turn of the Cardinal , who , after much secret
trickery , succeeded in casting out , not the devil , but the confessor
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.277

The next object was to get rid of the Ministers .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.278

Madrid was supplied with provisions by a monopoly .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.279

The government looked after this most delicate concern as it looked
after every thing else . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.280

The partisans of the House of Bourbon took advantage of the negligence
of the administration . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.281

On a sudden the supply of food failed . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.282

Exorbitant prices were demanded . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.283

The people rose . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.284

The royal residence was surrounded by an immense multitude .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.285

The Queen harangued them . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.286

The priests exhibited the host . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.287

All was in vain . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.288

It was necessary to awaken the King from his uneasy sleep , and to carry
him to the balcony . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.289

There a solemn promise was given that the unpopular advisers of the
crown should be forthwith dismissed . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.290

The mob left the palace MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.291

and proceeded to pull down the houses of the ministers .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.292

The adherents of the Austrian line were thus driven from power ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.293

and the government was entrusted to the creatures of Porto Carrero .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.294

The King left the city in which he had suffered so cruel an insult for
the magnificent retreat of the Escurial . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.295

Here his hypochondriac fancy took a new turn .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,268.296

Like his ancestor Charles the Fifth , he was haunted by a strange
<P_8,269> curiosity to pry into the secrets of that grave to which he
was hastening . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.297

In the cemetery which Philip the Second had formed beneath the pavement
of the church of St. Lawrence , reposed three generations of Castilian
princes . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.298

Into these dark vaults the unhappy monarch descended by torch-light ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.299

and penetrated to that superb and gloomy chamber where , round the great
black crucifix , were ranged the coffins of the kings and queens of
Spain . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.300

There he commanded his attendants to open the massy chests of bronze in
which the relics of his predecessors decayed .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.301

He looked on the ghastly spectacle with little emotion till the coffin
of his first wife was unclosed , and she appeared before him - such was
the skill of the embalmer - in all her well-remembered beauty .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.302

He cast one glance on those beloved features , unseen for eighteen years
, those features over which corruption seemed to have no power ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.303

and rushed from the vault , exclaiming , " She is with God ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.304

and I shall soon be with her . " MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.305

The awful sight completed the ruin of his body and mind .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.306

The Escurial became hateful to him ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.307

and he hastened to Aranjuez . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.308

But the shades and waters of that delicious island-garden , so fondly
celebrated in the sparkling verse of Calderon , brought no solace to
their unfortunate master . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.309

Having tried medicine , exercise , and amusement in vain , he returned
to Madrid to die . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.310

He was now beset on every side by the bold and skilful agents of the
House of Bourbon . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.311

The leading politicians of his court assured him that Louis , and Louis
alone , was sufficiently powerful to preserve the Spanish monarchy
undivided , and that Austria would be utterly unable to prevent the
Treaty of Partition from being carried into effect .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,269.312

Some celebrated lawyers gave it as their opinion that the act of
renunciation executed by the late Queen of France ought to be construed
according to the spirit , and <P_8,270> not according to the letter .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.313

The letter undoubtedly excluded the French Princes .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.314

The spirit was merely this , that ample security should be taken against
the union of the French and Spanish crowns on one head .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.315

In all probability , neither political nor legal reasonings would have
sufficed to overcome the partiality which Charles felt for the House of
Austria . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.316

There had always been a close connection between the two great royal
lines which sprang from the marriage of Philip and Juana .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.317

Both had always regarded the French as their natural enemies .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.318

It was necessary to have recourse to religious terrors ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.319

and Porto Carrero employed those terrors with true professional skill .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.320

The King's life was drawing to a close . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.321

Would the most Catholic prince commit a great sin on the brink of the
grave ? MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.322

And what could be a greater sin than , from an unreasonable attachment
to a family name , from an unchristian antipathy to a rival house , to
set aside the rightful heir of an immense monarchy ?
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.323

The tender conscience and the feeble intellect of Charles were strongly
wrought upon by these appeals . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.324

At length Porto Carrero ventured on a master-stroke .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.325

He advised Charles to apply for counsel to the Pope .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.326

The King who , in the simplicity of his heart , considered the successor
of St. Peter as an infallible guide in spiritual matters , adopted the
suggestion ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.327

and Porto Carrero , who knew that his Holiness was a mere tool of France
, awaited with perfect confidence the result of the application .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.328

In the answer which arrived from Rome , the King was solemnly reminded
of the great account which he was soon to render ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.329

and cautioned against the flagrant injustice which he was tempted to
commit . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,270.330

He was assured that the right was with the House of Bourbon , and
reminded that his own salvation ought to be dearer to him than the
<P_8,271> House of Austria . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.331

Yet he still continued irresolute . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.332

His attachment to his family , his aversion to France , were not to be
overcome even by Papal authority . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.333

At length he thought himself actually dying . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.334

Then the cardinal redoubled his efforts . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.335

Divine after divine , well tutored for the occasion , was brought to the
bed of the trembling penitent . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.336

He was dying in the commission of known sin . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.337

He was defrauding his relatives . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.338

He was bequeathing civil war to his people . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.339

He yielded , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.340

and signed that memorable Testament , the cause of many calamities to
Europe . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.341

As he affixed his name to the instrument , he burst into tears .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.342

" God , " he said , " gives kingdoms MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.343

and takes them away . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.344

I am already one of the dead . " MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.345

The will was kept secret during the short remainder of his life .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.346

On the third of November 1700 he expired . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.347

All Madrid crowded to the palace . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.348

The gates were thronged . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.349

The antechamber was filled with ambassadors and grandees , eager to
learn what dispositions the deceased sovereign had made .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.350

At length the folding_doors were flung open . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.351

The Duke of Abrantes came forth , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.352

and announced that the whole Spanish monarchy was bequeathed to Philip
Duke of Anjou . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.353

Charles had directed that , during the interval which might elapse
between his death and the arrival of his successor , the government
should be administered by a council , of which Porto Carrero was the
chief member . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.354

Louis acted , as the English ministers might have guessed that he would
act . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.355

With scarcely the show of hesitation , he broke through all the
obligations of the Partition Treaty , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.356

and accepted for his grandson the splendid legacy of Charles .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.357

The new sovereign hastened to take possession of his dominions .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.358

The whole court of France accompanied him to Sceaux .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,271.359

His brothers escorted him to that frontier which , as they weakly
imagined , was to be a frontier no <P_8,272> longer .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.360

" The Pyrenees , " said Louis , " have ceased to exist . "
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.361

Those very Pyrenees , a few years later , were the theatre of a war
between the heir of Louis and the prince whom France was now sending to
govern Spain . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.362

If Charles had ransacked Europe to find a successor whose moral and
intellectual character resembled his own , he could not have chosen
better . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.363

Philip was not so sickly as his predecessor , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.364

but he was quite as weak , as indolent , and as superstitious ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.365

he very soon became quite as hypochondriacal and eccentric ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.366

and he was even more uxorious . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.367

He was indeed a husband of ten_thousand . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.368

His first object , when he became King of Spain , was to procure a wife
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.369

From the day of his marriage to the day of her death , his first object
was to have her near him , and to do what she wished .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.370

As soon as his wife died , his first object was to procure another .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.371

Another was found , as unlike the former as possible .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.372

But she was a wife ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.373

and Philip was content . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.374

Neither by day nor by night , neither in sickness nor in health ,
neither in time of business nor in time of relaxation , did he ever
suffer her to be absent from him for half an hour .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.375

His mind was naturally feeble ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.376

and he had received an enfeebling education . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.377

He had been brought up amidst the dull magnificence of Versailles .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.378

His grandfather was as imperious and as ostentatious in his intercourse
with the royal family as in public acts . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.379

All those who grew up immediately under the eye of Louis had the manners
of persons who had never known what it was to be at ease .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.380

They were all taciturn , shy , and awkward . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.381

In all of them , except the Duke of Burgundy , the evil went further
than the manners . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.382

The Dauphin , the Duke of Berri , Philip of Anjou , were men of
insignificant characters . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.383

They had no energy , no force of will . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,272.384

They had been so little accustomed to judge <P_8,273> or to act for
themselves that implicit dependence had become necessary to their
comfort . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.385

The new King of Spain , emancipated from control , resembled that
wretched German captive who , when the irons which he had worn for years
were knocked off , fell prostrate on the floor of his prison .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.386

The restraints which had enfeebled the mind of the young Prince were
required to support it . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.387

Till he had a wife he could do nothing : MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.388

and when he had a wife he did whatever she chose .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.389

While this lounging , moping boy was on his way to Madrid , his
grandfather was all activity . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.390

Louis had no reason to fear a contest with the Empire single-handed .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.391

He made vigorous preparations to encounter Leopold .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.392

He overawed the States-General by means of a great army .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.393

He attempted to soothe the English government by fair professions .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.394

William was not deceived . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.395

He fully returned the hatred of Louis ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.396

and , if he had been free to act according to his own inclinations , he
would have declared war as soon as the contents of the will were known .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.397

But he was bound by constitutional restraints .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.398

Both his person and his measures were unpopular in England .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.399

His secluded life and his cold manners disgusted a people accustomed to
the graceful affability of Charles the Second .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.400

His foreign accent and his foreign attachments were offensive to the
national prejudices . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.401

His reign had been a season of distress , following a season of rapidly
increasing prosperity . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.402

The burdens of the late war and the expense of restoring the currency
had been severely felt . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.403

Nine clergymen out of ten were Jacobites at heart ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.404

and had sworn allegiance to the new dynasty , only in order to save
their benefices . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.405

A large proportion of the country gentlemen belonged to the same party .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,273.406

The whole body of agricultural proprietors was hostile to that interest
which the creation of the <P_8,274> national debt had brought into
notice , and which was believed to be peculiarly favoured by the Court ,
the monied interest . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.407

The middle classes were fully determined to keep out James and his
family . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.408

But they regarded William only as the less of two evils ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.409

and , as long as there was no imminent danger of a counter-revolution ,
were disposed to thwart and mortify the sovereign by whom they were ,
nevertheless , ready to stand , in case of necessity , with their lives
and fortunes . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.410

They were sullen and dissatisfied . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.411

" There was , " as Somers expressed it in a remarkable letter to William
, " a deadness and want of spirit in the nation universally . "
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.412

Every thing in England was going on as Louis could have wished .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.413

The leaders of the Whig party had retired from power ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.414

and were extremely unpopular on account of the unfortunate issue of the
Partition Treaty . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.415

The Tories , some of whom still cast a lingering look towards St.
Germains , were in office , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.416

and had a decided majority in the House of Commons .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.417

William was so much embarrassed by the state of parties in England that
he could not venture to make war on the House of Bourbon .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.418

He was suffering under a complication of severe and incurable diseases .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.419

There was every reason to believe that a few months would dissolve the
fragile tie which bound up that feeble body with that ardent and
unconquerable soul . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.420

If Louis could succeed in preserving peace for a short time , it was
probable that all his vast designs would be securely accomplished .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.421

Just at this crisis , the most important crisis of his life , his pride
and his passions hurried him into an error , which undid all that forty
years of victory and intrigue had done , which produced the
dismemberment of the kingdom of his grandson , and brought invasion ,
bankruptcy , and famine on his own . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,274.422

<P_8,275>

James the Second died at St. Germains . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.424

Louis paid him a farewell visit , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.425

and was so much moved by the solemn parting , and by the grief of the
exiled queen that , losing sight of all considerations of policy , and
actuated , as it should seem , merely by compassion and by a not
ungenerous vanity , he acknowledged the Prince of Wales as King of
England . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.426

The indignation which the Castilians had felt when they heard that three
foreign powers had undertaken to regulate the Spanish succession was
nothing to the rage with which the English learned that their good
neighbour had taken the trouble to provide them with a king .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.427

Whigs and Tories joined in condemning the proceedings of the French
Court . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.428

The cry for war was raised by the city of London , and echoed and
reechoed from every corner of the realm . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.429

William saw that his time was come . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.430

Though his wasted and suffering body could hardly move without support ,
his spirit was as energetic and resolute as when , at twenty-three , he
bade defiance to the combined forces of England and France .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.431

He left the Hague , where he had been engaged in negotiating with the
States and the Emperor a defensive treaty against the ambitious designs
of the Bourbons . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.432

He flew to London . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.433

He remodelled the ministry . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.434

He dissolved the Parliament . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.435

The majority of the new House of Commons was with the King ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.436

and the most vigorous preparations were made for war .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.437

Before the commencement of active hostilities William was no more .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.438

But the Grand Alliance of the European Princes against the Bourbons was
already constructed . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.439

" The master workman died , " says Mr. Burke ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.440

" but the work was formed on true mechanical principles ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.441

and it was as truly wrought . " MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.442

On the fifteenth of May , 1702 , war was proclaimed by concert at Vienna
, at London , and at the Hague . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,275.443

Thus commenced that great struggle by which <P_8.276> Europe , from the
Vistula to the Atlantic Ocean , was agitated during twelve years .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.444

The two hostile coalitions were , in respect of territory , wealth , and
population , not unequally matched . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.445

On the one side were France , Spain , and Bavaria ; on the other ,
England , Holland , the Empire , and a crowd of inferior Powers .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.446

That part of the war which Lord Mahon has undertaken to relate , though
not the least important , is certainly the least attractive .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.447

In Italy , in Germany , and in the Netherlands , great means were at the
disposal of great generals . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.448

Mighty battles were fought . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.449

Fortress after fortress was subdued . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.450

The iron chain of the Belgian strongholds was broken .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.451

By a regular and connected series of operations extending through
several years , the French were driven back from the Danube and the Po
into their own provinces . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.452

The war in Spain , on the contrary , is made up of events which seem to
have no dependence on each other . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.453

The turns of fortune resemble those which take place in a dream .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.454

Victory and defeat are not followed by their usual consequences .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.455

Armies spring out of nothing , MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.456

and melt into nothing . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.457

Yet , to judicious readers of history , the Spanish conflict is perhaps
more interesting than the campaigns of Marlborough and Eugene .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.458

The fate of the Milanese and of the Low_Countries was decided by
military skill . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.459

The fate of Spain was decided by the peculiarities of the national
character . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.460

When the war commenced , the young King was in a most deplorable
situation . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.461

On his arrival at Madrid he found Porto Carrero at the head of affairs ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.462

and he did not think fit to displace the man to whom he owed his crown .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.463

The Cardinal was a mere intriguer , and in no sense a statesman .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.276.464

He had acquired , in the Court and in the Confessional , a rare degree
of skill in all the tricks by which weak minds <P_8.277> are managed .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.465

But of the noble science of government , of the sources of national
prosperity , of the causes of national decay , he knew no more than his
master . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.466

It is curious to observe the contrast between the dexterity with which
he ruled the conscience of a foolish valetudinarian , and the imbecility
which he showed when placed at the head of an empire .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.467

On what grounds Lord Mahon represents the Cardinal as a man " of
splendid genius , " " of vast abilities , " we are unable to discover .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.468

Louis was of a very different opinion , MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.469

and Louis was very seldom mistaken in his judgment of character .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.470

" Everybody , " says he , in a letter to his ambassador , " knows how
incapable the Cardinal is . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.471

He is an object of contempt to his countrymen . "
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.472

A few miserable savings were made , which ruined individuals without
producing any perceptible benefit to the state .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.473

The police became more and more inefficient . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.474

The disorders of the capital were increased by the arrival of French
adventurers , the refuse of Parisian brothels and gaming-houses .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.475

These wretches considered the Spaniards as a subjugated race whom the
countrymen of the new sovereign might cheat and insult with impunity .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.476

The King sat {TEXT:sate} eating and drinking all night ,
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.477

lay in bed all day , MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.478

yawned at the council table , MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.479

and suffered the most important papers to lie unopened for weeks .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.480

At length he was roused by the only excitement of which his sluggish
nature was susceptible . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.481

His grandfather consented to let him have a wife .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.482

The choice was fortunate . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.483

Maria Louisa , Princess of Savoy , a beautiful and graceful girl of
thirteen , already a woman in person and mind , at an age when the
females of colder climates are still children , was the person selected
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.484

The King resolved to give her the meeting in Catalonia .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.485

He left his capital , of which he was already thoroughly tired .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.277.486

At setting out he was mobbed by a gang of <P_8.278> beggars .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.487

He , however , made his way through them , MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.488

and repaired to Barcelona . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.489

Louis was perfectly aware that the Queen would govern Philip .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.490

He , accordingly , looked about for somebody to govern the Queen .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.491

He selected the Princess Orsini to be first lady of the bedchamber , no
insignificant post in the household of a very young wife , and a very
uxorious husband . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.492

The princess was the daughter of a French peer , and the widow of a
Spanish grandee . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.493

She was , therefore , admirably fitted by her position to be the
instrument of the Court of Versailles at the Court of Madrid .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.494

The Duke of Orleans called her , in words too coarse for translation ,
the Lieutenant of Captain Maintenon ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.495

and the appellation was well deserved . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.496

She aspired to play in Spain the part which Madame de Maintenon had
played in France . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.497

But , though at least equal to her model in wit , information , and
talents for intrigue , she had not that self-command , that patience ,
that imperturbable evenness of temper , which had raised the widow of a
buffoon to be consort of the proudest of kings .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.498

The Princess was more than fifty years old , MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.499

but was still vain of her fine eyes , and her fine shape ;
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.500

she still dressed in the style of a girl ; MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.501

and she still carried her flirtations so far as to give occasion for
scandal . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.502

She was , however , polite , eloquent , and not deficient in strength of
mind . MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.503

The bitter Saint Simon owns that no person whom she wished to attach
could long resist the graces of her manners and of her conversation .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8.278.504

We have not time to relate how she obtained , and how she preserved her
empire over the young couple in whose household she was placed , how she
became so powerful , that neither minister of Spain nor ambassador from
France could stand against her , how Louis himself was compelled to
court her , how she received orders from Versailles to retire , how the
<P_8,279> Queen took part with her favourite attendant , how the King
took part with the Queen , and how , after much squabbling , lying ,
shuffling , bullying , and coaxing , the dispute was adjusted .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.505

We turn to the events of the war . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.506

When hostilities were proclaimed at London , Vienna , and the Hague ,
Philip was at Naples . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.507

He had been with great difficulty prevailed upon , by the most urgent
representations from Versailles , to separate himself from his wife ,
and to repair without her to his Italian dominions , which were then
manaced by the Emperor . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.508

The Queen acted as Regent , MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.509

and , child as she was , seems to have been quite as competent to govern
the kingdom as her husband or any of his ministers .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.510

In August , 1702 , an armament , under the command of the Duke of Ormond
, appeared off Cadiz . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.511

The Spanish authoriites had no funds and no regular troops .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.512

The national spirit , however , supplied in some degree what was wanting
. MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.513

The nobles and farmers advanced money . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.514

The peasantry were formed into what the Spanish writers call bands of
heroic patriots , and what General Stanhope calls a " rascally foot
militia . " MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.515

If the invaders had acted with vigour and judgment , Cadiz would
probably have fallen . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.516

But the chiefs of the expedition were divided by national and
professional feelings , Dutch against English , and land against sea .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.517

Sparre , the Dutch general , was sulky and perverse .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.518

Bellasys , the English general , embezzled the stores .
MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.519

Lord Mahon imputes the ill temper of Sparre to the influence of the
republican institutions of Holland . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.520

By parity of reason , we suppose that he would impute the peculations of
Bellasys to the influence of the monarchical and aristocratical
institutions of England . MACAULAY-1833-2,8,279.521

