<BEGIN_macaulay-1843-2>

<P_10,4>

Unhappily , many years before her birth , the Macburneys began , as if
of set purpose and in a spirit of determined rivalry , to expose and
ruin themselves . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.3

The heir apparent , Mr. James Macburney , offended his father by making
a runaway match with an actress from Goodman's Fields .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.4

The old gentleman could devise no more judicious mode of wreaking
vengeance on his undutiful boy than by marrying the cook .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.5

The cook gave birth to a son named Joseph , who succeeded to all the
lands of the family , while James was cut off with a shilling .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.6

The favourite son , however , was so extravagant , that he soon became
as poor as his disinherited brother . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.7

Both were forced to earn their bread by their labour .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.8

Joseph turned dancing master MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.9

and settled in Norfolk . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.10

James struck off the Mac from the beginning of his name ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.11

and set up as a portrait painter at Chester . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.12

Here he had a son , named Charles , well known as the author of the
History of Music , and as the father of two remarkable children , of a
son distinguished by learning , and of a daughter still more honourably
distinguished by genius . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.13

Charles early showed a taste for that art , of which , at a later period
, he became the historian . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.14

He was apprenticed to a celebrated musician in London ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.15

and applied himself to study with vigour and success .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.16

He early found a kind and munificent Patron in Fulk Greville , a
highborn and highbred man , who seems to have had in large measure all
the accomplishments and all the follies , all the virtues and all the
vices , which , a_hundred years ago , were considered as making up the
character of a fine gentleman . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.17

Under such protection , the young artist had every prospect of a
brilliant career in the capital . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.18

But his health failed . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.19

It became necessary for him to retreat from the smoke and river fog of
London , to the pure air of the coast . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,4.20

He accepted the place of organist , <P_10,5> at Lynn ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.21

and settled at that town with a young lady who had recently become his
wife . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.22

At Lynn , in June , 1752 , Frances Burney was born .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.23

Nothing in her childhood indicated that she would , while still a young
woman , have secured for herself an honourable and permanent place among
English writers . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.24

She was shy and silent . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.25

Her brothers and sisters called her a dunce , and not without some show
of reason ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.26

for at eight years old she did not know her letters .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.27

In 1760 , Mr. Burney quitted Lynn for London , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.28

and took a house in Poland Street ; a situation which had been
fashionable in the reign of Queen Anne , but which , since that time ,
had been deserted by most of its wealthy and noble inhabitants .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.29

He afterwards resided in Saint Martin's Street , on the south side of
Leicestersquare . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.30

His house there is still well known , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.31

and will continue to be well known as long as our island retains any
trace of civilisation ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.32

for it was the dwelling of Newton , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.33

and the square turret which distinguishes it from all the surrounding
buildings was Newton's observatory . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.34

Mr. Burney at once obtained as many pupils of the most respectable
description as he had time to attend , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.35

and was thus enabled to support his family , modestly indeed , and
frugally , but in comfort and independence . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.36

His professional merit obtained for him the degree of Doctor of Music
from the University of Oxford ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.37

and his works on subjects connected with his art gained for him a place
, respectable , though certainly not eminent , among men of letters .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.38

The progress of the mind of Frances Burney , from her ninth to her
twenty-fifth year , well deserves to be recorded .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.39

When her education had proceeded no further than the hornbook , she lost
her mother , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.40

and thenceforward she educated herself . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,5.41

Her father <P_10,6> appears to have been as bad a father as a very
honest , affectionate , and sweet_tempered man can well be .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.42

He loved his daughter dearly ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.43

but it never seems to have occurred to him that a parent had other
duties to perform to children than that of fondling them .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.44

It would indeed have been impossible for him to superintend their
education himself . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.45

His professional engagements occupied him all day .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.46

At seven in the morning , he began to attend his pupils ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.47

and , when London was full , was sometimes employed in teaching till
eleven at night . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.48

He was often forced to carry in his pocket a tin box of sandwiches , and
a bottle of wine and water , on which he dined in a hackney coach ,
while hurrying from one scholar to another . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.49

Two of his daughters he sent to a seminary at Paris ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.50

but he imagined that Frances would run some risk of being perverted from
the Protestant faith if she were educated in a Catholic country ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.51

and he therefore kept her at home . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.52

No governess , no teacher of any art or of any language , was provided
for her . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.53

But one of her sisters showed her how to write ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.54

and , before she was fourteen , she began to find pleasure in reading .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.55

It was not , however , by reading that her intellect was formed .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.56

Indeed , when her best novels were produced , her knowledge of books was
very small . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.57

When at the height of her fame , she was unacquainted with the most
celebrated works of Voltaire and Moli√®re ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.58

and , what seems still more extraordinary , had never heard or seen a
line of Churchill , who , when she was a girl , was the most popular of
living poets . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.59

It is particularly deserving of observation that she appears to have
been by no means a novel reader . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.60

Her father's library was large ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,6.61

and he had admitted into it so many books which rigid moralists
generally exclude that he felt uneasy , as he afterwards owned , when
Johnson began to examine <P_10,7> the shelves . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.62

But in the whole collection there was only a single novel , Fielding's
Amelia . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.63

An education , however , which to most girls would have been useless ,
but which suited Fanny's mind better than elaborate culture , was in
constant progress during her passage from childhood to womanhood .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.64

The great book of human nature was turned over before her .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.65

Her father's social position was very peculiar .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.66

He belonged in fortune and station to the middle class .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.67

His daughters seemed to have been suffered to mix freely with those whom
butlers and waiting maids call vulgar . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.68

We are told that they were in the habit of playing with the children of
a wigmaker who lived in the adjoining house . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.69

Yet few nobles could assemble in the most stately mansions of Grosvenor
Square or Saint James's Square a society so various and so brilliant as
was sometimes to be found in Dr. Burney's cabin .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.70

His mind , though not very powerful or capacious , was restlessly active
; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.71

and , in the intervals of his professional pursuits , he had contrived
to lay up much miscellaneous information . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.72

His attainments , the suavity of his temper , and the general simplicity
of his manners had obtained for him ready admission to the first
literary circles . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.73

While he was still at Lynn , he had won Johnson's heart by sounding with
honest zeal the praises of the English Dictionary .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.74

In London the two friends met frequently , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.75

and agreed most harmoniously . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.76

One tie , indeed , was wanting to their mutual attachment .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.77

Burney loved his own art passionately ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.78

and Johnson just knew the bell of Saint Clement's church from the organ
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.79

They had , however , many topics in common ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.80

and on winter nights their conversations were sometimes prolonged till
the fire had gone out , and the candles had burned away to the wicks .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.81

Burney's admiration of the powers which had produced Rasselas and The
Rambler bordered on idolatry . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,7.82

Johnson , <P_10,8> on the other hand , condescended to growl out that
Burney was an honest fellow , a man whom it was impossible not to like .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.83

Garrick , too , was a frequent visitor in Poland Street and Saint
Martin's Street . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.84

That wonderful actor loved the society of children , partly from good
nature and partly from vanity . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.85

The ecstasies of mirth and terror , which his gestures and play of
countenance never failed to produce in a nursery , flattered him quite
as much as the applause of mature critics . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.86

He often exhibited all his powers of mimicry for the amusement of the
little Burneys , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.87

awed them by shuddering and crouching as if he saw a ghost ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.88

scared them by raving like a maniac in Saint Luke's ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.89

and then at once became an auctioneer , a chimney-sweeper or an old
woman , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.90

and made them laugh till the tears ran down their cheeks .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.91

But it would be tedious to recount the names of all the men of letters
and artists whom Frances Burney had an opportunity of seeing and hearing
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.92

Colman , Twining , Harris , Baretti , Hawkesworth , Reynolds , Barry ,
were among those who occasionally surrounded the tea table and supper
tray at her father's modest dwelling . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.93

This was not all . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.94

The distinction which Dr. Burney had acquired as a musician and as the
historian of music , attracted to his house the most eminent musical
performers of that age . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.95

The greatest Italian singers who visited England regarded him as the
dispenser of fame in their art , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.96

and exerted themselves to obtain his suffrage . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.97

Pacchierotti became his intimate friend . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.98

The rapacious Agujari , who sang for nobody else under fifty pounds an
air , sang her best for Dr. Burney without a fee ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.99

and in the company of Dr. Burney even the haughty and eccentric
Gabrielli constrained herself to behave with civility .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,8.100

It was thus in his power to give , with scarcely any expense , <P_10,9>
concerts equal to those of the aristocracy . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.101

On such occasions the quiet street in which he lived was blocked up by
coroneted chariots , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.102

and his little drawingroom was crowded with peers , peeresses ,
ministers , and ambassadors . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.103

On one evening , of which we happen to have a full account , there were
present Lord Mulgrave , Lord Bruce , Lord and Lady Edgecumbe , Lord
Barrington from the War office , Lord Sandwich from the Admiralty , Lord
Ashburnham , with his gold key dangling from his pocket , and the French
Ambassador , M. De Guignes , renowned for his fine person and for his
success in gallantry . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.104

But the great show of the night was the Russian Ambassador , Count
Orloff , whose gigantic figure was all in a blaze with jewels , and in
whose demeanour the untamed ferocity of the Scythian might be discerned
through a thin varnish of French politeness . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.105

As he stalked about the small parlour , brushing the ceiling with his
toupee , the girls whispered to each other , with mingled admiration and
horror , that he was the favoured lover of his august mistress ; that he
had borne the chief part in the revolution to which she owed her throne
; and that his huge hands , now glittering with diamond rings , had
given the last squeeze to the windpipe of her unfortunate husband .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.106

With such illustrious guests as these were mingled all the most
remarkable specimens of the race of lions , a kind of game which is
hunted in London every spring with more than Meltonian ardour and
perseverance . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.107

Bruce , who had washed down steaks cut from living oxen with water from
the fountains of the Nile , came to swagger and talk about his travels .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.108

Ornai lisped broken English , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.109

and made all the assembled musicians hold their ears by howling
Otaheitean love songs , such as those with which Oberea charmed her
Opano . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,9.110

With the literary and fashionable society , which <P_10,10> occasionally
met under Dr. Burney's roof , Frances can scarcely be said to have
mingled . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.111

She was not a musician , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.112

and could therefore bear no part in the concerts .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.113

She was shy almost to awkwardness , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.114

and scarcely ever joined in the conversation .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.115

The slightest remark from a stranger disconcerted her ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.116

and even the old friends of her father who tried to draw her out could
seldom extract more than a Yes or a No . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.117

Her figure was small , her face not distinguished by beauty .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.118

She was therefore suffered to withdraw quietly to the background , and ,
unobserved herself , to observe all that passed .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.119

Her nearest relations were aware that she had good sense ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.120

but seem not to have suspected that under her demure and bashful
deportment , were concealed a fertile invention and a keen sense of the
ridiculous . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.121

She had not , it is true , an eye for the fine shades of character .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.122

But every marked peculiarity instantly caught her notice
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.123

and remained engraven on her imagination . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.124

Thus , while still a girl she had laid up such a store of materials for
fiction as few of those who mix much in the world are able to accumulate
during a long life . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.125

She had watched and listened to people of every class , from princes and
great officers of state down to artists living in garrets , and poets
familiar with subterranean cookshops . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.126

Hundreds of remarkable persons had passed in review before her , English
, French , German , Italian , lords and fiddlers , deans of cathedrals
and managers of theatres , travellers leading about newly caught savages
, and singing women escorted by deputy husbands .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.127

So strong was the impression made on the mind of Frances by the society
which she was in the habit of seeing and hearing , that she began to
write little fictitious narratives as soon as she could use her pen with
ease , which , as we have said , was not very early .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.128

Her sisters were amused by her stories : MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.129

But Dr. Burney knew nothing of their existence ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,10.130

and in <P_10,11> another quarter her literary propensities met with
serious discouragement . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.131

When she was fifteen , her father took a second wife .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.132

The new Mrs. Burney soon found out that her stepdaughter was fond of
scribbling , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.133

and delivered several goodnatured lectures on the subject .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.134

The advice no doubt was well meant , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.135

and might have been given by the most judicious friend ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.136

for at that time , from causes to which we may hereafter advert ,
nothing could be more disadvantageous to a young lady than to be known
as a novel writer . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.137

Frances yielded , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.138

relinquished her favourite pursuit , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.139

and made a bonfire of all her manuscripts . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.140

She now hemmed and stitched from breakfast to dinner with scrupulous
regularity . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.141

But the dinners of that time were early ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.142

and the afternoon was her own . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.143

Though she had given up novelwriting she was still fond of using her pen
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.144

She began to keep a diary , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.145

and she corresponded largely with a person who seems to have had the
chief share in the formation of her mind . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.146

This was Samuel Crisp , an old friend of her father .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.147

His name , well known , near a century ago , in the most splendid
circles of London , has long been forgotten . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.148

His history is , however , so interesting and instructive , that it
tempts us to venture on a digression . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.149

Long before Frances Burney was born , Mr. Crisp had made his entrance
into the world , with every advantage . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.150

He was well connected and well educated . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.151

His face and figure were conspicuously handsome ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.152

his manners were polished ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.153

his fortune was easy ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.154

his character was without stain ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,11.155

he lived in the <P_10,12> best society ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.156

he had read much ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.157

he talked well ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.158

his taste in literature , music , painting , architecture , sculpture ,
was held in high esteem . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.159

Nothing that the world can give seemed to be wanting to his happiness
and respectability , except that he should understand the limits of his
powers , and should not throw away distinctions which were within his
reach in the pursuit of distinctions which were unattainable .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.160

" It is an uncontrolled truth , " says Swift , " that no man ever made
an ill figure who understood his own talents , nor a good one who
mistook them . " MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.161

Every day brings with it fresh illustrations of this weighty saying ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.162

but the best commentary that we remember is the history of Samuel Crisp
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.163

Men like him have their proper place , and it is a most important one ,
in the Commonwealth of Letters . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.164

It is by the judgment of such men that the rank of authors is finally
determined . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.165

It is neither to the multitude , nor to the few who are gifted with
great creative genius , that we are to look for sound critical decisions
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.166

The multitude , unacquainted with the best models , are captivated by
whatever stuns and dazzles them . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.167

They deserted Mrs. Siddons to run after Master Betty ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.168

and they now prefer , we have no doubt , Jack Sheppard to Van Artevelde
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.169

A man of great original genius , on the other hand , a man who has
attained to mastery in some high walk of art , is by no means to be
implicitly trusted as a judge of the performances of others .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.170

The erroneous decisions pronounced by such men are without number .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.171

It is commonly supposed that jealousy makes them unjust .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.172

But a more creditable explanation may easily be found .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.173

The very excellence of a work shows that some of the faculties of the
author have been developed at the expense of the rest ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,12.174

for it is not given to the human intellect to expand itself widely in
all directions at <P_10,13> once and to be at the same time gigantic and
well proportioned . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.175

Whoever becomes preeminent in any art , nay , in any style of art ,
generally does so by devoting himself with intense and exclusive
enthusiasm to the pursuit of one kind of excellence .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.176

His perception of other kinds of excellence is therefore too often
impaired . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.177

Out of his own department he praises and blames at random ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.178

and is far less to be trusted than the mere connoisseur , who produces
nothing , and whose business is only to judge and enjoy .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.179

One painter is distinguished by his exquisite finishing .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.180

He toils day after day to bring the veins of a cabbage leaf , the folds
of a lace veil , the wrinkles of an old woman's face , nearer and nearer
to perfection . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.181

In the time which he employs on a square foot of canvas {TEXT:canvass} ,
a master of a different order covers the walls of a palace with gods
burying giants under mountains , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.182

or makes the cupola of a church alive with seraphim and martyrs .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.183

The more fervent the passion of each of these artists for his art , the
higher the merit of each in his own line , the more unlikely it is that
they will justly appreciate each other . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.184

Many persons who never handled a pencil probably do far more justice to
Michael Angelo than would have been done by Gerard Douw , and far more
justice to Gerard Douw than would have been done by Michael Angelo .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.185

It is the same with literature . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.186

Thousands , who have no spark of the genius of Dryden or Wordsworth , do
to Dryden the justice which has never been done by Wordsworth , and to
Wordsworth the justice which , we suspect , would never have been done
by Dryden . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.187

Gray , Johnson , Richardson , Fielding , are all highly esteemed by the
great body of intelligent and well informed men .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.188

But Gray could see no merit in Rasselas ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.189

and Johnson could see no merit in the Bard . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.190

Fielding thought Richardson a solemn prig ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,13.191

<P_10,14>

and Richardson perpetually expressed contempt and disgust for Fielding's
lowness . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.193

Mr. Crisp seems , as far as we can judge , to have been a man eminently
qualified for the useful office of a connoisseur .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.194

His talents and knowledge fitted him to appreciate justly almost every
species of intellectual superiority . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.195

As an adviser he was inestimable . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.196

Nay , he might probably have held a respectable rank as a writer , if he
would have confined himself to some department of literature in which
nothing more than sense , taste , and reading was required .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.197

Unhappily he set his heart on being a great poet ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.198

wrote a tragedy in five acts on the death of Virginia ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.199

and offered it to Garrick , who was his personal friend .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.200

Garrick read , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.201

shook his head , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.202

and expressed a doubt whether it would be wise in Mr. Crisp to stake a
reputation , which stood high , on the success of such a piece .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.203

But the author , blinded by ambition , set in motion a machinery such as
none could long resist . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.204

His intercessors were the most eloquent man and the most lovely woman of
that generation . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.205

Pitt was induced to read Virginia and to pronounce it excellent .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.206

Lady Coventry , with fingers which might have furnished a model to
sculptors , forced the manuscript into the reluctant hand of the manager
; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.207

and , in the year 1754 , the play was brought forward .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.208

Nothing that skill or friendship could do was omitted .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.209

Garrick wrote both prologue and epilogue . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.210

The zealous friends of the author filled every box ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.211

and by their strenuous exertions , the life of the play was prolonged
during ten nights . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.212

But , though there was no clamorous reprobation , it was universally
felt that the attempt had failed . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.213

When Virginia was printed , the public disappointment was even greater
than at the representation . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,14.214

The critics , the Monthly Reviewers in particular , fell on plot ,
characters , and diction without mercy , but , we fear , not without
<P_10,15> justice . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.215

We have never met with a copy of the play ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.216

but if we may judge from the lines which are extracted in the
Gentleman's Magazine , and which does not appear to have been
malevolently selected , we should say that nothing but the acting of
Garrick , and the partiality of the audience , could have saved so
feeble and unnatural a drama from instant damnation .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.217

The ambition of the poet was still unsubdued .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.218

When the London season closed , he applied himself vigorously to the
work of removing blemishes . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.219

He does not seem to have suspected , what we are strongly inclined to
suspect , that the whole piece was one blemish , and that the passages
which were meant to be fine , were , in truth , bursts of that tame
extravagance into which writers fall , when they set themselves to be
sublime and pathetic in spite of nature . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.220

He omitted , added , retouched , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.221

and flattered himself with hopes of a complete success in the following
year ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.222

but in the following year , Garrick showed no disposition to bring the
amended tragedy on the stage . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.223

Solicitation and remonstrance were tried in vain .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.224

Lady Coventry , drooping under that malady which seems ever to select
what is loveliest for its prey , could render no assistance .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.225

The manager's language was civilly evasive ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.226

but his resolution was inflexible . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.227

Crisp had committed a great error ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.228

but he had escaped with a very slight penance .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.229

His play had not been hooted from the boards .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.230

It had , on the contrary , been better received than many very estimable
performances have been , than Johnson's Irene , for example , or
Goldsmith's Goodnatured Man . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.231

Had Crisp been wise , he would have thought himself happy in having
purchased selfknowledge so cheap . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.232

He would have relinquished , without vain repinings , the hope of
poetical distinction , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,15.233

and would have <P_10,16> turned to the many sources of happiness which
he still possessed . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.234

Had he been , on the other hand , an unfeeling and unblushing dunce , he
would have gone on writing scores of bad tragedies in defiance of
censure and derision . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.235

But he had too much sense to risk a second defeat , yet too little sense
to bear his first defeat like a man . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.236

The fatal delusion that he was a great dramatist , had taken firm
possession of his mind . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.237

His failure he attributed to every cause except the true one .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.238

He complained of the ill will of Garrick , who appears to have done
everything that ability and zeal could do , and who , from selfish
motives , would , of course , have been well pleased if Virginia had
been as successful as The Beggar's Opera . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.239

Nay , Crisp complained of the languor of the friends whose partiality
had given him three benefit nights to which he had no claim .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.240

He complained of the injustice of the spectators , when , in truth , he
ought to have been grateful for their unexampled patience .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.241

He lost his temper and spirits , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.242

and became a cynic and a hater of mankind . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.243

From London he retired to Hampton , and from Hampton to a solitary and
long deserted mansion , built on a common in one of the wildest tracts
of Surrey . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.244

No road , not even a sheepwalk , connected his lonely dwelling with the
abodes of men . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.245

The place of his retreat was strictly concealed from his old associates
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.246

In the spring he sometimes emerged , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.247

and was seen at exhibitions and concerts in London .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.248

But he soon disappeared , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.249

and hid himself , with no society but his books , in his dreary
hermitage . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.250

He survived his failure about thirty years . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.251

A new generation sprang up around him . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.252

No memory of his bad verses remained among men .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.253

His very name was forgotten . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.254

How completely the world had lost sight of him , will appear from a
single circumstance . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,16.255

We looked for his name in a copious Dictionary of Dramatic Authors
<P_10,17> published while he was still alive , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.256

and we found only that Mr. Henry Crisp , of the Custom House , had
written a play called Virginia , acted in 1754 .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.257

To the last , however , the unhappy man continued to brood over the
injustice of the manager and the pit , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.258

and tried to convince himself and others that he had missed the highest
literary honours , only because he had omitted some fine passages in
compliance with Garrick's judgment . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.259

Alas , for human nature , that the wounds of vanity should smart and
bleed so much longer than the wounds of affection !
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.260

Few people , we believe , whose nearest friends and relations died in
1754 , had any acute feeling of the loss in 1782 .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.261

Dear sisters , and favourite daughters , and brides snatched away before
the honeymoon was passed , had been forgotten ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.262

or were remembered only with a tranquil regret .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.263

But Samuel Crisp was still mourning for his tragedy , like Rachel
weeping for her children , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.264

and would not be comforted . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.265

" Never , " such was his language twenty-eight years after his disaster
, " never give up MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.266

or alter a tittle {COM:sic} unless it perfectly coincides with your
inward feelings . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.267

I can say this to my sorrow and my cost . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.268

But mum ! " MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.269

Soon after these words were written , his life , a life which might have
been eminently useful and happy , ended in the same gloom in which ,
during more than a quarter of a century , it had been passed .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.270

We have thought it worth while to rescue from oblivion this curious
fragment of literary history . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.271

It seems to us at once ludicrous , melancholy , and full of instruction
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.272

Crisp was an old and very intimate friend of the Burneys .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.273

To them alone was confided the name of the desolate old hall in which he
hid himself like a wild beast in a den . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.274

For them were reserved such remains of his humanity as had survived the
failure of his play . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.275

Frances Burney he regarded as his daughter . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.276

He called her his Fannikin ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,17.277

and she in <P_10,18> return called him her dear Daddy .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.278

In truth , he seems to have done much more than her real parents for the
development of her intellect ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.279

for though he was a bad poet , he was a scholar , a thinker , and an
excellent counsellor . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.280

He was particularly fond of concerts in Poland Street .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.281

They had indeed , been commenced at his suggestion ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.282

and when he visited London he constantly attended them .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.283

But when he grew old , and when gout , brought on partly by mental
irritation , confined him to his retreat , he was desirous of having a
glimpse of that gay and brilliant world from which he was exiled ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.284

and he pressed Fannikin to send him full accounts of her father's
evening parties . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.285

A few of her letters to him have been published ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.286

and it is impossible to read them without discerning in them all the
powers which afterwards produced Evelina and Cecilia , the quickness in
catching every odd peculiarity of character and manner , the skill in
grouping , the humour , often richly comic , sometimes even farcical .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.287

Fanny's propensity to novelwriting had for a time been kept down .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.288

It now rose up stronger than ever . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.289

The heroes and heroines of the tales which had perished in the flames ,
were still present to the eye of her mind . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.290

One favourite story , in particular , haunted her imagination .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.291

It was about a certain Caroline Evelyn , a beautiful damsel who made an
unfortunate love match and died , leaving an infant daughter .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.292

Frances began to image to herself the various scenes , tragic and comic
, through which the poor motherless girl , highly connected on one side
, meanly connected on the other , might have to pass .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,18.293

A crowd of unreal beings , good and bad , grave and ludicrous ,
surrounded the pretty , timid , young orphan ; a coarse sea captain ; an
ugly , insolent fop , blazing in a superb court dress ; another fop , as
ugly and as insolent , but lodged on Snow Hill , and <P_10,19> tricked
out in secondhand finery for the Hampstead ball ; an old woman ,
wrinkles and rouge , flirting her fan with the air of a miss of
seventeen and screaming in a dialect made up of vulgar French and vulgar
English ; a poet lean and ragged , with a broad Scotch accent .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.294

By degrees these shadows acquired stronger and stronger consistence ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.295

the impulse which urged Frances to write became irresistible ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.296

and the result was the History of Evelina . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.297

Then came , naturally enough , a wish , mingled with many fears , to
appear before the public ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.298

for , timid as Frances was , and bashful , and altogether unaccustomed
to hear her own praises , it is clear that she wanted neither a strong
passion for distinction , nor a just confidence in her own powers .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.299

Her scheme was to become , if possible , a candidate for fame without
running any risk of disgrace . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.300

She had not money to bear the expense of printing .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.301

It was therefore necessary that some bookseller should be induced to
take the risk ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.302

and such a bookseller was not readily found . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.303

Dodsley refused even to look at the manuscript unless he were intrusted
with the name of the author . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.304

A publisher in Fleet Street , named Lowndes , was more complaisant .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.305

Some correspondence took place between this person and Miss Burney , who
took the name of Grafton , and desired that the letters addressed to her
might be left at the Orange Coffeehouse . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.306

But , before the bargain was finally struck , Fanny thought it her duty
to obtain her father's consent . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.307

She told him that she had written a book , that she wished to have his
permission to publish it anonymously , but that she hoped that he would
not insist upon seeing it . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.308

What followed may serve to illustrate what we meant when we said that
Dr. Burney was as bad a father as so goodhearted a man could possibly
be . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,19.309

It never seems to have crossed his mind that Fanny was about to take a
step on <P_10,20> which the whole happiness of her life might depend , a
step which might raise her to an honourable eminence , or cover her with
ridicule and contempt . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.310

Several people had already been trusted , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.311

and strict concealment was therefore not to be expected .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.312

On so grave an occasion , it was surely his duty to give his best
counsel to his daughter , to win her confidence , to prevent her from
exposing herself if her book were a bad one , and , if it were a good
one , to see that the terms which she made with the publisher were
likely to be beneficial to her . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.313

Instead of this , he only stared , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.314

burst out a laughing , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.315

kissed her , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.316

gave her leave to do as she liked , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.317

and never even asked the name of her work . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.318

The contract with Lowndes was speedily concluded .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.319

Twenty pounds were given for the copyright , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.320

and were accepted by Fanny with delight . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.321

Her father's inexcusable neglect of his duty happily caused her no worse
evil than the loss of twelve or fifteen_hundred pounds .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.322

After many delays Evelina appeared in January 1778 .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.323

Poor Fanny was sick with terror , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.324

and durst hardly stir out of doors . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.325

Some days passed before anything was heard of the book .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.326

It had , indeed , nothing but its own merits to push it into public
favour . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.327

Its author was unknown . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.328

The house by which it was published was not , we believe , held in high
estimation . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.329

No body of partisans had been engaged to applaud .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.330

The better class of readers expected little from a novel about a young
lady's entrance into the world . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.331

There was , indeed , at that time a disposition among the most
respectable people to condemn novels generally ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.332

nor was this disposition by any means without excuse ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.333

for works of that sort were then almost always silly , and very
frequently wicked . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.334

Soon , however , the first faint accents of praise began to be heard .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,20.335

The keepers of the circulating libraries <P_10,21> reported that
everybody was asking for Evelina , and that some person had guessed
Anstey to be the author . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.336

Then came a favourable notice in the London Review ; then another still
more favourable in the Monthly . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.337

And now the book found its way to tables which had seldom been polluted
by marble_covered volumes . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.338

Scholars and statesmen , who contemptuously abandoned the crowd of
romances to Miss Lydia Languish and Miss Sukey Saunter , were not
ashamed to own that they could not tear themselves away from Evelina .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.339

Fine carriages and rich liveries , not often seen east of Temple Bar ,
were attracted to the publisher's shop in Fleet Street .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.340

Lowndes was daily questioned about the author ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.341

but was himself as much in the dark as any of the questioners .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.342

The mystery , however , could not remain a mystery long .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.343

It was known to brothers and sisters , aunts and cousins :
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.344

and they were far too proud and too happy to be discreet .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.345

Dr. Burney wept over the book in rapture . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.346

Daddy Crisp shook his fist at his Fannikin in affectionate anger at not
having been admitted to her confidence . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.347

The truth was whispered to Mrs. Thrale ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.348

and then it began to spread fast . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.349

The book had been admired while it was ascribed to men of letters long
conversant with the world , and accustomed to composition .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.350

But when it was known that a reserved , silent young woman had produced
the best work of fiction that had appeared since the death of Smollett ,
the acclamations were redoubled . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.351

What she had done was , indeed , extraordinary .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.352

But , as usual , various reports improved the story till it became
miraculous . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.353

Evelina , it was said , was the work of a girl of seventeen .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.354

Incredible as this tale was , it continued to be repeated down to our
own time . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.355

Frances was too honest to confirm it . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.356

Probably she was too much a woman to contradict it ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,21.357

and it was long before any of her detractors thought <P_10,22> of this
mode of annoyance . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.358

Yet there was no want of low minds and bad hearts in the generation
which witnessed her first appearance . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.359

There was the envious Kenrick and the savage Wolcot , the asp George
Steevens and the polecat John Williams . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.360

It did not , however , occur to them to search the parish register of
Lynn , in order that they might be able to twit a lady with having
concealed her age . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.361

That truly chivalrous exploit was reserved for a bad writer of our own
time , whose spite she had provoked by not furnishing him with materials
for a worthless edition of Boswell's Life of Johnson , some sheets of
which our readers have doubtless seen round parcels of better books .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.362

But we must return to our story . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.363

The triumph was complete . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.364

The timid and obscure girl found herself on the highest pinnacle of fame
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.365

Great men , on whom she had gazed at a distance with humble reverence ,
addressed her with admiration , tempered by the tenderness due to her
sex and age . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.366

Burke , Windham , Gibbon , Reynolds , Sheridan , were among her most
ardent eulogists . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.367

Cumberland acknowledged her merit , after his fashion , by biting his
lips and wriggling in his chair whenever her name was mentioned .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.368

But it was at Streatham that she tasted , in the highest perfection ,
the sweets of flattery mingled with the sweets of friendship .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.369

Mrs. Thrale , then at the height of prosperity and popularity , with
gay spirits , quick wit , showy , though superficial acquirements ,
pleasing , though not refined manners , a singularly amiable temper ,
and a loving heart , felt towards Fanny as towards a younger sister .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.370

With the Thrales , Johnson was domesticated . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.371

He was an old friend of Dr. Burney ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.372

but he had probably taken little notice of Dr. Burney's daughters ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,22.373

and Fanny , we imagine , had never in her life dared to speak to him ,
unless to ask whether he wanted a nineteenth or a <P_10,23> twentieth
cup of tea . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.374

He was charmed by her tale , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.375

and preferred it to the novels of Fielding , to whom , indeed , he had
always been grossly unjust . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.376

He did not , indeed , carry his partiality so far as to place Evelina by
the side of Clarissa and Sir Charles Grandison ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.377

yet he said that his little favourite had done enough to have made even
Richardson feel uneasy . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.378

With Johnson's cordial approbation of the book was mingled a fondness ,
half gallant half paternal , for the writer ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.379

and this fondness his age and character entitled him to show without
restraint . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.380

He began by putting her hand to his lips . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.381

But he soon clasped her in his huge arms , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.382

and implored her to be a good girl . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.383

She was his pet , his dear love , his dear little Burney , his little
charactermonger . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.384

At one time , he broke forth in praise of the good taste of her caps .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.385

At another time he insisted on teaching her Latin .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.386

That , with all his coarseness and irritability , he was a man of
sterling benevolence , has long been acknowledged .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.387

But how gentle and endearing his deportment could be , was not known
till the recollections of Madame D'Arblay were published .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.388

We have mentioned a few of the most eminent of those who paid their
homage to the author of Evelina . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.389

The crowd of inferior admirers would require a catalogue as long as that
in the second book of the Iliad . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,23.390

In that catalogue would be Mrs. Cholmondeley , the sayer of odd things
, and Seward , much given to yawning , and Baretti , who slew the man in
the Haymarket , and Paoli , talking broken English , and Langton ,
taller by the head than any other member of the club , and Lady Millar ,
who kept a vase wherein fools were wont to put bad verses , and
Jerningham , who wrote verses fit to be put into the vase of Lady Millar
, and Dr. Franklin , not , as some have dreamed , the great
Pennsylvanian Dr. <P_10,24> Franklin , who could not then have paid his
respects to Miss Burney without much risk of being hanged , drawn , and
quartered , but Dr. Franklin the less . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.391

{COM:greek_omitted}

It would not have been surprising {TEXT:suprising} if such success had
turned even a strong head , and corrupted even a generous and
affectionate nature . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.393

But , in the Diary , we can find no trace of any feeling inconsistent
with a truly modest and amiable disposition . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.394

There is , indeed , abundant proof that Frances enjoyed with an intense
, though a troubled , joy , the honours which her genius had won ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.395

but it is equally clear that her happiness sprang from the happiness of
her father , her sister , and her dear Daddy Crisp .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.396

While flattered by the great , the opulent , and the learned , while
followed along the Steyne at Brighton , and the Pantiles at Tunbridge
Wells , by the gaze of admiring crowds , her heart seems to have been
still with the little domestic circle in Saint Martin's Street .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.397

If she recorded with minute diligence all the compliments , delicate and
coarse , which she heard wherever she turned , she recorded them for the
eyes of two or three persons who had loved her from infancy , who had
loved her in obscurity , and to whom her fame gave the purest and most
exquisite delight . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.398

Nothing can be more unjust than to confound these outpourings of a kind
heart , sure of perfect sympathy , with the egotism of a bluestocking ,
who prates to all who come near her about her own novel or her own
volume of sonnets . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.399

It was natural that the triumphant issue of Miss Burney's first venture
should tempt her to try a second . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.400

Evelina , though it had raised her fame , had added nothing to her
fortune . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,24.401

Some of her <P_10,25> friends urged her to write for the stage .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.402

Johnson promised to give her his advice as to the composition .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.403

Murphy , who was supposed to understand the temper of the pit as well as
any man of his time , undertook to instruct her as to stage effect .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.404

Sheridan declared that he would accept a play from her without even
reading it . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.405

Thus encouraged , she wrote a comedy named The Witlings .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.406

Fortunately it was never acted or printed . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.407

We can , we think , easily perceive , from the little which is said on
the subject in the Diary , that The Witlings would have been damned ,
and that Murphy and Sheridan thought so , though they were too polite to
say so . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.408

Happily Frances had a friend who was not afraid to give her pain .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.409

Crisp , wiser for her than he had been for himself , read the manuscript
in his lonely retreat , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.410

and manfully told her that she had failed , and that to remove blemishes
here and there would be useless , that the piece had abundance of wit
but no interest , that it was bad as a whole , that it would remind
every reader of the <font> Femmes Savantes , <$$font> which , strange to
say , she had never read , and that she could not sustain so close a
comparison with Moli√®re . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.411

This opinion , in which Dr. Burney concurred , was sent to Frances in
what she called " a hissing , groaning , catcalling epistle . "
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.412

But she had too much sense not to know that it was better to be hissed
and catcalled by her Daddy than by a whole sea of heads in the pit of
Drury Lane Theatre : MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.413

and she had too good a heart not to be grateful for so rare an act of
friendship . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.414

She returned an answer , which shows how well she deserved to have a
judicious , faithful , and affectionate adviser .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.415

" I intend , " she wrote , " to console myself for your censure by this
greatest proof I have received of the sincerity , candour , and , let me
add , esteem , of my dear daddy . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,25.416

And , as I happen to love myself more than my play , this consolation
<P_10,26> is not a very trifling one . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.417

This , however , seriously I do believe , that when my two daddies put
their heads together to concert that hissing , groaning , catcalling
epistle they sent me , they felt as sorry for poor little Miss Bayes as
she could possibly do for herself . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.418

You see I do not attempt to repay your frankness with an air of
pretended carelessness . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.419

But , though somewhat disconcerted just now , I will promise not to let
my vexation live out another day . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.420

Adieu , my dear daddy , I wo@ @n't be mortified ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.421

and I wo@ @n't be <font> downed ; <$$font> MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.422

but I will be proud to find I have , out of my own family , as well as
in it , a friend who loves me well enough to speak plain truth to me .
" MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.423

Frances now turned from her dramatic schemes to an undertaking far
better suited to her talents . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.424

She determined to write a new tale , on a plan excellently contrived for
the display of the powers in which her superiority to other writers lay
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.425

It was in truth a grand and various picture gallery , which presented to
the eye a long series of men and women , each marked by some strong
peculiar feature . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.426

There were avarice and prodigality , the pride of blood and the pride of
money , morbid restlessness and morbid apathy , frivolous garrulity ,
supercilious silence , a Democritus to laugh at everything , and a
Heraclitus to lament over everything . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.427

The work proceeded fast , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.428

and in twelve months was completed . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.429

It wanted something of the simplicity which had been among the most
attractive charms of Evelina ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.430

but it furnished ample proof that the four years , which had elapsed
since Evelina appeared , had not been unprofitably spent .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.431

Those who saw Cecilia in manuscript pronounced it the best novel of the
age . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.432

Mrs. Thrale laughed and wept over it . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.433

Crisp was even vehement in applause , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.434

and offered to insure the rapid and complete success of the book for
half a crown . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,26.435

What Miss Burney received for the copyright <P_10,27> is not mentioned
in the Diary ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.436

but we have observed several expressions from which we infer that the
sum was considerable . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.437

That the sale would be great nobody could doubt ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.438

and Frances now had shrewd and experienced advisers , who would not
suffer her to wrong herself . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.439

We have been told that the publishers gave her two_thousand pounds ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.440

and we have no doubt that they might have given a still larger sum
without being losers . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.441

Cecilia was published in the summer of 1782 . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.442

The curiosity of the town was intense . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.443

We have been informed by persons who remember those days that no romance
of Sir Walter Scott was more impatiently awaited , or more eagerly
snatched from the counters of the booksellers .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.444

High as public expectation was , it was amply satisfied ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.445

and Cecilia was placed , by general acclamation , among the classical
novels of England . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.446

Miss Burney was now thirty . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.447

Her youth had been singularly prosperous ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.448

but clouds soon began to gather over that clear and radiant dawn .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.449

Events deeply painful to a heart so kind as that of Frances followed
each other in rapid succession . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.450

She was first called upon to attend the deathbed of her best friend ,
Samuel Crisp . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.451

When she returned to Saint Martin's Street after performing this
melancholy duty , she was appalled by hearing that Johnson had been
struck with paralysis , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.452

and , not many months later , she parted from him for the last time with
solemn tenderness . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.453

He wished to look on her once more ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.454

and on the day before his death she long remained in tears on the stairs
leading to his bedroom , in the hope that she might be called in to
receive his blessing . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.455

He was then sinking fast , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.456

and though he sent her an affectionate message , was unable to see her .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.457

But this was not the worst . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,27.458

There are separations far more cruel than those which are <P_10,28> made
by death . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.459

She might weep with proud affection for Crisp and Johnson .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.460

She had to blush as well as to weep for Mrs. Thrale .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.461

Life , however , still smiled upon Frances . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.462

Domestic happiness , friendship , independence , leisure , letters , all
these things were hers ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.463

and she flung them all away . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.464

Among the distinguished persons to whom she had been introduced , none
appears to have stood higher in her regard than Mrs. Delany .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.465

This lady was an interesting and venerable relic of a past age .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.466

She was the niece of George Granville , Lord Lansdowne , who , in his
youth , exchanged verses and compliments with Edmund Waller , and who
was among the first to applaud the opening genius of Pope .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.467

She had married Dr. Delany , a man known to his contemporaries as a
profound scholar and an eloquent preacher , but remembered in our time
chiefly as one of that small circle in which the fierce spirit of Swift
, tortured by disappointed ambition , by remorse , and by the approaches
of madness , sought for amusement and repose .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.468

Dr. Delany had long been dead . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.469

His widow , nobly descended , eminently accomplished , and retaining ,
in spite of the infirmities of advanced age , the vigour of her
faculties and the serenity of her temper , enjoyed and deserved the
favour of the royal family . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.470

She had a pension of three_hundred a year ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.471

and a house at Windsor , belonging to the crown , had been fitted up for
her accommodation . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.472

At this house the King and Queen sometimes called ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.473

and found a very natural pleasure in thus catching an occasional glimpse
of the private life of English families . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.474

In December 1785 , Miss Burney was on a visit to Mrs. Delany at Windsor
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.475

The dinner was over . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.476

The old lady was taking a nap . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,28.477

Her grandniece , a little girl of seven , was playing at some Christmas
game <P_10,29> with the visitors , when the door opened , and a stout
gentleman entered unannounced , with a star on his breast , and " What ?
what ? what ? " in his mouth . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.478

A cry of " The King ! " was set up . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.479

A general scampering followed . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.480

Miss Burney owns that she could not have been more terrified if she had
seen a ghost . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.481

But Mrs. Delany came forward to pay her duty to her royal friend ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.482

and the disturbance was quieted . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.483

Frances was then presented , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.484

and underwent a long examination and cross-examination
{TEXT:crossexamination} about all that she had written and all that she
meant to write . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.485

The Queen soon made her appearance , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.486

and his Majesty repeated , for the benefit of his consort , the
information which he had extracted from Miss Burney .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.487

The good nature of the royal pair might have softened even the authors
of the Probationary Odes , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.488

and could not but be delightful to a young lady who had been brought up
a Tory . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.489

In a few days the visit was repeated . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.490

Miss Burney was more at ease than before . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.491

His Majesty , instead of seeking for information , condescended to
impart it , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.492

and passed sentence on many great writers , English and foreign .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.493

Voltaire he pronounced a monster . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.494

Rousseau he liked rather better . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.495

" But was there ever , " he cried , " such stuff as {COM:sic} great part
of Shakspeare ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.496

Only one must not say so . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.497

But what think you ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.498

What ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.499

Is there not sad stuff ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.500

What ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.501

What ? " MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.502

The next day Frances enjoyed the privilege of listening to some equally
valuable criticism uttered by the Queen touching Goethe , and Klopstock
, MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.503

and might have learned an important lesson of economy from the mode in
which her Majesty's library had been formed . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.504

" I picked the book up on a stall , " said the Queen .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.505

" Oh , it is amazing what good books there are on stalls ! "
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,29.506

Mrs. Delany , who seems to have understood from these words that her
Majesty was in the habit of exploring the booths of Moorfields <P_10,30>
and Holywell Street in person , could not suppress an exclamation of
surprise . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.507

" Why , " said the Queen , " I do@ @n't pick them up myself .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.508

I have a servant very clever ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.509

and , if they are not to be had at the booksellers , they are not for me
more than for another . " MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.510

Miss Burney describes this conversation as delightful ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.511

and , indeed , we can@ @not wonder that , with her literary tastes , she
should be delighted at hearing in how magnificent a manner the greatest
lady in the land encouraged literature . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.512

The truth is , that Frances was fascinated by the condescending kindness
of the two great personages to whom she had been presented .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.513

Her father was even more infatuated than herself .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.514

The result was a step of which we can@ @not think with patience , but
which recorded as it is , with all its consequences , in these volumes ,
deserves at least this praise , that it has furnished a most impressive
warning . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.515

A German lady of the name of Haggerdorn , one of the keepers of the
Queen's robes , retired about this time ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.516

and her Majesty offered the vacant post to Miss Burney .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.517

When we consider that Miss Burney was decidedly the most popular writer
of fictitious narrative then living , that competence , if not opulence
, was within her reach , and that she was more than usually happy in her
domestic circle , and when we compare the sacrifice which she was
invited to make with the remuneration which was held out to her , we are
divided between laughter and indignation . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,30.518

What was demanded of her was that she should consent to be almost as
completely separated from her family and friends as if she had gone to
Calcutta , and almost as close a prisoner as if she had been sent to
gaol for a libel ; that with talents which had instructed and delighted
the highest living minds , she should now be employed only in mixing
snuff and sticking pins ; that she should be summoned by a <P_10,31>
waiting woman's bell to a waiting woman's duties ; that she should pass
her whole life under the restraints of a paltry etiquette , should
sometimes fast till she was ready to swoon with hunger , should
sometimes stand till her knees have way with fatigue ; that she should
not dare to speak or move without considering how her mistress might
like her words and gestures . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.519

Instead of those distinguished men and women , the flower of all
political parties , with whom she had been in the habit of mixing on
terms of equal friendship , she was to have for her perpetual companion
the chief keeper of the robes , an old hag from Germany , of mean
understanding , of insolent manners , and of temper which , naturally
savage , had now been exasperated by disease .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.520

Now and then , indeed , poor Frances might console herself for the loss
of Burke's and Windham's society , by joining in the " celestial
colloquy sublime " of his Majesty's Equerries .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.521

And what was the consideration for which she was to sell herself to this
slavery ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.522

A peerage in her own right ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.523

A pension of two_thousand a year for life ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.524

A seventy-four for her brother in the navy ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.525

A deanery for her brother in the church ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.526

Not so . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.527

The price at which she was valued was her board , her lodging , the
attendance of a manservant , and two_hundred pounds a year .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.528

The man who , even when hard pressed by hunger , sells his birthright
for a mess of pottage , is unwise . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.529

But what shall we say of him who parts with his birthright and does not
get even the pottage in return ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.530

It is not necessary to inquire whether opulence be an adequate
compensation for the sacrifice of bodily and mental freedom ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.531

for Frances Burney paid for leave to be a prisoner and a menial .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,31.532

It was evidently understood as one of the terms of her engagement , that
, while she was a member of the <P_10,32> royal household , she was not
to appear before the public as an author : MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.533

and , even had there been no such understanding , her avocations were
such as left her no leisure for any considerable intellectual effort .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.534

That her place was incompatible with her literary pursuits was indeed
frankly acknowledged by the King when she resigned .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.535

" She had given up , " he said , " five years of her pen . "
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.536

That during those five years she might , without painful exertion ,
without any exertion that would not have been a pleasure , have earned
enough to buy an annuity for life much larger than the precarious salary
which she received at Court , is quite certain .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.537

The same income , too , which in Saint Martin's Street would have
afforded her every comfort , must have been found scanty at Saint
James's . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.538

We can@ @not venture to speak confidently of the price of millinery and
jewellery ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.539

but we are greatly deceived if a lady , who had to attend Queen
Charlotte on many public occasions , could possibly save a farthing out
of a salary of two_hundred a year . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.540

The principle of the arrangement was , in short , simply this , that
Frances Burney should become a slave , and should be rewarded by being
made a beggar . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.541

With what object their Majesties brought her to their palace , we must
own ourselves unable to conceive . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.542

Their object could not be to encourage her literary exertions ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.543

for they took her from a situation in which it was almost certain that
she would write , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.544

and put her into a situation in which it was impossible for her to write
. MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.545

Their object could not be to promote her pecuniary interest ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.546

for they took her from a situation where she was likely to become rich ,
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.547

and put her into a situation in which she could not but continue poor .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.548

Their object could not be to obtain an eminently useful waiting maid ;
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,32.549

for it is clear that , though Miss Burney was the only woman <P_10,33>
of her time who could have described the death of Harrel , thousands
might have been found more expert in tying ribbons and filling snuff
boxes . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.550

To grant her a pension on the civil list would have been an act of
judicious liberality , honourable to the Court .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.551

If this was impracticable , the next best thing was to let her alone .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.552

That the King and Queen meant her nothing but kindness , we do not in
the least doubt . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.553

But their kindness was the kindness of persons raised high above the
mass of mankind , accustomed to be addressed with profound deference ,
accustomed to see all who approach them mortified by their coldness and
elated by their smiles . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.554

They fancied that to be noticed by them , to be near them , to serve
them , was in itself a kind of happiness ; and that Frances Burney ought
to be full of gratitude for being permitted to purchase , by the
surrender of health , wealth , freedom , domestic affection , and
literary fame , the privilege of standing behind a royal chair , and
holding a pair of royal gloves . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.555

And who can blame them ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.556

Who can wonder that princes should be under such a delusion , when they
are encouraged in it by the very persons who suffer from it most cruelly
? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.557

Was it to be expected that George the Third and Queen Charlotte should
understand the interest of Frances Burney better , or promote it with
more zeal , than herself and her father ? MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.558

No deception was practised . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.559

The conditions of the house of bondage were set forth with all
simplicity . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.560

The hook was presented without a bait ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.561

the net was spread in sight of the bird : MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.562

and the naked hook was greedily swallowed ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.563

and the silly bird made haste to entangle herself in the net .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.564

It is not strange indeed that an invitation to Court should have caused
a fluttering in the bosom of an inexperienced young woman .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,33.565

But it was the duty of the parent to watch over the child , and to show
her <P_10,34> that on one side were only infantine vanities and
chimerical hopes , on the other liberty , peace of mind , affluence ,
social enjoyments , honourable distinctions . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.566

Strange to say , the only hesitation was on the part of Frances .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.567

Dr. Burney was transported out of himself with delight .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.568

Not such are the raptures of a Circassian father who has sold his pretty
daughter well to a Turkish slave merchant . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.569

Yet Dr. Burney was an amiable man , a man of good abilities , a man who
had seen much of the world . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.570

But he seems to have thought that going to court was like going to
heaven ; that to see princes and princesses was a kind of beatific
vision ; that the exquisite felicity enjoyed by royal persons was not
confined to themselves , but was communicated by some mysterious efflux
or reflection to all who were suffered to stand at their toilettes , or
to bear their trains . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.571

He overruled all his daughter's objections , MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.572

and himself escorted her to prison . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.573

The door closed . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.574

The key was turned . MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.575

She , looking back with tender regret on all she had left , and forward
with anxiety and terror to the new life on which she was entering , was
unable to speak or stand ; MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.576

and he went on his way homeward rejoicing in her marvellous prosperity .
MACAULAY-1843-2,10,34.577

