<BEGIN_macquarie-1815-2>

<P_89>

<heading>

Tour to the new discovered country in April 1815 MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.4

<$$heading>

List of the names of the gentlemen who accompanied Govr. & Mrs.
Macquarie on the tour to the new discovered country in April 1815 :
vizt. 1 Jno. Thos. Campbell Esqr. Secry. 2 Capt. H. C. Antill
Major of Brigade . 3 Lieut. Jno. Watts Aid_de_Camp . 4 Wm. Redfern
Esqr. Asst. Surgeon . 5 Wm. Cox Esqr. J.P. &c. &c. 6 Sir Jno.
Jamison Knt . 7 Jno. Oxley Esqr. Surveyor Genl. 8 Mr. Jas. Meehan
Dy. Surveyor Genl. 9 Mr. Geo. W. Evans Dy. Surveyor . 10 Mr. J.
W. Lewin Painter & Naturalist . MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.6

Tuesday 25 April 1815 . MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.7

At 8 o'clock this morning Mrs. Macquarie and myself , after having
taken leave of our beloved infant , set out in the carriage on our long
projected journey to visit the new discovered country to the westward of
the Blue Mountains . MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.8

Arrived at Parramatta at half past 9 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.9

Breakfasted MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.10

and remained there till 1 o'clock , MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.11

and then set out for Mrs. King's farm on the South Creek , where we
arrived at 3 o'clock , MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.12

and took our quarters up here for the night ; the distance from Sydney
being 32 miles . MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.13

We were accompanied from Parramatta by Major Antill , Lieut. Watts ,
Doctor Redfern , and Mr. Hassall to Mrs. King's farm , where we found
Mr. Cox and Mr. Meehan waiting for us . MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.14

We all dined here very comfortably MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.15

and went to bed at an early hour . MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.16

Wednesday 26 April . MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.17

Got up early MACQUARIE-1815-2,89.18

and set out from Mrs. <P_90> King's farm at 7 o'clock this morning for
Sir Jno. Jamison's farm of Regent-Ville on the left bank of the River
Nepean , where we had engaged to breakfast . MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.19

We arrived here at 8 o'clock after a ride of 6 miles from Mrs. King's .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.20

We sent our carriage and horses to cross the river a mile lower down at
Emu Ford . MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.21

We found Secretary Campbell and Mr. Oxley waiting for us at Sir Jno.
Jamison's . MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.22

Sir John gave us a very hearty good breakfast , MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.23

and after resting ourselves at Regent-Ville for a couple of hours , we
crossed the river from thence to Emu Plains in the Government Boat
<font> Pheasant , <$$font> Sir John accompanying us and now making one
of our party . MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.24

Our carriage and horses were waiting for us at the Government Stock-Yard
on Emu Plains ; MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.25

and the Government herd of young heifers having been collected there for
the purpose by Mr. Hassall , we stopt for a little to inspect and look
at them ; after which we pursued our journey across Emu-Plains .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.26

Mrs. Macquarie and myself mounted our horses at the Three Mile Tree
from Emu Ford , which is immediately at the foot of the Mountains , at
half past 12 o'clock , MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.27

and we continued our journey up the mountain , the ascent of which is
pretty steep and sharp for about 3 quarters of a mile ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.28

and then we proceeded on a gentle aclivity as far as the First Depôt ,
distant 6 miles from Emu Ford , which we reached at 1 o'clock
MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.29

and stopt there for about a quarter of an hour . MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.30

Here a corporal and 3 privates of the Royal Veteran Company are
stationed . MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.31

Mr. Hassall and Mr. George Cox , son of Wm. Cox Esqr. accompanied us
as far as the 1st Depôt MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.32

and there took their leave of us . MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.33

From the 1st Depôt we continued our journey through an open hilly forest
with gentle ascents and descents occasionally , for six miles ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.34

but the road very good all the way . MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.35

We then halted at three o'clock in a very pretty wooded plain near a
spring of very good fresh water , MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.36

and pitched our tent near the side of the road . MACQUARIE-1815-2,90.37

This stage is 12 miles from <P_91> Emu Ford and our first on the
Mountains . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.38

The place being very pretty I have named it Spring-Wood .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.39

We dined at 1$$2 past 4 MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.40

and played cards in our tent in the evening , drinking tea afterwards ;
retiring to rest at an early hour . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.41

Thursday 27 April . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.42

Sent off our heavy baggage at 1$$2 past 7 o'clock this morning from
Spring-Wood . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.43

Breakfasted ourselves at 1$$2 past 8 , MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.44

and set out in the carriage at 1$$2 past ten on our journey .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.45

For the first few miles the road was through an open forest and very
good - MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.46

but we soon came to a very hilly broken country and rough stony road ,
especially on reaching The Bluff Bridge , it being very bad and hilly
from thence for five miles , with heavy pulls up steep hills for the
cattle and carriages , which rendered it a severe and fatiguing day's
work for them . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.47

In the course of this day's ride we had very fine and extensive views of
the adjacent low country towards Windsor , Parramatta , and Prospect ,
especially from Kealy's Pile , which I named Kealy's Repulse , and from
a very beautiful table land , which last I have named the King's
Table-Land . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.48

This table land is extremely beautiful MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.49

and has very fine picturesque grand scenery , consisting of deep finely
wooded glens , stupendous rocks & cliffs , with high distant hills and
mountains . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.50

From the King's Table Land we could distinctly see Windsor and some of
the reaches of the River Hawkesbury . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.51

We did not arrive at the 2d Depôt till 5 o'clock , distant from our last
stage 16 miles , MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.52

and here we halted for the night . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.53

Owing to the badness of the road the last of our baggage did not get up
with us till 8 o'clock , which obliged us to delay dining till then .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.54

The 2d Depôt is situated in a very pretty_looking valley very well
watered , but without much good feed for cattle .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.55

Friday 28 April . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.56

Got up early MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.57

and took a walk forward for a mile to look at the road .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.58

Sent off the baggage between 7 and 8 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.59

Breakfasted at 8 o'clock MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.60

and set out in the carriage at 9 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.61

This day's stage was over a hilly high country , MACQUARIE-1815-2,91.62

but the road was very good and easy for the cattle <P_92> and carriages
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.63

On the left we passed a very extensive deep romantic glen , full of very
picturesque and wild scenery . MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.64

It commenced at the 33d Mile Tree MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.65

and continues all the way from thence to the 41 Mile Tree , where we
halted for this day , being 13 miles from our last halting_place at the
2d Depôt . MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.66

Here we found tolerable good feed for our cattle and plenty of fresh
water , it being an open forest . MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.67

We arrived at our ground at the 41 Mile Tree at 3 o'clock ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.68

dined at 5 , MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.69

drank tea at 7 , MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.70

and went to bed between 9 and 10 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.71

I named the grand and picturesque extensive glen we passed this day on
our left The Regent's Glen in honor of H. R. Highness the Prince
Regent . MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.72

Saturday 29 April . MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.73

Rise {COM:sic} early MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.74

and sent off our heavy baggage between 7 and 8 o'clock .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.75

Breakfast at 8 o'clock MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.76

and set out from the 41 Mile Tree at 1$$4 past 9 o'clock .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.77

At 11 o'clock reached the termination of the Blue Mountains ending in a
very abrupt descent almost perpendicular . MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.78

Here we halted for a little while to view this frightful tremendous pass
, as well as to feast our eyes with the grand and pleasing prospect of
the fine low country below us and now in view from this termination of
the Blue Mountains . MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.79

Mr. Cox and his party with incredible labour and perseverance have
constructed a very safe carriage road down the face of this mountain
which does him and them infinite honor ; it being a most difficult and
most arduous undertaking , and one which most people would have at first
view abandoned in despair as being impracticable .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.80

From the beginning of the pass to the foot of the mountain is one mile
and a quarter in length , the road being made in traverses in as easy a
manner as it was practicable to construct it ; but still exceedingly
steep in most places along the declivity of the mountain , which is
above 600 feet in perpendicular height from the plain below .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.81

The distance from our last stage at the 41 Mile Tree and the Grand
Termination of the Blue Mountains is 7_3$$4 miles ;
MACQUARIE-1815-2,92.82

and this mountain being one of <P_93> the most prominent and remarkable
of the whole range , I have named it Mount York in honor of H. R.
Highness the Duke of York , on account of its being the only one by
which it is at all practicable to descend into the low country .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.83

The pass constructed here by Mr. Cox and his party I have named Cox's
Pass in honor of that gentleman and as a just tribute due to his
indefatigable zeal and meritorious exertions in constructing and finally
completing this grand and important pass . MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.84

The road down the mountain being so extremely steep as to render it
hazardous to drive down it in the carriage , we had the horses taken out
of it MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.85

and had it brought down by hand , MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.86

and the same method was adopted in regard to bringing down our caravan
and heavy loaded carts . MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.87

This retarded our journey a long time , the whole of the carriages not
having been got down the pass till 2 o'clock , tho' the first of them
began to descend at 11 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.88

Mrs. Macquarie and myself accompanied by Mr. Cox and Mr. Secretary
Campbell walked down the whole of the pass , MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.89

and waited at the foot of the mountain till all the carriages had come
down . MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.90

At 1$$4 past 2 p._m. we pursued our journey in the carriage over a fine
plain verdant country of open forest land through a beautiful extensive
vale of five miles , which I have named the Vale Clwydd after the vale
of the same name in Wales . MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.91

This vale terminates at a river running south formed by two smaller ones
coming from the westward and eastward , and which unite at the distance
of five miles from Mount York . MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.92

I have named the river thus formed Cox's River , in honor of Mr. Cox .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.93

We arrived at this river at 3 o'clock , MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.94

and encamped on the left bank of the western branch of it ; having here
good grass and plenty of fine water for our cattle .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.95

We dined at 5 o'clock MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.96

and played cards in the evening after dinner till tea-time , retiring
early to bed . MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.97

The distance of this day's journey is 14 miles from the 41 Mile Tree .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,93.98

The ground about and adjacent to the 41 Mile Tree <P_94> being a good
stage for both water and forage , and it having rather a wild heath-like
appearance , I have named it Hounslow . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.99

Sunday 30 April . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.100

We halt all this day at Cox's River on account of keeping the day holy .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.101

After breakfast I had all our servants and followers regularly paraded
and mustered , MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.102

and had Divine Service performed , the whole of our party being present
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.103

As Divine Service had been performed , the gentlemen of our party
accompanied me on a ride to Mount Blaxland , leaving Mrs. Macquarie in
camp . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.104

Mount Blaxland is distant 3_1$$2 miles west from Cox's River through a
fine open hilly country of good pasture . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.105

We ascended to the top of the mountain from whence we had a fine
prospect of the adjacent hilly country and of Wentworth's and Lawson's
Sugar Loaves in the immediate vicinity of Mount Blaxland .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.106

We returned to camp by 1$$2 past 3 , MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.107

dined at 5 o'clock , MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.108

and retired early to rest . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.109

Monday 1 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.110

Sent off our heavy baggage between 7 and 8 o'clock this morning .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.111

Breakfasted at 8 MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.112

and set out in the carriage at 9 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.113

Mrs. M. and myself mounted our horses at the foot of the first high
hill near Mount Blaxland , it being excessively steep and long , for
which reason I have named it Fag-Hill . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.114

A range of very lofty hills and narrow valleys , alternately , form the
tract of country lying between Cox's River and the Fish-River , which
tract I have named Clarence's Hilly Range in honor of H. R. Highness
The Duke of Clarence . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.115

This was a very trying heavy stage for our cattle , there being such
numerous steep ascents and descents the whole way .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.116

We arrived at the Fish River at 3 p._m. after a fatiguing and tiresome
journey of 16 miles , halting on the left bank of the river .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.117

Some of our heavy baggage did not get up to the ground till 7 o'clock at
night . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.118

We dined at 1$$2 past 5 o'clock , MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.119

and had some very fine fish out of the river for dinner .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.120

Retired early to bed . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.121

Tuesday 2 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.122

Got up early MACQUARIE-1815-2,94.123

and walked out for a mile <P_95> in front to view the road .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.124

On my way back had a very fine view of Mount Evans distant about 7 or 8
miles to the north west of our present ground . MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.125

Sent off our heavy baggage at 8 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.126

Breakfasted at 9 MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.127

and set out on horse-back with Mrs. M. at 10 o'clock .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.128

Halted on the top of a high hill about two miles from the Fish River to
give Mrs. M. an opportunity of seeing Mount Evans , and taking a
sketch of it ; which having done we pursued our journey .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.129

Halted at Sidmouth Valley at 1$$2 past 12 o'clock ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.130

and encamped here for this day in order to rest our cattle ; the water
and grass being both good and abundant here . MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.131

The distance between the Fish River and Sidmouth Valley is only 8 miles
, MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.132

but the country we have this day passed over is very hilly .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.133

Dined at 5 MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.134

and went early to bed . MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.135

N.B. Sir Jno. Jamison was lost for some hours this evening returning
from fishing in the river , by missing his way in the woods ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.136

but arrived in camp about 8 o'clock with a large string of fine fish and
2 water_moles caught in the Fish-River near our present ground .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.137

Wednesday 3 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.138

Sent off our heavy baggage at 8 a._m. MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.139

breakfast at 9 MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.140

and set out in the carriage with Mrs. M. at 10 o'clock .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.141

At 11 a._m. between the 33d & 34th Mile , quit the carriage
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.142

and mount my horse , leaving Mrs. M. to proceed in the carriage direct
to the Campbell River . MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.143

I set out accompanied by all the gentlemen of the party to explore
country along the banks of the Fish River to its junction with the
Campbell River . MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.144

We first arrive at O'Connell Plains , which are very beautiful to look
at but of no great extent , being only about a mile in length and half a
mile in breadth . MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.145

We came in on O'Connell Plains after riding about 2 miles from the main
road to the river and tracing it half a mile down .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.146

We crossed the river at the middle of O'Connell Plains to the north side
to examine the land there , which we found as good as on the south side
, it being very excellent soil on both sides of the river .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,95.147

We then rode along a ridge of hills along the <P_96> south side of the
river for about two miles in extent before we entered into Macquarie
Plains , which we did at 1 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.148

Our first view of these plains was most grand and interesting ,
presenting a beautiful rich tract of rich fertile land without hardly a
tree to be seen for four miles in length and two miles in breadth .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.149

These plains extend on both sides of the river affording beautiful
situations for farms on either bank , to the junction of the Fish River
with the Campbell River , where Macquarie Plains terminate and Bathurst
Plains commence . MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.150

After tracing the Fish-River to its junction with the Campbell River ,
we rode up along the right bank of the latter till we arrived where a
bridge is made across it about three miles above the confluence of the
two rivers . MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.151

Here we found Mrs. Macquarie in the carriage had arrived long before us
, as well as all the baggage carts had arrived before us .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.152

Here we arrived at 2 p._m. MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.153

and took up our ground for the night ; the distance from our last stage
at Sidmouth Valley being 13 miles . MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.154

Dined at 5 MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.155

and went early to bed . MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.156

Thursday 4 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.157

Sent off our heavy baggage for Bathurst Plains at 8 a._m.
MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.158

and breakfasted at that hour . MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.159

After breakfast we mounted our horses MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.160

and rode up for 3 miles along the right bank of the Campbell River to
take a view of Mitchell Plains , which is a fine rich tract of land
extending for a mile and a half along the river and for nearly half a
mile on each side of it ; the land being very fit for small farms , both
on account of its richness of soil on the low grounds for cultivation ,
and the hills in rear thereof being excellent for grazing .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.161

We saw great numbers of water_moles in the Campbell-River at Mitchell
Plains . MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.162

We came back again the same way we went from Mitchell Plains to our last
ground at the bridge over the Campbell River ; from whence we set out in
the carriage for Bathurst Plains at 11 a._m. MACQUARIE-1815-2,96.163

After riding about 9 miles through a very pretty wooded <P_97> country
we arrived on a height which commanded a very extensive , grand , and
noble view of Bathurst Plains extending on both sides of the Macquarie
River for 11 miles and for nearly 3 miles on each side of it , being
almost entirely clear of timber for that extent .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,97.164

Mrs. M. and myself mounted our horses when within a mile of the Grand
Depôt on the Macquarie River , Mr. Evans the Dy. Surveyor having rode
out and met us some little time before . MACQUARIE-1815-2,97.165

We arrived at the Depôt at 1$$2 past 1 p._m. the Guard being turned out
to receive us , and the whole of the people , who gave us three cheers !
MACQUARIE-1815-2,97.166

We found here also three adult male natives and four native boys of this
new discovered tract of country , who shewed great surprise , mixed with
no small degree of fear at seeing so many strangers , horses and
carriages , but to which they soon appeared to be reconciled on being
kindly spoken to . MACQUARIE-1815-2,97.167

They were all clothed with mantles made of the skins of opossums , which
were very neatly sewn together , MACQUARIE-1815-2,97.168

and the outside of the skins were carved in a remarkable neat manner .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,97.169

They appear to be very inoffensive and cleanly in their persons .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,97.170

In size and appearance they are like the natives on <P_98> the east side
of the Blue Mountains ; not being either stouter or taller in stature .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.171

The Grand Depôt at Bathurst Plains is beautifully situated on a fine
commanding eminence on the left bank and south side of Macquarie River ,
distant 10_1$$4 miles from our last stage at the Campbell River ; the
road being very good and easy for a carriage the whole of this last
stage . MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.172

The appearance of Bathurst Plains from the Depôt extending for many
miles on both sides of the Macquarie River , and surrounded at a
distance by fine verdant hills , is truly grand , beautiful and
interesting , forming one of the finest landscapes I ever saw in any
country I have yet visited . MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.173

The soil is uncommonly good and fertile , fit for every purpose of
cultivation and pasture , being extremely well watered , and thinly
wooded . MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.174

At this beautiful spot I have established my head quarters for the
present ; intending hereafter to erect a town and township here for the
convenience and accommodation of such settlers as may be indulged with
grants of lands in this new discovered country .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.175

In the mean time I shall make excursions from hence into the interior of
the country in different directions . MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.176

On our arrival I found one of my tents pitched here , which had been
sent on before us , and which will serve for our sleeping tent till the
others are put up in more regular order tomorrow .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.177

Mrs. M. I am happy to say , has bore the fatiguing journey over the
Blue Mountains to this place wonderfully well indeed , and has arrived
here in very good health . MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.178

We sat down 12 to dinner this day at 5 o'clock in the new Government
Store ; Mr. Evans having joined and being now one of our party here .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.179

We played cards in the evening between dinner and tea ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.180

and retired at an early hour to bed . MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.181

Friday 5 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.182

Got up early , MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.183

breakfasted at 9 , MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.184

and at 10 o'clock we all mounted our horses , Mrs. M. being one of the
party , MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.185

and set out on an excursion to see and explore those parts of Bathurst
and Macquarie Plains on the north side of the river .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,98.186

We crossed the Macquarie River close under <P_99> the Depôt by a very
easy fine ford of a hard pebbly {TEXT:pebly} bottom , there being very
little water in the river at present owing to the long continued
droughts . MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.187

We rode through a very rich low tract of land along the right bank of
the river with fine grass growing on it , between 3 and 4 feet high ,
for about 6 miles ; MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.188

then came to a chain or ridge of fertile wooded hills , running in a
northern direction from the confluence of the Fish and the Campbell
Rivers , and which chain of hills divide Bathurst from Macquarie Plains
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.189

On crossing these hills we had a very extensive fine view of the latter
extending along the Fish River for about five miles on each side of it .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.190

This is a most beautiful rich tract of land and very picturesque , the
grounds being much diversified in extensive plains , and hills and dales
alternately , terminating on the north in lofty wooded mountains ; near
to which there are fine downs very fit for sheep walks .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.191

We hunted two native dogs , and some emus in Macquarie Plains ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.192

but were not so fortunate as to catch any of them , tho' we saw them
very distinctly , and were much gratified with the sight of them .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.193

In returning home we kept nearer the mountains in order to see more of
the country , MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.194

and were well satisfied that the greater parts of both Bathurst and
Macquarie Plains are perfectly fit for the purposes of agriculture as
well as grazing . MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.195

We returned to head_quarters at 2 p._m. after a ride of about 16 miles
, highly gratified with our day's excursion . MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.196

On our return to head_quarters , I found our other two tents pitched in
regular order , and a flagstaff {TEXT:flagg_staff} erected in front of
our sleeping tent , which I had given orders to be done previous to our
setting out this morning , intending to hoist the British Colours on it
on Sunday next , when it is my intention to give a name to this
particular spot . MACQUARIE-1815-2,99.197

I forgot to mention in my notes of yesterday that a very fine large
black swan , and also a very large water-mole <paren> or duck-bill
<$$paren> had been shot on the Macquarie River , near head_quarters , on
the afternoon of our arrival here , which appear <P_100> as a good omen
of the future prosperity and plenty of this new country .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.198

The swan weighed {COM:missing_word} pounds MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.199

and was a remarkable large one . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.200

Saturday 6 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.201

Got up early MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.202

and breakfasted at 8 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.203

Mounted our horses at 10 o'clock , Mrs. M. forming one of the party ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.204

and set out on an excursion to explore the remaining parts of Bathurst
Plains on the north side of the river . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.205

We crossed them from the ford in a diagonal direction , our course being
nearly north_east till we reached a rich fertile valley near the foot of
the mountains with a very pretty brook of fine fresh water running
through the middle of it . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.206

This valley runs about 7 or 8 miles in length and from a quarter to half
a mile in breadth , with very fine pasture land on the hills skirting it
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.207

I have named this valley Winbourn-Dale , and the rivulet running through
it Winbourn-Brook . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.208

We rode over some very fine tracts of land this day fit for both
cultivation and pasture , and most eligible for farms of both
descriptions . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.209

On return we saw some emus and kangaroos ; MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.210

some of the party hunted the latter , MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.211

and the dogs came up with and caught one . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.212

Arrived at head_quarters at 1 p._m. after a very pleasant ride of about
12 miles , much pleased with our excursion . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.213

Wishing to explore the south side of the Macquarie River to the eastward
of the Depôt for 4 or {COM:missing_word} miles , I set out again at 2
p._m. along with Mr. Cox and some other gentlemen for this purpose ,
leaving Mrs. M. at home , who was a little tired after her morning's
ride . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.214

We rode along the left bank of the river over a tract of very fine rich
fertile land fit for any purpose , for about five miles to a large
beautiful reach of the river , where we saw a large swan and many ducks
swimming . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.215

I fired at the black swan with my pistol MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.216

but missed it . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.217

From this part of the river we returned home by a back line over fine
hills and valleys fit for cultivation and pasture .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.218

Returned to head_quarters at 4 o'clock from my last excursion after a
pleasant ride of ten miles . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.219

We dined at 5 MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.220

and spent the evening as usual . MACQUARIE-1815-2,100.221

<P_101>

Sunday 7 May 1815 ! ! ! MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.223

After breakfast , all the gentlemen and other people assembled for
Prayers and Divine Service ; MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.224

but previous thereto they were all mustered for the purpose of
witnessing my christening the new intended town on this beautiful spot ,
which I accordingly named Bathurst in honor of the noble Earl of that
name , now His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.225

The British Union Jack was first hoisted on the new flagstaff
{TEXT:flagg_staff} on this auspicious occasion ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.226

the Military fired 3 vollies MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.227

and the whole of the people assembled <paren> being 75 in number
<$$paren> gave three cheers in honor of the ceremony .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.228

I prefaced it by complimenting Mr. Cox and Mr. Evans , and their
respective parties for discovering this fine country , and afterwards
facilitating our access to it so easily and overcoming such
extraordinary difficulties in so doing . MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.229

The ceremony concluded by all of us drinking prosperity to the new town
of Bathurst . MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.230

After Divine Service had been performed , I accompanied Mr. Cox , and
Messrs. Oxley and Meehan the Surveyors , to lay down and mark out the
lines of the town of Bathurst at the spot fixed on now here for that
purpose , immediately in rear of the present head quarters ; reserving a
sufficient space next the river for a small Government Domain ,
extending half a mile in front and a quarter of a mile in depth .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.231

I also had marked out immediately in rear of the flagg-staff the spot
intended for the Government House being erected on hereafter .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.232

Monday 8 May 1815 . MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.233

Got up early MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.234

and breakfasted at 7 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.235

At 8 o'clock we mounted our horses MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.236

and set out to explore the country lying in a south_west direction from
Bathurst ; Mr. Evans who has already explored this country being our
guide . MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.237

It being too long a ride for her Mrs. M. staid at home this day , as
did Messrs. Oxley & Meehan for the purpose of marking out the new town
, and laying it down on paper . MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.238

The first four miles of our route was over a very fine rich tract of
land fit for any purpose . MACQUARIE-1815-2,101.239

We then got into a <P_102> more hilly country but all excellent pasture
land with very few exceptions . MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.240

We continued our ride along this open hilly country in a south_west
direction for at least twenty miles from Bathurst , passing several well
watered pretty vallies , the low parts of which were excellent land for
cultivation . MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.241

The two largest and principal vallies seen in the course of this day's
excursion I have named Queen Charlotte's Vale in honor of Her Majesty ;
and Princess Charlotte's Valley in honor of the Princess Charlotte of
Wales ; the former extending for about 20 miles in a S.west and N.east
direction and joining Bathurst Plains at the latter point ; and the
latter extending for about 18 miles in an east and westerly direction ,
and opening to the Macquarie River near Mount Pleasant at its western
extremity ; the two valleys being separated by a ridge of hills , where
they respectively terminate . MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.242

Both these valleys are remarkably well watered by large ponds at regular
distances contiguous to each other , which are even full of water at
this extraordinary dry season . MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.243

Those two vallies are well calculated for both grazing and agricultural
farms , MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.244

and would soon repay the labour of the husbandman and grazier .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.245

We halted for near an hour at the head of Queen Charlotte's Vale to rest
and feed our horses , MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.246

and then continued our journey homewards through this beautiful fertile
vale . MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.247

We saw a large flock of emus in Princess Charlotte's Valley , and a
great number {TEXT:editor_supplies_number?} of kangaroos , pigeons ,
quails , and a few wild geese , in our excursion of this day .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.248

We returned to head_quarters at 4 o'clock in the afternoon , after a
{TEXT:missing_"a"} very interesting but long ride of about forty miles .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.249

In crossing a deep part of the Princess Charlotte@ @'s Valley , about 12
miles from Bathurst , we fell in by mere chance with a poor old infirm
native woman with her left eye out and without a single tooth in her
head . MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.250

She had a large bag on her back , MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.251

and was in the act of taking up two long poles when we came in view of
her . MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.252

She was excessively alarmed and frightened on seeing us ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.253

but took up and put into her bag some pieces of biscuit we threw to her
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,102.254

On the opposite <P_103> side of the valley we saw a native boy , who the
old woman crossed over to join as soon as her fears had a little
subsided . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.255

She kept chattering and pointing with both her hands to the opposite
hills from the time she first saw us till we were a considerable
distance removed from her ; pointing , as we supposed , to where her
friends and tribe were to be found . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.256

Tuesday 9 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.257

Got up early , MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.258

and breakfasted at 8 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.259

At 1$$2 past 9 Mrs. M. and myself set out in the carriage ,
accompanied by all the gentlemen of our party , to see Mount Pleasant
and Pine-Hill , and the country in the vicinity of those hills .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.260

The country between Bathurst and Mount Pleasant for five miles is one
continued plain of fine rich fertile land , with beautiful verdant low
wooded hills skirting it . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.261

Beyond Mount Pleasant the country breaks into hills ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.262

and the plain ceases . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.263

We left Mrs. M. in the carriage at Mt. Pleasant , the country beyond
it being too rough to admit of its proceeding any farther in this
direction . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.264

The rest of the party accompanied me on horseback as far as Pine-Hill
about 7 miles to the westward of Mt. Pleasant .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.265

Our ride to this place was a very rough one over a succession of steep
hills and deep vallies alternately . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.266

On reaching Pine Hill we saw the pine-tree of this country in great
numbers and of a considerable height , but of no great circumference ,
none of them we saw being above one foot in diameter .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.267

On our way to Pine Hill soon after passing Mount Pleasant , we entered a
beautiful rich valley extending from Mt. Pleasant in a south west
direction for about 8 or 9 miles . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.268

This valley is very fertile and well watered , having fine verdant hills
rising on each side of it , affording excellent pasturage .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.269

I named this fine rich vale Campbell Valley in honor of Mrs. Macquarie
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.270

On our descent from Pine Hill we stopt to look at a ford and small fall
on the Macquarie River three miles to the westward of Mt. Pleasant ;
MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.271

we then continued our journey to the latter MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.272

and rode up to the top of it , which is a tableland , and from whence
there is a very fine extensive prospect . MACQUARIE-1815-2,103.273

We found on the very top of Mount Pleasant several <P_104> cairns or
piles of stones , which have every appearance of having been collected
there by the hands of man . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.274

From the top of Mt. Pleasant we descended on the opposite side to that
we ascended , MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.275

and joined Mrs. M. at half past 2 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.276

I then went into the carriage MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.277

and we all returned home , arriving at Bathurst at 1$$2 past 3 o'clock ,
much gratified with our day's excursion . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.278

We dined at 5 o'clock MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.279

and spent the evening as usual . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.280

Wednesday 10 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.281

After breakfasting this morning , we were visited by three male natives
of the country , all very handsome good_looking young men , and whom we
had not seen before . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.282

I gave them presents of slops and tomahawks , MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.283

and to the best_looking and stoutest of them I gave a piece of yellow
cloth in exchange for his mantle , which he presented me with .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.284

As soon as these 3 natives had taken their leave of us , Mrs. Macquarie
and myself , accompanied by Sir John Jamison and Secry. Campbell , went
on a short water-party on the river in the two new boats lately sent
here from Sydney ; Mrs. M. and myself going in the one called the
<font> Water-Mole , <$$font> and the two gentlemen in the one called the
<font> Swan . <$$font> MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.285

We rowed up and down one of the reaches of the river here about half a
mile long , MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.286

and tried to catch some fish with lines , MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.287

but were not successful , the sun being too bright for the fish biting ,
and also on account of the river being at present much lower than usual
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.288

The general breadth of the Macquarie River at Bathurst is between
twenty_five and thirty yards ; MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.289

but in some other places it contracts itself to one third of that
breadth . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.290

Having taken my gun with me on the water , I had an opportunity of
shooting at and killing a large black snake on the left bank of the
river . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.291

I also fired at a large hawk , MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.292

but missed it . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.293

We remained for an hour on the river MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.294

and then returned home at 1 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,104.295

At 2 p._m. the 3 natives who came into camp in the morning brought in
eleven others to see us , two of whom were grown_up men and the rest
boys , no female having come in <P_105> with them either time .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.296

I spoke kindly to them all , MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.297

gave them all presents of black leather caps and tomahawks , and slops
to the grown_up men . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.298

I also gave orders that they should have plenty to eat from the public
stores . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.299

They appeared very much pleased MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.300

and went away highly gratified . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.301

This afternoon a large fish was caught in the river which weighed
seventeen pounds ; MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.302

and Joseph Big my coachman killed and brought into camp a very fine
large emu , which weighed eighty_six pounds ! MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.303

We dined at 5 o'clock MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.304

and played cards as usual between dinner and tea-time .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.305

Thursday 11 May 1815 . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.306

Having sent off all our spare heavy baggage two days ago before us , and
having now made all my arrangements at Bathurst , I set out from it this
day at 1 p._m. on my return to Sydney . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.307

Before our departure some of the natives who were with us yesterday came
in to see us MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.308

and remained at Bathurst till we left it . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.309

I left Mr. Meehan the Dy. Surveyor_General at Bathurst for the purpose
of surveying and laying down on a chart the whole of the lands fit for
cultivation and grazing I {TEXT:missing_"I"} have explored in this new
country . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.310

I have also left Mr. Evans the Dy. Surveyor at Bathurst for the
purpose of proceeding on a further tour of discovery for the distance of
one_hundred miles in a south_west direction from Bathurst , in hopes of
falling in with the Macquarie River in that quarter .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.311

Mr. Evans takes with him 3 men and 2 horses to carry his provisions on
this tour , which he hopes to complete in six weeks .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.312

Dr. Redfern having lost his two caravan horses , which had strayed away
some days before , I had to furnish him with two of the Government
horses to carry home his caravan from Bathurst .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.313

Mrs. M. and myself went all the way from Bathurst to the Campbell
River , where we arrived and took up our ground for the night at 1$$2
past 2 p._m. MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.314

Dined at 5 MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.315

and spent the evening as usual . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.316

Mr. Meehan came on thus far with us MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.317

and dined with us . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.318

Friday 12 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,105.319

Sent off our baggage early in the morning <P_106> for the Fish River
MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.320

and set out ourselves in the carriage at 9 a._m.
MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.321

Reach Sidmouth Valley at 12 MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.322

and rest there for half an hour . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.323

Continued our journey again MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.324

and arrived at the Fish River at half past 3 p._m. encamping at this
time on the left bank of the river . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.325

Dined at 5 MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.326

and went early to bed . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.327

Saturday 13 May 1815 . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.328

Sent off our baggage at 7 , MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.329

breakfasted at 8 , MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.330

and set out on horseback with Mrs. M. at 1$$4 past 9 a._m.
MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.331

Halted for near an hour in a deep valley 8 miles from the Fish River to
rest ourselves and cattle , MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.332

and then pursued our journey forwards . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.333

At 3$$4 past 3 p._m. we arrived at Cox's River after a tiresome and
fatiguing journey of 16 miles from the Fish River , over Clarence's
Hilly Range , a very hilly rugged tract of country .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.334

We encamped in a pretty little valley on the left bank of Cox's River ,
the grass near our last ground here being all burnt during our absence .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.335

We dined at 5 o'clock MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.336

and spent the evening as usual . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.337

Sunday 14 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.338

Halted the whole of this day at Cox's River , MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.339

and had all the people assembled after breakfast near my tent for
Prayers . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.340

Some of the gentlemen of our party went after Prayers to explore Cox's
River and to endeavour to trace it to the Regent's {TEXT:Regents} Glen ,
through which it is supposed to bend its course .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.341

They returned an hour before dinner , reporting that the river does bend
its course towards the Regent's Glen as far as they were able to trace
it . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.342

Dined as usual at 5 o'clock MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.343

and went early to bed . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.344

Monday 15 May 1815 . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.345

Sent off our heavy baggage very early this morning for Cox's Pass
MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.346

and set out ourselves in the carriage at 1$$2 past 7 o'clock this
morning , arriving there at 1$$4 past 8 ; disce. from Cox's River
6_1$$4 miles to the foot of Mount York . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.347

Here we halted and breakfasted , whilst our heavy baggage , carriage ,
and horses were conveyed to the top of this tremendous and extraordinary
pass , which is a most steep and difficult aclivity for three quarters
of a mile . MACQUARIE-1815-2,106.348

The whole of the carriages and baggage having been safely conveyed to
the top of the pass , Mrs. M. and myself began <P_107> to ascend it on
foot at 35 minutes past 11 MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.349

and reached to the top of it at 5 minutes after 12 .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.350

From the top of the pass we once more feasted our eyes with the grand
and picturesque prospect {TEXT:missing_"prospect"} of the country below
us and which we had just quitted . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.351

We got into the carriage on the summit of Mount York ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.352

and pursued our journey forwards ; arriving at our former ground at the
41 Mile Tree at 2 o'clock ; disce. from Cox's River 14 miles .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.353

This place having a black wild appearance I have this day named it
Black-Heath . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.354

It affords however plenty of good water for man and beast and tolerable
good feed for the latter . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.355

We had a very thick heavy fog here all this day , which seemed to
threaten rain , MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.356

but none fell . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.357

We dined at 5 o'clock MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.358

and went early to bed . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.359

Tuesday 16 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.360

Sent off our heavy baggage early , MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.361

breakfasted at 8 , MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.362

and set out in the carriage with Mrs. M. at 1$$2 past 9 o'clock .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.363

We halted at the place we formerly did to take a second view of Pitts
Amphitheatre , with which we were again very much gratified .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.364

Mrs. M. and myself rode on horseback from the 35th Mile to the 28th
Mile , or Second Depôt , where we arrived at 1$$2 past 1 p._m. disce.
13 miles from Black-Heath . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.365

The 2d Depôt is situated in a {TEXT:missing_"a"} very extensive pretty
valley , with a lum of very fine fresh good water , with tolerable good
feed for cattle , MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.366

and is exactly halfway between Emu Ford and the Cox River .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.367

I have this day named this place Jamison's Valley in honor of Sir Jno.
Jamison one of our party on the present tour . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.368

Dined at the usual hour MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.369

and went to bed early . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.370

Wednesday 17 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.371

Got up this morning at day-break MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.372

and sent off our baggage immediately . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.373

Breakfasted at 7 MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.374

and set out in the carriage {TEXT:missing_"the"} with Mrs. M. at 8
o'clock ; MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.375

and arrived on the summit of the King's Table Land at half past 8
o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.376

Mrs. M. and myself here quitted the carriage MACQUARIE-1815-2,107.377

and mounted our horses for the purpose of viewing and exploring the
beauties of the grand and sublime scenery of this Table Mountain and of
the Prince Regent's Glen , which <P_108> presents a variety of sublime
and grand objects . MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.378

There is one water_fall at least one_thousand feet in height to be seen
here in awful grandeur ; MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.379

and there is also a most singular and curious cavern or cave in the face
of one of the hills forming one side of the Glen , and which I have
named Oxley's Grotto in commemoration of Mr. Oxley's <paren> the
Surveyor_General <$$paren> having first discovered it .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.380

We all descended the hill to see this curious cavern
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.381

and were much gratified with the sight of it . MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.382

The Prince Regent's Glen extends in length from the King's Table Land
for twenty_four miles to Mount York , and until it opens into the Vale
of Clwydd where the Glen terminates to the westward .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.383

From the highest part of the King's Table Land we could see the whole of
the country to the eastward of the Blue Mountains ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.384

and could plainly see and distinguish the several buildings in the town
of Windsor , distant about 30 miles from us in a direct line and bearing
{COM:missing_word} from the highest part of the King's Table Land .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.385

After exploring all the curious parts of the King's Table Land and
Prince Regent's Glen , we pursued our journey , on horseback ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.386

and arrived at Spring Wood at 3 o'clock ; the distance from our last
ground being 16 miles . MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.387

I stopt for a few minutes at the pile of stones which I have called
Caley's Repulse , situated near the 17th Mile Tree , and from whence
there is a very extensive view to the eastward and southward .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.388

Thursday 18 May . MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.389

Sent off our baggage from Spring Field between 7 and 8 o'clock ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.390

and breakfasted at 8 this morning . MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.391

I had the initials of my name and this day of the month cut on a very
large blood-wood tree on the south side of the road , close to where my
tent was pitched at Spring Field , to note our departure thence .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.392

This tree was 60 feet high and 14 feet 2 inches in circumference .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.393

We set out in the carriage from Spring Wood at half past 9 o'clock ;
MACQUARIE-1815-2,108.394

and having halted at the First Depôt for about half an hour , we reached
the foot of the Blue Mountains at <P_109> the 3 Mile Tree at 12 o'clock
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.395

Here we mounted our horses MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.396

and rode across Emu Plains to Emu Ford , which Mrs. M. and myself
crossed on horse-back , it being very safe and good , and the water of
the Nepean River here now not being above six inches high .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.397

We went into our carriage again at Capt. Woodriff's farm on the Nepean
; taking leave here of Mr. Cox , Sir Jno. Jamison , Mr. Oxley and Mr.
Secry. Campbell for the present ; the rest of our party having
accompanied us . MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.398

From Capt. Woodriff's farm to Mrs. King's we went in the carriage ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.399

and arrived at the latter place at half past one o'clock ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.400

and here we found Mr. Hassall waiting for us ; it being our intention
to take up our quarters for this night at Mrs. King's farm .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.401

N.B. I have named the first ascent from Emu Plains to the Blue
Mountains , and which is near a mile long , Emu Hill .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.402

It is very easy to ascend and descend this hill in a carriage , the road
being very good the whole of the way . MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.403

Mr. Hassall provided a most excellent dinner for us at Mrs. King's
overseer's house , and to which we sat down at 5 o'clock , drank tea at
7 , and went to bed at 9 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.404

Besides Mr. Hassall , Major Antill , Lieut. Watts , Doctor Redfern ,
and Mr. Lewin dined with us . MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.405

Friday 19 May 1815 . MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.406

We got up at day-break , MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.407

and set out {TEXT:missing_"out"} from Mrs. King's farm at 10 minutes
after 7 o'clock this morning , arriving at Government House at
Parramatta at 5 minutes past 9 o'clock ; distance from last night's
stage being 16 miles , and from Emu Ford to Mrs. King's farm 6 miles .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.408

At Parramatta Mrs. M. received letters from Mrs. Redfern giving us
most pleasing and highly gratifying accounts of our beloved darling
son's state of health and general improvement .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.409

Mrs. M. had received letters from Mrs. Redfern twice before to the
same effect whilst on our journey back from Bathurst ; the first time
between the Campbell River and Sidmouth Valley , and the second time
immediately on our crossing the River Nepean yesterday at Woodriff's
farm . MACQUARIE-1815-2,109.410

We <P_110> breakfasted at Parramatta , MACQUARIE-1815-2,110.411

and had the pleasure of seeing Capt. Gill of the 46th and Mr. Wm.
Wentworth there , who gave us all the Sydney news .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,110.412

After viewing the several improvements going on at Parramatta , and
giving our horses a rest of 3_1$$2 hours there , we set out at 10
minutes before 1 o'clock from thence for Sydney , where we arrived at
half past 2 o'clock , finding our dear infant , and all our concerns
there , entirely to our satisfaction . MACQUARIE-1815-2,110.413

<heading>

CONCLUSION MACQUARIE-1815-2,110.415

<$$heading>

<P_113>

<heading>

Journal of a tour to the Cow Pastures and other parts of the interior in
the month of Octr. 1815 MACQUARIE-1815-2,113.419

<$$heading>

Monday 3 Ocr. MACQUARIE-1815-2,113.421

Wishing to make myself sufficiently well acquainted with the
capabilities of that tract of country commonly called the Cow Pastures ,
and thence how far it may be practicable to tame the wild cattle ranging
in the said tract of country ; I set out this morning from Sydney in my
carriage , at 6 o'clock , with a view to satisfy myself in these
particulars , having engaged the following gentlemen to accompany me on
this excursion vizt. 1 Mr. Secry. Campbell 2 Paymr. Campbell 46th
Regt. 3 Wm. Cox Esqr. J.P. 4 Mr. Hassall Supdt. Govt. Stock 5
Jno. Oxley Esqr. Surveyor Genl. 6 Mr. Meehan Dy. Surveyor Genl. 7
Brigade Major Antill , and 8 Lieut. Watts A.D.C .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,113.422

I arrived at Mr. Moore's at Moore Bank , George's River , at 8 o'clock
, MACQUARIE-1815-2,113.423

and breakfasted there soon afterwards ; sending the carriage on to the
town of Liverpool to remain there for a sufficient number of hours to
bait and rest the horses . MACQUARIE-1815-2,113.424

Went up by water from Mr. Moore's to the town of Liverpool ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,113.425

and having viewed the several improvements going on there , set out from
thence in the carriage at 12 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,113.426

Travelled through a fine_looking open forest country all the way to the
ford of the River Nepean near the Government Hut ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,113.427

crossed the ford in the carriage , the water not being above six inches
high , MACQUARIE-1815-2,113.428

and went on about a mile beyond the ford in a southerly <P_114>
direction where I found my tent pitched and all my servants and baggage
encamped ; it being a very beautiful situation , close to the bank of
the river , and at the foot of a fine sloping bank about 4 miles east of
Mount Hunter . MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.429

Here the whole of our party joined MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.430

and we took up our ground for the day at 1$$2 past 2 o'clock .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.431

Found several natives here . MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.432

Walked about till dinner time to see the country
MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.433

and sat down to a very good dinner at 5 o'clock .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.434

Drank tea at 7 MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.435

and went to bed at 9 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.436

Wedy. 4 Ocr. MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.437

Breakfast at 8 a._m. MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.438

and set out from camp in half an hour afterwards to inspect the several
farms in the District of Appin , and some of the intermediate ones in
the Districts of Upper Minto and Airds . MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.439

Passed through Mr. McArthur's farm of Lower Cambden , where I stopt for
about a quarter of an hour to examine a piece of ground in rear thereof
, which Mrs. McArthur had solicited might be added to that farm , in
consequence of her having by <font> mistake <$$font> built a small
cottage on it . MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.440

After having looked at the land and seeing no reasonable objection
thereto , I acquiesced in her request , MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.441

and accordingly directed the Surveyor_General to locate and mark out the
piece of ground in question for her , which may be about sixty acres .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.442

From Lower Cambden Farm we proceeded to Mr. Davidson's farm called
Manangle , where we crossed the River Nepean into the District of Airds
, first passing through Horrax's and afterwards thro' several other
smaller farms , some few of which were tolerably well improved , and the
crops in the ground looking well and healthy . MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.443

At 11 a._m. entered the District of Appin at Mr. Uther's farm , which
is a very good and a very pretty well improved one on the slope of a
high hill , on the summit of which he has erected his house .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.444

Mr. Uther's crops look well MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.445

and promise to be very good and plentiful . MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.446

From Mr. Uther's we passed on to Mr. Hume's farm , which is also much
improved , MACQUARIE-1815-2,114.447

but his crops do not look so well or so promising as the last farm we
passed <P_115> through . MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.448

From Mr. Hume's farm we proceeded by a short but very rough road to the
farm of Wm. Broughton Esqr. which he has been pleased to name Lachlan
Vale . MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.449

Here he is now building a large one_story weather_boarded house with two
wings , on a very lofty eminence commanding a very extensive prospect .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.450

Mr. Broughton has cleared a considerable proportion of his farm ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.451

and has some fine_looking fields of wheat growing , looking healthy &
promising . MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.452

From Mr. Broughton's we proceeded to the next farm belonging to his
brother in law Mr. John Kennedy , within a few hundred yards of
one-another . MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.453

Mr. Kennedy has done a great deal in improving his farm ; having cut
down much timber , and having now several extensive fields of very
fine_looking wheat , with a good farm house and garden .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.454

In consideration of Mr. Kennedy's industry and great exertions to
improve his present farm <paren> 200 acres <$$paren> I have promised him
an additional grant of 100 acres immediately adjoining his present one .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.455

We halted and rested for about half an hour at Mr. Kennedy's , where we
partook of a slight refreshment of bread & wine .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.456

On our arrival at Mr. Kennedy's farm I was much concerned to find my
poor horse Cato very lame . MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.457

I discovered early after setting out this morning that he was a little
stiff in his movements , MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.458

but was in hopes it would go off on his getting a little warm .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.459

I was however disappointed , MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.460

for he continued a little stiff all day MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.461

and became very lame at Mr. Kennedy's on getting cool .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.462

I had no other horse to ride however , MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.463

and therefore was forced to use him still . MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.464

From Mr. Kennedy's we proceeded to see the farm of Mr. Sykes about
half a mile further to the southward , and at present the most southern
one in Appin . MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.465

This man has , with small means , made wonderful exertions , having
cleared and cultivated a large proportion of his farm ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.466

and there is every appearance of his having an abundant crop of wheat
this season . MACQUARIE-1815-2,115.467

In consideration of Sykes's industry , I <P_116> have promised him an
addition of seventy acres adjoining immediately his present one , which
will make his whole farm 150 acres . MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.468

Sykes's farm is supposed to be about 20 miles distant from the ground we
set out from this morning , MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.469

and we have at least ten miles to ride to our next ground or station at
the Stone-Quarry Creek in the Cow Pastures , whither all our servants
and baggage proceeded this morning at the same time we set out for Appin
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.470

At 2 p._m. set out from Sykes's farm on our return to the Cow Pastures
; MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.471

and crossing the River Nepean at Mr. Riley's farm , and at a very rough
steep pass <paren> which I have named Campbell's Pass in honor of Mr.
Paymaster Campbell <$$paren> we arrived at the Stone Quarry Creek at 4
p._m. after riding 8 miles over a beautiful country thither in the Cow
Pastures . MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.472

Here we found all our servants , cattle , and baggage had arrived safe
about an hour before us . MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.473

We saw only 3 or 4 wild bulls in our journey this afternoon between
Campbell's Pass and Stone-Quarry-Creek . MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.474

Our ride this day could not have been less than 28 miles .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.475

We sat down at 6 p._m. to a very good dinner , MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.476

drank tea , MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.477

and went to bed between 9 and 10 o'clock . MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.478

Thursday 5 Ocr. MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.479

Breakfasted at 6 o'clock this morning , MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.480

and set out for the Natai Mountains at 7 , MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.481

arrive on the farthest verge of the table land of the Natai Mountains at
half past 9 o'clock , disce. by measurement of the perambulator 8_1$$4
miles . MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.482

From this table land we had a fine view of a very deep ravine or glen
below us , which leads to the Natai River ; the mountains on either side
being an immense height from the bottom , not less than 8 or 900 feet
high . MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.483

We proceeded on horseback by a circuitous route to this glen for 2_1$$2
miles through very intricate thick forest and brush , at the termination
of which we arrived at the top of a very deep rocky gulley , which in
many places appeared to be almost perpendicular and down which it was
impossible to go on horseback . MACQUARIE-1815-2,116.484

There being , however , no other way of going to the Natai River , we
determined to leave our horses at the top of this deep gulley <paren>
called by our guide Brimstone <P_117> Gulley <$$paren> and to descend on
foot , guided by Warbey and the native Boodbury .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.485

Mr. Hassall not liking the appearance of the rugged descent , preferred
remaining at the top of the gulley with the servants and horses .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.486

The rest of the party and myself commenced to descend at 1$$2 past 10 ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.487

and after a most tiresome scrambling walk reached the right bank of the
River Natai at 50 minutes past 11 o'clock , being one hour and 20
minutes in getting thither , the distance by computation from the top of
the gulley to the river being 3_1$$4 miles . MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.488

We were all very much fatigued by the time we got to the river
MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.489

and therefore rested there for an hour , where we had each a glass of
cherry brandy and a biscuit to refresh us ; Major Antill having carried
with him a pint bottle of this good stuff . MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.490

The Natai River is here about the size of George's River , about ten
yards in breadth , MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.491

and is a very pretty stream ; having fine open forest land on the left
or opposite bank of it , and which sort of land continues for nine miles
along its banks until this river unites with the Warragombie , by the
account given of it to us by our guide John Warbey .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.492

At ten minutes before 1 p._m. set out from the Natai River on our
return , MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.493

and after a most fatiguing tiresome scrambling walk of 1 hour and 25
minutes , arrived at the top of this tremendous gulley , where we found
Mr. Hassall , our servants , and horses impatiently waiting our return
. MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.494

From the near resemblance between them I have named this stupendous
valley or ravine Glencoe . MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.495

After getting back to the table-land of the Natai Mountains , we
proceeded on our return to camp by a different route to that we came by
from thence ; travelling back by a more northern track , and passing
through some very fine grazing country tollerably well watered ,
MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.496

but were much surprised to meet so few of the wild cattle during our
excursion outwards and homewards ; seldom meeting with a larger herd
than 10 or 12 head , and those principally bulls .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.497

We reached our camp at 1$$2 past 5 o'clock , having travelled this day
only 30 miles . MACQUARIE-1815-2,117.498

<P_118>

I learned this evening on my return to camp for the first time that my
greyhound dog Oscar had been hurt severely hunting a kangaroo two days
since at Mat-tailing , when taken out from thence on Tuesday morning by
the cook and Jack Moore along with Dennison the guide to hunt in that
forest . MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.500

I was very angry at their taking so daring a liberty .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.501

I ordered the poor animal to be taken particular care of , and to be
carried in one of the carts till he recovers . MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.502

Friday 6 Octr. MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.503

Breakfasted at 6 a._m. MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.504

and at 7 o'clock set out from camp to see and examine the tract of
country to the southward of the Stone Quarry Creek called Great Bargo .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.505

At 1$$2 past 9 o'clock , after riding about 8 miles , we arrived at and
crossed the Bargo River , which is a small branch of the Nepean , and
divides Bargo from the proper Cow-Pastures . MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.506

On entering Bargo we found the country barren and very bare of feed for
cattle , MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.507

but on advancing a few miles into the country we found both the land and
grazing improve a little but far from being very good .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.508

Here Mr. Oxley and Mr. Moore <paren> with my permission <$$paren> have
large herds of horned cattle grazing ; MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.509

but so many of them have died that these gentlemen intend removing them
immediately from this country . MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.510

After halting a few minutes at Mr. Oxley's stock-yard , we proceeded to
that part of Bargo where a great number of trees have been blown down by
some violent tempest , and appears as if they had been felled on purpose
to clear the land . MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.511

From this place we proceed to view that part of the great branch of the
River Nepean where the Bargo branch forms a junction with it , and where
the banks of the former are very high and rocky .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.512

The river runs here nearly N._east , and south_west .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.513

On the opposite side is Little Bargo or Wallamalla , adjoining the
District of Appin , from which it is separated by a very deep creek or
gulley . MACQUARIE-1815-2,118.514

Mr. Broughton's farm <paren> which he has called Lachlan-Vale <$$paren>
in Appin lies in <P_119> a north_east direction from the point where we
thus took our station to view the wild and grand scenery of the banks of
the River Nepean . MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.515

At 11 a._m. set out from the banks of the Nepean on our way back to
camp . MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.516

Halted again at Mr. Oxley's stock-yard to rest our horses for half an
hour . MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.517

Saw here three very young emus belonging to Mr. Oxley's overseer , not
more than 10 or 12 days old . MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.518

I desired the stockmen to inform the overseer <paren> who was out in the
bush <$$paren> when he came home that I wished to purchase his 3 young
emus if he was disposed to sell them , and if so to bring them to me to
Sydney soon . MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.519

We crossed the Bargo River at the same place as before into the proper
Cow Pastures , MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.520

and returned home to camp by a different and more southerly track than
the one we went out by , arriving in camp at 4 o'clock after a ride of
38 miles . MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.521

We saw several small herds of the wild cattle during this day's
excursion , MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.522

and observed many of their tracks even in Bargo .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.523

Saturday 7 Octr. MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.524

Breakfasted at 6 o'clock MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.525

and sent off our baggage from Stone-Quarry Creek at 8 , for Mr.
Hassall's farm called Macquarie-Grove on the east side of the River
Nepean , where we next intend to encamp ; setting out ourselves
immediately after sending off the baggage , in order to explore the
country lying between the Stone Quarry-Creek more westerly than the
route we came by , and extending to Mount Hunter Creek .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.526

On the baggage going away I was concerned to observe that my poor dog
Oscar looked very ill and much reduced in strength .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.527

I ordered him to be conveyed carefully in the caravan .
MACQUARIE-1815-2,119.528

