<BEGIN_maurice-1857-2>

<P_325>

<heading>

Twenty-Second Sunday after Trinity . MAURICE-1857-2,325.4

<font> November <$$font> 8 , 1857 . MAURICE-1857-2,325.5

Matthew v. 48 . MAURICE-1857-2,325.6

{COM:epigraph_omitted}

<$$heading>

The people who heard the Sermon on the Mount were astonished , we are
told , at the doctrine ; MAURICE-1857-2,325.9

" for He taught them as One having authority , and not as the Scribes .
" MAURICE-1857-2,325.10

The words were felt to be words of a King , not of a Book .
MAURICE-1857-2,325.11

The Speaker was not spelling out the mind of God , but announcing it ;
MAURICE-1857-2,325.12

He had a right to be obeyed . MAURICE-1857-2,325.13

Something of this impression has been transmitted to later ages .
MAURICE-1857-2,325.14

Though the words have become letters , though the letters have been
stereotyped ; yet men in the far West have felt as if they were standing
on the brow of the old hill , and listening to Him Who opened His mouth
and said , " Blessed are the poor in spirit : MAURICE-1857-2,325.15

Blessed are the meek . " MAURICE-1857-2,325.16

Those to whom the phrases of the Bible have become hard and traditional
, upon whose ears they fall as habitual sounds that carry little sense ,
have approached this discourse with a <P_326> kind of awe .
MAURICE-1857-2,326.17

Those who have thrown off all faith in what they call the specialities
of the Christian Faith , have thought they found here something common
and universal , which was worthy of their honour .
MAURICE-1857-2,326.18

One would say that these effects could not have been produced , if the
discourse had not been in the highest degree simple and practical , if
there were signs in it of any , even the least artifice .
MAURICE-1857-2,326.19

And yet the most popular historian of our day , or of any day - who
should know what rhetoric is , if any one knows - has spoken of " those
highly rhetorical passages " in this Sermon which refer to the
forgiveness of injuries , MAURICE-1857-2,326.20

and has even announced , with an almost Papal solemnity and decisiveness
, that " for sixteen centuries these passages were treated by all
persons as figurative ; " the fancy that they have any literal force
having first presented itself to George Fox , the founder of the Quakers
. MAURICE-1857-2,326.21

Such assertions , proceeding from one who represents so much of the
feeling and temper of the present day , and has so large an acquaintance
with the past , may well stagger us . MAURICE-1857-2,326.22

He can@ @not have spoken at random . MAURICE-1857-2,326.23

What he says must have an important meaning . MAURICE-1857-2,326.24

And how can this meaning be reconciled with that kind of judgment
respecting our Lord's language to which I have alluded - a judgment
which , in some sense or other , not sixteen but eighteen centuries
appear to have confirmed ? MAURICE-1857-2,326.25

On many accounts the subject has a close and immediate interest for us .
MAURICE-1857-2,326.26

It appeared , I think , very <P_327> clearly during the last session of
Parliament , that the legal and the ecclesiastical conscience in this
country were at issue on a question of the deepest concern , not to
lawyers and ecclesiastics , but to the domestic life of England .
MAURICE-1857-2,327.27

There is no doubt , on either side , as to the sacredness of this
domestic life . MAURICE-1857-2,327.28

Those who proposed to constitute a new tribunal for the trial of
offences connected with Marriage ; those who wished to make some
alterations in the rules respecting Divorce , believed that they were
removing obstacles which were unfavourable to morality and family peace
. MAURICE-1857-2,327.29

Those who opposed them , feared that the change might lead to a
dangerous confusion respecting the holiest obligations .
MAURICE-1857-2,327.30

So far there is an agreement as to ends . MAURICE-1857-2,327.31

But the ones believed that ordinary legislation may deal with the
subject ; that cases arising concerning it , may be referred to an
ordinary jurisdiction . MAURICE-1857-2,327.32

The others affirm that it is absolutely subject to a divine law ; that
only courts specially framed to execute that law can take cognizance of
it . MAURICE-1857-2,327.33

Now the Sermon on the Mount contains some of the express statements
which are said to preclude all such alterations in our system as have
recently been attempted . MAURICE-1857-2,327.34

The Sermon on the Mount certainly is that part of our Lord's teaching to
which we must turn for our estimate of the difference between the New
Testament and the Old . MAURICE-1857-2,327.35

Some writers indeed on the ecclesiastical side , of great weight for
their personal character , are inclined to deprive <P_328> it of this
authority . MAURICE-1857-2,328.36

They suppose that it tolerates an exception which a more strictly
Christian passage in St. Luke's Gospel has annulled .
MAURICE-1857-2,328.37

But this extreme doctrine , no less than those to which it is opposed ,
opens the whole inquiry , what kind of teaching it is which the Sermon
on the Mount contains , what matters it deals with ; to what persons it
addresses itself ; whether it is a code , or something else than a code
; whether its statements are to be taken in their full significance , or
are to be explained away as figurative and highly rhetorical .
MAURICE-1857-2,328.38

Other more recent , more tremendous events , compel us for a different
reason to enter upon the same investigation . MAURICE-1857-2,328.39

If these passages about forgiveness to which the historian alludes , are
construed according to the notions of George Fox and his successors ,
they must prohibit that punishment of the Indian delinquents which the
conscience of Englishmen seems to demand : MAURICE-1857-2,328.40

they must prohibit all attempts to recover or retain our empire , which
some of us feel that we can now less than ever dare to relinquish .
MAURICE-1857-2,328.41

But is not this mode of construing the words of Christ the only strict
and literal one ? MAURICE-1857-2,328.42

If that is abandoned , must not the whole discourse lose its worth and
its force , as an utterance of the Divine Mind and Will ?
MAURICE-1857-2,328.43

Can we speak of it any more as containing the ethics of the Gospel ?
MAURICE-1857-2,328.44

or must not these ethics be such as we can bend to our pleasure and
throw away at our pleasure ? MAURICE-1857-2,328.45

<P_329>

There are tremendous issues , you will see , involved in this inquiry ,
from whatever point we enter upon it . MAURICE-1857-2,329.47

Nothing less , it seems to me , than the very meaning of all relative
morality , and of all positive morality , is involved in it .
MAURICE-1857-2,329.48

Have we any moral foundation to stand upon that is not figurative , not
rhetorical , if our Lord's words deserve that title ?
MAURICE-1857-2,329.49

That there has been a disposition through sixteen centuries , through
eighteen centuries , to treat them as if they meant very little indeed ,
and as if that little meaning might be dispensed with in the lives of
Christians , I have no doubt . MAURICE-1857-2,329.50

That during all those same centuries there has been also a feeling that
the words had the most profound , direct , awful meaning , - that human
life can never be even and harmonious till it is brought into conformity
with that meaning , I am also convinced . MAURICE-1857-2,329.51

That ecclesiastics have been too strict , that Quakers have been too
strict , in their interpretations of the different passages to which
they have given their attention , I do not believe .
MAURICE-1857-2,329.52

I do not admit that either of them has been half strict enough , half
careful enough to submit their own judgments and preconceptions to the
mind of Christ , to receive Him simply as their Lawgiver and their Judge
. MAURICE-1857-2,329.53

I believe that there would not have been that conflict between the
ecclesiastical and the legal conscience , either now or in the
generations that are past , if ecclesiastics had been less eager to
establish their theories and their jurisdiction , more resolute to
acknowledge the <P_330> full gravity of our Lord's teaching on the
subject of Marriage and of all human relationships , more ready to
connect the Sermon on the Mount , as our Lord Himself connects it , with
the elder law , which He did not come to destroy , but to fulfil .
MAURICE-1857-2,330.54

I think then that it would be seen that the legislator of modern days
has a function which He does not supersede , but helps him manfully to
perform ; and that other and higher duties devolve upon His Church in
connection with human relationships , than that of impeding it .
MAURICE-1857-2,330.55

Again , I think that , just so far as the Quaker has honestly sought to
interpret the Sermon on the Mount rigorously , and to apply it to his
own moral and spiritual life , he has been a benefactor to the world ;
and that he has set himself in opposition to the conscience of mankind ,
has given encouragement to many of the self-indulgent and cowardly
feelings of mankind , just when he has shrunk from the full and clear
and severe explanation of its maxims , just when he has interpreted it
according to his own notions , and not in the light which proceeds from
Him Who spoke the words , and Who alone can enable us to understand them
and to obey them . MAURICE-1857-2,330.56

I do not purpose to speak this afternoon on either of these subjects .
MAURICE-1857-2,330.57

I reserve them for next Sunday , and the following Sunday .
MAURICE-1857-2,330.58

The text I have chosen expresses the principle which I believe goes
through the whole discourse , and which governs all the specific topics
that are treated in it . MAURICE-1857-2,330.59

But that text introduces <P_331> us into the heart of the difficulties
which are supposed to put it at a distance from the ordinary life and
practice of men . MAURICE-1857-2,331.60

If we are anywhere in the region of rhetoric , it is surely here .
MAURICE-1857-2,331.61

The command to be " perfect " - to whom can that be addressed but to
some transcendent saint ? MAURICE-1857-2,331.62

The command to be perfect " as our Father in Heaven is perfect " - must
not that be intended to make even the transcendent saint despair ?
MAURICE-1857-2,331.63

I. I think , my brethren , that the command to be " perfect " must
cause despair to the man who has been aspiring to be a transcendent
saint ; who has fancied that he is not as other men are .
MAURICE-1857-2,331.64

What our Lord tells His disciples in this sermon is , that their
righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees
. MAURICE-1857-2,331.65

They were men of this class : MAURICE-1857-2,331.66

they had raised themselves above the level of their fellows ;
MAURICE-1857-2,331.67

from the heights which they had reached they did look down with lofty
pity upon the crowd that they could just see at an immeasurable distance
beneath . MAURICE-1857-2,331.68

They were no doubt aiming at perfection ; MAURICE-1857-2,331.69

by this difference from others , they measured their approaches to it .
MAURICE-1857-2,331.70

He who began with saying , " Blessed are the poor in spirit , for of
them is the kingdom , " was laying the axe to the root of this
perfection . MAURICE-1857-2,331.71

He was not saying , " You are much further from the top of the ladder
than you have fancied . " MAURICE-1857-2,331.72

He was not saying , " You want aids to ascend which you have not found ,
or which you are rejecting . " MAURICE-1857-2,331.73

He was declaring , <P_332> simply and broadly , " You are on a wrong
road . MAURICE-1857-2,332.74

You are proposing to yourselves a false end . MAURICE-1857-2,332.75

Every step in this direction does not take you nearer perfection , but
further from it . " MAURICE-1857-2,332.76

He tells His disciples why it must do so . MAURICE-1857-2,332.77

The Pharisee <font> does his works to be seen of men ; <$$font> yes !
to be seen by those very men whom he is scorning , to be admired and
worshiped by those whom it is his glory to trample upon .
MAURICE-1857-2,332.78

This is the inevitable condition of such aspirants .
MAURICE-1857-2,332.79

They live for observation . MAURICE-1857-2,332.80

The world is to see how much they are above it . MAURICE-1857-2,332.81

Thus the question with them is more and more , not what they shall
<font> be <$$font> , but how they shall <font> appear . <$$font>
MAURICE-1857-2,332.82

With this terrible motive to become mere actors - in the strictest sense
of the word , hypocrites - another conspired . MAURICE-1857-2,332.83

God Himself was necessarily regarded as One Who demands an outside
apparent service . MAURICE-1857-2,332.84

He had given a law to His people . MAURICE-1857-2,332.85

They were not to take His name in vain , not to kill , not to commit
adultery . MAURICE-1857-2,332.86

These were common precepts ; MAURICE-1857-2,332.87

the vulgarest men must be forced by actual penalties now , or threats of
penalties hereafter , to observe them . MAURICE-1857-2,332.88

The exalted man was to practise a different - a meritorious obedience .
MAURICE-1857-2,332.89

But though different in degree , it was to be the same in kind .
MAURICE-1857-2,332.90

He was not to eat with unwashen hands ; not to eat at all at certain
times ; not to neglect the hours of prayer . MAURICE-1857-2,332.91

Additional obligations were laid upon him that he might be perfect , -
obligations not deduced from the law , except by accident , but appended
to it , - obligations <P_333> which , even if they interfered with the
law according to the simple letter of it , were still to be recognized
as means by which the select class might win God's favour .
MAURICE-1857-2,333.92

Our Lord dwells on one commandment which was treated with peculiar
contempt by those who were aiming at peculiar holiness .
MAURICE-1857-2,333.93

It was a sign of devoutness <font> not <$$font> to honour the father and
mother , not to contribute to the support of their weakness and age , if
the money which would have been given to them was dedicated to the
service of the Temple . MAURICE-1857-2,333.94

No more characteristic sign can be found of the nature of this Pharisaic
religion , of the results to which it was leading .
MAURICE-1857-2,333.95

Common duties - most of all , relative duties , those which had to do
with the family - were trifled with and discarded .
MAURICE-1857-2,333.96

The holiness was altogether individual . MAURICE-1857-2,333.97

It was to procure advantages and rewards for the individual man .
MAURICE-1857-2,333.98

And this , though in another sense it was altogether social , inasmuch
as it demanded spectators , as a very great part of it would have been
wasted , if there had not been bystanders to notice it and be affected
by it . MAURICE-1857-2,333.99

To understand how entirely the perfection of which our Lord speaks was
the reverse of this perfection , we must remember another quality of it
, which is clearly implied in those I have spoken of already .
MAURICE-1857-2,333.100

The Pharisaical aspirant assumed evil as the ground from which he
started . MAURICE-1857-2,333.101

Evil was the condition of his race . MAURICE-1857-2,333.102

Every step that raised him above evil , raised him above mankind .
MAURICE-1857-2,333.103

The nearer he approached to <P_334> the Being he worshiped , the further
he was from those among whom that Being had placed him .
MAURICE-1857-2,334.104

Godliness and humanity were direct and deadly opposites .
MAURICE-1857-2,334.105

Now when our Lord said to His disciples , " Be perfect , " He made it
evident by all the rest of His discourse that He meant , " Be men .
MAURICE-1857-2,334.106

You can@ @not by any possibility be anything better than that which you
are created to be . MAURICE-1857-2,334.107

You must make yourselves worse by becoming anything else than that . "
MAURICE-1857-2,334.108

Those to whom He said the Kingdom of Heaven belonged , were those who
did not lift themselves above their fellows , - the meek , the merciful
. MAURICE-1857-2,334.109

Those who should obtain consolation were precisely those who were
suffering as ordinary men suffer , who were suffering with them .
MAURICE-1857-2,334.110

Those were not rewarded who had righteousness , but who were hungering
and thirsting after it , and would find the attainment of it their
reward . MAURICE-1857-2,334.111

Not those whom the world looked upon , but those whom no eye but God
could see , the pure in heart , were to have that which they coveted ,
to see Him as He saw them . MAURICE-1857-2,334.112

Not those whom men thought well of , but those whom they thought ill of
, whose names they cast out as evil , might claim fellowship with the
prophets of old . MAURICE-1857-2,334.113

All therefore in this perfection is social , not , like the Pharisaic ,
individual . MAURICE-1857-2,334.114

And yet all is out of sight , not , like the Pharisaic perfection ,
apparent , cognizable by the eye . MAURICE-1857-2,334.115

Look again how this difference affects the relation of this Gospel of
perfection to the Law which had been <P_335> given in the old time .
MAURICE-1857-2,335.116

Evidently the difference is in kind and not in degree .
MAURICE-1857-2,335.117

It is not that a new code is appended to the old code .
MAURICE-1857-2,335.118

It is not that there is a code for a class of men which is different
from the code for men generally . MAURICE-1857-2,335.119

It is that the Gospel commandment belongs to the man himself , that the
legal precept belongs to the acts of the man . MAURICE-1857-2,335.120

It is therefore that the Gospel perfects , completes , fulfils the Law ,
without destroying one jot or tittle of it . MAURICE-1857-2,335.121

Each stands out in its own distinctness . MAURICE-1857-2,335.122

Each sustains and is necessary to the other . MAURICE-1857-2,335.123

They do not clash , MAURICE-1857-2,335.124

for they belong to different regions . MAURICE-1857-2,335.125

They must be continually acting and reacting upon each other ;
MAURICE-1857-2,335.126

the weakness of the one must be the weakness of the other ;
MAURICE-1857-2,335.127

the strength of the one must be the strength of the other ; because both
equally apply to the same man , to the same human race .
MAURICE-1857-2,335.128

The Lawgiver , Who deals with acts , says , <font> " Thou shalt not kill
; " <$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,335.129

the King , Who speaks to the minds of His subjects , says , <font> "
Thou shalt not be angry with thy brother without a cause . " <$$font>
MAURICE-1857-2,335.130

The Lawgiver , Who deals with acts , says , <font> " Thou shalt not
commit adultery . " <$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,335.131

The King , Who speaks to the heart , says , <font> " Thou shalt not look
upon a woman to lust after her . " <$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,335.132

The Lawgiver says , <font> " Thou shalt not forswear thyself ,
MAURICE-1857-2,335.133

but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths ; " <$$font>
MAURICE-1857-2,335.134

so announcing that every overt act of perjury will be avenged by the
all-seeing Ruler . MAURICE-1857-2,335.135

The King over the Spirit says , " <font> Swear not at all ,
MAURICE-1857-2,335.136

for heaven is God's throne , MAURICE-1857-2,335.137

earth is His footstool , MAURICE-1857-2,335.138

Jerusalem is His city , MAURICE-1857-2,335.139

the hairs of <P_336> your head can@ @not be white or black without Him ;
" <$$font> so guarding the continual hourly reverence of Him in Whom we
live and move and have our being , by the loss of which , through
carelessness and profaneness in ordinary conversation , the solemn oath
or asseveration becomes of little worth or obligation .
MAURICE-1857-2,336.140

With what especial force this general doctrine applies to that honouring
of fathers and mothers , which the Pharisees had set at naught by their
traditions , I shall endeavour to show you under the next head .
MAURICE-1857-2,336.141

What I have to remark further now is , that Jesus could raise the
standard of human morality , in opposition to the inhuman standard which
the Pharisee set up , because He was Himself the Son of Man ; because He
came to declare , and in His Own person to manifest , the truth that God
and man are not divided , but eternally united ; because He showed and
proved that man is made in the Image of God ; because therefore that
which is truly human must answer to that which is truly divine ; because
the fall of the first man must have been a fall from trust in God , and
from the belief that this was the state intended for him ; because the
fall of each man must consist in choosing to be a separate selfish man ,
to stand in his Adam-nature , in renouncing that true state of union
with Christ and of fellowship with each other , into which He has
redeemed us and which constitutes our perfection as members of the human
race . MAURICE-1857-2,336.142

<P_337>

II . But secondly , He says , <font> " Be ye perfect even as your
Father in Heaven is perfect . " <$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,337.144

" If the first clause is not fatal to all human endeavour , if it does
not prescribe an absolutely impossible enterprise , - what must we say
of this addition to it ? MAURICE-1857-2,337.145

What I say is , that we have in these words , <font> " as your Father is
perfect , " <$$font> that which removes any discouragement which the
other , after all explanation , might have left on our minds ; that we
have a maxim of ethics set before us , which differs from the maxims of
ordinary moral philosophers in being compassionate , practical , hopeful
; that we have here the proof that our Lord's doctrine is higher in its
demands than any other , and yet that " His yoke is easy and His burthen
is light . " MAURICE-1857-2,337.146

1. A man may say , " I am quite convinced that the social , human
morality is the highest morality , that this is what God seeks of us .
MAURICE-1857-2,337.147

I feel that to be a good father , a good son , a good husband , a good
citizen , in the full sense of that word , may be , must be , to lead a
more perfect life than to be practising the most admired religious
selfishness , than to be seeking after the highest selfish rewards which
religious teachers have ever spoken of . MAURICE-1857-2,337.148

But the more I wish for this perfection , commonplace as it is said to
be , the more distant it appears to be from me . MAURICE-1857-2,337.149

God may require nothing more of me than to do justice , to love mercy ,
and to walk humbly before Him ; MAURICE-1857-2,337.150

but oh , how hard is doing justice ! MAURICE-1857-2,337.151

how the love of mercy vanishes when I have some personal injury to
avenge ! MAURICE-1857-2,337.152

<P_338>

what pride springs up in me and enslaves me , when I fancy most that I
have acquired humility ! MAURICE-1857-2,338.154

The best laws , the most admirable rules of conduct , can@ @not make me
what St. Paul says I should be , to my children , to my servants .
MAURICE-1857-2,338.155

Suppose I love those who love me ; MAURICE-1857-2,338.156

suppose I yield to impulses of affection ; MAURICE-1857-2,338.157

does not my conscience tell me that I am partial , and therefore am
doing injury to those whom I fondle , as well as to those whom I treat
with coldness and indifference ? " MAURICE-1857-2,338.158

Such thoughts arise in one who is aspiring after no fantastic excellence
, who is simply caring to do his duty in that state in which he finds
himself . MAURICE-1857-2,338.159

He certainly does not scorn laws , not the most vulgar earthly laws .
MAURICE-1857-2,338.160

The Ten Commandments he reverences as divine , MAURICE-1857-2,338.161

but somehow they do not reach him ; MAURICE-1857-2,338.162

he wants help which they do not give . MAURICE-1857-2,338.163

To act out any one relation , he must not only avoid transgression , but
do right ; MAURICE-1857-2,338.164

he must not only do right , but be right . MAURICE-1857-2,338.165

How can he be right ? MAURICE-1857-2,338.166

Our Lord tells him that he is actually , really a child , not only of an
earthly parent , but of a Father in Heaven . MAURICE-1857-2,338.167

These relationships on earth are grounded on that celestial relationship
; MAURICE-1857-2,338.168

they exist because it exists ; MAURICE-1857-2,338.169

they are formed in its likeness . MAURICE-1857-2,338.170

The Eternal Father has constituted each family , because He has
established one Universal Family in His Son . MAURICE-1857-2,338.171

This is the state which Christ has revealed to us .
MAURICE-1857-2,338.172

The Pharisee would not honour father and mother , that he might reserve
all his honour <P_339> for God ; MAURICE-1857-2,339.173

therefore he could not honour God , because he did not believe in God as
a Father . MAURICE-1857-2,339.174

Jesus Christ bids us not love father or mother more than Him , because
in Him dwells the only love which we can show to father and mother ;
because it becomes a mere selfish affection , dependent on accident or
circumstance , sure to dry up , if it is not derived from His love , not
constantly renewed by it . MAURICE-1857-2,339.175

Thus then the perfection which He enjoins , the true human perfection ,
is possible when we submit to the Will which is governing the universe
and governing in us ; when we cease to kick against the pricks ; when we
will permit the Spirit which is proceeding at every moment from the
Father and the Son to take from us the conceit , vanity , restlessness
which are making us miserable . MAURICE-1857-2,339.176

2. But as there lies in this Name the power which may make us all that
we can want to be , so there is in it also the infinite compassion and
forgiveness for our failures , which we ask and ask in vain from all the
doctors in the world , even those who seem most tolerant , even those
who bid us content ourselves with acts and states of mind with which our
consciences refuse to be content . MAURICE-1857-2,339.177

I have a right to be like our Father in Heaven . MAURICE-1857-2,339.178

Likeness to Him is my proper human condition . MAURICE-1857-2,339.179

But I have also a right to go to Him and say , " Father , I have not
cared to be like Thee , MAURICE-1857-2,339.180

I have not believed that I could be like Thee , MAURICE-1857-2,339.181

I have not confessed myself to be Thy child . " MAURICE-1857-2,339.182

<P_340>

I have right to lay bare all my weakness before Him , to speak to Him as
One Who knows how great it is , as One Who understands all my
deflections from His ways , and cares for me more than I possibly can .
MAURICE-1857-2,340.184

" Be perfect according to this rule or that . " MAURICE-1857-2,340.185

" Yes , but may I confess to the rule ? MAURICE-1857-2,340.186

Will it understand me when I say I am sorry ? MAURICE-1857-2,340.187

Will it make me sorry ? " MAURICE-1857-2,340.188

- " Be perfect according to the standard of this holy man or that . "
MAURICE-1857-2,340.189

- " Yes , but does he know what I am striving after ?
MAURICE-1857-2,340.190

- Do his thoughts comprehend me ? all my stupidity , all my selfishness
? MAURICE-1857-2,340.191

Can his life become mine ? " MAURICE-1857-2,340.192

" Be perfect as your Father in Heaven is perfect . "
MAURICE-1857-2,340.193

The wrestler who has had most falls , who has had most experience of the
strength of the enemy , of his own feebleness ; the man who is in deep
mire where no ground is ; he who is in fetters from which he only wishes
to be free , - hears this message MAURICE-1857-2,340.194

and finds in it the assurance that he may yet rise up and walk ; that
there is a home for him , that there is One Who will bring him to it .
MAURICE-1857-2,340.195

What anger , rage , inclination to hate , there is in him !
MAURICE-1857-2,340.196

How circumstances seem to conspire with it ! MAURICE-1857-2,340.197

What strong pleas seem to justify it ! MAURICE-1857-2,340.198

How it is banishing God from him ! MAURICE-1857-2,340.199

what a distance it is creating between Him and His child !
MAURICE-1857-2,340.200

But He in Whom is all Mercy , Forgiveness of enemies , Patience , is not
afar off . MAURICE-1857-2,340.201

He bids me be what He is ! MAURICE-1857-2,340.202

He can convert me to be what He is ! MAURICE-1857-2,340.203

Who that has had a quiet , even pious education , can tell what infinite
efforts it may be costing some poor <P_341> or rich man , bred among
people whose language was half made up of curses , to obey the precept "
Swear not at all " ? MAURICE-1857-2,341.204

What would become of him if he might not throw himself on the pity and
strength of the very Being Whose name he is tempted continually to
trifle with ! MAURICE-1857-2,341.205

When he does , how much more he may know of that Being than men do whose
lot has been more fortunate ! MAURICE-1857-2,341.206

3. This text , therefore , cuts through a number of webs in which
casuists have entangled the human conscience . MAURICE-1857-2,341.207

It does so by putting an end to those tricks of the deceitful heart into
which we are all falling continually . MAURICE-1857-2,341.208

<font> " How oft , " <$$font> asks the Galilean , MAURICE-1857-2,341.209

- for he was just learning the first rudiments of his faith , under the
Divine Teacher , MAURICE-1857-2,341.210

- <font> " How oft shall my brother sin against me , and I forgive him ?
" <$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,341.211

What an opening for the refinements of a Confessor or Spiritual Director
! MAURICE-1857-2,341.212

How accurately the degrees , qualities , occasions , times , objects ,
places of forgiveness , might be set down ! MAURICE-1857-2,341.213

What delicate distinctions , what hairbreadth evasions of difficulties !
MAURICE-1857-2,341.214

What torments to the memory and heart of the doubter , what practical
indulgences to his worst inclinations ! MAURICE-1857-2,341.215

In our Lord's answer not a single subtlety . MAURICE-1857-2,341.216

He replies by a simple parable which brings out the very meaning of our
text . MAURICE-1857-2,341.217

God forgives , MAURICE-1857-2,341.218

thou art unlike God , MAURICE-1857-2,341.219

therefore thou art miserable if thou dost not forgive .
MAURICE-1857-2,341.220

There is no measure or limit in the command . MAURICE-1857-2,341.221

God's mind is the standard . MAURICE-1857-2,341.222

Try your mind by that . MAURICE-1857-2,341.223

Do you wish <P_342> God to be less forgiving than He is ?
MAURICE-1857-2,342.224

Would you contract His forgiveness ? MAURICE-1857-2,342.225

Would you make it not a forgiveness from the heart ?
MAURICE-1857-2,342.226

Then yours may be so . MAURICE-1857-2,342.227

But in this very parable God is represented as punishing , as punishing
severely . MAURICE-1857-2,342.228

Punishment in Him is not then incompatible with the most fervent love
and compassion - MAURICE-1857-2,342.229

may be demanded by love and compassion . MAURICE-1857-2,342.230

So be it with you . MAURICE-1857-2,342.231

Be perfect as your Father in Heaven is perfect . MAURICE-1857-2,342.232

On this instance of forgiveness I shall have more to say hereafter .
MAURICE-1857-2,342.233

I refer to it now as one of the most complete illustrations of the truth
, that , just because there are no indulgences in the Gospel morality ,
just because it proposes to man only the highest standard , it lays less
burden on him than any other ; MAURICE-1857-2,342.234

it is from first to last a deliverance from burdens .
MAURICE-1857-2,342.235

We are oppressed with the consciousness of something which we ought to
be , of something which we can@ @not be . MAURICE-1857-2,342.236

What do you gain by persuading your conscience that it has deceived you
as to the extent of your obligations ? MAURICE-1857-2,342.237

Diminish them , and what remains will be just as overwhelming .
MAURICE-1857-2,342.238

Each day , as your aims become lower , your difficulty in pursuing these
aims will be greater . MAURICE-1857-2,342.239

Christ teaches us that the burden is not in the strictness of the law ,
but in ourselves ; that a law - every law , human or divine - must be
weak through the flesh ; that so long as we are merely trying to obey a
rule we shall find that rule a burden - be it the most moderate ever
invented - that when we <P_343> claim our rights as new men , as created
in Him to good works , as children of a Father in Heaven , we become
united with Him from Whom laws proceed : MAURICE-1857-2,343.240

obedience to them is recognized as reasonable , as part of our
constitution ; MAURICE-1857-2,343.241

disobedience is felt to be the unnatural , miserable state ; all
disobedient acts to be departures from a blessed order .
MAURICE-1857-2,343.242

But for such acts , for such relapses into an unhealthy evil state ,
there is confession ; MAURICE-1857-2,343.243

there is the gift of repentance ; MAURICE-1857-2,343.244

there is that Divine restoration which no indulgence or toleration such
as men dream of can give . MAURICE-1857-2,343.245

And if this morality of Christ is not casuistical morality , still less
is it rhetorical morality . MAURICE-1857-2,343.246

The rhetorician exalts virtues , as if they were characteristic of
certain favoured persons whom it is his calling to praise ;
MAURICE-1857-2,343.247

denounces vices , as if none could have fallen into them but those whom
it is his calling to vituperate . MAURICE-1857-2,343.248

Our Lord speaks of the highest virtues which any man has ever practised
as being resemblances to the Father in Heaven , Who has made all men in
His image ; Who has redeemed all in Christ that they may be renewed in
His image . MAURICE-1857-2,343.249

Our Lord treats all vices which the law condemns , as vices into which
it is possible for any man to fall , as lying close to every man , as
being the consequences of inclinations to which no man is a stranger .
MAURICE-1857-2,343.250

The rhetorician deals in high-sounding generalities about magnanimous
endurance of wrong and suffering . MAURICE-1857-2,343.251

Christ speaks of the man who is <font> smitten on one cheek , turning
<P_344> the other ; <$$font> of the man <font> who is bidden to go one
mile , going twain . <$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,344.252

Homely , human illustrations , surely ; MAURICE-1857-2,344.253

precisely those which the rhetorician scorns ; MAURICE-1857-2,344.254

precisely those which we need for the business of life .
MAURICE-1857-2,344.255

I will not anticipate what I shall have to say , if God permit , next
Sunday , respecting the conflict between legal and ecclesiastical
morality . MAURICE-1857-2,344.256

But this I will say , that the more we clergymen teach children and
teach grown men the doctrine of our old Catechism , that they are "
members of Christ , and children of God , and inheritors of the Kingdom
of Heaven , " the more I believe we shall be fulfilling our tasks ; the
more we shall prove to you that the country needs some help besides that
which laws and penalties can give , for the preservation of anything
that is good among us , for the reformation of anything that is evil .
MAURICE-1857-2,344.257

Above all , I trust that you will come to perceive that in this teaching
, illustrated by the whole history of the Old and New Testament , lies
the protection of all domestic society , of the reverence for fathers ,
of the marriage bond . MAURICE-1857-2,344.258

What ecclesiastics have done for these , I shall have to confess with
much sorrow and shame . MAURICE-1857-2,344.259

What the Gospel has done for them , what the Church of God - so far as
it has been the witness of Christ's redemption and of our adoption to be
children of His Father - has done for them , I can assert with freedom
and confidence , because I can appeal to the facts of history and the
conscience of mankind in support of what I say . MAURICE-1857-2,344.260

The sacredness <P_345> of our hearths and homes we do not owe , we shall
not owe , to legal enactments , to courts of justice , whatever names
they may bear . MAURICE-1857-2,345.261

We have owed them to Him Who has said , <font> " Be ye perfect , as my
Father in Heaven is perfect , " <$$font> to Him Who has made Himself the
Bridegroom and Husband of our race . MAURICE-1857-2,345.262

We shall owe the continuance and elevation of them to the growing belief
that all things in heaven and earth stand not upon some shifting sand of
legal or of priestly inventions , but in Him Who was before all worlds ,
and Who will abide when all that has been merely the work of our hands
shall be dissolved . MAURICE-1857-2,345.263

<P_347>

<heading>

Twenty-Third Sunday after Trinity . MAURICE-1857-2,347.266

<font> November <$$font> 15 , 1857 . {COM:epigraph_omitted} <$$heading>
MAURICE-1857-2,347.267

Last week I examined a statement , made on very high authority , that
the Sermon on the Mount contains a number of rhetorical passages , which
can@ @not in their strict sense be applied to the regulation of our
lives . MAURICE-1857-2,347.268

I disputed this assertion altogether . MAURICE-1857-2,347.269

I maintained that the very persons who were supposed to have erred
through over-much rigour in construing our Lord's words , had really
erred from explaining them too loosely , from overlooking hints which He
had Himself given us to guide us in the understanding of them .
MAURICE-1857-2,347.270

I maintained that the application of them to our daily duties had been
weakened by this laxity , that they would bear with far greater force
upon our conduct if they were not controlled <P_348> and reduced by the
notions of their expounders . MAURICE-1857-2,348.271

Having spoken on those general words , which contain , I think , the
principle of the whole discourse , <font> " Be ye perfect as your Father
in Heaven is perfect , " <$$font> I proposed to consider two special
inferences from our Lord's doctrines , which have been supposed to be
particularly direct and obvious , and to make them impracticable : -
First , the inference which has been drawn from His teaching respecting
divorce , by ecclesiastics ; secondly , the inference which has been
drawn from His teaching respecting forgiveness , by Quakers .
MAURICE-1857-2,348.272

I begin with the former . MAURICE-1857-2,348.273

Every one must have observed how often the phrase , <font> " It hath
been said of old time , " <$$font> occurs in the first division of the
Sermon on the Mount . MAURICE-1857-2,348.274

On the clear understanding of that phrase , the interpretation of it
must in a great measure depend . MAURICE-1857-2,348.275

In the text I have just read to you , and in some others , the phrase is
slightly varied . MAURICE-1857-2,348.276

The <font> old time <$$font> is omitted . MAURICE-1857-2,348.277

The difference is not very important . MAURICE-1857-2,348.278

But as I wish to be as exact as possible in treating language which has
been supposed to be loose and vague , I would not pass it by .
MAURICE-1857-2,348.279

I think there may be a significance in the change .
MAURICE-1857-2,348.280

If we turn to the 19th chapter of St. Matthew , we shall find our Lord
answering a question of the Pharisees , <font> " Is it lawful for a man
to put away his wife for every cause ? " <$$font> with the
counter-question , <font> " Have ye not read , that He which made them
at the beginning , made them male and female , and said , For this cause
<P_349> shall a man leave father and mother , and shall cleave to his
wife : and they twain shall be one flesh ? " <$$font>
MAURICE-1857-2,349.281

Then he adds : <font> " Wherefore they are no more twain , but one flesh
. MAURICE-1857-2,349.282

What therefore God hath joined together , let not man put asunder . "
<$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,349.283

Then , according to St. Matthew , the Pharisees rejoined , <font> " Why
did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement , and to put her
away ? " <$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,349.284

In the 10th chapter of St. Mark the conversation is reported somewhat
differently . MAURICE-1857-2,349.285

There , Jesus asked the Pharisees , <font> " What did Moses command you
? MAURICE-1857-2,349.286

And they said , Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement , and to
put her away . MAURICE-1857-2,349.287

And Jesus answered MAURICE-1857-2,349.288

and said unto them , For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this
precept . MAURICE-1857-2,349.289

But from the beginning of the Creation God made them male and female .
" <$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,349.290

Now , as it was the design of our Lord to bring out the truth that
Marriage was an institution far older than the Law , not in any sense
the creation of the Law , there seems a good reason why the expression "
ancients " or " old time , " which is applied in other cases , either to
the commandments or to certain venerable maxims of Scripture , should be
dispensed with here . MAURICE-1857-2,349.291

No doubt in strictness it was as applicable to the bill of divorcement
as to the commandment respecting adultery . MAURICE-1857-2,349.292

But since it was a special object in this passage to impress the hearer
with the feeling that there were older times than those which had
produced either the permission or the commandment , it may have been
purposely dropped <P_350> lest that impression should have been in any
degree weakened . MAURICE-1857-2,350.293

I rest nothing upon the difference in itself . MAURICE-1857-2,350.294

If some better reading were discovered , which contained the same words
that occur in the other clauses of the discourse , I should be perfectly
content with it . MAURICE-1857-2,350.295

For the principle which I suppose this variation of phrase may have been
intended to indicate , is amply established and sustained by those
passages which I have quoted , and by the tenour of our Lord's discourse
. MAURICE-1857-2,350.296

We fancy that He is enacting a new law to supersede an old law .
MAURICE-1857-2,350.297

No , He is bringing out that which is older than all penal laws , all
laws of tables , a primary part of the human constitution and of the
Divine order . MAURICE-1857-2,350.298

He is revealing that which is beneath all positive decrees and
enactments , beneath even God's commandments themselves , that without
which they would have no meaning . MAURICE-1857-2,350.299

What would a command not to commit adultery be worth , if there were no
marriage existing ? MAURICE-1857-2,350.300

How can a bond be broken which has not been formed ?
MAURICE-1857-2,350.301

The whole morality of the Pharisees , as we saw last Sunday , proceeded
upon the forgetfulness of this obvious and fundamental principle .
MAURICE-1857-2,350.302

They looked upon penal laws , not as preserving obligations , but as the
foundation of them . MAURICE-1857-2,350.303

And so they made the highest and divinest laws abortive ;
MAURICE-1857-2,350.304

they contradicted them in the letter as well as in the spirit .
MAURICE-1857-2,350.305

They would not look at the reason of the Sabbath-day , as it is stated
expressly , <P_351> formally , emphatically in the Fourth Commandment .
MAURICE-1857-2,351.306

They would not suppose that God could care for men-servants and
maid-servants , that He could wish them to rest because He rested .
MAURICE-1857-2,351.307

Therefore the whole nature of the day was changed .
MAURICE-1857-2,351.308

It became not a blessing but a curse , not a day made for men but
against men . MAURICE-1857-2,351.309

Precisely on the same ground they supposed the Fifth Commandment to be
the ground of the honour that was due to parents , not merely the
assertion and vindication of a relation already existing - implied in
the life of human beings . MAURICE-1857-2,351.310

Therefore the honour of parents might be neglected , in order to pay
honour to Him Who had given the commandment . MAURICE-1857-2,351.311

I dwelt upon this subject especially last Sunday , not only because
there is none which shows so clearly the mind and spirit of the Pharisee
, but because there is none which so clearly sets forth the mind and
spirit of our Lord , which shows in what sense He was uttering an old
truth that had been from the beginning , in what sense He was revealing
that which had been kept secret from the foundation of the world .
MAURICE-1857-2,351.312

The fatherly relation had existed from the day that Eve brought forth
her first-born ; the brotherly relation , from the time that the keeper
of the flocks and the tiller of the ground grew up together .
MAURICE-1857-2,351.313

The earliest book in the Bible , which has nothing to do with the
burning mountain or with the laws upon tables , is mainly occupied with
setting forth the relations of a single family , a family by <P_352>
which all the families of the earth were to be blessed , - in setting
forth these relations as grounded upon the revelation of the God of
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob . MAURICE-1857-2,352.314

With one hand our Lord was striking at the attempt of the Pharisees to
derange the course of their own history , to put that first which God
had put second , to subject a constitution to mere decrees .
MAURICE-1857-2,352.315

With the other hand He was striking at the denial of the Pharisees of
that higher and fuller revelation of God which holy men had lived and
died expecting , - that revelation of Him as united to men , not by a
formal covenant but in an actual Son , - which He was making with His
words and in His acts , which He was to bring out fully in His death and
in His resurrection . MAURICE-1857-2,352.316

By basing everything upon outward law , upon a law only concerning
outward acts , the Pharisee overthrew that great simple human history
which is contained in the lives of the elder Patriarchs .
MAURICE-1857-2,352.317

He destroyed the sense and coherency of the prophetical books , their
worth as lessons in morals and politics , the grandeur of their poetry ,
their warnings and their hopes , by robbing them of their leading
characteristic , - that they connect all human relations with Divine ,
that they treat the superstitions and infidelities of the Nation as
adulteries from the Lord who has married it to Himself .
MAURICE-1857-2,352.318

By basing everything upon the Nature of God and His Own eternal Sonship
, Jesus restored the patriarchal records to their place in the Divine
economy , MAURICE-1857-2,352.319

proved that the prophetical <P_353> records were not a collection of
idle figures and vain rhetoric , but direct appeals to the conscience of
human beings , preparations for One Who could tell them plainly of the
Father . MAURICE-1857-2,353.320

The Pharisees , I have said , did not merely misrepresent the Patriarchs
and the Prophets ; MAURICE-1857-2,353.321

they misrepresented the statute law which they worshiped .
MAURICE-1857-2,353.322

They confounded permissions and commands . MAURICE-1857-2,353.323

When the Legislator wisely abstained from usurping a dominion over the
conscience which he could not exercise , they measured the demands of
the conscience by his decrees . MAURICE-1857-2,353.324

The prescription that a man who put away his wife must have a writing of
divorcement , was to them as much a rule of life as the precept not to
commit adultery . MAURICE-1857-2,353.325

" They were both found in the book ; MAURICE-1857-2,353.326

where was the difference ? " MAURICE-1857-2,353.327

When men begin to argue thus , we may be quite sure that the two will
<font> not <$$font> be of the same practical validity ; that the
permissive edict will be obeyed , that the restraining one will be
forgotten . MAURICE-1857-2,353.328

The records of this age as they are delivered by Josephus , as they are
indicated by the Evangelist , make it evident that this was actually the
case in Palestine . MAURICE-1857-2,353.329

The story in the 8th chapter of St. John , whether it should be in that
place or not , does not exaggerate the condition of society , even if we
suppose the accusers of the woman went out one by one convicted of the
very sin with which they had charged her . MAURICE-1857-2,353.330

On the other hand , there is not a word in our Lord's discourses , here
or elsewhere , which condemns <P_354> the regulation respecting divorces
: MAURICE-1857-2,354.331

<font> " For the hardness of your heart , " <$$font> he says , <font> "
he suffered you to put away your wives . " <$$font>
MAURICE-1857-2,354.332

In these words the Son and Lord over the house justifies , instead of
blaming , His faithful servant . MAURICE-1857-2,354.333

By this permission Moses confessed the necessary weakness of all mere
enactments . MAURICE-1857-2,354.334

With a clearness of insight which must have been imparted by a higher
Wisdom , - it is so contrary to the natural ambition and
self-sufficiency of a Legislator , - he saw what the Law can@ @not do .
MAURICE-1857-2,354.335

He saw that his function had respect to transgression ; that it presumed
hardness of heart ; that he had no power to make men love their wives or
respect the marriage vow . MAURICE-1857-2,354.336

Keeping the commandment always in sight , adapting his means to the
circumstances in which he found himself , because they were indications
of God's purpose , he could do something to prevent outrages upon God's
gracious ordinance , something to keep alive the sense of its being His
ordinance . MAURICE-1857-2,354.337

Overdoing might be just as unfavourable to the reverence which was by
all means to be cherished , as neglect . MAURICE-1857-2,354.338

The heart might be made harder , not softer , by efforts to force it and
crush it . MAURICE-1857-2,354.339

God made them male and female . MAURICE-1857-2,354.340

God said , " Let the twain be one flesh . " MAURICE-1857-2,354.341

Moses may weaken the power of those celestial words by his earthly
attempts to render them effectual . MAURICE-1857-2,354.342

Herein I perceive the fidelity of Moses to his divine office .
MAURICE-1857-2,354.343

Herein I see how truly he was an inspired man . MAURICE-1857-2,354.344

Herein I discover how he was intended as an <P_355> example of the
modesty , also the courage , which is befitting in legislators of all
times ; - modesty , to understand just how much they are able in their
own sphere to promote an object which is dear to them ; - courage , to
resolve that they will not go out of their sphere to promote it , by
whatever impulses from within or threats from without they may be urged
to do so . MAURICE-1857-2,355.345

But if our Lord does not blame the legislator , He speaks here , as
everywhere , to the conscience and spirit of the man :
MAURICE-1857-2,355.346

<font> " I say unto you , whosoever shall put away his wife , saving for
the cause of fornication , causeth her to commit adultery : and
whosoever marrieth her that is put away committeth adultery . "
<$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,355.347

No language can be more distinct . MAURICE-1857-2,355.348

" I am speaking to you , my disciples - to you , common men ; not in the
least to those who make laws or execute them . MAURICE-1857-2,355.349

I am speaking to you who are living under this Law of Moses , who can ,
therefore , avail yourselves of the license which that Law allows you .
MAURICE-1857-2,355.350

<font> I say to you , whosoever shall put away his wife . " <$$font>
MAURICE-1857-2,355.351

Our translators are strictly right , I conceive , in the first verb they
have chosen ; unfortunate , when they give a new rendering of the
participle of the same verb . MAURICE-1857-2,355.352

The word <font> divorce <$$font> , in the sense we give to it , was not
applicable to the practice of the ordinary Jewish husband .
MAURICE-1857-2,355.353

He simply ' put away ' or ' sent away ' his wife .
MAURICE-1857-2,355.354

The Law insisted that he should obtain a certain document to authorize
his act . MAURICE-1857-2,355.355

It was little more than a registration of his procedure .
MAURICE-1857-2,355.356

The separation was , to all <P_356> intents and purposes , his doing ;
not the decision of any court . MAURICE-1857-2,356.357

I make this remark , that you may feel how entirely the circumstances of
the evil which our Lord was rebuking , conspire with His Own divine
purpose to explain the object and direction of His words .
MAURICE-1857-2,356.358

Then follows the exception about which there has been so much debate ,
and which some hope to get rid of by referring to the 15th verse of the
16th chapter of St. Luke , where it does not occur .
MAURICE-1857-2,356.359

I am most anxious that you should compare those words with these .
MAURICE-1857-2,356.360

It will strike you , I think , at once , that ours are much more
elaborate ; that they occur in a more regular discourse ; that they
involve a much more careful comparison of the old time with the new .
MAURICE-1857-2,356.361

The words in St. Luke are evidently used as an illustration of another
topic ; MAURICE-1857-2,356.362

they are meant to explain the assertion , that , in the Kingdom of
Heaven , into which many were pressing , not a jot or tittle of the Law
would be abolished . MAURICE-1857-2,356.363

But this is common to the two passages : MAURICE-1857-2,356.364

each speaks of the man as putting away his wife ; MAURICE-1857-2,356.365

neither deals with outward law , or with the permissions which it ought
or ought not to grant ; MAURICE-1857-2,356.366

that subject is not handled , not even hinted at .
MAURICE-1857-2,356.367

The passage in St. Luke , even more obviously than that in St. Matthew
, refers to the existing practice of the Jews , and to the notions of
the Pharisees . MAURICE-1857-2,356.368

The next clause of our text illustrates , even more strikingly , the
personal character of the command . MAURICE-1857-2,356.369

<P_357>

The man is treated as the guardian of his wife's life and purity .
MAURICE-1857-2,357.371

He must not put away his wife , lest he should cause her to commit
adultery . MAURICE-1857-2,357.372

This clause explains , I think , and vindicates the preceding one .
MAURICE-1857-2,357.373

If she has already been guilty of the sin , it may be right ,
MAURICE-1857-2,357.374

it may be a stern duty , not of course a privilege , to treat the bond
as broken ; MAURICE-1857-2,357.375

it may be right , for her sake as much as for his own , to seek a
separation . MAURICE-1857-2,357.376

Such a doctrine <paren> it has been observed , most truly as I think ,
by a clergyman who has treated this subject <$$paren> vindicates the
sanctity of marriage far more than the one to which it is opposed .
MAURICE-1857-2,357.377

The final clause , " Whosoever marrieth her that is put away committeth
adultery , " is a direct corollary from the former .
MAURICE-1857-2,357.378

If her putting away , does not in the sight of God separate her from her
first husband , even though it be authorized by the earthly legislator ,
she is not in the sight of God married to another , even though that
marriage be sanctioned by earthly law . MAURICE-1857-2,357.379

Here again Christ is speaking directly to the conscience .
MAURICE-1857-2,357.380

A lax outward rule will not acquit it of its responsibilities ;
MAURICE-1857-2,357.381

a stringent outward rule might not in the least assist it in
ascertaining the limits of its responsibilities .
MAURICE-1857-2,357.382

One solemnly divorced , in our sense of the word , is declared to be not
merely put away by her husband , but to be no longer his wife in the
sight of God . MAURICE-1857-2,357.383

The cases are not parallel ; MAURICE-1857-2,357.384

still less can the Mosaic Law , pronounce what a future legislator ought
or <P_358> ought not to permit to men's hardness of heart .
MAURICE-1857-2,358.385

But whatever the law be , the man stands at Christ's tribunal ,
MAURICE-1857-2,358.386

and must ask Him to search his heart , and tell him what he should do or
should not do . MAURICE-1857-2,358.387

If we suppose Our Lord , in this text or any other , to have set aside
the Mosaic code , and to have substituted a new code for Christendom ,
we empty the words of all their life , of all the power they have
exercised over mankind . MAURICE-1857-2,358.388

For these words - these few simple words - <font> have <$$font>
exercised a mighty power over mankind , just because they are <font> not
<$$font> corrective of an outward policy , but belong to that internal
regeneration which the Son of Man came to effect for the world .
MAURICE-1857-2,358.389

As long as the man is debating with himself what chance he has of
escaping from the marriage bond into which he has entered , so long it
is impossible that he can regard it with any real reverence ;
MAURICE-1857-2,358.390

it is not in any true sense a <font> relation , <$$font>
MAURICE-1857-2,358.391

it is merely a contract secured by certain penalties .
MAURICE-1857-2,358.392

If there has been any more elevated idea of wedlock in Christendom - in
England - than this , <paren> and if there had not been , there would
not have been a Christendom or an England at all ; each would have had
the semblance but not the substance of a social life , <$$paren> it has
been because Christ took marriage out of the narrow sphere of general
legislation , restored its elder sanctity , invested it with a deeper
sanctity by revealing His Own relation with humanity , which sustain it
, and which it sets <P_359> forth . MAURICE-1857-2,359.393

The Gospel of Marriage has done what laws respecting marriage never have
done , never can do . MAURICE-1857-2,359.394

And so He has given the modern legislator a help in compassing his own
truest ends , which the elder legislator did not possess .
MAURICE-1857-2,359.395

Moses was not merely obliged - obliged by duty and conscience - to
tolerate divorces , MAURICE-1857-2,359.396

he was also obliged to tolerate polygamy . MAURICE-1857-2,359.397

He would have been stepping out of his place , MAURICE-1857-2,359.398

he would have forgotten that he was a servant in the house , if he had
made any endeavour to stop it , great as the temptation must often have
been . MAURICE-1857-2,359.399

He would have anticipated a stage in the world's education ;
MAURICE-1857-2,359.400

he would have tried to do that by laws , which , we have the clearest
demonstrations of experience , has never been effected by laws , - has
always been effected gradually , if not at once , wherever the Gospel of
Jesus Christ , the Son of God , and the Son of Man , the One Head of the
race , has been preached and accepted . MAURICE-1857-2,359.401

Explain the fact as you like , MAURICE-1857-2,359.402

that <font> is <$$font> the fact . MAURICE-1857-2,359.403

Laws and punishments have never been able to undermine that which we
feel to be so fatal to domestic peace , to the strength of a nation ;
MAURICE-1857-2,359.404

with this proclamation it never can long co-exist .
MAURICE-1857-2,359.405

Then the legislator is able to move in the wake of a moral power which
has gone before him ; MAURICE-1857-2,359.406

he can say , " This shall not be ; MAURICE-1857-2,359.407

this is a violation of a primary institute of Society , which I will
avenge ; " MAURICE-1857-2,359.408

then , and not till then , he will be listened to .
MAURICE-1857-2,359.409

And in the other case the difference is not less conspicuous .
MAURICE-1857-2,359.410

The modern <P_360> legislator can take from the man all license of
putting away his wife at his own pleasure . MAURICE-1857-2,360.411

He can guarantee her rights . MAURICE-1857-2,360.412

He can watch over her . MAURICE-1857-2,360.413

He can claim that she shall only be divorced <paren> not dismissed
<$$paren> after the solemnest proof that the contract has been violated
. MAURICE-1857-2,360.414

So mighty has been the change - produced wholly by an invisible moral
force - that we scarcely know how to give the old word its proper
signification . MAURICE-1857-2,360.415

We unawares mix with it thoughts of formality and legality , which would
have been alien from it in the conception of an old Jew or Roman ,
formalists and legalists though they both of them were .
MAURICE-1857-2,360.416

The history of Christendom , in every period of it , bears out the
conclusion which we should deduce from this one fact .
MAURICE-1857-2,360.417

Intelligent and impartial Protestant historians , who are not content
with referring all the power which the Popes exerted in the Middle Ages
to the superstition or wickedness of those ages , - who believe that no
such power could have existed in God's world if there had not been
something in the conscience of mankind which upheld it , - have asked
themselves , or rather have asked the records of the past to tell them ,
what it was in this power which could exalt itself above the decrees of
States and the force of armies ? MAURICE-1857-2,360.418

And they have been compelled to answer : " Those who were called Fathers
of the Church did set forth an image , if it were ever so distorted an
image , of a Fatherly Government to men . MAURICE-1857-2,360.419

They did address themselves to that sense <P_361> of the dignity , the
awfulness of relationships which there is in the minds of men .
MAURICE-1857-2,361.420

They did vindicate these are more ancient and divine , more connected
with God and His dominion , than all the statutes of special kingdoms .
MAURICE-1857-2,361.421

And so , whenever they interfered to check the pride and license of
monarchs , especially in reference to their marriages and the
dissolution of them , there was that in the heart of Europe which
defended and sustained the assumption , - which confessed it as the
discovery of a higher tribunal , to redress crimes which lay beyond the
control of ordinary judges , - as a voice proclaiming that the deeds
done in darkness should be brought into the light of the sun . "
MAURICE-1857-2,361.422

Here was the <font> power of these rulers . MAURICE-1857-2,361.423

Where was their <font> weakness ? <$$font> MAURICE-1857-2,361.424

How was it that they convinced men that this power must be lodged
somewhere else than with them , that they could not wield it except to
the injury of that very cause which had made it tolerable , which had
made it venerable ? MAURICE-1857-2,361.425

