<BEGIN_maxwell-1747-1>

<P_9>

<heading>

The Practical Bee-Master , <font> &c. <$$font> MAXWELL-1747-1,9.4

<$$heading>

Husbandry consists of many Parts , MAXWELL-1747-1,9.6

the more profitable the more they are conjoined , the more they are made
to assist one another : MAXWELL-1747-1,9.7

All of them require Knowledge and Care in the Management , but some of
them more Labour and Expence than others , and some less ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,9.8

of the last Sort is the Husbandry of Bees : MAXWELL-1747-1,9.9

None of them can be so generally , and on so small a Stock , so
profitably followed as this . MAXWELL-1747-1,9.10

For , 2. Every Man or Woman , who has only a House and a Yeard , and
Money to buy one single Hive , who knows how to manage these laborious
and profitable Creatures , and who will adhibite due Care , may , after
a few Years , raise a considerable Sum yearly out of this very Article
alone ; MAXWELL-1747-1,9.11

and may , nevertheless , carry on other Business , without any
considerable Interruption by the Bee Husbandry . MAXWELL-1747-1,9.12

3. The History and Husbandry of Bees is one of the most curious and
entertaining Subjects , MAXWELL-1747-1,9.13

and has employed the Pens of the ablest Writers in different Kingdoms
and in different Ages ; MAXWELL-1747-1,9.14

but had these Writers omitted many unnecessary Speculations , and only ,
less intent on Theory , offered more and better practical Rules for the
Management of these highly beneficial Creatures in all probable
Occurrences , it can@ @not be doubted , but that <P_10> the
Bee-Husbandry would have been more general , and more profitable to
those who practise it ; That Honey the <font> Sugar of the Ancients
<$$font> would , ere now , have supplied many of our Uses of Sugar ;
Mead , or <font> British <$$font> Canary , of <font> French <$$font> and
<font> Spanish <$$font> Wines ; and that we might have had sufficient
Quantities of Wax , not only for Home-consumpt , but likewise for Export
: MAXWELL-1747-1,10.15

To prevent these Inconveniencies on the one Hand , and to obtain those
Advantages on the other , is the Design of publishing this Treatise .
MAXWELL-1747-1,10.16

4. Bees are of three distinct Species or Kinds . The <font>
Sovereign-Bee <$$font> , the <font> Working-Bees <$$font> , and <font>
Drones : <$$font> MAXWELL-1747-1,10.17

Of <font> Sovereigns <$$font> there is only one permitted to remain in
every Hive , except young ones , until Swarming , for Sovereigns to
other Hives ; MAXWELL-1747-1,10.18

on this Sovereign the Good of the whole Family or Society depends ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,10.19

for , if removed , or killed , the whole Hive goes to Ruin :
MAXWELL-1747-1,10.20

Tho' 't@ @is a Matter of small , if any Consequence , whether this
Sovereign is Male or Female , <font> King <$$font> , or <font> Queen
<$$font> , yet as possibly it may divert my Reader , I shall give my
Sentiments about it , and my Reasons . MAXWELL-1747-1,10.21

5. Dr. Warder pretends to have dissected <font> Bees <$$font> , and ,
by the Help of his Glasses , to have discovered their Organs of
Generation , whereby he says , he found the Sovereign Bee to be a Female
, all the <font> Working-Bees <$$font> to be her Female Subjects , and
the <font> Drones <$$font> to be the Male Bees ; MAXWELL-1747-1,10.22

and hence it is , that , according to his Notion , the Sovereign being a
Female , and all the <font> Working-Bees <$$font> her Female Subjects ,
carrying Arms for the Defence of their <font> Queen <$$font> , and her
Government , he calls it the <font> Amazonian <$$font> Government ; the
<font> Drones <$$font> , called by him the Males , having no Sting .
MAXWELL-1747-1,10.23

6. The Doctor found a Conveniency in maintaining that this Sovereign
was a Female : MAXWELL-1747-1,10.24

He dedicated his Book to the Queen , MAXWELL-1747-1,10.25

and told Her , <font> The Queen-Bee governs with Clemency and Sweetness
, MAXWELL-1747-1,10.26

so doth your Majesty , MAXWELL-1747-1,10.27

she is obeyed and defended , out of Choice and Inclination by her
Subjects , MAXWELL-1747-1,10.28

so is your Majesty , MAXWELL-1747-1,10.29

for all the thousands of your <$$font> Brittannick Israel <font> Esteem
your Majesty's Person as <P_11> sacred , MAXWELL-1747-1,11.30

and scarce such a Villain is among us , who would not lose his Life in
Defence of your Majesty : <$$font> MAXWELL-1747-1,11.31

You see , he has made a proper Use of his <font> Queen-Bee <$$font> ,
and taken her Assistance to make out these fine Compliments .
MAXWELL-1747-1,11.32

7. The greatest Part of the Writers on this Subject , having been of
the Opinion , That the Sovereign was a Male , and that it is by Virtue
of this King , that the Working-Bees , who are Females , are impregnate
; the Doctor makes merry , MAXWELL-1747-1,11.33

and says , <font> 'T@ @is too mean an Office for him to be the common
Bull of the Herd . <$$font> MAXWELL-1747-1,11.34

8. I wo@ @n't positively contradict what the Doctor pretends to have
seen , since I have not dissected these Animals , as he has done ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,11.35

yet I can@ @not help being of the Opinion , That , as I have said , was
generally received before the Doctor wrote , until I see with my own
Eyes , Cause for altering my Sentiments , or find the Reasons I offer ,
against what he says , satisfyingly answered : MAXWELL-1747-1,11.36

They are , 9. <font> 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
Government by a King seems to be the most natural Kind of it .
MAXWELL-1747-1,11.37

10. <font> 2d {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font> This Bee
by Bulk and Strength seems to be a Male , MAXWELL-1747-1,11.38

for every Body who has seen him engaged in Battle against stranger Bees
, will have observed him kill a great many of them .
MAXWELL-1747-1,11.39

11. <font> 3d {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font> What the
<font> Doctor <$$font> ridicules , seems to have more Weight than he is
aware of , MAXWELL-1747-1,11.40

and perhaps is the principal Cause why they bear so true Allegiance to
him , and hazard their Lives so freely in his Defence ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,11.41

for , in my Opinion , 't@ @is natural to think , that the Instinct those
Creatures are endowed with , of being solicitous to preserve their
Sovereign , more probably proceeds from his being the common Father ,
than because he is the common Defender of the Society .
MAXWELL-1747-1,11.42

12. I suppose none will deny , but natural Children are more engaged in
Affection to their Parents , than Political Children are to theirs ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,11.43

and it is , perhaps , because this Sovereign is both Natural and
Political Father , that their Love to him is so great .
MAXWELL-1747-1,11.44

13. If it be objected , that it is not easily to be imagined , <P_12>
how this Sovereign can be a Natural Father to so many . I answer , That
any Body who has thought of the Propagation of Insects , will not think
this strange : MAXWELL-1747-1,12.45

For Example , Let us but consider the Silk-Worms , MAXWELL-1747-1,12.46

after they have taken on the Form of Butterflies , what a Multitude of
Eggs will be laid in one Day by one Female , all impregnate by one Male
; MAXWELL-1747-1,12.47

But , 14. . <font> 4th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font>
The <font> Doctor <$$font> by supposing the Drones to be Male , brings
himself under this Inconveniency , of asserting that the Females are all
impregnate , seven or eight Months before they lay their Eggs ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,12.48

for I believe , all know that the Drones do not survive the Month of
<font> August <$$font> or <font> September . <$$font>
MAXWELL-1747-1,12.49

15. <font> 5th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font> The
<font> Doctor <$$font> says , when giving his Judgment about killing the
Drones , That this is not to be done , till the Working-Bees begin to do
it themselves , MAXWELL-1747-1,12.50

and alledges , That you may as well kill all the Rams of your Flock ,
and look for Lambs from your Ewes , as you can expect that Hive of Bees
to thrive next Summer , the Drones whereof you have killed this ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,12.51

but , I beg the <font> Doctor <$$font> 's Leave to tell my Readers ,
That a curious and ingenuous Bee-Master informs me , that , for a Trial
of this , he has begun early in the Month of <font> June <$$font> to
kill the Drones of an Hive , and has continued so to do , from Day to
Day , until he could find no more to kill ; and that he was very
positive , that few , if any , escaped his Knife , and that yet , that
Hive was as forward and Thriving next Spring as any other , whence it
may be concluded , that another Father , than the Drones , must be found
out , for the next Year's Brood . MAXWELL-1747-1,12.52

16. <font> 6th {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font> The last
Argument , which I advance to prove this Sovereign to be a Male , is ,
That when an Hive loses this Bee , they never increase any more , but
daily diminish till they dwindle to nothing . MAXWELL-1747-1,12.53

I know it will be objected , that this does not prove the Alledgeance ,
because , according to Dr. Warder , an Hive or Swarm of Bees , do
nothing at all after they lose , or are robbed of their Sovereign . 17.
To which I answer , That the <font> Doctor <$$font> is there <P_13>
speaking of a new Hive , about which he has made very considerable
Discoveries , as shall be taken Notice of afterwards ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,13.54

but an old Hive and a young one differ : MAXWELL-1747-1,13.55

Whatever Disorder or Discontent an old Hive may shew , yet they do not
take it so much to Heart as a new Swarm does , MAXWELL-1747-1,13.56

but will continue as long as they live , to carry in Honey to their
Hives , tho' they never work upon their Thighs , knowing it is fruitless
to make any Attempt for Propagation , when the common Parent is gone .
MAXWELL-1747-1,13.57

18. Thus I have known them all to {TEXT:missing_"to"} gradually die
away , and yet leave a considerable Deal of Honey , which accounts for
Bees their forsaking their Hives , without being any Way disobliged , so
far as can be understood , and yet leaving Plenty of Provision behind
them , which frequently happens , MAXWELL-1747-1,13.58

so I must be allowed to call their Sovereign a King , until these
Objections are answered . MAXWELL-1747-1,13.59

19. But , if it be enquired what is the Use of these Drones , and how
are they propagated ? I answer , That , their Use seems to remain still
a Secret , MAXWELL-1747-1,13.60

but I make no Question that they have Male and Female among themselves :
MAXWELL-1747-1,13.61

Nature has , no doubt , made them for some Use , MAXWELL-1747-1,13.62

and yet I could never find any Man who could satisfy me what it was :
MAXWELL-1747-1,13.63

Some alledge that they assist in hatching the young ones ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,13.64

for being bulky , and sometimes very numerous , their Warmth does not a
little contribute to the cherishing of the Brood ; MAXWELL-1747-1,13.65

but how answer they this Objection , <font> viz. {TEXT:viz} <$$font> ,
What Way is the Hatching of the Young performed in <font> April <$$font>
, when the Weather is cold , many of the Bees dead in Winter , and not a
Drone to be seen in the whole Hive ? MAXWELL-1747-1,13.66

20. I thought to have left this Argument , in my Opinion more amusing
than useful , with this further Observation on Dr. Warder's Opinion ,
that even he himself , speaking of the Drone , is obliged to confess ,
That it is only most probable , that he is of the Male Kind , and that
his being subject to the other Bees , is an Argument against him :
MAXWELL-1747-1,13.67

Now , if the Drone is not the Male-Bee , then there is none , according
to his Doctrine ; MAXWELL-1747-1,13.68

but the natural History of Bees , as translated from the <font> French
<$$font> , <P_14> and the Female Monarchy by the Rev. Mr. <font>
Thorley <$$font> , both published in the Year 1744 , falling into my
Hands ; these I can@ @not pass over without Remarks on what they say ,
concerning the Sex of Bees . MAXWELL-1747-1,14.69

21. In the Natural History mentioned , a Dialogue betwixt <font>
Eugenio <$$font> and <font> Clarissa ; Eugenio <$$font> , says , he
opened the Sovereign Bee anatomically , and assisted <font> Clarissa
<$$font> by his Glass , to see that she , the Sovereign Bee , is the
fruitful Mother , that the Drones are the Males , and that the
Working-Bees are of no Sex : MAXWELL-1747-1,14.70

Dr. Warder says they are Females : MAXWELL-1747-1,14.71

What shall we believe ? MAXWELL-1747-1,14.72

22. The Clergyman gives us the Opinion of many Authors , as to the Sex
of Bees , and their Manner of Procreation , MAXWELL-1747-1,14.73

and makes such Observations on them severally , as he thinks may best
suit his Purpose ; MAXWELL-1747-1,14.74

thereafter , <font> From the Premisses <$$font> , says he , {TEXT:.}
<font> may we not justly draw this Conclusion , That the Drones are not
the Males , neither have they any Instrumentality or Agency in the
Generation of Bees ? <$$font> MAXWELL-1747-1,14.75

So far you may remember , I agree with him , with Respect to the
Production of the Working_Bees , tho' I doubt not but that , as I have
said , there are both Male and Female Drones , and that they breed by
Copulation with one another . MAXWELL-1747-1,14.76

23. <font> If this Point , says he , is yielded to , then <$$font> , he
says further , <font> I am most fully perswaded that they do not breed
by Copulation , the common Bees being neither Males nor Females , and
the Sovereign being Female , and the only Female . <$$font>
MAXWELL-1747-1,14.77

24. I desire you may remark what he comes to at last :
MAXWELL-1747-1,14.78

<font> After all that has been offered on this Head <$$font> , says he ,
<font> it seems to be a mute Point that will admit of a further Dispute
; MAXWELL-1747-1,14.79

as I can@ @not attain to a full Satisfaction therein myself , How can I
expect that my Arguments should administer the same to my Reader , whom
I must leave to his own Judgment and Choice ? <$$font>
MAXWELL-1747-1,14.80

25. Now , after such a Concession , What can we think he aimed at ?
MAXWELL-1747-1,14.81

Does the <font> Clergyman <$$font> doubt , that all living Creatures
were created Male and Female ? MAXWELL-1747-1,14.82

Does he doubt , that the Males and Females of all living Creatures
<P_15> were preserved in the Ark ? MAXWELL-1747-1,15.83

If they were , I wish he had told us what has destroyed all the Male
Bees since ; MAXWELL-1747-1,15.84

but , strange ! Would he have us to believe , that a Female Bee can
carry on the Work of Generation , any other Way , than by the Assistance
and Co-operation of the Male . MAXWELL-1747-1,15.85

26. I shall next give you a more particular , tho' short , Description
of every particular Species of them , because this Treatise may fall
into Hands who have not , or want Money , to purchase Books , that
describe them . MAXWELL-1747-1,15.86

27. The King is considerably larger than the Working-Bee , but smaller
than the Drone ; MAXWELL-1747-1,15.87

He@ @'s broad-shouldered , MAXWELL-1747-1,15.88

his Legs are somewhat red , MAXWELL-1747-1,15.89

and his Train is long and taper , which makes his Wings look somewhat
short in Proportion to his Body ; MAXWELL-1747-1,15.90

His Sting is also shorter than that of the Working_Bees , tho' , as was
hinted before , he knows well how to use it when Occasion requires .
MAXWELL-1747-1,15.91

In Conclusion , he has so much Majesty about him , as plainly
distinguishes him , at first View , from the rest .
MAXWELL-1747-1,15.92

28. As to the Working_Bees , they being so well known , I need say
nothing about them ; MAXWELL-1747-1,15.93

the Drone is as large as two of them , but very clumsy ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,15.94

and has no Sting ; MAXWELL-1747-1,15.95

any Body may satisfy their Curiosity about the Drones , if in the
Summer-time they go to an Hive , betwixt Eleven o' Clock in the Forenoon
and Two in the Afternoon , MAXWELL-1747-1,15.96

then they will come abroad in great Numbers , and fly about , making a
buzzing Noise ; MAXWELL-1747-1,15.97

it is indeed very hard to get a View of the King , MAXWELL-1747-1,15.98

for there being but one in an Hive , and he coming seldom abroad , it is
difficult to nick the Opportunity of seeing him , tho' it is no Rarity
to get a Sight of him when dead ; MAXWELL-1747-1,15.99

for if any will take the Pains to turn over the dead Bees , of an Hive
that has been smoaked , they will scarce miss to find him ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,15.100

or when two new Hives are put together , by turning the Mouth of the one
upon the Mouth of the other , as shall be taught hereafter , you@ @'ll
very often find a dead King lying in the Bottom of the empty one ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,15.101

but he@ @'s then seen greatly to the Disadvantage , Death having <P_16>
disfigured him , MAXWELL-1747-1,16.102

yet his Corpse {TEXT:Corps} may be easily distinguish'd .
MAXWELL-1747-1,16.103

29. Having so far satisfied my Reader's {TEXT:Readers} Curiosity , I
shall now proceed to instruct , how to manage every Step of this
Husbandry , so as the newest Beginner may find both Profit and Pleasure
, in the Study of these wonderful Animals , and reap the Benefit of
every Year's Labour : MAXWELL-1747-1,16.104

This is what I chiefly intended , tho' it will afterwards fall in my Way
, to treat more fully of the curious and speculative Part .
MAXWELL-1747-1,16.105

But , as I think , others have made the Theory their principal Study , I
resolve to be the more practical ; MAXWELL-1747-1,16.106

and , that I may avoid the common Error , as much as possible , I shall
relate many Circumstances , neglected by others , tho' absolutely
necessary to be considered , MAXWELL-1747-1,16.107

and shall give particular Directions concerning them .
MAXWELL-1747-1,16.108

30. He who intends to be a Bee-Master , should buy a Top Swarm in the
End of <font> August <$$font> , or Beginning of <font> September
<$$font> , when they have given over Working : MAXWELL-1747-1,16.109

Here you must take Care to avoid the general Mistake , which is , That
the Hive , which is neither too light nor too heavy , is fitted for
keeping . MAXWELL-1747-1,16.110

These who are of this Opinion , maintain , that the Hive that has too
much Honey over Year , is indifferent and lazy in the Spring , and does
not set out to work briskly ; MAXWELL-1747-1,16.111

and one , say they , that is too light , will , unless supplied , perish
in Winter for Want of Food . MAXWELL-1747-1,16.112

31. This Assertion concerning the light Hive is certainly true ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,16.113

but the other is not so , MAXWELL-1747-1,16.114

for the more Honey an Hive has , if there are Bees in Proportion in it ,
the more brisk and forward will they be in the Spring , tho' one that
was but of a moderate Weight may , in some Seasons , do as well as one
that was heavier ; MAXWELL-1747-1,16.115

yet that rarely falls out ; MAXWELL-1747-1,16.116

it much oftener happens , that the heaviest of all will be pincht , and
that those that were thought heavy enough , must be fed , or die .
MAXWELL-1747-1,16.117

32. The Reason why a lighter Hive does sometimes as well as a heavier
one , is , if the Spring is good and early , and a continued Tract of
good Weather follows , <P_17> then the Hive , that had only a short
Allowance , does not come to know what Famine is ; MAXWELL-1747-1,17.118

but a greater Paradox than this is , the Lightest sometimes outstrips
the Heavier , and comes to good Account , when the other dies for want
of Food ; MAXWELL-1747-1,17.119

but this falls out rarely . MAXWELL-1747-1,17.120

33. The Case in which it happens , is ; when the Weather begins to be
tolerably good , in the End of <font> March <$$font> and Beginning of
<font> April <$$font> , then the strong lively Hives set out to work ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,17.121

and immediately begin to hatch a new Brood , which , toward the End of
<font> April <$$font> , come to require a great Deal of Food , so the
Remains of the Winter Provision must go for their Maintainance ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,17.122

and then if the Weather is so bad in <font> May <$$font> , that the Bees
can@ @not go abroad for a Recruit , their Provision falls short , their
Family being so numerous , MAXWELL-1747-1,17.123

so unless they be taken Notice of , and fed , they must die , while the
Weaker and less forward Hives are living moderately , with a small
Family upon their Winter Stock ; MAXWELL-1747-1,17.124

but , as I said before , this rarely happens , MAXWELL-1747-1,17.125

so it ought not to be established into a Rule , MAXWELL-1747-1,17.126

and therefore from what is said , I think , 't@ @is plain , that the
heaviest Hive is the fittest for keeping , tho' Dr. Warder be of
another Opinion . MAXWELL-1747-1,17.127

34. That you may know , when an Hive is heavy enough for keeping , or
whether the heaviest you can find be sufficient , take the following
Directions . MAXWELL-1747-1,17.128

35. A Top Swarm , in one of the ordinary Sort of the Bee-hives used in
this Country , which will hold about one Peck , three Lippies of Barley
, <font> Linlithgow <$$font> Measure , if it be hived , or cast , as we
call it , before the 10th of <font> June <$$font> , will probably be a
sufficient one for keeping , and weigh about Thirty , or Thirty_two
Pounds <font> Dutch <$$font> Weight ; MAXWELL-1747-1,17.129

It is perhaps the Shortness of the Winter in <font> England <$$font> ,
that makes Mr. Warder propose keeping of them , when they are only
Twenty_five Pounds : MAXWELL-1747-1,17.130

If the Hive you are to buy is in a Place of the Country , where Hives ,
larger than the common Sort , are used , you should take Care that it be
so much heavier in Proportion . MAXWELL-1747-1,17.131

36. I have tried the Weight of some Hives , MAXWELL-1747-1,17.132

and I have found them to be Sixty_four Pounds a-piece , and <P_18>
upwards ; MAXWELL-1747-1,18.133

in each of which I conclude there was near Ten Pints of Honey , <font>
Scots <$$font> Measure , allowing Five Pounds for each Pint , and about
Fourteen or Fifteen Pounds for the Weight of the Hive , and Wax , with
the Refuse ; MAXWELL-1747-1,18.134

and so I reckon an Hive of the ordinary Size , I mentioned , weighing
Thirty_two Pounds , will have upwards of Four Pints of Honey in it ,
which will seldom fail to keep over Year , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.135

and one weighing less , runs a Hazard . MAXWELL-1747-1,18.136

37. The Way of weighing them , is this , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.137

Take a thin Deal-board , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.138

and in the Evening lift your Hive , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.139

set it on the Board , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.140

put small Earth all round the Hive , to keep the Bees from coming out ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,18.141

stop the Entry with Grass or Fogg , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.142

carry it gently on a Hand-barrow , or any other Way to the Place for
weighing it , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.143

put the Deal-board along with it into the Scales , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.144

so weigh it ; MAXWELL-1747-1,18.145

and when you have carried it back again , you may weigh the Board
separately , to know how much you are to discount for the Weight of it .
MAXWELL-1747-1,18.146

38. When you have purchased an Hive , according to these Directions ,
remove it about the Beginning of <font> September <$$font> , or sooner ,
if the Bees have given over working , and before the Weather grows cold
MAXWELL-1747-1,18.147

for when they are taken to a strange Place , they go abroad ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,18.148

and fly about to be acquainted with it . MAXWELL-1747-1,18.149

If the Weather is bad , while they are thus employed , many of them die
. MAXWELL-1747-1,18.150

Here , by the Way , I advise you to disturb them as little as possible ,
during the Winter , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.151

for it does them much Mischief , if they are then disquieted ,
especially if they are provoked to crawl abroad , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.152

for they are not able to get in again , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.153

but perish with Cold , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.154

or , tho' able to return , are seized with Sickness and Diseases ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,18.155

and gradually pine away . MAXWELL-1747-1,18.156

39. When the Day begins to lengthen , and the Influence of the Sun is
reviving them out of their half-dead Condition , a little Disturbance ,
to move them to take the Air , is not improper , if the Weather
continues warm and kind : MAXWELL-1747-1,18.157

But even this is dangerous , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.158

for if bad Weather returns , many of them die , being unable to get back
, if the Change be sudden , MAXWELL-1747-1,18.159

and many of the <P_19> Strongest which escape immediate Death , take a
Looseness , of which they seldom recover . MAXWELL-1747-1,19.160

40. This is best observed if there comes a Fall of Snow ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.161

and it frequently comes after the Season is well advanced ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.162

then you will see them lying dead , and their Excrements , in brown
Spots , along the Surface of the Snow . MAXWELL-1747-1,19.163

41. Here , for the following Reason , it is proper to take Notice ,
likewise , that they ought not to be suffered to come abroad in Time of
Snow , tho' the shining Sun may invite and tempt them .
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.164

The Sun dazzles {TEXT:dazles} their Eyes , MAXWELL-1747-1,19.165

amazes and confounds them , so they fall into it , and die presently .
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.166

The Way to prevent them is herein taught elsewhere .
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.167

42. If the Distance is small , you may transport your Hive on a
Hand-barrow , as before directed ; MAXWELL-1747-1,19.168

if it is great a safe Way is to lay a Cloth over the Mouth of it , every
where so close {TEXT:closs} that none of them get out ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.169

then you may dispose of it as you please ; on a Horse's Neck before a
Man , a Pole betwixt two Men , or any Way your Discretion shall direct ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.170

if you neglect to purchase and transport in <font> September , April
<$$font> is the next best Time ; MAXWELL-1747-1,19.171

but if the Seller hath run the Hazard of the Winter , the Price will be
the higher : MAXWELL-1747-1,19.172

You@ @'ll find Directions for buying in this last Month , when the
Management of Bees , at that Time of the Year , is considered .
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.173

43. Now , I come to direct your Conduct thro' Winter :
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.174

To preserve your Hive from Cold , Storms of Wind and Rain , and from
Mice , which are great Enemies to Bees , are essential Matters .
MAXWELL-1747-1,19.175

Because there are different Methods practiced , as the different
Circumstances of Bee-Masters allow , I shall mention the several Ways
which I have observed . MAXWELL-1747-1,19.176

If Bees were only to be defended from stormy Weather and Cold , or if
they were only to be preserved from Mice , the Matter would be much
easier ; MAXWELL-1747-1,19.177

but when both the Weather and these Vermin conspire against them , the
Task is the more difficult . MAXWELL-1747-1,19.178

44. Such as are not Proprietors of Land , or have not Leaves for
several Years to run , and therefore can@ @not <P_20> reasonably put
themselves to the Charge of Bee-houses commonly thatch over their Hives
with Straw , which when the Work is done neatly , and the Straw laid on
thick , makes a good Defence against bad Weather ; MAXWELL-1747-1,20.179

but Mice are very apt to nestle in the Straw , to cut out a Way to
themselves . to destroy the Bees , and to consume the Honey . To
prevent which , lay the whole Hive over , in <font> September <$$font> ,
with Plaister-lime , and when it is fully dry , cover it with the Straw
: MAXWELL-1747-1,20.180

this answers both the Intentions aforementioned ; MAXWELL-1747-1,20.181

but still this Inconveniency remains , that the Strength or Weakness of
such Hives , can@ @not be right judged of by poising them in one's Hands
, MAXWELL-1747-1,20.182

and this Way , in a great Measure , frustrates the buying of Hives by
Weight . MAXWELL-1747-1,20.183

45. Another Way of preferring Bees thro' the Winter , is by making
Covers of Deal-boards for every particular Hive , and liming them all
around , close {TEXT:closs} to the Stone or Board whereon the Hive
stands , only preserving an Entry for them . MAXWELL-1747-1,20.184

These Covers make noble Defences against Mice ; MAXWELL-1747-1,20.185

but the Sun soon makes them rent , tho Rain gets in .
MAXWELL-1747-1,20.186

and the Hive grows rotten and mouldy , which exceedingly disobliges the
Bees , MAXWELL-1747-1,20.187

46. To prevent this Inconveniency , some make Covers like Barrels ,
with Iron-hoops around them : MAXWELL-1747-1,20.188

These Covers cling , as we say , with the Summer's Drought ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,20.189

then they drive the Hoops strait , which makes them tight again ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,20.190

but neither will this do so well as could be wished ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,20.191

for the Winter-rains swell them , MAXWELL-1747-1,20.192

and make such a Pressure , as causes the weakest Staves or Boards , of
which they are made , to start out of their Places ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,20.193

and so the Rain gets in . MAXWELL-1747-1,20.194

47. A Way , so far as I know , never tried , might be taken by
Gentlemen for ornamenting their Parterres , or Flower Gardens ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,20.195

't@ @is to make leaden Covers for their Hives ; MAXWELL-1747-1,20.196

these they cause cast in different Shapes and Figures ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,20.197

and set them on Pedestals ; MAXWELL-1747-1,20.198

I know not , how this Proposal will take , MAXWELL-1747-1,20.199

but it would please me exceedingly to know , that each of these
Ornamental Figures , had a family of these highly profitable and
wonderful <P_21> living Creatures in it ; MAXWELL-1747-1,21.200

besides , you see it fully removes the Objections , the first two ways
are liable to . MAXWELL-1747-1,21.201

48. Other Sorts of Covers are used , MAXWELL-1747-1,21.202

but , as I have seen none , that are better than these mentioned ; I
pass forward to give some few Directions to such as use , or incline to
use any of these described . MAXWELL-1747-1,21.203

49. Let such as choose {TEXT:choise} Straw , be sure to put it on thick
, and cause it to rise pretty high in Form of a Piramid ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,21.204

for , if it lies flat , it will not so well defend the Rain ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,21.205

it should be wrapt with a small Cord , and tied down to the Stone or
Board , whereon the Hive stands , that it may not be blown away with the
Wind , or rub'd off by any Accident . MAXWELL-1747-1,21.206

50. From Time to Time you should take a narrow Inspection , if Mice
begin to lodge in it ; MAXWELL-1747-1,21.207

to this Purpose you should be frequently pricking it up and down with
some small iron Instrument , to try if you can dislodge them ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,21.208

I have sometimes thought , that Tar boiled to such a Consistence , that
it would not penetrate too far into the Hive when rub'd with it , might
prove an Antidote ; MAXWELL-1747-1,21.209

I resolve to try it , MAXWELL-1747-1,21.210

but , till I find it answer , I do@ @n't recommend it as a <font>
probatum . <$$font> MAXWELL-1747-1,21.211

51. Such as resolve to try the Covers , whether Leaden or Wooden ,
should cause them to be made so large , as they may allow the Hive to be
laid over with the Refuse of Flax , commonly called <font> Pob-tow
<$$font> , or some such dry Stuff , before the Covers be put on , when
special Care should be taken to lime the Entry neatly , that the Bees ,
going out and in , may find no Passage to lead them betwixt the Hive and
the Cover ; MAXWELL-1747-1,21.212

Covers with dry Stuff betwixt them and the Hives , preserve Bees well in
Winter , and the Beginning of the Spring from the Cold ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,21.213

whatever Cover you intend , put it on whenever the Bees give over Work ,
and while the Weather is dry ; MAXWELL-1747-1,21.214

for if you cover your Hive when wet or moist , Mouldiness will thereby
be occasioned ; which , as has been observed , is hurtful .
MAXWELL-1747-1,21.215

52. The two Scourges that prove most fatal to Bees , and sometimes
destroy more than the Half of our Hives <P_22> in one Year , are Cold
and Hunger . MAXWELL-1747-1,22.216

Whenever the Cold increases , they fall into a Lethargick State , in
which they take little , if any , Sustenance , MAXWELL-1747-1,22.217

and when it softens , they revive , MAXWELL-1747-1,22.218

and their craving for Food returns : MAXWELL-1747-1,22.219

Thus the softer the Air continues during Winter , the more Honey the
Bees consume MAXWELL-1747-1,22.220

and consequently they run the greater Hazard of spending their whole
Stock , before the Flower-season comes round again ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,22.221

so they are in Danger of being starved : MAXWELL-1747-1,22.222

On the other Hand , if they are not numerous enough in the Hive , or if
the Winter is inclement , they very probably may be killed by the Cold .
MAXWELL-1747-1,22.223

53. A certain Degree of Cold in Winter , is therefore favourable for
Bees ; MAXWELL-1747-1,22.224

that which only pinches or benumbs , secures them from the Danger of
starving ; MAXWELL-1747-1,22.225

that which does not pinch them , may occasion their being famish'd ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,22.226

and that which pinches and benumbs them too much , is mortal :
MAXWELL-1747-1,22.227

Hence it is , that Bees , during severe Winters , are exposed to perish
thro' Cold , and in soft Winters to be starved to Death ; both which we
should endeavour to prevent . MAXWELL-1747-1,22.228

54. When you cover your Hive , make the Entry to it so little , that a
Mouse may not get in ; MAXWELL-1747-1,22.229

if she does , she@ @'ll kill and eat all the Bees , one after another ,
and perhaps not meddle with the Honey , until they are all destroyed .
MAXWELL-1747-1,22.230

I have known People very much surprised , to find a Hive with Plenty of
Honey , and no Bees dead or alive in it ; from whence they concluded ,
that the Bees had taken some Disgust at their Habitation , and had gone
elsewhere , just as they thought in the Case of the Death of a King ,
aforementioned ; MAXWELL-1747-1,22.231

but if you look to the Board or Stone whereon the Hive stood , you@ @'ll
find it spread over with Wings , Legs , and other small Fragments of the
Bees , which the Mice had carried out to eat . MAXWELL-1747-1,22.232

55. The Way which I use to lessen the Entry is this ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,22.233

I take a Piece of Wood square , above four Inches long ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,22.234

and cut a Doorway in it , the Length of three or four Inches , and a
Quarter of an Inch or so in Breadth , that <P_23> the largest Bee may
easily pass it . MAXWELL-1747-1,23.235

I fix this , with a Needle and Pack-thread , in the Mouth of the Hive
made to receive it , MAXWELL-1747-1,23.236

and lessen , or thereafter enlarge it , by a Bit of Lime or Clay ,
according to the Season of the Year , and as I see Occasion for letting
out and in the Bees , and debarring the Mice , and other Enemies that go
into Hives . MAXWELL-1747-1,23.237

Others , for preventing any of them from reaching the Bees , direct the
fixing of little Plates of Tin round the Entry , which serve them for
Doors , in like Manner as at the Windows of Dove-houses , to prevent
Polecats from creeping into them . MAXWELL-1747-1,23.238

56. The House-lark , a little dun Bird with a black Bill , the Swallow
, Sparrow , Moth , Spiders {TEXT:Spidders} , Wasps , Hornets , Earwigs
or Ermits , Toads , Ants and Snails , are all of them Enemies to Bees ,
as well as Mice , MAXWELL-1747-1,23.239

take all the Ways you can to destroy them . MAXWELL-1747-1,23.240

But , 57. Upon this Occasion , I shall here relate a very curious Story
from <font> Spectacle de la Nature <$$font> , or , Nature displayed ,
being a Part of a Dialogue betwixt the <font> Count de Jonval <$$font>
and the <font> Chevalier du Breuil . <$$font> MAXWELL-1747-1,23.241

58. <font> Count . <$$font> " A few Days since a Snail took it into
his Head to steal into the Glass-hive in my Window .
MAXWELL-1747-1,23.242

There was no Entrance to pass thro' but the proper one ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,23.243

and at length in he went . MAXWELL-1747-1,23.244

The Porters received him very rudely at the Gate ; MAXWELL-1747-1,23.245

and the first Attacks they made upon him with their Stings , obliged him
to march with more Expedition : MAXWELL-1747-1,23.246

But the stupid Animal , instead of retreating , thought to save himself
by going forwards , MAXWELL-1747-1,23.247

and he advanced into the very Middle of the Hive ; upon which a whole
Troop of Bees fastend upon him at once , MAXWELL-1747-1,23.248

and he immediately expired under their Strokes . MAXWELL-1747-1,23.249

The Conquerors were then in no little Perplexity how to get rid of the
Carcass , MAXWELL-1747-1,23.250

and a Council was instantly held upon that Occasion . "
MAXWELL-1747-1,23.251

59. <font> Chev. <$$font> " And your Lordship , without doubt ,
understood all their Debates . " MAXWELL-1747-1,23.252

60. <font> Count . <$$font> " From first to last .
MAXWELL-1747-1,23.253

The most experienced Sages among them reasoned in this Manner :
MAXWELL-1747-1,23.254

To <P_24> drag the Carcass out by main Strength , is an Impossibility ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,24.255

the Mass is too unwieldy {TEXT:unweildy} , MAXWELL-1747-1,24.256

and , besides , the Body is fixed to the Floor of the Hive by its own
Glue ; MAXWELL-1747-1,24.257

and , to leave it where it lies , would be very inconvenient , because
it would prove an alluring Regale to the common Flies , and , at the
same Time , be liable to Corruption and Worms ; MAXWELL-1747-1,24.258

and these Worms , when they have devoured the Snail , will infallibly
ascend to the Combs , and attack the young Bees . MAXWELL-1747-1,24.259

The Damage was evident , MAXWELL-1747-1,24.260

and required an immediate Remedy , MAXWELL-1747-1,24.261

but you will hardly guess the Dexterity with which they accomplished it
. MAXWELL-1747-1,24.262

<font> Chevalier <$$font> , I would be glad to know your Sentiments on
this Affair . MAXWELL-1747-1,24.263

How were they to conduct themselves , on this Occasion ? "
MAXWELL-1747-1,24.264

61. <font> Chev. <$$font> " So quick upon me , my Lord ?
MAXWELL-1747-1,24.265

You are really very severe , to put the Question to me ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,24.266

for it will appear that the Bees had more Presence of Mind than myself .
MAXWELL-1747-1,24.267

But pray , How did they proceed ? " MAXWELL-1747-1,24.268

62. <font> Count . <$$font> " They incrusted the whole Snail with Glue
, MAXWELL-1747-1,24.269

and cemented it so close {TEXT:closs} , that all the external Air was
excluded ; MAXWELL-1747-1,24.270

and as no Insect could have Access to deposite her Eggs in the Carcass ,
so when this should be reduced to Corruption , no malignant Steams would
transpire through the Inclosure . " MAXWELL-1747-1,24.271

63. <font> Chev. <$$font> " Will your Lordship let me see the poor
Snail's Tomb ? " MAXWELL-1747-1,24.272

64. <font> Count . <$$font> " You shall have a Sight of it to-day ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,24.273

It wants nothing but an Epitaph . " MAXWELL-1747-1,24.274

65. For a general Direction where to set your Hives , or build your
Bee-house to be after-@ @mentioned , The Place freest from Wind ; and
most exposed to the Sun , is the best ; MAXWELL-1747-1,24.275

yet every Place where the Wind does not beat upon the Hives is not so ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,24.276

for they may be set in a Place so wall'd around , that the Wind can@
@not harm the Bees , while they are within these Walls ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,24.277

and yet , nevertheless , this may be a very improper Situation ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,24.278

for if they have no other Way to go abroad for their Food , but over the
Tops of high Walls , the Wind comes upon <P_25> them in a Surprize ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,25.279

beats them against the Stones , MAXWELL-1747-1,25.280

and kills Multitudes . MAXWELL-1747-1,25.281

65. {COM:sic_bis} Therefore a Place , by Nature or Art , so screened
from Winds , <paren> especially the Southwest , which is the frequentest
and strongest we have <$$paren> as they can fly , <paren> having the
Advantage of the Sun , under the Cover of a Wall , or Planting , or
hollow Glen , or the like <$$paren> to proper Places to feed in , is the
best Situation : MAXWELL-1747-1,25.282

They@ @'ll improve an Advantage of this Kind wonderfully , by flying
close to the Ground under these Covers : MAXWELL-1747-1,25.283

I would rather want a great Deal of the Sunshine for Bees , than that
they should be deprived of such a Shelter . MAXWELL-1747-1,25.284

This Direction is of great Use in high Situations .
MAXWELL-1747-1,25.285

66 If the Place have Water-springs , Rivulets , or Ponds by it , 't@ @is
so much the fitter ; MAXWELL-1747-1,25.286

if there is no Water , but at a great Distance , you must supply them in
the Drought of Summer , in a Plate or other convenient Vessel ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,25.287

and Numbers of them will repair to it for Drink ; no doubt , to make the
Honey and Wax they bring Home in their Bellies of such a Consistence ,
as they may manage it the more easily : MAXWELL-1747-1,25.288

You must be sure to throw some Straw or Grass upon the Top of the Water
, that they may pitch upon it , and drink , without being in Hazard of
drowning ; MAXWELL-1747-1,25.289

or an easier and surer Way may be , to sprinkle Water upon the Bushes ,
Flowers , or Herbs , near their Hives , MAXWELL-1747-1,25.290

and they will drink up the Drops greedily . MAXWELL-1747-1,25.291

67. If it be expected , that I should here direct what Plants should be
propagated near an Apiary for the Food of Bees ; all I shall at this
Time say upon this Head , is , the more of the flowering Kind that are
planted , and the more differing they are in their Times of flowering ,
the better , MAXWELL-1747-1,25.292

for the Bees will be so much the longer provided ; MAXWELL-1747-1,25.293

't@ @is better to have a Competency for all the Season , than to have a
Superfluity for only a Part of it ; MAXWELL-1747-1,25.294

I know no Flowers they refuse , except of Alder and Rue , according to
the natural Historian aforementioned ; MAXWELL-1747-1,25.295

and with him , I am apt to think , That Henbane , Milk-thistle , Hemlock
, and such like , whose Juice is known to be hurtful , <P_26> may very
possibly communicate their Malignity to the Honey extracted from them ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,26.296

for this Reason , I would make no Difficulty to grub up all such
pernicious Weeds in the Places adjacent to my Hives .
MAXWELL-1747-1,26.297

68. Now , I think , I have directed you how to bring your Hive safe to
the Month of <font> April <$$font> , the Time , when Bees commonly set
out in our Country to their Work , and when they begin to increase their
Family ; for which End they lay their Eggs in Cells , and go abroad to
fetch in that Stuff commonly called Bee-Bread , concerning which , its
Preparation and Use in feeding young Bees , from their first Formation ,
until they are able to provide for themselves , you shall be informed
before this Treatise is ended , in the Answers to Questions relative to
these Matters . MAXWELL-1747-1,26.298

69. When the Weather is inviting , and your Bees are flying out and in
, and when they are bringing in Plenty of this Stuff upon their Thighs ,
then you may conclude , all is well with them ; MAXWELL-1747-1,26.299

but , if you find them at Work , and yet not bringing in this Stuff ,
then you may suspect , that they have lost their King some Way or other
, and that , therefore , they will turn to no good Account .
MAXWELL-1747-1,26.300

70. You@ @'ll be more able to judge of this Matter , when you come to
have several Hives over Year , and of other Things to be treated of
concerning them , by comparing one Hive with another , or your own with
those of your Neighbours ; MAXWELL-1747-1,26.301

however , if your Hive have any Considerable Weight , and your own , or
your Neighbour's Bees are fallen to work , and yet , the Bees of the
Hive you suspect , bring in Nothing upon their Thighs , 't@ @is plain ,
they have lost their King , as I have said . MAXWELL-1747-1,26.302

71. The Reason why I speak of Weight , is , because when an Hive falls
short of Provision soon in the Year , and consequently grows light ,
they@ @'ll be going out , but bringing nothing in ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,26.303

so you see , that 't@ @is by the Weight , that you are to distinguish ,
whether it be Want of a King , or Want of Provision that ails them :
MAXWELL-1747-1,26.304

But of this more by_and_by . MAXWELL-1747-1,26.305

72. In the mean Time , it may be remarked , That an <P_27> Hive well
chosen and right managed , seldom wants Provision so soon ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,27.306

for 't@ @is commonly a Storm in <font> May <$$font> , that kills the
Bees for Want of it . MAXWELL-1747-1,27.307

73. About the Beginning of <font> April <$$font> , they only begin to
bring forward a new Family , which , against the Beginning of <font> May
<$$font> , comes to be very numerous ; MAXWELL-1747-1,27.308

then the Consumption within is far greater than the Supply from without
, the Flowers in our Country yielding little Honey so early ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,27.309

and thus it comes to pass , that the best of them all will run short of
Food , if a Storm of any Continuance happens at this Season , when a
weaker one with a small Family will suffer less , as I hinted before .
MAXWELL-1747-1,27.310

74. It being a nice Point to determine , when Bees want Provision , and
what is the properest Method to be observed in giving them Supply , I
shall treat of it the more fully , and beg to be excused , if I seem to
make Repetitions . MAXWELL-1747-1,27.311

75. Supposing then that a Storm comes in <font> May <$$font> , and
continues for some Time , you have Reason to be afraid your Bees suffer
Want , MAXWELL-1747-1,27.312

and should look to them daily , to see if you can discover any of the
following Signs of it . MAXWELL-1747-1,27.313

76. <font> 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font> You
should try the Weight of your Hive , MAXWELL-1747-1,27.314

if you find it light , you have good Reason to be afraid ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,27.315

for , at this Season , when they have a great Number of young , the Hive
will be of a considerable Weight , tho' their Provision be run ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,27.316

but when it falls short , before they begin to breed , the Hive will
feel in your Hands , as if there were little in it .
MAXWELL-1747-1,27.317

77. . <font> 2d {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font> If the
weighing of your Hive does not satisfy you , as truly , I would not have
you satisfied with it ; then you must lift up the Edge of it pretty high
, MAXWELL-1747-1,27.318

if you find the Bees make a Noise , and come down to see , what the
Matter is , 't@ @is a good Symptom , if otherwise , bad .
MAXWELL-1747-1,27.319

78. . <font> 3d {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font> If you
find any great Quantity of young Bees lying on the Board or Stone ,
either within or without the Entry , or on the Ground before the Hive ,
't@ @is a Sign they suffer Famine ; MAXWELL-1747-1,27.320

for , at this Time of the Year , whenever they are pinched for food ,
they throw out <P_28> great Numbers of young Bees especially Drones ,
some of them perfectly white , being not quite formed , others
grey_coloured , and to Appearance perfect , MAXWELL-1747-1,28.321

but , as they can@ @not shift for themselves , they crawl about until
they die . MAXWELL-1747-1,28.322

79. 4. If a good Day comes , and your Bees do not fall heartily to
Work , you may conclude their Store is gone , MAXWELL-1747-1,28.323

yea , tho' they be flying out and in , if they are not taking in Work
upon their Thighs , all is not well with them ; MAXWELL-1747-1,28.324

for as I hinted a little before , they are in this Case just as when a
Hive has not a King ; MAXWELL-1747-1,28.325

but , if you give them a hearty Meal , you@ @'ll see them , the very
next Day , fall chearfully to Work , and come home with loaden Thighs .
MAXWELL-1747-1,28.326

Thus you may plainly discover , whether it is want of Food , or want of
a King that ailed them . MAXWELL-1747-1,28.327

80. If you find by these Directions , That your Bees are in Hazard for
want of Food , you {TEXT:your} are immediately to supply them ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,28.328

but , before I proceed to give you Advice concerning this Matter , I
shall answer an Objection which naturally falls in here , <font> viz.
<$$font> What is the Necessity for letting their Provision be so far run
, as to endanger them , when a little Honey , their most natural Food ,
or even a little Sugar and Water , or sweet Wort , given at a Venture ,
would not only save their Lives , but also prevent the Trouble of
observing daily , whether they are in Want or not .
MAXWELL-1747-1,28.329

To this I answer , That they are not to be fed at all unless they are in
a famishing State ; MAXWELL-1747-1,28.330

the Reasons are : 81. <font> 1st {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} .
<$$font> 'T@ @is exceedingly troublesome to give them Food , in such a
Manner , as to prevent their falling out about it , especially if you
have more Hives than one ; MAXWELL-1747-1,28.331

for the neighbouring Bees are very ready to scent it out , which
frequently sets all the Hives in the Garden , and , perhaps , in the
Neighbourhood too afighting , which occasions much Mischief .
MAXWELL-1747-1,28.332

82. <font> 2d {COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} . <$$font> The giving
them Meat , at this Time of the Year , brings them all down from their
several Posts , MAXWELL-1747-1,28.333

and so by neglecting the Performance of their Duty to the <P_29> young ,
they receive a wrong Formation , MAXWELL-1747-1,29.334

and great Multitudes of diseased ones will be found crawling on the
Ground ; MAXWELL-1747-1,29.335

tho' you@ @'ll discern little , if any Blemish about them , yet they are
good for nothing . MAXWELL-1747-1,29.336

Now I humbly think , that these Reasons , with what you@ @'ll afterwards
hear concerning their Wars , may apologize for giving you the Trouble of
this Enquiry concerning their having or wanting food ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,29.337

I next proceed to direct how to feed them . MAXWELL-1747-1,29.338

83. Take a Pewter or Earthen Plate , larger than the Mouth of the Hive
, MAXWELL-1747-1,29.339

put Honey in it , brought to such a Consistence , by Water mixt with it
, as they may lodge it conveniently in their Cells , and that all the
candyed Bits may be broken and dissolved . MAXWELL-1747-1,29.340

Set the Hive on it , after laying over the Honey , a Sheet of strong
Paper pricked full of Holes , that the Bees may eat the Food , just
mentioned , without Hazard of drowning , or , its sticking to their Legs
, MAXWELL-1747-1,29.341

then close it all around , MAXWELL-1747-1,29.342

and shut the Entry with Grass or Fogg . MAXWELL-1747-1,29.343

84. Let this be done in the Evening , when they have given over working
; and , if possible , in a cloudy , misty Day , when the Bees come least
abroad : MAXWELL-1747-1,29.344

Remove the Plate next Morning , that their Neighbours may not find the
Smell of it . MAXWELL-1747-1,29.345

You are also , for the same Reason , to take Care that none of the Honey
be spilt upon the Ground , or about the Hive , MAXWELL-1747-1,29.346

if it is , 't@ @is ten-to-one , but they fight about it ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,29.347

so you see how foolish the ordinary Way of feeding , which exposes them
to so great Hazard , is . MAXWELL-1747-1,29.348

85. In case you have not a Plate of the Size aforementioned , cause to
{TEXT:missing_"to"} make a hollow Place in a thick Deal-board , so large
as to contain a Plate or Ashet with the Honey , MAXWELL-1747-1,29.349

and place it so in the Board , and the Board so under the Hive , that
the Brim of the Plate may not hurt the Combs ; MAXWELL-1747-1,29.350

then shut up the Hive , as before directed . MAXWELL-1747-1,29.351

This Deal-board should be as large as the Boards or thin Stones whereon
your Hives stand , MAXWELL-1747-1,29.352

and may be kept for feeding your Bees from Time to Time .
MAXWELL-1747-1,29.353

86. Another Way of feeding , and which I think best in the Spring ,
when a small Quantity of Food may probably be sufficient , is to turn up
the Hive , and to pour <P_30> the Honey prepared , as directed , but
somewhat thinner , here and there upon the Combs , so as it may run down
amongst the Bees ; which Method has this Advantage of the other , That
it does not bring them down from their several Stations ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,30.354

and tho' it seems to be a coarse Way of doing , it will answer the
Design very well . MAXWELL-1747-1,30.355

Possibly a young Beginner will think this an hazardous Undertaking ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,30.356

but there@ @'s no Fear , even tho' the Bees be lively .
MAXWELL-1747-1,30.357

87. As to the Quantity of Honey , you may take a Pound or so , which I
think is sufficient for one Time , tho' some direct a Pound and a Half ,
or two Pounds : MAXWELL-1747-1,30.358

You may intermit the Night following , MAXWELL-1747-1,30.359

or , if you think there is no great Danger , you may wait till you see
how the Weather turns out ; MAXWELL-1747-1,30.360

for if 't@ @is so far in <font> May <$$font> , that the wild Mustard
among the Corn is flowered , one good Day's Work upon it will afford
eight Days Provision ; MAXWELL-1747-1,30.361

but if the Scarcity happens before the wild Mustard , one of our
earliest flowering Plants of the wild Kind is blossomed , the Bees must
be taken Notice of the more carefully , MAXWELL-1747-1,30.362

and while you find Occasion for it , you must continue to feed them .
MAXWELL-1747-1,30.363

88. I shall next inform you , how to do with an Hive that hath lost its
King . MAXWELL-1747-1,30.364

I suppose you@ @'ll know by this Time , whether 't@ @is a King or
Provision that@ @'s wanted . MAXWELL-1747-1,30.365

If a King , you must let the Hive be doing , the best Way it can , till
your first Hive swarm ; MAXWELL-1747-1,30.366

then put the young King and his Company upon it , whom they@ @'ll
receive very chearfully , and these two united Hives will make a very
good one before the End of the Season . MAXWELL-1747-1,30.367

The Way of putting a young Swarm to any old Hive , you shall be taught
afterwards . MAXWELL-1747-1,30.368

In the mean Time , I proceed to speak of their Wars , and to direct you
how to put an End to them . MAXWELL-1747-1,30.369

89. Bees have a martial and unpeaceable Spirit , MAXWELL-1747-1,30.370

and strive to enrich themselves at the Expence and Ruin of their
Neighbours ; MAXWELL-1747-1,30.371

for when no Honey is to be had among the Flowers abroad , they will
venture their Lives , and rob for it ; MAXWELL-1747-1,30.372

then not an Hive within their Reach is <P_31> left unassaulted :
MAXWELL-1747-1,31.373

I shall first , before I propose Remedies , teach you how to know when
they are engaged in Battle . MAXWELL-1747-1,31.374

90. 1. You@ @'ll perceive Bees going out and in to the Hive , which is
receiving the Injury , early before other Bees are fallen to Work , and
at Even when other Bees have left Working ; MAXWELL-1747-1,31.375

they will also be doing so at the Hive that is committing the Robbery ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,31.376

for these Plunderers find this the best Time for their Purpose , because
they meet with the least Resistance . MAXWELL-1747-1,31.377

91. 2. You@ @'ll find them meet with Resistance ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,31.378

and the further the Day is advanced , they will be the more resisted ,
until the Evening come on : MAXWELL-1747-1,31.379

You will likewise observe these Robbers hovering in their Flight , about
the entry of the injured Hive , as Bees of a new Hive do for some Days
about their old Quarters , MAXWELL-1747-1,31.380

and then you may see some of the injured Bees running about the Entry ,
bending up their Wings , and catching at every Bee that lights upon the
Board . MAXWELL-1747-1,31.381

If they find , upon Examination , that it is a Friend , then 't@ @is
allowed to pass ; MAXWELL-1747-1,31.382

if an Enemy , 't@ @is immediately seized , MAXWELL-1747-1,31.383

and must either fight or be killed , or fly , if it can get off :
MAXWELL-1747-1,31.384

You may also perceive the injured Bees , now and then , haling out a
Robber , which they have apprehended within Doors , and likewise see
some of these Robbers coming out in such a Hurry of Escape , as will
often occasion them to tumble down head-long in the Flight :
MAXWELL-1747-1,31.385

While the Battle continues hot , you will perceive great Numbers of Bees
falling down slain on the Ground , before the Hive .
MAXWELL-1747-1,31.386

92. So soon as ever you find them engaged , endeavour to put an End to
the War in the very Beginning , MAXWELL-1747-1,31.387

for 't@ @is then done more easily than afterwards .
MAXWELL-1747-1,31.388

For this End , lessen the Entry to the Hive that is getting the Wrong ,
to such a Degree , that only two , or at most three Bees , can go out
and in at once ; for doing of which , straiten the Entry , as before
directed , for holding out Mice . MAXWELL-1747-1,31.389

93. If , upon the first Appearance of Robbery , you lessen this Entry
whenever their Work is over at <P_32> Night , and enlarge it the next
Day , when they begin to be throng at Work , that they be not impeded in
their Labour by so small a Passage ; by doing this , regularly , for
several Nights together , further Disorder will be prevented effectually
. MAXWELL-1747-1,32.390

94. The Reason is plain . MAXWELL-1747-1,32.391

The Nights are yet cold , MAXWELL-1747-1,32.392

't@ @is the weakest Hives , as I told you , that suffer this Calamity ,
the Bees therein being the least numerous ; MAXWELL-1747-1,32.393

and the Cold therefore affecting them most , they go up high among the
Combs , MAXWELL-1747-1,32.394

fit closs together , MAXWELL-1747-1,32.395

and preserve Heat , as if it were yet Winter . MAXWELL-1747-1,32.396

Thus the Door is left without a Guard , MAXWELL-1747-1,32.397

and thus they become a Prey to their Enemies . MAXWELL-1747-1,32.398

95. Now , as the straining of the Entry makes their Habitation warmer ,
cherishes them , and brings them down nearer to the Door , so they can
the better examine who comes in , MAXWELL-1747-1,32.399

and are in the better Condition to make Resistance ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,32.400

for now , that the Passage is so little , a single Bee , or two , can
make a more effectual Defence , than twenty or thirty could do before ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,32.401

and hence it is , that the Robbers , meeting with so strong Opposition ,
give over making further Attempts . MAXWELL-1747-1,32.402

96. But if there hath been a great Slaughter of the weaker Party ,
before you knew the War was commenced , perhaps this Remedy may prove
ineffectual . MAXWELL-1747-1,32.403

In that Case , you must either , for some Days , shut up the Hive that
is attacked altogether , that the Destroyers coming , from Day to Day ,
for Spoil , may be wearied by Disappointments , and give over their
Design , or carry away the Hive to some other Place , at least to a
Mile's Distance ; MAXWELL-1747-1,32.404

for , if 't@ @is set within Bounds known to the Robbers , they will
renew the Attack ; MAXWELL-1747-1,32.405

or , if you can do no better , take a desperate Cure for a desperate
Disease , MAXWELL-1747-1,32.406

and animate your distress'd Bees , as directed by Mr. <font> Thorley
<$$font> , to fight like Devils , by disturbing them with a Bunch of
Stinking Madder , <paren> I suppose any other stinking Plant will do
<$$paren> tied to the End of a little Stick , of a convenient Length ,
till they begin to shew their Resentment . Then you@ @'ll see them
seize the robbing <P_33> Bees , and tumble them down in great Wrath ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,33.407

so you may assuredly infer their Safety . MAXWELL-1747-1,33.408

They will best defend themselves . MAXWELL-1747-1,33.409

At the Time you are thus employed , it is needful to give you a Caution
to take Care of yourself . MAXWELL-1747-1,33.410

But should your Hives thus attacked have but a few Bees , and little
Honey , it is better to take them than to stand a Trial .
MAXWELL-1747-1,33.411

97. Thus I have led you on Step by Step , and thro' several
Difficulties , to the 20th of <font> May <$$font> ; when it may be
presumed , that the wild Mustard , and some other flowering Plants are
blossomed , and so that your Hive is past Hazard of Famine ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,33.412

next , that you may know when your Bees are ready to swarm , or call , I
advise you , now and then , to lift up the Edge of your Hive , and look
in ; MAXWELL-1747-1,33.413

if the Spring has been forward , you@ @'ll observe them , their Family
being increased , in considerable Numbers below the Combs , by the
Beginning of <font> May <$$font> , MAXWELL-1747-1,33.414

and if the Weather continues good , they will come more and more in View
, and make a buzzing Sound in the Night-time , which will still increase
till they cast . MAXWELL-1747-1,33.415

But , if a cold Storm comes , they will draw closs together , and out of
your View among the Combs . MAXWELL-1747-1,33.416

They will also desist from making a Noise . MAXWELL-1747-1,33.417

98. As they increase in Numbers , they begin to water ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,33.418

and you will find some Drops of insipid Liquid , upon the Board or Stone
before the Entry , which sometimes runs over upon the Ground .
MAXWELL-1747-1,33.419

This is , no doubt , the Exhalations occasioned by their Warmth , which
, being condensed by the external Air , falls in Drops {TEXT:Dops} , as
I have said ; MAXWELL-1747-1,33.420

but , when they grow very strong , this Water is not to be found .
MAXWELL-1747-1,33.421

99. The Reason is probably this , That when their Heat grows very great
, as you@ @'ll find it , if you hold your Face or Hand to the Door , it
forces these Exhalations a good Way off , before the external Air is so
cold as to condense them ; MAXWELL-1747-1,33.422

so instead of falling on the Board or Stone , as at first , they will
now fall upon the Ground , MAXWELL-1747-1,33.423

and are there imperceptible ; MAXWELL-1747-1,33.424

but the most certain Sign , which proclaims that Event to be the very
Day , is when <P_34> the Bees forbear flying into the Fields , tho' the
Season is inviting . MAXWELL-1747-1,34.425

100. Before I go on to advise you , about the swarming or casting of
your Bees , I shall here say a Word or two concerning the Entries and
Covers of Hives . MAXWELL-1747-1,34.426

This you possibly expected ere now . MAXWELL-1747-1,34.427

As to the Entry , it must be gradually enlarged , as the Bees grow
stronger at Work ; MAXWELL-1747-1,34.428

you can easily judge what is sufficient , MAXWELL-1747-1,34.429

and may manage accordingly with a Bit of Clay , by which , as aforesaid
, you may either enlarge or straiten the Entry , as you see Cause .
MAXWELL-1747-1,34.430

If a Storm comes , you must straiten it , to keep the Bees warm ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,34.431

and if Enemies attack , you are before directed to do it .
MAXWELL-1747-1,34.432

101. If you expect that I should advise you , to remove the Winter
Cover from off your Hive , that the Sun may have Access to play upon it
, you are much disappointed , MAXWELL-1747-1,34.433

for it is far better that you keep it on ; because , when the Hive grows
very throng {COM:sic} ; and yet not quite ready to cast , the intense
Heat of the Sun upon it , when uncovered , so stifles the Bees within it
, that they come out , and hang in great Clusters about the Hive , which
frequently puts them so out of their Measures , that a Hive , which , to
Appearance , was ready to cast , will lie {TEXT:ly} out this Way for
several Weeks . MAXWELL-1747-1,34.434

102. When this happens far in the Year , it makes the young Hive of
small Value , not having Time to do much in that Season ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,34.435

and sometimes , when bad Weather comes , it will put the Bees from
swarming , which is a great Loss . MAXWELL-1747-1,34.436

103. They are very unmanageable {TEXT:unmanagable} , when they take
this Conceit of lying out in Clusters , MAXWELL-1747-1,34.437

and I know nothing that prevents it so much , as keeping on the Winter
Cover all the Year round : MAXWELL-1747-1,34.438

an Excess of Cold , and an Excess of Heat , are both prejudicial ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,34.439

it serves to prevent the one in Winter , and the other in Summer .
MAXWELL-1747-1,34.440

104. When , by raising the Side of your Hive , you discover it to be
quite full of Bees , you should be on your Guard ; MAXWELL-1747-1,34.441

likewise , when you find the Water dried up , it denotes that they want
Room , as I said before , MAXWELL-1747-1,34.442

<P_35>

and when they come out and hang in Clusters , that is another Sign of it
; MAXWELL-1747-1,35.444

any of these prognosticate , that the Time of their swarming draweth
near : MAXWELL-1747-1,35.445

By this Time also , the Drones will begin to make their Appearance ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,35.446

and your Hive will be making a Reel , as we call it , once every Day ,
which a young Bee-master is apt to take for swarming , till he be
otherwise taught by Experience . MAXWELL-1747-1,35.447

105. This reeling is occasioned , by a great many of the Bees flying ,
and making a confused Motion and Noise in the Fore-part of the Hive ,
much after the Manner of Gnats , when they make that Motion we call
Midges dancing : MAXWELL-1747-1,35.448

They make this Reeling all the Year round , even in Winter , in a very
fine Day , MAXWELL-1747-1,35.449

but now they do it every Day ; which is the Cause why I have taken
Notice of it here . MAXWELL-1747-1,35.450

106. Tho' the Bees should not lie {TEXT:ly} out in Clusters , yet ,
every Morning when they come abroad to work , a great many of them will
stay about the Door , upon the Board or Stone , and perhaps scatter
themselves around the Entry of the Hive in a large Circle :
MAXWELL-1747-1,35.451

This they will probably do for several Days before they swarm ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,35.452

you@ @'ll likewise by this Time observe , that when they give over
working in the Evening , they double , triple , or quadruple their Guard
, which some time ago consisted {TEXT:consisted,} only , of a single
Centinel or two standing Centries in the very Passage , or within it ,
with their Tails outward , and bending up , and their Wings in a
continual Motion , making a humming Noise , MAXWELL-1747-1,35.453

but now you@ @'ll see ten or twelve about the Door in the same Posture
and Motion . MAXWELL-1747-1,35.454

107. When you make these Remarks , you should cause to
{COM:missing_"to"} watch them constantly , from before Nine o'Clock ,
till the Height of the Day is more than past , and their Throng is fully
over ; MAXWELL-1747-1,35.455

't@ @is likewise {TEXT:likewise,} convenient to have an Hive provided
and in Readiness for the Swarm , concerning which , take the following
Directions . MAXWELL-1747-1,35.456

108. If your Bees swarm in <font> May <$$font> , or first Week of
<font> June <$$font> , your Hive should be somewhat larger than the old
one , especially , if the Swarm is large , Which a <P_36> young
Bee-master can@ @not easily judge ; MAXWELL-1747-1,36.457

neither can plain enough Directions be given to make it known , tho'
Observation and Practice will teach it . MAXWELL-1747-1,36.458

109. If they swarm in the second Week , the new Hive may be just of the
Size of the old , MAXWELL-1747-1,36.459

but it is better that it should be little , than too big ; because , a
little one can be enlarged , as Need requires , but one too large makes
a cold Habitation for them , all the Winter over , there being empty
Room in it ; MAXWELL-1747-1,36.460

besides , it occasions that they do@ @n't swarm early next Year , having
the Void to make up in the Spring , before they swarm .
MAXWELL-1747-1,36.461

110. I need not direct you to put Sticks in your Hive ,
MAXWELL-1747-1,36.462

for every Body does it ; MAXWELL-1747-1,36.463

keep an Inch of one of the two lower ones , which cross the
{COM:missing_"the"} other directly above the Door without to take hold
of , for raising up the Hive the more easily to look how all is within
it : MAXWELL-1747-1,36.464

'T@ @is convenient , that the rest of the cross Sticks should also be so
long , that a Part at each End may be on the Out-side ;
MAXWELL-1747-1,36.465

for by this Assistance , one can lift or poise the Hive the more
conveniently , MAXWELL-1747-1,36.466

and they can be the better pulled when the Combs are to be taken out ,
especially if they be great at the one End , and gradually small to the
other . MAXWELL-1747-1,36.467

111. The middle Stick , that stands perpendicular , should be so long ,
that the End of it may just reach the Stone or Board , whereon the Hive
stands : MAXWELL-1747-1,36.468

It should likewise be pretty thick , that when the upper End of it is
cut small , for about the Length of an Inch , to go in to the Top of the
Hive , the Stick may have a good Shoulder for supporting it , that the
Hive may not fall flat in the Top , or yield to a Side with the Pressure
of the {TEXT:the_the} weighty Combs full of Honey within , and with the
Weight of Turff , or any such Thing on the Out-side , which Hives often
do , especially if they are long kept , and which very much incommodes
the Bees , occasions the Rain to stand upon the Hives , and so they rot
much the sooner . MAXWELL-1747-1,36.469

