<BEGIN_meredith-1895-1>

<P_19,132>

<heading>

Chapter XIII MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.4

An Irruption of Mistress Gossip in Breach of the Convention
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.5

<$$heading>

' It is a dark land , ' Carinthia said , on seeing our Island's lowered
clouds in swift motion , without {TEXT:withoug} a break of their folds ,
above the sheer white cliffs . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.7

- She said it , we know . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.8

That poor child Carinthia Jane , when first she beheld Old England's
shores , tossing in the packet-boat on a wild Channel sea , did say it
and think it , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.9

for it is in the family that she did ; and no wonder that she should ,
the day being showery from the bed of the sun , after a frosty three
days , at the close of autumn . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.10

We used to have an eye of our own for English weather before printed
Meteorological Observations and Forecasts undertook to supplant the
shepherd and the poacher , and the pilot with his worn brown leather
telescope tucked beneath his arm . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.11

All three would have told you , that the end of a three days' frost in
the late season of the year and the early , is likely to draw the warm
winds from the Atlantic over Cornish Land's End and Lizard .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.12

Quite by chance of things , Carinthia Jane looked on the land of her
father and mother for the first time under those conditions .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.13

There can be no harm in quoting her remark . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,132.14

Only - I have to say it - experience causes apprehension , that we are
again to be delayed by descriptions , and an exposition of feelings ;
taken for granted , of course , in a serious narrative ; which it really
seems these moderns think designed for a frequent arrest of the actors
in the story and a searching of the internal state of this one or that
one of them : who is <P_19,133> laid out stark naked and probed and
expounded , like as in the celebrated picture by a great painter :
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.15

and we , thirsting for events as we are , are to stop to enjoy a lecture
on Anatomy . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.16

And all the while the windows of the lecture-room are rattling , if not
the whole fabric shaking , with exterior occurrences or impatience for
them to come to pass . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.17

Every explanation is sure to be offered by the course events may take ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.18

so do , in mercy , I say , let us bide for them .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.19

She thought our Island all the darker because Henrietta had induced her
to talk on the boat of her mountain home and her last morning there for
the walk away with Chillon John . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.20

Soon it was to appear supernaturally bright , a very magician's cave for
brilliancy . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.21

Now , this had happened - MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.22

and comment on it to yourselves , remembering always , that Chillon John
was a lover , and a lover has his excuses , though they will not obviate
the penalties he may incur ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.23

and dreadful they were . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.24

After reading Henrietta's letter to him , he rode out of his Canterbury
quarters across the country to the borders of Sussex , where his uncle
Lord Levellier lived , on the ridge of ironstone , near the wild land of
a forest , Croridge the name of the place . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.25

Now , Chillon John knew his uncle was miserly , and dreaded the prospect
of having to support a niece in the wretched establishment at Lekkatts ,
or , as it was popularly called , Leancats ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.26

you can understand why . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.27

But he managed to assure himself he must in duty consult with the senior
and chief member of his family on a subject of such importance as the
proposal of marriage to his lordship's niece .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.28

The consultation was short : MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.29

' You will leave it to me , ' his uncle said : MEREDITH-1895-1,19,133.30

and we hear of business affairs between them , involving payment of
moneys due to the young man ; and how , whenever he touched on them ,
his uncle immediately fell back on the honour of the <P_19,134> family
and Carinthia Jane's reputation , her good name to be vindicated , and
especially that there must be no delays , together with as close a
reckoning as he could make of the value of Lord Fleetwood's estates in
Kent and in Staffordshire and South Wales , and his house property in
London . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.31

' He will have means to support her ' said the old lord , shrugging as
if at his own incapacity for that burden . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.32

The two then went to the workshops beside a large pond , where there was
an island bordered with birch trees and workmen's cottages near the main
building ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.33

and that was an arsenal containing every kind of sword and lance and
musket , rifle and fowling-piece and pistol , and more gunpowder than
was , I believe , allowed by law . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.34

For they were engaged in inventing a new powder for howitzer shells , of
tremendous explosive power . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.35

Nothing further did either of them say concerning the marriage .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.36

Nor did Carinthia Jane hear any mention of Lord Fleetwood from her
brother on the landing-place at Dover . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.37

She was taken to Admiral Baldwin Fakenham's house in Hampshire ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.38

and there she remained , the delight of his life , during two months ,
patiently expecting and rebuking the unmaidenliness of her expectations
, as honest young women in her position used to do .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.39

So did they sometimes wait for years ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.40

they have waited until they withered into their graves , like the
vapours of a brief winter's day : a moving picture of a sex restrained
by modesty in those purer times from the taking of one step forward
unless inquired for . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.41

Two months she waited in our ' dark land . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.42

January arrived , and her brother . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.43

Henrietta communicated the news : - MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.44

' My Janey , you are asked by Lord Fleetwood whether it is your wish
that he should marry you . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,134.45

<P_19,135>

Now , usually a well-born young woman's answer , if a willing one , is
an example of weak translation . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.47

Here it was the heart's native tongue , without any roundabout , simple
but direct . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.48

' Oh , I will , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.49

I am ready , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.50

tell him . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.51

Remember , she was not speaking publicly . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.52

Henrietta knew the man enough to be glad he did not hear .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.53

She herself would have felt a little shock on his behalf :
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.54

only , that answer suited the scheme of the pair of lovers .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.55

How far those two were innocent in not delivering the whole of Lord
Fleetwood's message to Carinthia Jane through Lord Levellier , we are
unable to learn . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.56

We may suspect the miserly nobleman of curtailing it for his purposes ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.57

and such is my idea . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.58

But the answer would have been the same , I am sure .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.59

In consequence and straight away , Chillon John betakes him to Admiral
Baldwin MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.60

and informs him of Lord Fleetwood's proposal on the night at Baden , and
renewal of it through the mouth of Lord Levellier , not communicating ,
however <paren> he may really not have known <$$paren> , the story of
how it had been wrung from the earl by a surprise movement on the part
of the one-armed old lord , who burst out on him in the street from the
ambush of a Club-window , where he had been stationed every day for a
fortnight , indefatigably to watch for the passing of the earl , as
there seemed no other way to find him . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.61

They say , indeed , there was a scene , judging by the result ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.62

and it would have been an excellent scene for the stage ; though the two
noblemen were to all appearance politely exchanging their remarks .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.63

But the audience hearing what passes , appreciates the courteous
restraint of an attitude so contrasting with their tempers .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.64

Behind the ostentation of civility , their words were daggers .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,135.65

For it chanced , that the young earl , after a period of <P_19,136>
refuge at his Welsh castle , supposing , as he well might , that his
latest mad freak of the proposal of his hand and title to the strange
girl in a quadrille at a foreign castle had been forgotten by her , and
the risks of annoyance on the subject had quite blown over , returned to
town , happy in having done the penance for his impulsiveness , and got
clean again - that is to say , struck off his fetters and escaped from
importunities - the very morning of the day when Lord Levellier sprang
upon him ! MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.66

It shows the old campaigner's shrewdness in guessing where his prey
would come , and not putting him on his guard by a call at his house .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.67

Out of the window he looked for all the hours of light during an entire
fortnight . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.68

' In the service of my sister's child , ' he said .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.69

' To save him from the cost of maintaining her , ' say his enemies .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.70

At any rate he did it . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.71

He was likely to have done the worse which I suspect .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.72

Now , the imparting of the wonderful news to Admiral Baldwin Fakenham
was , we read , the whiff of a tropical squall to lay him on his beam
ends . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.73

He could not but doubt ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.74

and his talk was like the sails of a big ship rattling to the first puff
of wind . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.75

He had to believe ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.76

and then , we read , he was for hours like a vessel rolling in the
trough of the sea . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.77

Of course he was a disappointed father . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.78

Naturally his glance at the loss to Henrietta of the greatest prize of
the matrimonial market of all Europe and America was vexing and
saddening . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.79

Then he woke up to think of the fortunes of his ' other girl , ' as he
named her , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.80

and cried : ' Crinny catches him ! ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.81

He cried it in glee MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.82

and rubbed his hands . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.83

So thereupon , standing before him , Chillon John , from whom he had the
news , bent to him slightly , as his elegant manner was ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,136.84

and lengthened the admiral's chaps with another proposal ; easy ,
deliberate , precise , quite the respectful bandit , if you please ,
determined on having <P_19,137> his daughter by all means , only much
preferring the legal , formal , and friendly .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.85

Upon that , in the moment of indecision , Henrietta enters , followed by
Admiral Baldwin's heroine , his Crinny , whom he embraced and kissed ,
congratulated and kissed again . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.86

One sees the contrivance to soften him . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.87

So it was done , down in that Hampshire household on the heights near
the downs , whence you might behold , off a terra firma resembling a
roll of billows , England's big battle-ships in line fronting the island
; when they were a spectacle of beauty as well as power : which now they
are no more , but will have to be , if they are both to float and to
fight . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.88

For I have had quoted to me by a great admirer of the Old Buccaneer ,
one of the dark sayings in his Maxims for Men , where Captain John Peter
Kirby commends his fellow-men to dissatisfaction with themselves <font>
if they have not put an end to their enemy handsomely . <$$font>
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.89

And he advises the copying of Nature in this ; whose elements have
always , he says , <font> a pretty , besides a thorough , style of doing
it , <$$font> when they get the better of us ; and the one by reason of
the other . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.90

He instances the horse , the yacht , and chiefly the sword , for proof ,
that the handsomest is the most effective . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.91

And he prints large : ' Ugly is Only Half Way to a Thing . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.92

To an invention , I suppose he intends to say .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.93

But looking on our huge foundering sea-monsters and the disappearance of
the unwieldy in Nature , and the countenances of criminals , who are ,
he bids us observe , <font> always in the long run beaten , <$$font> I
seem to see a meaning our country might meditate on .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.94

So , as I said , it was done ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.95

for Admiral Baldwin could refuse his Crinny nothing ; as little as he
would deny anything to himself , the heartiest of kindly hosts , fathers
, friends . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.96

Carinthia Jane's grand good fortune covered that pit , the question of
money , somehow , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,137.97

and was , we <P_19,138> may conceive , a champagne wine in their
reasoning faculties . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.98

The admiral was in debt , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.99

Henrietta had no heritage , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.100

Chillon John was the heir of a miserly uncle owing him sums and evading
every application for them , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.101

yet they behaved as people who had the cup of golden wishes .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.102

Perhaps it was because Henrietta and her lover were so handsome a match
as to make it seem to them and others they must marry ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.103

and as to character , her father could trust her to the man of her
choice more readily than to the wealthy young nobleman ; of whose
discreetness he had not the highest opinion .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.104

He reconciled this view with his warm feeling for the Countess of
Fleetwood to be , by saying : ' Crinny will tame him ! '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.105

His faith was in her dauntless bold spirit , not thinking of the animal
she was to tame . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.106

Countess Livia , after receiving Henrietta's letter of information ,
descended on them MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.107

and thought them each and all a crazed set . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.108

Love , as a motive of action for a woman , she considered the female's
lunacy and suicide . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.109

Men are born subject to it , happily , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.110

and thus the balance between the lordly half of creation and the frail
is rectified . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.111

We women dress , and smile , sigh , if you like , to excite the malady .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.112

But if we are the fools to share it , we lose our chance ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.113

instead of the queens , we are the slaves , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.114

and instead of a life of pleasure , we pass from fever to fever at a
tyrant's caprice : MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.115

he does rightly in despising us . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.116

Ay , and many a worthy woman thinks the same .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.117

Educated in dependency as they are , they come to the idea of love to
snatch at it for their weapon of the man's weakness . For which my lord
calls them heartless , and poets are angry with them , rightly or
wrongly . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.118

It must , I fear , be admitted for a truth , that sorrow is the portion
of young women who give the full measure of love to the engagement ,
marrying for love . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,138.119

At least , <P_19,139> Countess Livia could declare subsequently she had
foretold it and warned her cousin . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.120

Not another reflection do you hear from me , if I must pay forfeit of my
privilege to hurry you on past descriptions of places and anatomy of
character and impertinent talk about philosophy - in a story .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.121

When we are startled and offended by the insinuated tracing of principal
incidents to a thread-bare spot in the nether garments of a man of no
significance , I lose patience . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.122

Henrietta's case was a secondary affair . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.123

What with her passion - it was nothing less - and her lover's cunning
arts , and her father's consent given , and in truth the look of the two
together , the dissuasion of them from union was as likely to keep them
apart as an exhortation addressed to magnet and needle .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.124

Countess Livia attacked Carinthia Jane and the admiral backing her .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.125

But the admiral , having given his consent to his daughter's marriage ,
in consequence of the earl's pledged word to ' his other girl , ' had
become a zealot for this marriage : MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.126

and there was only not a grand altercation on the subject because Livia
shunned annoyances . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.127

Alone with Carinthia Jane , as she reported to Henrietta , she spoke to
a block , that shook a head and wore a thin smile and nursed its own
idea of the better knowledge of Edward Russett , Earl of Fleetwood ,
gained in the run of a silly quadrille at a ball .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.128

What is a young man's word to his partner in a quadrille !
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.129

Livia put the question , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.130

she put it twice rather sternly , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.131

and the girl came out with : ' Oh , he meant it ! '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.132

The nature , the pride , the shifty and furious moods of Lord Fleetwood
were painted frightful to her . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.133

She had conceived her own image of him . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,139.134

Whether to set her down as an enamoured idiot or a creature not a whit
less artful than her brother , was <P_19,140> Countess Livia's debate .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.135

Her inclination was to misdoubt the daughter of the Old Buccaneer :
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.136

she might be simple , at her age , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.137

and she certainly was ignorant ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.138

but she clung to her prize . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.139

Still the promise was extracted from her , that she would not worry the
earl to fulfil the word she supposed him to mean in its full meaning .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.140

The promise was unreluctantly yielded . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.141

No , she would not write . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.142

Admiral Fakenham , too , engaged to leave the matter to a man of honour
. MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.143

Meanwhile , Chillon John had taken a journey to Lekkatts ; following
which , his uncle went to London . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.144

Lord Fleetwood heard that Miss Kirby kept him bound .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.145

He was again the fated prisoner of his word .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.146

And following that , not so very long , there was the announcement of
the marriage of Chillon John Kirby-Levellier , Lieutenant in the King's
Own Hussars , and Henrietta , daughter of Admiral Baldwin Fakenham .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.147

A county newspaper paragraph was quoted for its eulogy of the Beauty of
Hampshire - not too strong , those acquainted with her thought .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.148

Interest at Court obtained an advancement for the bridegroom :
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.149

he was gazetted Captain during his honeymoon ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.150

and his prospects under his uncle's name were considerd fair , though
certain people said at the time , it was likely to be all he would get
while old Lord Levellier of Leancats remained in the flesh .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.151

Now , as it is good for those to tell who intend preserving their taste
for romance and hate anatomical lectures , we never can come to the
exact motives of any extraordinary piece of conduct on the part of man
or woman . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.152

Girls are to read , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.153

and the study of a boy starts from the monkey .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.154

But no literary surgeon or chemist shall explain positively the cause of
the behaviour of men and women in their relations together ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.155

and speaking to rescue my story , I say we must with due submission
accept the facts . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,140.156

We are not a bit the <P_19,141> worse for wondering at them .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.157

So it happened that Lord Fleetwood's reply to Lord Levellier's
hammer-hammer by post and messenger at his door , one may call it , on
the subject of the celebration of the marriage of the young Croesus and
Carinthia Jane , in which there was demand for the fixing of a date
forthwith , was despatched on the day when London had tidings of
Henrietta Fakenham's wedding . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.158

The letter , lost for many years , turned up in the hands of a Kentish
auctioneer , selling it on behalf of a farm-serving man , who had it
from Lord Levellier's cook and housemaid , among the things she brought
him as her wifely portion after her master's death ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.159

and this she had not found saleable in her husband's village at her
price , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.160

but she had got the habit of sticking to the scraps , being proud of
hearing it said that she had skinned Leancats to some profit :
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.161

and her expectation proved correct after her own demise ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.162

for her husband putting it up at the auction , our relative on the
mother's side , Dr. Glossop , interested in the documents and
particulars of the story as he was , had it knocked down to him , in
contest with an agent of a London gentleman , going as high as two
pounds ten shillings , for the sum of two pounds and fifteen shillings .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.163

Count the amount that makes for each word of a letter a marvel of
brevity , considering the purport ! MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.164

But Dr. Glossop was right in saying he had it cheap .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.165

The value of that letter may now be multiplied by ten :
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.166

nor for that sum would he part with it . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.167

Thus it ran , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.168

I need not refer to it in Bundle No. 3 : MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.169

' My Lord : I drive to your church-door on the fourteenth of the month
at ten a._m. , to keep my appointment with Miss C. J. Kirby , if I do
not blunder the initials . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.170

Your lordship's obedient servant , Fleetwood . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,141.171

<P_19,142>

That letter will ever be a treasured family possession with us .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.173

That letter was dated from Lord Fleetwood's Kentish mansion , Esslemont
, the tenth of the month . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.174

He must have quitted London for Esslemont , for change of scene , for
air , the moment after the news of Henrietta's marriage .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.175

Carinthia Jane received the summons without transmission of the letter
from her uncle on the morning of the twelfth .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.176

It was a peremptory summons . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.177

Unfortunately , Admiral Fakenham , a real knight and chevalier of those
past times , would not let her mount the downs to have her farewell view
of the big ships unaccompanied by him ; and partly and largely in pure
chivalry , no doubt ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.178

but her young idea of England's grandeur , as shown in her great vessels
of war , thrilled him , too , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.179

and restored his youthful enthusiasm for his noble profession
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.180

or made it effervesce . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.181

However it was , he rode beside her MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.182

and rejoiced to hear the young girl's talk of her father as a captain of
one of England's thunderers , and of the cruelty of that Admiralty to
him : at which Admiral Baldwin laughed , but had not the heart to
disagree with her , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.183

for he could belabour the Admiralty in season , cause or no cause .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.184

Altogether he much enjoyed the ride , notwithstanding intimations of the
approach of ' his visitor , ' as he called his attacks of gout .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.185

Riding home , however , the couple passed through a heavy rainfall ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.186

and the next day , when he was to drive with the bride to Lekkatts ,
gout , the fiercest he had ever known , chained him fast to his bed .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.187

Such are the petty accidents affecting circumstances .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.188

They are the instruments of Destiny . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,142.189

There he lay , protesting that the ceremony could not possibly be for
the fourteenth , because Countess Livia had , he now remembered ,
written of her engagement to <P_19,143> meet Russett on the night of
that day at a ball at Mrs. Cowper Quillett's place , Canleys , lying
south of the Surrey hills : a house famed for its gatherings of
beautiful women ; whither Lord Fleetwood would be sure to engage to go ,
the admiral now said ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.190

and it racked him like gout in his mind , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.191

and perhaps troubled his conscience about handing the girl to such a
young man . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.192

But he was lying on his back , the posture for memory to play the fiend
with us , as we read in the Book of Maxims of the Old Buccaneer .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.193

Admiral Baldwin wished heartily to be present at his Crinny's wedding '
to see her launched , ' if wedding it was to be ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.194

and he vowed the date of the fourteenth , in Lord Levellier's
announcement of it , must be an error and might be a month in advance ,
and ought to be . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.195

But it was sheer talking and raving for a solace to his disappointment
or his anxiety . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.196

He had to let Carinthia Jane depart under the charge of his house-keeper
, Mrs. Carthew , a staid excellent lady , poorly gifted with
observation . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.197

Her report of the performance of the ceremony at Croridge village church
, a half mile from Lekkatts , was highly reassuring to the anxious old
admiral still lying on his back with memory and gout at their fiend's
play , and livid forecasts hovering . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.198

He had recollected that there had been no allusion in Lord Levellier's
message to settlements or any lawyer's preliminaries ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.199

and he raged at himself for having to own it would have been the first
of questions on behalf of his daughter . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.200

' All passed off correctly , ' Mrs. Carthew said .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.201

' The responses of the bride and bridegroom were particularly articulate
. ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.202

She was reserved upon the question of the hospitality of Lekkatts .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.203

The place had entertained her during her necessitated residence there ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,143.204

and honour forbade her to smile concordantly at the rosy admiral's
mention <P_19,144> of Leancats . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.205

She took occasion , however , to praise the Earl of Fleetwood@ @'s '
eminently provident considerateness for his bride , inasmuch as he had
packed a hamper in his vehicle , ' which was a four-in-hand , driven by
himself . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.206

Admiral Baldwin inquired : ' Bride inside ? '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.207

He was informed : ' The Countess of Fleetwood sat on the box on the left
of my lord . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.208

She had made no moan about the absence of bridesmaids .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.209

' She appeared too profoundly happy to meditate an instant upon
deficiencies . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.210

' How did the bridegroom behave ? ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.211

' Lord Fleetwood was very methodical . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.212

He is not , or was not , voluntarily a talker . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.213

' Blue coat , brass buttons , hot-house flower ? old style or new ? '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.214

' His lordship wore a rather low beaver and a buttoned white overcoat ,
not out of harmony with the bride's plain travelling-dress . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.215

' Ah ! MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.216

He 's {COM:sic} a good whip , men say . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.217

Keeps first-rate stables , hacks , and bloods .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.218

Esslemont hard by will be the place for their honeymoon , I guess .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.219

And he@ @'s a lucky dog , if he knows his luck . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.220

So said Admiral Baldwin . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.221

He was proceeding to say more , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.222

for he had a prodigious opinion of the young countess and the benefit of
her marriage to the British race . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.223

As it concerned a healthy constitution and motherhood , Mrs. Carthew
coughed and retired . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.224

Nor do I reprove either of them . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.225

The speculation and the decorum are equally commendable .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.226

Masculine ideas are one thing ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.227

but let feminine ever be feminine , or our civilization perishes .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,144.228

At Croridge village church , then , - one of the smallest churches in
the kingdom , - the ceremony was performed <P_19,145> and duly witnessed
, names written in the vestry book , the clergyman's fee , the clerk ,
and the pew-woman , paid by the bridegroom . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.229

And thus we see how a pair of lovers , blind with the one object of
lovers in view ; and a miserly uncle , all on edge to save himself the
expense of supporting his niece ; and an idolatrous old admiral , on his
back with gout ; conduced in turn and together to the marriage gradually
exciting the world's wonder , till it eclipsed the story of the Old
Buccaneer and Countess Fanny , which it caused to be discussed afresh .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.230

Mrs. Carthew remembered Carinthia Jane's last maiden remark and her
first bridal utterance . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.231

On the way , walking to the church of Croridge from Lekkatts , the girl
said : ' Going on my feet , I feel I continue the mountain walk with my
brother when we left our home . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.232

And after leaving the church , about to mount the coach , she turned to
Mrs. Carthew , saying , as she embraced her : ' A happy bride's kiss
should bring some good fortune . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.233

And looking down from her place on the top of the coach : ' Adieu , dear
Mrs. Carthew . A day of glory it is to-day . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.234

She must actually have had it in her sight as a day of glory :
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.235

and it was a day of the clouds off our rainy quarter , similar in every
way to the day of her stepping on English soil and saying : ' It is a
dark land . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.236

For the heart is truly declared to be our colourist .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.237

A day having the gale in its breast , sweeping the whole country and
bending the trees for the twigs to hiss like spray of the billows around
our island , was a day of golden splendour to the young bride of the
Earl of Fleetwood , though he scarcely addressed one syllable to her ,
and they sat side by side all but dumb , he like a coachman driving an
unknown lady fare , on a morning after a night when his wife's tongue
may have soured him for the sex . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,145.238

<P_19,146>

<heading>

Chapter XIV MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.241

A Pendant of the Foregoing MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.242

<$$heading>

Mention has been omitted or forgotten by the worthy Dame , in her
vagrant fowl's treatment of a story she can@ @not incubate , will not
relinquish , and may ultimately addle , that the bridegroom , after
walking with a disengaged arm from the little village church at Croridge
to his coach and four at the cross of the roads to Lekkatts and the
lowland , abruptly , and as one pursuing a deferential line of conduct
he had prescribed to himself , asked his bride , what seat she would
prefer . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.244

He shouted : ' Ines ! ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.245

A person inside the coach appeared to be effectually roused .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.246

The glass of the window dropped . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.247

The head of a man emerged . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.248

It was the head of one of the barge-faced men of the British Isles ,
broad , and battered flattish , with sentinel eyes .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.249

In an instant the heavy-headed but not ill-looking fellow was nimble
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.250

and jumped from the coach . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.251

' Napping , my lord , ' he said . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.252

Heavy though the look of him might be , his feet were light ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.253

they flipped a bar of a hornpipe at a touch of the ground .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.254

Perhaps they were allowed to go with their instinct for the dance , that
his master should have a sample of his wakefulness .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.255

He quenched a smirk MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.256

and stood to take orders ; clad in a flat blue cap , a brown overcoat ,
and knee-breeches , as the temporary bustle of his legs had revealed .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.257

Fleetwood heard the young lady say : ' I would choose , if you please ,
to sit beside you . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,146.258

<P_19,147>

He gave a nod of enforced assent , glancing at the vacated box .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.260

The man inquired : ' A knee and a back for the lady to mount up , my
lord ? ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.261

' In ! ' was the smart command to him ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.262

and he popped in with the agility of his popping out .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.263

Then Carinthia made reverence to the grey lean figure of her uncle
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.264

and kissed Mrs. Carthew . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.265

She needed no help to mount the coach . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.266

Fleetwood's arm was rigidly extended , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.267

and he did not visibly wince when this foreign girl sprang to the first
hand-grip on the coach and said : ' No , my husband , I can do it ' ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.268

unaided , was implied . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.269

Her stride from the axle of the wheel to the step higher would have been
a graceful spectacle on Alpine crags . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.270

Fleetwood swallowed that , too , though it conjured up a mocking
recollection of the Baden woods , and an astonished wild donkey
preparing himself for his harness . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.271

A sour relish of the irony in his present position sharpened him to
devilish enjoyment of it , as the finest form of loathing : on the
principle that if we find ourselves consigned to the nether halls , we
do well to dance drunkenly . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.272

He had cried for Romance - MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.273

here it was ! MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.274

He raised his hat to Mrs. Carthew and to Lord Levellier .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.275

Previous to the ceremony , the two noblemen had interchanged the short
speech of mannered duellists punctiliously courteous in the opening act
. MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.276

Their civility was maintained at the termination of the deadly work .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.277

The old lord's bosom thanked the young one for not requiring
entertainment and a repast ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.278

the young lord's thanked the old one for a strict military demeanour at
an execution and the abstaining from any nonsensical talk over the
affair . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,147.279

A couple of liveried grooms at the horses' heads ran <P_19,148> and
sprang to the hinder seats as soon as their master had taken the reins .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.280

He sounded the whip caressingly . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.281

Off {TEXT:off} those pretty trotters went . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.282

Mrs. Carthew watched them , waving to the bride .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.283

She was on the present occasion less than usually an acute or a
reflective observer , owing to her admiration of lordly state and
masculine commandership , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.284

and her thought was : ' She has indeed made a brilliant marriage ! '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.285

The lady thought it , notwithstanding an eccentricity in the wedding
ceremony , such as could not but be noticeable .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.286

But very wealthy noblemen were commonly , perhaps necessarily ,
eccentric , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.287

for thus they proved themselves egregious , which the world expected
them to be . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.288

Lord Levellier sounded loud eulogies of the illustrious driver's team .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.289

His meditation , as he subsequently stated to Chillon , was upon his
vanquished antagonist's dexterity , in so conducting matters , that he
had to be taken at once , with naught of the customary preface and
apology for taking to himself the young lady , of which a handsome
settlement is the memorial . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.290

We have to suppose , that the curious occupant of the coach inside
aroused no curiosity in the pair of absorbed observers .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.291

Speculations regarding the chances of a fall of rain followed the coach
until it sank MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.292

and the backs of the two liveried grooms closed the chapter of the
wedding , introductory to the honeymoon at Esslemont , seven miles
distant by road , to the right of Lekkatts . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.293

It was out of sight that the coach turned to the left , Northwestward .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,148.294

<P_19,149>

<$$heading>

Chapter XV MEREDITH-1895-1,19,149.297

Opening Stage of the Honeymoon MEREDITH-1895-1,19,149.298

<$$heading>

A famous maxim in the book of the Old Buccaneer , treating of Precaution
, as <font> ' The brave man's clean conscience , ' <$$font> with sound
counsel to the adventurous , has it : - <font> ' Then you sail away into
the tornado , happy as a sealed bottle of ripe wine . ' <$$font>
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,149.300

It should mean , that brave men entering the jaws of hurricanes are
found to have cheerful hearts in them when they know they have done
their best . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,149.301

But , touching the picture of happiness , conceive the bounteous Bacchic
spirit in the devoutness of a Sophocles , and you find comparison
neighbour closely between the sealed wine-flask and the bride , who is
being driven by her husband to the nest of the unknown on her marriage
morn . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,149.302

Seated beside him , with bosom at heave and shut mouth , in a strange
land , travelling cloud-like , rushing like the shower-cloud to the vale
, this Carinthia , suddenly wedded , passionately grateful for
humbleness exalted , virginly sensible of treasures of love to give ,
resembled the inanimate and most inspiring , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,149.303

was mindless and inexpressive , past memory , beyond the hopes , a thing
of the thrilled blood and skylark air , since she laid her hand in this
young man's . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,149.304

His not speaking to her was accepted . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,149.305

Her blood rather than recollection revived their exchanges during the
dance at Baden , for assurance that their likings were one , their aims
rapturously one , that he was she , she he , the two hearts making one
soul . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,149.306

<P_19,150>

Could she give as much as he ? MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.308

It was hardly asked . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.309

If we feel we can give our breath of life , the strength of the feeling
fully answers . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.310

It bubbles perpetually from the depth like a well-spring in tumult .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.311

Two hearts that make one soul do not separately count their gifts .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.312

For the rest , her hunger to admire disposed her to an absorbing
sentience of his acts ; the trifles , gestures , manner of this and that
; which were seized as they flew , and swiftly assimilated to stamp his
personality . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.313

Driving was the piece of skill she could not do .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.314

Her husband's mastery of the reins endowed him with the beauty of those
harmonious trotters he guided and kept to their pace ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.315

and the humming rush of the pace , the smooth torrent of the brown
heath-knolls and reddish pits and hedge-lines and grass-flats and copses
pouring the counter-way of her advance , belonged to his wizardry .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.316

The bearing of her onward was her abandonment to him .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.317

Delicious as mountain air , the wind sang ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.318

it had a song of many voices . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.319

Quite as much as on the mountains , there was the keen , the blissful ,
nerve-knotting catch of the presence of danger in the steep descents ,
taken as if swallowed , without swerve or check .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.320

She was in her husband's hands . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.321

At times , at the pitch of a rapid shelving , that was like a fall , her
heart went down ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.322

and at the next throb exalted before it rose , not reasoning why ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.323

- her confidence was in him ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.324

she was his comrade whatever chanced . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.325

Up over the mountain-peaks she had known edged moments , little heeded
in their passage , when life is poised as a crystal pitcher on the head
, in peril of a step . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.326

Then she had been dependent on herself . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.327

Now she had the joy of trusting to her husband .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.328

His hard leftward eye had view of her askant , if he cared to see how
she bore the trial ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,150.329

and so relentlessly did he take the slopes , that the man inside pushed
out <P_19,151> an inquiring pate , the two grooms tightened arms across
their chests . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.330

Her face was calmly set , wakeful , but unwrinkled :
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.331

the creature did not count among timid girls - or among civilized .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.332

She had got what she wanted from her madman - mad in his impulses , mad
in his reading of honour . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.333

She was the sister of Henrietta's husband . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.334

Henrietta bore the name she had quitted . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.335

Could madness go beyond the marrying of the creature ?
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.336

He chafed at her containment , at her courage , her silence , her
withholding the brazen or the fawnish look-up , either of which he would
have hated . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.337

He , however , was dragged to look down . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.338

Neither Gorgon nor Venus , nor a mingling of them , she had the chasm of
the face , recalling the face of his bondage , seen first that night at
Baden . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.339

It recalled and it was not the face ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.340

it was the skull of the face , or the flesh of the spirit .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.341

Occasionally she looked , for a twinkle or two , the creature or vision
she had been , as if to mock by reminding him .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.342

She was the abhorred delusion , who captured him by his nerves ,
ensnared his word - the doing of a foul witch .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.343

How had it leapt from his mouth ? MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.344

She must have worked for it . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.345

The word spoken - she must have known it - MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.346

he was bound , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.347

or the detested Henrietta would have said : Not even true to his word !
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.348

To see her now , this girl , insisting to share his name , for a slip of
his tongue , despite the warning sent her through her uncle , had that
face much as a leaden winter landscape pretends to be the country
radiant in colour . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.349

She belonged to the order of the variable animals -
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.350

a woman indeed ! - womanish enough in that .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.351

There are men who love women - the idea of woman .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.352

Woman is their shepherdess of sheep . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.353

He loved freedom , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.354

loathed the subjection of a partnership ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.355

could undergo it only in adoration of an ineffable splendour .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,151.356

He had stepped to the altar fancying she might keep to her part of the
<P_19,152> contract by appearing the miracle that subdued him .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.357

Seen by light of day , this bitter object beside him was a witch without
her spells ; that is , the skeleton of the seductive , ghastliest among
horrors and ironies . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.358

Let her have the credit of doing her work thoroughly before the exposure
. MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.359

She had done it . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.360

She might have helped - MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.361

such was the stipulation of his mad freak in consenting to the bondage -
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.362

yes , she might have helped to soften the sting of his wound .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.363

She was beside him bearing his name , for the perpetual pouring of an
acid on the wound that vile Henrietta - poisoned honey of a girl ! -
had dealt . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.364

He glanced down at his possession : - MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.365

heaven and the yawning pit were the contrast !
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.366

Poisoned honey is after all honey while you eat it .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.367

Here there was nothing but a rocky bowl of emptiness .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.368

And who was she ? MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.369

She was the sister of Henrietta's husband . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.370

He was expected to embrace the sister of Henrietta's husband .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.371

Those two were on their bridal tour . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.372

This creature was also the daughter of an ancient impostor and desperado
called the Old Buccaneer ; a distinguished member of the family of the
Lincolnshire Kirbys , boasting a present representative grimly acquitted
, men said , on a trial for murder . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.373

An eminent alliance ! MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.374

Society considered the Earl of Fleetwood wildish , though he could
manage his affairs . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.375

He and his lawyers had them under strict control .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.376

How of himself ? MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.377

The prize of the English marriage market had taken to his bosom for his
winsome bride the daughter of the Old Buccaneer .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.378

He was to mix his blood with the blood of the Lincolnshire Kirbys ,
lying pallid under the hesitating acquittal of a divided jury .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.379

How had he come to this pass , which swung him round to think almost
regretfully of the scorned multitude of fair besiegers in the market ,
some of whom had their unpoetic charms ? MEREDITH-1895-1,19,152.380

<P_19,153>

He was renowned and unrivalled as the man of stainless honour : the one
living man of his word . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.382

He had never broken it - never would . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.383

There was his distinction among the herd . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.384

In that , a man is princely above princes . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.385

The nobility of Edward Russett , Earl of Fleetwood , surpassed the
nobility of common nobles . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.386

But , by all that is holy , he pays for his distinction .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.387

The creature beside him is a franked issue of her old pirate of a father
in one respect - MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.388

nothing frightens her . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.389

There she sits ; not a screw of her brows or her lips ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.390

and the coach rocked , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.391

they were sharp on a spill midway of the last descent .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.392

It rocks again . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.393

She thinks it scarce worth while to look up to reassure him .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.394

She is looking over the country . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.395

' Have you been used to driving ? ' he said .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.396

She replied : ' No , it is new to me on a coach . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.397

Carinthia felt at once how wild the wish or half expectation that he
would resume the glowing communion of the night which had plighted them
. MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.398

She did not this time say ' my husband , ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.399

still it flicked a whip at his ears . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.400

She had made it more offensive , by so richly toning the official title
just won from him as to ring it on the nerves ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.401

one had to block it or be invaded . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.402

An anticipation that it would certainly recur haunted every opening of
her mouth . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.403

Now that it did not , he felt the gap , relieved , and yet pricked to
imagine a mimicry of her tones , for the odd foreignness of the word and
the sound . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.404

She had a voice of her own besides her courage .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.405

At the altar , her responses had their music .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.406

No wonder : the day was hers . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.407

' My husband ' was a manner of saying ' my fish . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.408

He spoke very civilly . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.409

' Oblige me by telling me what name you are accustomed to answer to . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,153.410

<P_19,154>

She seemed unaware of an Arctic husband , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.412

and replied : ' My father called me Carin - short for Carinthia .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.413

My mother called me Janey ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.414

my second name is Jane . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.415

My brother Chillon says both . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.416

Henrietta calls me Janey . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.417

The creature appeared dead flesh to goads . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.418

But the name of her sister-in-law on her lips returned the stroke neatly
. MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.419

She spared him one whip , to cut him with another .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.420

' You have not informed me which of these names you prefer . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.421

' Oh , my husband , it is as you shall please . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.422

Fleetwood smartened the trot of his team , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.423

and there was a to-do with the rakish leaders .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.424

Fairies of a malignant humour in former days used to punish the
unhappiest of the naughty men who were not favourites , by suddenly
planting a hump on their backs . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.425

Off the bedevilled wretches pranced , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.426

and they kicked , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.427

they snorted , whinnied , rolled , galloped , outflying the wind , but
not the dismal rider . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.428

Marriage is our incubus now . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.429

No explanation is offered of why we are afflicted ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.430

we have simply offended , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.431

or some one absent has offended , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.432

and we are handy . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.433

The spiteful hag of power ties a wife to us ; perhaps for the reason ,
that we behaved in the spirit of a better time by being chivalrously
honourable . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.434

Wives are just as inexplicable curses , just as ineradicable and
astonishing as humps imposed on shapely backs .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.435

Fleetwood lashed his horses until Carinthia's low cry of entreaty rose
to surprise . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.436

That stung him . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.437

' Leave the coachman to his devices : MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.438

we have an appointment MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.439

and must keep it , ' he said . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.440

' They go so willingly . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.441

' Good beasts , in their way . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.442

' I do not like the whip . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,154.443

<P_19,155>

' I have the same objection . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.445

They were on the level of the vale , going along a road between farms
and mansions , meadows and garden-plots and park-palings .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.446

A strong warm wind drove the pack of clouds over the tree-tops
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.447

and charged at the branches . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.448

English scenery , animating air ; a rouse to the blood and the mind .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.449

Carinthia did not ask for hues . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.450

She had come to love of the dark land with the warm lifting wind , the
big trees and the hedges , and the stately houses , and people requiring
to be studied , who mean well and are warm somewhere below , as
chimney-pots are , though they are so stiff .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.451

English people dislike endearments , she had found .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.452

It might be that her husband disliked any show of fondness .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.453

He would have to be studied very much . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.454

He was not like others , as Henrietta had warned her .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.455

From thinking of him fervidly , she was already past the marvel of the
thought that she called him husband . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.456

At the same time , a curious intimation , gathered she knew not whence ,
of the word ' husband ' on a young wife's lips as being a foreign sound
in England , advised her to withhold it . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.457

His behaviour was instructing her . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.458

' Are you weather-wise ? - able to tell when the clouds will hold off
or pelt , ' he said , to be very civil to a neighbour .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.459

She collected her understanding , apparently ; treating a conversational
run of the tongue as a question to be pondered ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.460

and the horses paid for it . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.461

Ordinarily he was gentle with his beasts . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.462

He lashed at her in his heart for perverting the humanest of men .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.463

' Father was , ' she replied . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.464

' Oh ! I have heard of him . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.465

Her face lightened . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.466

' Father had a great name in England . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.467

' The Old Buccaneer , I think . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,155.468

<P_19,156>

' I do not know . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.470

He was a seaman of the navy , like Admiral Fakenham is .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.471

Weather at sea , weather on the mountains , he could foretell it always
. MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.472

He wrote a book ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.473

I have a copy you will read . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.474

It is a book of Maxims . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.475

He often speaks of the weather . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.476

English weather and women , he says . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.477

But not my mother . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.478

My mother he stood aside by herself - <font> pas capricieuse du tout !
<$$font> Because she would be out in the weather and brave the weather .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.479

She rode , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.480

she swam , best of any woman . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.481

If she could have known you , what pleasure for me !
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.482

Mother learnt to read mountain weather from father .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.483

I did it too . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.484

But sometimes on the high fields' upper snows it is very surprising .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.485

Father has been caught . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.486

Here the cloud is down near the earth MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.487

and the strong wind keeps the rain from falling .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.488

How long the wind will blow I can@ @not guess .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.489

But you love the mountains . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.490

We spoke . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.491

. . And mountains' adventures we both love .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.492

I will talk French if you like , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.493

for , I think , German you do not speak . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.494

I may speak English better than French ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.495

but I am afraid of my English with you . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.496

' Dear me ! ' quoth Fleetwood , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.497

and he murmured politely and cursorily , attentive to his coachman
business . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.498

She had a voice that clove the noise of the wheels ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.499

and she had a desire to talk - MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.500

that was evident . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.501

Talk of her father set her prattling . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.502

It became clear also to his not dishonest , his impressionable mind ,
that her baby English might be natural . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.503

Or she was mildly playing on it , to give herself an air .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.504

He had no remembrance of such baby English at Baden .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.505

There , however , she was in a state of enthusiasm - the sort of
illuminated transparency they show at the end of fireworks .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.506

Mention of her old scapegrace of a father lit her up again .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.507

The girl there and the girl here were no doubt the same .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,156.508

It could not be said <P_19,157> that she had duped him ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.509

he had done it for himself - acted on by a particular agency .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.510

This creature had not the capacity to dupe . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.511

He had armed a blunt-witted young woman with his idiocy ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.512

and she had dealt the stroke ; different in scarce a degree by nature
from other young women of prey . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.513

But her look at times , and now and then her voice , gave sign that she
counted on befooling him as well , to reconcile him to his bondage .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.514

The calculation was excessive . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.515

No woman had done it yet . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.516

Idiocy plunged him the step which reawakened understanding ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.517

and to keep his whole mind alert on guard against any sort of
satisfaction with his bargain , he frankly referred to the cause .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.518

Not female arts , but nature's impulses , it was his passion for the
wondrous in the look of a woman's face , the new morning of the idea of
women in the look , and the peep into imaginary novel character , did
the trick of enslaving him . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.519

Call it idiocy . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.520

Such it was . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.521

Once acknowledged , it is not likely to recur .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.522

An implacable reason sits in its place , with a keen blade for efforts
to carry the imposture further afield or make it agreeable .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.523

Yet , after giving his word to Lord Levellier , he had prodded himself
to think the burden of this wild young woman might be absurdly tolerable
and a laugh at the world . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.524

A solicitude for the animal was marked by his inquiry :
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.525

' You are not hungry yet ? ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.526

' Oh no , not yet , ' said she , oddly enlivened .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.527

They had a hamper and were independent of stoppages for provision , he
informed her . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.528

What more delightful ? cried her look , seeing the first mid-day's rest
and meal with Chillon on the walk over the mountain from their empty
home . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.529

She could get up enthusiasm for a stocked hamper !
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,157.530

And when told of some business that drew him to a <P_19,158> meadow they
were nearing , she said she would be glad to help , if she could .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.531

' I learn quickly , I know . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.532

I know . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.533

His head acquiesced . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.534

The daughter of the Old Buccaneer might learn the business quickly ,
perhaps ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.535

a singularly cutting smile was on his tight lips , in memory of a desire
he had as a boy to join hands with an Amazonian damsel and be out over
the world for adventures , comrade and bride as one .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.536

Here the creature sat . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.537

Life is the burlesque of young dreams ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.538

or they precipitate us on the roar and grin of a recognized beast world
. MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.539

The devil possessing him gnawed so furiously that a partial mitigation
of the pain was afforded by sight of waving hats on a hill-rise of the
road . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.540

He flourished his whip . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.541

The hats continued at wind-mill work . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.542

It signified brisk news to him , and prospect of glee to propitiate any
number of devils . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.543

' You will want a maid to attend on you , ' he said .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.544

She replied : ' I am not used to attendance on me .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.545

Henrietta's maid would help . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.546

I did not want her . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.547

I had no maid at home . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.548

I can do for myself . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.549

Father and mother liked me to be very independent . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.550

He supposed he would have to hear her spelling her words out next .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.551

The hill-top was gained ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.552

twenty paces of pretty trotting brought up the coach beside an inn porch
, in the style of the finish dear to whips , and even imperative upon
them , if they love their art . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.553

Two gentlemen stood in the road , and a young woman at the inn door ; a
dark-haired girl of an anxious countenance . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.554

Her puckers vanished at some signal from inside the coach .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.555

' All right , Madge ; nothing to fear , ' Fleetwood called to her ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.556

and she curtseyed . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.557

He alighted , saying to her , before he spoke to his friends : ' I@ @'ve
brought him safe ; MEREDITH-1895-1,19,158.558

had him under my <P_19,159> eye the last four_and_twenty hours .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.559

He 'll do the trick to-day . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.560

You do@ @n't bet ? ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.561

' Oh ! my lord , no . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.562

' Help the lady down . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.563

Out with you , Ines ! ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.564

The light-legged barge-faced man touched ground capering .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.565

He was greeted ' Kit ' by the pair of gentlemen , who shook hands with
him , after he had faintly simulated the challenge to a jig with Madge .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.566

She flounced from him , holding her arms up to the lady .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.567

Landlord , landlady , and hostler besought the lady to stay for the
fixing of a ladder . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.568

Carinthia stepped , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.569

leaped , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.570

and entered the inn , Fleetwood remarking : ' We are very independent ,
Chummy Potts . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.571

' Cordy bally , by Jove ! ' Potts cried . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.572

But the moment after this disengaged ejaculation , he was taken with a
bewilderment . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.573

' At the Opera ? ' he questioned of his perplexity .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.574

' No , sir , not at the Opera , ' Fleetwood rejoined .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.575

' The lady's last public appearance was at the altar . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.576

' Sort of a suspicion of having seen her somewhere .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.577

Left her husband behind , has she ? ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.578

' You see : she has gone in . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.579

The scoring of a proposition of Euclid on the forehead of Potts amused
him and the other gentleman , who was hailed ' Mallard ! ' and cared
nothing for problems involving the female of man when such work was to
the fore as the pugilistic encounter of the Earl of Fleetwood@ @'s
chosen Kit Ines , with Lord Brailstone's unbeaten and well-@ @backed Ben
Todds . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.580

Ines had done pretty things from the age of seventeen to his
twenty-third year . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.581

Remarkably clever things they were , to be called great in the annals of
the Ring . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.582

The point , however , was , that the pockets of his backers had
seriously felt his latest fight . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,159.583

He received a dog's licking at the hands of Lummy Phelps , <P_19,160>
his inferior in skill , fighting two to one of the odds ; and all
because of his fatal addiction to the breaking of his trainer's imposed
fast in liquids on the night before the battle .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.584

Right through his training , up to that hour , the rascal was devout ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.585

the majority's money rattled all on the snug safe side .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.586

And how did he get at the bottle ? MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.587

His trainers never could say . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.588

But what made him turn himself into a headlong ass , when he had only to
wait a night to sit among friends and worshippers drinking off his
tumbler upon tumbler with the honours ? MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.589

It was past his wits to explain . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.590

Endurance of his privation had snapped in him ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.591

or else , which is more likely , this Genius of the Ring was tempted by
his genius on the summit of his perfected powers to believe the battle
his own , and celebrate it , as became a victor despising the drubbed
antagonist . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.592

In any case , he drank , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.593

and a minor man gave him the dog's licking . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.594

' Went into it puffy , came out of it bunged , ' the chronicle
resounding over England ran . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.595

Old England read of an ' eyeless carcase ' heroically stepping up to
time for three rounds of mashing punishment .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.596

If he had won the day after all , the country would have been
electrified . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.597

It sympathized on the side of his backers too much to do more than nod a
short approval of his fortitude . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.598

To sink with flag flying is next to sinking the enemy .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.599

There was talk of a girl present at the fight , and of how she received
the eyeless , almost faceless , carcase of her sweetheart Kit , and
carried him away in a little donkey-cart , comfortably cushioned to meet
disaster . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.600

This petty incident drew the attention of the Earl of Fleetwood , then
beginning to be known as the diamond of uncounted facets , patron of the
pick of all departments of manly activity in England .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,160.601

The devotion of the girl Madge to her sweetheart <P_19,161> was really a
fine story . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.602

Fleetwood touched on it to Mr. Mallard , speaking of it like the
gentleman he could be , while Chumley Potts wagged impatient
acquiescence in a romantic episode of the Ring , that kept the talk from
the hotter theme . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.603

' Money@ @'s Bank of England to-day , you think ? ' he interposed ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.604

and had his answer after Mallard had said : ' The girl 's rather
good-looking , too . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.605

' You may double your bets , Chummy . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.606

I had the fellow to his tea at my dinner-table yesterday evening ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.607

locked him in his bedroom , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.608

and had him up and out for a morning spin at six .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.609

His trainer , Flipper , 's on the field , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.610

drove from Esslemont at nine , confident as trumps . '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.611

' Deuce of a good-looking girl , ' Potts could now afford to say ;
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.612

and he sang out : ' Feel fit , lucky dog ? ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.613

' Concert pitch ! ' was the declaration of Kit Ines .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.614

' How about Lord Brailstone's man ? ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.615

' Female partner in a quadrille , sir . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.616

' Ah ! ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.617

Potts doated on his limbs with a butcher's eye for prize joints .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.618

' Cock-sure has crowed low by sunset , ' Mallard observed .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.619

Fleetwood offered him to take his bets . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.620

' You 're heavy on it with Brailstone ? ' said Mallard .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.621

' Three_thousand . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.622

' I 'd back you for your luck blindfold . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.623

A ruffle of sourness shot over the features of the earl ,
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.624

and was noticed by both eager betters , who exchanged a glance .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.625

Potts inspected his watch , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.626

and said half aloud : ' Liver , ten to one ! MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.627

That never meant bad luck - except bad to act on .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.628

We slept here last night , you know . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.629

It@ @'s a mile and a quarter from the Royal Sovereign to the field of
glory . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.630

Pretty well time to start . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.631

Brailstone has a drive of a couple of miles .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,161.632

Coaches from London <P_19,162> down by this time .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.633

Abrane@ @'s dead on Ben Todds , any odds . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.634

Poor old Braney ! MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.635

" Steady man , Todds . " MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.636

Backs him because he@ @'s a " respectable citizen , " - do@ @n't drink .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.637

A prize-fighter total abstainer has no spurts .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.638

Old Braney@ @'s branded for the losing side .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.639

You might bet against Braney blindfold , Mallard .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.640

How long shall you take to polish him off , Kit Ines ? '
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.641

The opponent of Ben Todds calculated . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.642

' Well , sir , steady Benny ought to be satisfied with his dose in , say
, about forty minutes . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.643

Maybe he wo@ @n't own to it before an hour and ten .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.644

He@ @'s got a proud English stomach . ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.645

' Shall we be late ? ' Potts asked . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.646

' Jump in , ' Fleetwood said to his man . MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.647

' We may be five minutes after time , Chummy .
MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.648

I had a longer drive , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.649

and had to get married on the way , MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.650

and - ah , here they are ! ' MEREDITH-1895-1,19,162.651

