<BEGIN_midshipman-1767-2>

<P_5>

<heading>

A Journal of a Voyage Round the World . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,5.4

<$$heading>

Every thing being prepared for our voyage , on the ninth of June we
slipt our moorings , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,5.6

and sailed for Long Reach , where our guns were delivered and taken on
board , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,5.7

and were joined by the Tamer frigate , captain Mouat , who was to be our
consort : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,5.8

and on the fourteenth we received on board a pilot for the Downs ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,5.9

and early in the <P_6> morning weighed anchor , with a small breeze of
wind : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.10

at seven o' clock the Dolphin striking the bottom , swung round on her
keel ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.11

but , as the ground was muddy , she lay there two hours without
receiving any hurt . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.12

On the sixteenth , we arrived in the Downs , where our pilot went on
shore , and received a twelve_oar'd barge for the service of the Dolphin
, with fresh provisions for the use of the company .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.13

The Tamer , our consort , bound for Plymouth , passed us ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.14

and next day we received our commander on board ; upon which we weighed
anchor , and sailed . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.15

On the night of the twenty-first we had a strong squall of wind .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.16

On the twenty-second , we anchored at Plymouth sound ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.17

and saluted the admiral with thirteen guns , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.18

and sailed up the Hamoaze , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.19

and lash'd along the hulk . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.20

It was thought proper , as the Dolphin had taken ground , to examine if
she had received any damage ; when , to our great joy , we found she had
received none . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.21

We here received two months pay to purchase necessaries for so long a
voyage . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.22

After a stay of four days , we left Plymouth , in company with the Tamer
. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,6.23

Nothing remarkable happened in our voyage to Madeira , where we arrived
the fourteenth <P_7> of July . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.24

The same day we came to an anchor in Fonchiale bay .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.25

Madeira is situated in a fine and healthful climate ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.26

and is composed of one continued hill of a considerable height , which
extends from east to west . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.27

On the south side , the declivity is cultivated , and interspersed with
vineyards and country seats belonging to the merchants .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.28

The only considerable town in the island is Fonchiale , which is
situated on the south , at the bottom of a large bay ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.29

it is defended by a high wall with a battery of cannon , and a fortified
castle , which stands on the Loo , a rock that rises above the water at
a small distance from the shore . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.30

This town is the only place where it is possible for a boat to land ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.31

and even there a violent surf continually beats upon the beach .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.32

The island is justly famous for its excellent wines , which seem
designed by providence for the refreshment of the inhabitants of the
torrid zone : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.33

and never is esteemed good in England , till it has been a voyage to the
West_Indies . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.34

The air is temperate , pure , and serene . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,7.35

They have fine oranges , lemons , bananas , citrons , <P_8> apricots ,
peaches , figs , plumbs , grapes , all of exquisite taste , and high
flavour . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.36

This island abounds with fine cedar trees , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.37

and produces good corn and pasturage ; a great part of which they
annually burn , and plant sugar canes in the ashes , which , in six
months , produces large crops of sugar . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.38

The inhabitants are humane and good_natured , very affable , and
courteous to strangers : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.39

they are much given to pleasure , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.40

and are very dexterous in preserving their different fruits ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.41

In Fonchiale there is a bishop's see , with several other fine churches
and convents , which make a very fine appearance .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.42

The nuns here are , besides embroideries , employed in making curious
flowers of all sorts , and other trinkets , which , at particular hours
, they dispose of to strangers , for the benefit of the convents ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.43

and converse freely with strangers through a double_barr'd grate ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.44

and some of them are remarkably handsome . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.45

This island lies in the Atlantic ocean , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,8.46

is in the form of a triangle , two_hundred_and_forty miles north , by
east of Teneriffe ; three_hundred_and_sixty from Cape Contus on the
coast of Africa ; and three_hundred north of the island <P_9> of Furro :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.47

it was first discovered by an English gentleman , in 1344 .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.48

When we arrived at Madeira we found his Majesty's ship the Ferrit , who
saluted us in the usual form ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.49

we had the same honour paid us by the citadel . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.50

Here we were supplied with fresh provisions of all kinds , with water
and wine . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.51

On the twentieth , we took our leave of the governor ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.52

and after the usual compliments on both sides , of firing guns , &c. we
set sail with the Crown , Ferrit and Tamer : after which we steered for
St. Jago in our voyage , and parted with the Crown and Ferrit , and
fell in with the Liverpool , one of his Majesty's ships from the
East_Indies , bound for England , with whom we sent our dispatches .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.53

On the thirtieth , we saw the island of St. Jago ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.54

and came to an anchor in Porto Praya bay , after saluting a small
fortress , which they returned . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.55

St. Jago is a beautiful and considerable town in South America , and
the capital of Chili , longitude 69 . 35 west , latitude 33 . 40 south
: MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.56

it is situated on a large beautiful plain , abounding in all the
necessaries of life : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.57

it is a bishop's see , and a royal audience . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,9.58

This island abounds in trees , fruit , Indian corn , cattle , and mines
of <P_10> all kinds . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.59

The inhabitants are of a copper colour , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.60

and there are forty blacks to three whites ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.61

they are much addicted to pleasures , wine , and women .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.62

The most of the priests are negroes . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.63

The common people have scarce cloaths to cover their nakedness , so that
you may have all sorts of provisions , as hogs ; fowls of all kinds , as
turkeys , geese , &c. fruit , and whatever they have , for old cloaths
, which they are very proud of , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.64

particularly old black cloaths are looked upon as the most fashionable
and genteel . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.65

This island has four towns , Praya , seated on the eastern coast upon an
eminence , St. Domingo , a handsome town , with an archbishop's see ;
it has a fine superb cathedral , is the seat of the governor of the
island , and is situated on a large navigable river , and of very
difficult access ; St. Domingo Abacen , and St. Jago .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.66

After getting a supply of water and fresh provisions , we left St. Jago
, in company with the Tamer , on the eleventh of September ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.67

and made the coast of Brasil , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.68

and came to an anchor at Rio de Janeiro . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,10.69

It is pleasantly situated in twenty-three degrees , thirty minutes south
, and well fortified , so the Portugueze are vain enough to imagine ,
that it is beyond the power of any nation to attack it with success ,
there <P_11> being several other islands fortified with different
batteries at the entrance : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.70

but the Portuguese would not brag so much , did they know what a fleet
of first_rate English men of war can do . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.71

There was formerly a yard to build men of war in this place ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.72

their ship-carpenters are very slow , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.73

but make good work . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.74

The weather is so hot , that the inhabitants shut up their doors from
ten in the morning , when the land breeze generally ceases , till two in
the afternoon , when the sea breeze comes on . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.75

The vice-roy has his residence here , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.76

and is invested with regal power over the inhabitants .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.77

They sell slaves in the public market here , two and two being chained
together . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.78

The Portuguese women here are not very handsome ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.79

and are much given to pleasure ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.80

and the scenes of debauchery begin as soon as the evening , no women
ever being to be seen in the day time . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.81

The vice-roy's palace is a fine structure , which is a stately stone
building , and the only one in the whole city that has windows , all the
rest having only lattices . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.82

The churches and convents are very magnificent , which have a prodigious
effect upon the minds of the common people . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,11.83

On their altar-pieces are many fine figures of our Saviour , the Virgin
Mary , <P_12> the apostles , &c. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.84

In several places of the streets images are placed , dressed in the most
gorgeous apparel , to which you are obliged to pay all due reverence .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.85

Their houses are but three or four stories high ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.86

and canals run thro' most parts of the town , which make the streets
both clean and agreeable . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.87

A considerable trade is carried on ; a great number of ships arriving
yearly with all sorts of European commodities , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.88

and carry away in return sugars , tobacco , snuff , brazil and other
medicinal woods , fustic , raw hides , train oil , &c.
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.89

Their butcher meats are but indifferent of their kinds , and very ill to
be got ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.90

but they have plenty of fish and Indian corn . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.91

Brasil lies between the equinoctial line and the tropic of Capricorn
being about 1560 miles in length , and 1000 in breadth ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.92

but , measuring along the coast it is near 2000 miles long ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.93

and is bordered with mountains that open from time to time , and form
good harbours , where vessels may lie in safety .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.94

It was discovered by chance in 1500 ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.95

for Alvarez Cabral , a Portuguese , was forced upon it by a tempest ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.96

and the kings of Portugal have continued masters of it ever since .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,12.97

Some time after the revolt of the United Provinces , from the king of
Spain , <P_13> the Dutch drove away the Spaniards , to whom it then
belonged ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.98

but the Portuguese , in their turn , obliged the Dutch to leave it in
1655 . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.99

The air of this country , though within the torrid zone , is pretty
temperate and wholesome ; insomuch that people live there a long while .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.100

The water in general is very good , and the soil fertile and excellent .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.101

There comes more sugar from thence than all other parts of the world :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.102

besides this , it produces tobacco , Indian corn , several sorts of
fruits , and medicinal drugs . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.103

The wood brought from Brazil , and hence so called , is of very great
use in dying red ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.104

and , within the country , there is gold , and several sorts of precious
stones : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.105

likewise the cattle , carried over from Europe , increase prodigiously ,
insomuch that there is no want of provisions . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.106

They have several sorts of animals not known in Europe ; and among the
rest , a bird called Colibri , whose body is not much larger than that
of a May-bug , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.107

and it sings as harmoniously as a nightingale ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.108

it is a perfect beauty , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.109

and the neck is of such a lively red , that it might be mistaken for a
ruby ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.110

the belly , and the upper part of the wings , are of the colour of gold
, MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.111

and the thighs are as green as an emerald ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,13.112

the legs and bill are as black as <P_14> polished ebony ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.113

and the eyes resemble two oval diamonds , being of the colour of
burnished steel ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.114

the head is green , with a mixture of gold , and of a surprizing lustre
; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.115

that of the cock is adorned with a small tuft : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.116

it is almost impossible to conceive how so small a bird can have so loud
a note . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.117

The Portuguese chiefly inhabit the sea-coast , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.118

for they have not penetrated far into the country .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.119

The inland parts are full of people of different languages ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.120

but they all agree in wearing no sort of cloaths .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.121

They are of a copper-colour , with long coarse black hair on their heads
, but without any on the other parts of their bodies like the rest of
the Americans . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.122

They are strong , lively , and gay ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.123

and , as they are subject to few diseases , they live a long time .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.124

They love to adorn themselves with feathers , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.125

and they are very fond of feasts ; at which they dance and skip about
immoderately . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.126

They have no temples , nor any other sign of religion ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.127

and they make no manner of scruple to marry their nearest relations .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.128

Some pretend that they are canibals , and eat those that they have taken
in war : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.129

but this is a fable . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.130

They have huts made of the branches of trees , and covered with
palm-tree leaves . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,14.131

Their furniture consists chiefly in their hammocks , and <P_15> dishes ,
or cups , made of calibashes , painted without of a red colour , and
black within ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.132

their knives are made of a sort of stone and split canes ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.133

and they have likewise baskets of different sizes , chiefly made of
palm-tree leaves . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.134

Their arms are only bows , arrows , and wooden clubs .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.135

When they travel , they fasten their hammocks between two trees ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.136

and sleep all night therein . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.137

The Portuguese divide Brasil into fifteen governments or capitanaries ;
eight of which belong to the king of Portugal , and the rest to great
men , who have peopled them at their own expence .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.138

Salvador is the capital of Brasil , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.139

and stands on the bay of All Saints , near the river Pitangi ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.140

is large , rich and well-built ; but upon an uneven ground , upon an
eminence of about one_hundred fathoms , formed by the east side of the
bay ; so that cranes , &c. convey the goods up and down from the city
to the port . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,15.141

Though the streets are straight , and of a good breadth , most of them
are so steep as to be impracticable by coaches or chairs : to supply
which defect , the rich cause themselves to be carried about in a kind
of cotton hammocks called serpentines , which hang by the ends to a long
pole , and are carried by two negroes on their heads <P_16> or shoulders
. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.142

This bed has a tester and curtains , with a velvet pillow .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.143

This irregular situation however does not hinder the place from being
one of the most trading and rich in the country ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.144

and it moreover contributes much to its strength .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.145

The east side is almost inaccessible {TEXT:inaccessable} ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.146

and the other parts are well fortified both by art and nature , the
avenues to it being defended by several forts , in which and the town
are no more than six companies of regular forces .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.147

The commerce of this capital is very considerable , consisting in
woollen and linen cloths of all sorts , hats , stockings both of thread
and silk , wheat , barley , meal , biscuit , Port wine , houshold and
kitchen furniture , Guiney slaves , &c. oil , cheese , beef , and pork
salted ; in return for which they export gold , sugar , tobacco , snuff
, Brasil wood , hides , tallow , balsam of capivy , hipecacuanha , &c.
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.148

These are conveyed up and down upon sledges , which are drawn by cranes
turned by slaves ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.149

and the way , being one_hundred_and_forty fathoms in length , is boarded
, that the sledges may meet with no obstruction .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.150

The inhabitants , above the common rank , are courteous ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.151

but the lower class are insolent , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,16.152

<P_17>

and the soldiery are given to all manner of vice ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.154

and some of them are dangerous assassins . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.155

The women here are kept even more strictly than in Portugal ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.156

yet they find means to elude the watchfulness of their keepers .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.157

Husbands however make no scruple to stab or poison their wives if they
catch them a-tripping . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.158

The generality of the people here are rich , and much given to traffic ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.159

yet many of the wealthy citizens breed some of their sons to the church
, who are obliged to prove themselves old Christians , that is , of a
family which has never been tainted with Judaism or Moorism .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.160

The houses here are handsomely built , mostly of brick or stone , and
richly furnished . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.161

The city is supposed to contain about two_thousand of these .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.162

Here poor wretches of both sexes among the negroes are exposed stark
naked to public sale , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.163

and of blacks there are twenty to one white . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.164

The churches , monasteries , &c. here , are not only built in the most
sumptuous manner , but adorned with every thing rich and costly .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.165

The upper town has many such splendid structures , the most considerable
of which is the cathedral of San Salvador . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,17.166

The church belonging to the Jesuits college is all built of marble
<P_18> brought from Europe ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.167

the sacristy is very rich . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.168

The vice-roy's palace is a most sumptuous building , as are the
archbishop's palace , the courts of judicature , hospitals , &c.
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.169

The traffic of this place is still much enhanced by its correspondence
with Rio de Janeiro , near which are the gold mines called Paulistas .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.170

Though the inhabitants are forbid to wear any gold or silver-lace , yet
they have ornaments of massy gold about themselves ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.171

and they will sometimes hang them about their black women slaves .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.172

Strangers are not permitted to resort thither to carry away the produce
of the country , tho' they would buy it with specie , much less to carry
their goods to sell or exchange here . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.173

The bay of All Saints is in general rich and populous ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.174

but the climate is excessive hot and unhealthy .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.175

Here are great rains in winter , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.176

and provisions are scarce and bad . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.177

The fruits and greens are eaten up by pismires .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.178

The Portuguese are so addicted to the planting of sugar and tobacco ,
that some have upwards of five_hundred slaves , whose labour is so hard
, and sustenance so small , that they are reckoned to live long , if
they hold it out seven years . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,18.179

So great is the application of the Portuguese <P_19> to this trade ,
that they take no care to sow or plant other kinds of vegetables , which
makes all provisions excessive dear . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.180

For fish , though their coasts swarm with various sorts , none will be
at the pains to catch them ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.181

and as to flesh , the pasture being so far off , the cattle either die
by the way , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.182

or are mere carrion by that time they are brought to town .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.183

This being the principal city and province in all Brasil , the above
particular detail may serve to give a clearer idea of the rest of the
country , its trade , government , &c. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.184

On the ninetenth , the commodore went on shore to pay his compliments to
the vice-roy , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.185

and was most graciously received by him and all his nobles ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.186

and had the usual salute . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.187

At noon the Kent Indiaman with lord Clive entered the bay , when the
usual salutes were given . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.188

On the seventh of October , the vice-roy returned his visit to the
commodore , where he was received with the usual honours , all hands
having manned the ship , and fifteen guns fired on the occasion .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.189

On the ninth , lord Clive waited on the commodore , when the usual
compliments of guns were exchanged . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,19.190

From the fifteenth of September to the <P_20> eighteenth of October our
men were employed in wooding , watering , caulking , &c.
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,20.191

and having compleated our ships for sea , we supposed our next course
would have been for the East_Indies . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,20.192

Our commodore from all appearances seemed to have this in his view ,
that even Lord Clive was deceived , and imagined we should go by the
Cape of Good Hope . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,20.193

On the twentieth of October we left Rio de Janeiro .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,20.194

A signal being given by the commodore , the commander of the Tamer came
on board , when the companies of both ships were informed that we were
to go to make discoveries in the South seas ; and that the government
would allow them double pay for the prosecution of this voyage .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,20.195

There was nothing material happened till the twenty_seventh of November
, when , after many severe squalls of wind , we arrived at Cape Blanco ,
near the river Coemarories , in the latitude of 46 degrees , 50 minutes
south , and in the longitude of 72 degrees , 7 minutes from London .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,20.196

While we staid here the weather was very tempestous ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,20.197

therefore on the thirtieth we sent our boats to sound the harbour ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,20.198

and the next day we entered it , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,20.199

and found it very rocky on both sides of the entrance , about <P_21> a
quarter of a mile broad . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.200

On our entering the harbour the wind was very favourable , with fine
weather , our boats all out about the ship ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.201

but on a sudden the wind chop'd about , so that we could not get our
sails furl'd , nor return , the tide of flood running with such rapidity
, that before we could bring her up , she took the shore .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.202

The night was dark , rainy , and tempestuous . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.203

All our hopes of a golden treasure were now lost ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.204

as all our boats were driven to sea , and our ship on shore , we looked
for nothing but perishing on this desart coast of Patagonia .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.205

But next morning , to our great joy , Providence drove our twelve-oar'd
barge into the harbour , by which means the ship was preferred .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.206

Next day we got into the middle of the harbour ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.207

but the weather being still very tempestuous , we took all the
precautions we could to moor the ship safe . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.208

Two of the boats that were driven on shore returned this day , all well
, though the men had suffered extreamly by the weather .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.209

The day following our longboat returned after having been carried
several leagues to sea . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.210

During our stay here we repaired our ship . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,21.211

We could find but little fresh water , which <P_22> was of a mineral
taste , and the harbour but of bad anchorage . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.212

We left Port Doure on the fourth of December . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.213

The only good we got at this place was the refreshing our men with the
fresh provisions they got here . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.214

We directed our course to the southward of Pepys' island , in the
latitude of 48 degrees south , and in the longitude of 64 degrees from
the meridian of London . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.215

Here we expected to find plenty of wood and water ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.216

but were disappointed . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.217

On the twentieth , at four in the afternoon , we saw the extremity of
the land of Cape Fair-weather , extending from south to west .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.218

The next day we saw Cape Virgin Mary , from which we were five leagues
distant , and also the land named Terra del Fuego .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.219

At three o'clock next morning we weighed anchor ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.220

and at six the extremities of Terra del Fuego appeared ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.221

at eight we saw clouds of smoak arising from different places ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.222

and presently saw a number of people on horseback .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.223

At ten we anchored , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.224

and saw Cape Virgin Mary , which appeared at east north east .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.225

We were then about a mile from the land ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.226

and after we came to an anchor , they halloo'd MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,22.227

and <P_23> made friendly signals to us , upon which we manned and armed
all our boats . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.228

On our first approaching the shore evident marks of fear appeared in the
countenances of all in the boats , at seeing human creatures of such an
enormous size . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.229

When arrived within twenty yards of the shore we lay on our oars ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.230

and observed that great numbers of them surrounded the beach ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.231

and by their signals we imagined they were desirous to have us to land .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.232

We made a signal that they should retire backwards , the commodore and
chief officers consulting what was most proper to be done .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.233

As soon as the Indians retired the commodore and his officers landed ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.234

and immediately drew up his men in a form of defence .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.235

Upon our landing upwards of two_hundred came about us , smiling at the
prodigious disproportion there was between their size and ours .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.236

After many agreeable tokens of love and friendship , the commodore made
them some presents of beads , and other small trinkets ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.237

but was obliged to make them sit down before he could put the beads and
ribbons about their necks ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.238

and even then they were as high as him when {COM:sic} stands .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,23.239

They were so greatly pleased at seeing themselves dressed in these
ornaments , that <P_24> they could scarcely be hindered from caressing
the commodore , particularly the women , whose middle stature seemed to
be about eight feet , the largest size between nine and ten .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.240

The faces of the women were painted , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.241

and they had collars about their necks ; their hair long , black , and
hanging down behind . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.242

We were greatly surprized with seeing some of their women with collars
on their necks and bracelets on their arms , as from their great
surprize , at first seeing us , we imagined they had never seen any of
the human race before : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.243

but if what Sir John Narborough and others have observed be true , those
Indians change their situation with the sun , spending their summer here
, and their winter farther to the north , for the benefit of a warmer
climate . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.244

Those Indians were about ten feet high , straight and well made ,
broad_set , and of a prodigious strength . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.245

They ride upon horses about fifteen feet high : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.246

Both men and women ride astride . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.247

Their dog's noses were picked like a swine's . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.248

They by signs invited us up the country , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.249

and we by signs invited them on board the ship ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.250

{COM:remaining_two_lines_of_page_illegible}

<P_24.1_unnumbered_in_text>

A Patagonian is not fabricated as a man of London or Paris , of five
feet high ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.253

he does not approach his mistress with corrupted manners , a weakened
constitution , and a body hurt by excess and debauchery , but with a
virtuous behaviour , a good constitution , and noble sentiments .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.254

While a female Patagonian is with child , all disagreeable objects are
kept from her ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.255

she is awakened by musick ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.256

they study to divert her with amusements most suitable to her taste ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.257

her mind is brightened with joy ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.258

without allowing her to grow slothful for want of action , she has
exercise , such as walking , or such husbandry work , as is most
agreeable to her . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.259

The Patagonians do not doubt the mother's influence over both the
physical and moral constitution of the child , as a sound strong tree
produces large fruit . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.260

When a young Patagonian is born , it is suckled by its mother :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.261

it is the opinion of that country , that no other person can perform
that sacred office of nature properly , which is equally for the good of
both mother and child . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.262

The people of that nation do not chuse to have their children weak ,
lame , crooked-legg'd , or rickety ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.1_unnumbered_in_text.263

if any family among them , like a sickly nursery , should be unshapely ,
<P_24.2_unnumbered_in_text> and not grow , it would be forced to look
for shelter in the desart , where it might likely form a poor race of
weak savages of five feet .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.264

They are very careful not to stop the circulation of the blood , and
humours , or the motion of the limbs of their children ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.265

they do@ @n't swaddle them :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.266

they learned this lesson from the brutes ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.267

the healthy baby is left free like a puppy ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.268

scrabbles about a room covered with matts , where nothing can hurt it ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.269

it has no other cradle , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.270

and soon springs forward to meet the nipple from which it is nourished ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.271

and fastens itself to it , by hanging upon its mother with its knees and
feet about her waste : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.272

the mother does not leave her employment while the child sucks ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.273

nor gives it any assistance with her hands ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.274

in the same manner it scrabbles after any thing that is thrown on the
matt to it : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.275

as soon as it gets upon its feet , it is led twenty times a day to a
meadow , where it has pure air , and may run and tumble about without
harm ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.276

they do@ @n't use leading-strings , nor put on them pads or puddings to
prevent them from being hurt by a fall ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.277

as they are human creatures , the parent chuses they should learn to
suffer , and from experience prevent accidents for the future :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.2_unnumbered_in_text.278

<P_24.3_unnumbered_in_text>

their heads are never covered ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.280

and that exposure hardens the skull ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.281

and prevents humours and defluxions ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.282

and guards it against bruises ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.283

they are also accustomed to go bare_footed , as they have not always
time to put on their shoes and stockings , as in cases of fire , for
fear they should be burnt in their huts ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.284

and they can stand firmer on a steep place on their own skin , than on
the tann'd and slippery hides of beasts ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.285

the rest of their bodies are thinly and loosely covered ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.286

they wear no garters ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.287

they are accustomed to bear the heat of the sun by degrees , also
excessive cold , and wetting rains :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.288

from the day they are born they bathe them in cold water every day ,
even when it is covered with ice ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.289

though the Patagonians do@ @n't understand physic , they know that the
motion of the blood is quicker in infancy , and is sufficient to keep
them warm , and that the cold affects them no further than the skin .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.290

As they are prepared to bear the severity of the weather , they also are
accustomed to every thing that appears frightful in the air ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.291

they are used to hear and see the troubled sky , the loud winds ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.292

they are led into the middle of a garden ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.293

and their parents dance round them ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.3_unnumbered_in_text.294

and admire the lightnings , as we do the <P_24.4_unnumbered_in_text>
noise of a gun ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.295

they count the claps of thunder as we do the report of cannon at publick
rejoicings , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.296

and seem disappointed when it ceases , that they hear no more ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.297

and go into their houses only because the shew is over .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.298

They will tell a young Patagonian , that lightnings will kill , as
really happens once or twice a year , that a man is crushed to death by
the fall of a tree , a house , or a rock :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.299

but this is not a time for talking , but doing ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.300

they do@ @n't always keep him lying or sitting ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.301

when they chuse he should move they set him upon his legs .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.302

As he grows in strength and size daily , the father or his tutor studies
every thing that may add to his strength , activity , and address ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.303

any thing he would have for breakfast is put in a basket , and hung upon
a tree ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.304

if he gets it he must climb the tree , or knock it down with a stone or
an arrow ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.305

any vegetable he is particularly fond of he must dig out of the ground ,
or not get it ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.306

if he would have a bird to play with , he must hunt it down ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.307

if he chuses a companion in his sports , he is separated from him by a
ditch , which he must leap over to come at him ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.308

at another time he must climb over a wall to get to his mother :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.4_unnumbered_in_text.309

if his father is going to the chase , and he has an inclination
<P_24.5_unnumbered_in_text> to follow him , if he is allowed to go , the
father takes him to the foot of a mountain ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.310

gets on before him over rocks , and through briers ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.311

leaps from point to point ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.312

comes back , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.313

and finds him following : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.314

Come on , my boy , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.315

and do like your father . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.316

A very Chiron he , educating an Achilles .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.317

In the same way he teaches them to carry burthens , to know the use of
the lever , to lift weights , to cleave bodies , and to do any thing
with his left hand as with his right .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.318

The Patagonian system of education is quite gymnastic , always
fortifying the fibres by constancy and dexterous exercise ,
strengthening the muscles , adjusting the organs to the objects of their
respective action , giving them equally pliability and resistance ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.319

and accustoms the body to bear and do every thing .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.320

As to the moral education of the Patagonians , they are all intended to
promote the social virtues .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.321

In this vast university the professors are not satisfied with desiring
the pupils to be just , humane , generous , grateful , patient ,
laborious , temperate , obedient to the laws , the magistrates , and
their prince . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.322

They are put to the practice of such virtues daily .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.323

If a pupil borrows any thing , he is obliged to return it on the day
promised ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.5_unnumbered_in_text.324

if another wants any <P_24.6_unnumbered_in_text> thing , the person who
has it to spare is obliged to give it to him ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.325

if one has received a favour , and is not grateful for it , or does not
discover it , he is immediately observed ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.326

if any of them falls sick , and bears it with patience and meekness ,
every body is ready to serve him as much as they can ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.327

but if he is impatient and ill-natured he has only bare necessaries .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.328

No one is allowed to do himself justice ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.329

but if the strong takes upon him to insult the weak , he is severely
punished : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.330

even the youth appoint judges among themselves to determine all causes
of dispute or injustice ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.331

a prince is also appointed emblem of him who commands the nation , the
school of love , and obedience :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.332

they read the book of the laws , mostly which is applied in miniature ,
to the institution of youth .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.333

There is a large field in the neighbourhood of the college , which the
pupils cultivate at stated hours , to accustom them to labour , and
instruct them in the nature of the earth and its productions ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.334

in their hours of leisure and amusement they sing heroick songs in
praise of the Patagonians , who have been illustrious examples to their
country . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.335

These are the only ideas that are inculcated in the youth .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.6_unnumbered_in_text.336

The Patagonian children have no imaginary <P_24.7_unnumbered_in_text>
apprehensions about ghosts , witches , significant dreams , fatal days ,
or unlucky numbers , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.337

they are only acquainted with real dangers , that they may learn to
avoid them ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.338

they are told , learn to manage that horse ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.339

he may run away with you ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.340

it is possible you may be pursued by a wild beast ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.341

learn to defend yourself , to run faster than it , to climb up a tree ,
or attack and kill it , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.342

learn to swim , least you should have occasion to save yourself or your
friend in a time of danger .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.343

The females are instructed in the same manner with regard to the dangers
both sexes are liable to , in order to lessen them as much as possible .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.344

The Patagonian metropolis is much more extensive than the greatest city
in Europe , but not near so populous ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.345

A fine river divides it , with bridges of a great length , and
prodigious elevation thrown over it .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.346

Through want of taste the Ediles had built houses on those bridges ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.347

but they are now taken down by their posterity .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.348

There is nothing magnificent , but every thing for convenience ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.349

the streets are broad , regular , and neat , the markets large , and
many of them ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.350

conduits are disposed properly , and every part of the town well
supplied with water : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.7_unnumbered_in_text.351

every <P_24.8_unnumbered_in_text> body is furnished with the
conveniences of health and cleanliness by the publick baths and immense
edifices , which greatly decorate the city .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.352

Knowing that large cities crowded are very pernicious to health , the
country is brought into the city :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.353

the houses are but one story high , built separate , with a garden and
park to each house . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.354

They build their houses with large beams of wood , notwithstanding they
have plenty of stone-quarries ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.355

but make use of stone , only in building publick edifices ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.356

they object against stone and mortar , as these materials are apt to
sweat out a moisture , which occasions a constant breathing of vapours ,
which affect the nerves and stomach thro' time .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.357

Every thing is removed that may corrupt the air .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.358

Some ignorant but charitable Patagonian had built hospitals in different
parts of the city , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.359

but finding the people more sickly in those quarters of the town , the
hospitals were removed without the walls , by which means the sick also
found good effects , and recovered more speedily :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.360

at the same time a regulation was made , that every patient should have
a bed to themselves . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.8_unnumbered_in_text.361

A great part of the nation was carried off <P_24.9_unnumbered_in_text>
by a foreign disease , which was brought home by some Patagonian
travellers : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.362

many means were used to destroy its violence , but to no purpose , till
they thought of a method to remove its fatality by communicating the
distemper to the subjects after a proper preparation ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.363

the practice was brought in vogue after seven or eight successful
experiments , and a new hospital built for those who were willing to
secure themselves and their children from danger .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.364

The Patagonians are only acquainted with natural medicine :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.365

they look upon their blood as the fountain of life ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.366

and say it ought not to be exhausted , but purified .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.367

Every person is his own family's physician , with the assistance of diet
, and a few simples , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.368

and calls in his neighbours for their assistance , if he finds himself
at a loss . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.369

The Patagonians might very easily comfort themselves for their ignorance
in medicine , if they were not sensible that some proficiency has been
made in it within these two_thousand years ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.370

they proceed by observation , not by system :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.371

the part of physick most esteemed by them is the hygiene , which
prevents maladies , by means of temperance , exercise , and alacrity .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.9_unnumbered_in_text.372

<P_24.10_unnumbered_in_text>

As to the general term of the duration of life among the Patagonians ,
it is to be presumed , that as great bodies keep growing till thirty ,
their very old age is about two_hundred_and_ten , when their strength
fails , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.374

and their senses decaying , they seldom regret the loss of life .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.375

Their place of burial was formerly within the walls of the city ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.376

but , as it was feared the corruption of the dead bodies might infect
the living , that was prevented for the future .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.377

About a century ago , the Patagonians were much affrighted by some
people , who were supposed to be dead , and had come to life again ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.378

they made enquiry of each other what were the certain signs of death ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.379

it was determined , that putrification was an undoubted sign :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.380

so instead of burying the dead bodies within twenty-four hours , they
deferred the interment till there was a sign of putrefaction .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.381

This error was of long standing ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.382

but time does not consecrate error in that colossal nation , which has
more coarse good sense than refined wit .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.383

They live entirely upon fish and vegetables at a certain time of the
year , to give the animals time to regenerate and repair their species ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.10_unnumbered_in_text.384

but the hospitals are allowed to sell animal
<P_24.11_unnumbered_in_text> food , in favour of weak constitutions
under certain regulations as to price and quality .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.385

Are you curious to know how a Patagonian lives in a capital city thus
built and regulated ? MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.386

I will tell you ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.387

a Patagonian , even of the first rank , rises
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.388

and goes to bed with the sun ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.389

in good weather he enjoys the pleasure of the fresh air ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.390

and admires the beauties of the morning , the fields , and woods ,
beautified by Aurora , the trees covered with flowers or fruits , the
most pleasing verdure , the playful flocks , the purling brooks , the
feather'd songsters , that rejoice at the return of day ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.391

all nature , which awakes in smiles , diffuses a pleasing calmness over
his soul , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.392

and imparts the balm of life to his heart .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.393

Every day he employs himself in some kind of labour , often in husbandry
, and always in the open air :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.394

he knows that free air , particularly when it is scented with all the
perfumes of nature , is more healthful than being in a chamber .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.395

He always goes abroad on foot , that he may have the advantage of a
motion so necessary for the good of his health ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.396

neither rain , frost , snow , nor fogs prevents his exercise in winter ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.11_unnumbered_in_text.397

as he is innured {COM:sic_with_double_"n"} to the variations and
impressions of the climate from his <P_24.12_unnumbered_in_text> birth ,
he is in a manner secured by his own skin .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.398

He has no fixed hours for his meals ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.399

as he knows by experience , that gratification is dependent on desire ,
he eats only when he is hungry ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.400

and lives more on vegetables than animal food , as he has a natural
dislike to the killing of animals , and remarks , that carnivorous
beasts and birds are usually very lean .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.401

The Patagonian approaches nearest to the man of nature of all men that
live in a state of society ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.402

ignorant of the arts of luxury , he finds water ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.403

and satisfies his thirst ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.404

wine is only sold by apothecaries as a medicine , as well as other
fermented liquors ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.405

he finds milk refreshing , and the most simple foods nourishing , and at
the same time pleasing to his taste ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.406

he thinks the skins of animals a sufficient covering ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.407

and finds his horse relieves him when he is tired with walking ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.408

he thinks himself very fine when he is dressed with a metal collar , and
a few feathers ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.409

these are almost all the Patagonians desires .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.410

He is passionately fond of a domestic life ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.12_unnumbered_in_text.411

and every thing is pleasing and interesting to him in the midst of his
family , his wife , his children , their education , even their noise ,
his servants , agreeable repasts with his family sometimes
<P_24.13_unnumbered_in_text> in a grove , sheltered from the heat of the
sun , and at other times in a valley , by the side of a murmuring brook
, at others , on the top of a rock , from whence he may observe an
extensive horizon . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.412

He is unacquainted with cold ceremonious visits ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.413

and makes none but those of friendship , humanity , or business .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.414

He is happiest in his own house ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.415

for there he governs , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.416

loves , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.417

and is beloved . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.418

He is not shut up in his house , as we are in ours ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.419

a garden , a park , and a live stock are all necessary to his happiness
. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.420

He is only susceptible of the milder passions ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.421

has no ambition , but that of an happiness easily obtained , by treading
the steps of nature . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.422

If he is called upon to attend pubick affairs , and leave this state of
tranquillity , he makes that sacrifice for the cause and good of his
country , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.423

for the offices of state are only burthensome :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.424

he returns as soon as possible to his own former private station , his
family being to him a most agreeable and lasting amusement .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.425

The Patagonians have also their publick diversions ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.13_unnumbered_in_text.426

they have their circus and their amphitheatres , where their youth
dispute the prize of leaping , wrestling , running , the management of
the bow , the sling , at carrying <P_24.14_unnumbered_in_text> weights ,
and fighting wild beasts .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.427

The young females also display their charms there in the most ingenious
and forcible manner ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.428

they are finely shaped , without having been squeezed in a box of
whalebone , or cramped with bars of iron .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.429

Such a publick day is the most agreeable of their whole lives ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.430

on this occasion they distribute the prizes ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.431

and make choice of their husbands , who must be twenty-eight years of
age at least : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.432

the inequality of condition between families is no objection to any
match , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.433

the only lawful obstacle is difference of age ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.434

they say nature hath for ever separated summer from winter .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.435

As to fortune , each individual finds a competency in labour and
industry . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.436

Their opera is without action ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.437

and consists intirely in recital and description .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.438

They sing of the beauty of the sun , the succession of the seasons , the
fruitfulness of the earth , conjugal affection , the annual increase of
population , friendship , brotherly love , patriotism , the inventors of
the plough , the mill , the art of building , language , writing ,
navigation , <font> &c. <$$font>
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.14_unnumbered_in_text.439

In their tragedies the persons of the drama consist of ancient giants ,
who wanted to tyranize over others , because they were stronger and
taller . The catastrophe being always consistent
<P_24.15_unnumbered_in_text> with poetical justice , and ending with the
punishment of the guilty .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.440

By their comedies it would seem , that the Patagonians do@ @n't like to
be diverted at the expence of each other ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.441

but they keep some little men as we do dwarfs in Europe ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.442

and takes pleasure in introducing these on the stage by way of contrast
; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.443

for example , they represent a Patagonian beauty as setting a man of
five feet upon her knee , treating him with great kindness , and
desiring him to reach her some fruit from the top of an {COM:sic} high
tree . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.444

The little creature , who has neither the nimbleness nor strength of the
country , looks up at it ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.445

but despairs ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.446

she gives him an ax to break down the tree ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.447

but he is not able to lift it .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.448

A wild beast approaches them ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.449

Ah my dear lover ! cries the fair Patagonian , protect me :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.450

He seizes a bow , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.451

but alas ! finds himself so weak , he can@ @not bend it , which obliges
his mistress to fly with her brave defender under her arm .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.452

In another scene there is a prize depending upon a leap over a little
ditch of water , only thirty feet broad ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.453

our little man jumps , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.454

and falls in the middle .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.455

He is offered revenge in a fight with a petty Patagonian , not seven
feet and a half high , who knocks him down the first blow ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.15_unnumbered_in_text.456

<P_24.16_unnumbered_in_text>

his antagonist is enraged , and the spectators diverted at his impotent
resentment . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.458

The Patagonians generally despise men of our size , on account of their
own majestick stature , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.459

but behave kindly to them , even while they divert themselves with them
. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.460

These people hope to have comedies soon in a better taste ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.461

for the Beaux-esprits , that have succeeded already in the tragedy and
opera , are improving the comic theatre at present ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.462

but as they are whimsical and quarrelsome , it is feared it will delay
the work , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.463

but their quarrels furnish the publick with very high entertainments .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.464

The Patagonian theatre is very singular ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.465

for without having read either Vitruvius or Palladio , or seen any
models from them , their houses are built in the elliptical
{TEXT:eliptical} form , so well proportioned to the eye and ear , that
the beholders may see and hear from the most distant parts of the
theatre . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.466

There are seats in the pit as well as the boxes for the company ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.467

the Patagonians say they should not make a toil of a pleasure .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.468

Their theatres in general are larger than ours ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.469

that of the capital is of an extraordinary size ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.470

and so it should be , to hold thirty_thousand giants :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.16_unnumbered_in_text.471

their inhabitants are about <P_24.17_unnumbered_in_text> that number ,
including the common people , who partake of all publick diversions .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.472

Their magistrates say , the more people labour , they have the more need
for relaxation , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.473

and it can@ @not be a publick diversion which the populace do not share
in . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.474

There is not the least disturbance either at coming in , or going out of
the theatre , notwithstanding the great multitude , because the doors
are large , and it is situated in the middle of an extensive square ,
the avenues spacious and wide in proportion .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.475

The building is rustic , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.476

but from its height and grandeur , has a majestic appearance .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.477

There are no beggars at the church doors , nor in the streets or
highways of Patagonia ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.478

all the people are employed in agriculture , or other useful employments
. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.479

If a person refused to work , he is compelled to enter upon the
settlements for that purpose .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.480

Those who are past labour are maintained to prevent the mortification of
being forced to beg . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.481

It is labour in general which constitutes the wealth of particular
families , as it does that of the state .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.482

Certain of subsisting by the work of their hands , they are not
apprehensive of becoming too numerous , whilst labour is universally
respected : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.17_unnumbered_in_text.483

the more they increase , the more land is cultivated ,
<P_24.18_unnumbered_in_text> so that the birth of a Patagonian is always
a subject of joy . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.484

Polygamy is forbid , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.485

but in case of barrenness , of diseases , or disagreement in temper ,
the law allows a divorce ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.486

but this very seldom happens ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.487

when it does , the state provides for the children .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.488

All taxes are paid in the time of harvest , and where it was produced ,
which makes every one pay regularly :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.489

this portion of the state is estimated by its real produce , not by the
quality or extent of the soil ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.490

and is therefore just what it should be ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.491

and the prince takes care of it .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.492

Such is the whole system of imposts ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.493

and nobody has reason for complaint .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.494

The Patagonians are ignorant of everything but what is necessary ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.495

and that they find where ever they want it .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.496

They have no foreign trade ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.497

nor have they any notion of the usefulness of commerce , notwithstanding
that they have cut a number of artificial rivers across their country ,
which has the appearance of a trading nation ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.498

but they are only canals , which serve to water the country , and afford
an easy conveyance from one city to another , and a communication with
the capital . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.18_unnumbered_in_text.499

The sides of <P_24.19_unnumbered_in_text> these canals are planted with
trees , which adds greatly to the beauty of the country .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.500

The Patagonians are unacquainted with civil strife ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.501

they are not courteous enough to cut each others throats ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.502

and being sensible that foreign wars had brought a train of evils on
their country , it was determined they should enter into no wars for the
future , but such as were in their own defence .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.503

Every Patagonian being bred up to arms and hard labour , he is of course
a soldier , and able to defend the land he cultivates :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.504

they therefore keep no standing army in time of peace , as they are
fearful that soldiers well armed , and well paid , may be converted into
slaves , ready to obey the call of ambition , and crush their countrymen
. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.505

Among the Patagonians , all persons who have behaved well to their
country , by obtaining a victory , cultivating a desart , draining a
morass , improving the useful arts , or discovering {TEXT:discover}
remedies against diseases , are maintained by the state , look'd upon as
people of consequence , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.506

and have places of pre-eminence apointed them in all publick meetings .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.507

This honour is only personal ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.508

and their children enjoy no benefit from it ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.19_unnumbered_in_text.509

but are obliged to labour , and strive to <P_24.20_unnumbered_in_text>
raise themselves by their own industry , that they may become as noble
as their ancestors . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.20_unnumbered_in_text.510

If any of the nobility among them , by his superior virtues , or fine
talents , engages the particular esteem of his nation , he is presented
with some valuable possessions , and a collar of topaz .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.20_unnumbered_in_text.511

As the noblemen must do the honours of the capital , by preparing
entertainments they are generally good oeconomists , to enable them to
be just , magnificent , and generous
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.20_unnumbered_in_text.512

They do@ @n't pay their court to their prince in person unless to give
him an opportunity of doing some good ; so that he is certain his
subjects are happy , when he is alone :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.20_unnumbered_in_text.513

he therefore enjoys the pleasures of private life as much as individuals
do . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.20_unnumbered_in_text.514

By the laws he is obliged to spend three months every year in making a
tour thro' Patagonia , to see whether any part of the government be
deficient ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.20_unnumbered_in_text.515

and his successor accompanies him in this tour , which instructs him in
the nature of the country , the inhabitants , and their employment .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.20_unnumbered_in_text.516

Since the Patagonians have been capable of thinking seriously , they
have always paid respect to the laws , which are made at general
meetings , and remain in force till they grow
<P_24.21_unnumbered_in_text> out of use , and are no longer suited to
the times . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.517

The Patagonians were neither unjust nor cruel originally ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.518

but had a pride in their humanity and justice .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.519

They had however adapted barbarous laws , without knowing them to be so
; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.520

the people who demanded justice , were ruined by the forms of justice :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.521

they punished before conviction ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.522

tortured , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.523

broke on the wheel , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.524

burnt , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.525

and impaled all , because it was the custom ; till an old Patagonian , a
professor in the law , who had distinguished himself in the magistracy ,
published a new book , intitled , The good sense of the laws , which was
agreeably received . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.526

I shall give you a few of its articles .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.527

There had been many degrees of jurisdiction before this reformation ,
that it was necessary to gain the same cause three or four times over ,
which occasioned great uneasiness to the clients , and hindrance of
business to carry on their suits .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.528

The reformer said , the expedition of justice was as necessary as
justice itself , and that the judge can@ @not be too near the matter to
be decided : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.529

he was attended to , and heard .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.530

Every inhabited town and village had a tribunal of its own , from which
there was no appeal ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.21_unnumbered_in_text.531

and , by this means , more disputes were <P_24.22_unnumbered_in_text>
determined by arbitration , than by the courts ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.532

and that was what was mostly desired by the judges .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.533

The costs were so great before this reformation , that those who gained
their cause , said , they had better have given up their point in
dispute : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.534

it was of no consequence to the client , whether he was ruined by
justice or injustice , if he must be ruined at all events .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.535

The officers and attendants of the court should be properly provided for
, at the expence of the publick , because they can@ @not improve their
land . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.536

It was therefore determined , that justice should be had at no expence ,
and consequently pure and undefiled .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.537

Before the reformation , local customs took place of the laws ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.538

and it frequently happened , that a person in doing the same thing ,
might be right in one place , and wrong in another .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.539

The reformer said , reason was every where the same ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.540

the same troops ought to have the same discipline .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.541

Then the laws were made universal , as the same weights and measures
were before , which prevented the unjust trader from imposing upon the
honest purchaser ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.542

and if any party commenced an unjust suit , he was obliged to pay a
certain penalty . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.22_unnumbered_in_text.543

<P_24.23_unnumbered_in_text>

The laws concerning criminal affairs had been very cruel ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.545

the person accused of a crime was thrown into a dungeon , without the
necessaries of life , infectious , unwholesome , and dark .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.546

The reformer said , you are not certain that he is guilty ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.547

he should not be punished till he is convicted ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.548

imprisonment ought not to be severe but secure :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.549

so now the prisoner is as much at ease , except freedom , as in his own
house , having the choice of any two friends to be with him in the
prison . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.550

Before the reformation they found an_hundred trifling excuses for
delaying the trial {TEXT:tryal} of prisoners ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.551

it was sometimes a year or more before his fate was determined .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.552

Says the author of the new code , if he should be innocent , a long
imprisonment must be hurtful to justice , and the humanity of the
Patagonians : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.553

it was therefore decreed , that the accused should be tried within a
month , a space of time too long , says the law , for the ordinary
course of things . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.554

Every thing was done privately before the reformation , the examination
, deposition of the witnesses , confrontation , and judgment , as if
justice was ashamed of the light .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.23_unnumbered_in_text.555

The new code <P_24.24_unnumbered_in_text> addresses the judges in these
terms ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.556

If the accused is justifiable you should afford him every means of
defence , and to reap the honour of your own integrity ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.557

but as all men are subject to prepossession , you do@ @n't know but the
publick may give you some light into the affair ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.558

a person who might witness falsly in private , may be possibly , struck
with remorse in the face of the whole nation :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.559

a man that is innocent , may appear guilty by his timidity ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.560

therefore needs a council to plead for him .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.561

When a Patagonian's life is at stake , if his crime is not quite clear ,
it should at least appear so clear , that all the judges agree in their
sentence . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.562

This prejudice was laid aside ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.563

and according to the new method of proceeding , the judges hear causes ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.564

and pass sentence in publick .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.565

Before the reformation , when proofs against the person accused were
insufficient , the judges made use of the torture , to see if they could
force them to a confession .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.566

The reformer says , how cruel and shocking to nature and humanity is
such proceeding , if the person is innocent , to be dislocated , broil'd
, and torn to pieces ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.567

the law can@ @not torture before judgment .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.568

It was with difficulty the courts were prevailed on to give up this
point , least it might give room for criminals to escape ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.24_unnumbered_in_text.569

but while <P_24.25_unnumbered_in_text> they were discussing this matter
, it happened , that a hardy criminal , by denying the fact obstinately
, was saved , and a poor innocent creature of a weak constitution , who
could no longer bear the tortures , made a confession to be released ,
and was executed . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.570

This truth was engraven on brass , as was also the law that destroyed
the torture . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.571

Before the reformation , death was the punishment of all trifling crimes
. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.572

A number of servants were put to death for pilfering trinkets from their
masters , which prevented masters from prosecuting their servants ,
least they should be universally disliked ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.573

and agreed to give them up to justice if they would punish them
moderately , to prevent their robbing elsewhere .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.574

Nobody ever proposed saving common robbers , or house breakers from the
gallows , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.575

yet there were not fewer robberies committed .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.576

Punishments were invented for the good of society :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.577

a_hundred robbers , under proper order , might break up a common drain ,
a morass , dig a canal , make highways , and so be serviceable to the
state , even in their punishments ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.578

and these lasting examples of justice might have more effect , than the
sight of an execution , which is immediately over .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.25_unnumbered_in_text.579

<P_24.26_unnumbered_in_text>

Another abuse very hurtful to publick safety was , that there was no
difference made between the punishment for a robber and murderer , and a
robber on the highway . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.581

The reformer , who always consulted the first law of good sense ,
observed on this occasion , that there should be degrees of punishment ,
as well as degrees in crimes , and that it was by degrees that mankind
were led to have such impressions made on their minds , as might deter
them from crimes : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.582

it was therefore resolved , that the mere robber should be condemned to
work on the publick highways .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.583

They reserved the punishment of death for murder ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.584

but it was difficult to determine the manner of inflicting it .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.585

The courts were inclined to the most severe punishments , imagining that
the horror of them would deter men from crimes ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.586

and they were confirmed in that opinion by a Patagonian , who had talked
with a Spaniard among the Chanos ;
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.587

he was informed by him , that the enlightened people on the continent of
Europe were extremely severe on these occasions .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.588

Heaven protect us from being so cruelly enlightened ! replied the
reformer ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.589

men are not to be worked upon by extremes ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.26_unnumbered_in_text.590

let us try to affect their minds by moderate punishments , as much as
they now are <P_24.27_unnumbered_in_text> by these severe ones , which I
am certain leave a stain of barbarity on the nation who uses them :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.591

having shewed his good sense on all other subjects , the publick
depended on him in this also .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.592

From that time they have only drowned murderers ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.593

and do@ @n't find , since that time , that crimes have increased ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.594

and therefore are convinced , that tormenting punishments have no effect
towards reforming . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.595

The people shut themselves up in their houses on the day of an execution
, so great is their terror to see the death of a Patagonian .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.596

They execute no sentence of death till the sovereign signs it with his
own hand ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.597

the law seems to appeal to him thus :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.598

on this affair depends the life of a man ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.599

and as you are a man , judge if it is necessary to take him from society
. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.600

A Patagonian financer proposed to seize the properties of a condemned
criminal , to enrich the exchequer :
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.601

Barbarian , said the prince , his wife and children are sufficiently
miserable , she , in having such a husband , and they , in having such a
father ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.602

wouldst thou have the punishment to fall on the innocent ?
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.603

The person who made the proposal had part of his own property taken from
him , to help the distressed family .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.27_unnumbered_in_text.604

<P_24.28_unnumbered_in_text>

There are very few deserters in this country , as the nation engages in
no wars but what are merely defensive .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.606

The soldier defends his own property , by defending the property of
others , as he is attached to his own house , his wife , and his
children . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.607

The punishment inflicted on deserters was , to walk about the camp , in
a woman's dress , three days , and discharged from the service .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.608

This punishment was more terrible than death to most of the Patagonians
. MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.609

Slanderers are not punished ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.610

whether they can find no punishment for detraction , or that they take
no notice of it , ca@ @n't be determined .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.611

The person who accuses another , does it in the face of the law ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.612

and if he is found guilty of false imputation , he has the same
punishment inflicted on him , which he intended the innocent person
should have . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.613

What the new code is mostly admired for , is , its laws are sensible ,
clear , precise , simple , and not arbitrary .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.614

The former laws were scarce known to the publick ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.615

and were often wrong interpreted : a sure proof that they were captious
, and hard to be understood .
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.616

Interpretation of the present laws is not allowed ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.617

and they are so plain , that they are taught the youth in the very words
of the texts . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,24.28_unnumbered_in_text.618

<P_25>

This country lies in 45 degrees south . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.620

It is sometimes extended from Rio de la Plata to Cape Horn , and
sometimes included in Chili . MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.621

Magellan , in his voyage in 1519 gives this description of one of them ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.622

he says , " his bulk and stature were such , as would easily allow him
the character of a giant : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.623

the head of one of our middle-sized men reach but to his waist ,
MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.624

and he was proportionably big . " MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.625

So far was without doubt strictly true ; MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.626

but he proceeds , " His body was formidably painted , especially his
face , a stag's horn being drawn upon each cheek , and great circles
about his eyes : MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.627

his colour was otherwise mostly yellow , MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.628

only his hair was white . " MIDSHIPMAN-1767-2,25.629

