<BEGIN_miles2-1893-2>

<P_2,134.C1>

<heading>

Chapter XIII . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.4

Stable management : MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.5

The groom : MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.6

The strapper : MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.7

Stable-boys : MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.8

Racking and dressing : MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.9

Clipping and singeing : MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.10

Feeding : MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.11

Exercise : MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.12

Conditioning . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.13

<$$heading>

We shall not treat of the hierarchy of stable dignitaries in the crack
establishments of our great public trainers , where strings of
thoroughbreds go through an education to fit them for " competitive
examination " for " public honours , " at the post of a T. Y. C. ,
but confine ourselves to the useful and practical treatment of the
horses of the gentleman and sportsman . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.15

The groom has several distinctive epithets indicative of the description
of horse he attends , or of the class of duties expected to be fulfilled
by him . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.16

The " pad groom " is employed in the hack stable and to follow his
master , to whom he also in many cases officiates as valet .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.17

If his master sports blood nags , and particularly if he occasionally
takes a turn with the hounds , the importance of his servant augments ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.18

and he borders on the next grade . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.19

The " hunting or stud groom " ought to be a very clever fellow ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.20

he should already know much , and be ready to learn as much more ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.21

for his is truly an important office , particularly if he have either a
confiding or an idle master . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.22

It is necessary that he should have a full knowledge of training , with
all its important bearings and dependances {TEXT:dependences} .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.23

He should be fond of the chase , and yet sufficiently manifest
attachment to his horses and respect to his master , that he should be
able to go to the field without making himself one of the company , or
attempting , when in chase , to " ride to " hounds .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.24

We , however , to make our subject complete , must quit the field , and
glance at these necessary and indeed important aids on the sod or turf .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.25

The regular " training groom " is a still more important personage than
those already noticed : MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.26

to him is entrusted the care and management of the racing stables ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.27

it is he that regulates the whole discipline of the racers ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.28

and he has likewise the direction of the subordinate grooms and
stable-lads . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.29

The " trials " are conducted by him , MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.30

and on his fidelity and judgment immense sums are dependent .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.31

The " training groom " is also a person of no mean consideration ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.32

for much of the future reputation of his employer's racing establishment
depends upon him . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.33

He superintends the crossings and breedings , MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.34

and on him devolves the care of rearing the young stock .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.35

Much likewise depends on his management whether they enter on their
training in <font> high form and vigour , <$$font> or whether they are
<font> below par <$$font> MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.36

Having said thus much , we will proceed with the duties of the groom
generally , wherever good horses are kept and good grooming is required
. MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C1.37

<P_2,134.C2>

A good groom is as indispensable to the well-being of the inmates of a
stable as a good whip is to their driving , good harness to their
comfort , or good food to their health and condition .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.39

No gentleman can be well-carried , no family be well-appointed in their
equipages , but by care in the selection of the groom or horsekeeper .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.40

Nimrod sensibly says : - " The principal duties of a groom may be said
to consist of cleaning - strapping , as it is called , - feeding , and
travelling horses . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.41

A man should have a certain degree of substance to strap a horse
properly ; MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.42

but we do not agree with those who think an herculean monster , whose
blows would almost fell an ox , a necessary article .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.43

I have seen light lathy fellows full of muscle and sinew that would kill
one of these plummy , lumpy gentry . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.44

There is a wide difference between what John Warde used to describe as a
man fit ' to strip a horse and starve him , ' and a clean_made
light-limbed active fellow . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.45

Beyond grooming and feeding , I do not wish for much science in a
servant MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.46

- your pedantic , infallible-recipe fellows are no men for my money .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.47

Good strapping , and food proportionate to work , is the grand secret .
" MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.48

The " helper " is an adjunct in many stables .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.49

He is generally a hardworking man , or lad of eighteen , who is able to
strap a horse well , and do all the mechanical work of the stable ; but
is wholly incapable of taking the management , or is so uncouth in his
person as to forbid his employment in livery .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.50

The last is a very common reason for some helpers always remaining
understrappers ; MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.51

they are excellent in that capacity , but so unwieldy in their movements
that they would disgrace a neat livery , and would sit beside their
master with all their native clownishness . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.52

If , however , they are honest , civil , and industrious , they are
often very desirable acquisitions to a large stable ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.53

and frequently do all the hard work of these establishments .
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.54

These men often do four horses well , and in livery yards or omnibus
establishments more than double that number ; though , in this latter
case , the horses are of course not so well dressed as in private
establishments . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.55

" Stable-boys " must learn as boys somewhere or other , because it is a
trade which is seldom learnt after this age . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.56

Nevertheless , no master who really looks to his own affairs will
encourage their employment , knowing how frequently they play tricks
with or neglect his horses . MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.57

Under a steady and strict coachman they may be made useful ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,134.C2.58

but they <P_2,135.C1> should seldom be trusted to do anything of
importance out of his sight . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.59

When first put under him , he will , of course , show them everything
they have to do by example ; MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.60

and , if naturally quick , they soon learn to carry out the ordinary
stable operations in an efficient manner . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.61

<heading>

Racking and dressing . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.63

<$$heading>

The first morning duty of the groom is " racking and dressing . "
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.65

The first operation immediately follows the opening of the stable-door .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.66

The hay should be first shaken to clear it from dust , and then but a
small portion given to leave the horse his full powers for the digestion
of his corn ; MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.67

indeed , were it not from a fear that the eagerness of the early
appetite might make the horse swallow his corn without sufficient
mastication , we should prefer giving the oats first ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.68

and when two morning feeds are allowed , we strongly recommend to
commence with the corn . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.69

When this is not the case , after racking , give the usual feed of corn
, which should be first well sifted and looked over , to separate any
extraneous matter . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.70

The morning allowance of water is usually reserved until after dressing
, MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.71

but we have known some horses who would not feed until they had drunk .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.72

We therefore advise that this time of watering be not obstinately
adhered to ; but that it be made to suit the appetites of the horses
themselves . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.73

A careful groom will study the peculiarities of each horse ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.74

and then his own judgment will be his best guide .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.75

You may now give his stable a slight " set fair : " that is , throw the
dung off the litter , but do not disturb that just under him to raise
the ammonia from his having staled thereon . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.76

We are supposing that you mean to give the horse a thorough " dressing "
before he goes out . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.77

If , however , time does not serve , or there are other reasons for
postponing this till his return to stable , you may " muck out " as
hereafter described . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.78

We will now describe the important operation of " dressing , "
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.79

and would first impress upon the reader the fact , that it is not only
to remove soils and make the coat glossy that we " dress " a horse , but
that the process is most important , when diligently carried out , for
assuring the health of the animal , by the life-giving excitement of the
whole exhalant surface of the body . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.80

Scales of scurf - dandriff - are constantly in process of generation
over the whole surface of the animal's , body ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.81

and the act of carrying , brushing , and dressing clears off those
scales , MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.82

and stimulates those exhalant and inhalant pores by which excretory and
noxious particles are thrown out , and air and moisture imbibed .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.83

Itching , irritation - and consequent inflammation - surfeit , and
thirst , with a train of minor evils , are kept aloof from well-fed and
warmly clothed horses by a diligent application of " elbow-grease ; "
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.84

for able physiologists have shown that the skin not only throws off
impurities , but absorbs pure water and atmospheric air , at need , when
kept in healthy condition . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C1.85

The observant horse-owner may easily satisfy himself of the fact that a
well-groomed horse has more spirit , cheerfulness , and <P_2,135.C2>
endurance than an undressed one , by a few days' experiment .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.86

With horses much in stable , too , periodical friction is exercise
without fatigue . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.87

The curious reader may find in <font> The Book of the Farm <$$font> an
account of the superior thriving of some pigs who were regularly curried
, over those in a stye left to their own nasty ways .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.88

The writer , however , observes in defence of poor piggy , that he
contracts many of those bad habits from confinement and domestication ;
and that the wild pig is as cleanly an animal as need be - currying
himself daily by drawing himself through bushes , brambles , &c. , and
industriously rubbing himself against trees . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.89

On the continent , too , stall-kept cattle are in many places regularly
curried night and morning , to the great advantage of their working
capabilities . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.90

There are two capital books on the subject of grooming , so little known
to the general public , that we shall be thanked for an extract or two .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.91

The first is " Hipponomia , or the Vineyard of Horsemanship , " by
Michael Baret , 1720 - a curious work , of which Mr. Bracy Clark says :
" It contains more learning and reasoning <paren> on horse-subjects
<$$paren> than any book of its time . " MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.92

The other is a little treatise by one Jeremiah Weal , called The Young
Groom's Guide - a practical book , by a practical man .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.93

The old writer , Michael Baret , shows that the approved method of "
dressing " a horse has not varied , except in a few details of fashion
and in improved implements , for the last two centuries .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.94

" Having tyed up your horse's head , " says Baret , " take a currie-comb
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.95

and currie him all over his body , to raise the dust , beginning first
with his neck , holding the left cheek of his headstal in your left hand
. MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.96

Then currie him from the setting-on of his head to the length of his
neck , where comes the setting-on of the shoulder .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.97

Thence go all over his side to his buttocks ; and so down to his
cambrel-hough . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.98

Then change your hands , MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.99

and currie him before , on the breast ; MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.100

and laying your right arm over his back , place your right side against
his left , MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.101

and thus currie him all under his belly , near to his fore-bowels ; and
so all over very well , from the knees to the cambrel-houghs , upwards .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.102

After that go round to the far side , MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.103

and do that in like manner . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.104

Then take a dead horse's tayl , or a dusting cloath of cotton ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.105

and strike that dust away which the currie-comb hath raised .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.106

Then take a round brush made of bristles {TEXT:bristels} ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.107

and dress him all over , both head , body , and legs , to his very
fetlockes ; always cleansing the brush from that dust it gathereth by
rubbing it upon the currie-comb . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.108

Thus currying and brushing over , take a hair-cloth , with which rub him
again all over very hard , to take away the loose hairs and help to lay
his coat . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.109

Next wash your hands in fair water , MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.110

and rub him all over with your wet hands , as well head as body ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.111

for that will fresh him , and take away any hair the hair-cloth hath
left . MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.112

Lastly , take one other clean cloth , MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.113

and rub him all over till dry , when his coat will be smooth and clean .
MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.114

Lastly , take another hair-cloth MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.115

<paren> for note that you should have two , one for his body , the other
for his legs <$$paren> , MILES2-1893-2,2,135.C2.116

and rub his legs exceeding well , from the knees to the cambrel-houghs ,
downwards , to his very hoofs , picking , <P_2,136.C1> and dressing them
very carefully about the fetlocks from gravel or dust , which will
harbour in the bendings of his joints . " MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.117

From this it will be seen that our great-great-grandfathers knew and
practised a thing or two in dressing a horse .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.118

There is here , however , a remarkable omission .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.119

The wisp the great implement of the modern " strapper " - is not even
mentioned . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.120

Ordinarily the wisp follows the curry-comb ; MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.121

but where the brush replaces the curry-comb , the wisp follows it .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.122

The best wisp is made from about two feet and a-@ @half of a hay-band of
fine twist . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.123

Loosely untwist and double it , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.124

moisten with a little - water , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.125

and then slightly retwist it : MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.126

the damping shapes it , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.127

and fits it for more effectually cleaning away the dust .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.128

As the time required thoroughly to dress a high-@ @conditioned
saddle-horse is about an hour , in very cold weather the horse should
have a cloth on the loins while cleaning other parts .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.129

Stains from litter should be removed by the sponge , and from the tail
by the water-brush . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.130

When the dust has quite settled , comes the " finishing-off , " in the
direction of the hair and the clothing . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.131

And here we will resort to the little book of Jeremiah Weal , above
alluded to : MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.132

- " Observe that whatever clothing you put on is put on in a workmanlike
manner . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.133

Take the horse-cloths in both hands , with the outside of the cloths
next you , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.134

and with your right hand to the off-side throw them over his back ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.135

not hang them over his tail . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.136

Place them no farther back than they will be straight and level , which
you will find to be from a foot to eighteen inches from the tail .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.137

Put the roller round , and the pad-piece under it in the proper place ,
which is from three to eight inches from the forelegs . "
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.138

So far Jeremiah . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.139

Now loosen the horse's head , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.140

and turn him about in the stall , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.141

and give his untied head a thorough rubbing and brushing in every part -
ears , throat , and channel - with the dusting-cloth .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.142

Finish by manipulating his ears <font> a_la Rarey . <$$font>
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.143

This is called " pulling his ears ; " MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.144

however it should be nothing of the sort , but , what all horses so much
enjoy , a passing through and through the hands of the animal's
auricular appendages - accompanying their passage by gentle intermittent
pressures , and an occasional soothing , coaxing utterance .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.145

This over , comb out his mane and foretop , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.146

and pass over them a damp sponge ; MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.147

place your horse-napkin at the near side of the upper part of his mane ,
pulling it over to the off side , and pressing the mane smooth at the
root of hair from behind his ears to his withers downwards .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.148

Turn him round once again to his manger , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.149

buckle on his stall-collar , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.150

comb his tail , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.151

and wipe his dock with a wet sponge . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.152

Do@ @n't use a cloth for this purpose , as a hanging-down end may make a
ticklish horse kick , as we have seen . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.153

Pick out the foot , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.154

and wash if necessary , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.155

and once more rub the legs down with cloth and with hand .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.156

At the risk of repetition , we must once more impress on the mind of the
groom , and therefore of the master , the paramount importance of
leg-friction . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C1.157

Although Michael Baret , above quoted , has told us " to rub the legs
exceeding well , " we can@ @not forbear from pressing <P_2,136.C2> on
the minds of all who are concerned in horses , that friction to the legs
is both a preventive and a cure of disease . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.158

The eminent veterinarian , Delabere Elaine , thus bears testimony on
this point : MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.159

- " Leg-rubbing prevents gorgings , which are the forerunners of cracks
and grease , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.160

and disperses such accumulations as are already made .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.161

Few actions relieve the tired horse more than well rubbing his legs ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.162

and it is remarkable , that whatever else a horse resists , he very
seldom resists this . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.163

Further , whenever a horse comes home in a dirty condition , it is
prudent first to attend to his legs and feet , which should be well
washed : MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.164

but when the weather is frosty , it should be done in tepid water ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.165

it is essential to his health , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.166

and it also affords him much comfort and refreshment .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.167

We know how grateful it is to ourselves to put our feet into water after
great fatigue ; MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.168

and we can@ @not but observe by their manner , also , that it is the
same to them . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.169

The feet of horses require also daily examination ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.170

they should always be well picked out whenever they come in , to remove
stones and dirt , which may have lodged between the shoe and the sole ;
and which , if suffered to remain but a few hours , might do irreparable
injury . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.171

The state of the shoes should likewise be looked to every morning , not
only as to their actual wear , but also to see that the clenches do not
protrude to cut the legs , or that the shoe may not have gotten awry ,
or become loosened . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.172

Whenever a set of shoes has been on three weeks , particularly where the
hoofs grow fast , even if such shoes be not worn out , they should be
removed ; MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.173

for in every instance , as soon as the horn of the foot grows too high ,
it begins to contract ; MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.174

and there are more horses ruined by standing too long without paring
down the hoof than by all the bad shoeing that is practised . "
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.175

Watering should follow dressing , and then a second feed of corn , where
four feeds per day are customary : MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.176

but , if not going out to work , merely put hay in the rack .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.177

Jeremiah Weal shall again speak for us , as to " setting the stable fair
, " as he is in this matter certainly " the right man in the right place
: " MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.178

- " Shake the horse's bed three or four feet behind him , if the stable
will admit of it ; MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.179

put some straw under the manger ; MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.180

lay the straw high near the sides of the stall , and rather high behind
the stall-post ; MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.181

leave the straw somewhat hollow and thin in the middle , and behind the
horse . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.182

Shake the sides well , MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.183

and lay them level and smooth . MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.184

The platted mat looks neat laid down in front of the beds ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.185

but it is more generally seen in dealers' stables than gentlemen's :
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.186

it , however , looks neat in all . " MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.187

A few words about " litter . " MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.188

We have already mentioned the pungent ammonia which arises so rapidly in
a close and heated stable , to the detriment of the respiratory
functions of the animal , and the damage of the hay in the loft above .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.189

As much of the litter as has been wetted and softened by the urine must
be removed every morning , a little being left for the animal to stale
on , as some animals object to and are uneasy at the splashing which
takes place on the bricks or cobble-stone pavement .
MILES2-1893-2,2,136.C2.190

No heap of fermenting dung should <P_2,137.C1> ever be allowed in any
corner of the stable ; MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.191

upon this point the master should be inflexible .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.192

Whether horses should be allowed to stand upon litter at all during the
day is a subject on which opposite opinions have been entertained by
practical writers . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.193

When the litter is suffered to remain , it certainly encourages the
horse to lie down , which is favourable to the recovery of strained or
overworked limbs , and prevents extreme pressure on tender feet , if the
stable should be bricked or paved . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.194

But , <font> per contra , <$$font> foul-feeding horses are very apt to
eat their litter , MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.195

and the other mischiefs from acrid exhalations , elsewhere spoken of ,
are multiplied . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.196

With some horses , too , the very disorder it would seem to alleviate is
produced or aggravated by it - namely , swelled legs , which have been
found to return to their proper size when the stimulus of warm litter
was removed . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.197

Litter , when neglected and allowed to heat , is mischievous to the
horny hoof , which is contracted by the increased temperature .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.198

We would recommend a little only of the litter to be left under the
fore-feet during the day , and in the summer that the bricks should be
lightly watered to keep them sweet and cool .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.199

Fresh green rushes , if they can be procured , make an excellent day
litter . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.200

In many stables on the continent , and some of our racing establishments
, the floor is of wood , cut across the grain ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.201

this , and hard compo , " are not bad for the purpose , with tan , a
coat of sawdust , or a thin layer of straw , spread upon the floor of
the stall . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.202

<heading>

Clipping and singeing . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.204

<$$heading>

Clipping , which for many years was the only method of relieving a horse
of his winter's blanket , has now been almost entirely superseded by
singeing . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.206

Dandyism , as much as utility , produced the general adoption of the
former practice , MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.207

and inflamed lungs , swollen legs , and a host of inflammatory diseases
were the consequence . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.208

It was all very well to deprive a valuable hunter , who was never
exposed to the cold air without his body clothes , except when hunting ,
of old coat , MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.209

but it was dangerous in an extreme degree to such horses as were not so
carefully attended to . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.210

Clipping has now had its reign , Singeing having dethroned it .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.211

The setting of the hair , each of which is a hollow tube , gives the
whole surface of the body an exposure to the cold air by millions of
orifices . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.212

Singeing , on the contrary , seals up these as it proceeds ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.213

and is no more than a man taking off an upper coat .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.214

When clipping was the practice , it was lamentable to see carriage
horses standing shivering with cold at the doors of great people , or
when conveying some fashionable physician on his visiting round .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.215

Before an owner has his horse singed , let him consider what he is going
to use him for , and whether he is likely to be kept standing still ,
exposed to the inclemency of the season ; MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.216

if not , let it be done . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.217

Singeing has this advantage over clipping , that to look well a horse
must be clipped close . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.218

In singeing you may regulate this . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.219

The coat may be once gone over , MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.220

and this will remove but a moderate portion ; MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C1.221

if more is desired <P_2,137.C2> a second singeing must be resorted to .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.222

After the horse is singed , he should be well washed over with soap and
warm water , with an extra dose of soda in it :
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.223

this will cleanse the coat and make the skin comfortable .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.224

Then , in a few days , if you want it shorter , repeat the process ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.225

and afterwards give the horse a gentle sweat , just as much as will
enable you to give him a scrape . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.226

This , note well , is after the second singeing :
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.227

with the coat left on after a first going over , it might be somewhat
difficult to dry him , and risk giving him cold .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.228

The soap and soda , and the after-sweat and scrape , will immensely
relieve the skin . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.229

When clipping was in vogue , all the pretty bays , browns , and
chestnuts , and many blacks , were made of an unsightly mouse or slate
colour . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.230

Now we can singe a horse nearly as short as close-@ @clipping without
this unseemly effect . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.231

There are some capital lamps made nowadays for this special purpose .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.232

The hair being charred as the operation proceeds prevents the light hue
from prevailing . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.233

Grey , dun , or roan horses look as well , however , clipped as singed .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.234

No sooner does the horse's coat begin to shoot in the autumn , than the
groom will urge you to have your horses clipped or singed ; and will ,
when he has your consent , get as much coat off them as he possibly can
, for the sake of saving trouble , and , as he thinks , of improving
their appearance . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.235

Let the master , then , consider what work his horses are likely to get
during the winter . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.236

If he is a saddle-horse , merely to be used as a park and town hack ,
cantered or galloped the length of Rotten Row , or to carry his master
from his country seat to his town house - or , if a harness-horse , to
be kept standing at doors , while business or pleasure detains his owner
within - leave his coat on , or moderately thick .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.237

If , on the other hand , he is to be used as a cover-hack , ridden
possibly ten or a_dozen miles to the meet , at a rattling pace , get him
into hunting condition and a short coat . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.238

In a word , the coat should be made lighter according to the fast work
the animal is called upon to perform ; MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.239

and he will thus be in a better condition to go through his allotted
task with comfort to himself and owner . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.240

If you are fastidious as to the appearance of your horses , get a man
used to the business to singe them ; MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.241

the charge is small , MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.242

and it will be more judiciously done than by a general groom .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.243

<heading>

Feeding . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.245

<$$heading>

Feeding is a matter of observation , MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.247

and requires study and attention . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.248

Most servants are so fond of stuffing themselves that they think horses
must be equally so . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.249

Stuffing may do with a cart horse , MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.250

but will not answer with a hunter , or a horse required for quick strong
work . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.251

A groom should study each horse's appetite and constitution .
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.252

Some horses require far more meat than others ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.253

but this truism never enters the head of most of the fellows calling
themselves grooms . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.254

Having ascertained the " maximum " quantity of corn master allows , they
forthwith prepare for getting it down the horses' throats in equal
proportion . MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.255

A half-finished feed conveys no hint to them :
MILES2-1893-2,2,137.C2.256

they add a whole feed to it next feeding <P_2,138.C1> hour :
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.257

then horses get cracked heels and swelled legs ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.258

and the fellows wonder how it happens . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.259

They perhaps have recourse to their antediluvian hook , or some
horse-leech in the neighbourhood , who can@ @not even write out a bill
for the medicine he professes to give . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.260

Bleeding and physicking should be included in a groom's catalogue of
qualifications ; MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.261

but never allow either to be done without an order .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.262

Some grooms say they can@ @not keep horses in high condition without
high feeding ; MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.263

but many masters would ride much more pleasantly if their horses were
not in such high condition . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.264

What is the use of having a horse capable of double the exertion the
rider is equal to ? MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.265

We are not all Osbaldestons , to ride two_hundred miles in nine hours ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.266

and whether on the road or in the field , a horse above himself is a
great nuisance . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.267

Lord Pembroke truly observes , that " it is a matter of the greatest
consequence , though few attend to it , to feed horses according to
their work . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.268

When the work is hard , " says he , " food should be plenty ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.269

when it is otherwise , the food should be diminished immediately , the
hay particularly . " MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.270

That sentence should be placed in every stable and saddle-room in the
kingdom . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.271

<font> Hay . <$$font> MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.272

- The principal food of horses in the stable is hay and oats ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.273

and consequently it behoves every master of horses to be a good judge of
their quality . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.274

The hay given to your horses should be old upland meadow hay , bright ,
greenish , fragrant , and not too dry and crisp :
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.275

it ought indeed to be , in a trifling degree , tough , and not to
crackle when twisted in the hand , thereby denoting that it has
preserved its juices and nutritious qualities .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.276

Many people are in the habit of never giving any other than meadow hay
to their horses , MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.277

but this is not at all necessary . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.278

Provided the quantity of hay you allow your horses in the day be not too
great , they will be gratified by a slight change in their diet now and
then ; MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.279

and you may with great propriety let them have an occasional handful of
sainfoin hay , or of white clover and bents <paren> rye grass <$$paren>
, though most grooms will assert that by so doing you will ruin your
horse's wind . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.280

Those who say so , however , have never made the experiment themselves ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.281

or have made it improperly , by allowing their groom to stuff a horse
with hay until he is surfeited , or by giving it in too new a state ,
when it will produce acidity and flatulence .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.282

The allowance of hay for each horse is , in most stables , two trusses
per week ; MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.283

one-@ @half this quantity is sufficient . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.284

Eight pounds of hay per_diem is as much as any horse should be allowed
to eat , MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.285

and those who give them more go the right way to breed listlessness ,
dulness , and disease . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.286

Of all animals the horse , in comparison to his size , has the smallest
stomach , MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.287

and consequently his food , when hard work is required of him , should
contain as much nutriment as possible in the smallest compass ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.288

for remember that the origin of impaired digestion , and consequently
the cause of most diseases , is distension of the stomach and bowels ,
by which they become debilitated , and their secretions vitiated ; the
natural and inevitable result of which is general weakness of the whole
system . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C1.289

<P_2,138.C2>

How can any horse possess vigour and sprightliness who is allowed to
swallow as much hay at a time as he will eat , when a large quantity of
this species of food does not contain sufficient nutriment of itself to
keep a horse in condition . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.291

The food of horses , whatever it may consist of , should at all times be
small in quantity , and of the very best quality ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.292

for as we require great exertions from them , so must we take the best
means to provide them with the most nutritious sustenance without
over-taxing their powers of digestion . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.293

Hay that is at all mow-burnt is liable to produce gripes or flatulent
colic ; as likewise is that which has been recently made , and has not ,
as it is called , completely " sweated " in the stack .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.294

Indeed horses that are expected to perform hard work should never be
allowed to eat hay less than eight months old .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.295

Some people like it better when two years old ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.296

it is then , however , little better than so much straw .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.297

<font> Oats . <$$font> MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.298

- Your oats should be at least a twelvemonth old bright , clear , full ,
without smell of any kind , and weighing at least forty pounds per
bushel . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.299

Many people prefer black oats to white ; MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.300

provided the weight of both be equal , and they be equally well kept ,
it matters little which of the two you use - MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.301

horses will work as well when kept on the one as on the other .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.302

Nevertheless it is certainly a difficult matter to obtain black oats of
as fine a quality as the white potato oat , inasmuch as they will
generally be found to contain more " heads " and " tails " than the
latter ; MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.303

and therefore those who are not simply satisfied with good oats , but
will procure the very best , will be more likely to find the great
desiderata of weight and plumpness in some species of the white than in
the black oat . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.304

A horse of good constitution , and in regular and moderate work , should
not have less than four quarterns of oats <paren> weighing forty pounds
per bushel <$$paren> in the course of the day .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.305

Oats of the above weight may be thus given by measure ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.306

and they are by far better than a larger quantity of oats of less weight
. MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.307

It is the most absurd plan to feed a horse by measure without reference
to the weight of his corn . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.308

It has frequently been found on examination , in the stables of
gentlemen who never choose their own corn , but suffer a corn-chandler
to send them what he pleases , that their horses have been feeding upon
oats that to all appearance were little more than the light seeds blown
asi174320de by the winnowing machine , and only fit for poultry .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.309

No horse can of course be expected to thrive and stand his work upon
such diet : MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.310

therefore be particular , when you purchase oats , to see them weighed ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.311

and for this purpose turn out one-third of the oats in the sack ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.312

and weigh a bushel from the middle , MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.313

for here you will often find them of an inferior quality , both as
regards weight and cleanliness . MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.314

If you work your horses hard they must be allowed either a larger
quantity of oats than here specified , MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.315

or you must mix with them a few handfuls of old and sweet beans .
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.316

This is good hearty food for a horse of strong constitution ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,138.C2.317

but some horses of a foul habit of body will not endure <P_2,139.C1>
being fed for any length of time on beans without exhibiting symptoms of
heat of body somewhere - generally by greasy or cracked heels , or by
scurf and surfeit . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.318

With a horse of this description you must every now and then - say three
times a fortnight - adopt the plan of giving half a pailful of bran mash
instead of a feed of corn , giving him at the same time half an ounce of
nitre in his water ; MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.319

or you may add a double handful of dry bran to his oats every day , or
whenever the state of his bowels requires it .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.320

<font> Peas . <$$font> MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.321

- Peas are a very good substitute for beans , MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.322

and , according to the analysis which has been made of both , contain
rather more nutritious matter than oats in a given quantity .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.323

They are not , however , in general use . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.324

A small quantity of barley added to oats is by many recommended as
excellent food for horses ; MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.325

we can say nothing respecting it from personal experience .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.326

<font> Barley . <$$font> MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.327

- Barley is still a common food for {TEXT:or} the horse on the continent
, MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.328

and , until the introduction of the oat , seems to have constituted his
ordinary stable food . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.329

It is more nutritious than oats , containing nine_hundred_and_twenty
parts of nutritive matter in every thousand .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.330

There seems , however , to be something necessary besides a great
proportion of nutritive matter , in order to render any substance
wholesome and strengthening . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.331

Except where horses are very hardly worked , barley does not seem in our
country to agree with them so well as oats : MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.332

they are more subject to inflammatory complaints , and particularly to
surfeit and mange . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.333

When barley is given , the quantity should not exceed a peck daily .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.334

It should be always bruised , MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.335

and the chaff should consist of equal quantities of hay and barley straw
, and not cut too short . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.336

If spotted barley is given , it will probably produce serious illness
among them . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.337

For horses that are recovering from illness , barley , in the form of
malt , is often serviceable , tempting the appetite and recruiting the
strength . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.338

It is best given in mashes ; water , considerably below the boiling heat
, being poured upon it , and the vessel or pail kept covered for half an
hour . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.339

<font> Grains . <$$font> MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.340

- Grains fresh from the mash-tub , either alone , or mixed with oats or
chaff , or both , may be occasionally given to horses slow at work ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.341

they afford very insufficient nourishment for horses who are called on
for smart exertion . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.342

<font> Wheat <$$font> is in Great Britain rarely given to horses .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.343

It must always be bruised and given in chaff .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.344

Wheat contains a greater proportion of <font> gluten <$$font> than any
other kind of grain ; MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.345

with the horse it is difficult of digestion , and apt to form
obstructions in the bowels . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.346

This will often be the case if the horse is suffered to drink much soon
after feeding . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.347

Wheaten flour , boiled in water to the thickness of starch , is given
with good effect in over-purging , especially if combined with chalk and
opium . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.348

There is no grain , however , that seems to agree so well with the
constitution of the horse as the oat . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.349

<font> Beans <$$font> add materially to the vigour of the horse .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C1.350

There are many horses that will not stand hard work without beans being
mingled with their food , and these not horses <P_2,139.C2> whose
tendency to purge it may be necessary to restrain by the astringency of
the bean . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.351

There is no horseman who is not aware of the difference in the spirit of
his horse if he allows or denies him beans on his journey .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.352

They afford not merely a temporary stimulus , MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.353

but may be daily used without losing their influence , or producing
exhaustion . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.354

Beans are generally given whole . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.355

This is absurd ; MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.356

for the young horse , whose teeth are strong , seldom requires them ;
while the old horse , to whom they are in a manner necessary , is
scarcely able to masticate them , swallows many of them whole , and
drops much corn from his mouth in the ineffectual attempt to break them
. MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.357

Beans should not be merely split , but crushed ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.358

they will even then give sufficient employment to the grinders of the
animal . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.359

<font> Tares . <$$font> MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.360

- Of the value of tares , as forming a portion of the late spring and
summer food of the stabled , and especially the slow-@ @worked
agricultural horse , there can be no doubt . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.361

They are nutritive , MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.362

and they act as a mild medicine . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.363

When surfeit lumps appear on the skin , and the slow-@ @worked horse
begins to rub himself against the divisions of the stall , and the legs
are turgid , a few tares cut up with the chaff , or given instead of a
portion of the hay , will often afford relief .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.364

Ten or twelve pounds may be given daily , and half that weight of hay
subtracted . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.365

It is an erroneous notion , that , given in moderate quantities , they
either roughen the coat or lessen the capability for work .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.366

<font> Lucern <$$font> is by some agriculturists considered preferable
to tares , and sainfoin superior to lucern . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.367

Although they contain but a small quantity of nutritive matter they are
easily digested and perfectly assimilated ; MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.368

they speedily put both muscle and fat on the horse that is worn down by
labour , MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.369

and are almost specific for hide-bound . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.370

Some farmers have thought so highly of lucern as to substitute it for
oats . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.371

This may do for the agricultural horse of slow work ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.372

but he from whom speedier action is required , and the horse of all work
, must have hard meat within him . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.373

<font> Carrots . <$$font> MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.374

- The virtues of this root are not too greatly esteemed .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.375

There is little food of which the horse is fonder .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.376

<font> Nutriment contained in the following vegetables <$$font> -
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.377

1,000 parts of wheat contain 955 parts of nutritive matter ; barley ,
920 ; oats , 743 ; peas , 574 ; beans , 570 ; potatoes , 230 ; red beet
, 148 ; parsnips , 99 ; carrots , 98 . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.378

Of the grasses , 1,000 parts of the meadow cat's_tail contain , at the
time of seeding , 98 parts of nutritive matter ;
{TEXT:missing_punctuation} narrow-leaved meadow grass in seed , and
sweet-scented soft grass in flower , 95 ; narrow-leaved and flat-@
@stalked meadow grass in flower , fertile meadow grass in seed , and
tall fescue in flower , 93 ; Swedish turnips , 64 ; common turnips , 42
; sainfoin , and broad-leaved and long-rooted clover , 39 ; white clover
, 32 ; and lucern , 23 . MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.379

Thus much of the articles of the horse's food ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.380

we will now return to the subject of feeding him .
MILES2-1893-2,2,139.C2.381

When horses are worked very hard , the practice of giving what is called
manger-meat alone has been adopted , and with great success , according
to the statement of those who <P_2,140.C1> have given this plan most
trial . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.382

Manger-meat is nothing more than a mixture of corn with hay cut into
chaff instead of being put into the rack . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.383

The advocates of this plan assert that a horse required to go through
much work finishes his food quicker than with rack-meat before him ,
lies down sooner , and consequently has a longer period for rest than he
would if treated in the usual way . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.384

This may be very true as regards some horses ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.385

but there are in fact very few who lie down directly after feeding ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.386

and a great proportion of horses , after having finished their
manger-meat , will pick over their straw , and eat such parts of it as
are not much soiled , in preference to lying down .
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.387

The Americans , in addition to chopping up their horses' hay , grind
their oats coarsely , MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.388

and mix the whole together . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.389

For farm-horses while baiting such a plan may be a good one ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.390

but horses used for pleasure are generally allowed plenty of time for
feeding , MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.391

and there can therefore neither be any necessity for adopting this
system . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.392

Horses again that have weak stomachs , and are shy feeders , take a long
time before they will eat a sufficient quantity of food to keep them in
condition : MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.393

and , if a large mess of hay and corn be placed before them , will take
a few mouthfuls perhaps , and blow upon the rest , until they take a
disgust to it , and refuse it altogether . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.394

There is many a hunter of this description not fit probably to take the
field more than once a week , but who , when out , does his work in a
style that makes him invaluable to a man that can afford to keep a large
stud , and is therefore worth nursing . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.395

If you cram his manger with food , the animal will , in all probability
, not touch one particle of it ; MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.396

you visit him hour after hour , MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.397

and find his corn untouched , and himself dispirited from want of
nourishment . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.398

What is to be done with such a horse ? MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.399

You have over-taxed his powers - MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.400

you have thought of nothing but keeping the lead ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.401

and when your horse has flagged under you you have roused him with bit
and spur ; MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.402

and , despite the warning voices of heaving sides and shaking tail , of
which some brother sportsman has perhaps given you notice , you have
crammed along to the finish , and found that you had just killed in time
, MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.403

for your horse had already cried " Hold , enough "
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.404

You have your fears of " having come it rather too strong " confirmed by
finding your trusty steed refuse his corn and show other evident
symptoms of distress . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.405

If you are enough of a veterinarian to be able to judge of the state of
his pulse , and no symptoms of congestion of the lungs betray themselves
, it may happen that a little warm ale and ginger may be advantageous to
him ; MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.406

but as there is risk in giving stimulants after hard work , unless you
have " good store of veterinary science " to guide you , after having
seen him made pretty comfortable , give him <paren> and this drink you
should accustom him to take lest he refuse it when you wish him to take
it <$$paren> half a quartern or more of oatmeal made into porridge or
gruel with a small quantity of boiling water - stirring in the oatmeal
in small quantities , and keeping the whole simmering , diluted with
linseed tea . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C1.407

<P_2,140.C2>

This last may be made by putting half a pint of linseed into a gallon of
water , and placing it close to the fire for some hours , after which
set it aside to get cold . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.409

On hunting days this should be prepared while you are out , and be ready
for use on your return . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.410

The linseed tea on cooling gets very thick and glutinous ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.411

and contains as much nourishment as with the oatmeal is sufficient for a
horse whose powers of digestion are for a time enfeebled .
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.412

If your horse drink this mixture , you may put a lock of sweet hay in
his rack , a few handfuls of oats in one corner of his manger , and as
much beans in another , with perhaps a couple of chopped carrots ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.413

and it is ten to one , unless he be severely overmarked , that he will
soon nibble sufficient of one or the other to sustain him until his
appetite completely returns . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.414

<font> Water . <$$font> MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.415

- Soft water in all cases is better for horses than hard :
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.416

home water from a brook or pond is preferable to that raised from a well
by pump or bucket . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.417

Valuable horses , who are apt to be heated , should not , however , be
allowed to slake their thirst at pond or brook , but have water given
them but little below the temperature of their stable , say 65@ @=o= to
70@ @=o= , MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.418

and this may be done by mixing a little hot water with the cold .
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.419

Observe , extremely cold water will often produce staring of the coat ,
colic , and rheumatism . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.420

It is by no means an uncommon notion that if horse are to be got into
condition for work , they should be allowed to drink but a very small
quantity of water . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.421

On what physiological basis this opinion is founded is a mystery .
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.422

Nevertheless as many persons adopt this treatment , it is fitting to
notice it . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.423

It is a bad plan to stint a horse in his water .
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.424

Of course it is not asserted that when a horse comes in heated from
exercise he should be suffered to drink , or should have a bellyful of
water just prior to being ridden ; MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.425

but , if a horse be watered <font> ad lib. <$$font> in the morning , he
will not require to drink again for some hours ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.426

and should never be allowed to do so then unless perfectly cool .
MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.427

Those horses that are only supplied with a limited quantity of water at
a time , and are never permitted to slake their thirst fully , will be
much more liable to be griped , if at any time they by chance should
drink their fill , than those who are always suffered to take as much as
Nature dictates to them ; MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.428

but , should a horse have been hard-worked , and come into his stable
very hot , after having seen him well dried , only at first give him a
small quantity , for two reasons : first , because his eagerness for
water may load him to drink more at a time than is good for him ; and
secondly , because a large quantity of water will probably cause him to
break out into a cold sweat , in which he may remain all night if not
looked to . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.429

After having taken a third , or less , of a stable pailful of water , he
should be kept without any for some time , and then be allowed to take
what he pleases . MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.430

When , however , you intend to stint your horse in this way , do not
suffer your groom to offer him a pailful of water , and to take it from
him when he has drunk a small portion of it , MILES2-1893-2,2,140.C2.431

but let just the quantity you wish him to have , and no <P_2,141.C1>
more , be given to him ; MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.432

he will then feel to a certain degree satisfied with what he gets :
whereas , by taking from him what he expects to have , he becomes
fretful and discontented . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.433

In the first instance he makes up his mind to slake his thirst with a
short allowance of water ; whereas in the second his just expectations
are baulked in mid career , and his imagination cheated as it were in
the height of his enjoyment : MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.434

there is much more in this than may be generally supposed .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.435

Physiologists are well aware of the connexion existing between the
stomach and brain ; MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.436

and those who have not inquired into this fact must either do so before
they attempt to refute it , or take what is here stated as proven .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.437

What is said with respect to giving a horse water while he is hot
applies equally to his food . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.438

Never suffer a horse to feed until he is cool .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.439

After fatigue of body , the stomach of all other parts is perhaps the
least capable of exertion ; MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.440

and although in some cases of severe exertion a slight degree of
sustenance may be requisite to support the strength and stamina of every
living animal , it should always be administered in moderation ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.441

and for this purpose there is nothing better than the gruel already
recommended . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.442

It is a light species of diet when not given too abundantly , against
which the stomach will seldom rebel , MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.443

and it is always proper that this organ , like any other , should be in
good tone before its work - that of digestion - be required of it ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.444

and as , when a horse is violently heated the blood is propelled by the
heart in a much greater ratio than usual , the stomach , being
consequently supplied with a greater quantity of blood within a given
time than it would have received without undue excitement , is as
unfitted to perform its task while under the influence of that stimulus
, as the eye would be to bear a strong light after having been irritated
by some heating application . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.445

Let your horse then remain quiet for some time after he has done his
work , MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.446

and he will not only feed the better for it , MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.447

but will likewise digest what he eats . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.448

There are not a few masters of horses , who , from a mistaken feeling of
kindness , like always to see a good quantity of food before their
animals , so that they may never be hungry ; not stopping for a moment
to consider the degree of injury they occasion by this perpetual
cramming , but vainly imagining that every extra mouthful a horse
swallows is so much added to his strength and condition .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.449

We can@ @not , of course , expect the brute creation to act as rational
beings , or to be able to resist the temptation of eating more than is
good for them ; MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.450

and therefore the first symptom of loathing food , which is the
necessary consequence of perpetual repletion , is a proof that the
powers of the stomach have been overtaxed , and that it requires the
same rest - only for a much longer period - as does the body generally
after severe exercise . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.451

Next to the quantity and quality of your horse's food , there is nothing
that will tend so quickly to put him into condition as giving it at
stated hours and at regular intervals . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C1.452

After a meal proportioned <P_2,141.C2> to his work - say from a quartern
to a quartern and a half of oats - four hours are the very least period
that should be allowed to elapse before your horse is again fed ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.453

and during this time <paren> unless he has been worked so hard that you
wish him to lie down <$$paren> his head should be fastened so that he
may not be able to get at his straw , which very many horses will eat ,
no matter how soiled it may be . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.454

A horse in regular and fair exercise should have but very little , if
any , hay in the middle of the day ; MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.455

but a small quantity may be given in the early part of the morning , and
a sufficient portion at night to make up his daily allowance of about
eight pounds - not more . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.456

Although corn is certainly more nutritious than hay , yet if you
increase your number of feeds of oats , and deprive your horses entirely
of hay , it is surprising how quickly some of them will lose flesh .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.457

Business of various kinds will sometimes compel you to alter your hours
of feeding , MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.458

but regularity should always be adhered to as strictly as possible ;
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.459

for , after having been for some time accustomed to be fed at a certain
time , nature will crave food at the usual hour , even though the
previous meal may have been more than commonly abundant .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.460

A horse that is generally taken out in the forenoon , if fed twice in
the morning , should have the larger portion of his food at his first
meal ; MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.461

and if he be required to work on most days from about nine till one or
two , the better plan is to divide his corn into three feeds instead of
four . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.462

This is preferable to working him on a full stomach , than which few
things in time are likely to prove more injurious .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.463

<heading>

Exercise . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.465

<$$heading>

Exercise , the prime necessity of animal health , is an instinct
wonderfully active in the horse , when free to indulge his own will ,
and at leisure from the restraint and servitude of man .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.467

The benefits of exercise , as a preventive of disease and as a promoter
of the working condition of the animal frame , are equally self-evident
. MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.468

If it be true then that in a state of nature horses instinctively play
with each other , and that to such an extent as to produce perspiration
and violent breathing , may we not infer that when we stable them ,
subject to restraint , and then neglect to exercise them , their health
must be injured ! MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.469

In all great cities the evil of want of exercise sadly prevails among
the better class of horses . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.470

We shall quote here a clever sporting writer , the late Mr. Bingley , "
Harry Hieover , " who says that he verily believes as many horses are
ruined for want of work as from too much of it .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.471

It is true that the better sort of horses of the better sort of owners
are ordered to be exercised , MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.472

but how , where , and when they do not condescend to inform themselves ,
or to inform their servants . MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.473

Well , the men have too much to do , MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.474

and gentlemen object to boys riding their valuable horses .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.475

So they rub the dirt off them ; MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.476

give them a brush over ; MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.477

make the stable clean , MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.478

ventilate it by opening door and window , MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.479

and are satisfied that they have done their duty .
MILES2-1893-2,2,141.C2.480

Or , perhaps the animals are ostensibly brought out and led - observe ,
not even ridden - up and down a covered <P_2,142.C1> ride perhaps fifty
or sixty yards long , littered with strong-smelling , half-saturated
straw , aided by the fine ammonia of the dung-pit itself , quite "
convaynient " as our Irish friends would say .
MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.481

Ought an owner to feel astonished that {TEXT:at} " influenza , " or any
other disease which assumes an epizootic form , should rage in his
stable ? MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.482

Of course he will hear from the " Vet. , " according to his
enlightenment , an extensive amount of prate about " contagion , great
prevalence of disease at this season , " &c. , while he is positively
brewing his own miasma , and exposing his too-much-favoured animals to
circumstances which must produce the visitation which exercise ,
involving change of air , would as assuredly prevent .
MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.483

Broken_wind , incipient ophthalmia , sandcracks , grease , contracted
heels , hide_bound , and digestively-@ @disturbed functions , staring
coat , and general constitutional disturbance are among the mischiefs
which physic and " horse-doctrine " will substitute for horse-exercise
and horse-play : MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.484

which is the more economical , which the more satisfactory , we leave
the reader to judge . MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.485

The spring and autumn shedding of the coat , too , is never properly
gone through by horses who have not frequent and strong periodical
exercise . MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.486

So necessary is exercise to the health of the horse , that , unless
prevented by sickness , lameness , hard frost , or a previous severe
hard day's work , no day should be missed . MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.487

The quantity , frequency , and pace , must , however , depend upon
circumstances . MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.488

Where horses work two or three days in the week , the resting days
require no more than airing exercise ; MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.489

for every horse should have , at least two days in the week , such work
or exercise that will give him a moderate sweating .
MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.490

This throws out through the pores of the skin , what might lodge in the
system and create diseases ; MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.491

it likewise free the horse of scurf adhering to the skin ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.492

and makes the coat fine . MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.493

Those days , therefore , that the horse is not wanted for work , he must
be exercised MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.494

for the fresh air , which is bracing and strengthening to his limbs ,
refreshes the body , MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.495

and creates appetite . MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.496

The early part of the day is preferable for this ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.497

but in wet weather embrace the best opportunity .
MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.498

Exercise enlarges the muscles , by forcing more red blood into them :
MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.499

thus the arms of the blacksmith , the legs of the pedestrian , the
sword-arm of the fencer , greatly increase by use ; which is well fabled
in the account that Milo , by every day carrying his calf , became
insensible to its increasing weight , and bore it also when it had grown
into a bull . MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.500

The athlete of Greece and Rome braced their limbs by constant exertion ,
MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.501

and the gymnastics of the forum were the produce of much previous
exercise . MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.502

The boxer also is forced to submit to close training , which is
principally composed of strong exercise . MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.503

Our hounds take their training gallops preparatory to hunting ; our
hawks their training flights ; MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.504

and game-cocks were brought into wind and vigour by similar means .
MILES2-1893-2,2,142.C1.505

