<BEGIN_miles1-1873-2>

<P_485.C1>

<heading>

Supplement . MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.4

Chapter I . MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.5

The horse and its management . MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.6

- Proper position of saddle , bridle , etc. : MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.7

Mounting and dismounting : MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.8

Management of the reins , and seat on horseback : MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.9

Riding to hounds : MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.10

Ladies' hoursemanship . MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.11

Driving . MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.12

- General observations : MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.13

Harness : MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.14

Four-in-hand : MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.15

A pair : MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.16

Single harness . MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.17

<$$heading>

No one who has mixed much in general society but has found , from peer
to peasant , that one of the tenderest points of an Englishman's self
opinion is touched by the bare supposition that he " knows nothing about
a horse ; " MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.19

yet how few really have studied the subject , MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.20

and how many less have possessed the opportunity of a technical
acquaintance even with the leading points necessary to form an
approximately just judgment of a horse's capabilities , powers , and
suitableness for the purpose for which he is required .
MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.21

With a view , therefore , to rendering our readers familiar , so far as
our limited space will permit , with the principle requisites for the
thorough management of the horse , we purpose to append a concise
treatise on the most modern systems of horsemanship , both for ladies
and gentlemen ; to be followed with instructions on driving , and on the
proper working of a horse in the field and when on the road ; concluding
with some brief general observations respecting his treatment under
injury or disease . MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.22

We proceed , first of all , to the - <heading> Position of the saddle ,
bridle , and stirrups . MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.23

<$$heading>

<font> The Saddle <$$font> , which ought to be wide and roomy , should
be placed in the middle of the horse's back , a hand's breadth <paren>
four or five inches <$$paren> from the point of the withers , but so as
to give free play to the action of the muscles of the shoulders .
MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.25

Lay the <font> girths <$$font> evenly one over the other ;
MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.26

draw them only so tight as to admit comfortably the forefinger to be
placed between the girth and the horse's belly .
MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.27

Fit the <font> surcingle <$$font> neatly over the girths ,
MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.28

and do not buckle it tighter than they are drawn .
MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.29

The large ring of the breast plate or martingale , when worn , should be
placed two inches above the breast-bone , MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.30

and should allow of the hand being laid flat between it and the horse's
shoulders . MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.31

The malposition of the saddle , particularly in horses with upright
shoulders , is the cause of many horses falling , from its pressing too
much on the shoulders , and by that means confining the action of the
muscles , which thus become benumbed , and lose their elasticity .
MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.32

A partial deadening of the limbs having taken place , the horse , from
want of vitality in the legs , stumbles , MILES1-1873-2,485.C1.33

and is unable , through the torpidity of <P_485.C2> the muscles , to
recover himself , MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.34

and falls to the ground ; MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.35

in many cases he has been known to fall as if shot .
MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.36

<heading>

The stirrups . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.38

<$$heading>

The length of the <font> stirrups <$$font> should be so adjusted that
the bottom edge of the bar hangs about three inches above the heel of
the boot . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.40

This length will be found most convenient for the horse and his master
in hack-riding . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.41

The method of determining the best length for the stirrup is thus given
by Mr. Waite in his little book called " Graceful Riding : "
MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.42

" Take up the stirrup-iron with the right hand , at the same time
placing the bottom of the stirrup-iron under the left arm-pit ;
MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.43

then extend the left arm until the fingers of that hand easily touch the
stirrup buckles ; MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.44

this is a sure criterion with most people . " MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.45

<font> The Bridle <$$font> is put on with the curb bit so placed that
the mouthpiece in horses is no more than an inch above the tush of the
lower jaw ; MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.46

in mares two inches above the corner teeth is the distance .
MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.47

The <font> bridoon <$$font> should just touch the angles of the mouth ,
so as to sit easy , with drawing them up . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.48

The <font> headstall <$$font> should be parallel to the projection of
the cheek-bone , and not lie over or upon it . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.49

The <font> noseband <$$font> is better placed low ,
MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.50

and should not be buckled tight . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.51

The curb , when properly fitted , should lie flat and smooth in the
hollow of the lips , so as to allow the finger to be easily introduced
between . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.52

<heading>

Mounting and dismounting . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.54

<$$heading>

Directions for mounting must always be taken with an allowance for the
different relative heights of the horseman and the animal he is to ride
. MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.56

We shall therefore merely give such general instructions as apply to the
medium size in both biped and quadruped , and the average activity and
weight of gentlemen of the present day . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.57

When a horse is intended to be mounted he should always be approached
quietly on the near <paren> or left <$$paren> side , and the reins
gathered up in the hand steadily . The snaffle rein <paren> or bridoon
<$$paren> first ; MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.58

then pass this rein along the palm of the left hand , between the
forefinger and the thumb . MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.59

The curb rein must now be drawn over the little finger ,
MILES1-1873-2,485.C2.60

and both reins being held of an <P_486.C1> equal length , and having an
even pressure on the horse's mouth , must be laid over each other , and
held firmly in the hand ; the thumb pressing upon them to prevent them
slipping through the fingers . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.61

Be particular that the reins are not taken up too short , lest it should
cause the horse to rear or run back ; MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.62

they must be held neither too tight nor too slack , but having an equal
feeling of the horse's mouth . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.63

Next take up a handful of the mane with the right hand ,
MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.64

bring it through the palm of the left hand , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.65

and twist it round the thumb . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.66

Take hold of the stirrup with the right hand , the thumb in front .
MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.67

Place the left foot in the stirrup as far as the ball of it , placing
the right hand on the cantle <paren> or back part of the saddle
<$$paren> , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.68

and , by a spring of the right foot from the instep , the rider should
raise himself up in the stirrup , then move the hand from the cantle to
the pommel , to support the body while the right leg passes clearly over
the horse's quarters ; MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.69

the rider's right knee closes on the saddle , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.70

and the body drops gently into it . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.71

The left hand now quits the mane , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.72

and the second stirrup must be taken without the help of eye or hand .
MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.73

The left hand <paren> the bridle hand <$$paren> must be placed with the
wrist rounded outwards , opposite the centre of the body , and about
three inches from it , letting the right arm drop unconstrained by the
side of the thigh . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.74

Mounting without stirrups while the horse is standing still is effected
as follows : MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.75

- The rider stands opposite the saddle MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.76

and takes hold of both the pommel and the cantle , keeping the reins in
the left hand at the same time , and in the same manner as in ordinary
mounting . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.77

Now spring strongly from the ground , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.78

and by means of the spring , aided by the arms , raise the body above
the saddle ; MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.79

then twist the leg over , whilst the right hand is shifted to the right
side of the pommel , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.80

and by means of both the hands the body is steadied into the saddle .
MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.81

Mounting without stirrups may , by very active men , be effected while
the horse is going on , much in the same way as is seen constantly in
the circus . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.82

The rider runs by the side of the horse , laying hold of the pommel of
the saddle with both hands strongly , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.83

and allowing him to drag him along for two or three very long steps , he
suddenly springs from the ground MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.84

and is drawn into the saddle . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.85

This feat is seldom achieved by the ordinary equestrian ;
MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.86

but it is easier than it looks , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.87

and in riding to hounds is sometimes of great service with a fidgety
horse . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.88

<font> Dismounting <$$font> is effected by first bringing the horse to a
standstill ; MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.89

then shorten the left hand on the reins till it lies on the withers ,
with a steady feel of the mouth , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.90

twist a lock of the mane on the finger , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.91

and hold it with the reins ; bearing also on the pommel with the heel of
the hand . MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.92

Next , throw the right foot out of the stirrup , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.93

and lift the body , steadied by the left hand , and borne by the left
foot , until it is raised out of the saddle ; MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.94

throw gently the right leg over the cantle , MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.95

and as it passes it grasp this part with the right hand ;
MILES1-1873-2,486.C1.96

then lower the body gently to the ground by the aid of the two hands and
the left foot ; or if it is a very short person and a tall horse , by
raising the body out <P_486.C2> of the stirrup on the hands , and
dropping to the ground by their aid alone . MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.97

Dismounting without stirrups requires the horse to be brought to a
standstill , MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.98

then holding the reins in the left hand both are placed upon the pommel
, MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.99

and by their aid alone the body is raised out of the saddle ;
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.100

the right leg is now thrown over the cantle , MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.101

and in doing so the right hand seizes it MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.102

and with the left lowers the body to the ground .
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.103

<heading>

Management of the reins , and seat on horseback .
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.105

<$$heading>

Our horseman at ease in his seat , and looking forward between the ears
of his animal , adjusts the reins , which we will suppose to be bridoon
, or snaffle and curb . MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.107

The reins should hang untwisted from the bits .
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.108

Mr. Waite gives the following minute practical directions , which we
transcribe , for holding the reins with one or both hands .
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.109

" <font> Holding the reins in one hand . <$$font> - The rider must take
up the bridoon reins with his right hand , and pass the second and third
fingers of the bridle or left hand between them , draw up the reins with
the right hand , until the horse's mouth can be felt , and then pass
them between the forefinger and thumb . MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.110

Next take up the curb reins <paren> again with the right hand <$$paren>
, MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.111

and pass the little finger of the bridle hand between them ,
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.112

draw them up , as before directed , with the right hand , until the
rider perceives there is an equal length and feeling with the bridoon
reins ; the latter having rather the strongest pressure on the animal's
mouth . MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.113

This done , lay them also over between the forefinger and thumb ,
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.114

and press down the thumb firmly upon them to keep them from slipping ;
the hand to be held with the wrist rounded outwards , opposite the
centre of the body , and about four inches from it .
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.115

The right arm should hang without restraint , and slightly bent , by the
thigh ; the whip being held about twelve inches from its head , with the
point turned upwards . MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.116

<font> Riding on one rein . <$$font> MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.117

- Take up that particular rein with the right hand ,
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.118

and pass the second and third fingers of the bridle hand between them ,
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.119

then draw up the reins , MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.120

but be careful , in doing so , not to hold the horse too tight in hand ;
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.121

the other rein should hang down , having the little finger passed
between them , and the thumb also over them , so that they may be caught
hold of , and drawn up quickly on any sudden emergency ;
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.122

the loose reins are to hang between those in use .
MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.123

<font> Using both hands . <$$font> MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.124

- Take the bridoon reins between the second and third , and the curb
reins between the third and fourth , fingers of each hand , each rein
having an equal bearing on the horse's mouth ; MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.125

the hands are to be held about six inches apart , with the wrists
rounded outwards , and the thumbs pressing firmly upon the reins , the
elbows well down , and held near to the sides , the whip held as
directed above . MILES1-1873-2,486.C2.126

A tight rein should always be avoided , because , if he carries his head
low , it tends to deaden his mouth , and teaches him the bad habit of
depending upon the bridle for support ; in which case , he always goes
heavily in hand , and <P_487.C1> on his shoulders .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.127

The horse should at all times be taught to go on his haunches .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.128

If the horse naturally carries his head well , it is better to ride him
with a light hand , only just feeling his mouth .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.129

<font> Turning . <$$font> MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.130

- In the turn either to the right or left , the reins must be held quite
evenly , so that the horse may be immediately made to feel the aid of
the rider's hands ; MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.131

he <paren> the rider <$$paren> must then have a double feeling on the
inward rein , also retaining a steady feeling on the outward ; the horse
being kept up to the hand by a pressure of both legs , the outward leg
being the stronger . MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.132

<font> Reining Back . <$$font> MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.133

- The rider should frequently practise reining back , which is of the
utmost service both to himself and his horse : MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.134

by it , the rider's hand is rendered firm and materially strengthened ;
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.135

and the pliancy of wrist so essential to the complete management of the
horse is achieved , likewise causing the body of the rider to be well
thrown back and his chest expanded , thus forcing , and preserving , an
erect position in the saddle . MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.136

Also , the carriage of the horse becomes greatly improved ;
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.137

his head is maintained in its correct position ,
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.138

and he is compelled to work correctly on his haunches .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.139

In ' reining back , ' the horseman requires a light and steady feeling
of both reins , a pressure of both legs , so as to raise his horse's
forehand and keep his haunches well under him , at the same time easing
the reins , and feeling them again after every step .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.140

<font> Stopping . <$$font> MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.141

- None are thoroughly taught until quite <font> au_fait <$$font> in the
stop . MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.142

It is of far greater importance than may be usually imagined .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.143

In the first place , it shows the horse to be well under command ,
especially when the rider is able to do so instantaneously :
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.144

it saves , in the second place , many serious and inevitable accidents
from carriages , horsemen , &c. , such as crossing before , suddenly
pulling up , turning quickly around a corner , or coming unawares upon
the rider . MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.145

Care must be taken to make the stop steadily ; not by a sudden jerk upon
the bit ; MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.146

by doing so the horse , if " tender_mouthed , " will be made to rear and
plunge . MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.147

To make the horse stop properly , the bridle-hand must be kept low , and
the knuckles turned down . MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.148

The rider's body must be well up to hand . MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.149

The rider's hands always must be eased as soon as halted . "
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.150

As to <font> Seat on Horseback <$$font> , there have been small volumes
written on it in sporting magazines , works on the <font> manège
<$$font> , and books on " The Noble Science " of Foxhunting .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.151

With the <font> haute_école <$$font> , as our neighbours call the
teaching of horses to astonish the beholders by capricoles , demivoltes
, lifting their feet in a manner to render them useless and
unserviceable , and other tricks of the circus , we have nought here to
do , confining ourselves to the modern English school of riding .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C1.152

It is easy to discover the riders who have been taught in a good school
, by their firm , graceful , and uniform position in <P_487.C2> the
saddle , and by their ready and skillful application of the bridle ,
hands , and legs ; such being indispensable to the skilful guidance and
control of the horse . MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.153

It will not be necessary here to describe the marked characteristics
exhibited by the jockey , the huntsman , the whipper-in , the groom ,
the postboy , the soldier , the dealer's lad , and the butcher .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.154

These have all different seats on horseback , each best adapted to their
several occupations : MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.155

for the man who all his life is accustomed to one particular style of
riding and to one particular kind of horse , will adopt a natural style
, which marks the whole class of those adopting it .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.156

In acquiring a good seat , there are four things necessary to be
attended to - first , the position of the weight , so as to be
sufficiently forward in the saddle ; secondly , the fixing of the knees
on the padded part of the flap ; thirdly , the proper length and
position of the stirrups ; and fourthly , the carriage of the body .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.157

The weight of the body should be well forwards , because the centre of
motion is close to the middle of the saddle ; and as the weight is
chiefly thrown upon the breech , if the seat is far back it is not in
that part , but near the cantle that it is placed .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.158

But by sitting well forwards the weight is distributed between the
breech , thighs , and feet ; MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.159

and the horse is able to rise and fall in his gallop without disturbing
his rider . MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.160

The knees must be well forward to effect this seat , and also well in
front of the stirrup-leathers ; MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.161

for if they are placed behind them the body is thrown too far back ,
MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.162

and the hold is insecure . MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.163

The object of all young riders should be to get as far forward as
possible , so that the knee is not off the saddle ;
MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.164

and they can scarcely overdo this part of the lesson by any effort in
their power . MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.165

Riding well upon the fork , with the knees upon the padded part of the
flap , will ensure a good position if the stirrups are not too short .
MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.166

These should be about the length which will touch the projecting
ankle-bone , when the legs are placed as above directed , but out of the
stirrups ; MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.167

and when they are placed in them , the heel should be about one inch and
a half below the ball of the foot . MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.168

This latter part receives the pressure of the stirrup in road-riding ,
MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.169

but in hunting or any other kind of field-riding the foot is thrust "
home " MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.170

and the stirrup touches the instep , whilst the pressure is taken by the
under part of the arch of the foot . MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.171

The reason of this is , that in leaping the pressure on the stirrup is
almost lost ; and if the toe only is placed within it the foot is
constantly coming out . MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.172

Besides this , in the gallop the attitude is of that nature that the
spring of the instep is not wanted , the weight being too much thrown
upon the foot , if standing in the stirrups ; MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.173

and if sitting down in the saddle the feet should scarcely press upon
the stirrups at all , MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.174

and therefore the best place for them is where they will be most secure
. MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.175

The body should be carried easily , balancing backward and forward or
sideways , as required , but not forcibly . MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.176

Instinct is here the best guide , MILES1-1873-2,487.C2.177

and the rider should follow <P_488.C1> its precepts rather than attempt
to follow any preconceived rule . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.178

If the horse rears , he will feel called upon by nature to lean forward
, MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.179

and may even grasp the neck if needful , or anything but the bridle ,
which will only bring the horse back upon him .
MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.180

The body should not be held stiffly upright , MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.181

but , short of this , it can scarcely be too still , the loins being
slightly arched forwards . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.182

The legs also should be as motionless as possible , and nearly
perpendicular from the knee downwards ; but , if anything , a little
forward , the heel being well depressed and the toes very slightly
turned outwards . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.183

The shoulders should always be square - that is , at right angles to the
road taken ; MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.184

and whether trotting or galloping neither of them should be advanced
before the other . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.185

If a man contemplates becoming a perfect horseman , he should consider
in what way his riding will be chiefly required , and make himself
master of that . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.186

If he only contemplates road riding , if he acquire a neat , easy , and
firm seat , with good hands , he will do well enough ;
MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.187

and having gained these , he may be satisfied .
MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.188

If he means to be a hunting man , he will find it will require a still
firmer seat , stronger arms , and far stronger nerves , without which he
will never become a " workman " across country ;
MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.189

and , as to race riding , no man need hope to arrive at any perfection
as a jockey , unless from a boy he has been more or less in the habit of
riding race-horses . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.190

There are two things all but indispensable to the man who wishes to
become perfect as a horseman - good nerve and good temper :
MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.191

without the first , he will want confidence ; MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.192

and without the second , he will neither have patience to be taught
himself or to teach his horse . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.193

So far as seat is concerned , a great deal depends on the formation of
the man . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.194

With very few exceptions , short chubby-made men never make neat
horsemen ; MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.195

and without any exception , such persons can hardly possess an easy and
graceful seat . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.196

Such men are usually very round in the thigh ; a formation much against
a firm seat , without which no man can be a good horseman .
MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.197

Huntsmen usually sit more down in their seat than gentlemen do .
MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.198

This arises from the keeping a constant eye on their hounds , which they
can have with that seat more than they could standing in their stirrups
as a jockey does . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.199

Huntsmen are apt to sit a little oblique on their horse .
MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.200

This is caused by their riding much with the rein in one hand , which
hand is usually held rather more forward than other men hold it , so as
to enable them to have more command over the horse ; which is quite
necessary for a man to have who has to get through thick covers at the
risk of having his own and his horse's eyes cut or knocked out by
brambles , thorns , or hanging boughs . MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.201

The way in which both learn to avoid these is extraordinary : the more
so when the man's whole attention is devoted to every turn his hounds
make , and to every hound he hears throw a tongue .
MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.202

We will suppose a huntsman in the middle of a thick cover of perhaps
a_hundred acres ; MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.203

he hears a view halloo on which he can depend , MILES1-1873-2,488.C1.204

and also hears his <P_488.C2> hounds making to the point from whence the
halloo comes . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.205

Get to them he must ; and that over newly-@ @cut stubs like harrows
reversed , or through underwood where half his time he is forced keep
his arm before his face to save it . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.206

All he can do is to trust to his horse ; MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.207

and the way in which those accustomed to it do gallop through and over
such obstacles , no man but a huntsman , and no horse but a huntsman's
can imitate . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.208

He gets to the cover's skirt : MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.209

no matter how awkward the fence to get out , he has no time to pick a
safer place . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.210

" Come up , " MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.211

and with a haul at his horse's mouth , and a whack with his whip on the
shoulders , over they come somehow . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.212

He has then to rattle along over any ground , not merely at a chasing
but a catching pace . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.213

He comes up with the crowd in a narrow lane , with half a_hundred
gentlemen trotting up the centre ; MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.214

these he can@ @not command to get out of his way , though every good
sportsman would voluntarily do so . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.215

" By your leave , gentlemen , " is the utmost he dare say ;
MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.216

and with a " hark forward , hark ! " or " hoick together , hoick ! "
and the occasional use of " by your leave , " he rattles by them with a
wagon-rut for his horse's path . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.217

He gets to the hounds , MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.218

and with a half-blown horse has to face a country that others begin with
one quite fresh . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.219

It is not to be wondered at , therefore , that half-tired man and horse
get on , in such a case , just as they can , and that both huntsmen and
their horses are slovenly goers , and the animals not " gentlemen's "
horses . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.220

Connected with the seat , is what is called in horse language " hands .
" MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.221

When a man inquires what kind of bit he should use , he generally means
what sort would suit his horse's mouth ; MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.222

it is of importance to inquire what will suit his own " hands . "
MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.223

This is to say that a man with " good hands " can ride with any bit ;
while it is most important , where the rider has " no hands at all , "
that the animal should not be punished and confined by a cruel piece of
ironwork . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.224

The bridle with which , in the first case , he would go pleasantly and
gracefully , would , in the latter , become neither more nor less than
an instrument of torture , under the effects of which he could go
neither pleasantly , gracefully , or even safely to himself or rider .
MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.225

One would naturally suppose that any man in the habit of riding would be
anxious to acquire so necessary a part of horsemanship as good hands .
MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.226

Daily observation , however , shows that it is not so ;
MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.227

and this inattention or indifference arises from various causes .
MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.228

The first is , the man knows nothing about " hands , " consequently does
not know that he has bad ones ; MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.229

again , if he does know this , as he merely rides an animal for health
and exercise , and having found one who has no more " mouth " than his
master has " hands , " the latter has probably found himself safely
enough carried , MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.230

and wants no more . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.231

Bad " hands " are much more frequent causes of bad riding than even
defects of seat . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.232

Indeed , the things act and re-act , MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.233

and an unsteady seat will produce bad " hands . "
MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.234

Should a friend , then , ask you candidly about bits and bridles , and
so forth , be equally candid with him . MILES1-1873-2,488.C2.235

Ask <P_489.C1> him , " Has your horse a good mouth ? " that is , tender
, and " Does he often throw up his head ? " MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.236

Is his mouth , temper , and disposition such that a curb-bit can be
dispensed with ? MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.237

If it is , ride your horse , by all means , in a plain snaffle and
martingale <paren> not a nose one <$$paren> . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.238

If he requires a curb , use an easy one , MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.239

and only make use of it occasionally . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.240

We would recommend all men with bad hands to use martingales ; not
exactly to keep the horse's head down , but to counteract the effect of
their hands getting up , which is nearly always the practice with bad
riders . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.241

Martingales , too , are advisable , because with one it matters less
<font> where <$$font> the hands are ; MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.242

they do not affect the horse's mouth as respects the elevating or
lowering of the head . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.243

All they can do is to use such force in pulling the reins that the horse
can@ @not advance . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.244

Probably the rider will take the hint , and moderate his pull at the
reins . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.245

" Hands " may be considered the refinement of horsemanship , without
which no man has any pretentions to the character of a horseman ;
MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.246

he may ride boldly , and sit fast . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.247

This does not make him a horseman . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.248

" The difference between riders , " says " Harry Hieover , " is - " the
one sits on the back of a horse , crossing a country in such form and
style as the animal likes ; the other causes the horse to do the same
thing , but in a proper manner . " MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.249

Good " hands " are to a man of fortune worth a diadem ;
MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.250

in virtue of them , he is carried as no man wanting them can be .
MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.251

It may be said his money could purchase horses that want no hands to
make them do their business handsomely . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.252

He might ; MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.253

but if they wanted no hands to make them go in such manner , still less
do they want bad ones to thwart them when they do .
MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.254

They are invaluable to the poorer man . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.255

They enable him to purchase horses hitherto thought little of from a bad
style of carriage , and raise the price of the same horse , while in his
possession , from , perhaps , eighty to a_hundred_and_fifty .
MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.256

Finally , " hands " are of the utmost importance to the horse himself ,
particularly in hunting ; MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.257

wanting them , beats many a good horse before his time .
MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.258

Permitting a horse , in technical phrase , to " make a spread eagle of
himself , " and go sprawling along over a deep fallow , " sows him up "
at once . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.259

It is quite a fallacious idea to suppose that a horse knows the easiest
way of going to himself . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.260

He , perhaps , would do so in a state of nature ;
MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.261

but nature is not crossing a hundred-acre holding pasture , with twelve
<paren> or more <$$paren> stone weight on his back .
MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.262

<heading>

Riding to hounds . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.264

<$$heading>

We have , in various subsidiary branches of the subject of Riding ,
forestalled so many points of the present subject , that we can almost
deal with it by way of reference to the opening part of this Chapter ,
and to Foxhunting . MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.266

To keep on terms with a modern pack when running hard , neither man or
horse , whatever other faults they may have , must be troubled with "
the slows . " MILES1-1873-2,489.C1.267

As an old-world enthusiast in the art of driving once told us , " the
<P_489.C2> great secret of coaching , is to keep your time ; "
MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.268

so in riding to hounds , the chief and indispensable accomplishment is
to know how to gallop . MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.269

This is not , as might at first sight be supposed , a mere matter of "
horse ; " MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.270

on the contrary , it has a good deal to do with the biped who bestrides
him . MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.271

One man will get across a field in half the time it takes his friend ,
though mounted on a faster animal , to accomplish the same distance ;
MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.272

and this facility is a sort of knack , which it is impossible to teach
and almost hopeless to explain . MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.273

It is an accomplishment compounded of hand , eye , and seat , with a
considerable allowance of nerve ; MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.274

for , strange as it may appear , men are far less shy of fences than
they are of galloping ; MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.275

and many a bruising , daring rider , with good hands , undying pluck ,
and a first-rate eye to hounds , finds that , although in a hunting run
he can generally go first and foremost , yet for want of this gift of
galloping he is always beaten , he can@ @not really tell how , in the
first three fields of a really quick thing . MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.276

The man can@ @not of course " carry the horse , " though young gentlemen
often think they can " lift " him . MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.277

We do not mean to say that the best hunter in England , if slow , will
bear his owner satisfactorily through a burst , but that the quick man
on the slow horse will go in a good place <paren> supposing he wishes to
show in the front rank <$$paren> till his steed stops ; whereas the slow
man on the fast horse will be nowhere throughout , though doubtless of
the two he will have the pleasanter ride home .
MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.278

We will suppose , however , that man and horse are both of the " going
sort " - the one devotedly fond of hounds and determined to be with them
, the other sharing his master's attachment to the chase , and trained
to that state of wind and condition which enables him to undergo the
severest exertion , not only without inconvenience , but with positive
enjoyment . MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.279

This is but the foundation of the science : MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.280

how much skill and judgment is required in its superstructure !
MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.281

The knowledge of hunting , necessary to place every turn of the hounds
to account ; the choice of ground , which makes all the difference
between gliding smoothly down a furrow , or labouring uneasily athwart a
ridge ; the quickness of eye , which , on landing in a field , spies
instantaneously the weak place at which to get out , and makes directly
for that spot without deviation or delay ; the accuracy of ear , that ,
when the hounds are necessarily unseen , can be guided by their notes ;
the experience , which tells as it were intuitively the direction they
are likely to take ; and lastly , the dauntless nerve , that , among
rasping fences , is determined to be forward , and prepared to run its
chance of what there is beyond the obstacle . MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.282

" Eternal misery on this side , my Lord , and certain death on the other
, " said one of the best of our steeple-chase riders to a nobleman who
was almost his rival ; MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.283

and in another instant he was in the air . MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.284

To put in practice the intellectual qualities essential to clever
hunting , it is essential to possess likewise the physical advantage of
fine horsemanship , of which more is required in crossing a country than
the uninitiated are apt to suppose . MILES1-1873-2,489.C2.285

Horace <P_490.C1> says , " the horse's ear is in his mouth ; "
MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.286

and you need only deprive him of his bridle , to render the finest rider
in England utterly helpless on his steed . MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.287

" Harry Hieover " tells an anecdote illustrative of this quality , which
we must preserve . MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.288

" A gentleman in Northamptonshire was run away with some few years ago .
MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.289

His horse having got his feet through his reins in a scramble at a fence
, and tore them completely from his head , away went the pair - the
animal frightened out of his wits , as is the custom of the species when
anything extraordinary happens ; the biped cool and unmoved , as if he
sat in an arm-chair . MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.290

Fond , however , as he was of going fast , it was necessary on this
occasion to stop ; MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.291

so , being a long-armed man , he leant well forward ,
MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.292

and placing his hands over its eyes , completely blinded his horse ,
MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.293

and brought him to a standstill , if we may be allowed the expression ,
in a twinkling . MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.294

We are not all , however , gifted with such long limbs as this
imperturbable equestrian , MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.295

and must make up , if we can , for deficiency of arm by increased
fineness of hand ; MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.296

and here we lay it down as an established rule , that no horse can go
properly with hounds if he pulls . MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.297

Let him lean upon his bit to that extent which enables us to draw him
into a collected form ; let him get his head up , or down , or sideways
, or into any other position he pleases , with a proper feeling of
resentment at undue interference with his mouth , and we freely forgive
him ; MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.298

but for a boring , dead , or stiffnecked puller , we confess to an
insuperable aversion . " MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.299

Common riding , as Colonel Greenwood's book truly points out , is but
common sense , MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.300

and the whole object of bitting and bridling is , after all , to get the
horse's hind legs into their proper place under his quarters , through
the medium of his head . MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.301

The animal is formed , that when he bends his neck and tucks his nose in
, he brings his hocks and hind feet well under his body , and <font>
vice_versâ <$$font> ; MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.302

hence it is that horses with well-made , powerful quarters , have for
the most part light mouths . MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.303

Should that sensitive organ , however , have been hardened by a bad
education or bad usage , it must be our study to apply such an
instrument as , by giving us additional power , or , in other words ,
inflicting a severer pressure , shall make up for this want of
sensitiveness without giving pain , and thereby causing irritation at
the time , and increased callousness afterwards .
MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.304

This is the whole art of bitting , MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.305

and on this depends the skilful touch we term " hand . "
MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.306

That such power is obtained over the horse by an almost innumerable
diversity of bridles , we have only to look into any saddler's window to
observe ; MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.307

and it is impossible to establish any of these as the best , inasmuch as
the grey horse will only go pleasantly in one that would drive the
chestnut mad , while that which brings the brown instantaneously on his
haunches is a mere halter in the mouth of the bay .
MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.308

Different men , too , would ride the same animal in different bridles ,
so various are the methods in which people deem it safe and expedient to
handle their horses . MILES1-1873-2,490.C1.309

The large plain double-bridle , with a thick bridoon , a low port , and
a very long cheek , more <P_490.C2> particularly should the bit be made
to slide up and down for an inch or so on the cheek aforesaid , will be
found admirably adapted to three horses out of four ;
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.310

but then it may render the fourth totally unridable :
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.311

so , as we have already said , it is impossible to lay down any rule on
the subject . MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.312

But that it is absolutely necessary to find out the bridle in which he
goes most pleasantly , to get a horse quickly along over a country , it
needs but little argument to demonstrate . MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.313

For mere galloping , we should be able to turn and twist him anywhere .
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.314

The very fact of pulling up short to open a gate , and consequently
keeping up the steam till within a few yards of that friendly egress ,
will give one man an immense advantage over another , who , although
riding a second Eclipse , can@ @not quite command him , and , should he
mean to stop at all , must begin hauling long ere he is half-way across
a forty-acre field . MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.315

What , too , can be more provoking , when jammed into a lane amongst
a_hundred dear friends , than to spy a weak place in the fence , through
which , if you could but hustle , you might be alone with the hounds ;
and to find that , pressed as you are by the galloping crowd around you
, it is impossible to pull up or turn , till several hundred yards past
the only practicable gap for miles ? MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.316

Though the hounds are running at right angles to you , it would take
more time to turn round than to keep forward , MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.317

and you are carried on by the tide till you find yourself in a turnpike
road , from which , as we all know , there is no escape .
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.318

All this is rectified by having horses what is called " handy ; "
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.319

and to make them so , should be the first object of any man who wishes
to ride well to hounds , more particularly in the grass countries ,
where the crowd of his fellow-sportsmen is one of the greatest
difficulties he has to encounter . MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.320

A fast slug , if he has courage enough to face large fences , will
generally slip away quicker than any other description of hunter ;
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.321

and it is extraordinary how many horses that have been ridden by good
men become so quiet and temperate that we might almost call them slugs .
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.322

When thus mounted , and in a good place with hounds , a really fine
rider seems to glide over a country , almost like a bird upon the wing .
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.323

It is beautiful to ride behind such , and watch his performance .
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.324

How quietly he sits down in his saddle , giving and taking with every
motion of his horse ; MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.325

how judiciously he selects the soundest ground ,
MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.326

and at what a rattling place he makes play when its inclination is at
all in his favour . MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.327

With what patience he waits at a slow canter , or pulls completely to a
trot in the ploughs ; MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.328

what skill he shows in angling the ridge and furrow , or avoiding it
altogether by making at once for the headland ; MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.329

how he seems to anticipate every turn of the hounds , and thereby gains
a timely pull almost whenever he stands in need of a moment's
breathing-space ; MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.330

and above all , with what determination he crosses the severe fences ,
which in every good run we may be pretty sure it will be his lot to
encounter . MILES1-1873-2,490.C2.331

<P_491.C1>

<heading>

Ladies' horsemanship . MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.334

<$$heading>

Albeit we do not expect lady-readers to con the pages of " The Book of
Field Sports , " yet do we esteem it a serious omission that the art of
riding , as practised by lady-proficients , should be passed over
without mention in such works ; MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.336

for surely a brother , father , friend , or , better still , a lover ,
may desire the knowledge which would enable them to speak , or , if need
be , to instruct in these matters , " as one having understanding . "
MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.337

We are not going to advocate the " first-flight " as an accomplishment ;
or torn veils and rent skirts , got in charging a " bullfinch , " or
rising , mermaid-like , bedraggled from the depths of a soft-@ @banked
brook , as a triumph becoming our British fair .
MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.338

We rate too highly their precious limbs and beauteous faces , to desire
to see them exposed to the risk of injury . MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.339

Yet who can assert that painter or poet can have a more beautiful
subject for pencil or pen than a fair Englishwoman on a handsome horse ,
as she passes in the power of her charms , her eyes brightened , her
colour heightened by the health and spirit-giving exercise , her hair
floating , and her lithe figure swaying and bending in graceful pliancy
to every movement of the glossy steed she manages with a woman's tact
and a woman's pride ? MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.340

All this may be delightfully enjoyable in " the ride " in Hyde Park , or
on the greensward of the avenue of the " old house at home ; "
MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.341

or the ten or twelve miles an hour may be enjoyed on the road , through
bridle-lanes , an occasional hand-gate and grass-field , as , with
spirits gay , they repair to " the meet " they so radiantly adorn .
MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.342

But here , as we have said before , we pause , though perhaps some of
our youth - for human nature is ever the same - may yield to the modern
Sauromatae of whom Herodotus tells the story so quaintly .
MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.343

This Scythian tribe of female warriors , says the old Greek , were
called " manslayers ; " MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.344

but this was in a more literal sense than we would apply in the present
day . MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.345

How the Greeks fought with them in the field , intermarried with them ,
and were conquered at home , the reader may seek in the ancient
historian referred to . MILES1-1873-2,491.C1.346

<P_491.C2>

There is , in our opinion , ample scope for what Tom Hood punningly
called she-questrianship {COM:font_change_around_"she"} , without
following the hounds . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.348

Within the last quarter of a century , the maids , matrons , and widows
of England have taken to the saddle in numbers unprecedented in former
days , MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.349

and far be it from us to wish it otherwise . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.350

A fine woman on a fine horse is a most graceful combination of beauty
and power . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.351

Horse exercise is conducive to the health and spirits ;
MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.352

and how it enhances the charms of the lovely Amazons , many a captivated
youth can avouch with a loving sigh . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.353

It is , then , that he may understand the principles of graceful riding
by the fairer sex , as well as for the lovely horsewomen themselves ,
that we pen a few practical lines on the subject .
MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.354

<font> Dress . <$$font> MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.355

- And here , upon the very threshold , we feel the danger and delicacy
of our task . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.356

We have to advise the ladies on that subject most eminently within their
province - dress . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.357

We shall not trespass on matters of fashion and taste , but hope they
will agree with us that a habit can@ @not be too plain , if well made ,
well fitting , and well put on . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.358

Observe , we stipulate for light " ladies' cloth , " strictly so called
, which will tear easily . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.359

The skirt too , should be as short as is at all consistent with
appearance . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.360

It need hardly be pointed out , what danger there is in the
preposterously long skirt : MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.361

we have seen it become entangled with the stirrup , a passing rail ,
hedge , or even the horse's legs , MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.362

and then the helplessness of the fair rider is involved with him in a
peril from which she can@ @not be easily extricated without injury .
MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.363

A dangerous fashion , now happily on the wane , is that of wearing "
habit-brooches , " as the tradesmen who deal in these dangerous devices
call them . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.364

This mode of confining the skirt of the habit is utterly superfluous to
a graceful horsewoman . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.365

The position of a lady on horseback is much more constrained than that
of a man . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.366

The " habit-brooch " deprives her of the chance of escape when an
accident happens . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.367

A very slight fall may prove serious or fatal , where , with full
liberty of the skirt , it would have been harmless or trivial .
MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.368

The arrangement of the skirt , without this <font> impedimentum <$$font>
, is thus directed by Mr. Waite . MILES1-1873-2,491.C2.369

He strongly advises a lady never , under any circumstances , to tuck her
skirt tight over the crutch of <P_492.C1> her saddle , but take pains to
have them so easy as to be enabled on the instant to disengage both
skirt and knee . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.370

A facility in this can only be acquired by constant practice ;
MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.371

and it is of far greater importance to the lady equestrian to attain
than may appear at the first glance . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.372

Had this apparently slight attainment been a matter of moderate
consideration , many a parent need not have to deplore the more or less
disfigurement or maiming of a beloved child . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.373

When a lady has her habit drawn over the crutch of her saddle , and
tucked tightly in under her leg <paren> for the purpose of keeping the
skirt in its proper position <$$paren> , she denies herself the full
liberty of her knee , and , in case of an accident , to be quickly off
the horse . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.374

On the slightest warning , though unforeseen , whatever the danger , the
tightness of the lady's dress will not allow her to get her leg out of
its place in time to make any effectual effort to save herself ;
MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.375

it is also probable that the habit may get entangled in the pommel , and
she , frightened of course , will become unable to disengage her foot
from the stirrup or shoe , in which case she inevitably experiences the
most appalling and dangerous of all accidents - falling , and being
dragged powerless by a terrified horse . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.376

<font> Mounting . <$$font> MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.377

- Preparatory to a lady mounting her horse , let her steadily and
without bustle approach his near shoulder . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.378

The quietest animal will occasionally start , or even kick , when
suddenly approached from behind . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.379

It is also to the advantage of the animal , to see his rider as much as
possible ; though some would seem to think otherwise ; by their <font>
coup_de_main <$$font> mode of " getting hold " of the animal .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.380

In assisting a lady to mount , two persons are necessary .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.381

The groom to keep the horse quiet , which he should do by standing in
front of him , with one rein in each hand , holding the bridle-rein
close to the bit . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.382

The other attendant - a proud privilege for the favoured cavalier , or a
loving duty for the brother or friend - has to assist the fair one to
mount . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.383

This he does by placing himself near to and almost in front of her .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.384

Having joined his hands by interlacing his fingers with each other , he
stoops , MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.385

and putting them near the ground receives the lady's left foot , which
she should place lightly but firmly in them , taking care that no part
of her skirt is under it . MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.386

The left knee should be kept firmly straight , to give a safe purchase
while she is being lifted perpendicularly and springily into her seat .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.387

Before this lift , however , the lady having regulated her habit , must
stand perfectly erect , MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.388

and taking the bridoon-rein loosely over the thumb of her right hand
<paren> holding the whip between the thumb and forefinger <$$paren> ,
she lays gently hold of the upright horn of the saddle .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.389

Her right side being now close to it , the lift is easy of
accomplishment ; MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.390

a spring from the instep , simultaneously placing her left hand on the
assistant's right shoulder , will land the lady safe in her seat .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C1.391

Being now in the saddle , the lady should lay hold of her habit with her
right hand close to the knee , lifting it so as to <P_492.C2> allow the
right knee to rise and fall well home into the crutch , and holding it
there firmly . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.392

This will be much assisted by drawing the heel backwards , by which the
muscles of the calf and the <font> tendo Achillis <$$font> come to the
aid of the position . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.393

The left leg should hang easily , not resting the weight of the body on
the stirrup ; MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.394

if this is done , the foot naturally turns outward ,
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.395

inclines the body to an insecure balance , MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.396

and gives a wavering and ungainly appearance to the rider .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.397

To avoid this , keep the left knee pressed against the saddle ,
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.398

depress the heel , MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.399

and turn the toes slightly inwards . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.400

The position of the stirrup has much to do with the seat of the female
equestrian . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.401

The stirrup must be correctly adapted to the length of the lady's foot
when seated in a square and exact position in the saddle .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.402

The <font> modus operandi <$$font> is as follows :
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.403

- Let the stirrup-foot hang down freely from the hip-joint , the knee
slightly flexed , the toes raised and turned towards the horse's side .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.404

Then , while the foot is immovable in the stirrup , let the strap-holes
be taken up and permanently kept at the approved length .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.405

The pressure of the foot in the stirrup should come alone from the toes
to the arch of the foot , which will give the desired elasticity of
movement in the quicker paces of the horse . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.406

Should the lady be impelled to the endeavour to retain her foot in the
stirrup , her weight must preponderate on the left side .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.407

On the contrary , if the stirrup be too short , it necessarily gives a
rolling motion to her body , destructive alike to grace , elegance , and
security of seat , MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.408

and will prevent her seating herself sufficiently back in her saddle .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.409

Thus much of seat and stirrups . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.410

The arms should be held freely and unconstrainedly , but <font> near the
sides <$$font> . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.411

The motion of the bridle hand must be , like that of skilled pianoforte
players , confined to the wrist . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.412

From that alone must its action be derived ; MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.413

and here Mr. Waite's little " Manual " shall again instruct us .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.414

" The motion of the lady's hand should be confined to the wrist , the
action coming from it alone . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.415

By the management of the reins , in concert with the yielding or
retraction of the wrists , the horse is guided in his paces .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.416

By this mode the sensibility and goodness of his mouth is preserved ;
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.417

the beauty of his action is developed ; MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.418

steadiness is combined with security in his paces ;
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.419

and the safety of his rider is secured . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.420

The degree of command which the animal can be placed under , entirely
depends on the degree of proficiency acquired in this branch . "
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.421

There are four motions requisite in guiding a horse .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.422

" <font> To go forward . <$$font> - Lengthen the reins ,
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.423

and give the animal his liberty . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.424

For this purpose the lady's hand must be guided by the action of her
wrist , MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.425

and , at the same time , she must apply gently her whip .
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.426

Here , it is proper to remark , the lady's bridle , or left , hand must
never be left inactive , but , by practice , she must endeavour to
understand the art of feeling the horse's mouth ;
MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.427

should the bridle hand not be kept in constant use , this will never
come easily to the rider , MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.428

the hand will be unsteady , MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.429

and the horse will become the same . MILES1-1873-2,492.C2.430

<P_493.C1>

<font> To go backward . <$$font> - The reins must be shortened a little
, the back of the hand turned down , the little finger next the body ;
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.432

the weight of the rider should be thrown back , with the little finger
slightly pulled in towards the waist , MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.433

then the horse will readily step back . MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.434

<font> To turn to the right . <$$font> - The hand must be turned
upwards , which will direct the little finger to the right .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.435

Throw the balance of the body into the turn , by inclining the bust to
the right and applying the whip , which will cause the horse to move
forward as he turns , obey the hand , and cross his legs one over the
other correctly . MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.436

<font> To turn to the left . <$$font> - Let the hand be turned down ,
so that the little finger may be directed to the left ;
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.437

the bust must also be turned to the left , and the hand up , with the
left heel applied to his side , and the whip to his right shoulder . "
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.438

<font> Dismounting . <$$font> MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.439

- The remarks on mounting should be remembered here .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.440

Should hired servants only be at hand , there is some skill required to
avoid the <font> désagrémens <$$font> or inelegance of a lady being
lifted from the saddle in the arms of a groom .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.441

Previous to dismounting , the attendant must stand by the horse's head ,
holding the reins close to the bit , to keep him as steady as possible .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.442

The lady , having removed her foot from the stirrup , and passed her
hand down to free her skirt , &c. , from the chance of catching to the
saddle or stirrup , should remove her knee from the saddle-crutch ; at
the same time taking the precaution to disengage the habit from that
side . MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.443

Then holding the crutch with her right hand <paren> the rein hanging
loosely on the thumb <$$paren> , and placing her left hand on her
attendant's right arm , near the wrist ; his arm being extended for the
purpose , she must spring lightly and clear from the saddle , slightly
inclining the bust towards the horse's shoulder .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.444

By this method the lady will cleverly disengage herself , and descend
gently to the ground . MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.445

The following are Mr. Waite's " Maxims : " - MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.446

" Be particular to avoid nervousness and hurry , either in mounting or
dismounting . MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.447

Take time , MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.448

and have everything correctly arranged before starting ;
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.449

serious accidents have occurred from haste in starting off .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.450

Arrange the habit and length of stirrup , MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.451

and have the saddle-bands and buckles properly examined before the
journey is begun , to prevent having to stop on the road .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.452

Be careful to keep the band active , and watch the movements of the
horse ; MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.453

by this means the rider will never be thrown off her guard ,
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.454

and will be prepared for every emergency . MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.455

Keep the horse's mouth always in play , so as to keep up its fine
feeling , indispensable to his correct guidance .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.456

Never allow the reins to hang loosely on the horse's neck , crutch , or
pommel of the saddle . MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.457

This oversight frequently causes serious and fatal accidents .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.458

Always use double reins . MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.459

Should one become useless , there is still another to rely upon . "
MILES1-1873-2,493.C1.460

<P_493.C2>

Mr. Waite winds up by justly observing that an elegant and accomplished
equestrian becomes an equally graceful pedestrian , from the improved
carriage acquired from proficiency in the former accomplishment .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.462

To become an elegant pedestrian is no mean task , nor easy to accomplish
. MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.463

Yet it is of the utmost importance to a lady to achieve it .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.464

How often , in our experience through life , have we met with a lovely
face and perfect figure , - everything that could constitute the
perfection of female beauty , <font> while at rest <$$font> :
MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.465

but once in motion , the illusion is dispelled by a bad carriage and
shuffling gait , MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.466

and the perfect form becomes common-place . MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.467

These two detractions to beauty can be entirely eradicated by attention
to the following directions , which apply equally to walking and riding
. MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.468

Keep the bust and head erect ; the shoulders well thrown back .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.469

The motive power to proceed from the hips alone .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.470

Perseverance in these directions will soon give all that is required for
a graceful and healthy carriage . MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.471

Finally . - At all times trust to your reins for security in cases of
danger . MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.472

Never grasp the pommel of the saddle ; MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.473

and never use a " habit-brooch . " MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.474

<font> Choosing a Lady's Horse . <$$font> MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.475

- The general ideas in Buying a Horse are found under that heading ;
MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.476

the special merits of a lady's horse are worth considering .
MILES1-1873-2,493.C2.477

