<BEGIN_mill-1871-2>

<P_17,1792>

<heading>

1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1792.4

<$$heading>

{ED:1626_To_Edwin_Chadwick}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1792.7

Jan. 2 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1792.8

Dear Chadwick I like most of the Resolutions very much
MILL-1871-2,17,1792.9

<paren> I have made a few verbal corrections in some of them <$$paren> .
MILL-1871-2,17,1792.10

The only ones I do not agree with are Resolutions 8 and 18 .
MILL-1871-2,17,1792.11

I do not think it safe to trust entirely to voluntary enlistment for the
large defensive force which this and every other country now requires .
MILL-1871-2,17,1792.12

The perfection of a military system seems to me to be , to have no
standing army whatever <paren> except the amount required for foreign
possessions <$$paren> but to train the whole of the able_bodied male
population to military service . MILL-1871-2,17,1792.13

I believe that with previous school drill , six months training at first
, and a few days every succeeding year , would be amply sufficient for
the infantry . MILL-1871-2,17,1792.14

This would not take away the young men from civil occupations to any
material extent : MILL-1871-2,17,1792.15

the six months would be taken at the very beginning of active life ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1792.16

and there would be at once the greatest amount of force possible , and
the strongest security against its being called out unnecessarily :
MILL-1871-2,17,1792.17

for a service from which no one would be exempt would inevitably be
unpopular , unless the cause were one for which the nation at large felt
a real enthusiasm . MILL-1871-2,17,1792.18

Any military force composed by voluntary enlistment even under the
improved circumstances contemplated by you , would have , in a greater
or less degree , the inconveniences of a standing army :
MILL-1871-2,17,1792.19

it would consist principally of the more idle and irregular part of the
population , MILL-1871-2,17,1792.20

it would acquire a professional military spirit , MILL-1871-2,17,1792.21

and it would have time to learn habits of passive and active obedience
to its commanders which would make it , if of any considerable magnitude
, an apt instrument of despotism . MILL-1871-2,17,1792.22

I am Dear Chadwick yours very truly J. S. Mill MILL-1871-2,17,1792.23

<P_17,1793>

{ED:1627_To_William_Dougal_Christie}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1793.26

Jan. 2 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1793.27

Dear Mr Christie Excuse the delay in answering your note .
MILL-1871-2,17,1793.28

The only thing I know of which would effect newspaper reform would be to
start a first_rate newspaper . MILL-1871-2,17,1793.29

The obstacle to this is the difficulty of obtaining money to set up such
a newspaper and carry it on for a considerable time at a pecuniary loss
: MILL-1871-2,17,1793.30

and this obstacle seems likely to be of long continuance .
MILL-1871-2,17,1793.31

Short of this I do not see what there is to be done , except for each of
us to do what he can towards improving any of the existing newspapers ,
either by writing in it or by such personal influence as he may be able
to exercise . MILL-1871-2,17,1793.32

You are not mistaken in thinking that I shall sympathize with anything
you may do that tends to so desirable an object : MILL-1871-2,17,1793.33

but I can@ @not find time at present for discussing the subject with you
, either by accepting your kind invitation to dinner or otherwise .
MILL-1871-2,17,1793.34

I am Dear Mr Christie very truly yours J. S. Mill
MILL-1871-2,17,1793.35

{ED:1628_To_Mrs._Fanny_Hertz}

Jan. 5 , 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1793.37

It gives me great pleasure to hear that a meeting is to be held at
Bradford for the repeal of the C. D. Acts , MILL-1871-2,17,1793.38

and I wish it all success . {COM:ellipsis} MILL-1871-2,17,1793.39

<P_17,1794>

{ED:1629_To_an_unidentified_correspondent}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1794.42

Jan. 5 , 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1794.43

Dear Madam Your letter of Dec. 31 only reached me on Monday evening
after post hour , so that it was impossible for me to answer it in time
for your meeting on Tuesday . MILL-1871-2,17,1794.44

I am much honoured by the wish of the Committee of the Ladies' Sanitary
Association that I should take the Chair at their intended public
meeting ; MILL-1871-2,17,1794.45

but it will not be in my power to visit Birmingham either for that
purpose , or for the meeting which I am happy to hear it is intended to
hold in support of Women's Suffrage . MILL-1871-2,17,1794.46

I am Dear Madam yours very sincerely J. S. Mill MILL-1871-2,17,1794.47

{ED:1630_To_Mary_Mill_Colman}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

Jan. 6 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1794.50

Dear Mary - When several years ago I offered you the 80 +L {TEXT:+L80}
it was on the supposition that 50 +L {TEXT:+L50} added to what you have
& what you then earned would meet your wants : MILL-1871-2,17,1794.51

and as you had mentioned the Policies to me I made it 80 +L {TEXT:+L80}
to enable you to be free from anxiety about that .
MILL-1871-2,17,1794.52

I will now make it 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} MILL-1871-2,17,1794.53

and enclose a cheque for 5 +L {TEXT:+L5} for the December quarter .
MILL-1871-2,17,1794.54

As to the Policies can you tell me whether if you sell them & invest the
proceeds , the interest will be all paid to you ? or whether Mr Colman
{TEXT:C} will have any claim ? MILL-1871-2,17,1794.55

The accounts of June are very satisfactory . MILL-1871-2,17,1794.56

{ED:1631_To_John_Morley}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

Jan. 6 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1794.59

Dear Mr Morley - I rejoice to hear that your short visit to the seaside
has somewhat improved your health , MILL-1871-2,17,1794.60

but I am afraid that its permanent reestablishment <P_17,1795> will be
much retarded if you work up to the utmost limits of your strength .
MILL-1871-2,17,1795.61

I hope that you will consider my proposal as still holding good & that
you will have recourse to it at once if you find that your health does
not continue to improve . MILL-1871-2,17,1795.62

If I were to write on the attitude which England ought to take in regard
to the war , without entering into the subject of the war itself , what
I should have to say would be soon said , MILL-1871-2,17,1795.63

for my answer would be , no attitude at all . MILL-1871-2,17,1795.64

It does not seem that there is any urgent necessity for saying this , as
there is at present no danger that England might interfere in any way .
MILL-1871-2,17,1795.65

There is not likely to be any party in Parliament for going to war with
Germany in support of France . MILL-1871-2,17,1795.66

I greatly regret to see the political leaders of the working classes led
away by the Comtists & by the mere name of a republic into wishing to
drag England into fighting for a government which dreads to face any
popular representation & is forcing the French peasantry by the fear of
being shot , into going up against their will to place themselves under
the fire of the German armies ; MILL-1871-2,17,1795.67

but there is not the slightest shadow of a probability that such
counsels will be listened to by the government or by any party in
Parliament . MILL-1871-2,17,1795.68

The really vital subject of debate will be the necessity of
strengthening ourselves for military purposes MILL-1871-2,17,1795.69

& the subject on which Cairnes is writing seems to me to be that which ,
at the present moment , it is of real importance to take up
energetically . MILL-1871-2,17,1795.70

If , on the other hand , the question to be written about is the war
itself , & its probable or desirable issues , I would rather that this
task sh=d= devolve on any one than on myself . MILL-1871-2,17,1795.71

It is only an evident call of duty that would make me willing to write &
publish all I think about the conduct of the French from first to last &
about their claim , aggressors as they were , & defeated as they are ,
to dictate the terms of peace . MILL-1871-2,17,1795.72

Any one who writes on the subject might make good use of a remarkable
pamphlet by Count Ag√©nor de Gasparin in which he proposes as the only
right condition of peace the erection of Alsace & German Lorraine into
an independent & neutralized republic . MILL-1871-2,17,1795.73

I do not know if the most useful thing that you could publish at this
moment on the subject would not be a short analysis of this pamphlet
with copious translated extracts . MILL-1871-2,17,1795.74

I am afraid the French authorities by their obstinacy have let the time
go by when the German people might have been induced to content
themselves with this amount <P_17,1796> of concession .
MILL-1871-2,17,1796.75

But it is really though not unattended with difficulties the only
settlement that would be just to all parties ; MILL-1871-2,17,1796.76

& by bringing it forward the minds of some readers might perhaps be put
upon a right train of thought , MILL-1871-2,17,1796.77

& even the newspaper writers would have an idea suggested to them their
advocacy of which would make the nation less contemptible than they are
making it at present . MILL-1871-2,17,1796.78

If you would like to use M. de Gasparin's pamphlet for this or any
other purpose , my copy is at your service . MILL-1871-2,17,1796.79

{COM:letter_1632_omitted}

{ED:1633_To_Edwin_Chadwick}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

Jan. 15 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1796.83

Dear Chadwick - Having only returned home yesterday I did not get the
Draft Resolutions until after the meeting . MILL-1871-2,17,1796.84

I think that the alterations have considerably improved them , & that
their publication will do much good , though I myself go the whole
length with Cairnes . MILL-1871-2,17,1796.85

<P_17,1797>

{ED:1634_To_Sir_Charles_Wentworth_Dilke}

Blackheath Park MILL-1871-2,17,1797.88

Jan. 17 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1797.89

Dear Sir Charles Dilke Of course M=rs= Fawcett has far better claims to
be a member of the Political Economy Club than many of its present
members , MILL-1871-2,17,1797.90

and I need hardly say that I should support her warmly if proposed .
MILL-1871-2,17,1797.91

I think , however , that considering how perfectly well every one knows
my opinions on the subject , the proposal would scarcely come with a
good grace from me . MILL-1871-2,17,1797.92

It would have in some degree the appearance of wishing to impose my own
opinions upon others . MILL-1871-2,17,1797.93

With regard to any one else proposing M=rs= Fawcett , I should say yes ,
at once , but with one proviso , that there is a probable chance of her
being elected ; MILL-1871-2,17,1797.94

for as I do not doubt we could succeed in a few years , it would be
foolish to court failure now by undue haste . MILL-1871-2,17,1797.95

I think , therefore , that the best course would be for you to take
counsel with M=r= Newmarch , a hearty friend to women's suffrage , and
the best judge of the probable leanings of the Club as a whole .
MILL-1871-2,17,1797.96

If he thinks it judicious to put M=rs= Fawcett's name among the
candidates , there will not be the smallest difficulty in finding
friends to propose and second her among influential members of the Club
less specially associated with the women's movement than myself , and
therefore in the particular case more suited for the purpose .
MILL-1871-2,17,1797.97

I am Dear Sir Charles Dilke very truly yours J. S. Mill
MILL-1871-2,17,1797.98

{ED:1635_To_Charles_Loring_Brace}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

Jan. 19 , 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1797.101

My Dear Sir It is always a pleasure & an advantage to hear from you ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1797.102

for your letters always contain , however briefly , valuable information
which the ordinary sources do not give , respecting the various
important movements <P_17,1798> going on in the U. S.
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.103

It is most interesting to have news of the struggle which you & others
are making against the characteristic evils of the city of New York
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.104

& when I hear that your efforts to extend education among the dangerous
classes have already had a perceptible influence in the amount of
juvenile delinquency as shown by the prison records , I congratulate you
most heartily , MILL-1871-2,17,1798.105

for success of that kind goes nearer than any other to the root of the
mischief , MILL-1871-2,17,1798.106

& every step made renders further progress easier .
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.107

It is also most gratifying to hear that there is an increased feeling
for the reform & purification of the Civil Service .
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.108

That the cause of free trade was greatly advancing we already knew ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.109

but that is a small thing compared with the other :
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.110

besides , a people like the Americans who really attend to their own
public business must find out that what is called protection is an
organised system of pillage of the many by the few ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.111

& the different classes of the pillaged must soon see that the remedy is
to put an end to the pillaging & not to ask to be compensated by
permission to pillage somebody else , with an ultimate result like
placing all Americans in a circle each with his hand in the pocket of
his right-hand neighbour . MILL-1871-2,17,1798.112

The economic loss & waste of all this is tremendous ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.113

but the resources of your country & the facilities of living in it are
so great that you can bear this waste for a time as no other country
could do . MILL-1871-2,17,1798.114

But the corruption of your politicians is a far more serious matter ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.115

it saps the very roots of free government ; MILL-1871-2,17,1798.116

& the triumphant success of villainy by corrupting your legislatures &
even the bench of justices , can@ @not go on without demoralizing the
whole nation . MILL-1871-2,17,1798.117

As you truly say , the only remedy is in awakening the public conscience
. MILL-1871-2,17,1798.118

The still uncorrupted rural population , - M=r= Disraeli's " territorial
democracy " - who have so often come forward & saved the country when it
seemed on the brink of being led by the professional politicians into
some great folly or iniquity - have to be awakened to the disgrace &
danger of leaving the affairs of the country in the hands of men who
care for them only as a source of corrupt profit .
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.119

They have only to refuse their votes to these men
MILL-1871-2,17,1798.120

& the rule is at an end . MILL-1871-2,17,1798.121

You wish that our writers would discuss the idea of an International
Court of Arbitration . MILL-1871-2,17,1798.122

They do discuss it : MILL-1871-2,17,1798.123

more has been said & written on the subject in the last year than ever
before . MILL-1871-2,17,1798.124

But how little prepared the European world is for the realization of the
idea may be seen in the fact , that the leaders of our working classes ,
who have been more zealous for peace than any other class , & who at the
beginning of this war made a strong demonstration against allowing
ourselves to be drawn into it , are now or at least many of them are
loudly demanding that we sh=d= go to war with Germany in behalf of
France . MILL-1871-2,17,1798.125

I believe that the conditions of a settlement of differences by
arbitration do exist between G. B. & the U. S. : because in the
first place as I believe , there really exists in both countries a
sincere repugnance to going to <P_17,1799> war with one another ; &
besides , the ostensible causes of our disagreements are always the real
ones . MILL-1871-2,17,1799.126

But how could the quarrel between France & Germany have been referred to
arbitration ? MILL-1871-2,17,1799.127

The pretended grievance was a mere sham ; MILL-1871-2,17,1799.128

the cause of war was that France could not bear to see Germany made
powerful by union . MILL-1871-2,17,1799.129

If such a war could have been prevented it would not have been by a
judicial process but by the forcible interference of neutrals to aid the
party attacked . So with the Crimean war : MILL-1871-2,17,1799.130

the real question was not about any special ground of quarrel :
MILL-1871-2,17,1799.131

it was , whether Russia sh=d= be allowed to conquer Turkey or not ,
which question did not admit of being referred to arbitration .
MILL-1871-2,17,1799.132

When the nations of Europe shall have given up national hatreds &
schemes of national aggrandizement , & when their institutions shall be
sufficiently assimilated to prevent any of the governments from seeing
in the greatness & prosperity of another state a danger to its power
over its own people , they will probably be all so sincerely desirous of
peace that they will never dream of any other than an amicable
settlement of any accidental differences that may still arise .
MILL-1871-2,17,1799.133

And every step taken in the improvement of the intelligence & morality
of mankind brings this happy result a little nearer .
MILL-1871-2,17,1799.134

There is a sort of stagnation just now in our internal politics as the
public can hardly feel interested in anything but the war .
MILL-1871-2,17,1799.135

The bringing of the new Education Act into force is however one
exception ; MILL-1871-2,17,1799.136

the elections of the School Boards for London & other places have
excited great interest : MILL-1871-2,17,1799.137

& there will probably be a great extension of instruction in reading &
writing among the children of the poor . MILL-1871-2,17,1799.138

How much more will be taught or how well time must shew ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1799.139

but no real friend of popular education regards this Education Act as a
final measure . MILL-1871-2,17,1799.140

The right of women to a voice in the management of education has been
asserted by the triumphant return of two ladies as members of the London
School Board & of several others in different parts of the country .
MILL-1871-2,17,1799.141

You ask if we were prepared for the tremendous collapse of the French
military system . MILL-1871-2,17,1799.142

Nobody I suppose expected it to be so sudden & complete ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1799.143

but to those who knew France there was nothing surprising in it when it
came . MILL-1871-2,17,1799.144

I hope it will tend to dispel the still common delusion that despotism
is a vigorous government . MILL-1871-2,17,1799.145

There never was a greater mistake . MILL-1871-2,17,1799.146

When a government is continually requiring its functionaries to commit
rascalities for its sake , they will go on committing rascalities for
their own : MILL-1871-2,17,1799.147

& as there can be no publicity & no effectual system for the detection
of abuse when the government itself has an interest in concealment , the
funds intended for the service of the State find their way into private
pockets MILL-1871-2,17,1799.148

& all who want to get rid of onerous public obligations are able to buy
them off . MILL-1871-2,17,1799.149

No doubt even Frederick II & the first Napoleon were often cheated by
their officers ; MILL-1871-2,17,1799.150

but an indolent <P_17,1800> man like the present Napoleon , who moreover
by the circumstances of his usurpation could get few honest men to serve
him , was peculiarly exposed to have the whole of his administration one
mass of profligate malversation . MILL-1871-2,17,1800.151

His folly was that he does not seem to have had any suspicion of this ,
but rushed into war in reliance on ground which was completely rotten
under his feet . MILL-1871-2,17,1800.152

{ED:1636_To_Mrs._M._C._Halsted}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

Jan. 19 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1800.155

Dear Madam - I have had the honour of receiving your letter of 29=th=
December . MILL-1871-2,17,1800.156

Your idea of a general Federation , or United States of Europe , has
occurred to many people , MILL-1871-2,17,1800.157

& has been a good deal talked and written about of late years among
advanced philanthropists , especially on the Continent ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1800.158

indeed , there can be no advanced philanthropist who does not look
forward to something of the kind as the ultimate result of human
improvement . MILL-1871-2,17,1800.159

But a great many things have to be got rid of , & a great many others to
be created , before it will begin to be useful to pursue this federation
as a practical object . MILL-1871-2,17,1800.160

Such a federal system supposes a very great degree of mutual trust on
the part of the communities which comprise it , in at least the good
intentions of one another . MILL-1871-2,17,1800.161

This trust substantially exists between the States of the American Union
<paren> with the temporary exception of the relations between North and
South <$$paren> MILL-1871-2,17,1800.162

but the States of Europe do not trust one another ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1800.163

& none of them really trusts its own government much less the
governments of the other states . MILL-1871-2,17,1800.164

There is moreover such a want of homogeneity among them , such
differences in their opinions , their institutions , their education ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1800.165

& among some of them there is still so much mutual antipathy that none
of them would choose to give up so much of its power over its own
affairs into the hands of the others , as your scheme would require .
MILL-1871-2,17,1800.166

Every improvement however which takes place either in the internal
government or in the education of any of them , tends to diminish these
obstacles & to bring universal peace , grounded on federal institutions
, so much the nearer MILL-1871-2,17,1800.167

& it is to such improvements we must trust for bringing about that & all
the other salutary changes in human affairs which philanthropists look
forward to . MILL-1871-2,17,1800.168

<P_17,1801>

{ED:1637_To_J._K._Hamilton_Willcox}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

Jan. 20 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1801.172

Dear Mr Willcox , I send you my acknowledgment of the honour done me by
the New York Liberal Club MILL-1871-2,17,1801.173

& I have in accordance with your request taken the opportunity of adding
a few arguments against Protectionism considered with reference to
America . MILL-1871-2,17,1801.174

I duly received your writings on the Women question .
MILL-1871-2,17,1801.175

I had already , with much pleasure remarked some of them in the journals
devoted to that cause . MILL-1871-2,17,1801.176

I have long been of the opinion expressed by you " that the cause of
overpopulation " or at all events a necessary condition of it " is
woman's subjugation , & that the cure is her enfranchisement . "
MILL-1871-2,17,1801.177

It is one of the endless benefits that will flow from that greatest &
most fundamental of all improvements in human society .
MILL-1871-2,17,1801.178

{ED:1638_To_the_New_York_Liberal_Club}

Jan. 20 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1801.180

Dear Sir - I have had the pleasure of receiving your letter of Nov. 11
, transmitting the Diploma by which the New York Liberal Club do me the
honour of signifying my election as an Honorary Member of their body .
MILL-1871-2,17,1801.181

What you tell me respecting the origin & purposes of the Liberal Club ,
reflects great credit on its founders . MILL-1871-2,17,1801.182

There can@ @not be a higher or more important aim than that of asserting
& maintaining individuality of thought & character , <P_17,1802>
together with its necessary complement , the fullest latitude of mutual
criticism . MILL-1871-2,17,1802.183

Such Associations are a means of making head against the greatest danger
of a settled state of society , the danger of intellectual stagnation ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.184

& help towards raising up men qualified to speak to the public with
decisive effect on those political & social questions which are
continually presenting fresh demands on the collective thought &
intellectual discernment of the nation . MILL-1871-2,17,1802.185

You intimate that it might be acceptable if in acknowledging your
communication , I were to take the opportunity of expressing my opinion
on the desirableness of a Free Trade policy for America .
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.186

I can@ @not suppose that those who have thought me deserving of the
distinguished honour conferred on me , can have anything to learn
respecting my opinion on a question of this nature .
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.187

But I sh=d= not be doing justice to my sense of that honour or to the
interest I feel in the objects & in the prosperity of the Club , were I
not to comply with the wish expressed by you in its behalf .
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.188

I hold every form of what is called Protection to be an employment of
the powers of Government to tax the Many with the intention of promoting
the pecuniary gains of a Few : MILL-1871-2,17,1802.189

I say the intention , because even that desired object is very often not
attained , & never to the extent that is expected .
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.190

But whatever gain there is , is made by the Few , & them alone ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.191

for the labouring people employed in the protected branches of industry
are not benefitted . MILL-1871-2,17,1802.192

Wages do not range higher in the protected than in other employments ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.193

they depend on the general rate of the remuneration of labour in the
country , MILL-1871-2,17,1802.194

& if the demand for particular kinds of labour is artificially increased
, the consequence is merely that labour is attracted from other
occupations , so that employment is given in the protected trades to a
greater number , but not at a higher remuneration .
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.195

The gain by Protection when there is gain , is for the employers alone .
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.196

Such legislation was worthy of Great Britain under her unreformed
constitution , when the powers of legislation were in the hands of a
limited class of great landowners & wealthy manufacturers .
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.197

But in a democratic nation like the U. S. it is a signal instance of
dupery , MILL-1871-2,17,1802.198

& I have a higher opinion of the intelligence of the American Many than
to believe that a handful of manufacturers will be able to retain by
fallacy & sophistry that power of levying a toll on every other person's
earnings , which the powerful aristocracy of England with all their
political ascendancy & social prestige have not been able to keep
possession of . MILL-1871-2,17,1802.199

The misapprehension , & confusion of thought which exist on this subject
- misapprehension & confusion quite genuine , I allow , in the
Protectionist mind - arise from a very small number of oversights ,
natural enough perhaps in those who have never thought on the subject .
MILL-1871-2,17,1802.200

1. When people see manufactories built & hands set to work to produce
at home what had previously been imported from abroad , they imagine
that all <P_17,1803> this is fresh industry & fresh employment , over &
above that which existed before , & that whatever increased production
takes place in these particular trades is so much additional wealth
created in the country . MILL-1871-2,17,1803.201

The oversight is in not considering that this additional labour &
capital to which this production is due , are not created , but
withdrawn from other employments in which they would have added as much
to the wealth of the country , & not only as much , but more , since
they would not have needed a subsidy out of every consumer's pocket to
make their employment remunerative . MILL-1871-2,17,1803.202

That the apparent increase of employment produced by Protection is a
mere transfer from one business to another , is true everywhere
MILL-1871-2,17,1803.203

but is particularly obvious in America since no one will pretend that
labour & capital in the U. S. are in any danger of not finding
employment , or that the time is at hand when they will even be obliged
to submit to any diminution of wages or of profits .
MILL-1871-2,17,1803.204

2. There is a widely diffused notion that by means of protecting duties
on foreign commodities , a nation taxes not itself , but the foreign
producers . MILL-1871-2,17,1803.205

Because foreign nations can really be made to suffer , by being deprived
of a beneficial trade , it is imagined that what the foreigners lose
one's own country must gain . MILL-1871-2,17,1803.206

But this is a complete misunderstanding of the nature & operation of
Protection . MILL-1871-2,17,1803.207

Duties on such foreign commodities as do not come into competition with
home productions , sometimes do fall partly on foreigners , unless the
effect is frustrated by a similar policy in the foreign country .
MILL-1871-2,17,1803.208

Such duties do not destroy any wealth , MILL-1871-2,17,1803.209

& may alter its distribution . MILL-1871-2,17,1803.210

But such is not the case with any duties so far as they have a
protective operation . MILL-1871-2,17,1803.211

For their protective operation consists in causing something to be made
in one place which in a state of freedom would be made in another ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1803.212

& whatever does this diminishes the total produce of the world's labour
; MILL-1871-2,17,1803.213

for in a state of freedom , everything naturally tends to be produced in
the places & in the ways by which the cost incurred in labour & capital
obtains the largest return . MILL-1871-2,17,1803.214

If this working of the ordinary motives to production is interfered with
, & producers are bribed , at other people's expense , to produce an
article where they would not otherwise find it for their interest to do
so , there is a loss to the world of a portion of its annual produce ,
which would have been shared in some proportion or other between the
importing & the exporting countries . MILL-1871-2,17,1803.215

America can in this way damage foreigners MILL-1871-2,17,1803.216

but she can@ @not tax them , MILL-1871-2,17,1803.217

for she can@ @not avoid largely sharing their loss .
MILL-1871-2,17,1803.218

3. A notion very powerful in the minds of some Americans , is that if
they let in the competition of what they call the pauper labour of
Europe they would reduce their own labourers to similar pauperism .
MILL-1871-2,17,1803.219

Let me observe by the way that the labour which produces the exportable
articles of Europe & especially of England , is not pauper labour , but
is generally the most highly paid manual labour of the country .
MILL-1871-2,17,1803.220

But it is of course true that the general wages of labour in America are
above the English level , MILL-1871-2,17,1803.221

& if these high wages <P_17,1804> were the effect of Protection , I for
one sh=d= never wish to see Protection abolished .
MILL-1871-2,17,1804.222

But it is not because of Protection that wages in America are high ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1804.223

it is because there is abundance of land for every labourer & because
every labourer is at liberty to acquire it . MILL-1871-2,17,1804.224

As long as this abundance of land relatively to population continues ,
wages will not decline . MILL-1871-2,17,1804.225

These high wages are not a special burthen upon the New_England cotton
spinner or the Pennsylvanian iron master ; MILL-1871-2,17,1804.226

but have equally to be paid in agriculture & in those numerous branches
of manufacturing & other industries <paren> the building trades for
example <$$paren> which every country necessarily carries on for itself
. MILL-1871-2,17,1804.227

If those employments , which form the bulk of the industry of the
country , can pay the high American wages & yield besides , the high
American profits , & if there are other branches of manufacture which
can@ @not do this unless the people of the U. S. consent to pay them a
subsidy in the form of a large extra price , the former class of
employments yield a greater return to the labour & capital of America
than the latter , MILL-1871-2,17,1804.228

& it is for the interest of American production on the whole that the
labour & capital of the country sh=d= be diverted from the employments
which require to be subsidized , to those which can maintain themselves
without . MILL-1871-2,17,1804.229

4. An argument in favour of protection which carries weight with many
Americans who are not deceived by the economic fallacies of
Protectionism , is that it is an evil to have the population of a
country too exclusively agricultural & that the interests of
civilisation require a considerable admixture of large towns .
MILL-1871-2,17,1804.230

I acknowledge that there was no little force in this argument , at a
much earlier period of American development . MILL-1871-2,17,1804.231

But the time has surely gone by when the growth of towns in the U. S.
required any artificial encouragement . MILL-1871-2,17,1804.232

Even in those parts of the Union in which little or no protected
industry is carried on , towns spring into existence & into greatness
with a rapidity more marvellous than even the extension of the
cultivated area of your territory . MILL-1871-2,17,1804.233

The necessity of centres both for internal & foreign trade ; the
multitude of occupations which from the nature of things are not exposed
to the competition of distant places ; & the many kinds & qualities of
manufacture which are kept at home by the natural protection of cost of
carriage , ensure to the U. S. a town population amply sufficient for
a country in which to be an agricultural labourer does not mean as it
has hitherto meant in England to be an uneducated barbarian .
MILL-1871-2,17,1804.234

I believe the most enlightened Americans are generally of opinion that
at present it is the rural much more than the town population which is
both the physical & the moral strength of the country .
MILL-1871-2,17,1804.235

To these various considerations I might add that the protection lavished
upon some favoured classes of producers is even from the Protectionist
point of view a serious injury to other producers who depend on those
for the materials or the instruments of their several businesses ; &
that the attempt to remedy this injustice by distributing protection all
round exhibits American <P_17,1805> producers in the ludicrous light of
attempting to get rich by mutually taxing one another .
MILL-1871-2,17,1805.236

But these points have been placed in so strong a light by Mr Wells'
justly celebrated Report that it is quite superfluous for me to insist
on them . MILL-1871-2,17,1805.237

Rather would I endeavour to impress my conviction that the evils of
Protection though they may be aggravated by the details of its
application , can@ @not be removed by any readjustment of those details
; & that any Protection whatever , just in so far as it <font> is
<$$font> Protection - just in so far as it fulfils its purpose -
abstracts in a greater or a less degree from the aggregate wealth of
mankind , & leaves a less amount of product to be shared among the
nations of the earth , to the necessary loss of all nations whose
industry is forced out of its spontaneous course , by preventing them
either from importing or from exporting any article which they would
import or export in a state of freedom . MILL-1871-2,17,1805.238

{ED:1639._To_T._E._Cliffe_Leslie}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

Feb. 5 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1805.241

Dear Mr Leslie - I did not write to you on receiving your letter of the
22nd because from what you said I counted upon seeing you at the
Political Economy {TEXT:P_E} Club ; MILL-1871-2,17,1805.242

I hope your absence was not caused by any retrogression in your health ,
the account of which in your letter was so favourable .
MILL-1871-2,17,1805.243

I am extremely glad that you are going to speak at the Women's Suffrage
meeting . MILL-1871-2,17,1805.244

It is settled that Sir R. Anstruther is to take the chair .
MILL-1871-2,17,1805.245

I will endeavour to refresh my memory of your article in Dec. 1867
MILL-1871-2,17,1805.246

& will mention it as opportunities offer . MILL-1871-2,17,1805.247

It does you great honour to have taken up the Swiss system so early as
the example to be followed in reforming our own .
MILL-1871-2,17,1805.248

Many thoughtful people are now coming round to the Swiss system <paren>
of <P_17,1806> which Chadwick's school drill forms a part <$$paren>
MILL-1871-2,17,1806.249

but the majority even of army reformers are still far behind .
MILL-1871-2,17,1806.250

They are prejudiced against making military service within the country
compulsory on the whole male population chiefly because for want of
knowledge of facts they have a most exaggerated idea of the time which
would have to be sacrificed from the ordinary pursuits of life .
MILL-1871-2,17,1806.251

It is to be hoped there will at least be some few persons in Parl=t= who
will resist the attempt likely to be made by the Gov=t= to satisfy the
demand for an increased military force without making any fundamental
change in the old system . MILL-1871-2,17,1806.252

It will be an uphill fight to get a really national defensive force ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1806.253

but it may be a question of life & death to this country not only to
have it , but to have it soon . MILL-1871-2,17,1806.254

I do not know which are most smitten with imbecility , those who are for
trusting our safety solely to our navy on the speculation that no
foreign army can land in England or those who after crying at the top of
their voices that we are utterly without the means of facing an enemy in
the field turn around next day & demand that we sh=d= instantly go to
war with Russia for the Black Sea or with Germany for France .
MILL-1871-2,17,1806.255

{ED:1640_To_Sir_Charles_Wentworth_Dilke}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1806.257

Feb. 8 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1806.258

Dear Sir Charles Dilke I expect to be able to be at the Radical Club on
Feb. 12 . MILL-1871-2,17,1806.259

My daughter is not able to say with certainty if she can be .
MILL-1871-2,17,1806.260

I am Dear Sir Charles Dilke yours very truly J. S. Mill
MILL-1871-2,17,1806.261

{ED:1641_To_Pasquale_Villari}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

Feb. 16 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1806.264

Dear Mr Villari - It was a real pleasure to hear from you again .
MILL-1871-2,17,1806.265

It is , as you say a long time since any letters have passed between us
, MILL-1871-2,17,1806.266

& the momentous and most unexpected events which have succeeded one
another so <P_17,1807> rapidly during the time make it seem even longer
than it is . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.267

Among all these events there is but one which we can regard with
unqualified satisfaction . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.268

The acquisition of Rome by Italy is now an accomplished fact ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1807.269

& I hope it will be an example how great the power of an accomplished
fact is . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.270

But Italy will have to look to her strength . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.271

If either the Legitimist or the Orleanist party gets the upper hand in
the struggle for power which will now take place in France , they will
certainly ally themselves with the clergy . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.272

How hostile both those parties have always been to the cause of Italy we
know ; MILL-1871-2,17,1807.273

& when the French begin to aim at recovering their military reputation &
some part of their influence in Europe , they are much more likely to
make their first trial of strength with Italy <paren> & indeed with any
of the neutrals <$$paren> than with Germany . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.274

This is one of the most serious dangers impending over Europe , though
apparently one of the least thought of , at least in England .
MILL-1871-2,17,1807.275

With regard to the present war , there now seems to be good hope that
the National Assembly will put an end to it . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.276

The time for the neutral powers to have interfered was before
hostilities had begun . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.277

I did not see this at the time , MILL-1871-2,17,1807.278

but have been converted to it since . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.279

I now believe that there would not have been any war , if even England
alone had declared that it would send its fleet to act against whichever
side began the attack . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.280

But there has been no time since at which neutrals could have interfered
to any good purpose . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.281

Armed interference was out of the question , MILL-1871-2,17,1807.282

for not having opposed the French aggression , they could not go to war
to shield France from the penalties of failure : MILL-1871-2,17,1807.283

& for mediation there was no room so long as the French Government
insisted that France alone of all nations may gain territory by
successful war but must not lose territory by the most thorough & most
just defeat . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.284

Even now , when that pretension will probably be abandoned , things have
gone too far MILL-1871-2,17,1807.285

& the public opinion of Germany as to the only safe terms of peace has
become too decided , to make it conceivable that the counsels or opinion
of neutrals will be at all listened to by the German Government .
MILL-1871-2,17,1807.286

I regret for the sake of Italy that you no longer occupy your position
in the Ministry of Public Instruction , though I hope for a large
compensation in the use you are making of your leisure to write a book
on Machiavelli . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.287

You were of course quite right to resign rather than be the instrument
of a policy you do not approve . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.288

Doubtless , a rigid economy in expenditure is at present indispensable
to Italy ; MILL-1871-2,17,1807.289

but education is the last of the public interests which should be the
subject of any other economy than that which consists in making every
<font> lira <$$font> spent go the farthest possible towards the
attainment of the end . MILL-1871-2,17,1807.290

Unfortunately the economy of most governments consists in starving
<P_17,1808> useful service & spending the money of the public in
political or private jobbing ; MILL-1871-2,17,1808.291

& I suppose Italy has its share of those costs like other countries .
MILL-1871-2,17,1808.292

Do not trouble yourself to send the many large folio volumes you mention
. MILL-1871-2,17,1808.293

The occasion which made me write to have those on emigration has now
passed by . MILL-1871-2,17,1808.294

{ED:1642_To_Sir_Charles_Wentworth_Dilke}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1808.296

March 2 1871 {TEXT:missing_"1871"} MILL-1871-2,17,1808.297

Mr J. S. Mill will dine with the Radical Club on Sunday March 5 .
MILL-1871-2,17,1808.298

{ED:1642A_To_Auberon_Herbert}

March 15 , 1871 . MILL-1871-2,17,1808.300

I was much pleased with the manner in which you stood up for the Swiss
system in your speech on the Army Regulation Bill ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1808.301

and I am happy to hear that you propose to follow up that effort by
others . MILL-1871-2,17,1808.302

I believe that as much of the opposition to training the whole people as
is <font> bona_fide <$$font> would mostly disappear if it were
understood how little interruption need be caused in the ordinary
pursuits of life . MILL-1871-2,17,1808.303

{ED:1643_To_William_Longman}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

March 15 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1808.306

Dear Sir - I send you by this post a proof copy of a paper of mine which
has been adopted by an Association formed for the reform of the Land
Laws as <P_17,1809> an exposition of its principles .
MILL-1871-2,17,1809.307

I am requested by the Committee of the Association to ask whether you
would be willing to publish it , on the half profit principle .
MILL-1871-2,17,1809.308

It has been set up in type for the convenience of the members of the
Committee MILL-1871-2,17,1809.309

but no copies have yet been put into circulation .
MILL-1871-2,17,1809.310

The Committee would like the price to be sixpence .
MILL-1871-2,17,1809.311

The name of the publishers would of course be added to the title page .
MILL-1871-2,17,1809.312

{ED:1644_To_William_Longman}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

March 17 , 1871 . MILL-1871-2,17,1809.315

Dear Sir - I have directed the printers to put themselves in
communication with you . MILL-1871-2,17,1809.316

I should like everything to be put in readiness for publication ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1809.317

but the pamphlet is not to be published nor any copies sent to the press
or elsewhere until I communicate with you again .
MILL-1871-2,17,1809.318

I understand you to assent to the proposed price <paren> 6@ @d <$$paren>
. MILL-1871-2,17,1809.319

The Committee wish to retain the copyright . MILL-1871-2,17,1809.320

The number of copies to be printed remains to be settled .
MILL-1871-2,17,1809.321

What are your ideas on that point ? MILL-1871-2,17,1809.322

The feeling of the Committee is for a large edition & for distributing
it widely . MILL-1871-2,17,1809.323

{ED:1645_To_Mark_H._Judge}

Blackheath Park , MILL-1871-2,17,1809.325

21st March 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1809.326

Dear Sir , - I have understood that the expediency of making the
contract between a trades union and its members legally binding and
enforceable by the tribunals , has been much discussed among trade
unionists , and that the prevailing opinion among them is adverse to
giving force of law to the engagement . MILL-1871-2,17,1809.327

I believe that one objection felt by the trade unionists to the
establishment of a legal obligation , is that it would necessarily lead
to the decision of the ordinary courts of law of the expediency of
particular strikes , whenever funds have been prevented by such strikes
from being forthcoming to meet the other liabilities of the unions .
MILL-1871-2,17,1809.328

This appears to open up the question of how far it is well that the same
organisation should provide for the trade interests as well as for the
private interests of its members : MILL-1871-2,17,1809.329

and this is a question <P_17,1810> on which I am not at present prepared
to give a decided opinion ; MILL-1871-2,17,1810.330

for while , at first sight , the reasons against this combination appear
extremely powerful , I am aware that there are others of very great
weight in its favour . MILL-1871-2,17,1810.331

One of these reasons is that the fact that a trade union has other and
pressing demands for its funds is likely to induce great caution , if
not reluctance , to entering upon a strike ; MILL-1871-2,17,1810.332

and the combination therefore is thought by many to have a tendency to
diminish the number of strikes that will be undertaken by the unions .
MILL-1871-2,17,1810.333

{ED:1646_To_William_Longman}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

March 22 , 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1810.336

Dear Sir - The Committee of the Land Tenure Reform {TEXT:L_T_R} Ass=n=
are desirous to take 1000 copies of the pamphlet for distribution ,
chiefly to the Provincial Press & to associations of working men .
MILL-1871-2,17,1810.337

These will be required at once in addition to the 1000 copies you
propose printing . MILL-1871-2,17,1810.338

The Committee would be obliged by your informing them at what cost you
can let them have the 1000 copies & by your giving them a list of the
newspapers & periodicals to which you would yourself send copies in
order that they may not send any of theirs to the same .
MILL-1871-2,17,1810.339

They would like your copies & theirs to go out on the same day , in
order not to give any priority to some newspapers over others .
MILL-1871-2,17,1810.340

{ED:1647_To_Frederick_J._Furnivall}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1810.342

March 23 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1810.343

Dear Sir I know of no one more likely to undertake what you propose in
your note to me , than Professor Cliff Leslie , and no political
economist of whom I have a higher opinion . MILL-1871-2,17,1810.344

I wrote to him on receiving your note , MILL-1871-2,17,1810.345

and I inclose his reply . MILL-1871-2,17,1810.346

I find the question you put to me respecting books rather difficult to
decide , MILL-1871-2,17,1810.347

but I will consider of it , and write to you in a few days .
MILL-1871-2,17,1810.348

I am Dear Sir Yours very truly J. S. Mill MILL-1871-2,17,1810.349

<P_17,1811>

{ED:1648_To_Mrs._Millicent_J._Fawcett}

Blackheath Park , Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1811.352

March 26 , 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1811.353

Dear Mrs Fawcett There is not at present any question of having a paid
Secretary to the Land Tenure Reform Association , because the attempt to
do so must land the Association in bankruptcy , inasmuch as our whole
assets would not pay a Secretary with the needful printing and
stationery for one year , MILL-1871-2,17,1811.354

and on this account it is that a new Secretary has to be found .
MILL-1871-2,17,1811.355

Some of our members are anxious that the Secretary should be paid ,
thinking that the work may be better attended to in that case ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1811.356

but I do not find that anyone is forthcoming to state how the money is
to be got with which to pay one ; MILL-1871-2,17,1811.357

and I need not say that I shall never consent to launch into expenses in
the hope that they may bring in future subscriptions .
MILL-1871-2,17,1811.358

I shall decline to be President or Chairman if any expenses are
undertaken for which we have not a clear prospect of funds .
MILL-1871-2,17,1811.359

If , however , subscriptions should come in , I should be glad to know
whether Miss Rhoda Garrett would think as little as 50 +L {TEXT:+L50} a
year sufficient for her services . MILL-1871-2,17,1811.360

The late Secretary asks 100 +L {TEXT:+L100} , MILL-1871-2,17,1811.361

and of course it may be possible that we may have sufficient
subscriptions for the half , though not for the whole ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1811.362

and it might form an element in our decision , if we know what would be
Miss R. Garrett's terms . MILL-1871-2,17,1811.363

I am , Dear Mrs Fawcett Very truly yours J. S. Mill
MILL-1871-2,17,1811.364

{ED:1649_To_Longmans,_Green_&_Co.}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

March 27 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1811.367

Dear Sirs - The pamphlet is now ready for press MILL-1871-2,17,1811.368

& the sooner it is out the better . MILL-1871-2,17,1811.369

As soon as the 1000 copies subscribed for by the L. T.
{COM:missing_"R."} Ass=n= are delivered <P_17,1812> at the office , 9
Buckingham St Strand , those intended for the press will be folded &
directed , MILL-1871-2,17,1812.370

& as this will take a longer time than will probably be required to get
the copies you propose sending to editors , ready for posting , the
Committee propose that when their copies are ready , the Secretary or
some member of the Committee sh=d= call with them at your office ,
receive yours , & post them altogether . MILL-1871-2,17,1812.371

This will accordingly be done unless I hear from you to the contrary .
MILL-1871-2,17,1812.372

{ED:1650_To_Frederick_J._Furnivall}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1812.374

March 30 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1812.375

Dear Sir It is very difficult to recommend books on politics for such
students as those who are the subject of your letter .
MILL-1871-2,17,1812.376

Not only , as you truly say , there are no manuals of statesmanship ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1812.377

but , though there are many books which treat particular topics
instructively or which for one reason or another are worth reading , I
can mention very few which , judged by the best lights of the present
time , do not contain at least as many errors as truths ; in addition to
which , they are written with reference to European questions and
difficulties , and presuppose a knowledge of ordinary European facts and
opinions such as it is not likely that your Japanese friends have yet
acquired . MILL-1871-2,17,1812.378

There are few writers better worth studying to an European thinker than
Adam Smith , Montesquieu , Tocqueville ; MILL-1871-2,17,1812.379

but I doubt their being of much use for this particular purpose .
MILL-1871-2,17,1812.380

On the whole I can think of no books so likely to be useful , both from
their intrinsic merit and from their cosmopolitan character as some of
Bentham's writings , especially those edited in French by Dumont ,
translations of which , or the original papers on which they were
founded , are in the collected edition of Bentham's Works .
MILL-1871-2,17,1812.381

To these I may add some of my father's articles in the Supplement to the
Encyclopedia Britannica , especially " Jurisprudence , " " Education , "
and " Law of Nations . " MILL-1871-2,17,1812.382

To enable an active_minded Asiatic to understand and profit by European
political thought , nothing seems to me more important than that he
should acquaint himself with European history ; beginning with the
standard books , notwithstanding their imperfections , and enriching
them by the best critical or philosophical writings on historical
subjects . MILL-1871-2,17,1812.383

Here , also , the choice of <P_17,1813> books presents great
difficulties ; MILL-1871-2,17,1813.384

but the general outline of the facts of history has to be first acquired
, with as little admixture of false notions as possible .
MILL-1871-2,17,1813.385

I am Dear Sir Yours very truly J. S. Mill MILL-1871-2,17,1813.386

F. J. Furnivall Esq. MILL-1871-2,17,1813.387

{ED:1651._To_Henry_Maine}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1813.389

March 30 , 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1813.390

Dear Mr Maine I am much obliged to you for your book , which I had
already read in the sheets you sent to Mr. Morley , and with all the
pleasure and admiration I expected . MILL-1871-2,17,1813.391

I am writing something on it for the Fortnightly , but with little
confidence of success , MILL-1871-2,17,1813.392

for it is hardly possible to do justice to any of your writings by a
summary . MILL-1871-2,17,1813.393

I share your fears as to the tendency of things in India .
MILL-1871-2,17,1813.394

It is remarkable that a reaction in favour of the English ideas of
landed property should have taken place in India at the very time when
in England itself a movement has been beginning towards the wider and
more literal conception which has prevailed for two generations in India
. MILL-1871-2,17,1813.395

Nothing , however , is so likely to check this reaction as your book ,
which may be expected to be read not only by the young civil officers of
the Indian Government , but , we may hope , by those who are preparing
for the competitive examination . MILL-1871-2,17,1813.396

Unhappily , it is difficult to interest English readers of periodicals
in an Indian subject , MILL-1871-2,17,1813.397

but that part of your book which relates to Europe and England will have
great and increasing interest ; MILL-1871-2,17,1813.398

and by the aid of that , the more intelligent readers may be led to pay
attention to the Indian part . MILL-1871-2,17,1813.399

Could you give me the pleasure of dining with me some day that you are
in town ? MILL-1871-2,17,1813.400

It would give me much pleasure if you could come down on Sunday April 16
. MILL-1871-2,17,1813.401

We dine at 5 o'clock , MILL-1871-2,17,1813.402

and there are plenty of trains both for coming and returning between
Blackheath and Charing Cross . MILL-1871-2,17,1813.403

I am Dear Mr. Maine very truly yours J. S. Mill
MILL-1871-2,17,1813.404

<P_17,1814>

{ED:1652_To_Alfred_Russel_Wallace}

{ED:April_1871}

It would be very useful to the association , and a great pleasure to
myself , if you would consent to be one of the speakers at the meeting .
MILL-1871-2,17,1814.408

There is the more reason why you should do so , as you are the author of
one very valuable article of the programme . MILL-1871-2,17,1814.409

Were you to explain and defend that article , it would be a service
which no one is so well qualified to render as yourself .
MILL-1871-2,17,1814.410

{ED:1653_To_Frederick_J._Furnivall}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1814.412

April 4 , 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1814.413

Dear Sir I have just ascertained that my friend Mr Cairnes , Professor
of Political Economy at University College , might be willing to give
lessons in Political Economy to your Japanese friends .
MILL-1871-2,17,1814.414

There is no person whom I know of , more highly qualified to give
instruction in Political Economy than Professor Cairnes ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1814.415

and as I believe you and Mr Leslie have not been able to make an
arrangement , it would be much to the advantage of your friends if one
could be made with Mr Cairnes . MILL-1871-2,17,1814.416

His address is J. E. Cairnes Esq Chesterfield Lodge High Road Lee S.
E. MILL-1871-2,17,1814.417

I am Dear Sir very truly yours J. S. Mill MILL-1871-2,17,1814.418

<P_17,1815>

{ED:1654_To_George_Jacob_Holyoake}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

April 6 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1815.422

Dear Sir - Excuse the delay in answering your note .
MILL-1871-2,17,1815.423

I do not like to put any sort of pressure on my publisher , which even a
letter of introduction , for the purpose you have in view , would be to
a certain extent ; MILL-1871-2,17,1815.424

but if you like to mention me to Mr. Longman as knowing you , I sh=d=
be happy , if he asks me , to tell him all I know of you ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1815.425

& all I know is in your favour . MILL-1871-2,17,1815.426

{ED:1655_To_William_Longman}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

April 20 , 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1815.429

Dear Sir - The oversight about the 1000 copies of " Liberty " is of no
consequence . MILL-1871-2,17,1815.430

I sh=d= like to continue publishing the three People's editions with you
receiving for each a fixed sum for every thousand copies printed ;
MILL-1871-2,17,1815.431

& I sh=d= be glad to hear from you what you would propose to give for
each on that principle . MILL-1871-2,17,1815.432

Will you be so good as to send me 10 copies of the Land Tenure pamphlet
on my private account . MILL-1871-2,17,1815.433

{ED:1656_To_Thomas_F._Kelsall}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

April 30 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1815.436

Dear Sir I thank you <paren> though very tardily <$$paren> for your very
interesting letter MILL-1871-2,17,1815.437

& I think your idea of making public access to parks <paren> when beyond
a small size <$$paren> no <P_17,1816> longer optional with the
proprietor , an excellent one : wholly right in principle & more likely
than anything else to reconcile the people to keeping up the parks
instead of ploughing them up to grow corn , which I sh=d= much regret .
MILL-1871-2,17,1816.438

With regard to game , I am aware that by English law it is not strictly
speaking property until it is killed ; MILL-1871-2,17,1816.439

but the lord of the manor has , if I rightly understand the matter , the
exclusive right of shooting or giving permission to shoot on what is by
law his waste . MILL-1871-2,17,1816.440

I agree with you that the State sh=d= prevent common land from being
made the absolute property of individuals even with the consent of those
who have common rights , MILL-1871-2,17,1816.441

& the programme of the Ass=n= goes this length .
MILL-1871-2,17,1816.442

{ED:1657_To_Frederic_Harrison}

{ED:May?_1871}

{ED:harrison's_introduction_omitted}

The crimes of the <font> parti de l'ordre <$$font> are atrocious , even
supposing that they are in revenge for those generally attributed to the
Commune . MILL-1871-2,17,1816.446

{ED:1658_To_George_Odger}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

May 1 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1816.449

Dear Sir - Allow me to introduce to you a very old friend of mine , M.
Gustave d'Eichthal , formerly one of the chiefs of the St_Simonian body
, <paren> the original source of many of the Socialist ideas which have
diffused themselves in France <$$paren> & who has retained through life
the same strong interest in whatever tends to the reorganisation of
society on a more just foundation . MILL-1871-2,17,1816.450

M. d'Eichthal wishes to learn all he can of the movement which is
proceeding among the working classes of our own country
MILL-1871-2,17,1816.451

& would be much obliged by being allowed an opportunity of conversing
with you as one of the foremost representatives of that movement .
MILL-1871-2,17,1816.452

<P_17,1817>

{ED:1659_To_John_Plummer}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1817.455

May 2 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1817.456

Dear Mr Plummer I fear I have been very long a debtor to you in the
matter of your last letter . MILL-1871-2,17,1817.457

We heard with much regret and sympathy of the loss you sustained during
the winter . MILL-1871-2,17,1817.458

My daughter has been so much indisposed during this winter , that we
have been seeing very few of our friends . MILL-1871-2,17,1817.459

We shall hope that as the warm season advances , her health will improve
, and that we may have the pleasure of being able to ask you and Mrs
Plummer to come over here and spend an afternoon with us .
MILL-1871-2,17,1817.460

My daughter desires her kind regards to Mrs Plummer ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1817.461

and I am Dear Mr Plummer very truly yours J. S. Mill
MILL-1871-2,17,1817.462

{ED:1660_To_Duncan_McLaren}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

May 6 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1817.465

Dear Sir - I think so favourably of the capacity shown in your son's
volume of Essays that I have no difficulty in placing the inclosed
expression of opinion at his disposal for any use he may think it can be
to him . MILL-1871-2,17,1817.466

Having read Mr Charles McLaren's volume of philosophical essays shortly
after it was printed , I have formed a very high estimate both of his
attainments in mental philosophy , & of his metaphysical acuteness .
MILL-1871-2,17,1817.467

So far as his opinions agree with my own , I think the Essays show a
very considerable mastery of the subject : MILL-1871-2,17,1817.468

but I was perhaps still more impressed by one of them which maintains
opinions opposed to my own , & which shows an originality & vigour of
thought entitling it to a high place among the writings on its own side
of the question . MILL-1871-2,17,1817.469

<P_17,1818>

{ED:1661_To_George_Croom_Robertson}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1818.472

May 13 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1818.473

Dear Mr Robertson I have seen Mr Hare , who would like to see you on
Tuesday at 12 , if you can make it convenient to call on him at No 8
York Street St James's Square . MILL-1871-2,17,1818.474

It appears to me that if you are outvoted on the motion that the
Committee refuses to send delegates , it would be advisable to take a
fresh ground , viz. that a measure which would swamp the London
Committee in a Central Committee of provincials in which it would have
but three representatives can@ @not be adopted except by a vote of the
London Society , which the London Committee represents .
MILL-1871-2,17,1818.475

This seems to me both rational in itself , and technically correct ,
MILL-1871-2,17,1818.476

and if your motion is negatived , we think another should be made ,
referring the question to a general meeting of the London Society , to
be called for the purpose . MILL-1871-2,17,1818.477

This would embarrass the enemy very much as their object is , quietly to
supersede the London Committee , and not to raise a public discussion .
MILL-1871-2,17,1818.478

The best person to bring forward this motion would be Mr. Hare , or in
his default , Mr. Hunter . MILL-1871-2,17,1818.479

This practically also would gain time MILL-1871-2,17,1818.480

<paren> and the object of the enemy is to decide all as swiftly as
possible , in order that they may get into action this session in London
<$$paren> : MILL-1871-2,17,1818.481

and we think it would probably detach Mrs Taylor's vote at least from
the enemy , as she would be likely to be moved by the argument that the
London Executive Committee has no right to decide a point practically
swamping the London Society , without referring to the members of that
Society itself . MILL-1871-2,17,1818.482

I am Dear Mr Robertson very truly yours J. S. Mill
MILL-1871-2,17,1818.483

<P_17,1819>

{ED:1662_To_William_Longman}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

May 15 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1819.487

Dear Sir - On the whole I prefer that an abridgment sh=d= not be made of
my Princ. of Pol. Econ. MILL-1871-2,17,1819.488

& I have written to that effect to Mr. Howitt {ED:Howitt?} .
MILL-1871-2,17,1819.489

I accept your proposals for the People's Ed. of Pol. Economy & Repr.
Gov=t= MILL-1871-2,17,1819.490

but there seems to be some mistake in the terms you offer for the
People's Edition of Liberty . MILL-1871-2,17,1819.491

I should expect 12 +L {TEXT:+L12} not 10 +L {TEXT:+L10} for that .
MILL-1871-2,17,1819.492

Please oblige me by sending a copy of my " System of Logic " to the Rev.
A. J. Ashworth , Bramley , Leeds . MILL-1871-2,17,1819.493

{ED:1663_To_George_Croom_Robertson}

Blackheath Park Kent MILL-1871-2,17,1819.495

May 16 1871 {TEXT:missing_"1871"} MILL-1871-2,17,1819.496

Dear Mr. Robertson We think that it would be a very good plan to send
round as you propose , to the other Committees a statement of reasons ,
and that there is no harm , but rather good , in any steps that make
widely known a distinct difference of opinion between the London
Committee and the Manchester ; short always of its being so done as to
be likely to get into the newspapers . MILL-1871-2,17,1819.497

Perhaps to avoid this , the word " <font> Private <$$font> " should be
written or printed at the head of whatever paper is sent round .
MILL-1871-2,17,1819.498

We think also that it would be better for all to vote simply against any
new member of the London Committee of whom you can@ @not feel quite sure
in future divisions : MILL-1871-2,17,1819.499

and no reasons need be given , MILL-1871-2,17,1819.500

but if any is wanted I think it amply sufficient to plead the superior
efficiency of a small Committee over a large one .
MILL-1871-2,17,1819.501

I am Dear Mr. Robertson yours very truly J. S. Mill
MILL-1871-2,17,1819.502

<P_17,1820>

{ED:1664_To_William_Longman}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

May 18 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1820.506

The calculation or data which you ask me for respecting my book on
Liberty , are extremely simple . MILL-1871-2,17,1820.507

It is merely that the offer you make me is less than what I have
received on the half profit system . MILL-1871-2,17,1820.508

{ED:1665_To_William_Longman}

Blackheath Park {TEXT:B_P}

May 20 . 1871 MILL-1871-2,17,1820.511

Dear Sir - Thanks for the cheque for which I return the receipt .
MILL-1871-2,17,1820.512

Will you oblige me by sending copies of all my writings <paren> Library
Editions <$$paren> to the Committee formed in London to collect books
for the new Library in course of formation at Strasburg .
MILL-1871-2,17,1820.513

