<BEGIN_mill-1854-2>

<P_14,119>

<heading>

1854 MILL-1854-2,14,119.4

<$$heading>

{ED:109_To_Harriet_Mill_3}

Châlon - MILL-1854-2,14,119.7

Jan. 2 . 1854 {TEXT:missing_"1854"} MILL-1854-2,14,119.8

I fill my letters with nothing but the chances & mischances of this
journey - MILL-1854-2,14,119.9

but I know they are interesting to my dearest one MILL-1854-2,14,119.10

& I shall write better letters when I am quiet at home .
MILL-1854-2,14,119.11

Home ! MILL-1854-2,14,119.12

how completely home it is even in her absence - MILL-1854-2,14,119.13

but how completely also the place where she is & which I am so happy to
have seen & to know , is home too - MILL-1854-2,14,119.14

I am looking with the mind's eye across that Place des Palmiers which
cold as I used to think it , seems almost summer to me now - & seeing
that beautiful prospect instead of these tame snowcovered fields .
MILL-1854-2,14,119.15

But I will take up the history where I left it - MILL-1854-2,14,119.16

The diligence by which I took my place from Avignon & which was called
Messageries Françaises des maîtres de poste , left a little after five ,
MILL-1854-2,14,119.17

& after four changes of carriage , at Montelimart , Valence , Vienne &
Givors <paren> the last piece was part of the St. Etienne railway
<$$paren> brought me to Lyons almost frozen at ten on Saturday .
MILL-1854-2,14,119.18

I was in despair about getting on , as it was so late to go about
finding offices in that large place & I had heard all the way of the
impossibility of getting places to Châlon & the fabulous prices paid for
them , MILL-1854-2,14,119.19

so I thought myself lucky in being offered a place for 7=th= the next
morning - MILL-1854-2,14,119.20

I made it secure MILL-1854-2,14,119.21

& then went to the Univers MILL-1854-2,14,119.22

& on New Year's morning made my way in the dark to the office just
opposite the place where we landed - MILL-1854-2,14,119.23

They promised I should arrive in 12 hours , or as there was snow perhaps
in 14 . MILL-1854-2,14,119.24

The carriage turned out to be an omnibus with 8 places which generally
goes between Lyons & Villefranche a place about a quarter of the way but
which since the steamboats have been stopped , takes passengers to
Châlon . MILL-1854-2,14,119.25

It made me pay 25 fr. though others I found were only charged 18 & 20
fr. MILL-1854-2,14,119.26

At the time at which we ought to have been at Châlon we were only at
Macon where we were kept 3 hours on pretext of waiting for another
carriage . MILL-1854-2,14,119.27

I had promised myself a night's sleep at Châlon , & to leave this
morning by the first train & go on by a night train to Boulogne , so
saving a day : MILL-1854-2,14,119.28

but we arrived here at 7 this morning when the train was gone
MILL-1854-2,14,119.29

& there is no other but the express at 1_3$$4 MILL-1854-2,14,119.30

so I must pass a useless night at Paris . MILL-1854-2,14,119.31

This delay was only <P_14,120> partly owing to the snow of which up to
Macon there was not very much MILL-1854-2,14,120.32

only a little of the delay was owing to the driver's knocking against a
stone hidden as he said by the snow & breaking the pole of the carriage
<paren> at 11 at night <$$paren> : MILL-1854-2,14,120.33

for this only caused about 1_1$$2 hour of the twelve hours' delay .
MILL-1854-2,14,120.34

The whole concern is a piece of knavery as those small diligence
concerns are apt to be . MILL-1854-2,14,120.35

There were one or two agreeable men especially one Frenchman & a young
Savoyard in the crowded little omnibus which made the whole affair a
little less tiresome & provoking . MILL-1854-2,14,120.36

I am now at the trois faisans MILL-1854-2,14,120.37

& shall make them shew me their bed rooms in case you like to come there
in spring . MILL-1854-2,14,120.38

The inn at Avignon , l'Europe , was cheap as well as good -
MILL-1854-2,14,120.39

only the table_d'hôte is dear , having an inscription that on account of
the énorme increase of the price of wine & of la plupart des vivres the
table_d'hôte must be raised to 3_1$$2 f. except for diligence
travellers who have never time to do more than diner à la hote <paren>
considerate <$$paren> . MILL-1854-2,14,120.40

Adieu till Boulogne <font> darling . <$$font> MILL-1854-2,14,120.41

{ED:110_To_Harriet_Mill_4}

Boulogne MILL-1854-2,14,120.43

Thursday MILL-1854-2,14,120.44

{ED:Jan._5._1854}

My adored one will know without my telling her , how the very instant
after I arrived here I rushed through the sloppy melting snow to the
post office tormenting myself all the way lest the man should pretend
there was no letter . MILL-1854-2,14,120.46

When I got the darling word how I devoured it MILL-1854-2,14,120.47

& how happy & in spirits I was made by the good news of her health & the
exquisite proofs of her love that its most precious words contained .
MILL-1854-2,14,120.48

But it disappointed me that she had not yet received my first letter ,
which I put into the post at Arles on Thursday afternoon : which would
reach Marseille that evening & I hoped would go to Hyères that night so
that she would get it before she wrote - MILL-1854-2,14,120.49

I pleased myself with the thought that she would have a letter sooner
than she expected & that her first would tell me she had received it .
MILL-1854-2,14,120.50

However no doubt it came right ; as it was independent of the man at the
post office , having been directed in the same manner as this , which
has also been the case with the two I have since written , from Avignon
& Châlon ; & will be the case with all I write . MILL-1854-2,14,120.51

To go on with my adventures : the Trois Faisans is a second_rate inn
apparently MILL-1854-2,14,120.52

but has one very large & good salon au premier & plenty of tolerable
though not very large bedrooms . MILL-1854-2,14,120.53

I did not go to bed MILL-1854-2,14,120.54

but went on by the tram at 1$$2 past 1 MILL-1854-2,14,120.55

& got to Paris very nicely & <P_14,121> comfortably the carriages being
warmed . MILL-1854-2,14,121.56

I arrived at past 12 at Lawson's Bedford Hotel , which is close to the
Victoria & can almost be seen from it , being the fourth or fifth house
in the Rue de l'Arcade , the street which turns off at the fruitshop .
MILL-1854-2,14,121.57

It seems a good inn & not dear , & at least to voyageurs who sit in what
the waiter called le coffee room . MILL-1854-2,14,121.58

I saw a very nice set of rooms au second MILL-1854-2,14,121.59

& was told they were the like au troisième , those on the premier which
must have been if anything better were let avec cuisine which the
landlady said she only does in winter . MILL-1854-2,14,121.60

The house looks about as large outwardly as the Victoria , not larger .
MILL-1854-2,14,121.61

One recommendation is that it has an omnibus of its own to the northern
railroad . MILL-1854-2,14,121.62

As I arrived so late & had not had the night I expected at Châlon , I
thought I would give myself a long night at Paris , & not attempt to go
by the 9 o'clock train , but wait till the next at one o'clock which I
found would do very well as the steamboat next day <paren> Wednesday
<$$paren> did not go till half past one - MILL-1854-2,14,121.63

& I thought now my troubles were over , MILL-1854-2,14,121.64

but the worst was to come MILL-1854-2,14,121.65

& my experience of winter travelling was to be completed by being snowed
up for near 24 hours on a railway . MILL-1854-2,14,121.66

We got in pretty good time to Amiens MILL-1854-2,14,121.67

but came to a halt between it & Abbeville - MILL-1854-2,14,121.68

Seven hours we remained on the line while messages were sent to
Abbeville & Amiens for another engine - MILL-1854-2,14,121.69

but none came , from the first because there were none there , from the
second for some reason I could get no explanation of .
MILL-1854-2,14,121.70

At last they got up the steam again MILL-1854-2,14,121.71

& took on the train by half at a time to Abbeville where it was declared
we must halt till the road was cleared . MILL-1854-2,14,121.72

I & a few others got into an omnibus MILL-1854-2,14,121.73

& went to the town MILL-1854-2,14,121.74

& I sat by the kitchen fire of the hotel du Commerce from 1$$2 past 4
till daylight when we were sent for by a blunder of the railway people
who first told us we could now go , & . then when we were seated in the
carriages , that we could not , MILL-1854-2,14,121.75

so there all the passengers remained unable to leave the waiting room
because told that we might go at any minute till half past two yesterday
afternoon . MILL-1854-2,14,121.76

The bore was immense , the passengers being more than half of them
English & Americans , the <font> most <$$font> vulgar & illiterate -
MILL-1854-2,14,121.77

& the one or two English & French that were better kept aloof like me
MILL-1854-2,14,121.78

& we did not find each other out . MILL-1854-2,14,121.79

I found two of them at this inn at Boulogne , an Englishman who it
appeared was a coachmaker & a Frenchman settled in England in some
business whose English was <font> quite <$$font> undistinguishable from
an Englishman's , MILL-1854-2,14,121.80

& found them rather sensible people . MILL-1854-2,14,121.81

To the bore of the detention was added another , viz that somebody went
off with my umbrella from the salle_d'attente , MILL-1854-2,14,121.82

& I shall have to buy one here . MILL-1854-2,14,121.83

The lost one was luckily old , having been several times covered ,
MILL-1854-2,14,121.84

but I regret it as you darling liked the stick . MILL-1854-2,14,121.85

I came here to the Hotel Folkestone , one of those on the quai opposite
the landing place , thinking I would try it as it was recommended in
Galignani & it seems a very tolerable place , having both salons &
bedrooms <P_14,122> on the ground floor & good ones too though not very
large . MILL-1854-2,14,122.86

As for my health which she writes so sweetly about , I could not expect
not to catch fresh cold now & then . MILL-1854-2,14,122.87

I have been better one day & worse another MILL-1854-2,14,122.88

& am on the whole much the same as at Hyères . MILL-1854-2,14,122.89

I am still of the same opinion about the chief mischief being overaction
of the heart which is checked but not conquered by the digitalis I have
been taking ever since Avignon - MILL-1854-2,14,122.90

& now heaven bless my own dearest angel . MILL-1854-2,14,122.91

{ED:missing_"P.S."} I hate this nasty blue ink MILL-1854-2,14,122.92

but can get no other . MILL-1854-2,14,122.93

{ED:111_To_Harriet_Mill_5}

India House {TEXT:I_H}

Jan. 6 . 1854 {TEXT:missing_"1854"} MILL-1854-2,14,122.96

How sweetest sweet of the darling to write a second time on Friday after
she received the letter - MILL-1854-2,14,122.97

& how happy it made me to see her letter here on arriving , among the
heap of trumpery {ED:words_obliterated} reports &c that the post had
brought here in the 3 months - along with a few letters that required
attending to about which {ED:words_obliterated} tomorrow or next day
when I have had more time to look at them . MILL-1854-2,14,122.98

I now write , among what bustle you can imagine , only to say by the
very first post what she was anxious to know - how I got here .
MILL-1854-2,14,122.99

I had a very smooth passage of only two hours MILL-1854-2,14,122.100

& succeeded in not being sick at all . MILL-1854-2,14,122.101

I got home between 10 & 11 MILL-1854-2,14,122.102

& had a warm reception from Kate & <paren> for him <$$paren> from Haji .
MILL-1854-2,14,122.103

The ground here is covered with snow , MILL-1854-2,14,122.104

& where the snow <paren> at Blackheath <$$paren> has been partly scraped
off or beaten down it is frozen again & very slippery so that getting to
town was some trouble MILL-1854-2,14,122.105

& the streets are sloppy with the half melted snow so that London looks
its ugliest & feels its most disagreeable . MILL-1854-2,14,122.106

I had not been in my room ten minutes when Hill , Thornton & various
others poured in one after another with their congratulations &
enquiries . MILL-1854-2,14,122.107

There seems to have been a general impression that I was so ill that
there was no knowing when I might come back <paren> or perhaps if I
should ever come back at all <$$paren> so that they generally said I
looked better than they expected . MILL-1854-2,14,122.108

Several asked if it was not imprudent to return at this season & in this
weather . MILL-1854-2,14,122.109

Ellice received me with the cordial manner which imposed on me before &
which his note so belied , MILL-1854-2,14,122.110

said he had been <P_14,123> uneasy about me , having heard from Sykes ,
it did not clearly appear what , MILL-1854-2,14,123.111

but he said he had feared I was worse . MILL-1854-2,14,123.112

I said I had not written again after my second letter because I hoped
every week to be able to come . MILL-1854-2,14,123.113

When I said I had been harassed by the thought that I was wanted here he
said he would not tell me how much I had been wanted -
MILL-1854-2,14,123.114

but I could gather nothing of whether he had really felt the want of me
or not . MILL-1854-2,14,123.115

He as well as Hill , Thornton & others asked the questions that might be
expected about your health & in a manner which shewed interest .
MILL-1854-2,14,123.116

Peacock alone asked not a single question about your health & hardly
about mine MILL-1854-2,14,123.117

but struck into India house subjects & a visit he has had from James .
MILL-1854-2,14,123.118

Grote & Prescott called together today , as they said to enquire if I
was returned MILL-1854-2,14,123.119

& were very warm , especially Grote , in their expressions of sympathy &
interest about your illness . MILL-1854-2,14,123.120

It is odd to see the sort of fragmentary manner in which news gets about
- MILL-1854-2,14,123.121

Grote had heard of you as dangerously ill but not of my being ill at all
, & of your illness as a fever but not of the rupture of a bloodvessel .
MILL-1854-2,14,123.122

Grote is vastly pleased with the article in the Edinburgh -
MILL-1854-2,14,123.123

& a_propos I found here a letter from M=rs= Grote , of complimentation
on the article , which though little worthy of the honour of being sent
to you I may as well inclose . MILL-1854-2,14,123.124

The impudence of writing to me at all & of writing in such a manner is
only matched by the excessive conceit of the letter .
MILL-1854-2,14,123.125

Grate alluded to it saying M=rs= Grote had written to me after reading
the article - MILL-1854-2,14,123.126

I merely answered that I had found a note from her on arriving .
MILL-1854-2,14,123.127

There is a friendly note from Sykes written after we left which I will
inclose tomorrow when I can send with it a sketched answer to it -
MILL-1854-2,14,123.128

Adieu my most beloved MILL-1854-2,14,123.129

& I shall write soon again . MILL-1854-2,14,123.130

{ED:112_To_James_Garth_Marshall}

East India House MILL-1854-2,14,123.132

Jan. 7 . 1854 MILL-1854-2,14,123.133

Dear Sir I am very sorry that my absence from England prevented me until
yesterday from receiving your two notes , as I fear that by waiting for
an answer to <P_14,124> them , the publication of your pamphlet <paren>
the proof of which I have read with great pleasure <$$paren> may have
been delayed . MILL-1854-2,14,124.134

No doubt , however , it has now long been published & I hope , much read
. MILL-1854-2,14,124.135

If I had received your note in time I should have requested you to make
use of any part of my letter to L=d= Monteagle in any manner which you
might think useful , with no other reservation than that of not implying
that I am a positive supporter of your plan - MILL-1854-2,14,124.136

for though it is very likely I may become so , I have not yet seen it
sufficiently discussed , to be aware of all the objections to which it
may possibly be liable . MILL-1854-2,14,124.137

I am D=r= Sir yrs very truly J. S. Mill MILL-1854-2,14,124.138

{ED:113_To_Henry_Cole}

East India House MILL-1854-2,14,124.140

Jan. 9 . 1854 MILL-1854-2,14,124.141

Dear Cole I found your note on arriving in town two days ago .
MILL-1854-2,14,124.142

I am sorry that I can@ @not give you any of the information you require
as I am very little acquainted with recent writings on Jurisprudence &
especially with those relating to special departments such as that you
refer to . MILL-1854-2,14,124.143

I have to thank you for your pamphlet . MILL-1854-2,14,124.144

I entirely agree in your conclusion - MILL-1854-2,14,124.145

& your description of the mode of action of public boards ought to carry
weight , as it is so evidently derived from actual experience .
MILL-1854-2,14,124.146

Very truly yours , J. S. Mill MILL-1854-2,14,124.147

<P_14,125>

{ED:114_To_Harriet_Mill_7}

India House {TEXT:I_H}

Jan. 9 . 1854 MILL-1854-2,14,125.151

No letter today darling - MILL-1854-2,14,125.152

but I did not <font> count <$$font> upon it - MILL-1854-2,14,125.153

& Lily's to Haji which arrived on Sat=y= evening gave news of my darling
one up to Monday . MILL-1854-2,14,125.154

I wonder when I shall be able to write her a letter not filled with
petty details . MILL-1854-2,14,125.155

However as the details must be written about , the best plan is to knock
them off as quickly as possible & get rid of them .
MILL-1854-2,14,125.156

I looked over the bills yesterday MILL-1854-2,14,125.157

& found that the quantity of bread which we thought would be sufficient
now , viz a 2 lb loaf every day from Monday to Friday & a 4 lb on Sat=y=
, is exactly what has been taken all along , <font> including even the
time when Haji was away . <$$font> MILL-1854-2,14,125.158

I asked Kate the meaning of this MILL-1854-2,14,125.159

& she said she did@ @n't have potatoes for herself & that she could not
take less than a 2 lb loaf - evidently unsatisfactory -
MILL-1854-2,14,125.160

but I find from Haji that she has had her aunt staying with her the
greater part of the whole time including his absence , which leaves less
to be accounted for . MILL-1854-2,14,125.161

Haji says he told you of this <paren> the aunt <$$paren> at Nice
MILL-1854-2,14,125.162

perhaps it is a good thing by preventing the worse things which you
feared . MILL-1854-2,14,125.163

The butter has been pretty regularly a pound of fresh & half pound of
salt each week . MILL-1854-2,14,125.164

My return can hardly increase the pound to 1_1$$2 lb.
MILL-1854-2,14,125.165

Nothing else struck me as noticeable MILL-1854-2,14,125.166

but Parsons has not sent any bills for a month owing it is said to Mrs
P. having had an accident on the ice - MILL-1854-2,14,125.167

but I shall make him send them . MILL-1854-2,14,125.168

Should the bills be now paid ? MILL-1854-2,14,125.169

The birds are in fine feather , MILL-1854-2,14,125.170

& Kate says , sing much more & better than at first
MILL-1854-2,14,125.171

& eat immensely . MILL-1854-2,14,125.172

I have answered Marshall & Urquhart . MILL-1854-2,14,125.173

To M. I said that if it were still in time which of course it is not ,
I would have bid him do with my letter anything he thought useful , only
not to imply that I was a positive supporter of his plan , as it had not
yet been sufficiently discussed to bring out all the objections &c.
MILL-1854-2,14,125.174

Urquhart I advised to publish his paper <paren> a very good one
<$$paren> as a pamphlet MILL-1854-2,14,125.175

but offered if he liked to recommend it to Fraser .
MILL-1854-2,14,125.176

There was also an application from the Soc. of Arts saying that they
have to adjudicate a prize to some work on jurisprudence & asking me to
send them a list of the three best recently published , in order of
merit . MILL-1854-2,14,125.177

I answered acknowledging the honor <P_14,126> but saying I was not
sufficiently acquainted with recent writings on jurisprudence to be a
qualified witness as to their claims to the prize .
MILL-1854-2,14,126.178

The Kensington letters I inclose , as it is best you should see all that
comes from that quarter - & along with them , a note I have just written
to my mother . MILL-1854-2,14,126.179

I have looked through the Edinburgh for October - MILL-1854-2,14,126.180

the article on Grote reads , to my mind , slighter & flimsier than I
thought it would . MILL-1854-2,14,126.181

There is another article by Greg on Parl=y= reform shewing that he had
seen our letter to Ld Monteagle <paren> the one Marshall writes about
<$$paren> MILL-1854-2,14,126.182

for he has adopted nearly every idea in the letter almost in the very
words , MILL-1854-2,14,126.183

& has also said speaking of the ballot , that it is within his knowledge
that some to whom ballot was once a sine_qua_non , now think it would be
" a step backward " the very phrase of the letter .
MILL-1854-2,14,126.184

He goes on to attack the ballot with arguments some of them so exactly
the same as those in our unpublished pamphlet <paren> even to the
illustrations <$$paren> that one would think he had seen that too if it
had been physically possible . MILL-1854-2,14,126.185

Though there are some bad arguments mixed yet on the whole this
diminishes my regret that ours was not published .
MILL-1854-2,14,126.186

It is satisfactory that those letters we take so much trouble to write
for some apparently small purpose , so often turn out more useful than
we expected . MILL-1854-2,14,126.187

Now about reviewing Comte the reasons <font> pro <$$font> are evident .
MILL-1854-2,14,126.188

Those <font> con <$$font> are 1=st= I do@ @n't like to have anything to
do with the name or with any publication of H. Martineau .
MILL-1854-2,14,126.189

2=dly= . The West=r= though it will allow I dare say anything else ,
could not allow me to speak freely about Comte's atheism
MILL-1854-2,14,126.190

& I do not see how it is possible to be just to him , when there is so
much to attack , without giving him praise on that point of the subject
. MILL-1854-2,14,126.191

3=dly= , as Chapman is the publisher he doubtless wishes , & expects ,
an article more laudatory on the whole , than I sh=d= be willing to
write . MILL-1854-2,14,126.192

You dearest one will tell me what your perfect judgment & your feeling
decide . MILL-1854-2,14,126.193

- My cough varies from day to day MILL-1854-2,14,126.194

but I have certainly rather <font> more <$$font> than when I left Hyères
, MILL-1854-2,14,126.195

still however the irritation does not feel as if it came from the chest
. MILL-1854-2,14,126.196

I do not know what to make of the great derangement of the circulation .
MILL-1854-2,14,126.197

My pulse which when I am well is not above 60 , is now fully 90 , &
without any apparent cause , MILL-1854-2,14,126.198

for I have now no signs of the <P_14,127> low fever to which Gurney
attributed it - MILL-1854-2,14,127.199

my stomach & bowels are in good order , my appetite excellent
MILL-1854-2,14,127.200

<paren> during the journey it was immense <$$paren> .
MILL-1854-2,14,127.201

I have sent for digitalis from Allen MILL-1854-2,14,127.202

but it is impossible to go on taking that indefinitely
MILL-1854-2,14,127.203

& it has only a temporary effect when any at all .
MILL-1854-2,14,127.204

That & the obstinacy of the cough seem to imply something that keeps up
irritation in the system , requiring to be removed
MILL-1854-2,14,127.205

but I do@ @n't know whom to consult - MILL-1854-2,14,127.206

I must see Coulson I suppose , if only because I have not yet paid him ,
MILL-1854-2,14,127.207

but this is not I fancy in his line MILL-1854-2,14,127.208

& he would probably refer me to Bird who he says has much practice in
chest complaints . MILL-1854-2,14,127.209

Tell me dearest what you think . MILL-1854-2,14,127.210

Au reste I feel quite well & strong . MILL-1854-2,14,127.211

Several times every day I have longed to be with her in those little
rooms under that light sky instead of this dismal congregation of
vapours - though the snow now is nearly gone - MILL-1854-2,14,127.212

adieu my own darling for this time . MILL-1854-2,14,127.213

Love to Lily . MILL-1854-2,14,127.214

{ED:115_To_Harriet_Mill_8}

Blackheath MILL-1854-2,14,127.216

Jan. 11 . 1854 {TEXT:missing_"1854"} MILL-1854-2,14,127.217

No letter yet ! MILL-1854-2,14,127.218

The two letters dated on the Friday after I left are all I have yet had
. MILL-1854-2,14,127.219

Surely one must have miscarried , MILL-1854-2,14,127.220

for she can@ @not have been eight days without either she or Lily
writing even a line - MILL-1854-2,14,127.221

& it does not seem half so unlikely that a letter from Hyères , as it
did that one from Sidmouth should go astray . MILL-1854-2,14,127.222

I have enquired everywhere at the I.H. MILL-1854-2,14,127.223

It is of no use writing to Maberly till I can tell him on what day the
letter was sent . MILL-1854-2,14,127.224

But indeed I shall care comparatively little about a former letter when
I shall have received <font> any . <$$font> MILL-1854-2,14,127.225

Not to have heard for so long fills me with all sorts of anxious
misgivings about her health - not to say that my own spirits are apt to
flag without the support of her & hearing from her -
MILL-1854-2,14,127.226

a letter is a support in the same way though it can@ @not be in the same
degree , as her presence . MILL-1854-2,14,127.227

Did she not see the precious , the dearly beloved one , during those two
or nearer three months , that it is <font> impossible <$$font> for me to
be really out of spirits when I am seeing her , living with her ?
MILL-1854-2,14,127.228

Next to that is the joy & support of a few words of her handwriting -
MILL-1854-2,14,127.229

I am writing this in our pleasant room - pleasant even in her <P_14,128>
absence - MILL-1854-2,14,128.230

indeed her presence always seems to hover over it .
MILL-1854-2,14,128.231

My first care after returning was to have everything in it about which
she had spoken , arranged in the manner she wished -
MILL-1854-2,14,128.232

my second look , & almost my first , on the evening of my arrival , was
to see if the chair with its back to the fire was the one that should be
- MILL-1854-2,14,128.233

it was so , MILL-1854-2,14,128.234

& has been ever since , & Haji says , always before .
MILL-1854-2,14,128.235

The two chairs which should be at the ends of the sideboard are there ,
with the things tied round them , unchanged . MILL-1854-2,14,128.236

We have moved the table nearer the window , as she wished ;
MILL-1854-2,14,128.237

the edge at which I sit at meals is opposite the <font> middle <$$font>
of the fire . MILL-1854-2,14,128.238

The little book was procured - MILL-1854-2,14,128.239

I wrote in it for the first time on Sunday MILL-1854-2,14,128.240

& have written something each evening since - MILL-1854-2,14,128.241

whether what I have written was much worth writing is another question .
MILL-1854-2,14,128.242

Ever since Sunday I have had meat with tea instead of dining out .
MILL-1854-2,14,128.243

It is pleasanter MILL-1854-2,14,128.244

& subtracts so much from the being out after dark .
MILL-1854-2,14,128.245

I was almost forgetting to say a thing of much more importance , viz.
that I today wrote out and signed that codicil - MILL-1854-2,14,128.246

the signature is attested by Napier & Bourdillon .
MILL-1854-2,14,128.247

Touching my health - the digitalis which I have taken for the last three
days has I <font> think <$$font> done the cough some little good
MILL-1854-2,14,128.248

but has not reduced the pulse perceptibly . MILL-1854-2,14,128.249

I have pretty well made up my mind to see Clark tomorrow or the day
after , as the more I think about it the less I rely on any of the
opinions given by Gurney on the subject , & besides when an ailment of
this sort sticks to one , one should not be too long without consulting
somebody . MILL-1854-2,14,128.250

The most unpleasant thing as to present comfort , & a thing I never have
been used to formerly , is the great portion of the middle of each night
that I lie awake . MILL-1854-2,14,128.251

I do not know the cause - MILL-1854-2,14,128.252

it does not arise from any painful sensation , nor from coughing .
MILL-1854-2,14,128.253

The snow is mostly melted MILL-1854-2,14,128.254

& the country looks green from our windows MILL-1854-2,14,128.255

but there has been a north east wind these two days which though not so
cold as one would expect is raw & unpleasant . MILL-1854-2,14,128.256

I.H . MILL-1854-2,14,128.257

<font> Thursday . <$$font> MILL-1854-2,14,128.258

Heaven be thanked , here is her Thursday's letter .
MILL-1854-2,14,128.259

It has not really taken seven days coming as it did not go till Friday ,
MILL-1854-2,14,128.260

& they tell me here that it arrived yesterday evening -
MILL-1854-2,14,128.261

we may call it 5_1$$2 days which is <P_14,129> still very long .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.262

Her not writing sooner is but too well accounted for by her having been
unwell & in bed MILL-1854-2,14,129.263

but now when it <font> has <$$font> come what an angel of a letter !
MILL-1854-2,14,129.264

How loving & how lovely like everything that its <font> perfect <$$font>
writer writes , says , does or feels ; MILL-1854-2,14,129.265

but it makes me feel very anxious about that cough -
MILL-1854-2,14,129.266

I so hope to hear that it gets better by not catching fresh cold .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.267

I am glad she is taking again to the quinine . MILL-1854-2,14,129.268

If the cough does not improve will she not send for one of those
physicians ? MILL-1854-2,14,129.269

At the hotel at Paris I found a book like the Post office Directory
MILL-1854-2,14,129.270

& took down the names of the medical men at Hyères :
MILL-1854-2,14,129.271

they are Allégre , Benet , Brune , Chassinat , Honoraty , Verignon .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.272

It struck me that Benet <paren> an odd name if French , meaning <font>
stupid ass <$$font> <$$paren> is perhaps <font> Bennet <$$font> & that
that is the name of the <font> English <$$font> physician .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.273

By the way , how can you ask such a question darling about Gurney's
letter - as if there needed any asking for her to open & read anything
addressed to me . MILL-1854-2,14,129.274

Do darling MILL-1854-2,14,129.275

& then inclose it MILL-1854-2,14,129.276

or tell me the contents whichever is least trouble .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.277

I went to Clark this morning : MILL-1854-2,14,129.278

he examined my chest &c thoroughly MILL-1854-2,14,129.279

& reports favorably so far that he says there is no organic disease -
MILL-1854-2,14,129.280

at the same time he quite justifies my having gone to him by the very
strong impression he has given me that he thinks me in some degree
<font> threatened . <$$font> MILL-1854-2,14,129.281

In fact when I said " then you find nothing the matter with my lungs
beyond catarrh " he qualified his answer by saying " not at present " .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.282

He prescribed hemlock pills , & mustard poultices , which I am sure I do
not know how Kate will make or I apply : MILL-1854-2,14,129.283

& recommended my coming again in two or three weeks if not quite well by
that time , that he may examine me again - MILL-1854-2,14,129.284

meanwhile he will look back to the notes he made formerly -
MILL-1854-2,14,129.285

& he let out that he had some " suspicion " then .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.286

However I do@ @n't think he thinks there is much to be afraid of , as he
said nothing about not going out , or about respirators or anything of
that sort - but contented himself with recommending warmer flannels than
those I wear . MILL-1854-2,14,129.287

How very much I enjoy those little details about herself .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.288

I fancy myself looking at that beautiful view with her - which I am so
glad she enjoys - MILL-1854-2,14,129.289

when darling is beginning tea , at half past six , I am always <font>
making <$$font> it , & then beginning my supper .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.290

Haji {TEXT:H} always comes in before I have done .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.291

He behaves very well MILL-1854-2,14,129.292

& his being in the room is agreeable rather than the contrary .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.293

When she wrote this precious letter on Thursday evening I was probably
in the act of arriving at our home . MILL-1854-2,14,129.294

I think it is best to write <font> Angleterre . <$$font>
MILL-1854-2,14,129.295

A_thousand loves & best wishes for this & all other years .
MILL-1854-2,14,129.296

{ED:missing_"P.S."} I meant to have inclosed a note this time
MILL-1854-2,14,129.297

but have not been able to get them in time . MILL-1854-2,14,129.298

<P_14,130>

{ED:116_To_John_William_Parker,_Jr.}

India House MILL-1854-2,14,130.301

Jan. 11 . 1854 MILL-1854-2,14,130.302

Dear Sir On my arrival I found that Prescott had not given you a receipt
for the 250 +L {TEXT:+L250} . MILL-1854-2,14,130.303

I shall have much pleasure in giving you one the first time I come your
way . MILL-1854-2,14,130.304

Mr Pollard Urquhart , the member for Westmeath and author of a " Life of
Francesco Sforza " & of some ingenious Essays on Political Economy , has
written the inclosed paper on the Irish Tenant Right question .
MILL-1854-2,14,130.305

I think it quite the best thing I have seen on the subject ; moderate ,
conclusive , & very judiciously put for English readers .
MILL-1854-2,14,130.306

Mr Urquhart is desirous of offering it to Fraser's .
MILL-1854-2,14,130.307

I therefore send it for the consideration of the authorities .
MILL-1854-2,14,130.308

very faithfully y=rs= J. S. Mill MILL-1854-2,14,130.309

Mr Urquhart's address is Castle Pollard - Westmeath .
MILL-1854-2,14,130.310

J. W. Parker Jun=r= Esq MILL-1854-2,14,130.311

{ED:117_To_Harriet_Mill_9}

Jan. 14 . 1854 {TEXT:missing_"1854"} MILL-1854-2,14,130.313

The good which that precious letter did me , has not yet left me
MILL-1854-2,14,130.314

& will last a long while . MILL-1854-2,14,130.315

I long however to hear more about her dear health .
MILL-1854-2,14,130.316

The coughing after talking is not an alarming symptom .
MILL-1854-2,14,130.317

It is just the same with me on <P_14,131> the bad days of my cough
MILL-1854-2,14,131.318

& yet Clark could not find any organic disease - at least " at present "
. MILL-1854-2,14,131.319

By the way <paren> as I am on the subject <$$paren> though I see he has
suspicions which he expects to be able to test by reexamination a few
weeks hence , I do not at all regard them 1=st= , because he had similar
suspicions , as it now appears , five years ago . 2=nd= , I can see
that the side he a little suspects is the left side :
MILL-1854-2,14,131.320

now I have long felt perfectly sure that if my lungs are ever attacked
it will be first & worst on the right side , as all my ailments without
exception always are - MILL-1854-2,14,131.321

& now all my sensations of uneasiness in the chest back shoulder & side
are on the right side chiefly & almost exclusively .
MILL-1854-2,14,131.322

So do not be uneasy darling on account of what he said .
MILL-1854-2,14,131.323

At present my pulse is better MILL-1854-2,14,131.324

but the appearance of improvement in the cough has ceased - apparently
caused by the digitalis & going off whenever I cease taking that .
MILL-1854-2,14,131.325

Chronic catarrh is a very common old man's disorder ,
MILL-1854-2,14,131.326

but I am hardly old enough for it yet - MILL-1854-2,14,131.327

it seems however that is what I have . MILL-1854-2,14,131.328

I am working hard at getting up the arrear of India house business
MILL-1854-2,14,131.329

& have taken some of it home to work at tomorrow <paren> Sunday
<$$paren> . MILL-1854-2,14,131.330

I hardly feel well or vigorous enough to set about any work of our own
yet on Sundays & in the evenings - MILL-1854-2,14,131.331

when I do the first thing shall be to finish the rewriting of the paper
on Nature , which I began before we left . MILL-1854-2,14,131.332

It is now <paren> yesterday & today <$$paren> beautiful weather here ,
that is for England - mild and clear - MILL-1854-2,14,131.333

but what a difference between <font> this <$$font> clearness & <font>
that , <$$font> which my darling is now looking on & which <font> do
<$$font> I <font> not <$$font> wish I was looking on along with her .
MILL-1854-2,14,131.334

How I rejoice every day in knowing exactly her whereabout - all the
objects about her both indoors & out . MILL-1854-2,14,131.335

I have seen & heard from or of nobody MILL-1854-2,14,131.336

& have no news to tell . MILL-1854-2,14,131.337

I hope the Spectator arrived safe . MILL-1854-2,14,131.338

This morning Kate announced that she had no kitchen candles or soap ;
the last owing to her having washed things for Haji .
MILL-1854-2,14,131.339

I said you expected her stores of all sorts would last till March .
MILL-1854-2,14,131.340

I said I would write to you about it & in the meantime to order 1 lb of
each from Dalton . MILL-1854-2,14,131.341

She also said that there were only potatoes for two or three days .
MILL-1854-2,14,131.342

The last had were a bushel on the 3=rd= of November ;
MILL-1854-2,14,131.343

have they not gone very fast , considering Haji's three weeks absence &
that when he was here <paren> until the last week <$$paren> they were
only wanted one day in the week ? MILL-1854-2,14,131.344

What does the tax gatherer mean by charging us 12 <slash> for " armorial
bearings " ? MILL-1854-2,14,131.345

Can he mean the crest on your dear little seal ? MILL-1854-2,14,131.346

Webster's bill is " Examining correcting & cleaning foreign marble clock
15 <slash> , new winder 2 <slash> 6 . Cleaning & repairing carriage
clock <paren> which he spoiled <$$paren> 12 <slash> 6@ @d . "
MILL-1854-2,14,131.347

Roberts sends a bill of 6 +L {TEXT:+L6} <slash> 5 for things supplied
Feb. 26 . Ap. 23 & Sept. 14 . MILL-1854-2,14,131.348

I think he was paid the two first MILL-1854-2,14,131.349

& shall look into it . MILL-1854-2,14,131.350

Chapman <paren> Cooper <$$paren> sends a bill for 1@ @s@ @3@ @d for "
hoop to washing tub . " Todman a bill <P_14,132> for 17 <slash> which
it will be very troublesome to pay . MILL-1854-2,14,132.351

I think we settled that Prescott's clerks were <font> not <$$font> to
have the Xmas money this year ? MILL-1854-2,14,132.352

I find an unexpected difficulty in getting small notes of the Bank of
France . MILL-1854-2,14,132.353

The man I usually employ , Massey , in Leadenhall St. says he has not
been able to get any , MILL-1854-2,14,132.354

& I have tried two other places with no better success -
MILL-1854-2,14,132.355

I could get a note for 500 fr. MILL-1854-2,14,132.356

but that seems too much to risk without first putting forth a feeler -
MILL-1854-2,14,132.357

but if I can@ @not get soon what I want , I must send that .
MILL-1854-2,14,132.358

I have been nowhere west of Bucklersbury where I went to get tea from
Mansell's . MILL-1854-2,14,132.359

Thornton during our absence has published a volume of poems in which he
has taken the liberty of addressing one to me by name -
MILL-1854-2,14,132.360

it is an imitation of an epistle of Horace . MILL-1854-2,14,132.361

He apologized for doing it without leave on account of my absence - a
very insufficient apology - MILL-1854-2,14,132.362

in the thing itself there is little about me , & that little neither
good nor harm . MILL-1854-2,14,132.363

Though the verses in the volume are better than common , he has not
raised my opinion of his good sense by publishing them .
MILL-1854-2,14,132.364

I send this letter <font> unpaid <$$font> dear as being one that I am
sure is not overweight , that you may see if they do not charge 16 sous
, instead of the 10 pence which must be paid to frank it here .
MILL-1854-2,14,132.365

There seems no use in paying an extra twopence on every letter for the
sake of paying here instead of there . Does there ?
MILL-1854-2,14,132.366

& now adieu my own precious love . MILL-1854-2,14,132.367

I wait for the next letter as the greatest & chief pleasure I can have
during this absence . MILL-1854-2,14,132.368

A_thousand_thousand loves , MILL-1854-2,14,132.369

{ED:118_To_Harriet_Mill_10}

Blackheath - MILL-1854-2,14,132.371

Jan. 16 1854 {TEXT:missing_"1854"} MILL-1854-2,14,132.372

I received this morning my precious one's letter written on the 11=th= &
12=th= - MILL-1854-2,14,132.373

how delightfully quick it has come this time . MILL-1854-2,14,132.374

I hope this quickness will be the general rule . MILL-1854-2,14,132.375

To speak first of the most important thing that exists , to me , or ever
can exist , your health - I do not think there is anything alarming in
those <font> sudden & violent <$$font> coughs such as this seems to have
been - MILL-1854-2,14,132.376

it is not in that way that organic disease gets on .
MILL-1854-2,14,132.377

Such coughs come & go even where there is already pulmonary disease ,
MILL-1854-2,14,132.378

& are not only got rid of , MILL-1854-2,14,132.379

but do not leave <P_14,133> what was already wrong , worse than they
found it . MILL-1854-2,14,133.380

As an instance , Sinnett , soon after he was pronounced consumptive by
Clark , had a most violent , almost <font> terrible <$$font> cough ,
MILL-1854-2,14,133.381

& I happening to see him at the time , thought he must be in a very bad
way - MILL-1854-2,14,133.382

But the next thing I heard about him was that it was quite gone ,
MILL-1854-2,14,133.383

& I never heard that he was at all worse after it .
MILL-1854-2,14,133.384

On the whole it is a considerable comfort that you should have had so
bad a cough without any hemorrhage - MILL-1854-2,14,133.385

but that trial having been now made , I am very happy that it seemed to
be going away MILL-1854-2,14,133.386

& I hope in going it will carry off with it the cough you had before ,
MILL-1854-2,14,133.387

but if it does not , you are probably only in the same case with me ,
whose cough , now three months old , nothing seems to touch -
MILL-1854-2,14,133.388

Clark's hemlock pills & mustard poultices appear to have no more effect
than Gurney's remedies . MILL-1854-2,14,133.389

I never knew that a mere cough , not consumptive , could be as obstinate
as this is , MILL-1854-2,14,133.390

but I believe those influenza coughs last longer than any others .
MILL-1854-2,14,133.391

About Mrs Grote's letter , my darling is I dare say right .
MILL-1854-2,14,133.392

It did not escape me that there was that amende , MILL-1854-2,14,133.393

& I should have felt much more indignant if there had not .
MILL-1854-2,14,133.394

But what was to my feelings like impudent , though impudent is not
exactly the right word , was , that after the things she has said & done
respecting us , she should imagine that a tardy sort of recognition of
you , & flattery to me , would serve to establish some sort of relation
between us & her . MILL-1854-2,14,133.395

It strikes me as déplacé to answer the letter , especially so long after
it was written - MILL-1854-2,14,133.396

but her having made this amende might make the difference of my asking
how she is , at least when he mentions her . MILL-1854-2,14,133.397

That is about as much , I think , as her good intentions deserve .
MILL-1854-2,14,133.398

- I will , dear , say to Grote what she wishes MILL-1854-2,14,133.399

& the best opportunity will be the first time he writes a note to me in
that form . MILL-1854-2,14,133.400

I do not , & have not for years , addressed him as <font> M=r= <$$font>
- MILL-1854-2,14,133.401

& it is very dull of him not to have taken the hint .
MILL-1854-2,14,133.402

I am getting on with India house work MILL-1854-2,14,133.403

but the arrear will take me a long time - MILL-1854-2,14,133.404

I worked at it at home all yesterday <paren> Sunday <$$paren>
MILL-1854-2,14,133.405

& got through a good deal . MILL-1854-2,14,133.406

Sunday , alas , is not so different from other days as when she is here
- though more so than when I am quite with her . MILL-1854-2,14,133.407

I am reading in the evenings , as I said I would do , Sismondi's Italian
Republics which I read last in 1838 , before going to Italy .
MILL-1854-2,14,133.408

Having seen so many of the places since makes it very interesting .
MILL-1854-2,14,133.409

I.H . MILL-1854-2,14,133.410

17=th= . MILL-1854-2,14,133.411

This morning I watched the loveliest dawn & sunrise
MILL-1854-2,14,133.412

& felt that I was looking directly to where she is & that that sun came
straight <P_14,134> from her . MILL-1854-2,14,134.413

And now here is the Friday's letter which comes from her in a still more
literal sense . MILL-1854-2,14,134.414

I am so happy that the cough is better & that she is in better spirits .
MILL-1854-2,14,134.415

How kindly she writes about the keys , MILL-1854-2,14,134.416

never mind darling . MILL-1854-2,14,134.417

I have bought one set of flannels since . MILL-1854-2,14,134.418

I am glad she likes the note to Sykes . MILL-1854-2,14,134.419

As for Chapman's request , the <font> pro <$$font> was the great desire
I feel to atone for the overpraise I have given Comte & to let it be
generally known to those who know me what I think on the unfavourable
side about him . MILL-1854-2,14,134.420

The reason that the objection which you feel so strongly & which my next
letter afterwards will have shewn that I felt too , did not completely
decide the matter with me , was that Chapman did not want a review of
this particular book , but of <font> Comte <$$font> , & I could have got
rid of H. M.'s part in a sentence , perhaps without even naming her -
MILL-1854-2,14,134.421

I sh=d= certainly have put Comte's own book at the head along with hers
& made all the references to <font> it . <$$font>
MILL-1854-2,14,134.422

But malgré cela I disliked the connexion MILL-1854-2,14,134.423

& now I dislike it still more , MILL-1854-2,14,134.424

& shall at once write to C. to refuse - putting the delay of an answer
upon my long absence so that he may not think I hesitated .
MILL-1854-2,14,134.425

It is lucky he has not called . MILL-1854-2,14,134.426

A_propos he has not sent the January number of the West=r= .
MILL-1854-2,14,134.427

I will lend the 10 +L {TEXT:+L10} to Holyoake as she says darling .
MILL-1854-2,14,134.428

I did not propose the Edinburgh to Urquhart because he wanted to publish
in time for the beginning of the session & could not wait till April -
MILL-1854-2,14,134.429

so nothing but a magazine would do . MILL-1854-2,14,134.430

Besides the Ed. would not have taken it . MILL-1854-2,14,134.431

I have an answer from him , thanking me & accepting my offer to send it
to Parker which I have done . MILL-1854-2,14,134.432

I have no answer from Marshall - MILL-1854-2,14,134.433

I have not been able to get a 100 f. note of the B. of F.
MILL-1854-2,14,134.434

but I have at last got the one which I inclose <paren> 200 f. <$$paren>
. MILL-1854-2,14,134.435

If it goes safe I will send a larger one next . MILL-1854-2,14,134.436

Now that the snow is melted I must have the gardener to clear up the
place - MILL-1854-2,14,134.437

& I shall be able to pay the bills & taxes . MILL-1854-2,14,134.438

I paid Kate's wages . MILL-1854-2,14,134.439

She is exactly all you said - very pleasant to speak to & be served by -
MILL-1854-2,14,134.440

but her excuses are like a person with no sense or head at all
MILL-1854-2,14,134.441

& she requires <font> much <$$font> looking after .
MILL-1854-2,14,134.442

She says Parsons' bill is wrong because it charges , during all Haji's
absence about twice the quantity of meat she professes to have had ,
MILL-1854-2,14,134.443

& she has twice taken the bill to make him alter it ,
MILL-1854-2,14,134.444

but of course she <font> has <$$font> had the meat ,
MILL-1854-2,14,134.445

& last Sunday the fact that a large piece of the roast beef had been cut
off was as palpable as in the worst case I remember with the former cook
. MILL-1854-2,14,134.446

I shewed it to her of course , not charging <font> her <$$font> with
anything but that she might know I had noticed it .
MILL-1854-2,14,134.447

<P_14,135>

{ED:119_To_Harriet_Mill_11}

Blackheath MILL-1854-2,14,135.450

19 Jan 1854 {TEXT:missing_"1854"} MILL-1854-2,14,135.451

Another dear letter came today - MILL-1854-2,14,135.452

& did me good not only as they always do , by the love & sweetness & by
the sight of the precious handwriting <paren> she asked me in one of her
letters if I could read the pencil ! <font> bless <$$font> her !
<$$paren> but also by the pleasant picture of bright sunshine & pure air
with June temperature - which is made so much more pleasant by having
seen & knowing that beautiful view & all that she looked on when she
stood on the balcony that evening . MILL-1854-2,14,135.453

It is delightful to think of her with such weather -
MILL-1854-2,14,135.454

<font> here <$$font> the weather is not now cold nor very disagreeable ,
MILL-1854-2,14,135.455

there is only the total absence of agreeableness , characteristic of
English winter . MILL-1854-2,14,135.456

She says nothing of her health this time - MILL-1854-2,14,135.457

I hope the better news of the last letter continues .
MILL-1854-2,14,135.458

As for my own health she will have seen in my subsequent letters nearly
all there is to tell . MILL-1854-2,14,135.459

I am so glad she wished me to see Clark . MILL-1854-2,14,135.460

I should not like to go to any one who had not known my constitution
before , therefore certainly not to Gurney's doctor .
MILL-1854-2,14,135.461

How excessively cool of G. to make that very modest request to Lily !
MILL-1854-2,14,135.462

but you judged him right from the first - MILL-1854-2,14,135.463

you always said he was presuming to the verge of impertinence .
MILL-1854-2,14,135.464

It is quite pleasant however to read about ferns growing in immense
abundance . MILL-1854-2,14,135.465

How I wish we could see them together . MILL-1854-2,14,135.466

The Comte question is decided - MILL-1854-2,14,135.467

Chapman shall have a most positive negative . MILL-1854-2,14,135.468

I sent the 10 +L {TEXT:+L10} to Holyoake who has written back a letter
of thanks . MILL-1854-2,14,135.469

I am so glad that my answer to Westbourne was right .
MILL-1854-2,14,135.470

A_propos the insolence which I think you mean was in Clara's letter -
MILL-1854-2,14,135.471

I do not think Harriet was insolent or at least intended to be so -
MILL-1854-2,14,135.472

I think her words have always been much less bad than Clara's though her
conduct has been much the same - MILL-1854-2,14,135.473

The mistake I made about the bread was very stupid -
MILL-1854-2,14,135.474

I found it out soon after MILL-1854-2,14,135.475

but forgot to say so to her <paren> my dearest one <$$paren>
MILL-1854-2,14,135.476

& if I had she would have got it too late to save her the trouble of
writing about it . MILL-1854-2,14,135.477

Perhaps too the potatoes have lasted as long as could be expected .
MILL-1854-2,14,135.478

Kate did make Parsons strike out 1_1$$4 lb of beef from his bill
MILL-1854-2,14,135.479

so there was I suppose some truth in what she said .
MILL-1854-2,14,135.480

She now declares that there are only <P_14,136> coals to last till
Saturday . MILL-1854-2,14,136.481

The two tons which Haji ordered were had on the 12=th= November ,
MILL-1854-2,14,136.482

so they have lasted just nine weeks . MILL-1854-2,14,136.483

I find that the same quantity had on the 23=d= May lasted till the
15=th= August being twelve weeks : MILL-1854-2,14,136.484

we had not left off fires in the sitting rooms in May ,
MILL-1854-2,14,136.485

but perhaps the difference is as little as we could expect .
MILL-1854-2,14,136.486

When we had all the fires in full play two tons only lasted a month .
MILL-1854-2,14,136.487

I am sorry to say darling I have paid most of the bills to the end of
the year MILL-1854-2,14,136.488

but I will get Haji to pay the current ones in future -
MILL-1854-2,14,136.489

perhaps once a month will be sufficient ? MILL-1854-2,14,136.490

I took what she said in her last letter about letting bills & taxes wait
till I had less to do , as implying they might be paid when I had time
MILL-1854-2,14,136.491

so I have paid those which lay convenient - MILL-1854-2,14,136.492

even now I think I must myself pay those at Lee , viz. Upton & Stevens
. MILL-1854-2,14,136.493

Marshall has just sent his bill " repairing tea urn cover 9@ @d . new
heater 2 <slash> . repairing dish cover 6@ @d . garden fork 3 <slash>
6 {COM:missing_close_quote} . MILL-1854-2,14,136.494

Roberts I see had <font> not <$$font> been paid at all in the course of
the year . MILL-1854-2,14,136.495

Did the 200 fr. note inclosed in my last arrive safe ?
MILL-1854-2,14,136.496

When I hear that it did I will send another - probably a larger .
MILL-1854-2,14,136.497

I inclose a note from M. Laing , received today -
MILL-1854-2,14,136.498

none of the news seems to have reached her . MILL-1854-2,14,136.499

You do not say <paren> but I forget in what letter I mentioned it
<$$paren> whether to send the Adelaide letter . MILL-1854-2,14,136.500

Is it not wonderful , the stand which the Turks are making ?
MILL-1854-2,14,136.501

this last four days battle , they being the assailants , & completely
victorious , seems to me one of the most remarkable feats of arms in
recent history - MILL-1854-2,14,136.502

they must be not only most determinedly brave but <paren> what nobody
expected <$$paren> excellently led . MILL-1854-2,14,136.503

Selim Pasha one of those who commanded is I believe a Pole -
MILL-1854-2,14,136.504

what a pity Bem did not live to see & take part in it .
MILL-1854-2,14,136.505

In the last few days the papers have been full of the Prince Albert
political scandal , mostly complaining of the public gullibility , but
all saying that these reports were very widely spread over the country &
largely believed - the worth of popularity ! MILL-1854-2,14,136.506

Adieu darling for tonight , MILL-1854-2,14,136.507

for I must make & apply my mustard poultice - MILL-1854-2,14,136.508

you should see me doing it every <P_14,137> evening - not that it or the
hemlock pills seem to do any good , MILL-1854-2,14,137.509

for the cough if better at all is so little so as to leave the matter
doubtful MILL-1854-2,14,137.510

& I am not quite so well otherwise as I was - feverish I suppose
MILL-1854-2,14,137.511

for my face is always flushed & burning & my hands generally .
MILL-1854-2,14,137.512

I shall see Clark soon again therefore . MILL-1854-2,14,137.513

& now my precious more than life , good night . MILL-1854-2,14,137.514

I.H. MILL-1854-2,14,137.515

Jan. 20 . MILL-1854-2,14,137.516

I am better , darling , than yesterday - MILL-1854-2,14,137.517

I was less feverish in the night , MILL-1854-2,14,137.518

& my stomach which was somewhat disordered yesterday is less so today
owing to attention to diet . MILL-1854-2,14,137.519

I sleep considerably better than I did . MILL-1854-2,14,137.520

There is however evidently a good deal wrong about my state ,
MILL-1854-2,14,137.521

but whether it is something great or something comparatively small we
can@ @not at present know . MILL-1854-2,14,137.522

This is , for London , a really bright sunny day with a mild south wind
, MILL-1854-2,14,137.523

& even here such a day is inspiriting , MILL-1854-2,14,137.524

I write every evening in the little book . MILL-1854-2,14,137.525

I have been reading the Essay on Nature as I rewrote the first part of
it before we left MILL-1854-2,14,137.526

& I think it very much improved & altogether very passable .
MILL-1854-2,14,137.527

I think I could soon finish it equally well . MILL-1854-2,14,137.528

Did I not darling some time before leaving , give you the will ?
MILL-1854-2,14,137.529

The last one I mean , the one prepared by Gregson .
MILL-1854-2,14,137.530

I think I did MILL-1854-2,14,137.531

& I certainly can@ @not find it , but only all the old wills -
MILL-1854-2,14,137.532

& now again a_thousand loves & blessings . MILL-1854-2,14,137.533

{ED:120_To_Harriet_Mill_12}

Jan. 23 1854 {TEXT:missing_"1854"} MILL-1854-2,14,137.535

How very happy my beloved one your letter makes me by saying that the
cough is so much better . MILL-1854-2,14,137.536

I longed so for that news MILL-1854-2,14,137.537

& now it has come I feel quite lighthearted . MILL-1854-2,14,137.538

I have made a copy of Bird's prescription MILL-1854-2,14,137.539

& inclose it MILL-1854-2,14,137.540

but I am rather afraid the pharmaciens will not know anything about
Syrup of Iron & Iodide of Quinine . MILL-1854-2,14,137.541

I will when I see Coulson which I have not done yet , but which I will
do immediately , ask him to make an equivalent prescription which they
will understand . MILL-1854-2,14,137.542

Meanwhile luckily you have some - MILL-1854-2,14,137.543

it is to be taken a teaspoonful thrice a day MILL-1854-2,14,137.544

& Bird prefers that it should be at or immediately after meals .
MILL-1854-2,14,137.545

I too have thought very often lately about the life
MILL-1854-2,14,137.546

& am most anxious that we should complete it the soonest possible .
MILL-1854-2,14,137.547

What there is of it is in a perfectly publishable state -
MILL-1854-2,14,137.548

as far as writing goes it could be printed tomorrow -
MILL-1854-2,14,137.549

& it contains a full writing out as far as anything can write out , what
you are , as far as I am competent to describe you , <P_14,138> & what I
owe to you - MILL-1854-2,14,138.550

but , besides that until revised by you it is little better than
unwritten , MILL-1854-2,14,138.551

it contains nothing about our private circumstances , further than
shewing that there was intimate friendship for many years ,
MILL-1854-2,14,138.552

& you only can decide what more it is necessary or desirable to say in
order to stop the mouths of enemies hereafter . MILL-1854-2,14,138.553

The fact is there is about as much written as I <font> can <$$font>
write without your help & we must go through this together & add the
rest to it at the very first opportunity - MILL-1854-2,14,138.554

I have not forgotten what she said about bringing it with me to Paris .
MILL-1854-2,14,138.555

- Now dear about myself , I went again to Clark on Saturday being
thereunto determined by feeling myself worse in several ways &
especially by having had the aguish chill very much the evening before &
a <font> great deal <$$font> of fever in the night after it .
MILL-1854-2,14,138.556

Clark examined my chest &c carefully again MILL-1854-2,14,138.557

& said there is some congestion of the lungs , on the right side , but
that he does <font> not <$$font> believe there is any commencement of
organic disease MILL-1854-2,14,138.558

& from the way in which he said it I feel much more sure than I did
before both that he did not keep back anything , & also that he does not
think the cough a really serious matter . MILL-1854-2,14,138.559

He found some congestion of the liver which he thought was probably the
cause of the fever & other symptoms , MILL-1854-2,14,138.560

& for this he prescribed acids <paren> nitric & muriatic <$$paren> &
mustard poultices in the region of the liver . MILL-1854-2,14,138.561

Since that the fever I have had for nearly a fortnight has very much
gone off MILL-1854-2,14,138.562

& I feel better altogether - MILL-1854-2,14,138.563

with regard to the cough he advised me to do nothing , but leave off the
hemlock pills to see what cough there would be if no sedative were taken
. MILL-1854-2,14,138.564

Accordingly it is somewhat worse , especially at night -
MILL-1854-2,14,138.565

but since there seems to be nothing dangerous about it we must have
patience MILL-1854-2,14,138.566

& it will I suppose go off some time . MILL-1854-2,14,138.567

Thanks darling for the directions about the mustard ,
MILL-1854-2,14,138.568

but I have till now applied it <font> without <$$font> any intervening
muslin , direct to the skin <paren> by advice of one of the partners at
Allen's <$$paren> MILL-1854-2,14,138.569

& as it is , by Clark's directions , mixed with an equal quantity of
linseed meal , it is not too strong . MILL-1854-2,14,138.570

In fact I can@ @not get it strong enough though I keep it on much longer
than the half hour Clark recommended . MILL-1854-2,14,138.571

My having tea at half past six is by choice - MILL-1854-2,14,138.572

I manage so as to have done my supper & have the tea ready to pour out
when Haji comes in - MILL-1854-2,14,138.573

but the last four days I have dined in town at a very good & cheap place
which Haji told me of , the place where the French restaurant formerly
was , in Gracechurch St. MILL-1854-2,14,138.574

My own angel Haji is not to blame about the place at table .
MILL-1854-2,14,138.575

That where I sit is now directly opposite the very middle of the fire ,
MILL-1854-2,14,138.576

& is I think the warmest - MILL-1854-2,14,138.577

in any case I prefer it to the other . MILL-1854-2,14,138.578

H. does not even always sit there , but sometimes on the contrary side
of the table . MILL-1854-2,14,138.579

He behaves very well MILL-1854-2,14,138.580

& is even empressé to do things for me as well as give things up to me -
MILL-1854-2,14,138.581

he is altogether much more amiable than I ever knew him , which is
probably to be partly ascribed to his being , as he evidently is , in
<font> very <$$font> much better health . MILL-1854-2,14,138.582

He does not mope nor sit with <P_14,139> his head on his hand <paren>
except a very little occasionally <$$paren> MILL-1854-2,14,139.583

can , & does , read nearly all the evening , MILL-1854-2,14,139.584

& is not now at all like an invalid . MILL-1854-2,14,139.585

I waited for one more letter before writing to Chapman
MILL-1854-2,14,139.586

but as that contained no suggestion about the reply I wrote merely that
for various reasons it was impossible for me to do it & that I hoped the
delay of answering had not caused him inconvenience .
MILL-1854-2,14,139.587

The first time he calls however I will say to him what you now suggest .
MILL-1854-2,14,139.588

Yesterday was the loveliest day possible in an English winter -
MILL-1854-2,14,139.589

I went out for a little in the mild & warm sun MILL-1854-2,14,139.590

& enjoyed the beautiful view towards Shooter's Hill -
MILL-1854-2,14,139.591

what & whom I thought of you do not need that I sh=d= tell .
MILL-1854-2,14,139.592

I worked again all day & part of the evening at India house work .
MILL-1854-2,14,139.593

I do not however think I shall need to do this again , as I have already
made a very perceptible impression on the arrears .
MILL-1854-2,14,139.594

Today though it began gloomy has turned out at last equally fine .
MILL-1854-2,14,139.595

The stocks & wallflowers in Lily's garden are beginning to flower ,
MILL-1854-2,14,139.596

& I hope the bitterness of winter is past . MILL-1854-2,14,139.597

It seems the 26=th= of Dec=r= was the coldest day ; the therm=r= in
London at zero of Fahrenheit , at Nottingham 4 degrees lower , or 36
below freezing ! MILL-1854-2,14,139.598

Adieu my perfect - MILL-1854-2,14,139.599

& bless her a million of times . MILL-1854-2,14,139.600

{ED:121_To_Harriet_Mill_13}

Jan. 26 1854 {TEXT:missing_"1854"} MILL-1854-2,14,139.602

I got her letter yesterday MILL-1854-2,14,139.603

& though she says it is <font> not a letter <$$font> I was delighted to
have it , as well as with the promise of another in a day or two .
MILL-1854-2,14,139.604

To take the subjects in their order : the word " threatened " was not
used by Clark MILL-1854-2,14,139.605

but was my own expression of the impression he gave me as to his opinion
, by his guarded phrase ' at present ' & other signs .
MILL-1854-2,14,139.606

You will have seen since the more decidedly favorable opinion he
afterwards gave - MILL-1854-2,14,139.607

but I agree in all she says about it - MILL-1854-2,14,139.608

no doubt we both are always threatened with consumption when we are long
out of health MILL-1854-2,14,139.609

& we must endeavour not to be so . MILL-1854-2,14,139.610

I have continued better as to general health , MILL-1854-2,14,139.611

& the cough after being for two days as I said in my last , rather worse
, became & has been since considerably better , in fact more like a
gradual going off than I have yet thought it - the diminution being both
in cough & expectoration & what I think an improvement in the quality of
both . MILL-1854-2,14,139.612

This is the more encouraging as I am doing absolutely nothing against
the cough . MILL-1854-2,14,139.613

With regard to Thornton I do not think what you say too severe -
MILL-1854-2,14,139.614

he has suddenly plumped down to the place of a quite common person in my
estimation , when I thought he was a good deal better .
MILL-1854-2,14,139.615

<P_14,140>

There are in the book itself many proofs of excessive , even ridiculous
vanity , not much the better for being , as in his case it is , <font>
disappointed <$$font> vanity . MILL-1854-2,14,140.617

He is far from the first instance I have known of inordinate vanity
under very modest externals . MILL-1854-2,14,140.618

His misjudgment of me is so far less than you supposed , as he has not
put in any flattery <font> proprement dit , <$$font>
MILL-1854-2,14,140.619

but the fact itself is a piece of flattery which he must have thought
would be agreeable or he would not have taken so impertinent a liberty .
MILL-1854-2,14,140.620

There are so few people of whom one can think even as well as I did of
him , that I feel this a loss , MILL-1854-2,14,140.621

& am like you angry with him for it . MILL-1854-2,14,140.622

- I will of course resist the charge for armorial bearings
MILL-1854-2,14,140.623

but I really do not know whom to call on , MILL-1854-2,14,140.624

for even the name of the Collector is not given MILL-1854-2,14,140.625

& the only one I can hear of lives at Charlton . MILL-1854-2,14,140.626

I have paid Webster - MILL-1854-2,14,140.627

he says he will find & send back the packing case .
MILL-1854-2,14,140.628

About the clock he offered to send his man again , which I of course
declined . MILL-1854-2,14,140.629

Roberts can@ @not have been paid MILL-1854-2,14,140.630

for I find no entry this year of his name in the monthly account ,
MILL-1854-2,14,140.631

so I shall pay him the first opportunity . MILL-1854-2,14,140.632

I will try to find out why they charge four sous for the newspaper .
MILL-1854-2,14,140.633

At the post office in Leadenhall St , I was told it would go free .
MILL-1854-2,14,140.634

Shall I send the Examiner instead ? MILL-1854-2,14,140.635

I had <font> not <$$font> burned her notes , dear things as they were ,
MILL-1854-2,14,140.636

but I have since burnt them all except the two last <paren> which I
shall burn presently <$$paren> & a bit of one former one containing what
is to be said to Grote , which I wish to have to refer to now & then
until it <font> has <$$font> been said . MILL-1854-2,14,140.637

