<BEGIN_montefiore-1836-1>

<P_128>

<font> Sunday , August <$$font> 26 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.3

<font> Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.4

- Every hope was entertained of our arrival this evening on the shores
of that country where our forefathers endured so much persecution , and
witnessed so many miracles - the scene of ancient glory , splendour ,
and suffering ! MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.5

What a blessing did it seem to have been permitted to accomplish a
voyage , fraught with so many difficulties in the outset , but which ,
with the Almighty's blessing , we had in the sequel entirely escaped .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.6

We have come at the rate of five knots throughout the night ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.7

and at twelve o'clock were only twenty-four miles distant from the
destined port . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.8

About two , land was espied : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.9

the captain had promised a bottle of grog to the man who should first
discover it ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.10

but the commodore being in advance , had first shortened sail in sign
thereof . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.11

The mate <paren> Mr. Rennant <$$paren> soon confirmed Captain Anderson
in the pleasing tidings ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.12

and all hands were immediately employed in arranging the sails , cable ,
&c. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.13

A brisk breeze , which I should have called a gale , springing up , we
had to tack about for three or four hours , not knowing the intention of
the commodore ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,128.14

and again I had to take refuge on the mattress , instead <P_129> of
partaking of dinner . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.15

But the harbour was now neared , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.16

and the commodore raised a signal for us to lay-@ @to :
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.17

thus we remained beating about , while the Austrian having fired a
signal for a pilot , bore happily away for the inner harbour .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.18

On seeing this , the Leonidas also fired a gun ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.19

and having approached the Gannet , learned from Captain Brace , by the
aid of a speaking-trumpet , that it was his intention to remain where he
then was during the night , but that we might do as we pleased .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.20

We chose to advance ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.21

and when near the rocks , a pilot-boat appeared , with turbaned sailors
, waving a shawl or scarf in a graceful manner , according to the
direction we were to take to avoid the danger of the rocks , and calling
out to us to cast anchor , which we did immediately , in the old harbour
of Alexandria . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.22

Soon after another boat appeared with the harbour-master , who came on
board ; when Dash , Mr. Bell's spaniel , seemed by his howling , to
have an instinctive idea of the antipathy Turks entertain to his species
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.23

The names and number of the passengers , with a few other questions ,
were then asked ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.24

and , without further trouble , Major Temple , Mr. Bell , and Mr.
Mazzara , entered a boat MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.25

and leaped on shore , with all the delight and expectation of anxious
travellers . Mr. Bell promising to get permission for us to land , and
to send us some new bread for breakfast . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,129.26

<P_130>

The view of Pompey's Pillar , and Cleopatra's Needle , two of the most
interesting objects of antiquity , gratified us , some distance before
we entered the harbour . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,130.28

<font> Monday , August <$$font> 27 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,130.29

<font> Alexandria . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,130.30

- We passed a tranquil night at anchor ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,130.31

and early this morning a boat came alongside bringing a Turkish
police-officer , who came on board with permission to land when we
pleased , and some fresh bread from Mr. Bell , who soon after joined us
with his partner , Mr. Harris , Mr. Mazzara , and also the Major ;
from whom we learnt that the same uncertainty prevailed here respecting
politics as at Malta , and that the Pasha , and Mr. Salt , the British
consul-general , to whom we had letters of introduction , were both at
Cairo . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,130.32

At ten we quitted the Leonidas in Captain Anderson's boat ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,130.33

and for the first time set foot on the land where our nation had , as it
were , its cradle ; where our ancestors were persecuted , but grew up
into a mighty people , and whence they were led forth by the arm of the
Almighty . The land of the Pharaohs , a name so renowned in history ,
and of the Ptolemies , a name so famed in the records of learning and
the arts ! MONTEFIORE-1836-1,130.34

The first view we had of this ancient city , presented us with a scene
of filth and desolateness . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,130.35

Many persons were swimming near the shore , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,130.36

and <P_131> pigs and dogs were feeding on the refuse of the town along
the banks ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.37

but as we passed through the narrow dirty streets , the novel sight of
loaded camels , and Turks on donkeys , which they honoured by the title
of a general and his regiment , attracted our observation ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.38

and we at once felt that we were no longer in Europe , or among
Europeans . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.39

Apartments were engaged for us at the inn , <paren> the only one in the
city , <$$paren> at two dollars per day . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.40

They consisted of one tolerable chamber , an adjoining one , which
scarcely deserved the title , and a closet , which was to be consigned
to Margarite . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.41

The sitting-room was that in which the <font> table_d'h√¥te <$$font> was
served ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.42

and I , therefore , preferred taking my meals in my room , the gentlemen
thinking fit to join the public table . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.43

The British consul , Mr. Barker , to whom Sir Frederic Hankey gave us a
letter , paid us a visit , attended by his dragoman , and dressed in all
the state of office . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.44

He gave us a pressing invitation to take up our abode at his house ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.45

and sat with us some time , conversing about Egypt and Syria .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.46

<font> Tuesday , August <$$font> 28 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.47

<font> Alexandria . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.48

- Captain Brace having called yesterday afternoon , to say , he intended
returning to Malta immediately , I availed myself of his kind offer ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.49

and wrote a few lines to Lady Stoddart , apprising her of our safe
arrival . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,131.50

<P_132>

The morning was chiefly employed in forming different plans , and
listening to suggestions for the prosecution of our tour to the best
advantage ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,132.52

but the present uncertainty respecting war or peace with the Ottoman ,
the reports of pirates , the heat of the weather , and other
circumstances of a similar nature , gave rise to a variety of opinions ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,132.53

and the propriety of our undertaking a voyage to Jaffa , especially
without convoy , was considered highly doubtful .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,132.54

After a good deal of discussion , the more safe and cautious plan was
adopted of going to Cairo , in a cangia , up the Nile .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,132.55

Captain Anderson , who was to accompany us , immediately sent four of
his men to perform ablution on the cangia , by dipping her two or three
times in the briny ocean , and then giving her a good scrubbing .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,132.56

This process , we understood , was absolutely necessary before we could
venture to take possession of her . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,132.57

She was one of the largest size ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,132.58

but the reis , with seven of his crew , with Captain Anderson , his mate
, and another of his men , were considered an ample complement of hands
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,132.59

As it was expected we should be five days in sailing to Cairo , a
plentiful supply of good things for the table was ordered , wine and
fruit , with spirits for the men not being forgotten .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,132.60

In the afternoon we took a most delightful ride to see Cleopatra's
needles , which are situated <P_133> in one of the most obscure and
distant quarters of the city , but are well worthy the attention they
usually obtain from travellers . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,133.61

They are covered with hieroglyphics , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,133.62

and while they interest the spectator by their connexion with remote
antiquity , astonish him as specimens of that gigantic art which taught
the Egyptians to hew such masses of granite out of the rock .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,133.63

In our way to Pompey's Pillar , we passed three other granite columns ,
which are said to have belonged to the Alexandrian Library ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,133.64

two of them were erect , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,133.65

but the other lay half-buried in the sands , which were continually
beating over it , and will soon , it is probable , form its tomb , as
they have done in regard to so many other monuments of this ancient land
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,133.66

These pillars are similar to those in front of the Pantheon at Rome ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,133.67

and opposite to them , in fact , is a Roman building , the ruins of
which were singularly contrasted with the bloom of a pretty garden that
surrounded them , and which opposed to mouldering columns , its thin
palm-trees and dates in the full beauty of their autumnal perfection .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,133.68

The ingenuity and persevering inquiries of modern travellers , have
proved that Pompey's Pillar has little right to the name of the
celebrated Roman . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,133.69

Of those who have attempted to <P_134> decipher the inscription which it
bears , some say that it was raised at as late a period as the reign of
Diocletian {TEXT:Dioclesian} ; others , that it was dedicated to Adrian
, while the circumstance of its having so long borne the name of Pompey
is accounted for by the supposition that it was erected by the order of
some prefect so called . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.70

It is , however , a noble monument of antiquity .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.71

The shaft is near ninety feet in length , and nine feet in diameter ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.72

and is supposed to consist of one block of oriental marble .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.73

This immense column is round , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.74

and at its summit is a Corinthian capital ten feet in height :
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.75

the pedestal which supports it , is twelve feet high , so that the whole
elevation amounts to one_hundred_and_twelve feet .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.76

It is in excellent preservation . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.77

<font> Wednesday , August <$$font> 29 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.78

<font> Alexandria . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.79

- The gratification I yesterday received , greatly improved my opinion
of this place . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.80

It is a city , indeed , where a reflecting mind can scarcely fail of
being kept constantly awake . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.81

Almost every quarter of it presents some relic of past grandeur , some
memento of ages when wealth flowed through the hands of kings in more
copious streams , than it has ever since done , and when human labour
was the combined force of thousands . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,134.82

In addition to the interest resulting from these sources , is that which
belongs to the city , <P_135> as one of the most important sea-ports in
the world ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,135.83

and the Nile , as it rolls along its fertilizing waters , and the
harbour , lined with ships from almost every nation of the world ,
strongly testify what this place might become were the advantages
bestowed on it properly employed . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,135.84

Among the other sights which attracted us , was the exercise of the
cavalry , in a place appropriated to that purpose , and where we were
delighted by the beauty of the horses , the admirable feats performed by
some of the riders , and the sagacity of a number of dogs , who appeared
to keep guard round the circle . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,135.85

As it was our intention to set out for Cairo this afternoon , we
declined an invitation for dinner at Mr. Barker's , the usual hour for
which repast is between twelve and one . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,135.86

Several dragomen applied to accompany us ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,135.87

and at five o'clock , the donkeys having arrived , we set off ,
accompanied by Margarite and Paulo , <paren> the two Maltese servants ,
<$$paren> and Armstrong ; Major Temple and Mr. Miller escorting us to
the harbour , where , on entering the cangia , we took a regretful leave
of those gentlemen , who after visiting Cairo and Thebes , are going
overland to India . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,135.88

We found Nathaniel , the mate , and Andrews <paren> both of the Leonidas
, <$$paren> on board , with the reis or captain , and seven Arabs .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,135.89

A numerous throng of supplicants assailed us as <P_136> we embarked ,
applying for <font> bakshiesh , <$$font> or a present ; to which
annoyance we were exposed for some time , Paulo having forgotten the
charcoal , a chief requisite for cooking . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.90

We however set sail about six o'clock . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.91

Before retiring to rest , we drank to the health of our beloved friend
and parent , Mrs. Montefiore , in a bottle of champagne , it being her
natal day . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.92

<font> Thursday , August <$$font> 30 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.93

<font> The Nile . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.94

- The two sofas from Captain Anderson's ship , were placed in the cabin
to form our bed ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.95

but the musquito-netting adhered so closely to our faces , that we had
the choice of being suffocated or bitten . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.96

We chose the latter , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.97

and had as little repose as we expected . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.98

Our reis entertained us yesterday evening , while the moon's silvery
rays prolonged our stay on deck , with some Arabian tunes on his pipe
made of reeds . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.99

He accepted a small portion of brandy with a smile ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.100

it seemed to increase the relish of his pipe of tobacco , that
indispensable article to Eastern comfort . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.101

His father was on board , acting as steersman , and his son as assistant
, making three generations employed together in the same occupation .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.102

Four of the men towed the cangia for some miles , pursuing their labour
with cheerfulness . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.103

They were destitute of covering , except a short drapery confined by a
rope round the waist ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,136.104

and even from this , which <P_137> seemed an incumbrance they released
themselves when wading through the water , which they were frequently
compelled to do . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.105

The canal extends forty miles ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.106

and its banks presenting little to engage the attention , we were
rejoiced when the wide river burst suddenly into sight , with its banks
lined with palm-trees , acacias and syccamores .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.107

It occasioned some trouble to overcome the force of the current at the
entrance of the stream ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.108

but the obstacles were at length conquered , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.109

and by two o'clock we were fairly on the bosom of the Nile .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.110

<font> Friday , August <$$font> 31 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.111

<font> The Nile . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.112

- Notwithstanding the ablutions the cangia had received , and the
assistance given to sleep by some of Captain Anderson's mulled wine , we
passed the night in wakeful irritation . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.113

The waters of the Nile were also at this season , that of their rise ,
so impregnated with sand , that we could not drink even that which had
been set to clarify in the vessels we had brought for that purpose .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.114

This obliged us to stop at a village to procure a supply of this
necessary beverage . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,137.115

Yesterday evening we waited for a time at the pretty town of Foua ,
built on the banks of the river , where groups of Arabs were seated in
circles , smoking and drinking coffee , and probably listening to some
of those wild , gay tales in which their language <P_138> is so rich .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.116

Large baskets of fruit were at the same time being embarked ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.117

and the <font> tout-ensemble <$$font> was calm , picturesque , and
impressive . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.118

Paulo procured at this place a good supply of milk , part of which he
took the precaution to boil , so that it was good this morning ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.119

but at breakfast we found that about a_dozen of the poor chickens which
were put in the hold , had been devoured during the night by the rats ,
to the chagrin of most of our party . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.120

The next village , however , supplied us with a plentiful store of fresh
meat , and at so moderate a price , that a couple of dollars afforded a
feast to the crew for two days , and our own party with the best joints
for boiling . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.121

We had a proportionable supply of new-laid eggs , vegetables , and dates
, the latter being the first I had ever tasted fresh of that fruit .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.122

The wind having abated , and a powerful current setting in against us ,
the men were again obliged to tow the boat . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.123

In doing this , the rope broke ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.124

and it was only by the prompt exertion of our captain and his men that
we were saved from running aground . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.125

During the delay which this occasioned , our eyes were filled , and our
dress completely covered , with the dust and sand from the shore .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,138.126

When all at length was satisfactorily arranged , the reis said it would
be requisite to <P_139> wait some time while his men prepared their
supper , they having had only some bread and water at ten o'clock for
breakfast , with which they had remained perfectly satisfied till now .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.127

In providing the repast , they cut the meat we had given them , into
small pieces , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.128

and boiled them for an hour , together with rice and onions , our reis
smoking and sipping a glass of brandy and water <paren> with which he
was treated <$$paren> in the meantime . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.129

The mess , when ready , was served in a large brown dish ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.130

and a portion being given to the grandfather , father , and son , the
rest sat round the dish , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.131

and eat out of it with their fingers . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.132

It was now time to sail , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.133

and permission was granted to raise all the canvass .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.134

We sat on deck till a late hour , enjoying the moonlight , but guarding
against the dew , which has been known to have pernicious effects .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.135

This being Captain Anderson's birth-day {COM:sic} , we also had an extra
bottle of champagne to its happy return , our party not having yet
adopted the necessary abstemious habits of an Eastern climate .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.136

<font> Saturday , September <$$font> 1 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.137

<font> The Nile . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,139.138

- Worse sufferings from vermin and insects , than I had yet experienced
, obliged me to quit my couch , and make my retreat from their assaults
to the deck ; where , seated against the partition , and wrapped up in
Montefiore's large cloak , I hoped <P_140> to have found shelter till
morning . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.139

I found every one in sound sleep ; some on the ground , others on
mattresses , and Mr. Mazzara and the captain on our portable bedsteads
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.140

It appeared like a bivouac , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.141

and having taken my station near the cabin-door , I felt somewhat
disheartened by the knowledge that night was not far advanced .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.142

But while endeavouring to resign myself to repose , I was startled by a
rustling noise , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.143

and on turning my head , to my great alarm , beheld a black figure
descending from above between the mattings which covered the outside of
the roof . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.144

I hurried to Captain Anderson who was nearest , calling him out of a
sonorous slumber . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.145

His surprise at seeing me was as great as my fright :
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.146

rubbing his eyes , " What ! MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.147

what@ @'s the matter ? " said he ; whilst I pointed to a poor black boy
, whose intentions being fairer than his complexion , I found , were
merely to loosen the rope in order to ease the sail .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.148

After explaining to the captain the reason of my unseasonable appearance
; at my earnest request he recomposed himself ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.149

and I , forgetting , from fatigue , my recent tormentors , covered
myself so completely with the musquito-curtain , notwithstanding the
heat , as to make their attacks futile . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.150

This little adventure created a laugh at breakfast -
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.151

thus we can smile at troubles past . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,140.152

Some of the party <P_141> walked over the cotton and corn-fields , in
hopes of meeting with curious birds ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.153

but the preparation of loading fowling-pieces proved vain ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.154

nothing but swallows , sparrows , or pigeons appeared to the sportsmen ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.155

and these , happily for the feathered race , were beneath the valour of
the gentlemen . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.156

While waiting for the reis , who had stopped at a village called Menouf
, our cangia got aground , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.157

and required all the art and strength of masters and men to get her off
again . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.158

Several women and children , in the meantime , came running towards us ,
offering pomegranates , melons , and mats for sale .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.159

Their covering , that of those who had any , consisted of a blue cotton
drapery , which enveloped the head and figure .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.160

The face was also concealed , with a space left open for the eyes and
mouth ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.161

their arms , neck , and feet were mostly exposed , and adorned with
bracelets and beads , with the addition of the tattoo .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.162

Our reis said he had eight wives , which he considered a very moderate
number . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.163

We now came in sight of the Pyramids , of which the two large and one
small were very perceptible . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.164

A brisk breeze carried us swiftly on towards Cairo .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.165

Numerous minarets , mosques , and other buildings rising into sight ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.166

and at two o'clock we arrived at Boulac , the place of landing , and
distant only two miles from Cairo . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,141.167

A <P_142> beautiful vista of that city was here gained from the water .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.168

The busiest scene was before us ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.169

and we had ample entertainment , during the two hours that the messenger
was gone with our cards to Mr. Salt . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.170

The number of boats loading and unloading bales of goods , &c , the
various coloured dresses of the men and women who came one after the
other to perform the ablutions at the river , many filling goat-skins
with water for the use of the town , and loading their camels and
donkeys therewith , altogether presented a picture replete with novelty
and interest . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.171

The vice-consul , and janissary , with a horse for Montefiore , and
donkeys for the rest of the party , now arrived , followed by a camel
for the luggage . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.172

The consul-general at the same time sent his compliments , with an
urgent solicitation that we would take up our abode at his house during
our sojourn at Cairo , which Montefiore declined ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.173

and at sun-set we repaired to the inn , where Mr. Salt , though he was
not in the best health , kindly waited our coming .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.174

He insisted on our promise for to-morrow . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.175

<font> Sunday , September <$$font> 2 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.176

<font> Cairo . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.177

- The accommodations at the inn being ill-suited to English ideas and
habits , we accepted Mr. Salt's kind solicitation with less reluctance
; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,142.178

and at twelve this forenoon , Montefiore and myself were conducted
<P_143> by that gentleman's janissary to his house ; Mr. Mazzara ,
Captain Anderson , and the servants , remaining at the inn , which is
kept by a French family , so that Mr. M- found himself quite <font>
au_fait <$$font> there . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.179

We were shown into a large room : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.180

its furniture bespoke it Turkish ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.181

divans were placed all round , with a small rich carpet in the centre :
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.182

little other furniture was observable , except books and maps , the
numerous and choice assortment of which testified both the country and
character of its owner , who soon made his appearance , and welcomed us
most hospitably . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.183

As Mr. Salt was conducting us to the apartment we were to take
possession of , we passed the dining-room , which at one end had a
handsome marble fountain ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.184

the water could be let in at pleasure : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.185

and it was in play , diffusing an agreeable freshness around , well
adapted to the clime . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.186

The chambers our kind host selected for our use were , in appearance ,
the counterpart of those we had left , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.187

and promised , from the whiteness of the furniture , comfort and repose
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.188

At the same time he apologized for any defect we might experience , as
there was no lady to superintend the establishment , Mrs. Salt having
died about four years before . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,143.189

I understand she was a very handsome young person , a native of Leghorn
; and that she died in confinement <P_144> with her first child , her
medical attendant not having bestowed proper attention , the plague
being then prevalent in the city . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.190

The little girl was living , we understood , and receiving her education
in Leghorn , under the care of her grandmamma .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.191

Mr. Salt had obtained deserved celebrity for his scientific knowledge ,
researches , and travels in Abyssinia . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.192

Of his labours in Upper Egypt and about the Pyramids , the French , as
well as the British Museum , is in possession of valuable proofs .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.193

The former completed a purchase from him last year , of curious
antiquities , for the sum of ten_thousand pounds .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.194

The dinner-hour in Cairo is at one , after which Mr. Salt took his
siesta , with his legs folded under him , <font> √†_la_Turc . <$$font>
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.195

In the evening he amused us by explaining some of the hieroglyphics ;
and in pointing out the great progress that had been made by Dr. Young
, M. Champallon , and himself , in elucidating and deciphering their
signification . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.196

He then showed us some of his drawings , which displayed infinite talent
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.197

At supper the conversation turned on Mr. Wolfe , who had been some time
at Cairo . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.198

Mr. Salt thought him a learned and conscientious man .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.199

<font> Monday , September <$$font> 3 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.200

<font> Cairo . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.201

- This day being appointed for our visit to the Pyramids , we requested
to be called at four o'clock . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,144.202

A tap at <P_145> the door announced the hour at the moment when our
first sleep had commenced ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.203

for it was impossible to obtain the least rest throughout the night ,
having been most intolerably plagued with a host of noxious insects .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.204

How deceiving had been those snow-white curtains :
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.205

they were like the soft skin of the serpent , serving to conceal its
venom . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.206

We passed from the bed to the sofa , and from the sofa to the bed ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.207

but neither afforded relief : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.208

and we prayed incessantly for morning ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.209

but at the instant a soft slumber had commiserated our situation ,
<font> per force <$$font> we must rise . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.210

Soon , however , was every drowsy sensation chased away , by the
animating thought of seeing one of the wonders of the world .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.211

Some excellent coffee and cake , called <font> pane di spagna , <$$font>
prepared us for a donkey-ride of no small distance .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.212

Mr. Salt's janissary made his appearance , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.213

and informed us that the guides and donkeys were all ready at the gate ,
and that it was time to depart . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.214

At six , Captain Anderson , Mr. Mazzara , Armstrong , Paulo , Margerite
, Nathaniel , Andrews , and the janissary , were <font> en_route ,
<$$font> attended by the guides . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.215

The janissary well-armed , led the van , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.216

and I followed next . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.217

One donkey was laden with a good supply of provisions for the day ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.218

and thus we passed through the city . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,145.219

In some of the narrow streets , the people had not yet risen from their
nightly <P_146> resting-place - the ground , with no other covering than
a piece of mat or a cloak . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.220

But here , as at Malta , they sleep as soundly as on a bed of down .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.221

I kept near the janissary , a good-tempered and attentive man , all the
way ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.222

and after about an hour's pleasant ride , we embarked to cross the Nile
; the donkeys and guides in a separate boat . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.223

The current being extremely powerful , we had to extend our passage some
little distance ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.224

but the fertile banks , the groves of palm-trees , the ripe fruit , the
minarets and mosques , amply rewarded us for the temporary delay .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.225

Having reached the other side of the river , we passed whole forests of
palms , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.226

and then came to a part over which the waters had spread .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.227

Here it was requisite to have the animals led by two Bedouins , who
approached and offered their services for that purpose .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.228

The only dress of these people , who stroll about and inhabit the desert
, was a piece of coarse cloth , thrown over the shoulder , and fastened
with a rope round the waist . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.229

Armstrong , fancying himself more dexterous than the rest , declined
their aid , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.230

and attempted to cross the stream without assistance ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.231

but was thrown ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.232

he , however , received no further injury than a good drenching .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,146.233

We next came to a pretty town called Tersi , whence , for some distance
, we had to make our way over a sort of dyke ; <P_147> the waters , to
the great delight of the people , having covered the surrounding land ,
and risen sufficiently high to ensure them a good harvest .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.234

Bountiful Heaven ! in what a variety of ways are thy blessings bestowed
! MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.235

A pleasant air relieved us from the oppression of the sun ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.236

and even , on approaching the sandy desert , we scarcely suffered any
inconvenience from heat . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.237

The Pyramids of Sacchara appeared near to us on our left ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.238

but their distance , as well as magnitude , is most deceptive .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.239

Numbers of buffaloes passed us , headed by their drovers , whose mien
was not the mildest ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.240

but my well-armed janissary was my constant protection ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.241

and , when near the Sphynx , a group of Bedouins , who hastened towards
us , saluted him as an old acquaintance , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.242

kissed his hand and the hem of his garment , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.243

and seemed rejoiced at our arrival . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.244

They escorted us to the famous granite animal , whose face is very
perceptible ; though time , and the sands of the desert , have so long
threatened to remove it from the gaze of mankind .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.245

But we were now too near the Pyramids not to find our thoughts wholly
occupied with contemplating their prodigious elevation and extent .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.246

Time has been longer conquered by the Pyramids than by any other
production of human art . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,147.247

They lift their strange forms above that sea of ages which holds in its
bosom all other relics of that hoar antiquity <P_148> to which they
belong : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.248

they were old in days which are the remotest in authentic history ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.249

and instead of their crumbling down to the earth , like other monuments
of men's labour , it appears as if they are only doomed to disappear
when the earth shall have gradually accumulated its own dust and ashes
around them . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.250

They truly merit the appellation of one of the seven wonders of the
world ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.251

and it is next to impossible to contemplate them without experiencing a
keen desire to determine the motives of those who built them , and the
object for which they were erected . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.252

There is every reason , however , to believe that religion furnished
both the motives and the design from which they sprang ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.253

and the most rational antiquaries agree in considering them in the light
of temples , certain portions of which were appropriated for the burial
of the dead . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.254

The numerous idols still to be found in them , and the splendid
mausoleums of their chambers , afford the strongest proof of the
correctness of this idea . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.255

There is , however , a general principle which affords , it may be
observed without presumption , a still more powerful proof of their
sacred origin . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.256

Religion is the only motive sufficiently strong , and sufficiently
enduring , to inspire men with such vast designs ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.257

and in the early ages of the world this was especially the case .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,148.258

A few great principles of thought <P_149> governed all their actions ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.259

and among these , as it must ever be when the economy of society is
simple , the fear or the love , the desire to propitiate , or the hope
of pleasing , the Deity , will always be found predominant over the rest
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.260

The wax-tapers being lighted , I prepared with most of our party , to
enter the great pyramid of Cheops , while the janissary remained to keep
guard at the entrance . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.261

My guide was a Bedouin , who told me he acted in the same capacity to
Buonaparte . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.262

This inspired me with additional resolution to enter ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.263

but in the attempt I found myself so overpowered by heat and sand ,
together with the stooping posture which it was at first necessary to
adopt , that I had almost determined on returning ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.264

but reanimated by the encouragement and example of my companions , I
persevered ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.265

and , after great difficulty arrived at what is called the king's
chamber , where we were recompensed for all the trouble we had undergone
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.266

The apartment in which we were now standing is somewhat above
thirty-seven feet long , seventeen wide , and twenty in height .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.267

The grandeur of a chamber of this extent , lined as it is on all sides
with the most beautifully polished stone , may be easily imagined ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,149.268

but the interest it awakens is considerably increased by the presence of
a large sarcophagus of hard dark stone , which is placed towards the
<P_150> west end of the room , and is all that the virtuosi have
permitted to remain , and that , perhaps , only because it is immovable
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.269

We marked our names on the wall , as a memento of having visited these
wonderful monuments . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.270

After seeing a second apartment , and what is called the well , we
happily made our way back again into the open air , where Paulo had
arranged our cold collation , which , with a bottle of champagne ,
addressed to the health of our dear absent friends , and success to the
Alliance , we found sufficiently grateful . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.271

Our guides were glad of some brandy-and-water ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.272

and the remainder of our stock of provision furnished them with a meal .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.273

The Bedouins offered us for purchase some small articles of antiques ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.274

and on taking our leave , a dispute arose between them respecting <font>
bakshiesh , <$$font> when they became as turbulent as they were before
mild . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.275

One of them escorted us some distance back , in order that we might
avoid the stream we had forded in the morning .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.276

On returning to Old Cairo I could scarcely stand :
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.277

but , with all our fatigue , we could not help laughing to see the
strange figures we presented after riding near forty miles ; the
distance of the Pyramids being eighteen miles , now that the waters are
spread over the land . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,150.278

As we passed near the city , groups of Turks were sitting around ,
enjoying their pipes and the evening air , <P_151> now sweetly perfumed
by groves of lime-trees . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.279

The scene was further enlivened by a bright moon , which made us forget
the fatigues of the day , until we dismounted at the Locande ; where ,
being incapable from exhaustion to proceed to Mr. Salt's , we remained
, and sent an apology to that gentleman . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.280

<font> Tuesday , September <$$font> 4 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.281

<font> Cairo . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.282

- Captain Anderson having politely resigned his room to us , and our
portable bedstead and mosquito-curtains being placed therein , we passed
a much more favourable night than the preceding one , notwithstanding
the intense heat . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.283

I suffer greatly from thirst to-day , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.284

and have no appetite - the consequence , probably , of yesterday's
excursion . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.285

But politeness obliged us to dine at Mr. Salt's , where we had engaged
ourselves . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.286

The early dinner-hour enabled us to return soon , as we could not accept
the use of his chambers any longer , the gnats from the garden being
quite insufferable . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.287

We found the consul confined to his room , with an oppression at the
chest , and attended by his physician , who had just opened a vein .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.288

Of course , we were obliged to suffer the loss of his company at dinner
; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.289

but the vice-consul , Mr. Maltasse , did the honours .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.290

A Mr. Walmas , interpreter to the Pacha , and an African prince , were
of the party : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,151.291

the latter , an elegant young man , had been taken prisoner <P_152> on
his way to Mecca , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.292

and was about to be sent back to his country .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.293

His white teeth were a great contrast to his sable complexion ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.294

and a handsome Turkish suit adorned his graceful figure , of which he
seemed rather conscious . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.295

After dinner we went with Mr. Maltasse to see a collection of
curiosities , belonging to a Signor Smarza , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.296

but did not make any purchases , the price being too high .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.297

We also saw a young hyaena there . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.298

<font> Wednesday , September <$$font> 5 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.299

<font> Cairo . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.300

- We heard the sounds of lamentation and mourning this morning ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.301

and were informed that they were in consequence of the death of a young
woman who expired the same day that she was married ; and , it was
imagined , from the effects of jealousy and poison .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.302

The lamentations were similar to the Irish howl ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.303

and continue for forty days . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.304

What , however , renders them the more singular is , that they are
uttered by the Turkish priests , who , at certain hours of the morning
and evening , call the multitude to their religious devotions .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.305

Their nightly and early walk round the minarets , and calling of the
hour , have a solemn and imposing effect ; while the barking of dogs is
a substitute for the rolling of carriages and cries of tradespeople in
other great cities . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.306

Montefiore was , today , introduced to the Pacha ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.307

and returned most pleased with his reception .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,152.308

Mr. Maltasse , Mr. <P_153> Mazzara , and Captain Anderson accompanied
him to his highness . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.309

The conversation was supported in a lively manner by the Pacha , for
three-quarters of an hour . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.310

He smoked , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.311

and ordered coffee to be served . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.312

His pipe was richly studded with diamonds and other precious stones .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.313

He encourages every new invention and improvement ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.314

and informed him of his having established silk and other manufactories
in his territories ; and that he had planted numbers of olive and
mulberry-trees . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.315

His extensive mercantile transactions were , however , a great source of
jealousy and dissatisfaction to his subjects , who are thereby deprived
of the advantages of competition and unfettered trade .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.316

He would not grant a farmer a longer lease than a year ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.317

and fixed the price of all the produce of the land himself .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.318

At the age of forty-five he commenced learning to read and write , which
he persevered in to his satisfaction ; a singular instance of strength
of mind . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.319

All his vast transactions are managed by himself ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.320

and every written document passes under his inspection .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.321

He told Montefiore that he never indulges in more than four hours' sleep
during the night . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.322

He might prove a great character in the world were he entirely
unfettered . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,153.323

As there was a garden attached to the inn , I <P_154> amused myself
therein as much as the heat and insects would allow .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.324

In the house , one of the attendants has a large whisk , or fan , with
which he drives the flies away . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.325

The gentlemen proposed setting off to-morrow morning , at two , for the
Pyramids of Sacchara . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.326

My curiosity agreed to the plan ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.327

and this afternoon we went to see Joseph's or Yassuf's well .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.328

It is cut through the rock in the citadel , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.329

and is two_hundred_and_eighty feet deep . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.330

I understand Jassuf and Saladin to mean the same personage .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.331

Our plan of visiting Sacchara was laid aside , information having been
brought us that an English brig of war was arrived , and that it was the
intention of Mr. Salt to return to Alexandria , whether for his health
or not we did not know ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.332

but our fears were excited , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.333

and prudence said , follow the same line , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.334

and do not extend your tour : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.335

the chance of war menaces your safety . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.336

Mr. Miller and Mr. Belfour , his new travelling companion ,
entertained no apprehensions , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.337

and resolved to await the result . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.338

We took our supper at the table_d'h√¥te . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.339

A Mr. Parker , and several French gentlemen , dressed in the Turkish
costume , were of the party ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.340

and had it not been for their conversation , I should have taken them to
be Turks . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.341

The French are held in great esteem here : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.342

Mr. Salt regards them particularly ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,154.343

and their <P_155> government , as I before observed , paid him for a
collection of curiosities two_hundred_and_fifty_thousand francs .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.344

<font> Thursday , September <$$font> 6 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.345

- The boat we had engaged to convey us to Sacchara , and Mr. Salt's
janissary , were in readiness at the gate , at two o'clock this morning
, according to appointment . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.346

The water , at this season , passing through the back streets of the
whole city , persons were enabled to go from their houses by water .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.347

We had but two hours' sleep after packing up and settling accounts , it
having been considered advisable to keep secret the alteration of our
intention ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.348

and our departure really seemed like a flight from Egypt .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.349

When all was ready , and we were seated in the boat , we mentioned our
purpose to the janissary , of going to Boulac instead of Sacchara ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.350

and he immediately proposed fetching the linen from the laundress ,
which was only in the next street . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.351

This detained us near two hours , and not under the most agreeable
circumstances , it being then but four in the morning .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.352

The least noise made us conjecture that the gates of the city were shut
on the janissary , or that some disturbance had occurred ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.353

but at last , to our relief , he returned safely with the bundle of wet
linen ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.354

and we proceeded , <font> a_la <$$font> Venice , cheered by the song of
the boatmen and the light of the moon . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,155.355

As we passed through <P_156> the different arches , we were often driven
up against the wall by the force of the current ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.356

and all the aid of Captain Anderson and his two men was required to set
us off again . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.357

When they were fairly in the unobstructed stream , they joined in the
<font> Alluhu <$$font> and <font> Salem <$$font> of the Arabs , to our
great amusement ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.358

and after a voyage of rather more than four hours , we arrived at Boulac
, where the English jack pointed out the cangia we had engaged by order
of the Pacha . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.359

<font> Friday , September <$$font> 7 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.360

- Our present cangia was larger than the one we had in going up the Nile
, MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.361

and the cabin was far more spacious : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.362

not having received ablution , it was not near so clean as the last .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.363

The night , of course , was fearfully disturbed ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.364

and the rats , whose treble note was joined to those of the cockchafers
and crickets , required not the melody of a young child , who was on the
outside of the cabin , to complete the concert .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.365

Its mother , however , stopped with it at a village which we came to
early in the morning , and where we obtained a supply of eggs , with
which Paulo <paren> whose culinary talents received due praise <$$paren>
made a delicious omelet for breakfast . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.366

Though it was fried in oil , butter not being obtainable , I did not
refuse a good portion of it . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.367

The wind now became contrary , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,156.368

and the men resorted some to the oars and others to the rope , chanting
at the same <P_157> time the <font> Halluh Selah <$$font> , and
stimulated by a glass of grog . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.369

<font> Saturday , September <$$font> 8 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.370

- We passed a miserable night , the torments increasing :
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.371

Montefiore complained also of rheumatism . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.372

This cangia , in fact , was a proper antidote against the mania for an
Egyptian tour . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.373

During the day , when our nightly tormentors were at rest , swarms of
flies attacked us , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.374

and perseveringly assaulted the eyes , nose , and mouth .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.375

The only consolation was , that it would not be of long duration ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.376

for , thanks to the Almighty , we were again on the canal ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.377

but our reis would not be persuaded to raise sail ; thinking , I suppose
, that his age entitled his judgment to more attention than that of
Captain Anderson . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.378

A glass of <font> aqua-vitae , <$$font> however , was proposed ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.379

and he accepted it with a smile . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.380

It seemed to give new zest to the fumes of his cibouc , but not to his
naval manoeuvres . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.381

<font> Sunday , September , <$$font> 9 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.382

<font> Alexandria . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.383

- We rejoiced at being again in the port of Alexandria ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.384

and after breakfasting on board the cangia , and seeing all our luggage
sent off , gladly took our leave of the reis and his crew , who
surrounded us for <font> bakshiesh . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.385

I was hoisted as usual on board the Leonidas ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,157.386

and never could I have imagined that I should ever walk the deck of a
ship so <P_158> contentedly . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.387

It appeared like a palace , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.388

and was in comparison certainly like a comfortable home .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.389

The Pelorus English brig of war was lying in the harbour , besides
several French vessels , and other merchantmen .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.390

Politics seemed in the same uncertain state as at our recent departure
from this port . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.391

<font> Monday , September <$$font> 10 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.392

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.393

- We went on shore . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.394

There are always men with donkeys in waiting , who will take you about a
mile for a piastre , and are most eager to be engaged .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.395

An Egyptian donkey is a much more complying animal than I have ever
understood an English one to be . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.396

Subjection extends to master and man in some countries .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.397

Mr. Bell encountered us in our ride , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.398

and accompanied us . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.399

We afterwards went to his house , where he invited us to dine to-morrow
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.400

The Greeks we heard were continuing their depredations :
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.401

a Swedish brig , indeed , was just come in , the captain and crew of
which had suffered personal ill treatment , besides the loss of
five_hundred dollars . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.402

I also walked with Captain Anderson and Mr. Mazzara to the bazaar ,
wishing to make some purchases , which our flight from Cairo had
prevented my doing . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.403

Many articles are superior at that city to what they are at this , such
as pipes , caps , slippers , &c. ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,158.404

and we only succeeded in the choice of half_a_dozen small <P_159>
coffee-cups , as a sample of the Turkish size of that article .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.405

Various political conjectures were afloat , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.406

but the majority of opinions inclined to hostilities .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.407

<font> Tuesday , September <$$font> 11 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.408

<font> The Leonidas in Alexandrian port . <$$font>
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.409

- Montefiore was in despair about Jerusalem ; the chance of our going
there declining as that of war with the Porte increased .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.410

Captain Richards , of the brig of war Pelorus , with Mr. Barker , the
English consul , politely came on board this forenoon to pay us a visit
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.411

Their opinion was , that every means would be employed by the united
powers to retain that desirable object - peace ; but that it rested with
the Grand Signor . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.412

Should the negociations terminate amicably , Captain Richards said he
would endeavour to convey {TEXT:convoy} us to Jaffa ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.413

but I feared the result would not be so favourable .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.414

The dinner at Mr. Bell's was served in superior style , the wines and
dessert corresponding : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.415

the conversation also was lively and well supported .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.416

We have heard , with profound regret , that Mr. Canning's death was no
longer doubted . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.417

It was considered a loss to all Europe , as well as to the senate and
his country in general . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.418

<font> Wednesday , September <$$font> 12 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.419

<font> Alexandria . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,159.420

- The gentlemen went on shore ; Montefiore to visit Mr. Salt and Mr.
Barker , who both considered it would <P_160> be highly imprudent to
proceed to Syria , during so uncertain a state of affairs .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.421

A numerous fleet of merchantmen sailed from this harbour , under convoy
of a French brig of war ; four of which returned , not being able to
keep pace with the rest , and fearing the coast of Candia .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.422

Mr. Mazzara was generally occupied with the study of Arabic , or other
affairs ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.423

Captain Anderson was out of spirits about being delayed ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.424

and Montefiore was disappointed ; while I thought to myself , how futile
and weak are all human plans ! MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.425

We form opinions and projects , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.426

and those on which we are most intent , perhaps turn out contrary to our
expectations . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.427

Oh , that we could be content with present good , nor seek for that of
which we know not the tendency ! MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.428

<font> Thursday , September <$$font> 13 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.429

- At half-@ @past two , we arrived at Mr. Barker's , in time to dress ,
being engaged to dine there ; Mrs. Barker having , out of compliment to
us , changed her dinner-hour from one to three .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.430

They have an excellent house , near the old harbour , commanding a fine
view of the sea , which abounds here with rocks , over which the water
breaks with great force , rendering the scene bold and majestic , and in
stormy weather , terrific . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.431

Mrs. Barker is a native of Aleppo ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,160.432

she wore the Turkish costume , and a vast number of valuable ornaments ,
which had a rich and commanding <P_161> effect , according with her
dress . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,161.433

Mr. Barker informed me that she was the subject of one of Mrs.
Trimmer's tales , called " Marianne of the Desert . "
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,161.434

They had one daughter living with them , very pretty ; another who is
married at Smyrna ; and three sons , receiving their education in
England . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,161.435

All the <font> haut-ton <$$font> of the city were assembled at dinner to
meet us ; viz. the Sardinian consul , and his lady , <paren> extremely
agreeable , and a native of Marseilles ; <$$paren> M. Piedimonti ; Mr.
Acerbi , the Austrian consul , who has been a great traveller , and
published some account of his journeys in Denmark and Sweden ; the
Russian consul , and three other gentlemen . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,161.436

The conversation was sustained with that animation natural to the
assemblage of natives of such a variety of countries ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,161.437

and the repast was a sumptuous assortment of delicacies , among which
were a variety of ices and fruits from foreign countries , and abundance
of choice wines . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,161.438

Mrs. Barker amused us , while the gentlemen sat enjoying their ciboucs
and coffee , with showing us her magnificent jewels , particularly
pearls , of which she has an entire apron , a veil , and head-dress .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,161.439

She wore her hair in a vast number of plaits down the back , and
drop-curls over the forehead . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,161.440

The Aleppo ladies pride themselves on the superiority of their jewels .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,161.441

She had two little Greek slaves in <P_162> her house , which she lately
purchased to rescue them from a far worse fate ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.442

and is much esteemed for her humanity towards that unfortunate people .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.443

We were pleased to learn that the Greek women who came from Malta with
us had succeeded in finding their daughters , and that with Mrs.
Barker's aid they were able to ransom them . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.444

The servant now informed Mr. Barker that an English man-of-war was just
coming into the harbour ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.445

and the captain soon entered the drawing-room .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.446

Every one was anxious to know - war or peace .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.447

Captain Davis could not give a favourable reply to Mr. Barker's
question on the subject , as the sultan refused to give any other answer
to the allied powers than what he before stated .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.448

No act , however , of hostility had yet commenced ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.449

and the ambassador and family were still at Constantinople .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.450

He was the bearer of dispatches from the admiral .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.451

<font> Friday , September <$$font> 14 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.452

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.453

- The weather was materially changed , it being much cooler , with a
fine breeze ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.454

but an accident having occurred to Montefiore's thermometer on board the
cangia , prevented , to his great chagrin , his keeping a register , as
usual , of the different degrees of heat and cold .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.455

Mr. Mazzara and Captain Anderson usually passed the forenoon on shore ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,162.456

and Montefiore and myself amused ourselves on board , <P_163> with a
book , writing , or with looking about us . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.457

But the view , composed of ships , water , a sandy shore , and a few
barren walls , was not very interesting ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.458

I should , however , have been perfectly content , could we have had
satisfactory news from our distant friends . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.459

Montefiore went to pay visits to Mr. Salt , and Mrs. Barker , the
latter having been thrown from her donkey , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.460

and on his return brought two of Galignani's papers , of the 11th of
August ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.461

but as I was reading one , the other flew overboard , to our no small
vexation . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.462

<font> Saturday , September <$$font> 15 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.463

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.464

- Mr. Bell to-day met the pacha's carriage passing through the town ,
with some of his ladies , taking their exercise .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.465

The public are not allowed a glance at these fair objects , all the
blinds being drawn , and a guard of soldiers placed on each side .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.466

A carriage is a marvellous object in this country , there being but two
, those of the pacha and his son . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.467

<font> Sunday , September <$$font> 16 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.468

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.469

- Three pieces of ordnance were drawn by four mules each to-day along
the fort , and placed among others on the battery .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.470

A warlike appearance this ! MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.471

It , however , did not prevent us from sending Paulo on shore , to
purchase a goose for dinner ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.472

and he obtained two for nine piasters , or two and sixpence a pair ,
which he considered dear . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.473

Spirits are a scarce and expensive article here ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,163.474

but our captain said , that since we left Malta he had consumed <P_164>
twenty gallons of brandy , besides wine and other liquors .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.475

Many of the resident English informed us , that they found it desirable
to abstain from strong drink , and also to take only a small quantity of
animal food . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.476

<font> Monday , September <$$font> 17 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.477

<font> Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.478

- Though three_thousand miles from home , yet , with my dear Montefiore
seated next me , I should feel almost at home even on board a ship ,
were it not for an anxious feeling respecting the many dear friends from
whom this distance separates us . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.479

My only source of comfort was , the knowledge that I might safely leave
all things in the hand of the Almighty Father , by whom we had ourselves
been so long protected . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.480

We learnt from the captain of a merchantman , who took tea with us , and
who had just arrived from Malta , that the Greeks were still
perpetrating their piratical enormities ; not contenting themselves with
plundering the vessels they took , but committing great cruelties on the
captains and crews , even nailing them down by the ears .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.481

These accounts justified our determination of not moving from this
harbour without convoy , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.482

and gave great force to the advice of those who persuaded us not to
venture into Syria in the present state of affairs .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.483

<font> Tuesday , September <$$font> 18 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.484

<font> Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,164.485

- I was contented to amuse myself , during the many idle hours I had now
to spend , with observing the crew busy <P_165> at their daily
occupations of cleaning or repairing the ship .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.486

Captain Anderson to-day bought twelve Egyptian idols , of which he
spared me four . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.487

The weather was so sultry at present that conversation even was too
fatiguing , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.488

and we had therefore recourse to our books . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.489

<font> Wednesday , September <$$font> 19 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.490

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.491

- People , notwithstanding the fineness of the climate , do not escape
colds here ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.492

and the mate and Armstrong both suffered under attacks of this kind .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.493

The former to-day made me a present of the ten commandments , most
beautifully written in the smallest compass imaginable .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.494

In the afternoon there was a sailing match between three boats ,
belonging to the the Martha , the Mary , and the Leonidas ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.495

the Martha conquered . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.496

We took our dessert on deck ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.497

and I may here observe that the pomegranate is , in my opinion , the
best fruit afforded by this place ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.498

the bananah is greatly esteemed , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.499

but it requires time to learn to relish it : MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.500

this , perhaps , is the best proof of its worth .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.501

<font> Thursday , September <$$font> 20 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.502

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.503

- A French brig hove in sight to-day , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.504

and our hopes were instantly excited by the anticipation of intelligence
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.505

In the afternoon we went on shore , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.506

and having engaged donkeys , rode to the field of battle where General
Abercrombie fell . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.507

Its distance from the town is about four miles .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,165.508

On the field is a stone <P_166> bearing an inscription to the memory of
Colonel Peter Dutens , who fell in the action of the 21st of March ,
1801 , at the head of his regiment . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.509

In the environs of this spot are the remains of a Roman praetorian camp
; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.510

and on our return , by way of the canal , we passed the palace of the
pacha's daughter , which is pleasantly situated , and has a spacious
garden ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.511

it is open to the public . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.512

Mr. Thurban had a tent erected near it , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.513

and was enjoying the salubrity of the evening air , with his family ,
amid the cultivated fields which skirt their country residence .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.514

<font> Friday , September <$$font> 21 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.515

<font> Alexandria . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.516

- As this was the day preceding the commencement of the new year , we
prepared for going on shore , having obtained a room at the Locande , to
pass the holidays . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.517

The heat to-day was very intense , the thermometer standing at 88@ @=o=
; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.518

and at one part of the day the cabin was suddenly filled with small
flies , like a blight . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.519

It was with some difficulty we had procured an apartment at the inn ,
owing to the great number of strangers , especially French , lately
arrived ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.520

nor did Montefiore dress in the same good spirits with which he had been
accustomed to prepare for the festival at home .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.521

There was nothing , in fact , to awaken a feeling of interest , or
excite the spirits , while there was much to depress them .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,166.522

There was every appearance of <P_167> our being prevented from
accomplishing the object of our voyage . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.523

Abdallah , the Pacha of Damascus , was inimical , we learned , to all
Europeans , and that he was also on bad terms with the Pacha of Egypt .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.524

It was , hence , the general opinion of the best informed persons here ,
that a Frank , by going to Syria at the present epoch , would run the
risk of being massacred - no very pleasant result of a tour of amusement
and pleasure . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.525

Mr. Mazzara walked with Montefiore to the synagogue , which was a small
building excessively hot , and containing a congregation of about sixty
persons , who were clad in the Arab costume . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.526

On their return they had tea , cake , and wine together , with some
water-melons , of which Montefiore is remarkably fond , although he was
for some time afraid to taste them . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.527

<font> Saturday , September <$$font> 22 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.528

<font> Alexandria . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.529

- A happy new year to all friends ! was our early exclamation to-day .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.530

Never had I thought of passing this season in Egypt ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.531

but Abdallah forbade our advance , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.532

and the pirates prevented our return . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.533

Montefiore now began to comprehend that travelling is not always
divested of disagreeables ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,167.534

and pent up , as we were , in a miserable room , in a confined street ,
and suffocating from the sands and hot blasts of the sirocco wind , it
was scarcely possible that we should help yielding to the recollections
<P_168> of home , which at this period more especially rose in our minds
. MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.535

Montefiore went to synagogue , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.536

and offered fifty dollars . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.537

In the evening I accompanied him to a place of devotion belonging to a
private gentleman , a Signor Fuor ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.538

it was small but extremely clean , and well , I might say brilliantly ,
lighted with wax tapers and oil lamps . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.539

Two ladies of the family were in the gallery ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.540

one of them was superbly dressed in a robe of dove-coloured cashmere ,
embroidered with gold ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.541

her head and neck were adorned with diamonds , pearls , &c.
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.542

and her pretty little white hands and arms were almost covered with
rings and bracelets . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.543

The congregation was numerous and respectable .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.544

<font> Sunday , September <$$font> 23 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.545

<font> Alexandria . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.546

- The autumnal equinox having commenced , we now felt all the annoyances
of a strong wind on the borders of a sandy desert .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.547

We this day paid a visit to Mr. and Mrs. Fuor .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.548

Their residence is extremely respectable ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.549

and the latter , who is a pretty young woman , and whom we had seen
dressed so superbly on the preceding evening , was habited to-day in a
Turkish mantle , made of the richest materials , her jewels
corresponding in richness and variety . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,168.550

I was greatly pleased at being introduced to her father , who had
arrived at the age of ninety , and was still cheerful , and in the
possession <P_169> of all his faculties . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.551

Ice was handed us by two young black slaves ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.552

and Italian being spoken as well as Arabic , we managed to support an
agreeable hour's conversation . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.553

We afterwards called on Mr. Salt , and Mrs. Barker ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.554

the former was having his antiquities packed up ready to export to
Europe . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.555

He complained of indisposition , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.556

and was observing in consequence a very limited diet , living
principally on rice , and abstaining entirely from wine .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.557

Several young men , he said , who had come from Europe , and had
ridiculed the idea of restricting their appetites , fell victims to
their indiscretion . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.558

We returned in the evening with great satisfaction to the Leonidas .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.559

<font> Monday , September <$$font> 24 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.560

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.561

- We found Captain Anderson and his party returned from Rosetta , and
complaining of the unpleasant nature of his excursion .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.562

The tent had scarcely protected them from being buried in the sand ,
which the wind had driven in clouds through the air , overwhelming every
object in its course , and so penetrating at the same time , that it
made its way through the canvass , and spoiled all their provisions .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.563

We escaped these inconveniences on board ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,169.564

but having sat some time in a current of air , while at Mrs. Barker's ,
I had considerable reason to dread the approach of fever , and to think
<P_170> I should be well content to commute it for a cough , and pain in
the limbs . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.565

<font> Tuesday , September <$$font> 25 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.566

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.567

- Every strange sail that appeared in sight inspired us with fresh hopes
, which were almost as soon dissipated as raised .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.568

We had now spent a month in harbour , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.569

and had experienced a species of confinement , only less than that of a
prison from our being able occasionally to take exercise , and having
unburthened minds . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.570

I was confined to bed by my cold , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.571

but was amused as I lay by the jovial sounds which came from the
captain's cabin , where several of his naval companions , Montefiore
being of the party , were assembled for a game of whist .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.572

<font> Wednesday , September <$$font> 26 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.573

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.574

- I again lost my broach , in what manner I can@ @not divine , having
had it last night when I undressed ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.575

but there seemed a fatality in this little ornament , it being the same
that was missing and recovered at the expense of a Napoleon , when we
were passing through Italy - MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.576

may our losses terminate here . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.577

I did not rise till dinner-time , feeling great debility .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.578

A vessel arrived to_day from Syria , which had been pillaged of her
cargo by the Greeks , who with infinite politeness offered the captain
four Greek ladies by way of indemnification . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,170.579

What a <P_171> wretched state of degradation , for these unfortunates to
have been thus transferred , at the will of their masters , from one to
the other , while possessing probably all the finer feelings of moral
sensibility which adorn human nature and should have protected them from
insult . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.580

<font> Thursday , September <$$font> 27 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.581

<font> Alexandria . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.582

- There had been a dispute , we heard , between the Pacha of Damascus ,
Abdallah , and Lady Hester Stanhope , which required the interference of
the British consul ; his highness having prohibited her ladyship's Arabs
from serving her on pain of death . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.583

The consul received some affront during the dispute ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.584

but I believe he succeeded in making an amicable arrangement between the
parties . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.585

Lady Hester's estate is situate {COM:sic} on a mountain called Sida ,
where there is no spring of water . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.586

It consequently becomes necessary to employ the Arabs in fetching a
supply for her household of that essential article ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.587

and they have to go some considerable distance .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.588

Singular strength of mind and forbearance must be required in such a
situation ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.589

and her ladyship must possess both spirit to resist tyrannical caprice ,
and eccentricity to make her abode agreeable .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.590

Mr. Bell obliged us by a sight of the Malta Gazette and Galignani's
papers . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.591

<font> Friday , September <$$font> 28 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.592

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,171.593

- This <P_172> beautiful month , though fertile in reports , expired in
tantalizing monotony . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.594

Montefiore kindly purchased a guitar for my amusement ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.595

the tone was good . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.596

An Italian came on board with it and several different articles for sale
this morning . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.597

Captain Jones and Mr. Lacey passed the evening with us ,
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.598

and we played chess and backgammon . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.599

This night we found an extra coverlet requisite for the first time .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.600

<font> Saturday , September <$$font> 29 . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.601

<font> The Leonidas . <$$font> MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.602

- Montefiore having promised the crew of our ship a good supper , in
celebration of our new year , it was prepared for this evening ; Paulo
having yesterday purchased eight geese and six fowls , with three
gallons of spirits , for the occasion . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.603

The captain went to procure a fiddler , MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.604

and the decks were cleared for the dance . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.605

We dined at one , that the cook , who had three assistants , might have
time to prepare the jovial feast . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.606

At three , all the sailors were nicely dressed , in white trousers
{TEXT:trowsers} and blue jackets . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.607

Captain Jones , Smart , and Powel , with Mr. Lacey , came on board to
witness the f√™te ; MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.608

and a more happy and jovial group I never beheld .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.609

The table for twenty was placed under an awning , formed of the sails ;
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.610

the glass circled merrily , with a song and a reel intervening :
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,172.611

the gentlemen joined in the light fantastic trip , like Highlanders in
their national dance , and in a manner which would not have <P_173>
disgraced the ball-room . MONTEFIORE-1836-1,173.612

The attention of the tars was then requested by the master of the
ceremonies , <paren> the carpenter , <$$paren> who rose and said , "
Gentlemen , fill your glasses - Mr. and Mrs. Montefiore ! "
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,173.613

The Russian , who acted as musician , then joined his vocal powers .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,173.614

At twelve o'clock festivities ceased , but not before most of the party
were overpowered by the spirit of the dance , or that of the bottle .
MONTEFIORE-1836-1,173.615

