<BEGIN_montagu-1718-1>

<P_77>

{ED:Letter_XXIII._To_the_Countess_of_-}

<font> Perterwaradin , <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,77.4

Jan. 30 , O. S. 1717 . MONTAGU-1718-1,77.5

At length , dear sister , I am safely arrived with all my family in good
health at <font> Peterwaradin <$$font> ; having suffered so little from
the rigour of the season <paren> against which we were well provided by
furs <$$paren> and found such tolerable accommodation every where , by
the care of sending before , that I can hardly forbear laughing when I
recollect all the frightful ideas that were given me of this journey .
MONTAGU-1718-1,77.6

These , I see , were wholly owing to the tenderness of my Vienna friends
, and their desire of keeping me with them for this winter .
MONTAGU-1718-1,77.7

Perhaps it will not be disagreeable to give you a short journal of my
journey , being through a country entirely unknown to you , and very
little passed , even by the Hungarians themselves , who generally chuse
to take the conveniency of going down the Danube . MONTAGU-1718-1,77.8

We have had the blessing of being favoured with finer weather than is
common , at this time of the year ; though the snow was so deep , we
were obliged to have our own coaches fixed upon <font> Traineaus
<$$font> , which move so swift and so easily , 't@ @is by far the most
agreeable {TEXT:agreeale} manner of travelling post .
MONTAGU-1718-1,77.9

We came to <font> Raab <$$font> <paren> the second day from Vienna
<$$paren> on the seventeenth <P_78> instant , where Mr. W- sending word
of our arrival to the governor , the best house in the town was provided
for us , the garrison put under arms , a guard ordered at our door , and
all other honours paid to us . MONTAGU-1718-1,78.10

The governor , and all other officers immediately waited on Mr. W- , to
know if there was any thing to be done for his service .
MONTAGU-1718-1,78.11

The bishop of <font> Temeswaar <$$font> came to visit us , with great
civility , earnestly pressing us to dine with him next day , which we
refusing , as being resolved to pursue our journey , he sent us several
baskets of winter fruit , and a great variety of Hungarian wines , with
a young hind just killed . MONTAGU-1718-1,78.12

This is a prelate of great power in this country , of the antient family
of <font> Nadasti , <$$font> so considerable , for many ages , in this
kingdom . MONTAGU-1718-1,78.13

He is a very polite , agreeable , chearful old man , wearing the
Hungarian habit , with a venerable white beard down to his girdle .
MONTAGU-1718-1,78.14

- <font> Raab <$$font> is a strong town , well garrisoned and fortified
, MONTAGU-1718-1,78.15

and was a long time the frontier town between the Turkish and German
Empires . MONTAGU-1718-1,78.16

It has its name from the river <font> Rab , <$$font> on which it is
situated , just on its meeting with the Danube , in an open champain
country . MONTAGU-1718-1,78.17

It was first taken by the Turks under the command of Bassa <font> Sinan
, <$$font> in the reign of Sultan <font> Amurath <$$font> III. in the
year fifteen_hundred_ninety_four . MONTAGU-1718-1,78.18

The governor being supposed to have betrayed it , was afterwards
beheaded by the Emperor's command . MONTAGU-1718-1,78.19

<P_79>

The Counts of <font> Swartzenburg <$$font> and <font> Palsi <$$font>
retook it by surprize 1598 , since which time it has remained in the
hands of the Germans , though the Turks once more attempted to gain it
by stratagem in 1642 . MONTAGU-1718-1,79.21

The cathedral is large and well built , which is all I saw remarkable in
the town . MONTAGU-1718-1,79.22

Leaving <font> Comora <$$font> on the other side the river , we went the
eighteenth to <font> Nosmuhl <$$font> , a small village , where ,
however , we made shift to find tolerable accommodation .
MONTAGU-1718-1,79.23

We continued two days travelling between this place and <font> Buda ,
<$$font> thro' the finest plains in the world , as even as if they were
paved , and extremely fruitful ; but for the most part desart and
uncultivated , laid waste by the long wars between the Turks and the
Emperor ; and the more cruel civil war , occasioned by the barbarous
persecution of the Protestant religion , by the Emperor Leopold .
MONTAGU-1718-1,79.24

That prince has left behind him the character of an extraordinary piety
, MONTAGU-1718-1,79.25

and was naturally of a mild merciful temper ; MONTAGU-1718-1,79.26

but , putting his conscience into the hands of a Jesuit {TEXT:jesuit} ,
he was more cruel and treacherous to his poor Hungarian subjects , than
ever the Turk has been to the Christians ; breaking , without scruple ,
his coronation oath , and his faith , solemnly given in many public
treaties . MONTAGU-1718-1,79.27

Indeed nothing can be more melancholy than in travelling through Hungary
, to reflect on the former flourishing state of that kingdom , and to
see such a noble spot of earth <P_80> almost uninhabited .
MONTAGU-1718-1,80.28

Such are also the present circumstances of <font> Buda <$$font> <paren>
where we arrived very early the twenty_second <$$paren> once the royal
seat of the Hungarian kings , whose palace there , was reckoned one of
the most beautiful buildings of the age , now wholly destroyed , no part
of the town having been repaired since the last siege , but the
fortifications and the castle , which is the present residence of the
governor_general <font> Ragule <$$font> , an officer of great merit .
MONTAGU-1718-1,80.29

He came immediately to see us , MONTAGU-1718-1,80.30

and carried us in his coach to his house , where I was received by his
lady , with all possible civility , and magnificently entertained .
MONTAGU-1718-1,80.31

This city is situated upon a little hill on the south side of the Danube
. MONTAGU-1718-1,80.32

The castle is much higher than the town , MONTAGU-1718-1,80.33

and from it the prospect is very noble . MONTAGU-1718-1,80.34

Without the walls lie a vast number of little houses , or rather huts ,
that they call the <font> Rascian <$$font> town , being altogether
inhabited by that people . MONTAGU-1718-1,80.35

The governor assured me it would furnish twelve_thousand fighting men .
MONTAGU-1718-1,80.36

These towns look very odd ; MONTAGU-1718-1,80.37

their houses stand in rows , many thousands of them so close together ,
that they appear , at a little distance , like old-fashioned thatched
tents . MONTAGU-1718-1,80.38

They consist , every one of them , of one hovel above , and another
under ground ; MONTAGU-1718-1,80.39

these are their summer and winter apartments . MONTAGU-1718-1,80.40

Buda was first taken by <font> Solyman <$$font> the magnificent , in
1526 , and lost the following year to Ferdinand the First , King of
<P_81> Bohemia . MONTAGU-1718-1,81.41

<font> Solyman <$$font> regained it by the treachery of the garrison ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,81.42

and voluntarily {TEXT:voluntary} gave it into the hands of King <font>
John <$$font> of Hungary , after whose death , his son being an infant ,
<font> Ferdinand <$$font> laid siege to it , MONTAGU-1718-1,81.43

and the Queen mother was forced to call Solyman to her aid .
MONTAGU-1718-1,81.44

He indeed raised the siege ; MONTAGU-1718-1,81.45

but left a Turkish garrison in the town , MONTAGU-1718-1,81.46

and commanded her to remove her court from thence , which she was forced
to submit to in 1541 . MONTAGU-1718-1,81.47

It resisted afterwards the sieges laid to it , by the Marquis of
Brandenburgh in the year 1542 ; Count Schwartzenburgh in 1598 ; General
Rosworm , in 1602 ; and the Duke of <font> Lorrain <$$font> , commander
of the Emperor's forces , in 1684 , to whom it yielded in 1686 , after
an obstinate defence , <font> Apti Bassa <$$font> , the governor , being
killed , fighting in the breach , with a Roman bravery .
MONTAGU-1718-1,81.48

The loss of this town was so important , and so much resented by the
Turks , that it occasioned the deposing of their Emperor <font> Mahomet
<$$font> the Fourth , the year following . MONTAGU-1718-1,81.49

We did not proceed on our journey till the twenty-third , when we passed
through <font> Adam <$$font> and <font> Todowar <$$font> , both
considerable towns , when in the hands of the Turks , but now quite
ruined . MONTAGU-1718-1,81.50

The remains , however , of some Turkish towns , shew something of what
they have been . MONTAGU-1718-1,81.51

This part of the country is very much overgrown with wood , and little
frequented . MONTAGU-1718-1,81.52

'T@ @is <P_82> incredible what vast numbers of wild fowl we saw , which
often live here to a good old age , - and <font> undisturb'd by guns ,
in quiet sleep . <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,82.53

- We came the five_and_twentieth , to <font> Mohatch , <$$font>
MONTAGU-1718-1,82.54

and were shewed the field near it , where <font> Lewis , <$$font> the
young King of Hungary , lost his army and his life , being drowned in a
ditch trying to fly from <font> Balybeus , <$$font> general of <font>
Solyman <$$font> the Magnificent . MONTAGU-1718-1,82.55

This battle opened the first passage for the Turks into the heart of
Hungary . MONTAGU-1718-1,82.56

- I do@ @n't name to you the little villages , of which I can say
nothing remarkable ; MONTAGU-1718-1,82.57

but I@ @'ll assure you , I have always found a warm stove and great
plenty , particularly of wild boar , venison and all kinds of <font>
Gibier . <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,82.58

The few people that inhabit Hungary , live easily enough ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,82.59

they have no money ; MONTAGU-1718-1,82.60

but the woods and plains afford them provision in great abundance ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,82.61

they were ordered to give us all things necessary , even what horses we
pleased to demand , <font> gratis <$$font> ; MONTAGU-1718-1,82.62

but Mr. W- would not oppress the poor country people , by making use of
this order , MONTAGU-1718-1,82.63

and always paid them to the full worth of what we had .
MONTAGU-1718-1,82.64

They were so surprised at this unexpected generosity , which they are
very little used to , that they always pressed upon us , at parting , a
dozen of fat pheasants , or something of that sort for a present .
MONTAGU-1718-1,82.65

Their dress is very <font> primitive , <$$font> being only a plain
sheep's skin , and a cap and boots of the same stuff .
MONTAGU-1718-1,82.66

You may easily imagine this <P_83> lasts them many winters ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,83.67

and thus they have very little occasion for money .
MONTAGU-1718-1,83.68

The twenty-sixth , we passed over the frozen Danube , with all our
equipage and carriages . MONTAGU-1718-1,83.69

We met , on the other side general <font> Veterani <$$font> , who
invited us , with great civility , to pass the night at a little castle
of his , a few miles off , assuring us we should have a very hard day's
journey to reach <font> Essek . <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,83.70

This we found but too true , the woods being very dangerous , and scarce
passable from the vast quantity of wolves that herd in them .
MONTAGU-1718-1,83.71

We came , however , safe , though late , to Essek , where we stayed a
day , to dispatch a courier with letters to the <font> Bassa <$$font> of
Belgrade ; MONTAGU-1718-1,83.72

and I took that opportunity of seeing the town , which is not very large
, but fair built and well fortified . MONTAGU-1718-1,83.73

This was a town of great trade , very rich and populous , when in the
hands of the Turks . MONTAGU-1718-1,83.74

It is situated on the <font> Drave , <$$font> which runs into the Danube
. MONTAGU-1718-1,83.75

The bridge was esteemed one of the most extraordinary in the world ,
being eight_thousand paces long , and all built of oak .
MONTAGU-1718-1,83.76

It was burnt , and the city laid in ashes by count <font> Lesley
<$$font> 1685 , MONTAGU-1718-1,83.77

but was again repaired and fortified by the Turks , who however
abandoned it in 1687 . MONTAGU-1718-1,83.78

General <font> Dunnewalt <$$font> then took possession of it for the
Emperor , in whose hands it has remained ever since , and is esteemed
one of the bulwarks of Hungary . MONTAGU-1718-1,83.79

The twenty-eighth we went to Bocorvar , a very large Rascian town ,
<P_84> all built after the manner I have described to you .
MONTAGU-1718-1,84.80

We were met there by Colonel - , who would not suffer us to go any where
but to his quarters , where I found his wife , a very agreeable
Hungarian lady , and his niece {TEXT:neice} and daughter , two pretty
young women , crowded into three or four Rascian houses , cast into one
, and made as neat and convenient as those places are capable of being
made . MONTAGU-1718-1,84.81

The Hungarian ladies are much handsomer than those of Austria .
MONTAGU-1718-1,84.82

All the Vienna beauties are of that country . MONTAGU-1718-1,84.83

They are generally very fair and well shaped , MONTAGU-1718-1,84.84

and their dress , I think , is extremely becoming .
MONTAGU-1718-1,84.85

This lady was in a gown of scarlet velvet , lined and faced with sables
, made exact to her shape , and the skirt falling to her feet .
MONTAGU-1718-1,84.86

The sleeves are strait to their arms , and the stays buttoned before ,
with two rows of little buttons of gold , pearl , or diamonds .
MONTAGU-1718-1,84.87

On their heads they wear a tassel of gold , that hangs low on one side ,
lined with sable , or some other fine fur . MONTAGU-1718-1,84.88

- They gave us a handsome dinner , MONTAGU-1718-1,84.89

and I thought the conversation very polite and agreeable .
MONTAGU-1718-1,84.90

They would accompany us part of our way . MONTAGU-1718-1,84.91

- The twenty-ninth , we arrived here , where we were met by the
commanding officer at the head of all the officers of the garrison .
MONTAGU-1718-1,84.92

We were lodged in the best apartments of the governor's house , and
entertained in a very splendid manner by the Emperor's order .
MONTAGU-1718-1,84.93

We wait here till all <P_85> points are adjusted , concerning our
reception on the Turkish frontiers . MONTAGU-1718-1,85.94

Mr. W-'s courier , which he sent from Essek , returned this morning ,
with the Bassa's answer in a purse of scarlet satin , which the
interpreter here has translated . MONTAGU-1718-1,85.95

'T@ @is to promise him to be honourably received . MONTAGU-1718-1,85.96

I desired him to appoint where he would be met , by the Turkish convoy .
MONTAGU-1718-1,85.97

- He has dispatched the courier back , naming Betsko , a village in the
midway between Peterwaradin and Belgrade . MONTAGU-1718-1,85.98

We shall stay here till we receive his answer . MONTAGU-1718-1,85.99

- Thus , dear sister , I have given you a very particular , and <paren>
I am afraid you@ @'ll think <$$paren> a tedious account of this part of
my travels . MONTAGU-1718-1,85.100

It was not an affectation of shewing my reading that has made me tell
you some little scraps of the history of the towns I have passed through
; MONTAGU-1718-1,85.101

I have always avoided any thing of that kind , when I spoke of places
that I believe you knew the story of , as well as myself .
MONTAGU-1718-1,85.102

But Hungary being a part of the world , which I believe quite new to you
, I thought you might read with some pleasure an account of it , which I
have been very solicitous to get from the best hands .
MONTAGU-1718-1,85.103

However , if you do@ @n't like it , 't@ @is in your power to forbear
reading it . MONTAGU-1718-1,85.104

I am , Dear sister . MONTAGU-1718-1,85.105

I am promised to have this letter carefully sent to Vienna .
MONTAGU-1718-1,85.106

<P_86>

{ED:Letter_XXIV._To_Mr._Pope}

<font> Belgrade , <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,86.109

Feb. 12 , O. S. 1717 . MONTAGU-1718-1,86.110

I did verily intend to write you a long letter from Peterwaradin , where
I expected to stay three or four days , MONTAGU-1718-1,86.111

but the Bassa here was in such haste to see us , that he dispatched the
courier back <paren> which Mr. W- had sent to know the time he would
send the convoy to meet us <$$paren> without suffering him to pull off
his boots . MONTAGU-1718-1,86.112

My letters were not thought important enough to stop our journey ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,86.113

and we left Peterwaradin the next day , being waited on by the chief
officers of the garrison , and a considerable convoy of Germans and
Rascians . MONTAGU-1718-1,86.114

The Emperor has several regiments of these people ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,86.115

but , to say the truth , they are rather plunderers than soldiers ;
having no pay , and being obliged to furnish their own arms and horses ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,86.116

they rather look like vagabond gypsies , or stout beggars , than regular
troops . MONTAGU-1718-1,86.117

I can@ @not forbear speaking a word of this race of creatures , who are
very numerous all over Hungary . MONTAGU-1718-1,86.118

They have a patriarch of their own at Grand Cairo ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,86.119

and are really of the Greek church , MONTAGU-1718-1,86.120

but their extreme ignorance gives their priests occasion to impose
several new notions upon them . MONTAGU-1718-1,86.121

<P_87>

These fellows letting their hair and beard grow inviolate , make exactly
the figure of the Indian Bramins . MONTAGU-1718-1,87.123

They are heirs-general to all the money of the laity ; for which , in
return , they give them formal passports signed and sealed for Heaven ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,87.124

and the wives and children only inherit the house and cattle .
MONTAGU-1718-1,87.125

In most other points they follow the Greek church .
MONTAGU-1718-1,87.126

- This little digression has interrupted my telling you we passed over
the fields of <font> Carlowitz <$$font> , where the last great victory
was obtained by Prince Eugene over the Turks . MONTAGU-1718-1,87.127

The marks of that glorious bloody day are yet recent , the field being
yet strewed with the skulls and carcasses of unburied men , horses and
camels . MONTAGU-1718-1,87.128

I could not look , without horror , on such numbers of mangled human
bodies , nor without reflecting on the injustice of war , that makes
murder , not only necessary , but meritorious . MONTAGU-1718-1,87.129

Nothing seems to be a plainer proof of the <font> irrationality <$$font>
of mankind <paren> whatever fine claims we pretend to reason <$$paren>
than the rage with which they contest for a small spot of ground , when
such vast parts of fruitful earth lie quite uninhabited .
MONTAGU-1718-1,87.130

'T@ @is true , custom has now made it unavoidable ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,87.131

but can there be a greater demonstration of want of reason , than a
custom being firmly established , so plainly contrary to the interest of
man in general ? MONTAGU-1718-1,87.132

I am a good deal inclined to believe Mr. <font> Hobbs <$$font> , that
the <font> state of nature <$$font> is a <font> state of war <$$font> ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,87.133

but thence <P_88> I conclude human nature , not rational , if the word
reason means common sense , as I suppose it does .
MONTAGU-1718-1,88.134

I have a great many admirable arguments to support this reflection ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,88.135

I wo@ @n't however trouble you with them , but return , in a plain stile
, to the history of my travels . MONTAGU-1718-1,88.136

We were met at Betsko <paren> a village in the midway between Belgrade
and Peterwaradin <$$paren> by an Aga of the Janizaries , with a body of
Turks , exceeding the Germans by one_hundred men , though the Bassa had
engaged to send exactly the same number . MONTAGU-1718-1,88.137

You may judge by this of their fears . MONTAGU-1718-1,88.138

I am really persuaded , that they hardly thought the odds of one_hundred
men set them even with the Germans ; MONTAGU-1718-1,88.139

however , I was very uneasy till they were parted , fearing some quarrel
might arise notwithstanding the <font> parole <$$font> given .
MONTAGU-1718-1,88.140

We came late to Belgrade , the deep snows making the ascent to it very
difficult . MONTAGU-1718-1,88.141

It seems a strong city , fortified , on the east-side , by the Danube ;
and on the south , by the river <font> Save <$$font> ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,88.142

and was formerly the barrier of Hungary . MONTAGU-1718-1,88.143

It was first taken by Solyman the Magnificent ; and since , by the
Emperor's forces , led by the Elector of Bavaria .
MONTAGU-1718-1,88.144

The Emperor held it only two years , it being retaken by the Grand
Vizier . MONTAGU-1718-1,88.145

It is now fortified with the utmost care and skill the Turks are capable
of , and strengthened by a very numerous garrison , of <P_89> their
bravest Janizaries , commanded by a Bassa <font> Seraskier <$$font>
<paren> <font> i.e. <$$font> General ; <$$paren> though this last
expression is not very just ; MONTAGU-1718-1,89.146

for to say truth , the Seraskier is commanded by the Janizaries .
MONTAGU-1718-1,89.147

These troops have an absolute authority here , MONTAGU-1718-1,89.148

and their conduct carries much more the aspect of rebellion , than the
appearance of subordination . MONTAGU-1718-1,89.149

You may judge of this by the following story , which at the same time ,
will give you an idea of the <font> admirable <$$font> intelligence of
the Governor of Peterwaradin , though so few hours distant .
MONTAGU-1718-1,89.150

We were told by him at Peterwaradin , that the garrison and inhabitants
of Belgrade were so weary of the war , they had killed their Bassa about
two months ago , in a mutiny , because he had suffered himself to be
prevailed upon , by a bribe of five purses <paren> five_hundred pound
sterling <$$paren> to give permission to the Tartars to ravage the
German frontiers . MONTAGU-1718-1,89.151

We were very well pleased to hear of such favourable dispositions in the
people ; MONTAGU-1718-1,89.152

but when we came hither , we found the governor had been ill informed ,
and the real truth of the story to be this . MONTAGU-1718-1,89.153

The late Bassa fell under the displeasure of his soldiers , for no other
reason , but restraining their incursions on the Germans .
MONTAGU-1718-1,89.154

They took it into their heads from that mildness , that he had
intelligence with the enemy , MONTAGU-1718-1,89.155

and sent such information to the Grand Signior at Adrianople ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,89.156

but , redress not coming quick enough from thence , they assembled
themselves <P_90> in a tumultuous manner , MONTAGU-1718-1,90.157

and by force dragged their Bassa before the Cadi and Mufti ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,90.158

and there demanded justice in a mutinous way ; one crying out , Why he
protected the Infidels ? Another , Why he squeezed them of their money
? MONTAGU-1718-1,90.159

The Bassa , easily guessing their purpose , calmly replied to them ,
that they asked him too many questions , and that he had but one life ,
which must answer for all . MONTAGU-1718-1,90.160

They then immediately fell upon him with their scymitars , <paren>
without waiting the sentence of their heads of the law <$$paren>
MONTAGU-1718-1,90.161

and in a few moments cut him in pieces . MONTAGU-1718-1,90.162

The present Bassa has not dared to punish the murder ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,90.163

on the contrary , he affected to applaud the actors of it , as brave
fellows , that knew how to do themselves justice .
MONTAGU-1718-1,90.164

He takes all pretences of throwing money amongst the garrison ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,90.165

and suffers them to make little excursions into Hungary , where they
burn some poor Rascian houses . MONTAGU-1718-1,90.166

You may imagine , I can@ @not be very easy in a town which is really
under the government of an insolent soldiery . MONTAGU-1718-1,90.167

- We expected to be immediately dismissed , after a night's lodging here
; MONTAGU-1718-1,90.168

but the Bassa detains us till he receives orders from Adrianople , which
may , possibly , be a month coming . MONTAGU-1718-1,90.169

In the mean time , we are lodged in one of the best houses , belonging
to a very considerable man amongst them , MONTAGU-1718-1,90.170

and have a whole chamber of Janizaries to guard <P_91> us .
MONTAGU-1718-1,91.171

My only diversion is the conversation of our host <font> Achmet-beg
<$$font> , a title something like that of Count in Germany .
MONTAGU-1718-1,91.172

His father was a great Bassa , MONTAGU-1718-1,91.173

and he has been educated in the most polite Eastern learning , being
perfectly skilled in the Arabic and Persian languages , and an
extraordinary scribe , which they call <font> Effendi . <$$font>
MONTAGU-1718-1,91.174

This accomplishment makes way to the greatest preferments ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,91.175

but he has had the good sense to prefer an easy , quiet secure life , to
all the dangerous honours of the Porte . MONTAGU-1718-1,91.176

He sups with us every night , MONTAGU-1718-1,91.177

and drinks wine very freely . MONTAGU-1718-1,91.178

You can@ @not imagine how much he is delighted with the liberty of
conversing with me . MONTAGU-1718-1,91.179

He has explained to me many pieces of Arabian poetry , which , I observe
, are in numbers , not unlike ours , generally of an alternate verse ,
and of a very musical sound . MONTAGU-1718-1,91.180

Their expressions of love are very passionate and lively .
MONTAGU-1718-1,91.181

I am so much pleased with them , I really believe I should learn to read
Arabic , if I was to stay here a few months . MONTAGU-1718-1,91.182

He has a very good library of their books of all kind ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,91.183

and , as he tells me , spends the greatest part of his life there .
MONTAGU-1718-1,91.184

I pass for a great scholar with him , by relating to him some of the
Persian tales , which I find are genuine . MONTAGU-1718-1,91.185

At first , he believed I understood Persian . MONTAGU-1718-1,91.186

I have frequent disputes with him , concerning the difference of our
customs , particularly the confinement of women . MONTAGU-1718-1,91.187

He assures me , there is nothing at all in it ; only , says he , <P_92>
we have the advantage , that when our wives cheat us , no body knows it
. MONTAGU-1718-1,92.188

He has wit , MONTAGU-1718-1,92.189

and is more polite than many Christian men of quality .
MONTAGU-1718-1,92.190

I am very much entertained with him . MONTAGU-1718-1,92.191

- He has had the curiosity to make one of our servants set him an
alphabet of our letters , MONTAGU-1718-1,92.192

and can already write a good roman hand . MONTAGU-1718-1,92.193

But these amusements do not hinder my wishing heartily to be out of this
place ; MONTAGU-1718-1,92.194

for the weather is colder than I believe it ever was , any where , but
in Greenland . MONTAGU-1718-1,92.195

- We have a very large stove constantly kept hot , MONTAGU-1718-1,92.196

and yet the windows of the room are frozen on the inside .
MONTAGU-1718-1,92.197

- God knows when I may have an opportunity of sending this letter ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,92.198

but I have written it , for the discharge of my own conscience ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,92.199

and you can@ @not now reproach me , that one of yours makes ten of mine
. MONTAGU-1718-1,92.200

Adieu . MONTAGU-1718-1,92.201

<P_93>

{ED:Letter_XXV._To_her_Royal_Highness_the_Princess_of_Wales}

<font> Adrianople , <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,93.204

April 1 . O. S. 1717 . MONTAGU-1718-1,93.205

I have now , Madam , finished a journey that has not been undertaken by
any Christian , since the time of the Greek Emperors ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,93.206

and I shall not regret all the fatigues I have suffered in it , if it
gives me an opportunity of amusing your R. H. by an account of places
utterly unknown amongst us ; the Emperor's Embassadors , and those few
English that have come hither , always going on the Danube to Nicopolis
. MONTAGU-1718-1,93.207

But the river was now frozen , MONTAGU-1718-1,93.208

and Mr. W- was so zealous for the service of his Majesty , that he
would not defer his journey to wait for the conveniency of that passage
. MONTAGU-1718-1,93.209

We crossed the desarts of Servia , almost quite over-grown with wood ,
though a country naturally fertile . MONTAGU-1718-1,93.210

The inhabitants are industrious ; MONTAGU-1718-1,93.211

but the oppression of the peasants is so great , they are forced to
abandon their houses , and neglect their tillage , all they have being a
prey to the Janizaries , when_ever they please to seize upon it .
MONTAGU-1718-1,93.212

We had a guard of five_hundred of them , MONTAGU-1718-1,93.213

and I was almost in tears <P_94> every day , to see their insolencies in
the poor villages through which we passed . MONTAGU-1718-1,94.214

- After seven days travelling through thick woods , we came to Nissa ,
once the capital of Servia , situated in a fine plain on the river
<font> Nissava , <$$font> in a very good air , and so fruitful a soil ,
that the great plenty is hardly credible . MONTAGU-1718-1,94.215

I was certainly assured , that the quantity of wine last vintage was so
prodigious , that they were forced to dig holes in the earth to put it
in , not having vessels enough in the town to hold it .
MONTAGU-1718-1,94.216

The happiness of this plenty is scarce perceived by the oppressed people
. MONTAGU-1718-1,94.217

I saw here a new occasion for my compassion . The wretches that had
provided twenty waggons for our baggage from Belgrade hither for a
certain hire , being all sent back without payment , some of their
horses lamed , and others killed , without any satisfaction made for
them . MONTAGU-1718-1,94.218

The poor fellows came round the house weeping and tearing their hair and
beards in a most pitiful manner , without getting any thing but drubs
from the insolent soldiers . MONTAGU-1718-1,94.219

I can@ @not express to your R. H. how much I was moved at this scene .
MONTAGU-1718-1,94.220

I would have paid them the money out of my own pocket , with all my
heart ; MONTAGU-1718-1,94.221

but it would only have been giving so much to the Aga , who would have
taken it from them without any remorse . MONTAGU-1718-1,94.222

After four days journey from this place over the mountains , we came to
<font> Sophia <$$font> , situated in a large beautiful plain on the
river <P_95> Isca , and surrounded with distant mountains .
MONTAGU-1718-1,95.223

'T@ @is hardly possible to see a more agreeable landscape
{TEXT:landskip} . MONTAGU-1718-1,95.224

The city itself is very large and extremely populous .
MONTAGU-1718-1,95.225

Here are hot baths , very famous for their medicinal virtues .
MONTAGU-1718-1,95.226

- Four days journey from hence we arrived at <font> Philipphopolis
<$$font> , after having passed the ridges between the mountains of
<font> Haemus <$$font> and <font> Rhodope , <$$font> which are always
covered with snow . MONTAGU-1718-1,95.227

This town is situated on a rising ground , near the river Hebrus ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,95.228

and is almost wholly inhabited by Greeks ; MONTAGU-1718-1,95.229

here are still some antient Christian churches . MONTAGU-1718-1,95.230

They have a bishop ; MONTAGU-1718-1,95.231

and several of the richest Greeks live here ; MONTAGU-1718-1,95.232

but they are forced to conceal their wealth with great care , the
appearance of poverty <paren> which includes part of its inconveniencies
<$$paren> being all their security against feeling it in earnest .
MONTAGU-1718-1,95.233

The country from hence to Adrianople , is the finest in the world .
MONTAGU-1718-1,95.234

Vines grow wild on all the hills , MONTAGU-1718-1,95.235

and the perpetual spring they enjoy , makes every thing gay and
flourishing . MONTAGU-1718-1,95.236

But this climate , happy as it seems , can never be preferred to England
, with all its frosts and snows , while we are blessed with an easy
government , under a King , who makes his own happiness consist in the
liberty of his people , and chooses rather to be looked upon , as their
father than their master . MONTAGU-1718-1,95.237

- This theme would carry me very far , MONTAGU-1718-1,95.238

and I am sensible , I have already tired out your R. H.'s {TEXT:H's}
<P_96> patience . MONTAGU-1718-1,96.239

But my letter is in your hands , MONTAGU-1718-1,96.240

and you may make it as short as you please , by throwing it into the
fire , when weary of reading it . MONTAGU-1718-1,96.241

I am , Madam , With the greatest respect . MONTAGU-1718-1,96.242

<P_97>

{ED:Letter_XXVI._To_the_Lady_-}

<font> Adrianople , <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,97.245

April 1 , O. S. 1717 . MONTAGU-1718-1,97.246

I am now got into a new world , where every thing I see , appears to me
a change of scene ; MONTAGU-1718-1,97.247

and I write to your ladyship with some content of mind , hoping , at
least , that you will find the charm of novelty in my letters , and no
longer reproach me , that I tell you nothing extraordinary .
MONTAGU-1718-1,97.248

I wo@ @n't trouble you with a relation of our tedious journey ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,97.249

but I must not omit what I saw remarkable at <font> Sophia <$$font> ,
one of the most beautiful towns in the Turkish Empire , and famous for
its hot baths , that are resorted to both for diversion and health .
MONTAGU-1718-1,97.250

I stop'd here one day , on purpose to see them ; MONTAGU-1718-1,97.251

and designing to go <font> incognito <$$font> , I hired a Turkish coach
. MONTAGU-1718-1,97.252

These voitures are not at all like ours , but much more convenient for
the country , the heat being so great that glasses would be very
troublesome . MONTAGU-1718-1,97.253

They are made a good deal in the manner of the Dutch stage coaches ,
having wooden lattices painted and gilded ; the inside being also
painted with baskets and nosegays of flowers , intermixed commonly with
little poetical motto's . MONTAGU-1718-1,97.254

They are covered all over with scarlet cloth , lined with silk , and
very often richly embroidered <P_98> and fringed .
MONTAGU-1718-1,98.255

This covering entirely hides the persons in them , MONTAGU-1718-1,98.256

but may be thrown back at pleasure , MONTAGU-1718-1,98.257

and thus permits the ladies to peep through through {COM:sic} the
lattices . MONTAGU-1718-1,98.258

They hold four people very conveniently , seated on cushions , but not
raised . MONTAGU-1718-1,98.259

In one of these covered waggons , I went to the <font> Bagnio <$$font>
about ten a clock . MONTAGU-1718-1,98.260

It was already full of women . MONTAGU-1718-1,98.261

It is built of stone , in the shape of a dome , with no windows but in
the roof , which gives light enough . MONTAGU-1718-1,98.262

There were five of these domes joined together , the outmost being less
than the rest , and serving only as a hall , where the <font> Portress
<$$font> stood at the door . MONTAGU-1718-1,98.263

Ladies of quality generally give this woman a crown or ten shillings ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,98.264

and I did not forget that ceremony . MONTAGU-1718-1,98.265

The next room is a very large one , paved with marble ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,98.266

and all round it are two raised Sofas of marble , one above another .
MONTAGU-1718-1,98.267

There were four fountains of cold water in this room , falling first
into marble basons , and then running on the floor in little channels
made for that purpose , which carried the streams into the next room ,
something less than this , with the same sort of marble Sofas , but so
hot with steams of sulphur proceeding from the baths joining to it , 't@
@was impossible to stay there with one's cloaths on .
MONTAGU-1718-1,98.268

The two other domes were the hot baths , one of which had cocks of cold
<P_99> water turning into it , to temper it to what degree of warmth the
bathers pleased to have . MONTAGU-1718-1,99.269

I was in my travelling habit , which is a riding dress ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,99.270

and certainly appeared very extraordinary to them .
MONTAGU-1718-1,99.271

Yet there was not one of them that shewed the least surprize or
impertinent curiosity , MONTAGU-1718-1,99.272

but received me with all the obliging civility possible .
MONTAGU-1718-1,99.273

I know no European court , where the ladies would have behaved
themselves in so polite a manner to such a stranger .
MONTAGU-1718-1,99.274

I believe , upon the whole , there were two_hundred women , and yet none
of those disdainful smiles , and satyrical whispers , that never fail in
our assemblies , when any one appears that is not dressed exactly in the
fashion . MONTAGU-1718-1,99.275

They repeated over and over to me : " Uzelle , pek Uzelle , " which is
nothing but , " <font> Charming , very charming . <$$font> "
MONTAGU-1718-1,99.276

- The first Sofas were covered with cushions and rich carpets , on which
sat the ladies ; and on the second , their slaves behind them , but
without any distinction of rank by their dress , all being in the state
of nature , that is , in plain English , stark naked , without any
beauty or defect concealed . MONTAGU-1718-1,99.277

Yet there was not the least wanton smile or immodest gesture amongst
them . MONTAGU-1718-1,99.278

They walked and moved with the same majestic grace , which Milton
describes our General Mother with . MONTAGU-1718-1,99.279

There were many amongst them , as exactly proportioned as ever any
<P_100> goddess was drawn , by the pencil of a Guido or Titian . - And
most of their skins shiningly white , only adorned by their beautiful
hair , divided into many tresses , hanging on their shoulders , braided
either with pearl or ribbon , perfectly representing the figures of the
graces . MONTAGU-1718-1,100.280

I was here convinced of the truth of a reflection I have often made ,
<font> that if it were the fashion to go naked , the face would be
hardly observed . <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,100.281

I perceived that the ladies of the most delicate skins and finest shapes
, had the greatest share of my admiration , though their faces were
sometimes less beautiful than those of their companions .
MONTAGU-1718-1,100.282

To tell you the truth , I had wickedness enough , to wish secretly ,
that Mr. <font> Gervais <$$font> could have been there invisible .
MONTAGU-1718-1,100.283

I fancy it would have very much improved his art , to see so many fine
women naked , in different postures , some in conversation , some
working , others drinking coffee or sherbet , and many negligently lying
on their cushions , while their slaves <paren> generally , pretty girls
of seventeen , or eighteen <$$paren> were employ'd in braiding their
hair in several pretty fancies . MONTAGU-1718-1,100.284

In short , 't@ @is the women's coffee-house , where all the news of the
town is told , scandal invented , &c. - MONTAGU-1718-1,100.285

They generally take this diversion once a week , MONTAGU-1718-1,100.286

and stay there at least four or five hours , without getting cold by
immediate coming out of the hot bath into the cool room , which was
<P_101> very surprizing to me . MONTAGU-1718-1,101.287

The lady , that seemed the most considerable amongst them , entreated me
to sit by her , MONTAGU-1718-1,101.288

and would fain have undressed me for the bath . MONTAGU-1718-1,101.289

I excused myself with some difficulty . MONTAGU-1718-1,101.290

They being however all so earnest in persuading me , I was at last
forced to open my shirt , and shew them my stays , which satisfied them
very well ; MONTAGU-1718-1,101.291

for , I saw , they believed I was locked up in that machine , and that
it was not in my own power to open it , which contrivance they
attributed to my husband . MONTAGU-1718-1,101.292

- I was charmed with their civility and beauty , MONTAGU-1718-1,101.293

and should have been very glad to pass more time with them ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,101.294

but Mr. W- resolving to pursue his journey next morning early , I was
in haste to see the ruins of Justinian's church , which did not afford
me so agreeable a prospect as I had left , being little more than a heap
of stones . MONTAGU-1718-1,101.295

Adieu , Madam , I am sure I have now entertained you , with an account
of such a sight as you never saw in your life , and what no book of
travels could inform you of , as 't@ @is no less than death for a man to
be found in one of these places . MONTAGU-1718-1,101.296

<P_102>

{ED:Letter_XXVII._To_the_Abbot_-}

<font> Adrianople , <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,102.299

April 1 , O. S. 1717 . MONTAGU-1718-1,102.300

You see that I am very exact in keeping the promise you engaged me to
make . MONTAGU-1718-1,102.301

I know not , however , whether your curiosity will be satisfied with the
accounts I shall give you , tho' I can assure you , the desire I have to
oblige you to the utmost of my power , has made me very diligent in my
inquiries , and observations . MONTAGU-1718-1,102.302

'T@ @is certain we have but very imperfect accounts of the manners and
religion of these people . This part of the world being seldom visited
, but by merchants , who mind little but their own affairs ; or
travellers , who make too short a stay to be able to report any thing
exactly of their own knowledge . MONTAGU-1718-1,102.303

The Turks are too proud to converse familiarly with merchants , who can
only pick up some confused informations , which are generally false ,
and can give no better account of the ways here , than a French Refugee
, lodging in a garret in Greek-street , could write of the court of
England . MONTAGU-1718-1,102.304

The journey we have made from Belgrade hither , can@ @not possibly be
passed by any out of a public character . MONTAGU-1718-1,102.305

The desert woods of Servia , are the common refuge for thieves , who rob
, fifty in a company , so that <P_103> we had need of all our guards to
secure us ; MONTAGU-1718-1,103.306

and the villages are so poor , that only force could extort from them
necessary provisions . MONTAGU-1718-1,103.307

Indeed the Janizaries had no mercy on their poverty , killing all the
poultry and sheep they could find , without asking to whom they belonged
; while the wretched owners durst not put in their claim for fear of
being beaten . MONTAGU-1718-1,103.308

Lambs just fallen , geese and turkies big with egg , all massacred
without distinction ! MONTAGU-1718-1,103.309

I fancied I heard the complaints of <font> Meliboeus <$$font> for the
hope of his flock . MONTAGU-1718-1,103.310

When the Bassas travel , 't@ @is yet worse . MONTAGU-1718-1,103.311

These oppressors are not content , with eating all that is to be eaten
belonging to the peasants ; MONTAGU-1718-1,103.312

after they have crammed themselves and their numerous retinue , they
have the impudence to exact what they call <font> Teeth-money <$$font> ,
a contribution for their use of their teeth , worn with doing them the
honour of devouring their meat . MONTAGU-1718-1,103.313

This is litterally and exactly true , however extravagant it may seem ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,103.314

and such is the natural corruption of a military government , their
religion not allowing of this barbarity , any more than ours does .
MONTAGU-1718-1,103.315

I had the advantage of lodging three weeks at Belgrade , with a
principal Effendi , that is to say , a scholar . MONTAGU-1718-1,103.316

This set of men are equally capable of preferments in the law or the
church ; those two sciences being cast into one , <P_104> and a lawyer
and a priest being the same word in the Turkish language .
MONTAGU-1718-1,104.317

They are the only men really considerable in the Empire ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,104.318

all the profitable employments and church revenues are in their hands .
MONTAGU-1718-1,104.319

The Grand Signior , though general heir to his people , never presumes
to touch their lands or money , which go , in an uninterrupted
succession , to their children . MONTAGU-1718-1,104.320

'T@ @is true , they lose this privilege , by accepting a place at court
, or the title of Bassa ; MONTAGU-1718-1,104.321

but there are few examples of such fools among them .
MONTAGU-1718-1,104.322

You may easily judge of the power of these men , who have engrossed all
the learning , and almost all the wealth of the Empire .
MONTAGU-1718-1,104.323

'T@ @is they that are the real authors , tho' the soldiers are the
actors of revolutions . MONTAGU-1718-1,104.324

They deposed the late Sultan <font> Mustapha <$$font> ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,104.325

and their power is so well known , that 't@ @is the Emperor's interest
to flatter them . MONTAGU-1718-1,104.326

This is a long digression , MONTAGU-1718-1,104.327

I was going to tell you , that an intimate , daily conversation with the
Effendi <font> Achmet-beg <$$font> , gave me an opportunity of knowing
their religion and morals in a more particular manner than perhaps any
Christian ever did . MONTAGU-1718-1,104.328

I explained to him the difference between the religion of England and
Rome ; MONTAGU-1718-1,104.329

and he was pleased to hear there were Christians , that did not worship
images , or adore the Virgin <font> Mary . <$$font>
MONTAGU-1718-1,104.330

The ridicule of <font> Transubstantiation <$$font> appeared very strong
to <P_105> him . MONTAGU-1718-1,105.331

- Upon comparing our creeds together , I am convinced that if our friend
Dr. - had free liberty of preaching here , it would be very easy to
persuade the generality to Christianity , whose notions are very little
different from his . MONTAGU-1718-1,105.332

Mr. <font> Whiston <$$font> would make a very good Apostle here .
MONTAGU-1718-1,105.333

I do@ @n't doubt but his zeal will be much fired , if you communicate
this account to him ; MONTAGU-1718-1,105.334

but tell him , he must first have the gift of tongues , before he can
possibly be of any use . MONTAGU-1718-1,105.335

- Mahometism is divided into as many sects as Christianity , and the
first institution as much neglected , and obscured by interpretations ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,105.336

I can@ @not here forbear reflecting on the natural inclination of
mankind to make mysteries and novelties . MONTAGU-1718-1,105.337

- The <font> Zeidi , Kudi , Jabari <$$font> , &c. put me in mind of the
<font> Catholics , Lutherans , <$$font> and <font> Calvinists , <$$font>
MONTAGU-1718-1,105.338

and are equally zealous against one another . MONTAGU-1718-1,105.339

But the most prevailing opinion , if you search into the secret of the
Effendi's , is plain Deism . MONTAGU-1718-1,105.340

This is indeed kept from the people , who are amused with a_thousand
different notions , according to the different interest of their
preachers . MONTAGU-1718-1,105.341

- There are very few amongst them <paren> <font> Achmet-beg <$$font>
denied there were any <$$paren> so absurd , as to set up for wit , by
declaring they believe no God at all . MONTAGU-1718-1,105.342

And Sir <font> Paul Rycaut <$$font> is mistaken <paren> as he commonly
is <$$paren> in calling the sect <font> Muterin <$$font> <paren> i.e.
<font> the secret with us <$$font> <$$paren> Atheists , <P_106> they
being Deists , whose impiety consists in making a jest of their prophet
. MONTAGU-1718-1,106.343

<font> Achmet-beg <$$font> did not own to me , that he was of this
opinion , MONTAGU-1718-1,106.344

but made no scruple of deviating from some part of Mahomet's law , by
drinking wine with the same freedom we did . MONTAGU-1718-1,106.345

When I asked him how he came to allow himself that liberty ? He made
answer , That all the creatures of God are good , and designed for the
use of man ; however , that the prohibition of wine was a very wise
maxim , and meant for the common people , being the source of all
disorders amongst them ; but , that the prophet never designed to
confine those that knew how to use it with moderation ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,106.346

nevertheless , he said , that scandal ought to be avoided , and that he
never drank it in publick . MONTAGU-1718-1,106.347

This is the general way of thinking amongst them ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,106.348

and very few forbear drinking wine , that are able to afford it .
MONTAGU-1718-1,106.349

He assured me , that if I understood Arabic , I should be very well
pleased with reading the Alcoran , which is so far from the nonsense we
charge it with , that 't@ @is the purest morality , delivered in the
very best language . MONTAGU-1718-1,106.350

I have since heard impartial Christians speak of it in the same manner ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,106.351

and I do@ @n't doubt but that all our translations are from copies got
from the Greek priests , who would not fail to falsify it with the
extremity of malice . MONTAGU-1718-1,106.352

No body of men ever were more ignorant , or <P_107> more corrupt ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,107.353

yet they differ so little from the Romish Church , that , I confess ,
nothing gives me a greater abhorrence of the cruelty of your clergy than
the barbarous persecution of them , whenever they have been their
masters , for no other reason , than their not acknowledging the Pope .
MONTAGU-1718-1,107.354

The dissenting in that one article , has got them the titles of Heretics
, and schismatics ; and what is worse , the same treatment .
MONTAGU-1718-1,107.355

I found at Philippopolis , a sect of Christians that call themselves
<font> Paulines . <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,107.356

They shew an old church where , they say , St. <font> Paul <$$font>
preached , MONTAGU-1718-1,107.357

and he is their favourite Saint , after the same manner that St. <font>
Peter <$$font> is at <font> Rome <$$font> ; MONTAGU-1718-1,107.358

neither do they forget to give him the same preference over the rest of
the Apostles . MONTAGU-1718-1,107.359

But of all the religions I have seen , that of the <font> Arnounts
<$$font> seems to me the most particular ; MONTAGU-1718-1,107.360

they are natives of <font> Arnountlich <$$font> , the antient <font>
Macedonia <$$font> , MONTAGU-1718-1,107.361

and still retain the courage and hardiness , tho' they have lost the
name of Macedonians , being the best militia in the Turkish Empire , and
the only check upon the Janizaries . MONTAGU-1718-1,107.362

They are foot soldiers ; MONTAGU-1718-1,107.363

we had a guard of them , relieved in every considerable town we passed ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,107.364

they are all cloathed and armed at their own expence , dressed in clean
white coarse cloth , carrying guns of a prodigious length , which they
run with upon their shoulders , as if they did not feel the weight of
them , the <P_108> leader singing a sort of a rude tune , not unpleasant
, and the rest making up the chorus . MONTAGU-1718-1,108.365

These people living between Christians and Mahometans , and not being
skilled in controversy , declare , that they are utterly unable to judge
which religion is best ; MONTAGU-1718-1,108.366

but to be certain of not entirely rejecting the truth , they very
prudently follow both . MONTAGU-1718-1,108.367

They go to the mosques on Fridays , and to the church on Sunday , saying
for their excuse , that at the day of judgment they are sure of
protection from the true prophet ; MONTAGU-1718-1,108.368

but which that is , they are not able to determine in this world .
MONTAGU-1718-1,108.369

I believe there is no other race of mankind , who have so modest an
opinion of their own capacity . MONTAGU-1718-1,108.370

These are the remarks I have made , on the diversity of religions I have
seen . MONTAGU-1718-1,108.371

I do@ @n't ask your pardon for the liberty I have taken in speaking of
the Roman . MONTAGU-1718-1,108.372

I know you equally condemn the quackery of all churches , as much as you
revere the sacred truths , in which we both agree .
MONTAGU-1718-1,108.373

You will expect I should say something to you of the antiquities of this
country , MONTAGU-1718-1,108.374

but there are few remains of antient Greece . MONTAGU-1718-1,108.375

We passed near the piece of an arch which is commonly called <font>
Trajan's gate <$$font> , from a supposition that he made it to shut up
the passage over the <P_109> mountains , between Sophia and
Philippopolis . MONTAGU-1718-1,109.376

But I rather believe it the remains of some triumphal arch <paren>
though I could not see any inscription ; <$$paren>
MONTAGU-1718-1,109.377

for if that passage had been shut up , there are many others , that
would serve for the march of an army ; MONTAGU-1718-1,109.378

and notwithstanding the story of <font> Baldwin <$$font> Earl of
Flanders , being overthrown in these straits , after he won
Constantinople , I do@ @n't fancy the Germans would find themselves
stopped by them at this day . MONTAGU-1718-1,109.379

'T@ @is true , the road is now made <paren> with great industry
<$$paren> as commodious as possible , for the march of the Turkish army
; MONTAGU-1718-1,109.380

there is not one ditch or puddle between this place and Belgrade , that
has not a large strong bridge of planks built over it ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,109.381

but the precipices are not so terrible as I had heard them represented .
MONTAGU-1718-1,109.382

At these mountains , we lay at the little village Kiskoi , wholly
inhabited by Christians , as all the peasants of Bulgaria are .
MONTAGU-1718-1,109.383

Their houses are nothing but little huts , raised of dirt baked in the
sun , MONTAGU-1718-1,109.384

and they leave them MONTAGU-1718-1,109.385

and fly into the mountains , some months before the march of the Turkish
army , who would else entirely ruin them , by driving away their whole
flocks . MONTAGU-1718-1,109.386

This precaution secures them in a sort of plenty ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,109.387

for such vast tracts of land lying in common , they have the liberty of
sowing what they please , MONTAGU-1718-1,109.388

and are generally very industrious husbandmen . MONTAGU-1718-1,109.389

I drank here several sorts of delicious wine . MONTAGU-1718-1,109.390

The women dress themselves <P_110> in a great variety of coloured glass
beads , MONTAGU-1718-1,110.391

and are not ugly , but of tawney complexions . MONTAGU-1718-1,110.392

I have now told you all , that is worth telling you , and perhaps more ,
relating to my journey . MONTAGU-1718-1,110.393

When I am at Constantinople , I@ @'ll try to pick up some curiosities ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,110.394

and then you shall hear again from , Yours , &c. MONTAGU-1718-1,110.395

<P_111>

{ED:Letter_XXIII._To_the_Countess_of_B-}

<font> Adrianople , <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,111.398

April 1 , O. S. 1717 . MONTAGU-1718-1,111.399

As I can never forget the smallest of your ladyship's commands , my
first business here , has been to enquire after the stuffs , you ordered
me to look for , without being able to find what you would like .
MONTAGU-1718-1,111.400

The difference of the dress here and at London is so great , the same
sort of things are not proper for <font> Caftans <$$font> and <font>
Manteaus . <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,111.401

However , I will not give over my search , but renew it again at
Constantinople , though I have reason to believe there is nothing finer
than what is to be found here , as this place is at present the
residence of the court . MONTAGU-1718-1,111.402

The Grand Signior's eldest daughter was married some few days before I
came hither , MONTAGU-1718-1,111.403

and upon that occasion , the Turkish Ladies display all their
magnificence . MONTAGU-1718-1,111.404

The bride was conducted to her husband's house in very great splendor .
MONTAGU-1718-1,111.405

She is widow of the late Vizier , who was killed at Peterwaradin ,
though that ought rather to be called a <font> contract <$$font> , than
a <font> marriage , <$$font> since she never has lived with him ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,111.406

however , the greatest part of his wealth is hers .
MONTAGU-1718-1,111.407

He had the permission of visiting her in the Seraglio ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,111.408

and being one of the handsomest <P_112> men in the empire , had very
much engaged her affections . MONTAGU-1718-1,112.409

- When she saw this second husband , who is at least fifty , she could
not forbear bursting into tears . MONTAGU-1718-1,112.410

He is indeed a man of merit , and the declared favourite of the Sultan ,
<paren> which they call <font> Mosayp <$$paren> <$$font> {COM:sic}
MONTAGU-1718-1,112.411

but that is not enough to make him pleasing in the eyes of a girl of
thirteen . MONTAGU-1718-1,112.412

The government here is entirely in the hands of the army .
MONTAGU-1718-1,112.413

The Grand Signior , with all his absolute power , is as much a slave as
any of his subjects , MONTAGU-1718-1,112.414

and trembles at a Janizary's frown . MONTAGU-1718-1,112.415

Here is , indeed , a much greater appearance of subjection than amongst
us ; MONTAGU-1718-1,112.416

a minister of state is not spoke to , but upon the knee ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,112.417

should a reflection on his conduct be dropt in a coffee-house , <paren>
for they have spies every where <$$paren> the house would be raz'd to
the ground , and perhaps the whole company put to the torture .
MONTAGU-1718-1,112.418

No <font> huzzaing mobs , senseless pamphlets , and tavern disputes
about politics <$$font> ; A consequential ill that freedom draws ; A bad
effect , - but from a noble cause . MONTAGU-1718-1,112.419

None of our harmless calling names ! MONTAGU-1718-1,112.420

but when a minister here displeases the people , in three hours time he
is dragged even from his master's arms . MONTAGU-1718-1,112.421

They cut off his hand , head and feet , MONTAGU-1718-1,112.422

and throw them before the palace gate , with <P_113> all the respect in
the world ; while the Sultan <paren> to whom they all profess an
unlimited adoration <$$paren> sits trembling in his apartment , and dare
neither defend nor revenge his favorite . MONTAGU-1718-1,113.423

This is the blessed condition of the most absolute monarch upon earth ,
who owns no <font> Law <$$font> but his <font> Will . <$$font>
MONTAGU-1718-1,113.424

I can@ @not help wishing , in the loyalty of my heart , that the
Parliament would send hither a ship_load of your passive-obedience men ,
that they might see arbitrary government in its clearest strongest light
, where 't@ @is hard to judge , whether the Prince , People , or
Ministers , are most miserable . MONTAGU-1718-1,113.425

I could make many reflections on this subject ; MONTAGU-1718-1,113.426

but I know , Madam , your own good sense , has already furnished you
with better than I am capable of . MONTAGU-1718-1,113.427

I went yesterday along with the French Ambassadress to see the Grand
Signior in his passage to the Mosque . MONTAGU-1718-1,113.428

He was preceded by a numerous guard of Janizaries , with vast white
feathers on their heads , as also by the <font> Spahis <$$font> and
<font> Bostangees , <$$font> <paren> these are foot and horse guards
<$$paren> and the Royal Gardeners , which are a very considerable body
of men , dressed in different habits of fine lively colours , so that ,
at a distance , they appeared like a parterre of tulips .
MONTAGU-1718-1,113.429

After them the Aga of the Janizaries , in a robe of purple velvet ,
lined with silver tissue , his <P_114> horse led by two slaves richly
dressed . MONTAGU-1718-1,114.430

Next him the <font> Kyzlier-Aga <$$font> , <paren> your ladyship knows ,
this is the chief guardian of the Seraglio Ladies <$$paren> in a deep
yellow cloth <paren> which suited very well to his black face <$$paren>
lined with sables . MONTAGU-1718-1,114.431

Last came his <font> sublimity <$$font> himself , arrayed in green ,
lined with the fur of a black Muscovite fox , which is supposed worth
a_thousand pound sterling , and mounted on a fine horse , with furniture
embroidered with jewels . MONTAGU-1718-1,114.432

Six more horses richly caparisoned were led after him ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,114.433

and two of his principal courtiers bore , one his gold , and the other
his silver coffee-pot , on a staff ; MONTAGU-1718-1,114.434

another carried a silver stool on his head , for him to sit on .
MONTAGU-1718-1,114.435

- It would be too tedious to tell your ladyship , the various dresses
and turbans by which their rank is distinguished ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,114.436

but they were all extremely rich and gay , to the number of some
thousands ; so that perhaps there can@ @not be seen a more beautiful
procession . MONTAGU-1718-1,114.437

The Sultan appeared to us a handsome man of about forty , with something
, however , severe in his countenance , and his eyes very full and black
. MONTAGU-1718-1,114.438

He happened to stop under the window where we stood ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,114.439

and <paren> I suppose being told who we were <$$paren> looked upon us
very attentively , so that we had full leisure to consider him .
MONTAGU-1718-1,114.440

The French Ambassadress agreed with me as to his good mien :
MONTAGU-1718-1,114.441

I see that lady very often ; MONTAGU-1718-1,114.442

she is young , MONTAGU-1718-1,114.443

and her conversation would be a great relief to <P_115> me , if I could
persuade her to live without those forms and ceremonies that make life
formal and tiresome . MONTAGU-1718-1,115.444

But she is so delighted with her guards , her four_and_twenty footmen ,
gentlemen-ushers , &c. that she would rather die than make me a visit
without them ; not to reckon a coachful of attending damsels yclep'd
maids of honour . MONTAGU-1718-1,115.445

What vexes me is , that as long as she will visit me with a troublesome
equipage , I am obliged to do the same ; MONTAGU-1718-1,115.446

however , our mutual interest makes us much together .
MONTAGU-1718-1,115.447

I went with her the other day all round the town , in an open gilt
chariot , with our joint train of attendants , preceded by our guards ,
who might have summoned the people to see what they had never seen , or
ever perhaps would see again , two young Christian Ambassadresses at the
same time . MONTAGU-1718-1,115.448

Your ladyship may easily imagine , we drew a vast croud of spectators ,
but all silent as death . MONTAGU-1718-1,115.449

If any of them had taken the liberties of our mobs upon any strange
sight , our Janizaries had made no scruple of falling on them with their
scymitars , without danger for so doing , being above law .
MONTAGU-1718-1,115.450

These people however , <paren> I mean the Janizaries <$$paren> have some
good qualities ; MONTAGU-1718-1,115.451

they are very zealous and faithful where they serve ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,115.452

and look upon it as their business to fight for you on all occasions .
MONTAGU-1718-1,115.453

Of this I had a very pleasant instance in a village on this side
Philippopolis , <P_116> where we were met by our domestic guards .
MONTAGU-1718-1,116.454

I happened to bespeak pigeons for supper , upon which one of my
Janizaries went immediately to the <font> Cadi <$$font> <paren> the
chief civil officer of the town <$$paren> and ordered him to send in
some dozens . MONTAGU-1718-1,116.455

The poor man answered , that he had already sent about , but could get
none . MONTAGU-1718-1,116.456

My Janizary , in the height of his zeal for my service , immediately
locked him up prisoner in his room , telling him he deserved death for
his impudence , in offering to excuse his not obeying my command ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,116.457

but , out of respect to me , he would not punish him but by my order .
MONTAGU-1718-1,116.458

Accordingly he came very gravely to me , to ask what should be done to
him ; adding , by way of compliment , that if I pleased , he would bring
me his head . MONTAGU-1718-1,116.459

- This may give you some idea of the unlimited power of these fellows ,
who are all sworn brothers , and bound to revenge the injuries done to
one another , whether at Cairo , Aleppo , or any part of the world .
MONTAGU-1718-1,116.460

This inviolable league makes them so powerful , that the greatest man at
court never speaks to them , but in a flattering tone ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,116.461

and in Asia , any man that is rich , is forced to enroll himself a
Janizary to secure his estate . MONTAGU-1718-1,116.462

- But I have already said enough , MONTAGU-1718-1,116.463

and I dare swear , dear Madam , that , by this time , 't@ @is a very
comfortable reflection to you , that there is no possibility of your
receiving such a tedious <P_117> letter but once in six months ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,117.464

't@ @is that consideration has given me the assurance of entertaining
you so long , and will , I hope , plead the excuse of , dear Madam ,
Yours , &c. MONTAGU-1718-1,117.465

<P_118>

{ED:Letter_XXIX._To_the_Countess_of_-}

<font> Adrianople , <$$font> MONTAGU-1718-1,118.468

April 1 , O. S. 1717 . MONTAGU-1718-1,118.469

I wish to God , dear sister , that you were as regular in letting me
know what passes on your side of the globe , as I am careful in
endeavouring to amuse you by the account of all I see here , that I
think worth your notice . MONTAGU-1718-1,118.470

You content yourself with telling me over and over , that the town is
very dull ; MONTAGU-1718-1,118.471

it may , possibly , be dull to you , when every day does not present you
with something new ; MONTAGU-1718-1,118.472

but for me , that am in arrears , at least two months news , all that
seems very stale with you , would be very fresh and sweet here .
MONTAGU-1718-1,118.473

Pray let me into more particulars , and I will try to awaken your
gratitude , by giving you a full and true relation of the novelties of
this place , none of which would surprize you more than a sight of my
person , as I am now in my Turkish habit , though I believe you would be
of my opinion , that 't@ @is admirably becoming .
MONTAGU-1718-1,118.474

- I intend to send you my picture ; MONTAGU-1718-1,118.475

in the mean time accept of it here . MONTAGU-1718-1,118.476

The first part of my dress is a pair of drawers , very full , that reach
to my shoes , and conceal the legs more modestly than your petticoats .
MONTAGU-1718-1,118.477

<P_119>

They are of a thin rose-coloured damask , brocaded with silver flowers .
MONTAGU-1718-1,119.479

My shoes are of white kid leather , embroidered with gold .
MONTAGU-1718-1,119.480

Over this hangs my smock , of a fine white silk gauze , edged with
embroidery . MONTAGU-1718-1,119.481

This smock has wide sleeves , hanging half-way down the arm ,
MONTAGU-1718-1,119.482

and is closed at the neck with a diamond button ; MONTAGU-1718-1,119.483

but the shape and colour of the bosom is very well to be distinguished
through it . MONTAGU-1718-1,119.484

- The <font> Antery <$$font> is a waistcoat , made close to the shape ,
of white and gold damask , with very long sleeves falling back , and
fringed with deep gold fringe , MONTAGU-1718-1,119.485

and should have diamond or pearl buttons . MONTAGU-1718-1,119.486

My <font> Caftan , <$$font> of the same stuff with my drawers , is a
robe exactly fitted to my shape and reaching to my feet , with very long
strait_falling sleeves . MONTAGU-1718-1,119.487

Over this is the girdle , of about four fingers broad , which , all that
can afford it , have entirely of diamonds or other precious stones ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,119.488

those , who will not be at that expence , have it of exquisite
embroidery on sattin ; MONTAGU-1718-1,119.489

but it must be fastened before with a clasp of diamonds .
MONTAGU-1718-1,119.490

- The <font> Curdee <$$font> is a loose robe they throw off , or put on
, according to the weather , being of a rich brocade <paren> mine is
green and gold <$$paren> either lined with ermine or sables ;
MONTAGU-1718-1,119.491

the sleeves reach very little below the shoulders .
MONTAGU-1718-1,119.492

