<BEGIN_moore-181x-2>

<P_1>

{ED:1818}

<font> August 18th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,1.4

Went to Bath , on my way to Leamington Spa , for the purpose of
consulting Mrs. Lefanu , the only surviving sister of Sheridan , on the
subject of her brother's life : MOORE-181X-2,1.5

meant to call also upon Dr. Parr , with whom I had had a correspondence
on the same subject . MOORE-181X-2,1.6

<font> 20th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,1.7

Breakfast in the coffee-room . MOORE-181X-2,1.8

Found Mrs. Lefanu - the very image of Sheridan , having his features
without his carbuncles , and all the light of his eyes without the
illumination of his nose . MOORE-181X-2,1.9

Her daughter , who has written novels , seems amiable , and looked up to
by father and mother . MOORE-181X-2,1.10

While I was there , and talking of Sheridan , Dr. Parr entered in full
wig and apron <paren> which he wears as prebendary of St. Paul's , and
not unwilling , of course , to look like a bishop <$$paren> .
MOORE-181X-2,1.11

I had written to him to say Mrs. L. was in his neighbourhood ,
MOORE-181X-2,1.12

and he came thus promptly and kindly to visit the sister of his friend ;
a powerful old man both in body and mind . MOORE-181X-2,1.13

Though it was then morning , he drank two glasses and a half of wine ;
and over that , when he was going away , a tumbler of the spa .
MOORE-181X-2,1.14

<font> 21st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,1.15

Dined with Dr. Parr : himself , his wife , and a friend he called '
Jack ' , a clergyman of 1000 +L {TEXT:+L_1000} a year , who lives in his
neighbourhood , very much devoted to him , and ready at a call to come
and write letters for him , &c. &c. ; his own hand being quite
illegible <paren> see what he says of it in preface to ' Fox's
Characters' <$$paren> . MOORE-181X-2,1.16

He was very cordial and animated ; MOORE-181X-2,1.17

hob-nobbed with me across the table continually ; MOORE-181X-2,1.18

told me he had written whole sheets of Greek verses against Big Ben
<paren> the Regent <$$paren> ; MOORE-181X-2,1.19

showed them to me : MOORE-181X-2,1.20

the name he designated him by , I saw , was <font> Phuskon , <$$font>
inflated or puffy . MOORE-181X-2,1.21

Told me they were full of wit , which I took his word for , as they
seemed rather puzzling Greek . MOORE-181X-2,1.22

<font> 22nd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,1.23

Dined with Dr. Parr ; the Duke of Grafton , the lion of the day ; young
Seymour , a nephew of Lord Hertford's ; the Burnes , Lefanus , &c. &c.
MOORE-181X-2,1.24

The doctor was glorious , often very eloquent , always odd ;
MOORE-181X-2,1.25

said there was no such man as Homer ; that there were various poems
tacked together by a <P_2> collector - that this was now the general
opinion of the learned . MOORE-181X-2,2.26

He had told me before dinner that we Irish started with a blunder in the
name we gave our St. Patrick , which meant the Devil , his real name
being <font> Succat <$$font> ; but the Pagan priests called him <font>
Patric , <$$font> which meant an evil spirit : MOORE-181X-2,2.27

took down Vallancey's ' Collectanea ' to prove it to me .
MOORE-181X-2,2.28

<font> 23rd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,2.29

Left Leamington to return home by way of Birmingham . MOORE-181X-2,2.30

<font> 24th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,2.31

Arrived at my cottage . MOORE-181X-2,2.32

Always glad to return to it , and the dear girl who makes it so happy
for me . MOORE-181X-2,2.33

Found heaps of letters , some of them from poets and authors , who are
the pest of my life : - one sending me a ' Serio-comic Drama of Invasion
, in Three Acts including the Vision and the Battle ' , and referring me
for his poetic credentials to three admirals and ' the late comptroller
of the navy ' ! Another begging to know whether I was acquainted with '
any man or woman to whom money was for a time useless ' , who would
venture 100 +L {TEXT:+L_100} upon a literary speculation he had in hand
. The third letter from an eternal Amelia Louisa , announcing to me
that her long threatened MS. was on its way to Wiltshire for my perusal
. MOORE-181X-2,2.34

<font> 26th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,2.35

Answered the author who wanted the ' useless money ' : MOORE-181X-2,2.36

told him I , at least , had none of that description , - very sorry ,
&c. , &c. MOORE-181X-2,2.37

Wrote also to the poetical grocer's apprentice in Dublin , from whom I
had had a long letter the week before , complaining that I had left his
MSS. when I came away unfolded , and ' open to the gaze of every one '
; MOORE-181X-2,2.38

assured him I was sorry for the accident , which was owing to the
carelessness of the person to whom I entrusted them , MOORE-181X-2,2.39

and concluded my letter thus , MOORE-181X-2,2.40

' wishing you all success in that line of life , from which it would be
cruel to divert you by any false hopes of literary eminence , I am , &c.
&c. ' MOORE-181X-2,2.41

<font> September 1st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,2.42

My Sheridan task in the morning : interrupted by Bowles , who never
comes amiss ; MOORE-181X-2,2.43

the mixture of talent and simplicity in him delightful .
MOORE-181X-2,2.44

His parsonage-house at Brenhill is beautifully situated ;
MOORE-181X-2,2.45

but he has a good deal frittered away its beauty with grottos ,
hermitages , and Shenstonian inscriptions : MOORE-181X-2,2.46

when company is coming he cries , ' Here , John , run with the crucifix
and missal to the hermitage , MOORE-181X-2,2.47

and set the fountain going . ' MOORE-181X-2,2.48

His sheep bells are tuned in thirds and fifths ; MOORE-181X-2,2.49

but he is an excellent fellow notwithstanding ; MOORE-181X-2,2.50

and , if the waters of his inspiration be not those of <P_3> Helicon ,
they are at least very <font> sweet <$$font> waters , and to my taste
pleasanter than some that are more strongly impregnated .
MOORE-181X-2,3.51

<font> 2nd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,3.52

Received a letter from Power , which will make it necessary for me to go
to town - a most unseasonable interruption . MOORE-181X-2,3.53

A collection of translations from Meleager sent to me , with a
dedication to myself , written by a Mr. Barnard , a clergyman of Cave
Castle , I think Yorkshire : MOORE-181X-2,3.54

they are done with much elegance ; MOORE-181X-2,3.55

I had his MS. to look over . MOORE-181X-2,3.56

<font> 3rd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,3.57

Wrote shoals of letters . MOORE-181X-2,3.58

This light skirmishing of letterwriting exhausts one's ammunition , both
of time and thought , most cruelly . MOORE-181X-2,3.59

<font> 7th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,3.60

Took a chaise to Devizes , MOORE-181X-2,3.61

and went from there outside the coach to Marlborough .
MOORE-181X-2,3.62

Saw a man in a foreign pelisse lying across the top of the coach reading
a pamphlet , whom I suspected I knew : MOORE-181X-2,3.63

turned out to be Kit Hutchinson , brother of Lords Hutchinson and
Donoughmore , just come from being made M. P. for Cork .
MOORE-181X-2,3.64

Was sure he was going to Burdett's , being quite of that kidney ;
MOORE-181X-2,3.65

but he was for town . MOORE-181X-2,3.66

Told me Burdett had made converts in Ireland ; among others , Lord
Dysart , once a rank Tory . MOORE-181X-2,3.67

Lord D. had frightened that black bigot , Saurin , out of his wits , by
enumerating among the measures that <font> must <$$font> soon be
conceded , Reform and Catholic Emancipation , Saurin near falling off
his horse at the sound . MOORE-181X-2,3.68

This all owing to Burdett . MOORE-181X-2,3.69

Hutchinson congratulated me on my triumphant dinner in Dublin ,
MOORE-181X-2,3.70

and I returned him the same on his at , Cork ; where , by-@ @the-@ @bye
, they hipped and hurraed me as ' the Poet , Patriot , and Pride of
Ireland ' . MOORE-181X-2,3.71

I am becoming a stock toast at these dinners . MOORE-181X-2,3.72

Had seen , this very morning , an account of a dinner to Mr. Denny , of
Cork , where I was drunk as ' Poet and Patriot , with great applause ' .
MOORE-181X-2,3.73

Took a chaise from Marlborough to Burdett's , - six miles , - Burdett
and Hobhouse out shooting . MOORE-181X-2,3.74

The Fitzgeralds gone that morning to Sir Charles Hastings ;
MOORE-181X-2,3.75

was very sorry I had missed seeing her . MOORE-181X-2,3.76

The company at Burdett's were the two Hobhouses , Scrope Davies , a
little doctor who attends Lady Burdett , and a Mr. Maxwell .
MOORE-181X-2,3.77

Davies , in fishing that morning , had caught his eye with the hook ,
MOORE-181X-2,3.78

but no great harm done . MOORE-181X-2,3.79

Walked with him and Mr. Maxwell to Ramsbury , to have leeches applied
to the eye . MOORE-181X-2,3.80

We laughed about Douglas Kinnaird's patriotic dinner at the Horns at
Kennington <paren> 5 <font> s. <$$font> a head <$$paren> in honour of
the ' Father of Reform ' , Major Cartwright . MOORE-181X-2,3.81

Davies proposed calling Cartwright <P_4> ' the Mother of Reform '
instead , MOORE-181X-2,4.82

he <font> is <$$font> a most mischievous old woman . MOORE-181X-2,4.83

- His taking the ' brevia Parliamentaria ' of Prynne for ' short
parliaments ' , admirable . MOORE-181X-2,4.84

Lord Lansdowne told me he was with Lord Holland when the letter
containing this precious bit of erudition arrived . MOORE-181X-2,4.85

Sat down to dinner without Burdett and Hobhouse . MOORE-181X-2,4.86

Davies told me that Berkeley Craven called the permission the Jews gave
him to come over from Paris and try his chance at Newmarket for a month
, ' the Jews' Pass-over ' . MOORE-181X-2,4.87

A good story of B. Craven and Lord Alvanly , when an accident happened
to their carriage : MOORE-181X-2,4.88

the former getting out to thrash the footman , saw he was an old fellow
, MOORE-181X-2,4.89

and said , ' Your <font> age <$$font> protects you ' : while Alvanly ,
who had advanced towards the postillion with the same intention , seeing
he was an athletic young fellow , turned from him saying , in his
waggish way , ' Your <font> youth <$$font> protects you . '
MOORE-181X-2,4.90

Two Miss Burdetts at dinner - nice girls . MOORE-181X-2,4.91

Burdett's style of living not at all equal to his means , either in
expense or elegance . MOORE-181X-2,4.92

With such a fortune , he ought to make his private life a sort of
counter-action to the plebeian tendency of his politics ; like
Washington , who threw all the graces and courtesies of aristocratic
ceremony round his republican court , and unlike his successor ,
Jefferson , who seemed to delight in vulgarising democracy to its lowest
pitch . MOORE-181X-2,4.93

Burdett , a most amiable man , something particularly attaching in his
manner ; his gentleness , and almost bashfulness , forming such a
contrast to the violence of his public career . MOORE-181X-2,4.94

He is , however , but a boy in wisdom , MOORE-181X-2,4.95

and , though he speaks plausibly , he is neither very sensible , nor
deeply informed upon any subject . MOORE-181X-2,4.96

I speak but from superficial knowledge of him . MOORE-181X-2,4.97

Hobhouse and other men , who know him better , think much more highly of
him . MOORE-181X-2,4.98

Music in the evening . MOORE-181X-2,4.99

Second Miss B. sung very prettily , MOORE-181X-2,4.100

and Davies delighted with the share he himself took in the ' Waters of
Babylon ' , a chant of Purcell's , which he had given Miss B.
MOORE-181X-2,4.101

<font> 8th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,4.102

Walked out , after breakfasting and writing to Bess <paren> my daily
task when away from her <$$paren> , with H. , D. , and Burdett ,
through Lord Aylesbury's forest . MOORE-181X-2,4.103

Magnificent ! MOORE-181X-2,4.104

could ramble through forest scenery for ever : MOORE-181X-2,4.105

there is less of <font> the world <$$font> there than anywhere else ,
except on the ocean , if one was <font> alone <$$font> on it .
MOORE-181X-2,4.106

Talked much of Ireland , with which Burdett is delighted ;
MOORE-181X-2,4.107

he told me if I would collect proofs against Lord Castlereagh's ministry
in Ireland , and draw up resolutions , he would move them in the House ,
and impeach him ; MOORE-181X-2,4.108

but the thing is gone by . MOORE-181X-2,4.109

He is evidently prejudiced against Grattan , MOORE-181X-2,4.110

and did not show quite a right feeling on the late outrageous attack
upon that noble old man in Dublin ; MOORE-181X-2,4.111

he wants <paren> what so many want <$$paren> <P_5> candour .
MOORE-181X-2,5.112

Curran evidently the favourite of the whole party ; MOORE-181X-2,5.113

and , no doubt , was far above Grattan in wit and genius , but still
further <font> below <$$font> him in real wisdom and goodness .
MOORE-181X-2,5.114

I told stories of Curran which made them laugh a good deal ; his
adventure at Oxford with Reinagle and his man John ; his speech to the
Englishman who was laughing at him on the top of the coach , ' May God
Almighty never humanise your countenance , you odious baboon ' : and
many others . MOORE-181X-2,5.115

<font> 9th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,5.116

Walked to Ramsbury at seven in the morning , MOORE-181X-2,5.117

and took the Marlborough coach . MOORE-181X-2,5.118

Arrived in London at half-@ @past six in the evening ,
MOORE-181X-2,5.119

and dined at the George in Coventry Street , MOORE-181X-2,5.120

and found that Power had taken lodgings for me in Duke Street , 33 , and
that my brother-in-law , Scully , was in town . MOORE-181X-2,5.121

<font> 10th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,5.122

Called on the Longmans : the ' Fudges ' soon going to press for another
edition ; MOORE-181X-2,5.123

they are very anxious for the ' Fudges ' in London , MOORE-181X-2,5.124

but I am still doubtful as to the good taste of following up the blow .
MOORE-181X-2,5.125

<font> 11th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,5.126

Mr. Hamilton the printer , who was once proprietor of the ' Critical
Review ' , called upon me with a letter of introduction from Wilkie .
MOORE-181X-2,5.127

Came to propose to me to be editor of a new Monthly Review ;
MOORE-181X-2,5.128

explained his plan , MOORE-181X-2,5.129

and said , with a true trading spirit , that he <font> intended <$$font>
the politics of the work should be Whiggish , <font> because <$$font>
those appeared to be becoming the <font> fashionable <$$font> politics
of the day . MOORE-181X-2,5.130

I declined , of course ; MOORE-181X-2,5.131

told him that , as long as the little fancy and originality I possess
remained , I should not take to reviewing ; but when I become invalided
, I shall look upon the editorship of a review as a good sort of
Greenwich Hospital to retire to . MOORE-181X-2,5.132

Called at Carpenter's , MOORE-181X-2,5.133

and had the triumph of telling him the liberal conduct of the Longmans
to me about the profits of the ' Fudges ' ; such a contrast to his own !
MOORE-181X-2,5.134

Dined at the George with Scully , MOORE-181X-2,5.135

and went alone to the Haymarket Theatre : MOORE-181X-2,5.136

' Honeymoon ' and the ' Green Man ' ; MOORE-181X-2,5.137

Major Dumpling in the latter by Tokeby excellent ; MOORE-181X-2,5.138

a pretty girl , Miss E. Blanchard , who moves her head like a mandarin
, when 't@ @is near stopping . MOORE-181X-2,5.139

Why are there not more pretty girls on the stage ? MOORE-181X-2,5.140

Beauty is at least the next thing to first-rate acting ;
MOORE-181X-2,5.141

and I agree with that French actress who , when told that the ' premier
principe ' of her art was attention to costume , answered , <font> ' le
premier principe d'une femme c'est de paroitre jolie ' . <$$font>
MOORE-181X-2,5.142

<font> 12th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,5.143

Went in the evening to the English Opera ; MOORE-181X-2,5.144

could not stand its dullness , MOORE-181X-2,5.145

and set off to the Coburg Theatre - pretty , gay-looking house , but
<P_6> duller still than the other . MOORE-181X-2,6.146

Went back to the Lyceum , MOORE-181X-2,6.147

and attained the <font> summum_bonum <$$font> of stupidity .
MOORE-181X-2,6.148

Afterwards met Scully and Woolriche at the York , MOORE-181X-2,6.149

and finished the night with oysters and brandy . MOORE-181X-2,6.150

<font> 13th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,6.151

Met Scully at breakfast at the George , MOORE-181X-2,6.152

and set off with him walking for Hornsey , in order to visit the grave
of my poor Barbara , and report to Bessy whether it was kept as neat and
sacred as she could wish . MOORE-181X-2,6.153

Felt it less this time than I did some months since , when I went to the
church-yard alone and had nothing to divert me from the melancholy train
of thinking it led to . MOORE-181X-2,6.154

That space which is left , upon , the stone for <font> other <$$font>
names is a frightful blank . MOORE-181X-2,6.155

I showed him the cottage , at the foot of Muswell Hill where we lost
this dear child , and to the gate of which she had so often run to meet
me . MOORE-181X-2,6.156

We dined at the Sun at Highgate , MOORE-181X-2,6.157

and walked home in the evening . MOORE-181X-2,6.158

<font> 14th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,6.159

Started in the coach for Devizes at six o'clock ; my neighbour McDonald
<paren> who had secured the places for us <$$paren> , his friend Capt.
Davis , and myself . ' inside , and Scully outside .
MOORE-181X-2,6.160

<font> 15th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,6.161

Lowering morning , MOORE-181X-2,6.162

- bad cottage weather ; MOORE-181X-2,6.163

walked out with Scully to show him the beautiful valley behind us ,
MOORE-181X-2,6.164

but the rain came on , MOORE-181X-2,6.165

and we returned . MOORE-181X-2,6.166

<font> 25th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,6.167

In the garden all day ; MOORE-181X-2,6.168

delicious weather . MOORE-181X-2,6.169

At my Sheridan task from ten till three ; MOORE-181X-2,6.170

so hard to narrate familiar events eloquently - MOORE-181X-2,6.171

I often wish Sheridan , Miss Linley , and Major Mathews at the devil .
MOORE-181X-2,6.172

This would have been a day for poetry - not tame , dull , business-like
prose ; MOORE-181X-2,6.173

and yet this have I lost all this most poetical summer .
MOORE-181X-2,6.174

Wrote a few lines of the epitaph for poor Joe Atkinson before breakfast
. MOORE-181X-2,6.175

In the evening walked with Bessy to drink tea at the Hughes's , where
they were preparing a harvest supper for their men : MOORE-181X-2,6.176

found , on my return home , a note from Mr. Money , inviting me to
dinner next day to meet William Linley . MOORE-181X-2,6.177

<font> 26th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,6.178

Finished my epitaph upon poor Joe . MOORE-181X-2,6.179

Wrote some of Sheridan . MOORE-181X-2,6.180

Went to dinner at Money's : MOORE-181X-2,6.181

none but he , Linley , and myself . MOORE-181X-2,6.182

Strange that Linley did not know Mathews was married at the time he was
paying court to his sister . MOORE-181X-2,6.183

Sheridan persuaded the Linleys to part with their shares in Drury Lane
for annuities which were never paid : MOORE-181X-2,6.184

he thus got the disposal of everything , the sale of private boxes , &c.
all into his own hands . MOORE-181X-2,6.185

Told some other stories of S.'s trickery in money matters ,
MOORE-181X-2,6.186

but seemed willing to acquit him of any low , premeditated design in
these various shifts and contrivances . MOORE-181X-2,6.187

Told me that one day at S.'s house , before poor Tom went abroad , the
servant in passing threw down the plate-warmer with a crash , which
startled Tom's nerves a good deal . MOORE-181X-2,6.188

Sheridan , after scolding most furiously the servant , who stood pale
and frightened , at last exclaimed , ' and how many plates have you
broke ? ' MOORE-181X-2,6.189

' Oh ! not one sir ' , answered the <P_7> fellow , delighted to
vindicate himself ; MOORE-181X-2,7.190

' and you , damned fool <paren> said S. <$$paren> , have you made all
that noise for nothing ? ' MOORE-181X-2,7.191

<font> 29th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,7.192

One day so like another , that there is little by which to distinguish
their features ; MOORE-181X-2,7.193

and these are the happiest ; true cottage days , tranquil and
industrious ; with no other alloy than the weak state of my sweet
Bessy's health , which I trust in Heaven , after she has had her little
one , will improve . MOORE-181X-2,7.194

Pursued my task all day in the garden , MOORE-181X-2,7.195

the evening most delicious ; MOORE-181X-2,7.196

seemed to be the last soft farewell of summer . MOORE-181X-2,7.197

<font> 30th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,7.198

Ditto for the most part . MOORE-181X-2,7.199

Another bright parting glance of summer in the evening ;
MOORE-181X-2,7.200

it surely must be the last . MOORE-181X-2,7.201

<font> October 1st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,7.202

Crowe called , MOORE-181X-2,7.203

and found me in the garden at work . MOORE-181X-2,7.204

I thought he was come to pay his long-promised visit ,
MOORE-181X-2,7.205

but he was on his way to dine at Devizes . MOORE-181X-2,7.206

Told me he remembered the first Mrs. Sheridan when Miss Linley :
MOORE-181X-2,7.207

there was a degree of sternness , he said , mixed with the beauty of her
features ; like her father , who was ill-tempered looking .
MOORE-181X-2,7.208

Tom resembled her very much . MOORE-181X-2,7.209

This I have heard from every one . MOORE-181X-2,7.210

Walked with Crowe on his way through the fields . MOORE-181X-2,7.211

<font> 2nd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,7.212

Set off , between two and three , to walk to Bowles's to dinner .
MOORE-181X-2,7.213

Bessy and the little ones saw me part of the way . MOORE-181X-2,7.214

Met on the Calne road a riding party , consisting of Lord Lansdowne ,
the Ordes <paren> Mrs. Orde , a very engaging little woman , sister to
Lady Oxford <$$paren> , and Mr. Wellesley . MOORE-181X-2,7.215

Lord L. said the Hollands were coming on Sunday : MOORE-181X-2,7.216

asked me to fix a day to dine ; MOORE-181X-2,7.217

fixed Wednesday . MOORE-181X-2,7.218

Slept at Bowles's . MOORE-181X-2,7.219

<font> 3rd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,7.220

Dreadfully rainy day . MOORE-181X-2,7.221

After much doubting and watching of the weather determined on staying ,
MOORE-181X-2,7.222

and wrote home to Bessy . MOORE-181X-2,7.223

Linley produced Greene's ' Andhems ' . MOORE-181X-2,7.224

I think I surprised him a little by singing them at sight with him , and
tolerably well too . MOORE-181X-2,7.225

We talked away all the morning as incessant as the rain .
MOORE-181X-2,7.226

Some good stories . MOORE-181X-2,7.227

Sheridan , the first time he met Tom , after the marriage of the latter
, seriously angry with him ; told him he had made his will , and had cut
him off with a shilling . MOORE-181X-2,7.228

Tom said he was , indeed , very sorry , MOORE-181X-2,7.229

and immediately added , ' You do@ @n't happen to have the shilling about
you now , sir , do you ? ' MOORE-181X-2,7.230

Old S. burst out laughing , MOORE-181X-2,7.231

and they became friends again . MOORE-181X-2,7.232

<P_8>

<font> 4th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,8.234

Came home , MOORE-181X-2,8.235

and found my dearest Bessy very tired after her walk from church .
MOORE-181X-2,8.236

She had been receiving the sacrament , MOORE-181X-2,8.237

and never did a purer heart prostrate itself before the altar .
MOORE-181X-2,8.238

In the note she wrote me to Bowles's the day before , she said , ' I am
sorry I am not to see you before I go to church . ' MOORE-181X-2,8.239

In the evening tried over a new volume of Latrobe's sacred music , which
Mrs. Bowles had lent me . MOORE-181X-2,8.240

<font> 5th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,8.241

Wrote to Mr. Grenville , to ask him for any letters or papers he may
have of Sheridan's . MOORE-181X-2,8.242

My little Anastasia repeated to me a pretty child's poem she had learnt
, beginning , ' Twinkle , twinkle , little star ' . MOORE-181X-2,8.243

I wrote one for her the other day , which she repeats : ' Little Mayfly
, the sun@ @'s in the sky ' , &c. &c. MOORE-181X-2,8.244

Played a game of cribbage with Bessy after dinner , MOORE-181X-2,8.245

and lost sixpence to her . MOORE-181X-2,8.246

Read some of S.'s speeches before I went to bed . MOORE-181X-2,8.247

<font> 7th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,8.248

Quarter before six , Joy called upon me , in his father's carriage , to
take me to Bowood to dinner . MOORE-181X-2,8.249

Brought Bessy a beautiful Guernsey lily , a superfine thing ; originally
, he says , of Japan . MOORE-181X-2,8.250

A ship from Japan had been wrecked on the coast of Guernsey ,
MOORE-181X-2,8.251

and , having quantities of lilies aboard , they were cast among the sand
, MOORE-181X-2,8.252

and the following year these splendid flowers appeared .
MOORE-181X-2,8.253

The company at Bowood , besides those there on Sunday , the Hollands ,
Allen , Marsh , Henry Fox , Wellesley ; MOORE-181X-2,8.254

and Charles Fox and Fazakerly arrived in the evening .
MOORE-181X-2,8.255

Sat near Lady Holland at dinner ; MOORE-181X-2,8.256

very gracious ; MOORE-181X-2,8.257

has really shown a sincere anxiety about my Bermuda misfortune .
MOORE-181X-2,8.258

Talked of poor Monk Lewis : MOORE-181X-2,8.259

his death was occasioned by taking emetics for sea-sickness , in spite
of the advice of those about him . MOORE-181X-2,8.260

He died lying on the deck . MOORE-181X-2,8.261

When he was told all hope was over , he sent his man down below for pen
, ink , and paper ; MOORE-181X-2,8.262

asked him to lend him his hat ; MOORE-181X-2,8.263

and upon that , as he lay , wrote a codicil to his will .
MOORE-181X-2,8.264

Few men , once so talked of , have ever produced so little sensation by
their death . MOORE-181X-2,8.265

He was ruining his Negroes in Jamaica , they say , by indulgence , for
which they suffered severely as soon as his back was turned ;
MOORE-181X-2,8.266

but he has enjoined it to his heirs , as one of the conditions of
holding his estate , that the Negroes were to have three additional
holidays in the year ; MOORE-181X-2,8.267

and has left a sort of programme of the way these holidays are to be
celebrated , - the hour when the overseer is to sound his shell to
summon them together , the toasts , &c: MOORE-181X-2,8.268

the first toast to be ' the Lady Frederica , Duchess of York ' :
MOORE-181X-2,8.269

so like poor Lewis . MOORE-181X-2,8.270

Had a good <P_9> deal of conversation with Lord Holland in the evening
about Sheridan . MOORE-181X-2,9.271

Told me that one remarkable characteristic of S. , and which accounted
for many of his inconsistencies , was the high , ideal system he had
formed of a sort of impracticable perfection in honour , virtue , &c ,
anything short of which he seemed to think not worth aiming at ;
MOORE-181X-2,9.272

and thus consoled himself for the extreme laxity of his practice by the
impossibility of satisfying or coming up to the sublime theory he had
formed . MOORE-181X-2,9.273

Hence the most romantic professions of honour and independence were
coupled with conduct of the meanest and most swindling kind ;
MOORE-181X-2,9.274

hence , too , prudery and morality were always on his lips , while his
actions were one series of debauchery and libertinism .
MOORE-181X-2,9.275

This was all very amusing , MOORE-181X-2,9.276

and I was rather sorry I had arranged to return home at night .
MOORE-181X-2,9.277

Everybody pressed me to stay , MOORE-181X-2,9.278

and I was very near having reason to repent my going ;
MOORE-181X-2,9.279

for , when we were about a mile from the house , Joy's coachman drove
off the road and down a bank , MOORE-181X-2,9.280

and overset the carriage . MOORE-181X-2,9.281

The crash was tremendous , MOORE-181X-2,9.282

for three of the glasses were up ; MOORE-181X-2,9.283

but none of us were hurt , except Joy's man a little bruised in the hip
, and my arm slightly strained . MOORE-181X-2,9.284

Lord Lansdowne's keeper happened luckily to be passing ,
MOORE-181X-2,9.285

and helped us to raise the carriage . MOORE-181X-2,9.286

I walked home , MOORE-181X-2,9.287

and did not arrive till past one o'clock . MOORE-181X-2,9.288

In speaking of Sheridan's eloquence , Lord H. said that the
overstrained notions he had of perfection were very favourable to his
style of oratory in giving it a certain elevation of tone and dignity of
thought . MOORE-181X-2,9.289

Mr. Fox thought his Westminster Hall speech , trumpery ,
MOORE-181X-2,9.290

and used to say it spoiled the style of Burke , who was delighted with
it . MOORE-181X-2,9.291

Certainly in the report I have read of it , it seems most trashy bombast
. MOORE-181X-2,9.292

At Holland House , where he was often latterly , Lady H. told me he
used to take a bottle of wine and a book up to bed with him always ; the
<font> former <$$font> alone intended for use . MOORE-181X-2,9.293

In the morning he breakfasted in bed , MOORE-181X-2,9.294

and had a little rum or brandy with his tea or coffee ;
MOORE-181X-2,9.295

made his appearance between one and two , MOORE-181X-2,9.296

and pretending important business , used to set out for town ,
MOORE-181X-2,9.297

but regularly stopped at the Adam and Eve public-house for a dram .
MOORE-181X-2,9.298

There was indeed a long bill run up by him at the Adam and Eve , which
Lord H. had to pay . MOORE-181X-2,9.299

<font> 9th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,9.300

Received a long letter from Lord Byron , in which he sends me two
stanzas of the Beppo-ish poem he is about , called ' Don Juan ' .
MOORE-181X-2,9.301

<font> 15th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,9.302

In the garden all the morning . MOORE-181X-2,9.303

Visit from Miss Hughes and the Misses Crowe : MOORE-181X-2,9.304

showed them engravings of Lord Byron : MOORE-181X-2,9.305

they remarked that his not wearing whiskers gave him a singular look .
MOORE-181X-2,9.306

From thence the transition to <font> my <$$font> unwhiskered <font> face
<$$font> very obvious ; MOORE-181X-2,9.307

and , <font> per_saltum , <$$font> from me up to Buonaparte , who is
also without whiskers . MOORE-181X-2,9.308

<P_10>

<font> 18th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,10.310

As the morning was fine , set out to Bowood to see Rogers ;
MOORE-181X-2,10.311

caught him in the garden , on the way to Bowles's ; MOORE-181X-2,10.312

walked with him ; MOORE-181X-2,10.313

talked much about Sheridan . MOORE-181X-2,10.314

In a second search through the papers they have found the Acts of ' The
Foresters ' : some letters too of the Prince's , which , of course , I
must see , though I can@ @not make use of them . MOORE-181X-2,10.315

Sheridan once told Rogers of a scene that occurred in a French theatre
in 1772 , where two French officers stared a good deal at his wife , and
S. , not knowing a word of French , could do nothing but put his arms
a-kimbo and look bluff and defying at them , which they , not knowing a
word of English , could only reply to by the very same attitude and look
. MOORE-181X-2,10.316

He once mentioned to Rogers that he was aware he ought to have made a
love scene between Charles and Maria in the ' School for Scandal ' ; and
<font> would <$$font> have done it , but that the actors who played the
parts were not able to do such a scene justice . MOORE-181X-2,10.317

Left Bowles's at half-@ @past two . MOORE-181X-2,10.318

In passing through Bowood for home I was caught by Lady Lansdowne , Lord
Auckland , &c. &c. MOORE-181X-2,10.319

She begged me to stay for dinner ; MOORE-181X-2,10.320

said Lady Bath <paren> who was going next day <$$paren> wished very much
to know me . MOORE-181X-2,10.321

Consented : MOORE-181X-2,10.322

a man and horse sent for my things . MOORE-181X-2,10.323

Sat with Rogers in his room till dinner . MOORE-181X-2,10.324

Told me that Beckford <paren> <font> the <$$font> Beckford <$$paren> is
delighted with ' Lalla Rookh ' ; MOORE-181X-2,10.325

heard so from Beckford himself in the spring , when I met him at
Rogers's in town , and he was all raptures about it .
MOORE-181X-2,10.326

Beckford wishes me to go to Fonthill with R. ; anxious that I should
look over his ' Travels ' <paren> which were printed some years ago ,
but afterwards suppressed by him <$$paren> , and prepare them for the
press . MOORE-181X-2,10.327

Rogers supposes he would give me something magnificent for it -
a_thousand pounds , perhaps ; MOORE-181X-2,10.328

but if he were to give me a_hundred times that sum I would not have my
name coupled with his . MOORE-181X-2,10.329

<font> 19th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,10.330

Had promised Rogers , who was coming to me this morning , to meet him
half way . MOORE-181X-2,10.331

Mrs. Phipps , upon whom I called as I went , came out with me in order
to get a glimpse of <font> ' Memory <$$font> Rogers ' .
MOORE-181X-2,10.332

He and I walked to my cottage ; much delighted with the scenery around ;
MOORE-181X-2,10.333

said he preferred the valley and village before us to the laid-out
grounds of Bowood . MOORE-181X-2,10.334

Showed him some of my Sheridan papers . MOORE-181X-2,10.335

He mentioned ' Memoirs of Jackson ' of Exeter , written by himself ,
which he saw in MS. some years ago , and in which he remembered there
was a most glowing description of his pupil , Miss Linley , standing
singing by his side , and so beautiful that ' you might think you were
looking into the face of an angel ' . MOORE-181X-2,10.336

<font> 21st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,10.337

Walked to meet Rogers , who said he would call upon me .
MOORE-181X-2,10.338

Talked chiefly of Sheridan . MOORE-181X-2,10.339

Told me several anecdotes , some of which I have <P_11> written down in
my notebook as fit to use ; MOORE-181X-2,11.340

the rest practical jokes , not easily tellable : - His strewing the hall
or passage with plates and dishes , and knives and forks stuck between
them , and then tempting Tickell <paren> with whom he was always at some
frolic or other <$$paren> to pursue him into the thick of them :
MOORE-181X-2,11.341

Tickell fell among them MOORE-181X-2,11.342

and was almost cut to pieces , MOORE-181X-2,11.343

and next day , in vowing vengeance to Lord John Townshend against S.
for this trick , he added <paren> with the true spirit of an amateur in
practical jokes <$$paren> , ' but it was amazingly well done ' .
MOORE-181X-2,11.344

Another time , when the women <paren> Mrs. Crewe , Mrs. Tickell , &c.
<$$paren> had received the gentlemen after dinner in disguises , which
puzzled them to make out <font> which <$$font> was <font> which ,
<$$font> the gentlemen one day sent to the ladies to come downstairs to
<font> them <$$font> in the dining-room . MOORE-181X-2,11.345

The ladies , upon entering , saw them all dressed as Turks , holding
bumpers in their hands , MOORE-181X-2,11.346

and after looking amongst them and saying , ' This is Mr. Crewe ' ; '
No , this is he ' ; &c. &c , they heard a laugh at the door ,
MOORE-181X-2,11.347

and there they saw all the gentlemen in <font> propriis personis ;
<$$font> MOORE-181X-2,11.348

for 't@ @was the maids they had dressed up in Turkish habits .
MOORE-181X-2,11.349

S. was always at these tricks in country houses . MOORE-181X-2,11.350

He has been known to send a man and horse eight miles for a piece of
crape , MOORE-181X-2,11.351

and people were always kept in expectation of some forthcoming frolic .
MOORE-181X-2,11.352

<font> 22nd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,11.353

Walked at twelve o'clock towards Bowood to meet Rogers .
MOORE-181X-2,11.354

Met R. at the park-gate , MOORE-181X-2,11.355

and came on towards the cottage . MOORE-181X-2,11.356

Talked of the Scotch novels . MOORE-181X-2,11.357

When Wilkie the painter was taking his portraits of Scott's family , the
eldest daughter said to him , ' We do@ @n't know what to think of those
novels . MOORE-181X-2,11.358

We have access to all papa's papers . MOORE-181X-2,11.359

He has no particular study ; MOORE-181X-2,11.360

writes everything in the midst of us all ; MOORE-181X-2,11.361

and yet we never have seen a single scrap of the MS. of any of these
novels ; MOORE-181X-2,11.362

but still we have <font> one <$$font> reason for thinking them his ,
MOORE-181X-2,11.363

and that is , that they are the only works published in Scotland of
which copies are not presented to papa . ' MOORE-181X-2,11.364

The reason <font> against <$$font> is stronger than the reason <font>
for : <$$font> MOORE-181X-2,11.365

Scott gave his honour to the Prince Regent they were not his ;
MOORE-181X-2,11.366

and Rogers <font> heard <$$font> him do the same to Sheridan , who asked
him , with some degree of <font> brusquerie , <$$font> whether he was
the author of them . MOORE-181X-2,11.367

All this rather confirms me in my first idea that they are <font> not
<$$font> Scott's . MOORE-181X-2,11.368

<font> 23rd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,11.369

Crowe to breakfast . MOORE-181X-2,11.370

Walked over with Crowe to call at Bowood ; MOORE-181X-2,11.371

met Rogers , who returned with us there . MOORE-181X-2,11.372

Saw Lord Lansdowne - <font> kind <$$font> and <font> amiable as usual .
<$$font> MOORE-181X-2,11.373

I find he gains upon . one's heart in the true way , <font> piano e
sano . <$$font> MOORE-181X-2,11.374

Talked of Sir W. Jones , who died at forty-seven ; MOORE-181X-2,11.375

and so did Addison . MOORE-181X-2,11.376

Addison , according to the tradition of Holland House , used , when
composing , to walk up and down the long gallery there , with a bottle
of wine at each end of it , which he finished during the operation .
MOORE-181X-2,11.377

There is a little <P_12> white house , too , near the turnpike , to
which he used to retire when the Countess was particularly troublesome .
MOORE-181X-2,12.378

Returned home to dinner at four ; MOORE-181X-2,12.379

went to bed early , MOORE-181X-2,12.380

and was called up by Bessy at half-@ @past eleven o'clock :
MOORE-181X-2,12.381

sent for the midwife , who arrived between one and two ,
MOORE-181X-2,12.382

and at a quarter before four my darling Bessy was safely delivered of a
son <paren> and heir <font> in partibus <$$paren> , <$$font> to my
unspeakable delight , MOORE-181X-2,12.383

for never had I felt half such anxiety about her . MOORE-181X-2,12.384

I walked about the parlour by myself , like one distracted ; sometimes
stopping to pray , sometimes opening the door to listen ;
MOORE-181X-2,12.385

and never was gratitude more fervent than that with which I knelt down
to thank God for the dear girl's safety , when all was over - <paren>
the maid , by the by , very near catching me on my knees <$$paren> .
MOORE-181X-2,12.386

Went to bed at six o'clock . MOORE-181X-2,12.387

<font> 24th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,12.388

Rose at half-@ @past nine . MOORE-181X-2,12.389

Bessy and the little hero surprisingly well . MOORE-181X-2,12.390

<font> 27th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,12.391

Dined at Bowood . MOORE-181X-2,12.392

Had some conversation with Lord Lansdowne before dinner .
MOORE-181X-2,12.393

Talked of the impeachment of Hastings ; MOORE-181X-2,12.394

asked him his impression on the subject . MOORE-181X-2,12.395

He said he looked upon Hastings as an irregular man , using violent
means for purposes , which perhaps , nothing but irregular and violent
means would answer , as his command and situation in India were of such
a particularly difficult and embarrassing nature . MOORE-181X-2,12.396

Talked of the great question about the abatement of an impeachment by
dissolution of Parliament , upon which the lawyers and statesmen divided
, MOORE-181X-2,12.397

and the latter had the best of it in every respect : MOORE-181X-2,12.398

Erskine too much of a lawyer not to join his craft on this occasion .
MOORE-181X-2,12.399

When Burke was told of Erskine's opinion , ' What ! ' said he , ' a
nisi-prius lawyer give an opinion on an impeachment !
MOORE-181X-2,12.400

as well might a rabbit , that breeds fifty times in the year , pretend
to understand the gestation of an elephant ' . MOORE-181X-2,12.401

How admirable this is ! MOORE-181X-2,12.402

<font> 29th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,12.403

Have got Sheridan fairly married at last , MOORE-181X-2,12.404

and now enter into a new region of his life , for which my <font>
viatica <$$font> are not half so abundant as in the early part of the
journey . MOORE-181X-2,12.405

<font> 30th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,12.406

Worked a little at ' Sheridan ' ; MOORE-181X-2,12.407

badly off for materials ; MOORE-181X-2,12.408

almost reduced to Watkins . MOORE-181X-2,12.409

Received the Edinburgh Magazine <paren> Blackwood's <$$paren> for
November . MOORE-181X-2,12.410

A malicious and canting article in it against myself , in which the
fellow has both misrepresented and misquoted my song of ' The Legacy ' ,
which he says I have put into the mouth of a ' dying poet ' .
MOORE-181X-2,12.411

What a blockhead ! MOORE-181X-2,12.412

I find I am no gainer by the change of Ministry in this magazine :
MOORE-181X-2,12.413

used to be praised in it before Murray came into power :
MOORE-181X-2,12.414

how@ @'s this ? MOORE-181X-2,12.415

Dined with - , MOORE-181X-2,12.416

very dull ; MOORE-181X-2,12.417

but he gave us claret ; MOORE-181X-2,12.418

<font> et c'est toujours quelque chose ; <$$font> MOORE-181X-2,12.419

dulness and port together are the devil . MOORE-181X-2,12.420

<P_13>

<font> November 4th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,13.422

Received two most civil and anxious letters from that great ' Bibliopola
Tryphon ' , Murray , expressing his regret at the article against me in
' Blackwood ' , and his resolution to give up all concern in it if it
contained any more such personalities . MOORE-181X-2,13.423

Read , with a shock I have hardly ever felt before , the account of that
great and amiable man Romilly@ @'s death , in the papers .
MOORE-181X-2,13.424

He has left a void behind in public life that no one can fill up .
MOORE-181X-2,13.425

But what a splendid martyrdom to conjugal love ! MOORE-181X-2,13.426

She was too , if I mistake not , a simple , gay , <font> unlearned
<$$font> woman ; no <font> Blue ; <$$font> MOORE-181X-2,13.427

no , if she <font> had <$$font> been , such a man as Romilly could not
have loved her so much . MOORE-181X-2,13.428

<font> 6th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,13.429

While I was at dinner Lord Lansdowne called ; MOORE-181X-2,13.430

was denied to him ; MOORE-181X-2,13.431

but he asked to write a note , MOORE-181X-2,13.432

and the maid was showing him upstairs , MOORE-181X-2,13.433

so in my alarm lest he should surprise Bess , I made my appearance ,
MOORE-181X-2,13.434

and brought him into the parlour , where the little things and I were in
the very thick of boiled beef and carrots . MOORE-181X-2,13.435

He sat for some time ; MOORE-181X-2,13.436

talked of poor Romilly ; MOORE-181X-2,13.437

said he had hardly slept since he heard of the circumstances ;
MOORE-181X-2,13.438

wondered they had not applied leeches . MOORE-181X-2,13.439

I asked whether R.'s affection for his wife was so very strong as to
account for this effect ; MOORE-181X-2,13.440

he said it was ; but Romilly was a stern , reserved sort of man , and
she was the only person in the world to whom he wholly unbent and
unbosomed himself ; MOORE-181X-2,13.441

when he lost her , therefore , the very vent of his heart was stopped up
. MOORE-181X-2,13.442

<font> 14th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,13.443

Received American editions of different works of mine ;
MOORE-181X-2,13.444

' Lalla Rookh ' is the third . MOORE-181X-2,13.445

Another poem from Miss L- W- , the young poetess of fourteen , who
before addressed something to me ; a wild-brained little thing .
MOORE-181X-2,13.446

<font> 15th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,13.447

<paren> Sunday <$$paren> . MOORE-181X-2,13.448

This day my own excellent Bessy has completed her twenty-fifth year :
MOORE-181X-2,13.449

she is much better this {TEXT:bette_rthis} morning .
MOORE-181X-2,13.450

Heaven send her many happy returns of this anniversary !
MOORE-181X-2,13.451

<font> 18th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,13.452

Walked my dear Bessy for the first time into the garden ;
MOORE-181X-2,13.453

the day delightful . MOORE-181X-2,13.454

She went round to all her flower beds to examine their state ,
MOORE-181X-2,13.455

for she has every little leaf in the garden by heart .
MOORE-181X-2,13.456

Took a ramble afterwards by myself through the Valley of Chitoway , and
the fields . MOORE-181X-2,13.457

<font> 21st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,13.458

Walked to Bowood , to call on Lord Lansdowne . MOORE-181X-2,13.459

Always kind and agreeable . MOORE-181X-2,13.460

Told him I was going to town . MOORE-181X-2,13.461

He said he could have taken me in the middle of the week ;
MOORE-181X-2,13.462

but , unluckily , I have engaged myself to go with Macdonald , who has
taken our places in the coach . MOORE-181X-2,13.463

<P_14>

<font> 23rd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,14.465

Left home at eleven ; MOORE-181X-2,14.466

in coach about twelve . MOORE-181X-2,14.467

A jolly old farmer joined us part of the way ; MOORE-181X-2,14.468

talked of the late elections ; MOORE-181X-2,14.469

said he had given a plumper to , Methuen because he had ' flung the bill
<paren> for the additional income of the Princes <$$paren> out of the
house ' ; at the same time showing by his gesture that he understood
that Methuen had actually thrown the bill out of doors .
MOORE-181X-2,14.470

Upon finding Macdonald was in the navy , told him he had also when young
thought of going aboard a merchant ship ; but his father said , ' Do@
@n't go with <font> they , <$$font> boy ; MOORE-181X-2,14.471

go with a man-of-war ; MOORE-181X-2,14.472

thou bee'st scollard enough for that . ' MOORE-181X-2,14.473

Fare to Reading 1@ @+L {TEXT:+L1} 12 <font> s. <$$font> ;
MOORE-181X-2,14.474

slept there , MOORE-181X-2,14.475

share of the bill , 1@ @+L {TEXT:+L1} 3 <font> s. <$$font> ;
MOORE-181X-2,14.476

fare to town , 14 <font> s <$$font> MOORE-181X-2,14.477

Macdonald told me some interesting naval stories ; particularly of
Corbet's towing the French frigate off , after she had cut her cable to
run on shore . MOORE-181X-2,14.478

Dined by myself at the George , opposite the Hay-market ;
MOORE-181X-2,14.479

and had oysters at night at the York , in St. James's Street .
MOORE-181X-2,14.480

<font> 25th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,14.481

Received a letter from Lord Holland asking me to Holland House , and
bidding me ' bring my nightcap ' . MOORE-181X-2,14.482

<font> 27th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,14.483

Slept at Holland House . MOORE-181X-2,14.484

Walked before breakfast with Tierney , Rogers , &c , in the garden ,
MOORE-181X-2,14.485

and read Luttrell's very pretty verses , written under Lord Holland's ,
in the seat called ' Rogers' seat ' . MOORE-181X-2,14.486

The breakfast very agreeable : MOORE-181X-2,14.487

Lord Holland full of sunshine as usual . MOORE-181X-2,14.488

' He always comes down to breakfast <paren> says Rogers very truly
<$$paren> like a man upon whom some sudden good fortune had just fallen
. ' MOORE-181X-2,14.489

<font> 26th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,14.490

Another very agreeable breakfast , though a very late one - not till
nearly twelve o'clock . MOORE-181X-2,14.491

Rogers wished me to go and dine this day with his brother and sister at
Highbury . MOORE-181X-2,14.492

I assented , if he would take upon himself to stand the brunt of Lady
Holland's displeasure on the occasion . MOORE-181X-2,14.493

In for a very amusing scene between them on the subject , she insisting
upon keeping me , and he most miraculously courageous and persevering in
taking me away . MOORE-181X-2,14.494

' Why ' , says she to me , ' do you allow him to dispose of you thus ,
like a little bit of literary property ? ' MOORE-181X-2,14.495

<font> 28th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,14.496

Called upon Lord Lansdowne , who is returning to Wiltshire the day after
tomorrow , and offers to take me . MOORE-181X-2,14.497

Can@ @not go . MOORE-181X-2,14.498

Dined to-day with Scrope Davies to meet Jackson the boxer at my own
request , as I want to pick up as much of the flash , <font> from
authority , <$$font> as possible . MOORE-181X-2,14.499

Some talk with Davies before dinner , about Lord Byron and me having
been so near blowing each other's brains out : MOORE-181X-2,14.500

told him that Lord B. had said since he never <P_15> meant to fire at
me . MOORE-181X-2,15.501

Davies was with him at the time this hostile correspondence took place ,
MOORE-181X-2,15.502

and offered to bet upon friendship against fighting as the most likely
result . MOORE-181X-2,15.503

The event found him right . MOORE-181X-2,15.504

Lord B.'s conduct on this occasion was full of manliness and candour .
MOORE-181X-2,15.505

Got very little out of Jackson ; MOORE-181X-2,15.506

he makes , Davies tells me , more than a_thousand a-year by teaching
sparring . MOORE-181X-2,15.507

<font> December 1st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,15.508

Called upon Gifford , editor of the ' Quarterly ' ; MOORE-181X-2,15.509

have known him long , MOORE-181X-2,15.510

but forbore from calling upon him ever since I meditated ' Lalla Rookh '
, lest it might look like trying to propitiate his criticism ;
MOORE-181X-2,15.511

the mildest man in the world till he takes a pen in his hand ,
MOORE-181X-2,15.512

but then all gall and spitefulness . MOORE-181X-2,15.513

Spoke of Holland House . MOORE-181X-2,15.514

He knew it , he said , by report ; MOORE-181X-2,15.515

wished there was a Holland House on the other side of the question ,
MOORE-181X-2,15.516

but there was not ; MOORE-181X-2,15.517

said it was in politics and literature what Sir J. Banks's house was in
science ; and neither could be replaced . MOORE-181X-2,15.518

Party at dinner , Lord Alvanley , Berkeley Craven , Lady Affleck ,
Sharpe and Rogers . MOORE-181X-2,15.519

Sat next Lord Alvanley , MOORE-181X-2,15.520

and had much conversation with him about Lords Forbes and Rancliffe ,
and others of my early cronies . MOORE-181X-2,15.521

The conversation to-day of rather a commoner turn than usual , on
account of these slang bucks , but still very agreeable .
MOORE-181X-2,15.522

Alvanley just hits that difficult line between the gentleman and the
jolly fellow , MOORE-181X-2,15.523

and mixes their shades together very pleasantly ; MOORE-181X-2,15.524

but Craven goes further . MOORE-181X-2,15.525

Though clever in his way , he is too decidedly <font> flash <$$font> in
his tones , words , manner , everything . MOORE-181X-2,15.526

When one meets him in such company , ' one wonders how the devil he got
there . ' MOORE-181X-2,15.527

<font> 2nd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,15.528

Conversation at breakfast about late hours . MOORE-181X-2,15.529

The porter of the late Lord Jersey came to some one MOORE-181X-2,15.530

and complained he could not stay with the Jerseys , because my lady was
the very latest woman in London , MOORE-181X-2,15.531

' Well , but what then ? MOORE-181X-2,15.532

All women of fashion are late , MOORE-181X-2,15.533

you can sleep afterwards . ' MOORE-181X-2,15.534

' Ah no , sir , that@ @'s not all , MOORE-181X-2,15.535

for my lord is the earliest gentleman in London ; MOORE-181X-2,15.536

and , between the two , I get no sleep at all . ' MOORE-181X-2,15.537

<font> 3rd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,15.538

Found a note from Scrope Davies , on my return home very late , to say
that we must be in our chaise for the fight <paren> which I had engaged
to go - to see with him <$$paren> at eight in the morning .
MOORE-181X-2,15.539

<font> 4th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,15.540

Breakfasted with Davies at seven . MOORE-181X-2,15.541

Walked to Jackson's house in Grosvenor Street ; a very neat
establishment for a boxer . MOORE-181X-2,15.542

Were off in our chaise at eight . MOORE-181X-2,15.543

The immense crowds of carriages , pedestrians , &c. all along the road
- the respect paid to Jackson everywhere , highly comical .
MOORE-181X-2,15.544

He sung some flash songs on the way , MOORE-181X-2,15.545

and I contrived to muster up one or two myself , much to Scrope Davies's
surprise and diversion . MOORE-181X-2,15.546

The scene of action beyond Crawley , thirty-two miles from town ;
MOORE-181X-2,15.547

the combatants Randall and Turner , the former an Irishman , which was
lucky , as it gave me some sort <P_16> of interest in the contest .
MOORE-181X-2,16.548

The thing altogether not so horrid as I expected . MOORE-181X-2,16.549

Turner's face was a good deal dehumanised , MOORE-181X-2,16.550

but Randall <paren> the conqueror <$$paren> had hardly a scratch .
MOORE-181X-2,16.551

The battle lasted two hours and twenty-two minutes : MOORE-181X-2,16.552

a beautiful sunshine broke out at this part of the day ;
MOORE-181X-2,16.553

and had there been a proportionate mixture of women in the immense ring
formed around , it would have been a very brilliant spectacle .
MOORE-181X-2,16.554

The pigeons let off at different periods of the fight , with dispatches
, very picturesque ; MOORE-181X-2,16.555

at the close , as many as half_a_dozen took wing . MOORE-181X-2,16.556

It seems they are always sure messengers , unless they happen to meet
with a hawk . MOORE-181X-2,16.557

Was to have dined with Douglas Kinnaird , to meet the Oxfords , and hear
the new prima_donne , Madame Bellochi , sing in the evening ;
MOORE-181X-2,16.558

but did not get home till half-@ @past eight at night .
MOORE-181X-2,16.559

<font> 5th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,16.560

Breakfast with Power , in order to walk to Hornsey and pay my usual
visit for Bessy at the grave of our dear Barbara . MOORE-181X-2,16.561

Woolriche , whom I had seen but the day before , came and walked with us
. MOORE-181X-2,16.562

The Sunday papers all placarded with ' true ' , and ' genuine ' , and '
best ' accounts of the battle . MOORE-181X-2,16.563

On passing through Tottenham-court Road , we saw an immense congregation
of blackguards at the entrance of a passage called Cock Court .
MOORE-181X-2,16.564

Asked what was the matter ? MOORE-181X-2,16.565

' Randall lives here , sir . ' MOORE-181X-2,16.566

It was the conqueror's levee . MOORE-181X-2,16.567

I ought to pay these visits to my dear child alone , MOORE-181X-2,16.568

for the melancholy which came over me when I <font> did <$$font> go
alone was , I think , useful to me ; MOORE-181X-2,16.569

such melancholy purifies the heart . MOORE-181X-2,16.570

Found the grave neat and undisturbed . MOORE-181X-2,16.571

<font> 6th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,16.572

Breakfasted at Rogers's . MOORE-181X-2,16.573

Told me of Crabbe's negotiation with Murray for his new volume of '
Tales ' , consisting of near 12,000 lines . MOORE-181X-2,16.574

Murray offered him for this and the copyright of the past volumes 3000
+L {TEXT:+L_3000} . MOORE-181X-2,16.575

Crabbe was at breakfast with us , MOORE-181X-2,16.576

and seemed to think this was a good bargain ; MOORE-181X-2,16.577

and so , I confess , did I ; MOORE-181X-2,16.578

but Rogers thought this sum should be given for the new volume alone ,
and that the Longmans ought to be tried . MOORE-181X-2,16.579

<font> 9th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,16.580

Came down in the coach <paren> the York House <$$paren> with two or
three women . MOORE-181X-2,16.581

Arrived at Calne a little after seven , and at home before nine .
MOORE-181X-2,16.582

Found all well , my sweet Bessy looking better than I have seen her for
a long time . MOORE-181X-2,16.583

<font> 22nd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,16.584

Bessy thinks of giving a little dance next week , MOORE-181X-2,16.585

and as the idea seems to amuse her , she shall do it :
MOORE-181X-2,16.586

the dear girl so seldom leaves her home , that she deserves every
enlivenment of which that sphere is capable . MOORE-181X-2,16.587

<font> 23rd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,16.588

Received from one of my female correspondents <paren> the lady who loved
the Irish giant <$$paren> a Christmas present , consisting of a goose ,
a pot of pickles , another of clouted_cream , and some apples .
MOORE-181X-2,16.589

This , indeed , is a tribute of admiration more solid than I generally
receive from these fair {COM:illustrations_omitted} <P_17> admirers of
my poetry . MOORE-181X-2,17.590

The young Bristol lady , who inclosed me three pounds after reading '
Lalla Rookh ' , had also very laudable ideas on the subject ;
MOORE-181X-2,17.591

and if every reader of ' Lalla Rookh ' had done the same , I need never
have written again . MOORE-181X-2,17.592

Read the ' Heart of Mid-Lothian ' to Bessy in the evening .
MOORE-181X-2,17.593

Have got a wet-nurse for little Tommy , a woman in the neighbourhood ,
to come three times a day , which is better than nothing .
MOORE-181X-2,17.594

Poor little thing ! MOORE-181X-2,17.595

with a mother that can give him no milk , and a father that can give him
no money , what business has he in this world ? MOORE-181X-2,17.596

<font> 30th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,17.597

Routed out of my study by the preparations for the dance tomorrow night
, MOORE-181X-2,17.598

and not able to get into my <font> other <$$font> study , the garden ,
on account of the damp , foggy weather . MOORE-181X-2,17.599

Copied out some music . MOORE-181X-2,17.600

At a quarter to six , Macdonald called upon me to go to dinner at Bowood
; MOORE-181X-2,17.601

obliged to feel our way , not very safely , through the fog .
MOORE-181X-2,17.602

<font> 31st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,17.603

All bustle and preparation for our dance in the evening ;
MOORE-181X-2,17.604

the supper laid in my study . MOORE-181X-2,17.605

Poor Bessy on her legs all day , to get everything as nice as possible ;
MOORE-181X-2,17.606

my chief occupation , besides drawing the wine , to keep little Tom
quiet . MOORE-181X-2,17.607

All went off most gaily . MOORE-181X-2,17.608

We did our best to make them happy ; MOORE-181X-2,17.609

and , to do our guests justice , they seemed all to come with a
determination to be pleased . MOORE-181X-2,17.610

Supped at half-@ @past twelve . MOORE-181X-2,17.611

I had lobsters , oysters , and champagne , express from London for the
occasion , MOORE-181X-2,17.612

and the supper looked not only gay but elegant . MOORE-181X-2,17.613

Twenty-two persons supped in my little study . MOORE-181X-2,17.614

I sung for them after supper , MOORE-181X-2,17.615

and then to dancing again till near four in the morning .
MOORE-181X-2,17.616

Poor Bessy's eyes , which have been sore for some days , dreadfully
inflamed and red through the whole evening . MOORE-181X-2,17.617

A gay beginning to the new year . MOORE-181X-2,17.618

<P_18>

{ED:1819}

<font> January 5th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,18.621

To the Devizes ball in the evening : MOORE-181X-2,18.622

Lady Frances W. there ; MOORE-181X-2,18.623

introduced to her , MOORE-181X-2,18.624

and had much conversation , chiefly about our friend Lord B.
MOORE-181X-2,18.625

Several of those beautiful things , published <paren> if I remember
right <$$paren> with ' The Bride ' , were addressed to her .
MOORE-181X-2,18.626

She must have been very pretty when she had more of the freshness of
youth , though she is still but five or six_and_twenty ;
MOORE-181X-2,18.627

but she looks faded already . MOORE-181X-2,18.628

She told me she had an Album which had been begun and nearly half
written through by Lord B. MOORE-181X-2,18.629

<paren> the first thing in it , " When from the brow , where sorrow sits
' <$$paren> ; MOORE-181X-2,18.630

and she had another , which was as yet blank , and which she had
resolved to keep blank 'till an introduction to Mr. M. should enable
her to ask <font> him <$$font> to begin it for her ' .
MOORE-181X-2,18.631

I fought this off as well as I could ; MOORE-181X-2,18.632

said I must know her better before I could have the <font> tête_montée
<$$font> sufficiently for such an undertaking , &c. MOORE-181X-2,18.633

<font> 27th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,18.634

Dined at half-@ @past two , MOORE-181X-2,18.635

and at half-@ @past three set off in a chaise for Calne :
MOORE-181X-2,18.636

four coaches and the mail to pass through ; MOORE-181X-2,18.637

had not doubt of a place , MOORE-181X-2,18.638

but every thing seems to conspire against the poor poet's purse ;
MOORE-181X-2,18.639

all were full ; MOORE-181X-2,18.640

what was to be done ? MOORE-181X-2,18.641

I must be in town next day , MOORE-181X-2,18.642

and I had but five pounds in my pocket , which would be far short of the
expense of posting ; MOORE-181X-2,18.643

so I borrowed five pounds more of the man at the White Hart ,
MOORE-181X-2,18.644

and started in my solitary chaise at about eight . MOORE-181X-2,18.645

Arrived in town about half-@ @past nine ; MOORE-181X-2,18.646

drove to the New Hummuns , MOORE-181X-2,18.647

and had a warm bath . MOORE-181X-2,18.648

No room for me at my old lodgings in Duke Street ; MOORE-181X-2,18.649

was forced to put up at the George , in Coventry Street .
MOORE-181X-2,18.650

Dined in Paternoster Row . MOORE-181X-2,18.651

Had met Phillips <paren> the member <$$paren> and Sydney Smith together
in Leicester Square . MOORE-181X-2,18.652

Rees and I went after dinner to the Sanspareil , and from thence to the
pantomime at Covent Garden <paren> Harlequin Munchausen <$$paren> , with
which I was much amused . MOORE-181X-2,18.653

<font> 28th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,18.654

Went to breakfast with Rogers , who is in the very agonies of
parturition : MOORE-181X-2,18.655

showed me the work ready printed and in boards , MOORE-181X-2,18.656

but he is still making alterations : MOORE-181X-2,18.657

told me that Lord Byron's ' Don Juan ' is pronounced by Hobhouse and
others as unfit for publication . MOORE-181X-2,18.658

Called upon Shec the painter , who told me that Lord Holland was so much
pleased with his picture of <P_19> me <paren> a copy from that which
Richard Power bought , and not at all so good <$$paren> , that he said
he must have it : MOORE-181X-2,19.659

' Must have my friend Moore@ @'s picture . ' MOORE-181X-2,19.660

' This shows <paren> said Shee <$$paren> how you stand in that house ' ,
MOORE-181X-2,19.661

and it is certainly flattering . MOORE-181X-2,19.662

Went to Murray . MOORE-181X-2,19.663

Rogers had told me that Murray said he would himself , whether Wilkie
came into it or not , run all risks in publishing my ' Life of Sheridan
' , and give me a_thousand pounds for it . MOORE-181X-2,19.664

I now found this was the case . MOORE-181X-2,19.665

Talked of ' Don Juan ' : MOORE-181X-2,19.666

but too true that it is not fit for publication : MOORE-181X-2,19.667

he seems , by living so long out of London , to have forgotten that .
standard of decorum in society to which every one must refer his <font>
words <$$font> at least , who hopes to be either listened to or read by
the world . MOORE-181X-2,19.668

It is all about himself and Lady B. , and raking up the whole
transaction in a way the world would never bear . MOORE-181X-2,19.669

<font> 29th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,19.670

Breakfasted with the Donegals ; MOORE-181X-2,19.671

called afterwards upon Rogers , and from thence to Lord Holland's in St.
James's Square ; MOORE-181X-2,19.672

found Lord and Lady H. and Allen at home , just down to breakfast ,
though near two o'clock . MOORE-181X-2,19.673

... Went to Toller , MOORE-181X-2,19.674

and signed the affidavits ; MOORE-181X-2,19.675

called at Longmans , MOORE-181X-2,19.676

and then home to dress for the Covent Garden dinner .
MOORE-181X-2,19.677

The Duke of Sussex came out of the circle upon seeing me ,
MOORE-181X-2,19.678

and most cordially giving me both his hands , walked me into a corner to
converse with me . MOORE-181X-2,19.679

This <font> ought <$$font> to be flattering from royal persons ,
MOORE-181X-2,19.680

but , somehow , our precious Princes contrive that it should <font> not
<$$font> be so . MOORE-181X-2,19.681

The D. of S. is , however , as far as society goes , a perfectly
good_natured and unaffected person . MOORE-181X-2,19.682

The dinner long and tiresome . MOORE-181X-2,19.683

Lord Holland had asked me to go home with him after it ,
MOORE-181X-2,19.684

but having been crammed up in a corner with dirty dishes , I did not
feel clean enough for decent society afterwards . MOORE-181X-2,19.685

<font> 30th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,19.686

Met Hobhouse , MOORE-181X-2,19.687

and walked some time with him ; MOORE-181X-2,19.688

has no doubt of succeeding , MOORE-181X-2,19.689

but fears that Hunt will worry him prodigiously : MOORE-181X-2,19.690

says he can@ @not sleep at nights from anxiety , MOORE-181X-2,19.691

and he certainly seems wasting away under his patriotic operations .
MOORE-181X-2,19.692

Asked him , had I any chance of a glimpse at Don Juan ?
MOORE-181X-2,19.693

and then found that Byron had desired it might be referred to my
decision , the three persons whom he had bid Hobhouse consult as to the
propriety of publishing it being Hookham Frere , Stewart Rose , and
myself . MOORE-181X-2,19.694

Frere , as the only one of the three in town , had read it and
pronounced decidedly against the publication . MOORE-181X-2,19.695

Went to Lady Donegal's : MOORE-181X-2,19.696

on the way met my excellent old friend Admiral Douglas .
MOORE-181X-2,19.697

Frere came in while I was at Lady D.'s : MOORE-181X-2,19.698

was proceeding to talk to him about our joint umpireship on Byron's poem
, when he stopped me by a look , MOORE-181X-2,19.699

and we retired into the next room to speak over the subject .
MOORE-181X-2,19.700

He said he did not wish the opinion he had <P_20> pronounced to be known
to any one except B. himself , lest B. should suppose he was taking
merit to himself among the <font> righteous <$$font> for having been the
means of preventing the publication of the poem . MOORE-181X-2,20.701

Spoke of the disgust it would excite , if published ; the attacks in it
upon Lady B . ; MOORE-181X-2,20.702

and said it is strange , too , he should think there was any connection
between patriotism and profligacy . MOORE-181X-2,20.703

If we had a very Puritan court indeed , one can understand then
profligacy being adopted as a badge of opposition to it ,
MOORE-181X-2,20.704

but the reverse being the case , there is not even that excuse for
connecting dissoluteness with patriotism , which , on the contrary ,
ought always to be attended by the sternest virtues .
MOORE-181X-2,20.705

<font> 31st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,20.706

Went to breakfast with Hobhouse , in order to read Lord Byron's poem : a
strange production , full of talent and singularity , as everything he
writes must be : MOORE-181X-2,20.707

some highly beautiful passages , and some highly humorous ones ;
MOORE-181X-2,20.708

but , as a whole , not publishable . MOORE-181X-2,20.709

Don Juan's mother is Lady Byron , and not only her learning , but
various other points about her , ridiculed . MOORE-181X-2,20.710

He talks of her favourite dress being dimity <paren> which is the case
<$$paren> , dimity rhyming very comically with sublimity ;
MOORE-181X-2,20.711

and the conclusion of one stanza is ' I hate a dumpy woman ' , meaning
Lady B. again . MOORE-181X-2,20.712

This would disgust the public beyond endurance . MOORE-181X-2,20.713

There is also a systematised profligacy running through it , which would
not be borne . MOORE-181X-2,20.714

Hobhouse has undertaken the delicate task of letting him know our joint
opinions . MOORE-181X-2,20.715

<font> February 1st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,20.716

In the coach at half-@ @past six : MOORE-181X-2,20.717

a young Irishman one of the passengers , whose family reside entirely at
Bath . MOORE-181X-2,20.718

He abused the lower orders of Irish , MOORE-181X-2,20.719

and said it was impossible for a gentleman to <font> live <$$font> among
them without being <font> kilt . <$$font> MOORE-181X-2,20.720

Take for granted , from what he said , that this father must be some
griping landlord or Orange magistrate . MOORE-181X-2,20.721

Arrived at home at eight in the evening , MOORE-181X-2,20.722

and found the dear wife and her little ones well , and all smiles to see
me . MOORE-181X-2,20.723

<font> 10th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,20.724

Received a note from Bowles , in which he said , ' Have you seen the "
Quarterly " ? MOORE-181X-2,20.725

they are very complimentary to me as an author . ' MOORE-181X-2,20.726

How lucky it is that self-love has always something comfortable to
retire upon ! MOORE-181X-2,20.727

<font> 20th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,20.728

A sadness over me ; sometimes like that of my young days , and therefore
pleasant , but sometimes mingled with self-reproach , and so far painful
. MOORE-181X-2,20.729

<font> 25th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,20.730

The Macdonalds and Hugheses dined with us . MOORE-181X-2,20.731

With a little assistance from Phipps <paren> who joined us when his wife
and he came in the evening <$$paren> finished five bottles of wine .
MOORE-181X-2,20.732

All stayed to supper , MOORE-181X-2,20.733

and seemed to enjoy themselves . MOORE-181X-2,20.734

I sang in the evening , MOORE-181X-2,20.735

and , in spite of the wine , was in good voice . MOORE-181X-2,20.736

Macdonald brought two or three of the famous Chinese <P_21> birds' nests
to show us . MOORE-181X-2,21.737

I eat of the soup one day at Sir S. Raffles's : MOORE-181X-2,21.738

the soup was like other soup , MOORE-181X-2,21.739

but the nest that floated in it was the devil . MOORE-181X-2,21.740

<font> March 4th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,21.741

Received a letter from Miss - , one of my unknown lady correspondents ,
who sent me the two specimens of her poetry , and said her own favourite
of the two was that which began ' Come Stella , <font> arouse <$$font>
thee ' . MOORE-181X-2,21.742

Wishes me to recommend her to the Longmans , MOORE-181X-2,21.743

and mentions the titles of about half-a-dozen works which they may
choose from . MOORE-181X-2,21.744

Received also a letter from Mrs. - , the mother of the
fourteen-year_old poetess , saying how melancholy her daughter was at my
neglect of her last communications , and sending me some pensive and
rather pretty verses the girl wrote on the occasion .
MOORE-181X-2,21.745

<font> 19th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,21.746

Bowles and I <paren> after securing our tickets for the Harmonic in the
evening <$$paren> dined at the White Hart . MOORE-181X-2,21.747

Went at night to the Harmonic ; MOORE-181X-2,21.748

very full rooms - at least 300 persons . MOORE-181X-2,21.749

Introduced to a whole shoal of baronets , Sir Robert This and Sir John
That . MOORE-181X-2,21.750

Never was so stared at in my life before . MOORE-181X-2,21.751

Three things of mine sung , ' The Minstrel Boy ' , ' Hark ! the Vesper
Hymn ' , and a glee from ' Anacreon ' . MOORE-181X-2,21.752

At supper escaped from a wretched table , where I had been preordained
to sit between two ugly old <font> Blue Boars , <$$font> who said they
wished much to <font> ' talk to <$$font> Mr. Moore ' .
MOORE-181X-2,21.753

After supper , to my no small horror , ' The Minstrel Boy ' was sung
again , for the purpose of introducing a speech about me from Captain
Crofton , proposing my health in a most panegyric style .
MOORE-181X-2,21.754

It was received with great acclamations ; MOORE-181X-2,21.755

but , from having no previous suspicion of such an honour , I had hardly
a decent word to say in returning thanks for it . MOORE-181X-2,21.756

I know I concluded thus : MOORE-181X-2,21.757

' But perhaps silence is the best sort of eloquence , particularly for
an Irishman : MOORE-181X-2,21.758

I shall , therefore ' , &c. &c. MOORE-181X-2,21.759

I meant to have said , ' It is , at least , a very Irish sort . '
MOORE-181X-2,21.760

During the ball , was stared at on all sides without mercy .
MOORE-181X-2,21.761

In such a place as Bath , <font> any <$$font> little <font> lion
<$$font> makes a stir . MOORE-181X-2,21.762

Got to bed between two and three . MOORE-181X-2,21.763

<font> April 9th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,21.764

Good Friday : MOORE-181X-2,21.765

went to church . MOORE-181X-2,21.766

A most inhuman sermon : MOORE-181X-2,21.767

the sufferings described with all the monotony and coolness of an
auctioneer . MOORE-181X-2,21.768

How different do I remember the Passion sermons in Dublin chapels , when
, at the moment that the feelings of the congregation were excited to
the utmost pitch by the most eloquent and impassioned description of
what the Saviour had suffered , the orator suddenly produced the
crucifix before them , and the whole assembly , with groans and tears ,
prostrated themselves on the earth . MOORE-181X-2,21.769

<font> 19th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,21.770

Went to Chippenham with Phipps and Locke , to a dinner which the former
gave to his troop of yeomanry , all common farmers ; MOORE-181X-2,21.771

the only gentlemen ourselves and Gosset . MOORE-181X-2,21.772

A strange day : MOORE-181X-2,21.773

such tippling , and such <P_22> speechifying . MOORE-181X-2,22.774

I proposed Lord Lansdowne's health , in a speech which but about three
persons out of the fifty understood a syllable of : MOORE-181X-2,22.775

but such men like to be talked to unintelligibly ; MOORE-181X-2,22.776

they take it as a tribute to their understandings . MOORE-181X-2,22.777

<font> 21st <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,22.778

Went to Bath ; Bessy , myself , the little fellow , and the maid , in a
hack-chaise , and the Phippses in their own carriage .
MOORE-181X-2,22.779

Dined at the York House , MOORE-181X-2,22.780

and went in the evening to the theatre . MOORE-181X-2,22.781

Young in ' Cassius ' : MOORE-181X-2,22.782

got a wretched little private box , where we were almost suffocated ,
MOORE-181X-2,22.783

but moved to Lady Burdett's for the farce . MOORE-181X-2,22.784

Miss Tree sang my song of ' Young Love lived once ' very prettily ,
MOORE-181X-2,22.785

and was encored with great enthusiasm . MOORE-181X-2,22.786

Supped very merrily at the York House , MOORE-181X-2,22.787

and slept there . MOORE-181X-2,22.788

<font> 22nd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,22.789

Walked about all day shopping : MOORE-181X-2,22.790

gave directions about the binding of my books at Upham's .
MOORE-181X-2,22.791

Met the Bishop of Meath , MOORE-181X-2,22.792

and walked with him up and down Milsom Street , talking of Sheridan .
MOORE-181X-2,22.793

Told me the story about the sermon : MOORE-181X-2,22.794

it was at a country-house of Sheridan's <paren> forget the name of the
place ; must inquire <$$paren> : the company there at the time , Tickell
, Burgoyne , Mrs. Crewe . MOORE-181X-2,22.795

The subject given to Sheridan at dinner on the Saturday by O'Beirne ,
viz. ' The abuse of riches ' . MOORE-181X-2,22.796

Sheridan absent at coffee and for the rest of the evening ;
MOORE-181X-2,22.797

and O'Beirne found the MS. by his bedside next norning neatly tied
together with ribbon . MOORE-181X-2,22.798

An admirable discourse , he said , though with several strange
references to Scripture ; such as , ' It is easier , as <font> Moses
<$$font> says , for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle ' , &c.
&c. MOORE-181X-2,22.799

The person against whom the force of this sermon was directed was <font>
Child . <$$font> MOORE-181X-2,22.800

Met Crabbe toddling about the streets : MOORE-181X-2,22.801

who would suspect that he is <font> the <$$font> Crabbe ?
MOORE-181X-2,22.802

Lunched at a pastrycok's , MOORE-181X-2,22.803

and left Bath at five o'clock , Phipps driving , and I on the box with
him ; the servants in the hack-chaise . MOORE-181X-2,22.804

<font> 24th <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,22.805

A wet , gloomy day : MOORE-181X-2,22.806

my spirits of the same hue . MOORE-181X-2,22.807

Often do I wish I had a <font> good cause to die in . <$$font>
MOORE-181X-2,22.808

<font> 28th <$$font> MOORE-181X-2,22.809

Bath {COM:editor_supplies_"Bath"} - MOORE-181X-2,22.810

Breakfasted wth the Fitzgeralds . MOORE-181X-2,22.811

Took me to call on Mrs. Piozzi ; a wonderful old lady ;
MOORE-181X-2,22.812

faces of other times seemed to crowd over her as she sat , - the
Johnsons , Reynoldses , &c. , &c. : MOORE-181X-2,22.813

though turned eighty , she has all the quickness and intelligence of a
gay young woman . MOORE-181X-2,22.814

<font> May 3rd <$$font> - MOORE-181X-2,22.815

Set off from Calne in the York House coach for town .
MOORE-181X-2,22.816

Smattered a little theology with a clergyman , whom I at first took for
a clothier , but who turned out to be a very deep-read ecclesiastic ; a
great advocate for Calvin . MOORE-181X-2,22.817

Another of my companions turned out to be Sheddon , whose brother
married a sister of Monk Lewis . MOORE-181X-2,22.818

Lewis died of the yellow fever , <P_23> he said ; very unwilling to die
; all the last day exclaiming every instant , ' The suspense ! the
suspense ! " which the physician who attended him was doubtful whether
he meant to allude to religious doubts , or the success of a medicine
which he had taken , and on whose operation his life depended .
MOORE-181X-2,23.819

Arrived in town at half-@ @past seven . MOORE-181X-2,23.820

