<BEGIN_nightingale-1848-2>

<P_156>

{ED:Letter_XXVIII_Addressed_to_Mrs._Nightingale._Embley}

<font> January 4 , 1848 <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.4

My dears , I am in such a hurry to tell you my own story my own way , as
we have it from the very best authority , for fear you should hear it
differently , from those vile papers , that I must jump at once in
medias res . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.5

The Pope has been very ill , so ill from Influenza that he was obliged
to get out of his bed on Friday to go to the Gesù , for the Thanksgiving
Service , and only went because the Jesuits would certainly have made it
a tool against him , if their service had been the only one he had
neglected . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.6

Secondly , it had always been said that there would be a row on New
Year's Day - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.7

the Austrians have only withdrawn from Ferrara , in order to prosecute
their intrigues with less suspicion in Rome , under colour of that
retreat . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.8

There is a Jesuit-Austriaco party which on one side , irritates and
excites the people , on the other , alarms the Pope .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.9

On Friday night , all the troops were ordered to be under arms , and
7,000 of the Civic Guard to be at their quarters .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.10

On Saturday the whole of the University wished to go to the Quirinal and
wish the Pope buon capo d'Anno - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.11

they went - their officers , among whom was our friend Orioli going with
them to keep order and make it look respectable .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.12

But when they , with a great collection of people , got to the Quirinal
, the palace gates were shut . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.13

With great difficulty the officers succeeded in getting them home again
, NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.14

and they determined to send a deputation of four to the Pope to make
their excuses and their explanations . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.15

Orioli was one , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.16

but when he went to the place of rendezvous to meet his colleagues , he
found only one other - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.17

they were frightened or cautious . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.18

However , he determined to go , and do his duty by the Scolaresca ,
whether he was received or not . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.19

The Pope did not receive him , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,156.20

but sent word that he was indisposed , which was true , and that Orioli
was to say his say to the Cameriere , which he did , and which was only
to the <P_157> effect that the Scolaresca was very sorry that it had
been so ill interpreted to the Pope as having meant insurrection , that
all it desired was to wish him a buon Capo d'Anno .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.21

Meanwhile the people , infuriated at finding the palace gates shut , and
at a report which the Jesuit-Austriaco party had circulated among them ,
that orders had been given to the Governor of Rome to fire upon them ,
<paren> which last order you will , I have no doubt see gravely asserted
in the papers to be true , as the S. Herberts implicitly swallowed it -
and some English goose will write it home <$$paren> - the people ran to
the Senator , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.22

and tumultuously {TEXT:tumultously} insisted on his going to His
Holiness to inquire why the Palace gates were shut , what had become of
His Holiness , that they would see him , that they were very anxious
about him , that they were very angry at having been so mistrusted and
misinterpreted , that they only wanted to know how he was , and had some
advice to give him , etc. etc. - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.23

in short , behaved like naughty children , but nothing more .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.24

Prince Corsini , the Senator , at first tried to pacify them ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.25

but when he found that rather the more a tumult was made , he agreed to
go to the Pope , provided they would disperse , and would promise , none
of them , to go with him , <paren> the Pope besides having a terrible
attack of grippe <$$paren> . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.26

He went , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.27

but the people forgetting their promise joined him half way
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.28

and went too - so that when he got to the Palace , there was a perfect
rout . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.29

{COM:ellipsis}

here my story necessarily is imperfect . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.31

On Sunday at 1$$2 past 3 we were to have an audience of the Pope ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.32

but at 2 o'clock we were put off - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.33

the Pope had been obliged to drive out to show himself to the people ;
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.34

he went to all the quarters of the Civic Guard , himself , <paren> and
was received with unprecedented enthusiasm , <$$paren> though he was so
ill that he fainted in the carriage coming back ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.35

was attended home by twelve_thousand people . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.36

Ciceruacchio got up behind the attendants carriage ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.37

drove into the Quirinal with them - where the Pope said he was too ill
to give the Benediction , but he was with the people and for them .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.38

C. went out with this message , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.39

said A casa , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,157.40

and within 1$$4 of an hour <P_158> all were dispersed .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.41

All this sounds very childish , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.42

but will be represented in France as an insurrection .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.43

{ED:Letter_XXIX_Addressed_to_W._E._Nightingale._Embley}

<font> January 8 , 1848 <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.45

I hope Mr. Bracebridge finished my story for me , dear people , last
Tuesday . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.46

I left off where Corsini , the Senator , went in to the Pope .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.47

The Pope was amazed and indignant at finding from him that the gates of
the Quirinal were shut and himself barricaded in his own palace , which
had been done without his orders , or even his knowledge ;
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.48

he instantly sent to have the gates opened , and the guards dismissed -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.49

and the Governor of Rome , who was the author of it , is to resign .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.50

This Governor , who is in the Jesuit-Austriaco service , had gone the
night before to frighten Pius with the news of an insurrection , who had
simply said to him , Take the measures you think proper , whereupon the
man had done all this . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.51

Pius then went out to all the Civic Guard quarters himself , as I told
you , contrary to the advice of his physician ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.52

for he fainted coming back , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.53

and has been very ill since , to their great alarm -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.54

but he insisted upon going , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.55

and would only have four Guardia Nobili with him ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.56

and those were not allowed to ride by the carriage , that the people
might come up to the very windows , if they liked it .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.57

Mr. B. was out NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.58

and saw it . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,158.59

He would not go through the Corso for fear of disturbing <P_159> the
Sunday promenade , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.60

but the people intreated him to go , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.61

and he did . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.62

He was exceedingly pleased with his reception ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.63

the people insisted on kissing his hand through the window -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.64

one man , a well dressed man , addressed him NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.65

and said , Believe me , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.66

you may believe me , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.67

the Jesuits are in " trama " against you and your life .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.68

The new Government does not give satisfaction .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.69

Mezzofanti , who in all but languages , is an Asino , is to have Public
Instruction , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.70

Cardinal Riario Sforza , who has always been considered quite " stupido
" is to have Agriculture and Commerce - judge what he will make of it -
<paren> I hope you got our last Tuesday's Motu Proprio <$$paren> and
Amici , Internal Affairs . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.71

Oh would that the Pope had some good man about him -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.72

but he has none , no not one , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.73

and God must send his good angels to inspire him .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.74

Mr. B. has been to see Ventura NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.75

and took S. Herbert there yesterday . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.76

Ventura has but one panacea for Ireland , repeal .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.77

But , said S. H. {COM:missing_punctuation} that wo@ @n't prevent them
from starving , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.78

" Pardonnez moi , Monsieur , la liberté donne du pain . "
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.79

What was to be done with the mécontens ? NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.80

" Oh , they were to be pendus , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.81

and the rest were to have repeal . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.82

He had seen Wiseman and Lord Arundel about Ireland , " he said ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.83

" but they were des Anglais , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.84

what could they know about Ireland - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.85

they knew nothing - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.86

he believed no one but MacHale . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.87

The monarchie Anglaise was chancelante - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,159.88

there had been a conspiracy in the commencement du règne de la <P_160>
Reine Victoire among the Aristocracy to renverser the Queen <paren> the
Bedchamber Plot you know , <$$paren> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.89

and the throne might not stand such another ! ! "
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.90

S. H. told him he was an Irish proprietor NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.91

and tried to set him right about some things , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.92

but though exceedingly cordial , he said S. H. could know nothing
about it , and begged them to come again , etc. etc.
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.93

He has been prevented from preaching however during the Epiphany , for
fear he should do something incautious . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.94

Meanwhile Pio Nono is more popular than ever , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.95

but no one else is , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.96

it is the Pope and the People , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.97

that is the misfortune . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.98

Do@ @n't think P. Ventura is a fool , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.99

far from it , he knows a great deal - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.100

he knew the whole Hampden story - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.101

but he has two idées_fixes NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.102

<paren> most men have but one <$$paren> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.103

and they are absolute and entire liberty politically , absolute and
entire despotism religiously . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.104

At the same time you understand he has not the least idea of the <font>
real <$$font> workings of a free country - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.105

for to all S. H.'s questions as to <font> how <$$font> you would do
this and that in Ireland , he only answered as if the Sovereign had
nothing to do but put out her hand , and Jericho's walls would fall on
the one party , and repeal and bless the other .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.106

Alas ! alas . He would not believe S. H. when he told him that he ,
a proprietor , paid dimes , P. Ventura asserting that the great
hardship was that the tenants , the Catholics , paid the tithes , while
the proprietor , the Protestant , paid none .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.107

He is a good_natured , burly friar , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.108

was sitting at dinner with four obedient {ED:?_Yamens} <paren> priests
<$$paren> waiting his nod , three of whom he dismissed , when he
received Messrs. B. and H . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,160.109

, and went on cutting great slices of cheese , and extending his
forefinger in absolute <P_161> conviction all the while he was talking
to them . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.110

He is extremely eloquent and fluent . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.111

I can@ @not go into the Artist question now , having done that to Aunt
Patty . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.112

I am in furious haste too , as you see by this political nonsense -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.113

it all sounds very childish , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.114

but as my reminiscences will keep , and Pio is of rather more importance
than my feelings about Rome , I send what I think most interesting .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.115

Bless you all , my dear people - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.116

bless me too - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.117

and bless this poor noble victim of ignorance and difficulty , who is
struggling so gloriously to the light . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.118

You see the misery is , that the people will think now , that they can
get anything by making a little row . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.119

There was a cry of Morte ai Gesuiti , the other night ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.120

but the people for once , had the good sense to cry out , E pagato ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.121

and the fellow was arrested . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.122

The people cry but too often , Viva Pio Nono <font> solo . <$$font>
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.123

The affair of the poor man who attacked Torlonia about the Tabacchi e
Sale is going badly - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.124

they say he will be convicted and condemned - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.125

for how can he prove his libel to be true ? - though no one has any
doubt of its being a libel , i.e. of its being strictly true .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.126

{ED:Letter_XXX_Addressed_to_Mrs._Nightingale._Embley}

<font> January 11 , 1848 <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.128

My dear people , I do trust that you are not taken in by Rossi .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.129

Do@ @n't read anything except what is {TEXT:missing_"is"} on one side -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.130

that@ @'s my way - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.131

do@ @n't listen to anything but what is against him .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.132

Dear Mme. Sismondi knows nothing about it . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,161.133

Aunt Patty has written <P_162> to me - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.134

she is taken in by {TEXT:missing_"by"} Mme. S. -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.135

do You preserve the right amount of prejudice pure and undivided in your
minds - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.136

if there is anything aggravating in this world , it is to see the
absolute success of intellect . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.137

Rossi is a man who has no faith , in any thing , no principle upon
anything - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.138

but see how talent does instead of faith . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.139

A capital name has been given him , the " condottiere " of intelligence
- NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.140

he <font> has <$$font> served under every banner -
{TEXT:"ban"_without_following_dash} NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.141

at Geneva he was praying in the prayers of every religion ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.142

in France he is a Catholic . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.143

Cappellari <paren> the future Gregory XVI <$$paren> speaks thus of the
future Ambassador of L. Philippe to Gregory XVI , un certo avvocato ,
cattolico rinnegato . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.144

But I must speak of him in the words of a greater man , who says , that
his principal aim is success . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.145

Ambition inspired him with the science of expediency ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.146

revealed {TEXT:rev} to him the vulnerable points of many an amour-propre
, NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.147

he {TEXT:missing_"he"} possesses the key of the passions of humanity ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.148

he uses {ED:"_...} fruitful art " . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.149

Do@ @n't you see how he is a Jesuit against Jesuits {TEXT:Jesui} ,
out_Jesuiting Jesuitism - ' NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.150

he is the " truchement du pou {ED:..._"} and nothing else .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.151

The " condottiere " has <font> no <$$font> country , no opinions to
{TEXT:missing_"to"} defend - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.152

ideas , the tree of life to us , are wanting to him {TEXT:hi} .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.153

He does not care for the Jesuits , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.154

he cares for nothing but Rossi . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.155

I beg Gioberti's pardon - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.156

but he is taking Pius's name in vain , to talk of Rossi as his supporter
, as Mme. Sismondi does . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,162.157

<P_163>

Last Tuesday we were presented to the Pope . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.159

We went to the Quirinal at half past four , as we had received the
notification , where our Monsignore <paren> Hamilton <$$paren> joined us
. NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.160

We waited a few minutes by the fire in a little waiting room -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.161

there were no other females but us , a few other gentlemen .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.162

Then Hamilton was sent for , and a moment after , we .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.163

The Santo Padre stood in a small oblong room by a table with a crucifix
upon it , with his face to the light . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.164

Vengano , vengano , vengano pure avanti , he said ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.165

We kissed his hand . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.166

Then he talked a little in Italian about the bankruptcies in England ,
the distress , the Statistical returns of deaths being increased , etc.
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.167

and gave us his blessing . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.168

His voice is one of the most charming I have ever heard ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.169

and his manner easy , courteous , benevolent , is quite that of a man of
the world , with the grace besides of his own good heart .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.170

It is a very pretty picture , the reception room , that beautiful old
man <paren> for his hair is very grey , and his face wrinkled , though
he is but 55 , and walks so fast , he outstrips all his court <$$paren>
entirely in white , with his little white cap , standing by the table ,
covered with a crimson table cloth , an ivory crucifix and book upon it
, under a crimson canopy , the black figure of a woman in a veil
curtseying at the door , and the little group of uniforms behind her .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.171

There were only two priests in the room , so that we had him all to
ourselves . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.172

You make three distinct genuflexions as you go up .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.173

When I reached him , I curtsied as low as I possibly could ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.174

and gave his hand a most fervent press - with my lips .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.175

I was not in the least frightened - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.176

I should have thought it so wicked to have gone into the presence of
that good man with one worldly thought . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.177

I said to myself , If I can get out of the room without having had one
earthly idea , I shall be satisfied - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.178

but you do@ @n't know how the coeur vous serre , when you do get out ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.179

and you think , Now I shall never see that beautiful countenance again
on earth . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.180

I did not quite succeed in what I intended , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.181

but I did penance for it afterwards . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.182

I can@ @not do justice to the benevolence of his expression ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,163.183

<P_164>

but I am afraid of dwelling upon it to you usque ad nauseam .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.185

I wish he had somebody to take care of him . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.186

Have popes mothers ? NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.187

I never thought of that . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.188

Mr. Herbert had a private interview with the Santo Padre <paren>
through our Monsignore <$$paren> upon Irish affairs .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.189

Pius listened very attentively , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.190

did not say much , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.191

but I am happy to say , quite converted Mr. Herbert to him .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.192

I was sure he would , if they once got face to face .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.193

These rows at Milan make people very uneasy .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.194

I was introduced to Confalonieri's widow the other night -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.195

she remembered our name , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.196

and we were great friends in a moment . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.197

I am to go and see her - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.198

she talked a great deal about him . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.199

You know that he died at Ospenthal on St. Gottard {COM:sic} upon his
way to Italy , where he longed to return . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.200

It is intensely cold here now . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.201

I have been doing a good many convents and hospitals with Mrs. Herbert
, to which her Russian cousin obtains {TEXT:obtain} entrance for her .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.202

They are too long to tell about now . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.203

I have had some charming letters from you , dear people .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.204

The Pontifical Government is fitted up , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.205

people are somewhat dissatisfied . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.206

Cardinal Massimo had died since his appointment
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.207

and they hope that his place may be filled by a layman .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.208

Ventura is not nearly so often with the Pope as formerly .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.209

The Municipio has gone tête baissée into ferreting out all the abuses ,
scandals , pecuniary mismanagements of the charity and city revenues .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.210

Sparing nothing , it has wisely taken the old bull by the horns -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.211

and such abuses have come out . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,164.212

The <font> balance <$$font> of Cardinal Tosti's administration of the
<P_165> Ospedale di S. Michele proves to be a <font> deficit <$$font>
of 4_1$$2 millions of scudi <paren> in the last 10 years <$$paren> .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.213

In no city in the world , not even in London , are such sums given for
charity . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.214

The Municipio has disinterred the accounts of all these -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.215

and the scandals are really too atrocious to repeat .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.216

All has been given by favour , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.217

and people driving in the Corso in their own carriages receive 50 , 60 ,
70 scudi a month from charity . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.218

In one case , the woman reserved it for her tea parties .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.219

I hope that , in our old pension list , favouritism as tremendous ,
existed . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.220

Still , in the Holy City , such scandals cause more " ribrezzo " .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.221

Having some respect for Religion , one is sorry for it , for her sake .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.222

But Pius has heard the voice , Arise , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.223

shine , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.224

for thy light is come , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.225

and has arisen . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.226

The difficulty is , who are to be his advisers ?
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.227

The College of Cardinals is so notoriously incapable , that every one
says , there are <font> none <$$font> in it less unfit
{COM:font_change_around_"un"} to be his Ministers than those just chosen
who are giving so much dissatisfaction . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.228

A lay ministry is too much to hope for just at present ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.229

but it must come . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.230

Meanwhile patience , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.231

these people are babies in the art of governing ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.232

they have not learned even to walk yet , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.233

how can one expect them to walk well ? NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.234

But the faith and the will are there , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.235

and faith is every thing . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.236

The {TEXT:missing_"The"} Consulta is also doing its duty ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.237

but its difficulties are awful indeed - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.238

without any definite track of what its duties are to be , it has the
ungrateful task of routing out abuses without , like the Municipio ,
having the remedy in its own hands - as the Municipio is without appeal
, and has no responsibility towards any other Council .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.239

The accounts from Naples are tremendous , the cruelties exercised by the
Government . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.240

I can@ @not believe the stories of tortures we hear .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.241

Austria has applied to the Santo Padre for permission to send a body of
troops through the Pontifical States to Naples -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.242

it is impossible that he can grant it . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.243

How grateful our proud England ought to be for her insular position
which has enabled her to mature her liberties , amid the lull of
continental storms , more terrible than those of <font> her <$$font>
winds and waves . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,165.244

<P_166>

There is a curious mixture here of every sort of life , from the holy
Sister of S. Vincent de Paul , who asked me yesterday whether England
was far from here , and whose whole soul was in her little foundlings ,
to the struggling , quivering , Roman heart , which sees for the first
time liberty within the grasp of its hand and trembles lest it should
escape him - and the Holy Father , partaking of both sorts of life -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.246

how can his mind suffice it ? NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.247

He is an ascetic in practice - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.248

during Advent he fasted 18 hours a day . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.249

The greatest comfort I have had respecting him was seeing his little
Oratory , with two Bibles - dear people , I will swear to the Bibles ,
in it , and such a Guido . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.250

There , I trust he finds peace . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.251

I could be more homey myself with Guido than with any other painter -
even Raphael himself . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.252

I wish I had time to tell you all about it in this letter -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.253

farewell , dear people , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.254

and may we all live to see Rome the city of the Free -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.255

pardon this stupid letter . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.256

{ED:Letter_XXXI_Addressed_to_Miss_Nightingale._Embley}

<font> Palazzo dello Sdrucciolo . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.258

St. Antonio , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.259

January 17 , 1848 <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.260

My dearest people , I am really ashamed of you .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.261

Do@ @n't speak to me in that manner . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.262

I am surrounded here by enemies of Pius , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.263

and shall I find foes in mine own household ?
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.264

Is Pius to wait till all his convictions are made up before he acts ?
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.265

he would never act at all . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.266

What did we abuse all the former Popes for , but because they would
never listen to any body , but went on tramping on their own stupid ,
brutal , wicked course . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.267

And now we despise Pius , because he listens - and acts accordingly .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.268

I thought that old cry of Consistency was blown up , sunk and gone to
the bottom with the chew-the-end thing it represents .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.269

Pius is no Napoleon in the talent of discrimination ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.270

I know that - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.271

but to be consistent , a man must be either superhuman or subhuman .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.272

Now for what he really is , such as those most indifferent to him ,
represent him . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,166.273

His first desire is the good of his <P_167> people -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.274

it is his <font> real fervent pursuit <$$font> , that all acknowledge -
but with one condition : NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.275

- what is that ? NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.276

You do not expect , as the English do here , that he is to turn
Protestant , do you ? NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.277

The one condition is , that he will do nothing contrary to his quality
as Pope . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.278

Now Jesuitical wretches get to him , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.279

and represent that this , and that are contrary to his quality as Pope .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.280

He is sincerely religious , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.281

and confesses once a week . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.282

Pollotta , a mock Saint , is his Confessor . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.283

This man stays 1$$4 of an hour before every image of a Madonna he meets
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.284

and recites 300 Aves , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.285

and thumps his breast with hard blows to make known to every one that he
is a vilissimus peccator {TEXT:peccatore} . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.286

He pulls his hat over his eyes , not that he may not see , but per non
essere veduto , mentre ei vede . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.287

He sees all that is doing 100 miles off , while he is looking in his
prayerbook . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.288

He has visions , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.289

and St. Antony appears to him one day , and St. Thingumibob
{TEXT:Thingumibo} one night , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.290

and tells him to run immediately in to the Pope and tell him that , if
he does not do this or that , he will injure the Catholic Religion or
the Pontificate . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.291

Pius , who never believed in any one's hypocrisy yet , has given this
man a {TEXT:missing_"a"} key , it is said , to his apartment , to come
in at any hour with_out being announced , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.292

and hence comes a world of damage . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.293

No one suspects the Santo Padre's sincere piety -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.294

those indifferent to him say it is impossible to see him in church , and
not to see how he prays . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.295

The respect for the Church here is amazingly fallen .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.296

People used to be ready to fall on their knees when a Cardinal passed ;
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.297

now they look the other way . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.298

Pius himself is loved as Papa Principe and not as Papa Papa .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.299

Meanwhile the Consulta and the Municipio boldly go their way .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.300

All sorts of abuses they have unveiled . Imprigati , who receive
pensions for 40 years of <font> service <$$font> , and who are 30 years
of <font> age . <$$font> Convents which receive the Pension granted to
them by Pius VII when he returned from Paris , because their lands were
taken away from them under Napoleon , and who now enjoy their lands and
pensions too - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.301

and what@ @'s more , 30 or 40 monks are enjoying what was intended for 3
or 400 - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.302

for nobody makes himself a monk now , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.303

so the numbers are " decimated " . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,167.304

Tosti , besides his deficit as Chancellor <P_168> of the Exchequer , of
4_1$$2 millions , <paren> which I am afraid I represented to you as
being the deficit of S. Michele <$$paren> has <font> besides <$$font>
his nice little balance <font> there . <$$font>
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.305

I have told you what a " balance " means here .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.306

All these things the Consulta is dragging to light , a fanno inorridire
. NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.307

Vizardelli is to be the new Cardinal - a professor of the Sapienza
College here . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.308

Now , my dear people , do@ @n't you give in about Pius .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.309

I never set him up as a Lycurgus , but as something better , the
sincerest and most benevolent of men , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.310

and I am sure I have been candid enough about his mistakes .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.311

The whole of Sicily , they say , is ready for revolt -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.312

Lord Minto had a courier yesterday . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.313

The King went to S. Carlo - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.314

the people did not dare hiss him , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.315

but a new ballet , which they had always applauded , they hissed every
step of . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.316

The King understood it full well , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.317

went home , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.318

and went <font> to bed <$$font> , where he has been ever since - e certo
non sarà {TEXT:sará} pianto da Napoli , si viene a morire .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.319

He is entirely in the hands of a certain Monsignor Cocle , his confessor
. NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.320

A good many Neapolitan troops have been sent to Sicily .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.321

It {TEXT:missing_"It"} is said that Austria wants to get up a Rival Lega
Dogonale with poor little Parma and Modena . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.322

Heaven confound them ! NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.323

But I was going to tell you about the Oratory of the Sto. Padre .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.324

The first time we went to be presented , and he was obliged to go out
because of the row , we thought as we were once in , we would do
something before we were got out , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.325

and I asked to see this Oratory , which is never seen , because he can
come in to it at any moment . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.326

It is the prettiest little cheerful place - one little chair in the
middle for him - all in disorder , just as he left it - a ' heap of
books on one chair , i.e. two well-thumbed , well-dog's-eared ,
old-women's , bound-in-black , fat bibles , then 3 or 3 little books ,
missals , and then a little thin book , which looked like a Greek
Testament {TEXT:Gr_Test} . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.327

All looked and smelt as if it was constantly inhabited ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,168.328

two large bright windows , the altar quite plain , perfectly without
artificial flowers , or any ornament whatever - over it a large Guido of
the Annunciation - on one wall the Virgin making up domestic linen , and
an angel on each side learning to sew <P_169> from her , who are going
to help her , and are watching how she does it - a Padre Eterno in the
little cupola , with a Gloria of angels looking up - and a Virgin in
adoration - patriarchs and prophets about in odd corners .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.329

They are all Guido's very , very best . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.330

The flamingo who showed us in , a Cameriere in red , was in a great
fright to get us out , because there is a door into the Pope's own room
. NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.331

But I took a good look first . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.332

Here he had evidently just been , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.333

here he takes refuge from the troubles of his conscientiousness ,
<paren> which have made him a grey old man at 55 , <$$paren> - from the
doubts , the difficulties , <paren> which must tear a sincere man like
wild horses , in twain <$$paren> - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.334

for he is scrupulous , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.335

and only Napoleons , without consciences , are " consistent " -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.336

here he prays for light , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.337

and here that beautiful Angel of the Annunciation looks down upon him ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.338

and when he remembers the answer of the humble , hopeful Mary , he feels
that the day will come when all doubts shall be done away for him too ,
when fears and hesitations shall vanish , and when those who have indeed
said from their very hearts , " Behold the servant of the Lord , " as I
verily believe {TEXT:believes} he has done , shall <font> also <$$font>
be able to say , " be it unto me according to thy word " , all anxieties
being removed as to what that " word " is , and all fears as to whether
we are not following our own will after all , instead of discerning what
the will of God for us is . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.339

One might have more admiration for the intellect of Pius ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.340

but one would not have half the sympathy for him , if he were not beset
with anxieties . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.341

But I hope that to him too the angel brings peace .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.342

I had such pleasure in seeing his little Oratory ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.343

and I shall bring {TEXT:being} home {COM:sigma} 's New Year's gift as a
remembrance of many things , both in heaven and earth .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.344

Orioli , the Professor at the Sapienza , and leader of the Moderate
party here , is my authority for these things about Pius .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.345

He is giving a course in Geology , the first man who has dared to do it
in Rome - but wisely opening his course with quoting St. Augustine ,
who differs from Moses , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.346

and finding Minds Attentive , what he began with prudence , he has
continued with boldness . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.347

Mr. Colyar proves a most delightful acquaintance -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.348

he has taken us to the Lateran and Vatican - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.349

and Col. Lindsay says , is the best authority , not excepting Nibby ,
in Rome . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.350

He is a fervent Catholic , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.351

but has taken no trouble with us - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.352

he has been quite a father to me . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,169.353

<P_170>

I have been once more to the Sistine , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.355

but am quite afraid of approaching that great subject .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.356

Five of the nine compartments of the roof <paren> the other four I do
not trouble myself about <$$paren> seem to me upon the very limits of
the Supernatural . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.357

The first I do not understand , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.358

there is an appearance of exertion , of effort about the Creator in the
act of creation . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.359

- but the second where the Padre Eterno creates the Sun and the Moon ,
who can describe it ? NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.360

In the same compartment is a flying figure with its back to us , called
the Padro Eterno creating vegetation . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.361

I will never believe it . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.362

I believe Michael Angelo intended it for the Spirit of Darkness flying
away before the Creator of Light . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.363

That was his idea , I am sure . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.364

It is a crouching , crestfallen figure , so well befitting the Spirit of
Darkness - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.365

and the Creator in the same picture is so divine -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.366

there is nothing material about the Act of Creation , nothing in the
movement of the arms to remind me of moulding or fashioning ;
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.367

- it is , " he spake the word and it was done " , that is , he willed
and it was . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.368

Oh how <font> could human <$$font> genius approach such a conception .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.369

Then the little Cherubim <paren> shrinking from the Moon , <$$paren>
clinging to Him , to this awful Majesty , in perfect love and confidence
, afraid of his <font> works <$$font> , but not <font> of him <$$font> ,
it is so touching . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.370

I suppose that in all art , the idea must be one , and undivided ;
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.371

human imperfection must come in at last , and prevent even a M. Angelo
from representing more than one of the attributes <paren> of Him who has
all attributes in Himself , <$$paren> in one great shadowing forth -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.372

therefore the Omnipotence alone could be represented in this figure of
the Creator - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.373

but M. Angelo , unwilling to leave poor Mortals crushed and annihilated
under the idea of <font> Power Divine <$$font> , imagined all these cari
agnoletti clinging to the Great Unknown to show us that though unknown
even to them , he was not unloved and he was unfeared .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.374

Oh M. Angelo , arch priest of the Divinity , thou real priest and
minister of the Most High , art thou now an Archangel Michael , even as
he was perhaps once a mortal like thee . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.375

The next compartment is the Gathering of the Waters -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.376

and here too , there is nothing to remind one of earth in the drapery -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.377

it is all wonderfully carrying out the divine conception .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,170.378

But the three next speak perhaps the most fervently to the hearts of
poor mortals , i.e. the Creation <P_171> of Man , of Woman , and their
Fall . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.379

The difference between the characters of man and woman is so
extraordinarily kept . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.380

What we have just left was the Creation of Matter ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.381

we are come now to the Creation of Soul . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.382

The Padre Eterno having breathed into Adam the breath of life , is just
leaving him , committing to him his last behests .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.383

He veils none of the glory of his majesty from him ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.384

He appears before him in the full light of His presence , which none was
since to see and live , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.385

and Adam half rising from the earth , in the perfect sinless human
nature , <paren> there is nothing of the God , of the Apollo , about him
, he is perfectly fearless , but perfectly a subject , <$$paren> looks
at Him NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.386

and is not ashamed . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.387

There is however , nothing of the <font> inward <$$font> consciousness
of the Divine Presence in it ; no speaking purely from <font> heart
<$$font> to <font> heart - <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.388

the Creator has made himself known to man by an outward manifestation ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.389

and man has understood and accepted it . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.390

I do not make it clear , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.391

but any body looking at the Creation of <font> Woman <$$font> , will see
the difference - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.392

there she kneels , the lovely new_born woman , before her Creator , who
, in his unspeakable Goodness , has stripped himself of all his Power
and his Majesty , and stands before her in the semblance of a man , her
father , and her friend , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.393

and yet , such is the sublime idea of M. Angelo , that there is nothing
lost of dignity in the figure . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.394

Adam continues sleeping . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.395

No woman would have done this , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.396

she would have been warned <paren> by her quicker perception <$$paren>
of the presence of a supernatural being . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.397

Eve , kneeling in perfect love and devotion , receives with entire
submission , the commands of her Creator , which come straight from His
<font> spirit <$$font> to hers , without any material manifestation of
Power . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.398

She is lovely beyond description . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.399

But " devotion is not religion " - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.400

and next , oh woe woe to us , comes the Fall .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.401

The Tempter , a female figure , is bewitchingly beautiful .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.402

<font> Adam <$$font> again does not see her , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.403

but <font> Eve <$$font> , lying quite quiet , close to the earth ,
anxious to disguise from herself , her sin , and fearful to move , just
stretches out her arm , as a naughty child does , without making one
motion towards the forbidden fruit , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.404

and receives it . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.405

Poor , poor Eve - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.406

in the same picture is the instant punishment -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.407

the difference between Man and Woman , between Reasoning and Inward
Perception , is still preserved . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,171.408

Adam's thoughts are towards <P_172> the favoured Paradise and the
Avenging Angel , <paren> who is still tender even in his wrath <$$paren>
. NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.409

He seems to address himself only to him , and to leave Eve to her own
feelings , which are enough . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.410

Adam regrets , departs , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.411

and it is done . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.412

Eve , crouching and heart_stricken , scarcely giving a thought to what
she has lost , nor to the Material punishment awarded her , is an image
of the anguish of the soul , the long inward writhings of remorse ,
which receive no alleviation and no embitterment from eternal things .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.413

She seems literally " swallowed up " by self-abasement .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.414

This , a wonderful conception , and these three , though less striking ,
are to me as superior in genius to the first , as the Creator of the
Soul is to that of Earth . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.415

The last of the 9 is the Drunkenness of Noah , as if M. Angelo wished
to show us to what depths human nature could descend , before he came to
the Judgement . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.416

I can@ @not make myself understood by these words
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.417

<paren> when I come home , we will have long talks about these fruitful
Five <$$paren> . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.418

The other day S , Mrs. Herbert and I went to see the Hospital of Sto.
Spirito , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.419

but when we got there , we found a permission was necessary ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.420

and the priest whom we spoke to , said O vadano , vadano pure loro
stesso dal Monsignore sopra , la darà loro . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.421

Rather unwillingly we went up , having first sent up the servant , who
was refused it . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.422

The Monsignore's servant took in our Card , also rather unwillingly , we
only meaning the Card to ask permission - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.423

and after a few moments came back NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.424

and desired us to follow him - we , hardly knowing whether it was to the
awful presence , or to the Enfans trouvés , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.425

But , to provide against all dangers , we made Mrs. Herbert , who is
accustomed to speak to live cardinals , go first .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.426

Presently in the opening of the third door , I saw her curtseying on the
threshold , lower and lower - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.427

I thought she was going to kneel down - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.428

we went in - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.429

an immense round table separated the sacred Monsignore on one side and
the three impudent females on the other . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.430

Half rising , half ready to run round one side if we attempted to run at
him by the other , he asked us what we wanted -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.431

the hospital , he said , could@ @n't be opened at all hours , it was not
to be expected , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.432

è un affare molto curioso , he said - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,172.433

curiosissimo , I <P_173> thought . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.434

In a half scolding , half complaining voice , he asked whether we were
going to leave Rome soon . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.435

Nobody answered , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.436

so I thought they meant me to tell the lie , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.437

and bowing to the earth , I replied , <font> Very <$$font> soon .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.438

Well then , he said , when do you want to see the Convent ?
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.439

Tomorrow , I said , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.440

It@ @'s too soon , he said , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.441

we ca@ @n't get it ready . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.442

Well then Wednesday , I said very angrily . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.443

And do you want to see the Conservatorio <font> too <$$font> , in a
despairing tone . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.444

To be sure , I said , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.445

and again prostrating ourselves , we withdrew .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.446

I was laughing too much to make the least apology ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.447

but after we had finished our genuflexions , Mrs. Herbert went back
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.448

and made one . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.449

Now mind that this story be locked in your breasts -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.450

it was so truly impudent - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.451

Inglesissimo , is the only adjective it deserves .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.452

However we got what we wanted NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.453

and tomorrow I will tell the result . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.454

I do@ @n't suppose you want to hear about Dr. Hampden .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.455

I am convinced the great cause of the wrath and clamour against him is
that he has been incautious enough to <font> say <$$font> what half the
ecclesiastics <font> think <$$font> , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.456

and that has always been the unforgiven sin .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.457

If on the other hand , one is candidly to say which is the real
Trinitarian and which the infidel , he who believes the Trinity upon his
own grounds of conviction , or he who believes it upon those of others ,
whom he calls authority , let any child decide .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.458

I have read more of the Bampton Lectures here , than I ever read in my
life NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.459

and think them beautiful . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.460

Enough of that . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.461

I have saved myself much trouble of investigation by coming at once to
the conclusion that every body has disgraced themselves but Lord John
and Dr. Hampden . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.462

Wo@ @n't that do ? NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.463

I have a deal to say about home , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.464

but that is not exactly what you want to hear .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.465

Goodnight dear people . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,173.466

<P_174>

{ED:Letter_XXXII_Addressed_to_Mrs._Nightingale._Embley}

<font> Rome . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.469

January 18 , 1848 <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.470

My dearests , I have just had your welcome description of your Old
Year's estremo istante . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.471

Mine was spent in my own room - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.472

and as the last toll of the great bell striking twelve sounded from the
Trinità del Monte , I felt as if my breath stood still , and my heart
stopped beating , and as if the instant of death could scarcely be more
solemn . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.473

I could not begin my N. Year's Day at St. Peter's as I intended , it
rained so . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.474

I have a little corner of my own behind the left hand support looking
from the High Altar , where I always go - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.475

but I went to the Trinità NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.476

and heard the nuns sing Adeste fideles with heavenly voices .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.477

Then we went to church , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.478

called upon the Herberts with our N. Year's wishes ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.479

then I had a talk with {COM:sigma} , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.480

went by myself to Vespers at the Trinità - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.481

{COM:sigma} does not care for music , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.482

and when I came back , my children brought me a nosegay , which measured
a foot across , and some oranges out of their own garden .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.483

And so passed our N. Year's Day in great peace and joy ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.484

thanks be to God for it . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.485

The next day which was Sunday {COM:sigma} and I took Sacrament together
, NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.486

and we did not go out again . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.487

Mr. B. did not come in till very late , it being the day of the row ,
and the Santo Padre's going out to the Guardia Civica .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.488

Monday I went to St. Peter's before breakfast - to my own place and
home therein . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.489

Mr. B. and I called upon Mrs. Colyar next door , who is uncommonly
friendly when we are there , but determined to have nothing to say to us
. NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.490

He on the contrary . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.491

And my affections , oh che contraste orrible between him and the Santo
Padre . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.492

Orioli came in to give us the account of the row .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.493

And then we dressed to kiss my Pius's hand , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.494

and the disgrazia happened to the " poor dogs " which I told you of ,
amply remedied by our seeing the Oratory . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.495

Afterwards we went to see the Mausoleum of Augustus ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,174.496

but <P_175> the pieces of travertine , upon which the Emperors were
burnt , are now in the Vatican . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.497

Tuesday , we had a little Emerson boy in the morning to amuse ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.498

so I did not go out - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.499

and in the afternoon I was initiated into the awful presence of the
Countess Woronzow , late dame_d'honneur to the Emperor Paul , and all
but witness of his murder , Mr. Herbert's aunt , and the " Baron " -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.500

and went with them and Mrs. H. to the Bon Pasteur .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.501

<paren> I have been doing a course of convents and hospitals <$$paren> .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.502

I tumbled in love with the Mother Superior - herself a dame_d'honneur of
the Bavarian court , and really a sort of Mme. de Sevigné turned nun .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.503

But oh the waste of life in this place , the intense cold , the
miserable pozza-smelling rooms , the shortening of life in consequence
of these good women , their hopeless task - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.504

for this order , of which the Good Shepherd at Hammersmith is a branch ,
is devoted to the reclaiming of Penitents , or rather Non-Penitents ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.505

for all their sheep are goats , sent to them by the government , and
hopeless goats . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.506

A husband , father , or son , has here nothing else to do but to go to
the Vicario , and desire from him an order to send his refractory wife ,
mother , or daughter to the Bon Pasteur - which order is generally
executed in the night , so that the goat arrives kicking , screaming ,
violently agitated and perfectly unmanageable for two or three days ,
during which time they are obliged to keep her in a room to herself , or
she would do a mischief . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.507

This order may be obtained for extravagance , or <font> any <$$font>
troublesome conduct . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.508

Mr. B. says he wishes there were some such law in England .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.509

We saw one woman there of the highest rank in Rome shut up by her son
for extravagance , and two young noble women , who however I believe
were really bad . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.510

But conceive the punishment it must be . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.511

The patience of the good nuns is admirable , à toute épreuve ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,175.512

<P_176>

they have no means of compelling subordination ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.514

and one , who had refused the night before to go to bed , the poor nun
who slept in her room , only said , Well , I can@ @not go to bed till
you do , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.515

and there they sat , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.516

and all I could do she said , was to pray the Holy Virgin to inspire her
with the thought of bed . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.517

If ever I saw sanctity upon earth , " holiness purified from self denial
, " it was among these women , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.518

but they admitted that they made hardly any reformations -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.519

if the case was only come in for 6 months , they considered it quite
hopeless , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.520

if for several years , they did hope . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.521

But none ever came voluntarily , they said , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.522

and many tried to run away . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.523

Those who married when they went out , which they sometimes do , because
they are well taught , <paren> everything but kitchen work is taught
them here . No Italian woman learns that , because they all have their
dinners from Traitore <$$paren> , or get into good places , they do well
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.524

and then they always let the nuns hear from them .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.525

They never try to make them take the veil , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.526

and there is no temptation , because the nuns of the Bon Pasteur <font>
must <$$font> be women of good character . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.527

But they being all there under a sense of oppression , it is hoping
against hope - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.528

and even the Abbess admitted , if they come but for a short time , it is
hardly worth while to teach the uneducated ones to read or work .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.529

I thought their faces horrible ; NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.530

they were merry , no formality , but no humility .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.531

The nuns keep them generally singing to prevent talking .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.532

And there these real martyrs go on working against hope .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.533

Many of the Penitents come in upon the verge of madness ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.534

and go mad in the convent . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.535

There was a poor Arab there , who was miserable .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.536

But the cold , how it must exasperate them . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.537

The nun , who was teaching them to work , seemed an admirable creature .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.538

There are but 9 nuns altogether , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.539

and some are always ill - hardly any of them Italians .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.540

The Superior showed me a head of Our Saviour crowned with thorns , which
had been the Holy Father's own , and which he gave to them because he
found it affected him too much , and worked upon his feelings unduly .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.541

But what a waste of energy of these poor nuns -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.542

one of my companions said how grateful the Penitents must be -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.543

Oh no , she said , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.544

they are not grateful , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.545

what cause have they ? NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.546

They are here against their will NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.547

and they are very miserable here . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.548

They have no way of exercising them either NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,176.549

and it seems still an <P_177> untried region that of reclaiming them ,
though few have , like these , the candour to say so .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.550

I went in the evening to Mrs. Sartoris's with the Herberts .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.551

I do so like incautious women , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.552

and Mrs. Sartoris is always saying incautious things <paren> about her
own childhood and education <$$paren> without seeing how she shocks the
good Lindsays . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.553

Then she is such a pendulum twixt a smile and tear , as I think I told
you - how she was moved to tears when I asked her to sing something of
Mendlesohn - and then pitied Abdel Kader , because she " fancied the
horror of having all the French women making love to one . "
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.554

Then she is such a perfect gentlewoman about her own former life , never
avoiding the subject of the stage , but saying quite simply that she had
not dared to be presented to the Pope , because she was one of those "
horrid singing women . " NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.555

But I must go , dearest mother . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.556

{ED:Letter_XXXIII_Addressed_to_R._Fowler,_Esq.,_M.D._Salisbury}

<font> Rome . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.558

January 21 , 1848 <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.559

My dear Dr. Fowler , Mrs. Herbert has handed over your question to me
about the Eleusinian mysteries NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,177.560

and I should <P_178> have a chapter to write in answer to it , did I not
think that Hope and some others would make a reply much more worthy of
you than I can . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,178.561

Do read the chapter in Thomas Hope's Essay on Architecture , called "
Heathen Customs kept up or emulated by the Christians . "
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,178.562

It is the 17th of his first Vol. , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,178.563

and the previous chapter on the Symbols used by the early Christians ,
as well as the 18th chapter bear up on the subject .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,178.564

The whole book is most interesting , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,178.565

but , though <font> his <$$font> prejudices are in favour of embracing a
Pagan faith , I think he might accord to <font> my <$$font> prejudices ,
which are for the Christian one , the same toleration which I am quite
ready to grant to his . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,178.566

Though I quite agree that the early Christians were very provoking and
teased the Roman religion into giving them martyrdom , which they would
have , and would not be denied . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,178.567

Lord Lindsay <paren> whose book on Christian Art you perhaps know
<$$paren> recommends you " Sylvester Douglas " on " the remains of the
Ancient manners of Greece , " which will give a much better account than
I can . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,178.568

With regard to the introduction however of Roman observances into our
religion , which is Mr. Hope's theory , Lord Lindsay tells me that they
are of still earlier date . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,178.569

The bonfires lighted here on St. John's Day for instance , the origin
of which Hope assigns to the fires kindled by the Romans in <P_179>
honour of the summer solstice , are anterior -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.570

and date from the worship of Baal . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.571

Among the Celtic nations the name even is preserved ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.572

and they are called the fires of Baal . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.573

Our Maypole in the same way takes its origin from the same time and
worship <paren> of Baal <$$paren> . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.574

Lord Lindsay's theory is that the Southern nations represent the
principle of <font> inclusiveness - <$$font> the Northern of <font>
Protestantism . <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.575

Now the Italian nations are descendants of Greece and Rome , whose
principle was to incorporate all new religions , to assimilate all
conquered churches to their own . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.576

The German and English nations , on the other hand , descend from the
Persians , who represent the principle of Protestantism .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.577

The Persians protested against all other religions ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.578

they went forth determined to put down all but their own spiritual
worship of the unseen fire . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.579

The Persian contest with Greece and Rome was that between Protestantism
and Catholicism . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.580

You meet in these Southern lands with no fairies , gnomes , or
supernatural stories - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.581

they have all become angels or devils i.e. they are all Christianized ,
assimilated . Whereas , in Northern lands , all the stories of heathen
times remain . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.582

In France , which is a descendant of the <font> Roman <$$font> , S.
Denis is only the worship of Bacchus - Dionysos being his very name .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.583

SS. Eleutheros and Rusticus , his two companions , are only the one ,
another name for Bacchus , the other for his rites .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.584

The Christians did themselves much harm by this assimilation of heathen
rites and symbols . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.585

But I am afraid that I am mangling what Lord Lindsay told me , which I
wish he would give to the world in print . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.586

I have wished that I could send you some account of the Deaf and Dumb
establishment here , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.587

but as there is only one for boys , females , who appear to exist in
Rome only upon sufferance , are not admitted to see it .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,179.588

Mrs. Herbert desires me to tell you that the direction of Dr. Söstz ,
the person to whom you wished to send Dr. Howe's and the Abbe Carton@
@'s <P_180> papers , is Ehrenbreitstein , Coblentz - and that the parcel
had better be dispatched straight to Coblentz , as he will be delighted
to have them . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.589

You are rejoicing as we are over this glorious Sicilian news .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.590

What a bombardment it was and what a new life for a magnificent country
, so long oppressed and depopulated as poor Sicily .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.591

Of course the Obscuranti , as they are called here , meaning the old
Tories , object to the clause in the new Constitution , providing that
Sicilian employment shall be filled by Sicilians , and Neapolitan by
Neapolitans , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.592

and say that fusion is the principle of the day .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.593

Yes , and pretty work we have made of fusion in Ireland .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.594

The Sicilian race is as superior to the Neapolitan , as the Greek was to
the Roman ; NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.595

and yet the principle of fusion was to fill both Neapolitan and Sicilian
offices with <font> Neapolitans . <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.596

The spot of the houses of Hortensius and Cicero is supposed to be
ascertained with tolerable exactness NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.597

but the palace of Augustus was built over their site ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.598

and now there is nothing left but a hideous English villa .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.599

The ruins of the Palatine are the despair of Antiquaries .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.600

Mr. and Mrs. Bracebridge desire their kindest remembrance .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.601

So do Mr. and Mrs. Herbert , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.602

and believe me , my dear Dr. Fowler , with my very best love to dear
Mrs. Fowler , and hopes that neither you nor she have been <font>
aggrippate <$$font> as the Romans call being attacked with influenza .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.603

Your ever grateful and affectionate Florence Nightingale .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,180.604

<P_181>

{ED:Letter_XXXIV_Addressed_to_E._E._Nightingale._Embley}

<font> Rome , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.607

this glorious day of her liberty . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.608

January 21 , 1848 <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.609

Well , my dear people , what do you think of this ?
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.610

Is not this the most glorious news you have heard this many a day ?
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.611

Oh if you knew how these Sicilians have fought !
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.612

For seven days ! NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.613

They have behaved themselves like men NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.614

and so have the women . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.615

But you will see all that in the papers . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.616

The long and short of it is that the King has been obliged to give in ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.617

at least he had not sense enough himself to see that he must ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.618

but his brother did NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.619

and told him that he would not be a king the next day , if he did not .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.620

There is to be an amnesty , and liberty of the press ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.621

and Sicily is to have a constitution , and a Repeal of the Union and to
be governed only by Sicilians , and to have a Consulta -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.622

for all the people's cry was , We will have Pio Nono's reforms , nothing
less , nothing else . So that it is he who has done it , and not they
themselves , after all . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.623

They say he is radiant , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.624

and I thought him so ill and so subdued at the Consistory yesterday ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.625

and now he is as happy as he deserves to be .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.626

And Sicily will be herself again . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.627

You may believe all the stories of the iniquities practised at Naples at
the beginning of this revolt . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.628

Yes , the King actually had some old Sicilian noblemen , who had been
taken up for this revolt , branded in his presence , clothed as
galley-slaves and sent to the prisons at Procida .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.629

Absolute tortures Lord Eastnor tells {TEXT:tell} of , who is just come
back from Naples . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.630

But that is the way these Anointed of Heaven always begin -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.631

but the gallant Sicilians persisted , as you will see in the papers the
account of the siege , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.632

and have carried the day . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.633

The dear old Colyar rushed up to tell us the moment he had the news this
morning . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.634

I was out , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.635

so he came again tonight . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.636

But this is not all . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.637

Hurra for the greatest step Pio Nono has made yet .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.638

The government is secularized ! NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.639

We have got laity into the ministry . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.640

Now , call him a priest and a coward any more , if you dare .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.641

Prince Gabrielli is at the head of the Army - Monsignor Savelli , who
was the Governor and had the department of Police besides , being sent
off to foreign parts as a nuncio ; NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.642

Gaetani , an able man , has the Police - Monsignor Morichini being got
rid of for {TEXT:missing_"for"} a bishopric , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,181.643

and <P_182> Ferretti , the Cardinal's brother , has the Finance -
Monsignor Spada , who looked very glum at St. Peter's on Sunday , being
got rid of too . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.644

Cardinal Ferretti goes to Ravenna , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.645

and Cardinal Bofondi , the Pope's successor at his own bishopric of
Imola , succeeds him as Prime Minister , President of the Council and
Foreign Affairs . So that you see the three departments of Arms ,
Finance and Police are all in secular hands .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.646

But it is the principle , the great principle of breaking into this
court of priests , which is the thing . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.647

{COM:semantics_of_pseudo-imperative} Once let in the Atlantic of secular
knowledge and learning , and Mother Partington's red_gloved hands can
never bar it out again . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.648

Nobody thought that Pius would have the courage to do it -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.649

all hail to him - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.650

and they say that he is brilliant with joy . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.651

And these moments must repay him - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.652

for he said to Monsignor Rusconi , his own friend , who had the Arms ,
when he sent him off to Ancona and Rusconi looked aghast , I know that
it can@ @not be very agreeable to you to leave the centre of all things
, Rome , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.653

but our life is one of sacrifice . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.654

I would I were back at my bishopric of Imola -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.655

but it is good for me to be here and for you to be at Ancona .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.656

Now , my dear friends , let us rejoice , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.657

for I too have behaved like a man , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.658

I have told you all my Pius's mistakes , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.659

his faults and his sufferings have not been hid from you -
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.660

and now let us sing and be glad at his success .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.661

And is not this the opening of a great day for Italy ?
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.662

Now Naples will {TEXT:w} join the Lega Doganale ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.663

now Italy will become united and {TEXT:unit} independent ,
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.664

and perhaps the sun of our lives will not have set , before that of
Austria in Lombardy is gone down never to rise again .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.665

Metternich seems to be really dead , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.666

and the long prayed_for moment may really yet be held in the lap of the
19th century , when Austria shall see the necks of her eagle cut off by
the Italian good sword . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.667

1848 has entered bravely on her course - bless her !
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.668

And so has the Municipio . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,182.669

To give you an idea . Cardinal Tosti's brother , in the year of the
Cholera , 1834 , was provided a nice little place by the Cardinal to see
after the cholera at the rate of so many scudi a <P_183> month .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,183.670

The cholera stopped , not so the salary , which has regularly entered
the monthly ragamuffin pocket of Mr. Tosti .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,183.671

Ah ha ! says the Municipio , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,183.672

and presents its compliments to Mr. Tosti , desiring him not only to
eject himself , but to refund this 13 years salary .
NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,183.673

The man demurs , and grumbles , NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,183.674

the Municipio persists - NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,183.675

and to do this to the brother of the late Treasurer and present Cardinal
, is a good daring Municipio , me@ @seems . NIGHTINGALE-1848-2,183.676

