<BEGIN_nightingale-189x-1>

<P_419>

{ED:163._To_unknown_correspondent}

4 July 1890 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,419.4

<font> Please return this to F. N. <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,419.5

You ask <font> me <$$font> upon one of the most difficult subjects of
the present day , namely : ' To the rule inexorable by which families
where an unmarried daughter has had what they call a " misfortune "
should be turned themselves <paren> with her <$$paren> out of their
cottages ? ' NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,419.6

I should rather ask of <font> you . <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,419.7

In these days the subject is so much more complicated .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,419.8

Besides , the sin is <font> not <$$font> in having an illegitimate baby
, but in the sin which precedes it . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,419.9

And the new doctrine about the connection of the Sexes is now , I am
told , so widespread among the lower classes , that it is quite an open
secret . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,419.10

Thus , the great danger is that man & woman do learn how to commit the
sin without the consequence . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,419.11

A public schoolmaster , of gentle boys , I mean , who has particularly
studied the subject , & has succeeded in maintaining purity among his
boys , to a degree , I believe that no other Public School does , though
many do a great deal , has obtained the most varied information from
ministers , Anglican & Dissenting & from Roman_Catholic Priests , who
<P_420> commonly know more about this than any other ministers ,
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.12

and he declares that this open secret is more and more extensively
practised among the poor . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.13

<paren> You probably know that quite respectable socialists have printed
this - and , on one occasion , a very superior bookseller was prosecuted
for publishing a book of this kind , and condemned . <$$paren>
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.14

This appears to me greatly to alter the whole question .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.15

2. The danger of increasing child murder is so obvious , that it is
scarcely necessary to mention it . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.16

3. Again , it makes the case so different if the woman marries the man
. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.17

We may charitably suppose that they intended to follow God's Law of one
woman to one man , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.18

and it is quite different if a woman has had 2 or 3 children by
different men . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.19

And it is so dangerous if a woman for her first offence is condemned to
disgrace . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.20

<paren> In all institutions now , a difference is made between
primiparae and women who have fallen 2 or 3 times .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.21

Indeed there are institutions , as I think so wisely , which take in
only primiparae , and then help the woman to service and to maintain her
child herself instead of sending it to the workhouse . Otherwise its
usual fate . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.22

These women are generally recovered . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.23

One of our cousins is actually a prime mover in a division of one of our
vast London Workhouses for this object . <$$paren>
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.24

4. I need scarcely allude to the nonsense which is talked among the
very poor , about the honour of being married at sixteen ; which I know
leads almost unconsciously {TEXT:un-consciously} on the young woman's
part to sin with this purpose . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.25

But this is very different from the coarse brutish sensuality which
leads men & women to behave like animals . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.26

You know that very superior upper servants even , will talk this sort of
jingo among themselves . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.27

' I think it is time for Miss <paren> mentioning one of their Mistresses
friends <$$paren> to " go off " . ' NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.28

This means to be married , of course you know .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.29

All this sort of thing , like the publications of perfectly respectable
socialists , leads to mischief , without the poor young thing knowing it
is mischief . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.30

And now , when so many know that the mischief can be done without the
consequences , this is a very serious consideration .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.31

I am far from thinking that these considerations are final .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.32

I know how much may be said about maintaining a high standard of
morality , by the Londoner in his villages ; NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.33

but I think , that considering the almost promiscuous mixing up of young
men & women in the Cottage bedroom , & the London one room , this sin is
almost inevitable , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,420.34

and I think the chief hope , which it will take 2 or 3 generations to
fulfil , is in the better moral education which we may hope to see , and
which will prevent fathers & mothers from <P_421> jesting openly before
their young children on the most delicate & sacred subjects in the rooms
of the poor . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.35

5. The man is not punished , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.36

& the more villainous the man , the more he escapes .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.37

{ED:unsigned}

{ED:164._To_Rachel_Williams_Norris}

6 July 1891 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.40

Dearest Mrs. Norris I was so glad to see your handwriting & address .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.41

I have been thinking & feeling , feeling & thinking with you - & longing
to see you again & hear {TEXT:hearing} more from you .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.42

I saw an old pupil of yours , ' Baroness von? Rosen ' ,
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.43

but she did not know where you had moved to . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.44

I was longing to know what your plans were - whether the Riviera or
Edinburgh - & how you were . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.45

Besides this , I have a question to ask your kindness :
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,421.46

<P_422>

Gen'l Symonds , brother of the Capt. Symonds <paren> who is dead
<$$paren> who gave me all that Cocoatina in 1885 for the Egyptian
Military Hosp'ls wants me to give him a Certificate as to the usefulness
& goodness of this Cocoatina <paren> the manufacture of which - pure -
is their family's subsistence <$$paren> . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.48

I refer back to a letter of mine , dated April 23 <slash> 85 , telling
Capt. Symonds , without of course giving your name , when you arrived
from Souakim what you told me , viz. that to make the Cocoatina
acceptable , it should be combined with <font> milk <$$font> & that the
only Cocoa they <paren> the men <$$paren> liked was the cocoa <font> &
milk - <$$font> supplied in small quantities by the N. A. Soc'y .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.49

They the Symonds' have sent me however copy of a Telegram <paren>
without date <$$paren> which I sent Capt. Symonds :
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.50

' Just heard from Egypt . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.51

Cocoatina highly appreciated - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.52

more greatly desired if sent at once ' . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.53

I am greatly puzzled what to do . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.54

I do not like to refuse these poor Symonds . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.55

Yet , if I give them a ' Testimonial ' , I shall be deluged with similar
requests . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.56

They want me to date my Testimonial from the date of the War - 1885 .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.57

Might I ask <font> what your impression is now <$$font> of your kindness
of the <font> good <$$font> or <font> no-good <$$font> his <paren> Capt.
Symonds <$$paren> Cocoatina did in that War ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.58

<bracket> I have given away in the last few years large quantities of
Cocoatina to poor people in England . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.59

And it was uniformly liked . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.60

They Savory & Moore make now at Verney Junction ! ! <font> peptonized
<$$font> Cocoa <font> and Milk <$$font> which is excellent but expensive
. <$$bracket> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.61

I am interrupted , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.62

& I seem to have told you nothing , dear friend , of what I feel with
you : nor thanked you for your excellent book .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.63

But let me say God bless you NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.64

& believe me ever yours faithfully & sorrowfully F. Nightingale
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,422.65

<P_423>

{ED:165._To_Rosalind_Smith}

10 South St NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.68

8 Feb 1892 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.69

Dearest , very dearest , My heart <font> is <$$font> full of you ;
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.70

but , immersed in very sour business , I find nothing to <font> say
<$$font> worthy of your sweetness . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.71

I do give you joy for having found a man whom you can so thoroughly love
& esteem & work with . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.72

And I , of course , give him joy at having found you .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.73

And I give us all joy . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.74

But please look to the shillings . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.75

We can@ @not live on sweets . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.76

And we must live in order to work together . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.77

I know you think me very worldly . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.78

But , you see , unfortunately , we live in the world .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.79

It is a great bore . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.80

But then you heroically set to mending the world .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.81

So I pray you to live . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.82

This does not at all say what my heart is full of , dearest child .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.83

But I hope soon to hear from yourself what your heart is full of that is
, when your nursing of dear mother & father is finished .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.84

I am afraid both still want it . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.85

My love . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.86

And may I send a message to Mr. Nash ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.87

God bless you both NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.88

ever your loving Aunt Florence NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.89

{ED:166._To_Margaret_Verney_?}

20 April 1892 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.91

Yesterday was Parthe's birth-day ; NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.92

and I celebrate it by thinking of all you have done by bringing out the
books during <font> his <$$font> lifetime , for which she was so anxious
, for her . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.93

And I celebrated it too by having Rosalind Shore Smith before her unique
, singular marriage with absolutely no <font> certain <$$font> provision
. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.94

They were going to live in a cottage at the East Pole of London ,
separated from us by 5 millions of people , but not from the Easterns
among whom they are going to labour . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.95

They are called by respective relations the Naughties the Babes in the
Wood the Early Christians NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.96

I have not told Sir Harry because if he were to write to the parents ,
recommending a house in Grosvenor St. , he would send them stark
staring mad , the one from indignation that it should be thought
desirable - the other from regret that he is too poor to give it her .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,423.97

<P_424>

Verily the world is full of the strangest & saddest contradictions .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,424.99

But if you like to communicate this note to Sir Harry , please do .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,424.100

ever your loving Aunt Florence NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,424.101

{ED:167._To_George_H._De'ath,_Esq.,_MD}

10 South St NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,424.103

20 May 1892 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,424.104

My dear Sir Most heartily do I give you joy on the success of your '
Health at Home ' Education Mission - the enthusiastic attendance on your
Lectures of rural educated women from all over the County allowed to
attend for their own profit - your sifting & re-sifting till you
obtained a Class of 12 , who appeared willing & able to become
instructresses or missioners of Health to the uneducated rural women at
their own homes - the object of the whole course being the new one not
simply to give Sanitary information but to teach how to teach - the
examination by an independent well-known Sanitary authority - both in
writing & by word of mouth <paren> to test their power of speaking to
the uneducated <$$paren> And six of them passing the Exam'n with the
utmost success three indeed above what had been expected . the main
object of the Exam'n being to see not only if their book knowledge or
theory were competent but if they could give in the most <font>
practical <$$font> & <font> plainest <$$font> , in the most lively &
dramatic manner - their knowledge to uneducated women in their own
houses - translate in fact the object-lessons they had received from
your skill & kindness in the worst houses of the worst villages - into
the cottage life with their own hands & tongue .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,424.105

<P_425>

Your object was to teach practical work to the class - just as we teach
practical Ward work at the bed side to the Nurse Probationers in
Hospital - the object-lesson of the former being the Ward & the Patient
- the object-lesson of the latter being the Cottager's home & its
inmates - the rural domestic life . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.107

Just as the District Nurse goes into the cottage to nurse & to teach the
Patient by the family with her own head & hands - so would the Health
Nurse <paren> Missioner <$$paren> teach what to do in the cottage for
health with her own head & hands . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.108

It remains to be seen how it is to be worked out - say a meeting in a
willing cottage - visits to each cottage - and when she is in touch with
the cottager's wife , sent for by the wife-mother herself .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.109

Of course it will take a <font> long <$$font> time before prejudice &
ignorance are overcome . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.110

ever yours sincerely Florence Nightingale NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.111

{ED:168._To_Sir_Henry_Acland,_MD}

10 South St NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.113

18 Jan 1893 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.114

Dear Sir Henry Acland Yes , please , on Monday .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.115

Will 5-15 suit you ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.116

Are the Certificates which you are kindly going to present to Nurses at
St. George's in the East ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.117

Of course everything in ' what is to be said ' at a particular place
depends on what the <font> training <$$font> is , what the <font> length
of service <$$font> , what &c &c certified . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,425.118

<bracket> Certificates are given after 6 months service at Hospitals of
the <P_426> Metropol : Asylums Board where there is no pretence at
training ! ! ! <$$bracket> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.119

Now for the larger question - the essential question - more essential '
now ' than ever - viz. the character , the moral discipline of the
Nurse as a woman . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.120

It is not technical training only which makes a woman into a Nurse .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.121

And 2. what is the moral & technical discipline which she will receive
when armed with her certificate , of which the public does not know the
value , she leaves her Inf'y or Hosp'l . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.122

We are glad to think that the Med'l Profession are in some degree
awakening to this . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.123

Is there to be nothing between the ' Profession ' that is , the Army &
the individual ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.124

People would think this disastrous , ridiculous in the Army .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.125

<font> There <$$font> there is the company , the Regiment , the Corps ,
the ' Tommy_Atkins ' &c &c &c. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.126

No one thinks that the soldier is <font> vouched for <$$font> by
belonging to the Army , the ' Profession ' . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.127

It is 1000 times more necessary where the Private Nurse after she has
left her Hosp'l , but is still in her ' Profession ' , becomes an '
irresponsible ' normal NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.128

<bracket> People little know what the conversation of these Nurses is
<$$bracket> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.129

But the Med'l Profession is beginning to know .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.130

' Take a Nurse who has been 6 months away from her School or Hosp'l ?
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.131

No thank you , she has deteriorated from her Certificate , ' said one
the other day . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.132

One Hospital Sister is as unlike another , tho' with the same '
qualifications ' , as can be . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.133

The tone of the one influences our Students to all that is right - of
the other to much that is wrong or <font> not at all <$$font> says
another . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.134

I could multiply these instances ad inf . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.135

As you ask me , I venture to think that the one thing to call Nurses'
attention to ' now ' is 1. the need of what no Cert'e can certify , no
Exam'n can touch <font> and <$$font> 2. the necessity of attaching
herself to some Home with motherly & trained supervision , so that she
<font> may <$$font> have some ' esprit_de_corps ' to guide & support her
. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.136

This applies of course to Private Nurses especially .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.137

We venture to think that there is little real analogy between the
Medical <paren> or ' Pharmacy ' <$$paren> Profession & the ' Nursing
Profession ' . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.138

We venture to think that Nursing in the Social <paren> or ' State '
<$$paren> sense is not a Profession at all , but a calling , as you are
aware . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.139

A Physician of the Hosp'l which has put itself most forward about '
Registration ' & ' Profession ' expressed his opinion forcibly when he
said that it could end in nothing but an ' inferior class of Med'l
Practitioners ' especially in the country . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,426.140

<P_427>

As to <font> ' India ' <$$font> to turn a <font> class <$$font> of
Nurses up-country without other supervision but the Doctor's takes one's
breath away . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.142

<bracket> In one branch of this matter the consequences already have
been disastrous . <$$bracket> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.143

Lastly , how much has been purely ' doctrinaire ' in all these
Registration & Certificate advocacies . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.144

The advocates have not themselves believed in it .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.145

Your kindness to Sir Harry & the younger Harry is beyond thanks .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.146

{ED:unsigned}

{ED:169._To_Frances_Elizabeth_Spencer}

10 South St NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.149

16 Aug 1893 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.150

My dear friend - dearest Miss Spencer It is such a joy to me to hear
from you , & to hear of your Nurses & your work - & that you are ' well
' & ' strong ' tho' I do@ @n't quite believe your account of yourself ,
except about the ' work ' . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.151

I hope you do@ @n't do <font> too <$$font> much .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.152

I know your difficulties - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.153

& yet it always seems to me as if Edinburgh R. I. were a bit of
Jacob's ladder ' let down from heaven to earth ' Thanks be to God .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.154

Thank you very much for your two beautiful photographs - beautiful as to
Wards , beautiful as to execution . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.155

I should like to know the name of the good Head Nurse of Ward 25 .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.156

Every good Matron & Lady Sup't of experience of years makes but too
truly I am afraid the same complaint about the difficulty of getting the
right people for training . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.157

We find that few or none have any life purpose & many are not
purpose-like at all . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.158

And there are many more changes from want of vigour of body or mind to
endure more than a few weeks or months . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.159

There is a want of <font> staying <$$font> power even among <font> young
Matrons <$$font> . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,427.160

There is <font> fashion <$$font> now in <P_428> Nursing .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.161

We have fallen now I will not say upon evil times but upon <font> modern
<$$font> times . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.162

And these while taken into account - not ignored - must be steadily
neutralized as it were . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.163

The <font> modern <$$font> tendencies seem to be to let out Nurses like
Plumbers - for so many hours a day to the Wards - Sisters or Head Nurses
included - & then to let them live for the remaining hours quite apart
from the Hospital - wanting the motherly element altogether - essential
to a Nurse who is not a Plumber - but has the care of soul & body in her
Patients , & in her Assistant Nurses to certify them as Plumbers . 2 to
substitute the literary Nurse for the practical Nurse who is to be
raised by the moral side quite as much as by the technical side - to
have a spirit put into her quite as much as a hand .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.164

E.g. I was aghast - & I am sure you & yours were with your unfailing
good sense at the Glasgow R. I. plan - 1st putting the candidates to
live in lodgings , as I understand , in the City at the very beginning
of things when the moral discipline of a ' Home ' is most wanted . then
giving lectures <font> first <$$font> & <font> last <$$font> , practice
- which is putting the cart before the horse - or teaching Greek before
English . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.165

But I am quite as sensible as you are to the truth that we crowd too
much into the 1st year's probation - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.166

& we are trying to think how we can obviate this - & further to give
more advanced lectures & classes in the 2nd year . & the <font> 3rd
{COM:font_change_excludes_numeral} <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.167

And I should be truly grateful to you if you would be so very kind as to
let me have your ' plan ' <font> when <$$font> you <font> can <$$font>
for ' relieving the Prob'rs of so much study during the first 6 months
of their training ' - which is the time when they ought to be as free as
possible body & mind for the practical Ward work .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.168

<font> Strictly Private <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.169

I hope that you find help & not hindrance in your Med'l Sup't -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.170

I <font> do <$$font> hope . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.171

I am so glad that Miss Canning answers so well in the ' Home ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.172

<font> Private <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.173

As you ask , may it not be I think that a good deal of what we have to
deplore in the Modern Tendency is due to the R. B. N. A.
{COM:Royal_British_Nurses'_Association} & the Pr.
{COM:Princess_Christina_Helena} Nursing has become a fashion , an
amusement , a talk , or a literature - a dress .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.174

E.g. at the recent Oxford meeting with the Pr. as President , some
ladies were quite shocked at the Nurses - noisy untidy , exclaiming '
worth while to belong to the R. B. N. A. for the pretty badge ' - &
this tone pervading everything . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,428.175

There was not one , they <P_429> said , like a Nurse of the <paren> not
modern <$$paren> Schools . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.176

This is grievous - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.177

the public will take them for the crème de la crème -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.178

& they are not even the skim milk . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.179

But it is a supreme impertinence to be anxious even about the truth , as
if God could not take care of that . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.180

{ED:unsigned}

{ED:170._To_Rosalind_Smith_Nash}

10 South St NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.183

12 Jan 1893 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.184

Dearest Rosalind I am requested to take the learned Counsel's opinion on
the following : NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.185

The Women's Trades Unions have held a meeting NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.186

& are going to send a Deputation to Mr. Asquith <font> on Jan 24
<$$font> to request <font> Women <$$font> Inspectors for the Sanitary
arrangements for Women in Workshops & Factories .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.187

Frederick Verney accompanies the Deputation .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.188

Mr. Asquith is supposed to be favourable ' if they will be reasonable '
. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.189

The question I am to ask the two learned Counsels Mrs Nash & Mrs.
Rosalind is : how do you recommend the women Inspectors to be selected ?
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.190

What do you propose instead of examination ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.191

i.e. how get over the difficulties of examination ?
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.192

What should be the substitute ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.193

how you would select & how dismiss ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,429.194

<P_430>

Ought these Women Inspectors to work under Men Officials ?
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.196

If so in what position they should be ? and whether they could work in
factories or workshops where both men & women are employed ?
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.197

<bracket> N.B. I come in as the ' Devil's Advocate ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.198

I fear the Women Trades' Unions are much too much inclined to ask for
all the Women Inspectors to be factory workers - & entirely to overlook
various dangers , one of which is {TEXT:in} that such women would be
open to pressure - not to say corruption - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.199

and where are you to find the educated Sanitarian among them , when you
can@ @not find her even among Lady Doctors ? <$$bracket>
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.200

ever yours F. Nightingale NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.201

{ED:171._To_Rosalind_Smith_Nash}

10 South St NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.203

14 June 1895 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.204

Dearest Rosalind How are you ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.205

I am afraid you were very tired yesterday . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.206

And I tired you - especially by my crusade about milk for the poor
people - about the extraordinary superstitions as to food of poor
mothers . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.207

But I do@ @n't think you need apply these to the Princelet
{TEXT:Prince-let} . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.208

Just do what the doctor at Hampstead whom you like says -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.209

& take Sam who will be seeing the Prince-let into your counsels .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.210

I have great faith in Sam . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.211

As to the facts we were talking of about the harm to the infants of
their mothers' dieting , just see the difference between their cooking &
yours - between the meat they get & yours - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.212

& see how little it applies to the Prince-let .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.213

The frying pan is the only cooking they know .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.214

Or they do every thing in one saucepan . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.215

Or the children drink out of the kettle . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.216

But I will not go on for fear Mr. Vaughan should call our poor ' pigs '
. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,430.217

A Derbyshire working man once said to me : ' We live on <P_431>
beefsteaks & mutton-chops ' <paren> they eat or used to eat much more
meat than we do <$$paren> ' not because we like it nor because we do@
@n't know that it@ @'s extravagant , but because our wives do@ @n't know
how to do anything else . ' NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.218

Now the Prince-let is an exceedingly sensible young man .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.219

And in his name I say : ' the moral of all this & a great deal more is :
do@ @n't be so uneasy about me ' . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.220

<bracket> They used to say of Sam at St. Bartholomew's : that he was
the only man or woman who knew how to wash a baby .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.221

I have great faith in the scoundrel of my heart , Sam , tho' he <font>
will <$$font> say <paren> all at once <$$paren> something to the effect
that the world is made to be ill & had much better die off at once .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.222

But you - get him to Hampstead , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.223

do@ @n't be at him , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.224

but use him . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.225

God bless you both & the Prince-let . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.226

ever your loving Aunt Florence NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.227

I will send Hodgkin tomorrow with many thanks NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.228

{ED:172._To_Julia_Ann_Elizabeth_Roundell}

South St NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.230

4 Aug 1896 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.231

<font> Agnes Jones <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.232

<font> Mrs Roundell <$$font> This is a delightful account of dear Agnes
Jones , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.233

& carries me back to the days when I used to say to myself : <paren> in
'68 <$$paren> : How could I ever be unhappy while <font> she <$$font>
lived ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.234

<bracket> P. 18 is especially admirable <$$bracket>
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.235

But there is a whole side of Agnes Jones' character which is not touched
on here : & which it is very important for Workh. Inf'y Nurses to
understand . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.236

<font> She <$$font> felt it a <font> privilege , not a sacrifice
<$$font> - to attend the sick . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.237

Every Nurse must do so . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.238

Or she is not worth her salt . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.239

You do@ @n't know how to be nursing the Patients is all in all ,
{TEXT:.} the ' Wine of the entertainment ' , as the best Nurse we ever
had said to me . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,431.240

<P_432>

<font> I <$$font> pity the people who have all the organization , all
the writing , all the speaking to do , but who never see the Patients -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.242

they do so much NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.243

for Agnes' life was not gloomy . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.244

2. It is a great truth that we love those we make happy , whether
loveable or not NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.245

3. So much more can be done for the Workh. Inf'y than for Hospital
Patients , who change so fast , & where there is such a continual drive
. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.246

The Workh. Patients are like those who were brought in to the King's
supper from the ' highways ' & hedges - especially the children .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.247

They are not at all impervious to ' Good Words ' -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.248

many an one has said : ' it is the first Good Word we have ever heard '
. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.249

And a child was heard praying behind its crib when it had to leave the
Infirmary that it might not forget the ' good words ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.250

But remember it must be the best of good nursing - & ever better &
better than best - that opens the way to the ' good word ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.251

One year's training is only enough to show one how to train oneself .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.252

It takes 5 years to make a Ward Nurse . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.253

How I wish I had time to tell the facts I know about the ' highways ' &
hedges responding . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.254

One woman , left a widow at 23 , with a family of step-children to bring
them up did bring them up NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.255

& at 40 had to go into the W. I. from consumption
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.256

& said it was ' like heaven ' . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.257

4. I can@ @not depreciate Workh: Nursing , nor training .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.258

There is so much to be done for Workh: Patients .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.259

Nurses always dread the Infirm Wards , where the old Patients have to be
' changed ' 5 or 6 times in a night . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.260

But a good & clever Nurse will , after nursing them like children ,
treat them like reasonable beings . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.261

' Ah you were an orange woman - were@ @n't you ?
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.262

How much did you charge for an orange ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.263

A penny ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.264

And perhaps you <font> gave <$$font> the penniless boy an orange .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.265

Bad for trade - but very good for the penniless boys ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.266

And the old woman is so delighted . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.267

She says ' O you know all about me ' . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.268

And ' perhaps ' , she thinks , ' it is all known to the Queen ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.269

Treat them like your fellow-creatures , however tiresome they are .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.270

Or rather each of us wishes to know , ' the love of Christ to me ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.271

- treat them like those to whom comes the love of Christ .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.272

While you are in it , look at it as your life's work .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.273

That is what Agnes Jones did . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.274

One of our very best Nurses said to me once : while you have a Ward , it
must be your <font> home <$$font> - & the inmates your children .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.275

Do@ @n't be like water turned on from a cock - & turned off again .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.276

Returning to the old women : one of our Nurses , now a Matron , said : '
They <font> must <$$font> be those <font> tiresome old women <$$font> or
those <font> dear old things <$$font> to you ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,432.277

<P_433>

Now that is real philosophy & real Christianity .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.279

She is now promoted to an important post . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.280

{ED:unsigned}

{ED:173._To_Julia_Ann_Elizabeth_Roundell}

4 Aug 1896 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.283

<font> Private <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.284

Dear Madam You can@ @not think what pleasure your ' Letter to " the W.
I. Nurses " ' about the dear heroic Saint , Agnes Jones , gave me .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.285

I only want every side of her many-sided character to be understood
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.286

1. her intense pleasure in Nursing . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.287

She , like many others , wanted the worst , not the best Hospital to be
given up to her . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.288

2. <font> Kaiserswerth <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.289

The Nursing was nil . The Hygiene horrible .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.290

But the tone was excellent admirable . And Pastor Fliedner's addresses
to the Pupil <font> School Mistresses <$$font> the very best I ever
heard . And the Penitentiary outdoor work & Vegetable gardening under a
very capable Sister excellently adapted to the case . And Pastor
Fliedner's solemn & reverential teaching to us of the sad secrets of
Hospital life what I had never heard given in England .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.291

But the Hospital was certainly the worst part of Kaiserswerth
Institution . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.292

3. What I am going to say would not be worth saying if it did not bear
on the question of training , p. 13 . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.293

I took all the training that was to be had - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.294

there was none to be had in <font> England . <$$font>
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.295

So far from Kaiserswerth having trained me , after having seen some of
the best Hospitals on the Continent , I went to Paris ,
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.296

saw the Augustinian Sisters there , who were not so good as the best
trained English Nurses are now but like Saints to savages then .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.297

I lived in a Misericorde , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.298

<paren> there was one to every Municipality in Paris then <$$paren> .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.299

The Misericorde under the Soeurs de S. Vincent de Paul , did all the '
petite chiourgie {COM:sic} ' of outdoor Patients , like our District
Nurses , but more than they - & all the dispensing .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.300

They were , besides , the Relieving Officers -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.301

& <font> we <$$font> have nothing like it - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.302

they and they alone <font> knew <$$font> the poor -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,433.303

<P_434>

they distributed all the ' bons ' of the Municipality for meat , firing
&c - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.305

they were also allowed to distribute private charity -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.306

for the French only understand or understood then the combination of
public & private charity - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.307

they had besides boarding schools for poor adult girls - into which I
will not enter now . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.308

After that , I became Matron of a small Hospital in London , where I
remained till summoned to Scutari in the Crimean War .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.309

I have ' retired ' into work ever since . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.310

All this is of no consequence except for the purpose indicated .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.311

There was no training . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.312

Therefore it pleased God thus to establish training in England .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.313

4. It is a pity that so much of Agnes Jones' depression {COM:sic}
written under physical exhaustion & at night - so little of her divine
unconquerable courage should have been preserved .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.314

More than I have lamented the publication of the ' Memorials '
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.315

They give no real picture of her . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.316

5. It is a pity she had so much of <font> stores <$$font> to do .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.317

But she would never accept an Assistant . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.318

6. The cause of Her death seems to us a deplorable mistake .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.319

But God made her an example . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.320

But the most deplorable mistake was : the trying to make paupers into
Nurses by Mr R & her . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.321

The failure of this was what depressed her , when it might have been
foreseen from the beginning . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.322

You who have done & are doing so much : do@ @n't depreciate Workhouse
Inf'y Nursing nor training . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.323

7. Her ever increasing deafness made her superintendence not a <font>
dead <$$font> letter but a <font> deaf <$$font> letter <font> latterly
<$$font> . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.324

8. It is perhaps but little known that in more than one London Poor Law
Infirmary {TEXT:Infirmaries} long years after her death , there was
throwing of tin cups & tin plates across the ward by the Patients at
each other , each then giving the other in charge to the Police .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.325

All this disappears when there are educated women as Matrons & Ward
Nurses . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.326

All really trained women are educated women .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.327

But another danger appears now : NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.328

the Doctors say : ' those women know as many words as we do -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.329

but they do@ @n't know how to make a Patient comfortable ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.330

This was not a danger in the time of the dear Pioneer of Workho: Inf'y
Nursing . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.331

Agnes Jones <font> To the Nurses <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,434.332

<P_435>

It is a noble calling , the calling of Nurses NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.334

but it depends on you Nurses to make it noble .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.335

F. N. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.336

{ED:174._To_Henry_Bonham_Carter_?}

20 Nov 1896 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.338

Notes on <font> Nurse Harvey's death from Scarlet Fever <$$font>
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.339

<font> Confidential <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.340

Florence Ward Male Medical <font> Nurse Harvey <$$font> had seemed run
down for some two months before . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.341

While Sister Florence was away on her holiday , Sister <slash> She had
instructed the Nurse who supplied her place to let Harvey who was one of
the 3 Prob'rs sit down whenever one was to sit down .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.342

Cold with severe sore throat - possibly <font> beginning of Scarlet
<$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.343

Probationers take one side one week & next week the other of the Ward .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.344

For the week previous to her being taken ill she was on Dr. Theodora
Acland's side . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.345

<font> Night & morning she had to wash a boy with Carbolic & water - his
back & everything . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.346

That boy had Scarlet Fever , Sore Throat <$$font> -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.347

rash <paren> not then come out <$$paren> . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.348

<font> Here <$$font> lies the whole story . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.349

On Saturday evening she was sent down to Home Sister with head ache .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.350

She got up on Sunday as usual NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.351

& was put into a room with a fire . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.352

But <font> no Doctor was sent for till Monday <$$font> when Dr. Sharkey
was summoned ; & said at once that it was a very ' slight ' case of
Scarlet Fever - & ordered her into Block 8 - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.353

but by some mistake a room could not be prepared for her or she carried
in till the evening . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.354

After that the case made but too rapid progress towards death -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.355

and on the Friday she died . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,435.356

<P_436>

During these days her throat was in the ' most frightful ' state .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.358

She had the utmost difficulty in swallowing , ending in not being able
to swallow at all . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.359

Every means was tried , but in vain . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.360

As for the Ice baths , she implored that they should not be continued -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.361

but till the case became utterly hopeless , they were thought necessary
. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.362

As long as she could speak at all , she kept saying : ' Do you think
Matron will let me go to my work tomorrow ? '
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.363

She was the best of Probationers - quiet , thoughtful , most kind to the
Patients , most forgetful of Self - receiving every new piece of
instruction such as sub-cutaneous Injections , as if it was a ' handsome
present ' . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.364

She was at her work in <font> Florence Ward <$$font> Male Medical on one
Saturday - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.365

and on the next Saturday she was in her coffin .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.366

<bracket> A boy who came in from the country <paren> with some lameness
<$$paren> after Nurse Harvey's death , contracted Scarlet Fever <font>
in the Ward <$$font> , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.367

was sent to Block 8 , NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.368

but was allowed to die undisturbed , as the Ice baths had been such a
useless aggravation of Nurse Harvey's sufferings .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.369

Nurse Harvey had discharge of pus from nose & ears - haemorrhage under
the skin , blood poisoning . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.370

She was purple from head to foot when she died .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.371

She had suppression of urine . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.372

She was ordered Brandy Champagne , & something of meat Juice ,
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.373

but after some very short time <paren> 2 days <$$paren> it was found
impossible to get them down . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.374

Dr. Toller said he had never seen such a case .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.375

In fact she was dying before they hardly knew she was in danger <paren>
4 days <$$paren> . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.376

The Probationers are exceedingly shocked & distressed at her death .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.377

<font> Note <$$font> F. N. is not discussing the Medical treatment at
all . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.378

That is not her business . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.379

The <font> whole kernel {TEXT:kernal} of the case lies in p. 2 .
<$$font> as p. 2 & p. 6 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.380

After two such as p. 2 & p. 6 frightful cases , might it have been a
question whether <font> the Ward <$$font> should not have been <font>
purified <$$font> ? NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.381

F. N. has not mooted this . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,436.382

{ED:unsigned}

<P_437>

{ED:175._To_Edmund_Verney}

10 South St NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.386

10 Mar 1897 NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.387

My dear Edmund Thank you for your kind letter .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.388

You know how delighted I am at your success in getting the Claydons
under the Public Libraries Act . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.389

I wish <font> we <$$font> could get out 3 <font> Private <$$font>
Libraries at Lea Hurst under the Public Libraries Act .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.390

But it is said that the small rate-payers , of whom there is a large
body there , are unwilling - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.391

& we have no one to canvass them properly . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.392

However , I hope we shall come to it at last .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.393

<font> Bust given me by the soldiers <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.394

I About the <font> bust <$$font> of me by Steeli of Edinburgh , which is
the one , I believe , at Claydon : it is after this wise :
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.395

it was given me by the soldiers after the Crimean War ;
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.396

and I sat {TEXT:sate} for it - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.397

it is left in my Will back to the soldiers , if it were not given back
to them during my life - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.398

and enquiries have already been made where soldiers would like it best
to be , whether at Aldershot , or where . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.399

I do not know who told Lady Wantage of this bust -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.400

it was not I - tho' she had previously written to me on behalf of Lady
George Hamilton . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.401

When she , Lady Wantage , came to me , she knew about it .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.402

And it was impossible for me to decline <font> lending <$$font> it to
them for the Earl's Court Exhibition . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.403

<bracket> I have such a respect for Lady Wantage .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.404

She sometimes just reminds me a little of Margaret <$$bracket>
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.405

So I did promise it her . {TEXT:.:} NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.406

You perhaps know that I had previously refused all solicitations to give
them ' relics ' of ' me & the Crimean War ' , on the ground that the
real ' relics ' were : 1. <font> Sidney Herbert's <$$font> R.
Commission & 4 Sub-Commissions which laid the imperishable seed of the
great improvements in the soldier's daily life - direct & indirect 2.
the <font> training <$$font> of <font> Nurses <$$font> both in character
& technical skill & knowledge . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.407

The untrained Nurses sent out to the Crimean War were -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.408

well , it is unspeakable what they were NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.409

3. the <font> Hygiene <$$font> & <font> Sanitation <$$font> the want of
which in the Military & Medical authorities caused Lord Raglan's death &
that of thousands of our men from disease . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.410

That frightful lesson really , thanks to Dr. Sutherland , Sir Douglas
Galton , Sir Robert Rawlinson & others , began & continued the enormous
strides which have since been made in <paren> Civil & Military <$$paren>
science of Life & Death . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.411

Excuse this long story . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,437.412

I only wanted to be assured that the <P_438> bust of me at Claydon was
the original one which the soldiers started .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.413

III {COM:sic} <font> Revision of Old & New Testaments <$$font> -
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.414

I like to hear of it . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.415

It has always seemed that some of the alterations in the <font> New
<$$font> are unpardonable NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.416

e.g. in the Lord's Prayer ' But deliver us from <font> evil ' <$$font>
is <paren> or was <$$paren> altered to the <font> ' evil one ' <$$font>
. NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.417

We always want to shift everything on to the Devil .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.418

That was a wise child who said to his little sister : ' The Devil was@
@n't thinking of you ' . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.419

Also : in St. Paul's Conversion : they have omitted those memorable
words , which have saved so many . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.420

' Lord , what wilt Thou have me to do ? ' NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.421

how short the prayers in the N. T. are : how heart_felt .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.422

Excuse again this long story . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.423

I did not have your letter till late last night , because I had a lady
with me , & the servants were all at ' Aladdin ' .
NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.424

But I hope this letter will be in time . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.425

A good journey to you & blessed Marg't . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.426

I am so glad she is ' well ' - NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.427

& love to all . NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.428

yours sincerely F. Nightingale NIGHTINGALE-189X-1,438.429

