<BEGIN_nightingale-188x-1>

<P_410>

{ED:157._To_Angélique_Pringle}

1 Dec {ED:1888} NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.4

8 a._m. NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.5

Dearest ever dearest Your letter received last night .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.6

I can@ @not look upon it as final . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.7

You are in a more dangerous state than if you were ' ill ' .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.8

If you were ' ill ' , you would be in bed with a Doctor attending you ,
under treatment . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.9

And he would most certainly order you to rest & country air for a much
longer time than a week , <font> in order <$$font> to enable you to do '
the accounts ' uniform time & all your other yet more important affairs
. NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.10

But you are in a far more dangerous state - that most dangerous of all -
suffering from nervous exhaustion , even more than you know yourself .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.11

There is <font> no chance <$$font> of your being able to go thro' the
next two months beginning to-day unless you rest .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.12

You will make a gallant , almost violent struggle -
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.13

you will become more & more exhausted & depressed .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.14

You will break down - possibly have an illness - which possibly might
save you - NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.15

if not , you will become so that you must resign , probably before the
two months are up . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.16

Would you recommend such a course to any one else ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.17

<font> In order for <$$font> you to be capable of doing the essential
duties you enumerate it is that this week for rest was proposed - 4th to
11th - because it was supposed you could not get away before the 4th .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.18

I <font> fully <$$font> enter into the difficulty of getting away .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.19

But , my dear , have you considered that God may take altogether out of
your power the health of body & mind to stay ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.20

The 11th was supposed to give you a fortnight before Xmas .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.21

But if Miss Woolfrey does not return till Tuesday - would you go on
Thursday afternoon - NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.22

there is a 5 o'clock p._m. train which gets you in I think before 7 -
till Monday morning or afternoon - NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.23

there is a morning train 8 - something which gets you back soon after 10
. 30 . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.24

I do@ @n't advocate this . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.25

It would do you 5 times the good to go from Tuesday to Tuesday -
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.26

& coming in to a hard day's work after the little fatigue of the morning
departure is not good . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.27

But I am suggesting reasonable alternatives . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.28

Is the alternative of giving it all up reasonable ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.29

Miss Buchanan will stay easily & willingly - NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.30

& she is well in for the Xmas preparations {COM:missing_period}
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.31

I have telephoned to Claydon not to take your answer as final .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.32

Forgive me . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.33

But if I <font> must <$$font> use stronger arguments , dearest , since I
saw you so depressed on Thursday week till the moment you came last Th.
I could say little to God but O God receive the agony of my heart - but
always adding meaning it I hope . But what signifies my agony ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.34

It is she who signifies . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.35

Would you not do this little week for my sake ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,410.36

<P_411>

If I said anything on the first Thursday to run counter to you , I ask
your forgiveness on the knees of my heart . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.38

I can say no more - but May God guide & bless you
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.39

ever yours F Nightingale NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.40

Shall I come to St. T.'s & carry you off ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.41

I never leave Claydon without thinking I shall never go there again .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.42

Sir H.'s life may be numbered by days . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.43

My sister w'd then leave C. NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.44

Will you not go there once before he dies ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.45

Something should be arranged by_&_bye to give you time to think & to
plan , as you once said . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.46

{ED:158._To_Angélique_Pringle}

{ED:2_Dec_1888}

Dearest , ever dearest Thanks for your kind letter .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.49

But first let me say what I am sure you will believe without
asseveration or explanation on my part or wonder what expression in my
letter <font> could <$$font> have given rise to it . that my thoughts
about Claydon &c were simply & wholly about your health , & that the
ghost of an idea about ' madness ' was about as far from my mind as
murder or the North Pole - i.e. {TEXT:i.e} It could not go further .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.50

You will recollect , my darling {COM:missing_comma} that you said to me
<font> that <$$font> Thursday 22nd that you felt as if you ' would go
out of your senses ' . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.51

But that was about Claydon NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.52

you kindly ask me to ' decide ' . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.53

I can@ @not ' decide ' in the least . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.54

You transfer it to another ground that NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.55

Upon the basis you now put it - not I - of making a ' difference in the
current of your thought ' - & as regards ' occupation of mind ' , you
say that ' work ' may do more than ' the quiet of Claydon ' .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.56

At all events as you will see <font> I <$$font> can@ @not judge for you
now . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.57

<bracket> I had a note from Sir Harry yesterday evening written by the
earliest morning post , when he received yours , asking me ' to persuade
you to come ' . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.58

I merely give his message . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.59

That I can@ @not do . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.60

Do not read what follows till another moment unless you wish it .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.61

Could I continue that ' I ' acting To you the great sacrifice , the
going ' to Him without the camp bearing the reproach of superstition &
foolishness ' , has a charm . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.62

But have you ever thought of the ' reproach of foolishness ' you bring
upon others ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.63

That seems to me quite a secondary use . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,411.64

<P_412>

However there is a much more important question in comparison with this
to another having regard to the circumstances under which you were
appointed to St. Thomas' , & to the duties you have to carry out -
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.66

do you not think that you are bound to go on with it at least for
another year ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.67

A person has NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.68

You have generously accepted a heavy responsibility
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.69

sticking to the work before her <font> is <$$font> a duty
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.70

And we ca@ @n't be certain of the ' call ' NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.71

One is what is good for herself . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.72

The other is a certainty - as to the good she is doing to other people .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.73

You kindly ask me not to grieve for you . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.74

Am I not to grieve for this ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.75

Advent Sunday NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.76

About your being separated by ' only one generation ' from your '
Catholic ancestry ' , it would seem as if the Puritans & others were not
separated even by ' one generation ' from their Catholic ancestry .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.77

I too am ' grieved ' that I told you about my prayer .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.78

But you forbade our having any ' talk ' about the subject uppermost in
both our minds & hearts . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.79

And I obeyed you so implicitly that it seemed we were both like
{TEXT:like_were} actresses <slash> acting that second Thursday .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.80

Could I continue that acting ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.81

I could scarcely , Could I ? write keep up that strange farce between
us in writing . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.82

<font> But I am sorry . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.83

Consider it with_drawn <$$font> NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.84

Today is Advent Sunday NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.85

Xt is coming to us - NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.86

May He not come in the guise I have just tried to express ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,412.87

{ED:unsigned}

<P_413>

{ED:159._To_Mr_J._P._Burton}

10 South St , Park Lane NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.91

5 July 1889 NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.92

Dear Mr. Burton , I am very much obliged to you for your letter , and
for its very satisfactory enclosures . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.93

And I was very much pleased to see <paren> what you did not tell me
<$$paren> that you had kindly offered prizes at the Village
Horticultural Show for the best Collection of Leaves from Trees , with
the names appended , by the schoolchildren . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.94

That is the way to make them observe . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.95

And - I should very much like to know whether you have found any
opportunity of teaching the children the ways the leaves grow , and the
ways the flowers are made ; instead of the common way of teaching them
classification and Latin names , usually called Botany .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.96

And have you been able to make use of the collection of fossils and
spars and specimens to teach them the simplest geology which all
Derbyshire Children should know ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.97

I forget whether I mentioned to you that the man who supplied the small
collection I sent you , and who is , I believe , a Fellow of the
Geological Society , offered me , for a few shillings more , to make
that collection complete , and such as would be used in the Kensington
Museum and Society of Arts . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.98

Would you like this to be done ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.99

I should be so very glad . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,413.100

I was so pleased with what you told me of your taking <P_414> down the
boys into the mines <paren> at Burton on Trent I think you said
<$$paren> and showing them the fossils and the strata .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.101

It is worth anything to make the children observe .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.102

To teach and to train <font> themselves <$$font> when they leave school
- that is the real meaning of schooling . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.103

I have sometimes thought that the real test of a schoolmaster or
mistress would be whether the children go on after they have left school
liking to inform themselves , liking to observe , liking to read up a
thing : or whether they forget all they have been taught , never to open
a book , and even forget how to read or write correctly , {TEXT:.} worse
still , forget religion & morality . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.104

I had a good deal of talk on Saturday with a General who is my Sister's
nephew , and who cares for his men so much that I learn from him a great
deal , NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.105

and perhaps he learns a little from me . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.106

He was amazed to tell me , and I was amazed to hear that out of 350
recruits for the Guards , whom he was going to inspect and to talk to ,
60 could not read or write . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.107

<bracket> You know perhaps that in the Guards they are obliged to be
particularly careful that every man should read and write well , because
the men of the Guards have to do so much mounting guard at important
buildings in London and the Palaces . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.108

They have their written orders , often very important ones ; given them
every night , which they must be able to read correctly . <$$bracket>
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.109

My General was going to see every one of these 60 men each by himself ,
to ask them where they had been to school , to get them to wish to go to
school now to the Regimental Schoolmaster , <paren> because there is no
<font> compulsory <$$font> schooling allowed now in the army <$$paren>
and to get into their confidence . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.110

I told him that it would be most important for Civilians as well as for
the Army that we should have this information , because it tells us
really what are the results of elementary education .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.111

Soldiers are almost all recruited from the country ;
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.112

they are almost all in their teens , 18 or 19 ;
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.113

and therefore hardly any of them can have left school more than 5 years
. NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.114

There are , I imagine , either Lending-Libraries , or Night-Schools , or
Institutes of some kind or other - <paren> only I fear they do@ @n't all
admit boys as early as 14 <$$paren> almost everywhere ,
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.115

and therefore the boys can scarcely lack all opportunity of continuing
their own education . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.116

I am sure that the boys and girls who have completed their education
with you , would not have forgotten how to read and write in 5 years .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.117

2 {COM:followed_by_two_slashes_in_text} I was very glad to see the
successful report on the religious instruction of the children , and
especially on the ' <font> tone <$$font> ' of the School .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.118

And I have no doubt that the religious teaching is really impressed into
the Children's hearts and practical lives by you and Mrs. Burton , and
does not remain as a mere book of History and Geography to them .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,414.119

<P_415>

It very often happens to me to have to do with girls from 15 to 20 ,
chiefly when they have gone into domestic service .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.121

I will tell you one recent experience . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.122

It is that of a very nice girl of 15 from the country - a particularly
good and intelligent girl . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.123

She had been ten consecutive years , from 4 to 14 at a national school .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.124

I had occasion to take her through , and make her re-capitulate each of
her Confirmation Classes as they went on NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.125

for she was just going to be confirmed . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.126

She could not bring back one single idea from any of her Classes ,
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.127

and she was unable to write a single sentence .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.128

I had to write down for her answers to every one of the printed
questions , NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.129

and even then , she could not fit them on to the questions .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.130

As for discovering the moral , she was quite incapable ; tho' to my
great joy , I found that , after I had given her some of them in a sort
of familiar way , she repeated it all to one of her fellow-servants .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.131

But the most curious part remains to be told .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.132

Tho' she had had Scriptural instruction every day for 10 years , I found
she was apparently quite ignorant of the Gospels .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.133

I therefore told her , without allowing her to look at the Testament or
looking at it myself , the principal events and parables of our
Saviour's Life , and especially of the last week of His Life ,
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.134

and she was evidently very much interested ; NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.135

but - she did not recognize one of them . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.136

I attribute this to her having been in a School where the Children only
read verses in rotation , when of course they can only be thinking of
their own verse , and not of the story ; and where the master gives no
<font> oral <$$font> Religious Instruction . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.137

But I am sure this would never be the case with your children .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.138

3 {COM:followed_by_two_slashes_in_text} Among all the country girls
still in their teens , whom I have known or taught , and who had been
probably for 8 years at elementary schools , I have never known one who
knew , or wished to know , the names of trees or of flowers , or plants
, not even of the commonest wild@ @flowers <bracket> they might know a
Rose <$$bracket> nor of the common birds when they saw them , nor of
what made it possible for birds to fly , nor of any of those common
things which they had been seeing every day of their lives .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.139

I am almost afraid of asking you whether your boys and girls know ,
<paren> as well as the English names and ways and habits of common
plants <$$paren> , English names and ways and habits of common birds -
because the boys are only too ready to throw stones at birds , and to
rob their nests . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.140

But do they know that bird's bones are hollow , and like lungs , and the
way which enables them to fly ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.141

Do you know any good book which teaches this ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.142

The Rev'd T. G. Woods' Readers were the best -
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.143

but even these are not satisfactory , I think .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.144

I do@ @n't think they give a clear account of how the bird flies .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.145

Bishop Stanley did , NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.146

but his book is not for children . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,415.147

<P_416>

4 {COM:followed_by_two_slashes_in_text} A niece-in-law of mine , the one
who wrote that leaflet on the Elements of Botany I gave you , visited
this year many of the best Board Schools in London for her own
instruction . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.149

She thought them greatly improved from those of 10 years ago .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.150

But she found no teaching of History . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.151

She suggested to one excellent School Master the teaching of the History
of <font> London <$$font> . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.152

Why not , she said , label the places which they pass every day with
their genuine history , - the place where the Great Fire of London began
or stopped - that of the Great Plague ditto - the most picturesque
incidents of the Tower of London - the execution of Lady Jane Grey - and
so on - and so on - the familiar history of London .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.153

5 {COM:followed_by_two_slashes_in_text} She was very much pleased with
the teaching by the School Mistresses - of Health - of the Value of
Foods , e.g. of Milk to children - of Domestic Economy .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.154

How does your teaching of Domestic Economy fare ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.155

I hope well : & that you are satisfied with the children .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.156

I hear on all hands of their great improvement - in discipline & progess
. NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.157

And how goes the Girls' Needlework ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.158

My kind regards to Mrs. Burton , who has also brought about such great
improvement . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.159

I thought it might be interesting to you to hear the above experiences .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.160

I should be very glad to know how Selina Gregory does at the Mill .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.161

There are many temptations to girls there : NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.162

whether she forgets her education . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.163

I hope not . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.164

I should like to send her some little present , such as a book , if you
would kindly tell me what . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.165

And I should like some day to hear how my other children are doing at
School . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.166

I am very , very sorry that Mr. Wildgoose is moving to Matlock - even
that small distance . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.167

Your holiday to Cornwell was a success . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.168

I am so glad . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.169

God bless you NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.170

sincerely yours and Mrs. Burton's Florence Nightingale
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,416.171

<P_417>

{ED:160._To_Angélique_Pringle}

10 South St NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.174

12 July 1889 NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.175

<font> Memorial <$$font> <paren> B. N. A. <$$paren>
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.176

Ever dearest ' Little Sister ' With regard to signing this Memorial , we
think that , believing as we do that you not only see no objection to it
, but that you share , and to a vivid degree , the conviction of the
objections to the course of the B. N. Assoc'n , & of the mischief that
course is doing to the steady quiet progress of Nurse-training &
Nurse-life , it is highly important that you should sign .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.177

The blank the absence of your name would leave would be so serious that
those who are taking the course we think so unhappy for Nurses would of
course take advantage of it to represent you as being on their side .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.178

It is not as if you or we had been forward to appear in the ' fray ' -
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.179

for fray it is . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.180

On the contrary we have , as you are aware , done everything we could to
avoid it - perhaps more than we ought to have done , judging by the
result - which is that , unhappily , party-spirit , which ought of all
places to be banished from a Nurse's life is raging furiously .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.181

The opposition to the B. N. A. Registration scheme has by no means
originated with us . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.182

- & other considerable Hospitals & Training Schools are even more
convinced of its evils than we are . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.183

To take a public part in the matter as experience & judgment dictate has
been <font> forced <$$font> upon St. Thomas' - do you not think so ? &
upon <font> you <$$font> : NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.184

We also think that Miss Crossland should sign , as being in charge ,
under you , of the daily instruction & ' home ' of the Training School -
that is , if you see no objection . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.185

Sir Harry Verney has signed the Memorial , as Chairman , which I now
return . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.186

I think Mr. Bonham Carter's signature , which is in Sir Wm Bowman's
possession , should be obtained as his name has been prominent .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.187

ever yours F. Nightingale NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,417.188

{ED:incomplete_letter}

<P_418>

{ED:161._To_Sir_Douglas_Galton}

{ED:10_South_St_3_Dec_1889}

Dear Sir Douglas I must take your leavings , as beggars must not be
choosers . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.193

Yes , please , your dog will see you to_morrow Wed'y <$$paren> on your
way from Euston for as long as you can stop - but <font> also <$$font>
on Thursday at one . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.194

Will you consider the points of , if Cornish is to do the Indian , who
is to do the Home business - & other points for that interview ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.195

Your dog F. N. NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.196

{ED:162._To_Sir_Douglas_Galton}

{ED:10_South_St_16_Dec_1889}

Dear Sir Douglas , I am an egg full of meat , NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.199

and you might have come and cracked me if you had made an appointment .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.200

Other people rejoice that their correspondence is compromising .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.201

Therefore , I can only tell you by word of mouth what you would know .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.202

Shall you be in London this week ? NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.203

As for revising my Article for Dr. Quain , before Xmas , the type is so
diabolical , the mornings are so dark , and my eyes are so bad , that if
he must have it before Xmas , I think I must return it to him as it is .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.204

But if he chooses to let me have a little time before Xmas , and if so ,
how much ? I will try to do it . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.205

I think the only thing that wants adding is the remarkable development
and improvement of District Nursing <paren> instead of Almsgiving ,
{TEXT:.} <$$paren> during the last 10 or 12 years .
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,418.206

But I do@ @n't know <P_419> whether Dr. Quain wishes me to add to it or
only to revise it . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,419.207

Could you kindly tell me . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,419.208

And are you doing your article on Construction &c of Hospitals ?
NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,419.209

You said I was to send you something about the differences between these
& Poor Law Infirmaries . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,419.210

Sir Henry Yule is dying . NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,419.211

ever more truly yours F. Nightingale NIGHTINGALE-188X-1,419.212

